GALILEO, University System of Georgia

GALILEO Open Learning Materials
Biological Sciences Open Textbooks

Biological Sciences

Fall 2017

Microbiology for Allied Health Students
Molly Smith
South Georgia State College, molly.smith@sgsc.edu

Sara Selby
South Georgia State College, sara.selby@sgsc.edu

Follow this and additional works at: https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/biology-textbooks
Part of the Biology Commons, Medicine and Health Sciences Commons, and the Microbiology
Commons
Recommended Citation
Smith, Molly and Selby, Sara, "Microbiology for Allied Health Students" (2017). Biological Sciences Open Textbooks. 15.
https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/biology-textbooks/15

This Open Textbook is brought to you for free and open access by the Biological Sciences at GALILEO Open Learning Materials. It has been accepted
for inclusion in Biological Sciences Open Textbooks by an authorized administrator of GALILEO Open Learning Materials. For more information,
please contact affordablelearninggeorgia@usg.edu.

Open Textbook

South Georgia State College

UNIVERSITY SYSTEM
OF GEORGIA

Molly Smith and Sara Selby

Microbiology for
Allied Students

Microbiology for
Allied Health Students
Remixed Edition by  
Molly Smith, South Georgia State College  

Senior  Contributing  Authors  
Nina  Parker,  Shenandoah  University  
Mark  Schneegurt,  Wichita  State  University  
Anh-­Hue  Thi  Tu,  Georgia  Southwestern  State  University  
Brian  M.  Forster,  Saint  Joseph’s  University  
Philip  Lister,  Central  New  Mexico  Community  College  

OpenStax  
Rice  University  
6100  Main  Street  MS-­375  
Houston,  Texas  77005  

To  learn  more  about  OpenStax,  visit  http://openstaxcollege.org.  
Individual  print  copies  and  bulk  orders  can  be  purchased  through  our  website.  

©  2016  Rice  University.  Textbook  content  produced  by  OpenStax  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0  International  
License.  Under  this  license,  any  user  of  this  textbook  or  the  textbook  contents  herein  must  provide  proper  attribution  as  follows:  

-­

-­
-­

-­

If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to EPUB, PDF, and HTML), then you must retain on
every page the following attribution:
“Download for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/latest/.”
If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the following attribution:
“Download for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/latest/.”
If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including but not limited to
EPUB, PDF, and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
“Download for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/latest/.”
If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, then you should cite it as follows: OpenStax, Microbiology. OpenStax. 01
November 2016. <http://cnx.org/content/col12087/latest/>.

For  questions  regarding  this  licensing,  please  contact  partners@openstaxcollege.org.  

Trademarks  
The   OpenStax   name,   OpenStax   logo,   OpenStax   book   covers,   OpenStax   CNX   name,   OpenStax   CNX   logo,   Connexions   name,   and  
Connexions   logo   are   not   subject   to   the   license   and   may   not   be   reproduced   without   the   prior   and   express   written   consent   of   Rice  
University.  

ISBN-­10  

1-­938168-­14-­3  

ISBN-­13  

978-­1-­938168-­14-­7  

Revision  

MB-­2016-­000(11/16)-­BKB  

OpenStax  

OpenStax   is   a   non-­profit   organization   committed   to   improving   student   access   to   quality   learning   materials.   Our   free   textbooks   are  
developed  and  peer-­reviewed  by  educators  to  ensure  they  are  readable,  accurate,  and  meet  the  scope  and  sequence  requirements  of  
modern   college   courses.   Through   our   partnerships   with   companies   and   foundations   committed   to   reducing   costs   for   students,  
OpenStax  is  working  to  improve  access  to  higher  education  for  all.    

OpenStax  CNX  
The   technology   platform   supporting   OpenStax   is   OpenStax   CNX   (http://cnx.org),   one   of   the   world’s   first   and   largest   open-­education  
projects.  OpenStax  CNX  provides  students  with  free  online  and  low-­cost  print  editions  of  the  OpenStax  library  and  provides  instructors  
with  tools  to  customize  the  content  so  that  they  can  have  the  perfect  book  for  their  course.      

Rice  University  
OpenStax   and   OpenStax   CNX   are   initiatives   of   Rice   University.   As   a   leading   research  
university  with  a  distinctive  commitment  to  undergraduate  education,  Rice  University  aspires  
to  path-­breaking  research,  unsurpassed  teaching,  and  contributions  to  the  betterment  of  our  
world.   It   seeks   to   fulfill   this   mission   by   cultivating   a   diverse   community   of   learning   and  
discovery  that  produces  leaders  across  the  spectrum  of  human  endeavor.  

Foundation  Support  
OpenStax   is   grateful   for   the   tremendous   support   of   our   sponsors.   Without   their   strong   engagement,   the   goal   of   free   access   to   high-­
quality  textbooks  would  remain  just  a  dream.  

Laura and John Arnold Foundation (LJAF) actively seeks opportunities to invest in organizations
and thought leaders that have a sincere interest in implementing fundamental changes that not only
yield immediate gains, but also repair broken systems for future generations. LJAF currently focuses
its strategic investments on education, criminal justice, research integrity, and public accountability.	  

The  William  and  Flora  Hewlett  Foundation  has  been  making  grants  since  1967  to  help  solve  social  
and   environmental   problems   at   home   and   around   the   world.   The   Foundation   concentrates   its  
resources   on   activities   in   education,   the   environment,   global   development   and   population,  
performing  arts,  and  philanthropy,  and  makes  grants  to  support  disadvantaged  communities  in  the  
San  Francisco  Bay  Area.
Guided  by  the  belief  that  every  life  has  equal  value,  the  Bill  &  Melinda  Gates  Foundation  works  to  
help   all   people   lead   healthy,   productive   lives.   In   developing   countries,   it   focuses   on   improving  
people’s   health   with   vaccines   and   other   life-­saving   tools   and   giving   them   the   chance   to   lift  
themselves  out  of  hunger  and  extreme  poverty.  In  the  United  States,  it  seeks  to  significantly  improve  
education  so  that  all  young  people  have  the  opportunity  to  reach  their  full  potential.  Based  in  Seattle,  
Washington,  the  foundation  is  led  by  CEO  Jeff  Raikes  and  Co-­chair  William  H.  Gates  Sr.,  under  the  
direction  of  Bill  and  Melinda  Gates  and  Warren  Buffett.

The   Maxfield   Foundation   supports   projects   with   potential   for   high   impact   in   science,   education,  
sustainability,  and  other  areas  of  social  importance.

Our   mission   at   the   Twenty   Million   Minds   Foundation   is   to   grow   access   and   success   by   eliminating  
unnecessary   hurdles   to   affordability.   We   support   the   creation,   sharing,   and   proliferation   of   more  
effective,  more  affordable  educational  content  by  leveraging  disruptive  technologies,  open  educational  
resources,  and  new  models  for  collaboration  between  for-­profit,  nonprofit,  and  public  entities.

Preface

1

Preface
Welcome to Microbiology for Allied Health Students, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase
student access to high-quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax
OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it’s our mission to improve student access to education. Our
first openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 20 books for
college and AP courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. Our adaptive learning technology, designed to
improve learning outcomes through personalized educational paths, is being piloted in college courses throughout the
country. Through our partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource
organizations, OpenStax is breaking down the most common barriers to learning and empowering students and
instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization
Microbiology for Allied Health Students is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY)
license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to
OpenStax and its content contributors.
Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are
most relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters
and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the
sections in the web view of your book.
Faculty also have the option of creating a customized version of your OpenStax book through the aerSelect platform.
The custom version can be made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus
bookstore. Visit your book page on openstax.org for a link to your book on aerSelect.

Errata
All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. Since our books are web-based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on openstax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so
you will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org.

Format
You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Microbiology for Allied Health Students
Microbiology for Allied Health Students is designed to cover the scope and sequence requirements for the singlesemester Microbiology course for non-majors and allied health students. The book presents the core concepts of
microbiology with a focus on applications for careers in allied health. The pedagogical features of
Microbiology for Allied Health Students make the material interesting and accessible to students while maintaining
the career-application focus and scientific rigor inherent in the subject matter.

Coverage and Scope
The scope and sequence of Microbiology for Allied Health Students has been developed and vetted with input
from numerous instructors at institutions across the U.S. It is designed to meet the needs of most
microbiology courses allied health students.

2

Preface

With these objectives in mind, the content of this textbook has been arranged in a logical progression from
fundamental to more advanced concepts. The opening chapters present an overview of the discipline, with individual
chapters focusing on cellular biology as well as each of the different types of microorganisms and the
various means by which we can control and combat microbial growth. The focus turns to microbial
pathogenicity, emphasizing how interactions between microbes and the human immune system contribute to
human health and disease. The last several chapters of the text provide a survey of medical microbiology,
presenting the characteristics of microbial diseases organized by body system.
A brief Table of Contents follows. While we have made every effort to align the Table of Contents with the needs
of our audience, we recognize that some instructors may prefer to teach topics in a different order. A particular
strength of Microbiology for Allied Health Students is that instructors can customize the book, adapting it to the
approach that works best in their classroom.

Chapter 1: An Invisible World
Chapter 2: The Cell
Chapter 3: The Eukaryotes of Microbiology
Chapter 4: Acellular Pathogens
Chapter 5: Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity
Chapter 6: Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
Chapter 7: Adaptive Specific Host Defenses
Chapter 8: Diseases of the Immune System
Chapter 9: Control of Microbial Growth
Chapter 10: Antimicrobial Drugs
Chapter 11: Disease and Epidemiology
Chapter 12: Skin and Eye Infections
Chapter 13: Respiratory System Infections
Chapter 14: Urogenital System Infections
Chapter 15: Digestive System Infections
Chapter 16: Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections
Chapter 17: Nervous System Infections
Chapter 18: Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
Appendix A: Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology
Appendix B: Mathematical Basics
Appendix C: Glossary

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Preface

3

American Society of Microbiology (ASM) Partnership
Microbiology is produced through a collaborative publishing agreement between OpenStax and the American Society
for Microbiology Press. The book has been developed to align to the curriculum guidelines of the American Society
for Microbiology.

About ASM
The American Society for Microbiology is the largest single life science society, composed of over 47,000 scientists
and health professionals. ASM's mission is to promote and advance the microbial sciences.
ASM advances the microbial sciences through conferences, publications, certifications, and educational
opportunities. It enhances laboratory capacity around the globe through training and resources and provides a network
for scientists in academia, industry, and clinical settings. Additionally, ASM promotes a deeper understanding of
the microbial sciences to diverse audiences and is committed to offering open-access materials through their new
journals, American Academy of Microbiology reports, and textbooks.

ASM Recommended Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Microbiology Education
PART 1: Concepts and Statements
Evolution
1. Cells, organelles (e.g., mitochondria and chloroplasts) and all major metabolic pathways evolved from early

prokaryotic cells.
2. Mutations and horizontal gene transfer, with the immense variety of microenvironments, have selected for a

huge diversity of microorganisms.
3. Human impact on the environment influences the evolution of microorganisms (e.g., emerging diseases and

the selection of antibiotic resistance).
4. The traditional concept of species is not readily applicable to microbes due to asexual reproduction and the

frequent occurrence of horizontal gene transfer.
5. The evolutionary relatedness of organisms is best reflected in phylogenetic trees.

Cell Structure and Function
6. The structure and function of microorganisms have been revealed by the use of microscopy (including bright

field, phase contrast, fluorescent, and electron).
7. Bacteria have unique cell structures that can be targets for antibiotics, immunity and phage infection.
8. Bacteria and Archaea have specialized structures (e.g., flagella, endospores, and pili) that often confer critical

capabilities.
9. While microscopic eukaryotes (for example, fungi, protozoa and algae) carry out some of the same processes

as bacteria, many of the cellular properties are fundamentally different.
10. The replication cycles of viruses (lytic and lysogenic) differ among viruses and are determined by their unique

structures and genomes.
Metabolic Pathways
11. Bacteria and Archaea exhibit extensive, and often unique, metabolic diversity (e.g., nitrogen fixation, methane

production, anoxygenic photosynthesis).
12. The interactions of microorganisms among themselves and with their environment are determined by their

metabolic abilities (e.g., quorum sensing, oxygen consumption, nitrogen transformations).
13. The survival and growth of any microorganism in a given environment depends on its metabolic

characteristics.
14. The growth of microorganisms can be controlled by physical, chemical, mechanical, or biological means.

4

Preface

Information Flow and Genetics
15. Genetic variations can impact microbial functions (e.g., in biofilm formation, pathogenicity and drug

resistance).
16. Although the central dogma is universal in all cells, the processes of replication, transcription, and translation

differ in Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukaryotes.
17. The regulation of gene expression is influenced by external and internal molecular cues and/or signals.
18. The synthesis of viral genetic material and proteins is dependent on host cells.
19. Cell genomes can be manipulated to alter cell function.

Microbial Systems
20. Microorganisms are ubiquitous and live in diverse and dynamic ecosystems.
21. Most bacteria in nature live in biofilm communities.
22. Microorganisms and their environment interact with and modify each other.
23. Microorganisms, cellular and viral, can interact with both human and nonhuman hosts in beneficial, neutral or

detrimental ways.
Impact of Microorganisms
24. Microbes are essential for life as we know it and the processes that support life (e.g., in biogeochemical cycles

and plant and/or animal microbiota).
25. Microorganisms provide essential models that give us fundamental knowledge about life processes.
26. Humans utilize and harness microorganisms and their products.
27. Because the true diversity of microbial life is largely unknown, its effects and potential benefits have not been

fully explored.
PART 2: Competencies and Skills
Scientific Thinking
28. Ability to apply the process of science

a. Demonstrate an ability to formulate hypotheses and design experiments based on the scientific method.
b. Analyze and interpret results from a variety of microbiological methods and apply these methods to
analogous situations.
29. Ability to use quantitative reasoning

a. Use mathematical reasoning and graphing skills to solve problems in microbiology.
30. Ability to communicate and collaborate with other disciplines

a. Effectively communicate fundamental concepts of microbiology in written and oral format.
b. Identify credible scientific sources and interpret and evaluate the information therein.
31. Ability to understand the relationship between science and society

a. Identify and discuss ethical issues in microbiology.
Microbiology Laboratory Skills

32. Properly prepare and view specimens for examination using microscopy (bright field and, if

possible, phase contrast).

33. Use pure culture and selective techniques to enrich for and isolate microorganisms.
34. Use appropriate methods to identify microorganisms (media-based, molecular and serological).
35. Estimate the number of microorganisms in a sample (using, for example, direct count, viable plate

count, and spectrophotometric methods).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Preface

36.
37.
38.

5

Use appropriate microbiological and molecular lab equipment and methods.
Practice safe microbiology, using appropriate protective and emergency procedures.
Document and report on experimental protocols, results and conclusions.

OpenStax Microbiology for Allied Health Students Correlation to ASM Recommended
Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Microbiology Education
OpenStax Microbiology for Allied Health Students Correlation to ASM Curriculum Guidelines
Chapter

ASM Curriculum Guidelines

1—An Invisible World

2, 4, 5, 11, 16, 20, 23, 26, 27, 31

2—The Cell

1, 2, 5, 9, 16, 21, 25, 31

3—The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

2, 4, 5, 9, 12, 20, 23, 31

4—Acellular Pathogens

4, 10, 18, 23, 31

5—Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

8, 9, 10, 15, 18, 23, 33

6—Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

7, 8, 23

7—Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

7, 23, 26, 31

8—Diseases of the Immune System

7, 8, 24

9—Control of Microbial Growth

13, 14, 26, 31, 36, 37

10—Antimicrobial Drugs

3, 7, 14, 15, 23, 26, 31

11—Disease and Epidemiology

7, 14, 23, 26, 31

12—Skin and Eye Infections

8, 9, 10, 14, 18, 23, 24, 31

13—Respiratory System Infections

7, 8, 9, 14, 18, 23, 24, 31

14—Urogenital System Infections

7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 18, 22, 23, 24, 31

15—Digestive System Infections

7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 18, 23, 24, 31

16—Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

7, 8, 9, 14, 23, 31

17—Nervous System Infections

7, 8, 9, 14, 18, 23, 24, 31

18—Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

1, 2, 15, 16, 17, 31

6

Preface

Engaging Feature Boxes
Throughout Microbiology for Allied Health Students, you will find features that engage students by taking
selected topics a step further. Our features include:
Clinical Focus. Each chapter has a multi-part clinical case study that follows the story of a fictional patient.
The case unfolds in several realistic episodes placed strategically throughout the chapter, each episode
revealing new symptoms and clues about possible causes and diagnoses. The details of the case are directly
related to the topics presented in the chapter, encouraging students to apply what they are learning to reallife scenarios. The final episode presents a Resolution that reveals the outcome of the case and unpacks the
broader lessons to be learned.
Case in Point. In addition to the Clinical Focus, many chapters also have one or more single-part case studies
that serve to highlight the clinical relevance of a particular topic. These narratives are strategically placed
directly after the topic of emphasis and generally conclude with a set of questions that challenge the reader to
think critically about the case.
Micro Connections. All chapters contain several Micro Connections feature boxes that highlight real-world
applications of microbiology, drawing often-overlooked connections between microbiology and a wide range
of other disciplines. While many of these connections involve medicine and healthcare, they also venture into
domains such as environmental science, genetic engineering, and emerging technologies. Moreover, many
Micro Connections boxes are related to current or recent events, further emphasizing the intersections between
microbiology and everyday life.
Sigma Xi Eye on Ethics. This unique feature, which appears in most chapters, explores an ethical issue
related to chapter content. Developed in cooperation with the scientific research society Sigma Xi, each Eye
on Ethics box presents students with a challenging ethical dilemma that arises at the intersection of science
and healthcare. Often grounded in historical or current events, these short essays discuss multiple sides of an
issue, posing questions that challenge the reader to contemplate the ethical principles that govern professionals
in healthcare and the sciences.
Disease Profile. This feature, which is exclusive to Chapters 12-17, highlights important connections between
related diseases. Each box also includes a table cataloguing unique aspects of each disease, such as the
causative agent, symptoms, portal of entry, mode of transmission, and treatment. These concise tables serve
as a useful reference that students can use as a study aid.
Link to Learning. This feature provides a brief introduction and a link to an online resource that students may
use to further explore a topic presented in the chapter. Links typically lead to a website, interactive activity, or
animation that students can investigate on their own.

Comprehensive Art Program
Our art program is designed to enhance students’ understanding of concepts through clear and effective illustrations,
diagrams, and photographs. Detailed drawings, comprehensive lifecycles, and clear micrographs provide visual
reinforcement for concepts.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Preface

7

8

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Preface

Preface

9

10

Preface

Materials That Reinforce Key Concepts
Learning Objectives. Every section begins with a set of clear and concise learning objectives that are closely
aligned to the content and Review Questions.
Summary. The Summary distills the information in each section into a series of concise bullet points. Key
Terms in the Summary are bold-faced for emphasis.
Key Terms. New vocabulary is bold-faced when first introduced in the text and followed by a definition in
context. Definitions of key terms are also listed in the Glossary in (Appendix C).
Check Your Understanding questions. Each subsection of the text is punctuated by one or more
comprehension-level questions. These questions encourage readers to make sure they understand what they
have read before moving on to the next topic.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Preface

11

Review Questions. Each chapter has a robust set of review questions that assesses students’ mastery of the
Learning Objectives. Questions are organized by format: multiple choice, matching, true/false, fill-in-theblank, short answer, and critical thinking.

Additional Resources

Student and Instructor Resources
We’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, a test bank,
and an instructor answer guide. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which can be requested on
your openstax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book.

Partner Resources
OpenStax Partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning materials affordable and accessible to
students and instructors everywhere. Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at a low cost. To access
the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on openstax.org.

About the Authors

Senior Contributing Authors
Nina Parker (Content Lead), Shenandoah University
Dr. Nina Parker received her BS and MS from the University of Michigan, and her PhD in Immunology from Ohio
University. She joined Shenandoah University's Department of Biology in 1995 and serves as Associate Professor,
teaching general microbiology, medical microbiology, immunology, and epidemiology to biology majors and allied
health students. Prior to her academic career, Dr. Parker was trained as a Medical Technologist and received ASCP
certification, experiences that drive her ongoing passion for training health professionals and those preparing for
clinical laboratory work. Her areas of specialization include infectious disease, immunology, microbial pathogenesis,
and medical microbiology. Dr. Parker is also deeply interested in the history of medicine and science, and pursues
information about diseases often associated with regional epidemics in Virginia.
Mark Schneegurt (Lead Writer), Wichita State University
Dr. Mark A. Schneegurt is a Professor of Biological Sciences at Wichita State University and maintains joint
appointments in Curriculum and Instruction and Biomedical Engineering. Dr. Schneegurt holds degrees from
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a Ph.D. from Brown University. He was a postdoctoral fellow at Eli Lilly and
has taught and researched at Purdue University and the University of Notre Dame. His research focuses on applied
and environmental microbiology, resulting in 70+ scientific publications and 150+ presentations.
Anh-Hue Thi Tu (Senior Reviewer), Georgia Southwestern State University
Dr. Anh-Hue Tu (born in Saigon, Vietnam) earned a BS in Chemistry from Baylor University and a PhD in Medical
Sciences from Texas A & M Health Science Center. At the University of Alabama–Birmingham, she completed
postdoctoral appointments in the areas of transcriptional regulation in Escherichia coli and characterization of
virulence factors in Streptococcus pneumoniae and then became a research assistant professor working in the field
of mycoplasmology. In 2004, Dr. Tu joined Georgia Southwestern State University where she currently serves as
Professor, teaching various biology courses and overseeing undergraduate student research. Her areas of research
interest include gene regulation, bacterial genetics, and molecular biology. Dr. Tu's teaching philosophy is to instill in
her students the love of science by using critical thinking. As a teacher, she believes it is important to take technical
information and express it in a way that is understandable to any student.
Brian M. Forster, Saint Joseph's University
Dr. Brian M. Forster received his BS in Biology from Binghamton University and his PhD in Microbiology
from Cornell University. In 2011, he joined the faculty of Saint Joseph’s University. Dr. Forster is the laboratory
coordinator for the natural science laboratory-based classes designed for students who are not science majors. He

12

Preface

teaches courses in general biology, heredity and evolution, environmental science, and microbiology for students
wishing to enter nursing or allied health programs. He has publications in the Journal of Bacteriology, the Journal of
Microbiology & Biology Education and Tested Studies for Laboratory Education (ABLE Proceedings).
Philip Lister, Central New Mexico Community College
Dr. Philip Lister earned his BS in Microbiology (1986) from Kansas State University and PhD in Medical
Microbiology (1992) from Creighton University. He was a Professor of Medical Microbiology and Immunology at
Creighton University (1994-2011), with appointments in the Schools of Medicine and Pharmacy. He also served
as Associate Director of the Center for Research in Anti-Infectives and Biotechnology. He has published research
articles, reviews, and book chapters related to antimicrobial resistance and pharmacodynamics, and has served as an
Editor for the Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. He is currently serving as Chair of Biology and Biotechnology
at Central New Mexico Community College.

Contributing Authors
Summer Allen, Brown University
Ann Auman, Pacific Lutheran University
Graciela Brelles-Mariño, Universidad Nacional de la Plata
Myriam Alhadeff Feldman, Lake Washington Institute of Technology
Paul Flowers, University of North Carolina–Pembroke
Clifton Franklund, Ferris State University
Ann Paterson, Williams Baptist University
George Pinchuk, Mississippi University for Women
Ben Rowley, University of Central Arkansas
Mark Sutherland, Hendrix College

Reviewers
Michael Angell, Eastern Michigan University
Roberto Anitori, Clark College
James Bader, Case Western Reserve University
Amy Beumer, College of William and Mary
Gilles Bolduc, Massasoit Community College
Susan Bornstein-Forst, Marian University
Nancy Boury, Iowa State University
Jennifer Brigati, Maryville College
Harold Bull, University of Saskatchewan
Evan Burkala, Oklahoma State University
Bernadette Connors, Dominican College
Richard J. Cristiano, Houston Community College–Northwest
AnnMarie DelliPizzi, Dominican College
Elisa M. LaBeau DiMenna, Central New Mexico Community College
Diane Dixon, Southeastern Oklahoma State University

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Preface

Randy Durren, Longwood University
Elizabeth A. B. Emmert, Salisbury University
Karen Frederick, Marygrove College
Sharon Gusky, Northwestern Connecticut Community College
Deborah V. Harbour, College of Southern Nevada
Randall Harris, William Carey University
Diane Hartman, Baylor University
Angela Hartsock, University of Akron
Nazanin Zarabadi Hebel, Houston Community College
Heather Klenovich, Community College of Alleghany County
Kathleen Lavoie, Plattsburgh State University
Toby Mapes, Blue Ridge Community College
Barry Margulies, Towson University
Kevin M. McCabe, Columbia Gorge Community College
Karin A. Melkonian, Long Island University
Jennifer Metzler, Ball State University
Ellyn R. Mulcahy, Johnson County Community College
Jonas Okeagu, Fayetteville State University
Randall Kevin Pegg, Florida State College–Jacksonville
Judy Penn, Shoreline Community College
Lalitha Ramamoorthy, Marian University
Drew Rholl, North Park University
Hilda Rodriguez, Miami Dade College
Sean Rollins, Fitchburg State University
Sameera Sayeed, University of Pittsburgh
Pramila Sen, Houston Community College
Brian Róbert Shmaefsky, Kingwood College
Janie Sigmon, York Technical College
Denise Signorelli, College of Southern Nevada
Molly Smith, South Georgia State College–Waycross
Paula Steiert, Southwest Baptist University
Robert Sullivan, Fairfield University
Suzanne Wakim, Butte Community College
Anne Weston, Francis Crick Institute
Valencia L. Williams, West Coast University
James Wise, Chowan State University
Virginia Young, Mercer University

13

14

Preface

Remixed Edition Author and Editor
Molly Smith, South Georgia State College
Dr. Molly Smith received her BS from Mercer University and her PhD in Microbiology from
Clemson University. She joined Waycross College's Department of Biology in 1991 and served as
Professor, teaching general biology, microbiology, and anatomy and physiology to non- majors
and allied health students. In 2013, Waycross College consolidated with South Georgia College to
form South Georgia State College, where Dr. Smith currently serves in the School of Sciences as
Professor, teaching general biology to non-majors and microbiology to allied health students. She
has a keen interest in the use of Open Educational Resources and has created an Instructor's
Guide to Chapters 12-21 of the OpenStax Concepts of Biology textbook that is available via Merlot
and in the iBookstore and Curriki.
Sara Selby, South Georgia State College
Sara Selby received her BA and MA in English from the University of Mississippi. She joined
Waycross College's Department of English in 1991 and served as Professor, teaching a variety of
English and Humanities courses, as well as in a variety of administrative roles. At South Georgia
State College, Selby currently serves as Professor of English and Academic Affairs Projects
Specialist, having responsibility for a number of faculty development programs. She has worked
with Dr. Smith on several projects as editor and collaborator. This Microbiology for Allied Health
Students text was remixed from the OpenStax Microbiology textbook in partial fulfillment of a
project funded by a grant from the University System of Georgia's Affordable Learning Georgia
initiative.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

15

Chapter 1

An Invisible World

Figure 1.1 A veterinarian gets ready to clean a sea turtle covered in oil following the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in
the Gulf of Mexico in 2010. After the spill, the population of a naturally occurring oil-eating marine bacterium called
Alcanivorax borkumensis skyrocketed, helping to get rid of the oil. Scientists are working on ways to genetically
engineer this bacterium to be more efficient in cleaning up future spills. (credit: modification of work by NOAA’s
National Ocean Service)

Chapter Outline
1.1 What Our Ancestors Knew
1.2 A Systematic Approach
1.3 Types of Microorganisms

Introduction
From boiling thermal hot springs to deep beneath the Antarctic ice, microorganisms can be found almost everywhere
on earth in great quantities. Microorganisms (or microbes, as they are also called) are small organisms. Most are so
small that they cannot be seen without a microscope.
Most microorganisms are harmless to humans and, in fact, many are helpful. They play fundamental roles in
ecosystems everywhere on earth, forming the backbone of many food webs. People use them to make biofuels,
medicines, and even foods. Without microbes, there would be no bread, cheese, or beer. Our bodies are filled with
microbes, and our skin alone is home to trillions of them.[1] Some of them we can’t live without; others cause diseases
that can make us sick or even kill us.
Although much more is known today about microbial life than ever before, the vast majority of this invisible world
remains unexplored. Microbiologists continue to identify new ways that microbes benefit and threaten humans.

1. J. Hulcr et al. “A Jungle in There: Bacteria in Belly Buttons are Highly Diverse, but Predictable.” PLoS ONE 7 no. 11 (2012): e47712.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0047712.

16

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

1.1 What Our Ancestors Knew
Learning Objectives
• Describe how our ancestors improved food with the use of invisible microbes
• Describe how the causes of sickness and disease were explained in ancient times, prior to the invention of the

microscope
• Describe key historical events associated with the birth of microbiology

Most people today, even those who know very little about microbiology, are familiar with the concept of microbes, or
“germs,” and their role in human health. Schoolchildren learn about bacteria, viruses, and other microorganisms, and
many even view specimens under a microscope. But a few hundred years ago, before the invention of the microscope,
the existence of many types of microbes was impossible to prove. By definition, microorganisms, or microbes, are
very small organisms; many types of microbes are too small to see without a microscope, although some parasites
and fungi are visible to the naked eye.
Humans have been living with—and using—microorganisms for much longer than they have been able to see them.
Historical evidence suggests that humans have had some notion of microbial life since prehistoric times and have
used that knowledge to develop foods as well as prevent and treat disease. In this section, we will explore some of the
historical applications of microbiology as well as the early beginnings of microbiology as a science.

Fermented Foods and Beverages
People across the world have enjoyed fermented foods and beverages like beer, wine, bread, yogurt, cheese,
and pickled vegetables for all of recorded history. Discoveries from several archeological sites suggest that even
prehistoric people took advantage of fermentation to preserve and enhance the taste of food. Archaeologists studying
pottery jars from a Neolithic village in China found that people were making a fermented beverage from rice, honey,
and fruit as early as 7000 BC.[2]
Production of these foods and beverages requires microbial fermentation, a process that uses bacteria, mold, or yeast
to convert sugars (carbohydrates) to alcohol, gases, and organic acids (Figure 1.3). While it is likely that people first
learned about fermentation by accident—perhaps by drinking old milk that had curdled or old grape juice that had
fermented—they later learned to harness the power of fermentation to make products like bread, cheese, and wine.

Figure 1.3 A microscopic view of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the yeast responsible for making bread rise (left).
Yeast is a microorganism. Its cells metabolize the carbohydrates in flour (middle) and produce carbon dioxide, which
causes the bread to rise (right). (credit middle: modification of work by Janus Sandsgaard; credit right: modification of
work by “MDreibelbis”/Flickr)

2. P.E. McGovern et al. “Fermented Beverages of Pre- and Proto-Historic China.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 1 no. 51 (2004):17593–17598. doi:10.1073/pnas.0407921102.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Cora, a 41-year-old lawyer and mother of two, has recently been experiencing severe headaches, a high fever,
and a stiff neck. Her husband, who has accompanied Cora to see a doctor, reports that Cora also seems
confused at times and unusually drowsy. Based on these symptoms, the doctor suspects that Cora may have
meningitis, a potentially life-threatening infection of the tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord.
Meningitis has several potential causes. It can be brought on by bacteria, fungi, viruses, or even a reaction
to medication or exposure to heavy metals. Although people with viral meningitis usually heal on their own,
bacterial and fungal meningitis are quite serious and require treatment.
Cora’s doctor orders a lumbar puncture (spinal tap) to take three samples of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from
around the spinal cord (Figure 1.2). The samples will be sent to laboratories in three different departments
for testing: clinical chemistry, microbiology, and hematology. The samples will first be visually examined
to determine whether the CSF is abnormally colored or cloudy; then the CSF will be examined under a
microscope to see if it contains a normal number of red and white blood cells and to check for any abnormal
cell types. In the microbiology lab, the specimen will be centrifuged to concentrate any cells in a sediment;
this sediment will be smeared on a slide and stained with a Gram stain. Gram staining is a procedure used to
differentiate between two different types of bacteria (gram-positive and gram-negative).
About 80% of patients with bacterial meningitis will show bacteria in their CSF with a Gram stain.[3] Cora’s
Gram stain did not show any bacteria, but her doctor decides to prescribe her antibiotics just in case. Part of
the CSF sample will be cultured—put in special dishes to see if bacteria or fungi will grow. It takes some time
for most microorganisms to reproduce in sufficient quantities to be detected and analyzed.

• What types of microorganisms would be killed by antibiotic treatment?

Figure 1.2 (a) A lumbar puncture is used to take a sample of a patient’s cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing.
A needle is inserted between two vertebrae of the lower back, called the lumbar region. (b) CSF should be
clear, as in this sample. Abnormally cloudy CSF may indicate an infection but must be tested further to
confirm the presence of microorganisms. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; credit b: modification of work by James Heilman)
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

17

18

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

The Iceman Treateth
Prehistoric humans had a very limited understanding of the causes of disease, and various cultures developed different
beliefs and explanations. While many believed that illness was punishment for angering the gods or was simply the
result of fate, archaeological evidence suggests that prehistoric people attempted to treat illnesses and infections. One
example of this is Ötzi the Iceman, a 5300-year-old mummy found frozen in the ice of the Ötzal Alps on the AustrianItalian border in 1991. Because Ötzi was so well preserved by the ice, researchers discovered that he was infected
with the eggs of the parasite Trichuris trichiura, which may have caused him to have abdominal pain and anemia.
Researchers also found evidence of Borrelia burgdorferi, a bacterium that causes Lyme disease.[4] Some researchers
think Ötzi may have been trying to treat his infections with the woody fruit of the Piptoporus betulinus fungus, which
was discovered tied to his belongings.[5] This fungus has both laxative and antibiotic properties. Ötzi was also covered
in tattoos that were made by cutting incisions into his skin, filling them with herbs, and then burning the herbs.[6]
There is speculation that this may have been another attempt to treat his health ailments.

Early Notions of Disease, Contagion, and Containment
Several ancient civilizations appear to have had some understanding that disease could be transmitted by things they
could not see. This is especially evident in historical attempts to contain the spread of disease. For example, the Bible
refers to the practice of quarantining people with leprosy and other diseases, suggesting that people understood that
diseases could be communicable. Ironically, while leprosy is communicable, it is also a disease that progresses slowly.
This means that people were likely quarantined after they had already spread the disease to others.
The ancient Greeks attributed disease to bad air, mal’aria, which they called “miasmatic odors.” They developed
hygiene practices that built on this idea. The Romans also believed in the miasma hypothesis and created a complex
sanitation infrastructure to deal with sewage. In Rome, they built aqueducts, which brought fresh water into the
city, and a giant sewer, the Cloaca Maxima, which carried waste away and into the river Tiber (Figure 1.4). Some
researchers believe that this infrastructure helped protect the Romans from epidemics of waterborne illnesses.

3. Rebecca Buxton. “Examination of Gram Stains of Spinal Fluid—Bacterial Meningitis.” American Society for Microbiology. 2007.
http://www.microbelibrary.org/library/gram-stain/3065-examination-of-gram-stains-of-spinal-fluid-bacterial-meningitis
4. A. Keller et al. “New Insights into the Tyrolean Iceman's Origin and Phenotype as Inferred by Whole-Genome Sequencing.” Nature
Communications, 3 (2012): 698. doi:10.1038/ncomms1701.
5. L. Capasso. “5300 Years Ago, the Ice Man Used Natural Laxatives and Antibiotics.” The Lancet, 352 (1998) 9143: 1864. doi: 10.1016/
s0140-6736(05)79939-6.
6. L. Capasso, L. “5300 Years Ago, the Ice Man Used Natural Laxatives and Antibiotics.” The Lancet, 352 no. 9143 (1998): 1864. doi:
10.1016/s0140-6736(05)79939-6.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

19

Figure 1.4 (a) The Cloaca Maxima, or “Greatest Sewer” (shown in red), ran through ancient Rome. It was an
engineering marvel that carried waste away from the city and into the river Tiber. (b) These ancient latrines emptied
into the Cloaca Maxima.

Even before the invention of the microscope, some doctors, philosophers, and scientists made great strides in
understanding the invisible forces—what we now know as microbes—that can cause infection, disease, and death.
The Greek physician Hippocrates (460–370 BC) is considered the “father of Western medicine” (Figure 1.5). Unlike
many of his ancestors and contemporaries, he dismissed the idea that disease was caused by supernatural forces.
Instead, he posited that diseases had natural causes from within patients or their environments. Hippocrates and his
heirs are believed to have written the Hippocratic Corpus, a collection of texts that make up some of the oldest
surviving medical books.[7] Hippocrates is also often credited as the author of the Hippocratic Oath, taken by new
physicians to pledge their dedication to diagnosing and treating patients without causing harm.
7. G. Pappas et al. “Insights Into Infectious Disease in the Era of Hippocrates.” International Journal of Infectious Diseases 12 (2008)
4:347–350. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2007.11.003.

20

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

While Hippocrates is considered the father of Western medicine, the Greek philosopher and historian Thucydides
(460–395 BC) is considered the father of scientific history because he advocated for evidence-based analysis of
cause-and-effect reasoning (Figure 1.5). Among his most important contributions are his observations regarding the
Athenian plague that killed one-third of the population of Athens between 430 and 410 BC. Having survived the
epidemic himself, Thucydides made the important observation that survivors did not get re-infected with the disease,
even when taking care of actively sick people.[8] This observation shows an early understanding of the concept of
immunity.
Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 BC) was a prolific Roman writer who was one of the first people to propose the
concept that things we cannot see (what we now call microorganisms) can cause disease (Figure 1.5). In Res
Rusticae (On Farming), published in 36 BC, he said that “precautions must also be taken in neighborhood swamps
. . . because certain minute creatures [animalia minuta] grow there which cannot be seen by the eye, which float in
the air and enter the body through the mouth and nose and there cause serious diseases.”[9]

Figure 1.5 (a) Hippocrates, the “father of Western medicine,” believed that diseases had natural, not supernatural,
causes. (b) The historian Thucydides observed that survivors of the Athenian plague were subsequently immune to
the infection. (c) Marcus Terentius Varro proposed that disease could be caused by “certain minute creatures . . .
which cannot be seen by the eye.” (credit c: modification of work by Alessandro Antonelli)

• Give two examples of foods that have historically been produced by humans with the aid of microbes.
• Explain how historical understandings of disease contributed to attempts to treat and contain disease.

The Birth of Microbiology
While the ancients may have suspected the existence of invisible “minute creatures,” it wasn’t until the invention
of the microscope that their existence was definitively confirmed. While it is unclear who exactly invented the
microscope, a Dutch cloth merchant named Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) was the first to develop a lens
powerful enough to view microbes. In 1675, using a simple but powerful microscope, Leeuwenhoek was able to
observe single-celled organisms, which he described as “animalcules” or “wee little beasties,” swimming in a drop
8. Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War. The Second Book. 431 BC. Translated by Richard Crawley. http://classics.mit.edu/
Thucydides/pelopwar.2.second.html.
9. Plinio Prioreschi. A History of Medicine: Roman Medicine. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1998: p. 215.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

21

of rain water. From his drawings of these little organisms, we now know he was looking at bacteria and protists. (We
will explore Leeuwenhoek’s contributions to microscopy further in How We See the Invisible World.)
Nearly 200 years after van Leeuwenhoek got his first glimpse of microbes, the “Golden Age of Microbiology”
spawned a host of new discoveries between 1857 and 1914. Two famous microbiologists, Louis Pasteur and Robert
Koch, were especially active in advancing our understanding of the unseen world of microbes (Figure 1.6). Pasteur,
a French chemist, showed that individual microbial strains had unique properties and demonstrated that fermentation
is caused by microorganisms. He also invented pasteurization, a process used to kill microorganisms responsible for
spoilage, and developed vaccines for the treatment of diseases, including rabies, in animals and humans. Koch, a
German physician, was the first to demonstrate the connection between a single, isolated microbe and a known human
disease. For example, he discovered the bacteria that cause anthrax (Bacillus anthracis), cholera (Vibrio cholera),
and tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis).[10] We will discuss these famous microbiologists, and others, in later
chapters.

Figure 1.6 (a) Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) is credited with numerous innovations that advanced the fields of
microbiology and immunology. (b) Robert Koch (1843–1910) identified the specific microbes that cause anthrax,
cholera, and tuberculosis.

As microbiology has developed, it has allowed the broader discipline of biology to grow and flourish in previously
unimagined ways. Much of what we know about human cells comes from our understanding of microbes, and many
of the tools we use today to study cells and their genetics derive from work with microbes.

• How did the discovery of microbes change human understanding of disease?

10. S.M. Blevins and M.S. Bronze. “Robert Koch and the ‘Golden Age’ of Bacteriology.” International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 14
no. 9 (2010): e744-e751. doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2009.12.003.

22

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Micro Connections
Microbiology Toolbox
Because individual microbes are generally too small to be seen with the naked eye, the science of microbiology
is dependent on technology that can artificially enhance the capacity of our natural senses of perception. Early
microbiologists like Pasteur and Koch had fewer tools at their disposal than are found in modern laboratories,
making their discoveries and innovations that much more impressive. Later chapters of this text will explore
many applications of technology in depth, but for now, here is a brief overview of some of the fundamental
tools of the microbiology lab.

• Microscopes produce magnified images of microorganisms, human cells and tissues, and many other
types of specimens too small to be observed with the naked eye.

• Stains and dyes are used to add color to microbes so they can be better observed under a
microscope. Some dyes can be used on living microbes, whereas others require that the specimens
be fixed with chemicals or heat before staining. Some stains only work on certain types of microbes
because of differences in their cellular chemical composition.

• Growth media are used to grow microorganisms in a lab setting. Some media are liquids; others are
more solid or gel-like. A growth medium provides nutrients, including water, various salts, a source of
carbon (like glucose), and a source of nitrogen and amino acids (like yeast extract) so microorganisms
can grow and reproduce. Ingredients in a growth medium can be modified to grow unique types of
microorganisms.

• A Petri dish is a flat-lidded dish that is typically 10–11 centimeters (cm) in diameter and 1–1.5 cm high.
Petri dishes made out of either plastic or glass are used to hold growth media (Figure 1.7).

• Test tubes are cylindrical plastic or glass tubes with rounded bottoms and open tops. They can be
used to grow microbes in broth, or semisolid or solid growth media.

• A Bunsen burner is a metal apparatus that creates a flame that can be used to sterilize pieces of
equipment. A rubber tube carries gas (fuel) to the burner. In many labs, Bunsen burners are being
phased out in favor of infrared microincinerators, which serve a similar purpose without the safety
risks of an open flame.

• An inoculation loop is a handheld tool that ends in a small wire loop (Figure 1.7). The loop can be
used to streak microorganisms on agar in a Petri dish or to transfer them from one test tube to another.
Before each use, the inoculation loop must be sterilized so cultures do not become contaminated.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

23

Figure 1.7 (a) This Petri dish filled with agar has been streaked with Legionella, the bacterium responsible
for causing Legionnaire’s disease. (b) An inoculation loop like this one can be used to streak bacteria on agar
in a Petri dish. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:
modification of work by Jeffrey M. Vinocur)

1.2 A Systematic Approach
Learning Objectives
• Describe how microorganisms are classified and distinguished as unique species
• Compare historical and current systems of taxonomy used to classify microorganisms

Once microbes became visible to humans with the help of microscopes, scientists began to realize their enormous
diversity. Microorganisms vary in all sorts of ways, including their size, their appearance, and their rates of
reproduction. To study this incredibly diverse new array of organisms, researchers needed a way to systematically
organize them.

The Science of Taxonomy
Taxonomy is the classification, description, identification, and naming of living organisms. Classification is the
practice of organizing organisms into different groups based on their shared characteristics. The most famous
early taxonomist was a Swedish botanist, zoologist, and physician named Carolus Linnaeus (1701–1778). In 1735,
Linnaeus published Systema Naturae, an 11-page booklet in which he proposed the Linnaean taxonomy, a system
of categorizing and naming organisms using a standard format so scientists could discuss organisms using consistent
terminology. He continued to revise and add to the book, which grew into multiple volumes (Figure 1.8).

24

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Figure 1.8 Swedish botanist, zoologist, and physician Carolus Linnaeus developed a new system for categorizing
plants and animals. In this 1853 portrait by Hendrik Hollander, Linnaeus is holding a twinflower, named Linnaea
borealis in his honor.

In his taxonomy, Linnaeus divided the natural world into three kingdoms: animal, plant, and mineral (the mineral
kingdom was later abandoned). Within the animal and plant kingdoms, he grouped organisms using a hierarchy of
increasingly specific levels and sublevels based on their similarities. The names of the levels in Linnaeus’s original
taxonomy were kingdom, class, order, family, genus (plural: genera), and species. Species was, and continues to be,
the most specific and basic taxonomic unit.

Evolving Trees of Life (Phylogenies)
With advances in technology, other scientists gradually made refinements to the Linnaean system and eventually
created new systems for classifying organisms. In the 1800s, there was a growing interest in developing taxonomies
that took into account the evolutionary relationships, or phylogenies, of all different species of organisms on earth.
One way to depict these relationships is via a diagram called a phylogenetic tree (or tree of life). In these diagrams,
groups of organisms are arranged by how closely related they are thought to be. In early phylogenetic trees, the
relatedness of organisms was inferred by their visible similarities, such as the presence or absence of hair or the
number of limbs. Now, the analysis is more complicated. Today, phylogenic analyses include genetic, biochemical,
and embryological comparisons, as will be discussed later in this chapter.
Linnaeus’s tree of life contained just two main branches for all living things: the animal and plant kingdoms. In 1866,
Ernst Haeckel, a German biologist, philosopher, and physician, proposed another kingdom, Protista, for unicellular
organisms (Figure 1.9). He later proposed a fourth kingdom, Monera, for unicellular organisms whose cells lack
nuclei, like bacteria.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

25

Figure 1.9 Ernst Haeckel’s rendering of the tree of life, from his 1866 book General Morphology of Organisms,
contained three kingdoms: Plantae, Protista, and Animalia. He later added a fourth kingdom, Monera, for unicellular
organisms lacking a nucleus.

Nearly 100 years later, in 1969, American ecologist Robert Whittaker (1920–1980) proposed adding another
kingdom—Fungi—in his tree of life. Whittaker’s tree also contained a level of categorization above the kingdom
level—the empire or superkingdom level—to distinguish between organisms that have membrane-bound nuclei in
their cells (eukaryotes) and those that do not (prokaryotes). Empire Prokaryota contained just the Kingdom Monera.
The Empire Eukaryota contained the other four kingdoms: Fungi, Protista, Plantae, and Animalia. Whittaker’s fivekingdom tree was considered the standard phylogeny for many years.
Figure 1.10 shows how the tree of life has changed over time. Note that viruses are not found in any of these trees.
That is because they are not made up of cells and thus it is difficult to determine where they would fit into a tree of
life.

26

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Figure 1.10 This timeline shows how the shape of the tree of life has changed over the centuries. Even today, the
taxonomy of living organisms is continually being reevaluated and refined with advances in technology.

• Briefly summarize how our evolving understanding of microorganisms has contributed to changes in the way
that organisms are classified.

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Antibiotic drugs are specifically designed to kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria. But after a couple of days on
antibiotics, Cora shows no signs of improvement. Also, her CSF cultures came back from the lab negative.
Since bacteria or fungi were not isolated from Cora’s CSF sample, her doctor rules out bacterial and fungal
meningitis. Viral meningitis is still a possibility.
However, Cora now reports some troubling new symptoms. She is starting to have difficulty walking. Her
muscle stiffness has spread from her neck to the rest of her body, and her limbs sometimes jerk involuntarily.
In addition, Cora’s cognitive symptoms are worsening. At this point, Cora’s doctor becomes very concerned
and orders more tests on the CSF samples.

• What types of microorganisms could be causing Cora’s symptoms?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

27

Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

The Role of Genetics in Modern Taxonomy
Haeckel’s and Whittaker’s trees presented hypotheses about the phylogeny of different organisms based on readily
observable characteristics. But the advent of molecular genetics in the late 20th century revealed other ways to
organize phylogenetic trees. Genetic methods allow for a standardized way to compare all living organisms without
relying on observable characteristics that can often be subjective. Modern taxonomy relies heavily on comparing the
nucleic acids (deoxyribonucleic acid [DNA] or ribonucleic acid [RNA]) or proteins from different organisms. The
more similar the nucleic acids and proteins are between two organisms, the more closely related they are considered
to be.
In the 1970s, American microbiologist Carl Woese discovered what appeared to be a “living record” of the evolution
of organisms. He and his collaborator George Fox created a genetics-based tree of life based on similarities and
differences they observed in the small subunit ribosomal RNA (rRNA) of different organisms. In the process, they
discovered that a certain type of bacteria, called archaebacteria (now known simply as archaea), were significantly
different from other bacteria and eukaryotes in terms of the sequence of small subunit rRNA. To accommodate this
difference, they created a tree with three Domains above the level of Kingdom: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya
(Figure 1.11). Genetic analysis of the small subunit rRNA suggests archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes all evolved
from a common ancestral cell type. The tree is skewed to show a closer evolutionary relationship between Archaea
and Eukarya than they have to Bacteria.

Figure 1.11 Woese and Fox’s phylogenetic tree contains three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Domains
Archaea and Bacteria contain all prokaryotic organisms, and Eukarya contains all eukaryotic organisms. (credit:
modification of work by Eric Gaba)

Scientists continue to use analysis of RNA, DNA, and proteins to determine how organisms are related. One
interesting, and complicating, discovery is that of horizontal gene transfer—when a gene of one species is absorbed
into another organism’s genome. Horizontal gene transfer is especially common in microorganisms and can make it
difficult to determine how organisms are evolutionarily related. Consequently, some scientists now think in terms of
“webs of life” rather than “trees of life.”

28

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

• In modern taxonomy, how do scientists determine how closely two organisms are related?
• Explain why the branches on the “tree of life” all originate from a single “trunk.”

Naming Microbes
In developing his taxonomy, Linnaeus used a system of binomial nomenclature, a two-word naming system for
identifying organisms by genus and species. For example, modern humans are in the genus Homo and have the species
name sapiens, so their scientific name in binomial nomenclature is Homo sapiens. In binomial nomenclature, the
genus part of the name is always capitalized; it is followed by the species name, which is not capitalized. Both names
are italicized.
Taxonomic names in the 18th through 20th centuries were typically derived from Latin, since that was the common
language used by scientists when taxonomic systems were first created. Today, newly discovered organisms can
be given names derived from Latin, Greek, or English. Sometimes these names reflect some distinctive trait of
the organism; in other cases, microorganisms are named after the scientists who discovered them. The archaeon
Haloquadratum walsbyi is an example of both of these naming schemes. The genus, Haloquadratum, describes
the microorganism’s saltwater habitat (halo is derived from the Greek word for “salt”) as well as the arrangement
of its square cells, which are arranged in square clusters of four cells (quadratum is Latin for “foursquare”).
The species, walsbyi, is named after Anthony Edward Walsby, the microbiologist who discovered Haloquadratum
walsbyi in in 1980. While it might seem easier to give an organism a common descriptive name—like a redheaded woodpecker—we can imagine how that could become problematic. What happens when another species of
woodpecker with red head coloring is discovered? The systematic nomenclature scientists use eliminates this potential
problem by assigning each organism a single, unique two-word name that is recognized by scientists all over the
world.
In this text, we will typically abbreviate an organism’s genus and species after its first mention. The abbreviated
form is simply the first initial of the genus, followed by a period and the full name of the species. For example, the
bacterium Escherichia coli is shortened to E. coli in its abbreviated form. You will encounter this same convention in
other scientific texts as well.

Bergey’s Manuals
Whether in a tree or a web, microbes can be difficult to identify and classify. Without easily observable macroscopic
features like feathers, feet, or fur, scientists must capture, grow, and devise ways to study their biochemical properties
to differentiate and classify microbes. Despite these hurdles, a group of microbiologists created and updated a set
of manuals for identifying and classifying microorganisms. First published in 1923 and since updated many times,
Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology and Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology are the standard
references for identifying and classifying different prokaryotes. (Appendix D of this textbook is partly based
on Bergey’s manuals; it shows how the organisms that appear in this textbook are classified.) Because so many
bacteria look identical, methods based on nonvisual characteristics must be used to identify them. For example,
biochemical tests can be used to identify chemicals unique to certain species. Likewise, serological tests can be used
to identify specific antibodies that will react against the proteins found in certain species. Ultimately, DNA and rRNA
sequencing can be used both for identifying a particular bacterial species and for classifying newly discovered species.

• What is binomial nomenclature and why is it a useful tool for naming organisms?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

29

• Explain why a resource like one of Bergey’s manuals would be helpful in identifying a microorganism in a
sample.

Micro Connections
Same Name, Different Strain
Within one species of microorganism, there can be several subtypes called strains. While different strains
may be nearly identical genetically, they can have very different attributes. The bacterium Escherichia coli is
infamous for causing food poisoning and traveler’s diarrhea. However, there are actually many different strains
of E. coli, and they vary in their ability to cause disease.
One pathogenic (disease-causing) E. coli strain that you may have heard of is E. coli O157:H7. In humans,
infection from E. coli O157:H7 can cause abdominal cramps and diarrhea. Infection usually originates from
contaminated water or food, particularly raw vegetables and undercooked meat. In the 1990s, there were
several large outbreaks of E. coli O157:H7 thought to have originated in undercooked hamburgers.
While E. coli O157:H7 and some other strains have given E. coli a bad name, most E. coli strains do not cause
disease. In fact, some can be helpful. Different strains of E. coli found naturally in our gut help us digest our
food, provide us with some needed chemicals, and fight against pathogenic microbes.

Link to Learning
Learn more about phylogenetic trees by exploring the Wellcome Trust’s
interactive Tree of Life. The website (https://www.openstax.org/l/22wellcome)
contains information, photos, and animations about many different organisms.
Select two organisms to see how they are evolutionarily related.

1.3 Types of Microorganisms
Learning Objectives
• List the various types of microorganisms and describe their defining characteristics
• Give examples of different types of cellular and viral microorganisms and infectious agents
• Describe the similarities and differences between archaea and bacteria
• Provide an overview of the field of microbiology

Most microbes are unicellular and small enough that they require artificial magnification to be seen. However,
there are some unicellular microbes that are visible to the naked eye, and some multicellular organisms that are
microscopic. An object must measure about 100 micrometers (µm) to be visible without a microscope, but most
microorganisms are many times smaller than that. For some perspective, consider that a typical animal cell measures
roughly 10 µm across but is still microscopic. Bacterial cells are typically about 1 µm, and viruses can be 10 times
smaller than bacteria (Figure 1.12). See Table 1.1 for units of length used in microbiology.

30

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Figure 1.12 The relative sizes of various microscopic and nonmicroscopic objects. Note that a typical virus
measures about 100 nm, 10 times smaller than a typical bacterium (~1 µm), which is at least 10 times smaller than a
typical plant or animal cell (~10–100 µm). An object must measure about 100 µm to be visible without a microscope.

Units of Length Commonly Used in Microbiology
Metric Unit

Meaning of Prefix

Metric Equivalent

meter (m)

—

1 m = 100 m

decimeter (dm)

1/10

1 dm = 0.1 m = 10−1 m

centimeter (cm)

1/100

1 cm = 0.01 m = 10−2 m

millimeter (mm)

1/1000

1 mm = 0.001 m = 10−3 m

micrometer (μm)

1/1,000,000

1 μm = 0.000001 m = 10−6 m

nanometer (nm)

1/1,000,000,000

1 nm = 0.000000001 m = 10−9 m

Table 1.1

Microorganisms differ from each other not only in size, but also in structure, habitat, metabolism, and many other
characteristics. While we typically think of microorganisms as being unicellular, there are also many multicellular
organisms that are too small to be seen without a microscope. Some microbes, such as viruses, are even acellular (not
composed of cells).
Microorganisms are found in each of the three domains of life: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. Microbes within
the domains Bacteria and Archaea are all prokaryotes (their cells lack a nucleus), whereas microbes in the domain
Eukarya are eukaryotes (their cells have a nucleus). Some microorganisms, such as viruses, do not fall within any
of the three domains of life. In this section, we will briefly introduce each of the broad groups of microbes. Later
chapters will go into greater depth about the diverse species within each group.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

31

Link to Learning
How big is a bacterium or a virus compared to other objects? Check out this
interactive website (https://www.openstax.org/l/22relsizes) to get a feel for
the scale of different microorganisms.

Prokaryotic Microorganisms
Bacteria are found in nearly every habitat on earth, including within and on humans. Most bacteria are harmless or
helpful, but some are pathogens, causing disease in humans and other animals. Bacteria are prokaryotic because their
genetic material (DNA) is not housed within a true nucleus. Most bacteria have cell walls that contain peptidoglycan.
Bacteria are often described in terms of their general shape. Common shapes include spherical (coccus), rod-shaped
(bacillus), or curved (spirillum, spirochete, or vibrio). Figure 1.13 shows examples of these shapes.

Figure 1.13 Common bacterial shapes. Note how coccobacillus is a combination of spherical (coccus) and rodshaped (bacillus). (credit “Coccus”: modification of work by Janice Haney Carr, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; credit “Coccobacillus”: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
credit “Spirochete”: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

They have a wide range of metabolic capabilities and can grow in a variety of environments, using different
combinations of nutrients. Some bacteria are photosynthetic, such as oxygenic cyanobacteria and anoxygenic green
sulfur and green nonsulfur bacteria; these bacteria use energy derived from sunlight, and fix carbon dioxide for
growth. Other types of bacteria are nonphotosynthetic, obtaining their energy from organic or inorganic compounds
in their environment.
Archaea are also unicellular prokaryotic organisms. Archaea and bacteria have different evolutionary histories,
as well as significant differences in genetics, metabolic pathways, and the composition of their cell walls and
membranes. Unlike most bacteria, archaeal cell walls do not contain peptidoglycan, but their cell walls are often
composed of a similar substance called pseudopeptidoglycan. Like bacteria, archaea are found in nearly every habitat
on earth, even extreme environments that are very cold, very hot, very basic, or very acidic (Figure 1.14). Some
archaea live in the human body, but none have been shown to be human pathogens.

32

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Figure 1.14 Some archaea live in extreme environments, such as the Morning Glory pool, a hot spring in
Yellowstone National Park. The color differences in the pool result from the different communities of microbes that are
able to thrive at various water temperatures.

• What are the two main types of prokaryotic organisms?
• Name some of the defining characteristics of each type.

Eukaryotic Microorganisms
The domain Eukarya contains all eukaryotes, including uni- or multicellular eukaryotes such as protists, fungi, plants,
and animals. The major defining characteristic of eukaryotes is that their cells contain a nucleus.

Protists
Protists are unicellular eukaryotes that are not plants, animals, or fungi. Algae and protozoa are examples of protists.
Algae (singular: alga) are plant-like protists that can be either unicellular or multicellular (Figure 1.15). Their cells
are surrounded by cell walls made of cellulose, a type of carbohydrate. Algae are photosynthetic organisms that
extract energy from the sun and release oxygen and carbohydrates into their environment. Because other organisms
can use their waste products for energy, algae are important parts of many ecosystems. Many consumer products
contain ingredients derived from algae, such as carrageenan or alginic acid, which are found in some brands of
ice cream, salad dressing, beverages, lipstick, and toothpaste. A derivative of algae also plays a prominent role in
the microbiology laboratory. Agar, a gel derived from algae, can be mixed with various nutrients and used to grow
microorganisms in a Petri dish. Algae are also being developed as a possible source for biofuels.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

33

Figure 1.15 Assorted diatoms, a kind of algae, live in annual sea ice in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Diatoms range
in size from 2 μm to 200 μm and are visualized here using light microscopy. (credit: modification of work by National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)

Protozoa (singular: protozoan) are protists that make up the backbone of many food webs by providing nutrients for
other organisms. Protozoa are very diverse. Some protozoa move with help from hair-like structures called cilia or
whip-like structures called flagella. Others extend part of their cell membrane and cytoplasm to propel themselves
forward. These cytoplasmic extensions are called pseudopods (“false feet”). Some protozoa are photosynthetic; others
feed on organic material. Some are free-living, whereas others are parasitic, only able to survive by extracting
nutrients from a host organism. Most protozoa are harmless, but some are pathogens that can cause disease in animals
or humans (Figure 1.16).

Figure 1.16 Giardia lamblia, an intestinal protozoan parasite that infects humans and other mammals, causing
severe diarrhea. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Fungi
Fungi (singular: fungus) are also eukaryotes. Some multicellular fungi, such as mushrooms, resemble plants, but they
are actually quite different. Fungi are not photosynthetic, and their cell walls are usually made out of chitin rather
than cellulose.
Unicellular fungi—yeasts—are included within the study of microbiology. There are more than 1000 known species.
Yeasts are found in many different environments, from the deep sea to the human navel. Some yeasts have beneficial

34

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

uses, such as causing bread to rise and beverages to ferment; but yeasts can also cause food to spoil. Some even cause
diseases, such as vaginal yeast infections and oral thrush (Figure 1.17).

Figure 1.17 Candida albicans is a unicellular fungus, or yeast. It is the causative agent of vaginal yeast infections as
well as oral thrush, a yeast infection of the mouth that commonly afflicts infants. C. albicans has a morphology similar
to that of coccus bacteria; however, yeast is a eukaryotic organism (note the nuclei) and is much larger. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Other fungi of interest to microbiologists are multicellular organisms called molds. Molds are made up of long
filaments that form visible colonies (Figure 1.18). Molds are found in many different environments, from soil to
rotting food to dank bathroom corners. Molds play a critical role in the decomposition of dead plants and animals.
Some molds can cause allergies, and others produce disease-causing metabolites called mycotoxins. Molds have been
used to make pharmaceuticals, including penicillin, which is one of the most commonly prescribed antibiotics, and
cyclosporine, used to prevent organ rejection following a transplant.

Figure 1.18 Large colonies of microscopic fungi can often be observed with the naked eye, as seen on the surface
of these moldy oranges.

• Name two types of protists and two types of fungi.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

35

• Name some of the defining characteristics of each type.

Helminths
Multicellular parasitic worms called helminths are not technically microorganisms, as most are large enough to
see without a microscope. However, these worms fall within the field of microbiology because diseases caused by
helminths involve microscopic eggs and larvae. One example of a helminth is the guinea worm, or Dracunculus
medinensis, which causes dizziness, vomiting, diarrhea, and painful ulcers on the legs and feet when the worm works
its way out of the skin (Figure 1.19). Infection typically occurs after a person drinks water containing water fleas
infected by guinea-worm larvae. In the mid-1980s, there were an estimated 3.5 million cases of guinea-worm disease,
but the disease has been largely eradicated. In 2014, there were only 126 cases reported, thanks to the coordinated
efforts of the World Health Organization (WHO) and other groups committed to improvements in drinking water
sanitation.[11][12]

Figure 1.19 (a) The beef tapeworm, Taenia saginata, infects both cattle and humans. T. saginata eggs are
microscopic (around 50 µm), but adult worms like the one shown here can reach 4–10 m, taking up residence in the
digestive system. (b) An adult guinea worm, Dracunculus medinensis, is removed through a lesion in the patient’s
skin by winding it around a matchstick. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Viruses
Viruses are acellular microorganisms, which means they are not composed of cells. Essentially, a virus consists
of proteins and genetic material—either DNA or RNA, but never both—that are inert outside of a host organism.
However, by incorporating themselves into a host cell, viruses are able to co-opt the host’s cellular mechanisms to
multiply and infect other hosts.
Viruses can infect all types of cells, from human cells to the cells of other microorganisms. In humans, viruses are
responsible for numerous diseases, from the common cold to deadly Ebola (Figure 1.20). However, many viruses
do not cause disease.

11. C. Greenaway “Dracunculiasis (Guinea Worm Disease).” Canadian Medical Association Journal 170 no. 4 (2004):495–500.
12. World Health Organization. “Dracunculiasis (Guinea-Worm Disease).” WHO. 2015. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs359/
en/. Accessed October 2, 2015.

36

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Figure 1.20 (a) Members of the Coronavirus family can cause respiratory infections like the common cold, severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS). Here they are viewed under a
transmission electron microscope (TEM). (b) Ebolavirus, a member of the Filovirus family, as visualized using a TEM.
(credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by
Thomas W. Geisbert)

• Are helminths microorganisms? Explain why or why not.
• How are viruses different from other microorganisms?

Microbiology as a Field of Study
Microbiology is a broad term that encompasses the study of all different types of microorganisms. But in practice,
microbiologists tend to specialize in one of several subfields. For example, bacteriology is the study of bacteria;
mycology is the study of fungi; protozoology is the study of protozoa; parasitology is the study of helminths and
other parasites; and virology is the study of viruses (Figure 1.21). Immunology, the study of the immune system,
is often included in the study of microbiology because host–pathogen interactions are central to our understanding
of infectious disease processes. Microbiologists can also specialize in certain areas of microbiology, such as clinical
microbiology, environmental microbiology, applied microbiology, or food microbiology.
In this textbook, we are primarily concerned with clinical applications of microbiology, but since the various subfields
of microbiology are highly interrelated, we will often discuss applications that are not strictly clinical.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

37

Figure 1.21 A virologist samples eggs from this nest to be tested for the influenza A virus, which causes avian flu in
birds. (credit: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)

Eye on Ethics

Bioethics in Microbiology
In the 1940s, the U.S. government was looking for a solution to a medical problem: the prevalence of sexually
transmitted diseases (STDs) among soldiers. Several now-infamous government-funded studies used human
subjects to research common STDs and treatments. In one such study, American researchers intentionally
exposed more than 1300 human subjects in Guatemala to syphilis, gonorrhea, and chancroid to determine the
ability of penicillin and other antibiotics to combat these diseases. Subjects of the study included Guatemalan
soldiers, prisoners, prostitutes, and psychiatric patients—none of whom were informed that they were taking
part in the study. Researchers exposed subjects to STDs by various methods, from facilitating intercourse with
infected prostitutes to inoculating subjects with the bacteria known to cause the diseases. This latter method
involved making a small wound on the subject’s genitals or elsewhere on the body, and then putting bacteria
directly into the wound.[13] In 2011, a U.S. government commission tasked with investigating the experiment
revealed that only some of the subjects were treated with penicillin, and 83 subjects died by 1953, likely as a
result of the study.[14]
Unfortunately, this is one of many horrific examples of microbiology experiments that have violated basic
ethical standards. Even if this study had led to a life-saving medical breakthrough (it did not), few would argue
that its methods were ethically sound or morally justifiable. But not every case is so clear cut. Professionals
working in clinical settings are frequently confronted with ethical dilemmas, such as working with patients who

38

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

decline a vaccine or life-saving blood transfusion. These are just two examples of life-and-death decisions that
may intersect with the religious and philosophical beliefs of both the patient and the health-care professional.
No matter how noble the goal, microbiology studies and clinical practice must be guided by a certain set of
ethical principles. Studies must be done with integrity. Patients and research subjects provide informed consent
(not only agreeing to be treated or studied but demonstrating an understanding of the purpose of the study and
any risks involved). Patients’ rights must be respected. Procedures must be approved by an institutional review
board. When working with patients, accurate record-keeping, honest communication, and confidentiality are
paramount. Animals used for research must be treated humanely, and all protocols must be approved by an
institutional animal care and use committee. These are just a few of the ethical principles explored in the Eye
on Ethics boxes throughout this book.

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Cora’s CSF samples show no signs of inflammation or infection, as would be expected with a viral infection.
However, there is a high concentration of a particular protein, 14-3-3 protein, in her CSF. An
electroencephalogram (EEG) of her brain function is also abnormal. The EEG resembles that of a patient with a
neurodegenerative disease like Alzheimer’s or Huntington’s, but Cora’s rapid cognitive decline is not consistent
with either of these. Instead, her doctor concludes that Cora has Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), a type of
transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE).
CJD is an extremely rare disease, with only about 300 cases in the United States each year. It is not caused
by a bacterium, fungus, or virus, but rather by prions—which do not fit neatly into any particular category of
microbe. Like viruses, prions are not found on the tree of life because they are acellular. Prions are extremely
small, about one-tenth the size of a typical virus. They contain no genetic material and are composed solely of
a type of abnormal protein.
CJD can have several different causes. It can be acquired through exposure to the brain or nervoussystem tissue of an infected person or animal. Consuming meat from an infected animal is one way such
exposure can occur. There have also been rare cases of exposure to CJD through contact with contaminated
surgical equipment[15] and from cornea and growth-hormone donors who unknowingly had CJD.[16][17] In rare
cases, the disease results from a specific genetic mutation that can sometimes be hereditary. However, in
approximately 85% of patients with CJD, the cause of the disease is spontaneous (or sporadic) and has no
identifiable cause.[18] Based on her symptoms and their rapid progression, Cora is diagnosed with sporadic
CJD.
Unfortunately for Cora, CJD is a fatal disease for which there is no approved treatment. Approximately 90%
of patients die within 1 year of diagnosis.[19] Her doctors focus on limiting her pain and cognitive symptoms as
her disease progresses. Eight months later, Cora dies. Her CJD diagnosis is confirmed with a brain autopsy.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

13. Kara Rogers. “Guatemala Syphilis Experiment: American Medical Research Project”. Encylopaedia Britannica.
http://www.britannica.com/event/Guatemala-syphilis-experiment. Accessed June 24, 2015.
14. Susan Donaldson James. “Syphilis Experiments Shock, But So Do Third-World Drug Trials.” ABC World News. August 30, 2011.
http://abcnews.go.com/Health/guatemala-syphilis-experiments-shock-us-drug-trials-exploit/story?id=14414902. Accessed June 24, 2015.
15. Greg Botelho. “Case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Confirmed in New Hampshire.” CNN. 2013. http://www.cnn.com/2013/09/20/health/
creutzfeldt-jakob-brain-disease/.
16. P. Rudge et al. “Iatrogenic CJD Due to Pituitary-Derived Growth Hormone With Genetically Determined Incubation Times of Up to 40
Years.” Brain 138 no. 11 (2015): 3386–3399.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

39

Summary
1.1 What Our Ancestors Knew
• Microorganisms (or microbes) are living organisms that are generally too small to be seen without a
microscope.
• Throughout history, humans have used microbes to make fermented foods such as beer, bread, cheese, and
wine.
• Long before the invention of the microscope, some people theorized that infection and disease were spread
by living things that were too small to be seen. They also correctly intuited certain principles regarding the
spread of disease and immunity.
• Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, using a microscope, was the first to actually describe observations of bacteria, in
1675.
• During the Golden Age of Microbiology (1857–1914), microbiologists, including Louis Pasteur and Robert
Koch, discovered many new connections between the fields of microbiology and medicine.
1.2 A Systematic Approach
• Carolus Linnaeus developed a taxonomic system for categorizing organisms into related groups.
• Binomial nomenclature assigns organisms Latinized scientific names with a genus and species designation.
• A phylogenetic tree is a way of showing how different organisms are thought to be related to one another
from an evolutionary standpoint.
• The first phylogenetic tree contained kingdoms for plants and animals; Ernst Haeckel proposed adding
kingdom for protists.
• Robert Whittaker’s tree contained five kingdoms: Animalia, Plantae, Protista, Fungi, and Monera.
• Carl Woese used small subunit ribosomal RNA to create a phylogenetic tree that groups organisms into three
domains based on their genetic similarity.
• Bergey’s manuals of determinative and systemic bacteriology are the standard references for identifying and
classifying bacteria, respectively.
• Bacteria can be identified through biochemical tests, DNA/RNA analysis, and serological testing methods.
1.3 Types of Microorganisms
• Microorganisms are very diverse and are found in all three domains of life: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya.
• Archaea and bacteria are classified as prokaryotes because they lack a cellular nucleus. Archaea differ from
bacteria in evolutionary history, genetics, metabolic pathways, and cell wall and membrane composition.
• Archaea inhabit nearly every environment on earth, but no archaea have been identified as human pathogens.
• Eukaryotes studied in microbiology include algae, protozoa, fungi, and helminths.
• Algae are plant-like organisms that can be either unicellular or multicellular, and derive energy via
photosynthesis.
• Protozoa are unicellular organisms with complex cell structures; most are motile.
• Microscopic fungi include molds and yeasts.
• Helminths are multicellular parasitic worms. They are included in the field of microbiology because their
eggs and larvae are often microscopic.
• Viruses are acellular microorganisms that require a host to reproduce.

17. J.G. Heckmann et al. “Transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease via a Corneal Transplant.” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &
Psychiatry 63 no. 3 (1997): 388–390.
18. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Fact Sheet.” NIH. 2015. http://www.ninds.nih.gov/
disorders/cjd/detail_cjd.htm#288133058.
19. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Fact Sheet.” NIH. 2015. http://www.ninds.nih.gov/
disorders/cjd/detail_cjd.htm#288133058. Accessed June 22, 2015.

40

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

• The field of microbiology is extremely broad. Microbiologists typically specialize in one of many subfields,
but all health professionals need a solid foundation in clinical microbiology.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. Which of the following foods is NOT made by
fermentation?
a. beer
b. bread
c. cheese
d. orange juice
2. Who is considered the “father of Western medicine”?
a.
b.
c.
d.

Marcus Terentius Varro
Thucydides
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Hippocrates

3. Who was the first to observe “animalcules” under
the microscope?
a. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
b. Ötzi the Iceman
c. Marcus Terentius Varro
d. Robert Koch
4. Who proposed that swamps might harbor tiny,
disease-causing animals too small to see?
a. Thucydides
b. Marcus Terentius Varro
c. Hippocrates
d. Louis Pasteur
5. Which of the following was NOT a kingdom in
Linnaeus’s taxonomy?
a. animal
b. mineral
c. protist
d. plant
6. Which of the following is a correct usage of binomial
nomenclature?
a. Homo Sapiens
b. homo sapiens
c. Homo sapiens
d. Homo Sapiens
7. Which scientist proposed adding a kingdom for
protists?
a. Carolus Linnaeus
b. Carl Woese
c. Robert Whittaker
d. Ernst Haeckel

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

8. Which of the following is NOT a domain in Woese
and Fox’s phylogenetic tree?
a. Plantae
b. Bacteria
c. Archaea
d. Eukarya
9. Which of the following is the standard resource for
identifying bacteria?
a. Systema Naturae
b. Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology
c. Woese and Fox’s phylogenetic tree
d. Haeckel’s General Morphology of Organisms
10. Which of the following types of microorganisms is
photosynthetic?
a. yeast
b. virus
c. helminth
d. alga
11. Which of the following is a prokaryotic
microorganism?
a. helminth
b. protozoan
c. cyanobacterium
d. mold
12. Which of the following is acellular?
a. virus
b. bacterium
c. fungus
d. protozoan
13. Which of the following is a type of fungal
microorganism?
a. bacterium
b. protozoan
c. alga
d. yeast
14. Which of the following is not a subfield of
microbiology?
a. bacteriology
b. botany
c. clinical microbiology
d. virology

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

41

Fill in the Blank

15. Thucydides is known as the father of _______________.
16. Researchers think that Ötzi the Iceman may have been infected with _____ disease.
17. The process by which microbes turn grape juice into wine is called _______________.
18. In binomial nomenclature, an organism’s scientific name includes its ________ and __________.
19. Whittaker proposed adding the kingdoms ________ and ________ to his phylogenetic tree.
20. __________ are organisms without membrane-bound nuclei.
21. ______ are microorganisms that are not included in phylogenetic trees because they are acellular.
22. A ________ is a disease-causing microorganism.
23. Multicellular parasitic worms studied by microbiologists are called ___________.
24. The study of viruses is ___________.
25. The cells of prokaryotic organisms lack a _______.
Short Answer

26. What did Thucydides learn by observing the Athenian plague?
27. Why was the invention of the microscope important for microbiology?
28. What are some ways people use microbes?
29. What is a phylogenetic tree?
30. Which of the five kingdoms in Whittaker’s phylogenetic tree are prokaryotic, and which are eukaryotic?
31. What molecule did Woese and Fox use to construct their phylogenetic tree?
32. Name some techniques that can be used to identify and differentiate species of bacteria.
33. Describe the differences between bacteria and archaea.
34. Name three structures that various protozoa use for locomotion.
35. Describe the actual and relative sizes of a virus, a bacterium, and a plant or animal cell.
Critical Thinking

36. Explain how the discovery of fermented foods likely benefited our ancestors.
37. What evidence would you use to support this statement: Ancient people thought that disease was transmitted by
things they could not see.
38. Why is using binomial nomenclature more useful than using common names?

42

39. Label the three Domains found on modern phylogenetic trees.

40. Contrast the behavior of a virus outside versus inside a cell.
41. Where would a virus, bacterium, animal cell, and a prion belong on this chart?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 1 | An Invisible World

Chapter 3 | The Cell

89

Chapter 3

The Cell
To Table of Contents

Figure 3.1 Microorganisms vary visually in their size and shape, as can be observed microscopically; but they also
vary in invisible ways, such as in their metabolic capabilities. (credit a, e, f: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by NIAID; credit c: modification of work by CSIRO;
credit d: modification of work by “Microscopic World”/YouTube)

Chapter Outline
3.1 Spontaneous Generation
3.2 Foundations of Modern Cell Theory
3.3 Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells
3.4 Unique Characteristics of Eukaryotic Cells

Introduction
Life takes many forms, from giant redwood trees towering hundreds of feet in the air to the tiniest known microbes,
which measure only a few billionths of a meter. Humans have long pondered life’s origins and debated the defining
characteristics of life, but our understanding of these concepts has changed radically since the invention of the
microscope. In the 17th century, observations of microscopic life led to the development of the cell theory: the idea
that the fundamental unit of life is the cell, that all organisms contain at least one cell, and that cells only come from
other cells.
Despite sharing certain characteristics, cells may vary significantly. The two main types of cells are prokaryotic cells
(lacking a nucleus) and eukaryotic cells (containing a well-organized, membrane-bound nucleus). Each type of cell
exhibits remarkable variety in structure, function, and metabolic activity (Figure 3.1). This chapter will focus on the
historical discoveries that have shaped our current understanding of microbes, including their origins and their role in
human disease. We will then explore the distinguishing structures found in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.

90

Chapter 3 | The Cell

3.1 Spontaneous Generation
Learning Objectives
• Explain the theory of spontaneous generation and why people once accepted it as an explanation for the

existence of certain types of organisms
• Explain how certain individuals (van Helmont, Redi, Needham, Spallanzani, and Pasteur) tried to prove or

disprove spontaneous generation
Humans have been asking for millennia: Where does new life come from? Religion, philosophy, and science have all
wrestled with this question. One of the oldest explanations was the theory of spontaneous generation, which can be
traced back to the ancient Greeks and was widely accepted through the Middle Ages.

The Theory of Spontaneous Generation
The Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 BC) was one of the earliest recorded scholars to articulate the theory
of spontaneous generation, the notion that life can arise from nonliving matter. Aristotle proposed that life arose
from nonliving material if the material contained pneuma (“vital heat”). As evidence, he noted several instances
of the appearance of animals from environments previously devoid of such animals, such as the seemingly sudden
appearance of fish in a new puddle of water.[1]
This theory persisted into the 17th century, when scientists undertook additional experimentation to support or
disprove it. By this time, the proponents of the theory cited how frogs simply seem to appear along the muddy banks
of the Nile River in Egypt during the annual flooding. Others observed that mice simply appeared among grain stored
in barns with thatched roofs. When the roof leaked and the grain molded, mice appeared. Jan Baptista van Helmont,
a 17th century Flemish scientist, proposed that mice could arise from rags and wheat kernels left in an open container
for 3 weeks. In reality, such habitats provided ideal food sources and shelter for mouse populations to flourish.
However, one of van Helmont’s contemporaries, Italian physician Francesco Redi (1626–1697), performed an
experiment in 1668 that was one of the first to refute the idea that maggots (the larvae of flies) spontaneously generate
on meat left out in the open air. He predicted that preventing flies from having direct contact with the meat would also
prevent the appearance of maggots. Redi left meat in each of six containers (Figure 3.2). Two were open to the air,
two were covered with gauze, and two were tightly sealed. His hypothesis was supported when maggots developed in
the uncovered jars, but no maggots appeared in either the gauze-covered or the tightly sealed jars. He concluded that
maggots could only form when flies were allowed to lay eggs in the meat, and that the maggots were the offspring of
flies, not the product of spontaneous generation.

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Barbara is a 19-year-old college student living in the dormitory. In January, she came down with a sore throat,
headache, mild fever, chills, and a violent but unproductive (i.e., no mucus) cough. To treat these symptoms,
Barbara began taking an over-the-counter cold medication, which did not seem to work. In fact, over the next
few days, while some of Barbara’s symptoms began to resolve, her cough and fever persisted, and she felt
very tired and weak.

• What types of respiratory disease may be responsible?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box

1. K. Zwier. “Aristotle on Spontaneous Generation.” http://www.sju.edu/int/academics/cas/resources/gppc/pdf/Karen%20R.%20Zwier.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

91

Figure 3.2 Francesco Redi’s experimental setup consisted of an open container, a container sealed with a cork top,
and a container covered in mesh that let in air but not flies. Maggots only appeared on the meat in the open
container. However, maggots were also found on the gauze of the gauze-covered container.

In 1745, John Needham (1713–1781) published a report of his own experiments, in which he briefly boiled broth
infused with plant or animal matter, hoping to kill all preexisting microbes.[2] He then sealed the flasks. After a
few days, Needham observed that the broth had become cloudy and a single drop contained numerous microscopic
creatures. He argued that the new microbes must have arisen spontaneously. In reality, however, he likely did not boil
the broth enough to kill all preexisting microbes.
Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729–1799) did not agree with Needham’s conclusions, however, and performed hundreds of
carefully executed experiments using heated broth.[3] As in Needham’s experiment, broth in sealed jars and unsealed
jars was infused with plant and animal matter. Spallanzani’s results contradicted the findings of Needham: Heated but
sealed flasks remained clear, without any signs of spontaneous growth, unless the flasks were subsequently opened
to the air. This suggested that microbes were introduced into these flasks from the air. In response to Spallanzani’s
findings, Needham argued that life originates from a “life force” that was destroyed during Spallanzani’s extended
boiling. Any subsequent sealing of the flasks then prevented new life force from entering and causing spontaneous
generation (Figure 3.3).

2. E. Capanna. “Lazzaro Spallanzani: At the Roots of Modern Biology.” Journal of Experimental Zoology 285 no. 3 (1999):178–196.
3. R. Mancini, M. Nigro, G. Ippolito. “Lazzaro Spallanzani and His Refutation of the Theory of Spontaneous Generation.” Le Infezioni in
Medicina 15 no. 3 (2007):199–206.

92

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.3 (a) Francesco Redi, who demonstrated that maggots were the offspring of flies, not products of
spontaneous generation. (b) John Needham, who argued that microbes arose spontaneously in broth from a “life
force.” (c) Lazzaro Spallanzani, whose experiments with broth aimed to disprove those of Needham.

• Describe the theory of spontaneous generation and some of the arguments used to support it.
• Explain how the experiments of Redi and Spallanzani challenged the theory of spontaneous generation.

Disproving Spontaneous Generation
The debate over spontaneous generation continued well into the 19th century, with scientists serving as proponents of
both sides. To settle the debate, the Paris Academy of Sciences offered a prize for resolution of the problem. Louis
Pasteur, a prominent French chemist who had been studying microbial fermentation and the causes of wine spoilage,
accepted the challenge. In 1858, Pasteur filtered air through a gun-cotton filter and, upon microscopic examination of
the cotton, found it full of microorganisms, suggesting that the exposure of a broth to air was not introducing a “life
force” to the broth but rather airborne microorganisms.
Later, Pasteur made a series of flasks with long, twisted necks (“swan-neck” flasks), in which he boiled broth to
sterilize it (Figure 3.4). His design allowed air inside the flasks to be exchanged with air from the outside, but
prevented the introduction of any airborne microorganisms, which would get caught in the twists and bends of the
flasks’ necks. If a life force besides the airborne microorganisms were responsible for microbial growth within the
sterilized flasks, it would have access to the broth, whereas the microorganisms would not. He correctly predicted
that sterilized broth in his swan-neck flasks would remain sterile as long as the swan necks remained intact. However,
should the necks be broken, microorganisms would be introduced, contaminating the flasks and allowing microbial
growth within the broth.
Pasteur’s set of experiments irrefutably disproved the theory of spontaneous generation and earned him the
prestigious Alhumbert Prize from the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1862. In a subsequent lecture in 1864, Pasteur
articulated “Omne vivum ex vivo” (“Life only comes from life”). In this lecture, Pasteur recounted his famous swanneck flask experiment, stating that “…life is a germ and a germ is life. Never will the doctrine of spontaneous
generation recover from the mortal blow of this simple experiment.”[4] To Pasteur’s credit, it never has.

4. R. Vallery-Radot. The Life of Pasteur, trans. R.L. Devonshire. New York: McClure, Phillips and Co, 1902, 1:142.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

93

Figure 3.4 (a) French scientist Louis Pasteur, who definitively refuted the long-disputed theory of spontaneous
generation. (b) The unique swan-neck feature of the flasks used in Pasteur’s experiment allowed air to enter the flask
but prevented the entry of bacterial and fungal spores. (c) Pasteur’s experiment consisted of two parts. In the first
part, the broth in the flask was boiled to sterilize it. When this broth was cooled, it remained free of contamination. In
the second part of the experiment, the flask was boiled and then the neck was broken off. The broth in this flask
became contaminated. (credit b: modification of work by “Wellcome Images”/Wikimedia Commons)

• How did Pasteur’s experimental design allow air, but not microbes, to enter, and why was this important?
• What was the control group in Pasteur’s experiment and what did it show?

94

Chapter 3 | The Cell

3.2 Foundations of Modern Cell Theory
Learning Objectives
• Explain the key points of cell theory and the individual contributions of Hooke, Schleiden, Schwann, Remak,

and Virchow
• Explain the key points of endosymbiotic theory and cite the evidence that supports this concept
• Explain the contributions of Semmelweis, Snow, Pasteur, Lister, and Koch to the development of germ theory

While some scientists were arguing over the theory of spontaneous generation, other scientists were making
discoveries leading to a better understanding of what we now call the cell theory. Modern cell theory has two basic
tenets:
• All cells only come from other cells (the principle of biogenesis).
• Cells are the fundamental units of organisms.

Today, these tenets are fundamental to our understanding of life on earth. However, modern cell theory grew out of
the collective work of many scientists.

The Origins of Cell Theory
The English scientist Robert Hooke first used the term “cells” in 1665 to describe the small chambers within cork
that he observed under a microscope of his own design. To Hooke, thin sections of cork resembled “Honey-comb,” or
“small Boxes or Bladders of Air.” He noted that each “Cavern, Bubble, or Cell” was distinct from the others (Figure
3.5). At the time, Hooke was not aware that the cork cells were long dead and, therefore, lacked the internal structures
found within living cells.

Figure 3.5 Robert Hooke (1635–1703) was the first to describe cells based upon his microscopic observations of
cork. This illustration was published in his work Micrographia.

Despite Hooke’s early description of cells, their significance as the fundamental unit of life was not yet recognized.
Nearly 200 years later, in 1838, Matthias Schleiden (1804–1881), a German botanist who made extensive microscopic
observations of plant tissues, described them as being composed of cells. Visualizing plant cells was relatively easy
because plant cells are clearly separated by their thick cell walls. Schleiden believed that cells formed through
crystallization, rather than cell division.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

95

Theodor Schwann (1810–1882), a noted German physiologist, made similar microscopic observations of animal
tissue. In 1839, after a conversation with Schleiden, Schwann realized that similarities existed between plant and
animal tissues. This laid the foundation for the idea that cells are the fundamental components of plants and animals.
In the 1850s, two Polish scientists living in Germany pushed this idea further, culminating in what we recognize
today as the modern cell theory. In 1852, Robert Remak (1815–1865), a prominent neurologist and embryologist,
published convincing evidence that cells are derived from other cells as a result of cell division. However, this
idea was questioned by many in the scientific community. Three years later, Rudolf Virchow (1821–1902), a wellrespected pathologist, published an editorial essay entitled “Cellular Pathology,” which popularized the concept of
cell theory using the Latin phrase omnis cellula a cellula (“all cells arise from cells”), which is essentially the second
tenet of modern cell theory.[5] Given the similarity of Virchow’s work to Remak’s, there is some controversy as to
which scientist should receive credit for articulating cell theory. See the following Eye on Ethics feature for more
about this controversy.

Eye on Ethics

Science and Plagiarism
Rudolf Virchow, a prominent, Polish-born, German scientist, is often remembered as the “Father of Pathology.”
Well known for innovative approaches, he was one of the first to determine the causes of various diseases by
examining their effects on tissues and organs. He was also among the first to use animals in his research and,
as a result of his work, he was the first to name numerous diseases and created many other medical terms.
Over the course of his career, he published more than 2,000 papers and headed various important medical
facilities, including the Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, a prominent Berlin hospital and medical school.
But he is, perhaps, best remembered for his 1855 editorial essay titled “Cellular Pathology,” published in Archiv
für Pathologische Anatomie und Physiologie, a journal that Virchow himself cofounded and still exists today.
Despite his significant scientific legacy, there is some controversy regarding this essay, in which Virchow
proposed the central tenet of modern cell theory—that all cells arise from other cells. Robert Remak, a former
colleague who worked in the same laboratory as Virchow at the University of Berlin, had published the same
idea 3 years before. Though it appears Virchow was familiar with Remak’s work, he neglected to credit
Remak’s ideas in his essay. When Remak wrote a letter to Virchow pointing out similarities between Virchow’s
ideas and his own, Virchow was dismissive. In 1858, in the preface to one of his books, Virchow wrote that his
1855 publication was just an editorial piece, not a scientific paper, and thus there was no need to cite Remak’s
work.
By today’s standards, Virchow’s editorial piece would certainly be considered an act of plagiarism, since he
presented Remak’s ideas as his own. However, in the 19th century, standards for academic integrity were
much less clear. Virchow’s strong reputation, coupled with the fact that Remak was a Jew in a somewhat antiSemitic political climate, shielded him from any significant repercussions. Today, the process of peer review
and the ease of access to the scientific literature help discourage plagiarism. Although scientists are still
motivated to publish original ideas that advance scientific knowledge, those who would consider plagiarizing
are well aware of the serious consequences.
In academia, plagiarism represents the theft of both individual thought and research—an offense that can
destroy reputations and end careers.[6] [7] [8] [9]

5. M. Schultz. “Rudolph Virchow.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 14 no. 9 (2008):1480–1481.
6. B. Kisch. “Forgotten Leaders in Modern Medicine, Valentin, Gouby, Remak, Auerbach.” Transactions of the American Philosophical
Society 44 (1954):139–317.
7. H. Harris. The Birth of the Cell. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000:133.

96

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.6 (a) Rudolf Virchow (1821–1902) popularized the cell theory in an 1855 essay entitled “Cellular
Pathology.” (b) The idea that all cells originate from other cells was first published in 1852 by his
contemporary and former colleague Robert Remak (1815–1865).

• What are the key points of the cell theory?
• What contributions did Rudolf Virchow and Robert Remak make to the development of the cell theory?

Endosymbiotic Theory
As scientists were making progress toward understanding the role of cells in plant and animal tissues, others were
examining the structures within the cells themselves. In 1831, Scottish botanist Robert Brown (1773–1858) was the
first to describe observations of nuclei, which he observed in plant cells. Then, in the early 1880s, German botanist
Andreas Schimper (1856–1901) was the first to describe the chloroplasts of plant cells, identifying their role in starch
formation during photosynthesis and noting that they divided independent of the nucleus.
Based upon the chloroplasts’ ability to reproduce independently, Russian botanist Konstantin Mereschkowski
(1855–1921) suggested in 1905 that chloroplasts may have originated from ancestral photosynthetic bacteria living
symbiotically inside a eukaryotic cell. He proposed a similar origin for the nucleus of plant cells. This was the first
articulation of the endosymbiotic hypothesis, and would explain how eukaryotic cells evolved from ancestral bacteria.
Mereschkowski’s endosymbiotic hypothesis was furthered by American anatomist Ivan Wallin (1883–1969), who
began to experimentally examine the similarities between mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria—in other words,
to put the endosymbiotic hypothesis to the test using objective investigation. Wallin published a series of papers in
the 1920s supporting the endosymbiotic hypothesis, including a 1926 publication co-authored with Mereschkowski.
Wallin claimed he could culture mitochondria outside of their eukaryotic host cells. Many scientists dismissed his
cultures of mitochondria as resulting from bacterial contamination. Modern genome sequencing work supports the

8. C. Webster (ed.). Biology, Medicine and Society 1840-1940. Cambridge, UK; Cambridge University Press, 1981:118–119.
9. C. Zuchora-Walske. Key Discoveries in Life Science. Minneapolis, MN: Lerner Publishing, 2015:12–13.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

97

dissenting scientists by showing that much of the genome of mitochondria had been transferred to the host cell’s
nucleus, preventing the mitochondria from being able to live on their own.[10] [11]
Wallin’s ideas regarding the endosymbiotic hypothesis were largely ignored for the next 50 years because scientists
were unaware that these organelles contained their own DNA. However, with the discovery of mitochondrial and
chloroplast DNA in the 1960s, the endosymbiotic hypothesis was resurrected. Lynn Margulis (1938–2011), an
American geneticist, published her ideas regarding the endosymbiotic hypothesis of the origins of mitochondria and
chloroplasts in 1967.[12] In the decade leading up to her publication, advances in microscopy had allowed scientists to
differentiate prokaryotic cells from eukaryotic cells. In her publication, Margulis reviewed the literature and argued
that the eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts are of prokaryotic origin. She presented a
growing body of microscopic, genetic, molecular biology, fossil, and geological data to support her claims.
Again, this hypothesis was not initially popular, but mounting genetic evidence due to the advent of DNA sequencing
supported the endosymbiotic theory, which is now defined as the theory that mitochondria and chloroplasts arose
as a result of prokaryotic cells establishing a symbiotic relationship within a eukaryotic host (Figure 3.7). With
Margulis’ initial endosymbiotic theory gaining wide acceptance, she expanded on the theory in her 1981 book
Symbiosis in Cell Evolution. In it, she explains how endosymbiosis is a major driving factor in the evolution of
organisms. More recent genetic sequencing and phylogenetic analysis show that mitochondrial DNA and chloroplast
DNA are highly related to their bacterial counterparts, both in DNA sequence and chromosome structure. However,
mitochondrial DNA and chloroplast DNA are reduced compared with nuclear DNA because many of the genes have
moved from the organelles into the host cell’s nucleus. Additionally, mitochondrial and chloroplast ribosomes are
structurally similar to bacterial ribosomes, rather than to the eukaryotic ribosomes of their hosts. Last, the binary
fission of these organelles strongly resembles the binary fission of bacteria, as compared with mitosis performed
by eukaryotic cells. Since Margulis’ original proposal, scientists have observed several examples of bacterial
endosymbionts in modern-day eukaryotic cells. Examples include the endosymbiotic bacteria found within the guts
of certain insects, such as cockroaches,[13] and photosynthetic bacteria-like organelles found in protists.[14]

10. T. Embley, W. Martin. “Eukaryotic Evolution, Changes, and Challenges.” Nature Vol. 440 (2006):623–630.
11. O.G. Berg, C.G. Kurland. “Why Mitochondrial Genes Are Most Often Found in Nuclei.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 17 no. 6
(2000):951–961.
12. L. Sagan. “On the Origin of Mitosing Cells.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 14 no. 3 (1967):225–274.
13. A.E. Douglas. “The Microbial Dimension in Insect Nutritional Ecology.” Functional Ecology 23 (2009):38–47.
14. J.M. Jaynes, L.P. Vernon. “The Cyanelle of Cyanophora paradoxa: Almost a Cyanobacterial Chloroplast.” Trends in Biochemical
Sciences 7 no. 1 (1982):22–24.

98

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.7 According to the endosymbiotic theory, mitochondria and chloroplasts are each derived from the uptake
of bacteria. These bacteria established a symbiotic relationship with their host cell that eventually led to the bacteria
evolving into mitochondria and chloroplasts.

• What does the modern endosymbiotic theory state?
• What evidence supports the endosymbiotic theory?

The Germ Theory of Disease
Prior to the discovery of microbes during the 17th century, other theories circulated about the origins of disease. For
example, the ancient Greeks proposed the miasma theory, which held that disease originated from particles emanating
from decomposing matter, such as that in sewage or cesspits. Such particles infected humans in close proximity to
the rotting material. Diseases including the Black Death, which ravaged Europe’s population during the Middle Ages,
were thought to have originated in this way.
In 1546, Italian physician Girolamo Fracastoro proposed, in his essay De Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis, that
seed-like spores may be transferred between individuals through direct contact, exposure to contaminated clothing,
or through the air. We now recognize Fracastoro as an early proponent of the germ theory of disease, which states
that diseases may result from microbial infection. However, in the 16th century, Fracastoro’s ideas were not widely
accepted and would be largely forgotten until the 19th century.
In 1847, Hungarian obstetrician Ignaz Semmelweis (Figure 3.8) observed that mothers who gave birth in hospital
wards staffed by physicians and medical students were more likely to suffer and die from puerperal fever after
childbirth (10%–20% mortality rate) than were mothers in wards staffed by midwives (1% mortality rate).
Semmelweis observed medical students performing autopsies and then subsequently carrying out vaginal
examinations on living patients without washing their hands in between. He suspected that the students carried disease

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

99

from the autopsies to the patients they examined. His suspicions were supported by the untimely death of a friend,
a physician who contracted a fatal wound infection after a postmortem examination of a woman who had died of a
puerperal infection. The dead physician’s wound had been caused by a scalpel used during the examination, and his
subsequent illness and death closely paralleled that of the dead patient.
Although Semmelweis did not know the true cause of puerperal fever, he proposed that physicians were somehow
transferring the causative agent to their patients. He suggested that the number of puerperal fever cases could be
reduced if physicians and medical students simply washed their hands with chlorinated lime water before and after
examining every patient. When this practice was implemented, the maternal mortality rate in mothers cared for by
physicians dropped to the same 1% mortality rate observed among mothers cared for by midwives. This demonstrated
that handwashing was a very effective method for preventing disease transmission. Despite this great success, many
discounted Semmelweis’s work at the time, and physicians were slow to adopt the simple procedure of handwashing
to prevent infections in their patients because it contradicted established norms for that time period.

Figure 3.8 Ignaz Semmelweis (1818–1865) was a proponent of the importance of handwashing to prevent transfer
of disease between patients by physicians.

Around the same time Semmelweis was promoting handwashing, in 1848, British physician John Snow conducted
studies to track the source of cholera outbreaks in London. By tracing the outbreaks to two specific water sources,
both of which were contaminated by sewage, Snow ultimately demonstrated that cholera bacteria were transmitted via
drinking water. Snow’s work is influential in that it represents the first known epidemiological study, and it resulted
in the first known public health response to an epidemic. The work of both Semmelweis and Snow clearly refuted
the prevailing miasma theory of the day, showing that disease is not only transmitted through the air but also through
contaminated items.
Although the work of Semmelweis and Snow successfully showed the role of sanitation in preventing infectious
disease, the cause of disease was not fully understood. The subsequent work of Louis Pasteur, Robert Koch, and
Joseph Lister would further substantiate the germ theory of disease.
While studying the causes of beer and wine spoilage in 1856, Pasteur discovered properties of fermentation by
microorganisms. He had demonstrated with his swan-neck flask experiments (Figure 3.4) that airborne microbes,
not spontaneous generation, were the cause of food spoilage, and he suggested that if microbes were responsible for
food spoilage and fermentation, they could also be responsible for causing infection. This was the foundation for the
germ theory of disease.
Meanwhile, British surgeon Joseph Lister (Figure 3.9) was trying to determine the causes of postsurgical infections.
Many physicians did not give credence to the idea that microbes on their hands, on their clothes, or in the air could
infect patients’ surgical wounds, despite the fact that 50% of surgical patients, on average, were dying of postsurgical
infections.[15] Lister, however, was familiar with the work of Semmelweis and Pasteur; therefore, he insisted on
15. Alexander, J. Wesley. “The Contributions of Infection Control to a Century of Progress” Annals of Surgery 201:423-428, 1985.

100

Chapter 3 | The Cell

handwashing and extreme cleanliness during surgery. In 1867, to further decrease the incidence of postsurgical wound
infections, Lister began using carbolic acid (phenol) spray disinfectant/antiseptic during surgery. His extremely
successful efforts to reduce postsurgical infection caused his techniques to become a standard medical practice.
A few years later, Robert Koch (Figure 3.9) proposed a series of postulates (Koch’s postulates) based on the idea
that the cause of a specific disease could be attributed to a specific microbe. Using these postulates, Koch and
his colleagues were able to definitively identify the causative pathogens of specific diseases, including anthrax,
tuberculosis, and cholera. Koch’s “one microbe, one disease” concept was the culmination of the 19th century’s
paradigm shift away from miasma theory and toward the germ theory of disease. Koch’s postulates are discussed
more thoroughly in How Pathogens Cause Disease.

Figure 3.9 (a) Joseph Lister developed procedures for the proper care of surgical wounds and the sterilization of
surgical equipment. (b) Robert Koch established a protocol to determine the cause of infectious disease. Both
scientists contributed significantly to the acceptance of the germ theory of disease.

• Compare and contrast the miasma theory of disease with the germ theory of disease.
• How did Joseph Lister’s work contribute to the debate between the miasma theory and germ theory and how
did this increase the success of medical procedures?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
After suffering a fever, congestion, cough, and increasing aches and pains for several days, Barbara suspects
that she has a case of the flu. She decides to visit the health center at her university. The PA tells Barbara that
her symptoms could be due to a range of diseases, such as influenza, bronchitis, pneumonia, or tuberculosis.
During her physical examination, the PA notes that Barbara’s heart rate is slightly elevated. Using a pulse
oximeter, a small device that clips on her finger, he finds that Barbara has hypoxemia—a lower-than-normal
level of oxygen in the blood. Using a stethoscope, the PA listens for abnormal sounds made by Barbara’s heart,
lungs, and digestive system. As Barbara breathes, the PA hears a crackling sound and notes a slight shortness
of breath. He collects a sputum sample, noting the greenish color of the mucus, and orders a chest radiograph,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

which shows a “shadow” in the left lung. All of these signs are suggestive of pneumonia, a condition in which
the lungs fill with mucus (Figure 3.10).

Figure 3.10 This is a chest radiograph typical of pneumonia. Because X-ray images are negative images, a
“shadow” is seen as a white area within the lung that should otherwise be black. In this case, the left lung
shows a shadow as a result of pockets in the lung that have become filled with fluid. (credit left: modification
of work by “Christaras A”/Wikimedia Commons)

• What kinds of infectious agents are known to cause pneumonia?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

101

102

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.11 (credit “swan-neck flask”: modification of work by Wellcome Images)

3.3 Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells
Learning Objectives
• Explain the distinguishing characteristics of prokaryotic cells
• Describe common cell morphologies and cellular arrangements typical of prokaryotic cells and explain how

cells maintain their morphology
• Describe internal and external structures of prokaryotic cells in terms of their physical structure, chemical

structure, and function
• Compare the distinguishing characteristics of bacterial and archaeal cells

Cell theory states that the cell is the fundamental unit of life. However, cells vary significantly in size, shape, structure,
and function. At the simplest level of construction, all cells possess a few fundamental components. These include
cytoplasm (a gel-like substance composed of water and dissolved chemicals needed for growth), which is contained
within a plasma membrane (also called a cell membrane or cytoplasmic membrane); one or more chromosomes,
which contain the genetic blueprints of the cell; and ribosomes, organelles used for the production of proteins.
Beyond these basic components, cells can vary greatly between organisms, and even within the same multicellular
organism. The two largest categories of cells—prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells—are defined by major
differences in several cell structures. Prokaryotic cells lack a nucleus surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

103

and generally have a single, circular chromosome located in a nucleoid. Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus surrounded
by a complex nuclear membrane that contains multiple, rod-shaped chromosomes.[16]
All plant cells and animal cells are eukaryotic. Some microorganisms are composed of prokaryotic cells, whereas
others are composed of eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic microorganisms are classified within the domains Archaea and
Bacteria, whereas eukaryotic organisms are classified within the domain Eukarya.
The structures inside a cell are analogous to the organs inside a human body, with unique structures suited to specific
functions. Some of the structures found in prokaryotic cells are similar to those found in some eukaryotic cells; others
are unique to prokaryotes. Although there are some exceptions, eukaryotic cells tend to be larger than prokaryotic
cells. The comparatively larger size of eukaryotic cells dictates the need to compartmentalize various chemical
processes within different areas of the cell, using complex membrane-bound organelles. In contrast, prokaryotic
cells generally lack membrane-bound organelles; however, they often contain inclusions that compartmentalize
their cytoplasm. Figure 3.12 illustrates structures typically associated with prokaryotic cells. These structures are
described in more detail in the next section.

Figure 3.12 A typical prokaryotic cell contains a cell membrane, chromosomal DNA that is concentrated in a
nucleoid, ribosomes, and a cell wall. Some prokaryotic cells may also possess flagella, pili, fimbriae, and capsules.

Common Cell Morphologies and Arrangements
Individual cells of a particular prokaryotic organism are typically similar in shape, or cell morphology. Although
thousands of prokaryotic organisms have been identified, only a handful of cell morphologies are commonly seen
microscopically. Figure 3.13 names and illustrates cell morphologies commonly found in prokaryotic cells. In
addition to cellular shape, prokaryotic cells of the same species may group together in certain distinctive arrangements
depending on the plane of cell division. Some common arrangements are shown in Figure 3.14.

16. Y.-H.M. Chan, W.F. Marshall. “Scaling Properties of Cell and Organelle Size.” Organogenesis 6 no. 2 (2010):88–96.

104

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.13 (credit “Coccus” micrograph: modification of work by Janice Haney Carr, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; credit “Coccobacillus” micrograph: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; credit “Spirochete” micrograph: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

105

Figure 3.14

In most prokaryotic cells, morphology is maintained by the cell wall in combination with cytoskeletal elements.
The cell wall is a structure found in most prokaryotes and some eukaryotes; it envelopes the cell membrane,
protecting the cell from changes in osmotic pressure (Figure 3.15). Osmotic pressure occurs because of differences
in the concentration of solutes on opposing sides of a semipermeable membrane. Water is able to pass through a
semipermeable membrane, but solutes (dissolved molecules like salts, sugars, and other compounds) cannot. When
the concentration of solutes is greater on one side of the membrane, water diffuses across the membrane from
the side with the lower concentration (more water) to the side with the higher concentration (less water) until the
concentrations on both sides become equal. This diffusion of water is called osmosis, and it can cause extreme
osmotic pressure on a cell when its external environment changes.
The external environment of a cell can be described as an isotonic, hypertonic, or hypotonic medium. In an isotonic
medium, the solute concentrations inside and outside the cell are approximately equal, so there is no net movement
of water across the cell membrane. In a hypertonic medium, the solute concentration outside the cell exceeds that
inside the cell, so water diffuses out of the cell and into the external medium. In a hypotonic medium, the solute
concentration inside the cell exceeds that outside of the cell, so water will move by osmosis into the cell. This causes
the cell to swell and potentially lyse, or burst.
The degree to which a particular cell is able to withstand changes in osmotic pressure is called tonicity. Cells that
have a cell wall are better able to withstand subtle changes in osmotic pressure and maintain their shape. In hypertonic
environments, cells that lack a cell wall can become dehydrated, causing crenation, or shriveling of the cell; the
plasma membrane contracts and appears scalloped or notched (Figure 3.15). By contrast, cells that possess a cell
wall undergo plasmolysis rather than crenation. In plasmolysis, the plasma membrane contracts and detaches from
the cell wall, and there is a decrease in interior volume, but the cell wall remains intact, thus allowing the cell to
maintain some shape and integrity for a period of time (Figure 3.16). Likewise, cells that lack a cell wall are more

106

Chapter 3 | The Cell

prone to lysis in hypotonic environments. The presence of a cell wall allows the cell to maintain its shape and integrity
for a longer time before lysing (Figure 3.16).

Figure 3.15 In cells that lack a cell wall, changes in osmotic pressure can lead to crenation in hypertonic
environments or cell lysis in hypotonic environments.

Figure 3.16 In prokaryotic cells, the cell wall provides some protection against changes in osmotic pressure,
allowing it to maintain its shape longer. The cell membrane is typically attached to the cell wall in an isotonic medium
(left). In a hypertonic medium, the cell membrane detaches from the cell wall and contracts (plasmolysis) as water
leaves the cell. In a hypotonic medium (right), the cell wall prevents the cell membrane from expanding to the point of
bursting, although lysis will eventually occur if too much water is absorbed.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

107

• Explain the difference between cell morphology and arrangement.
• What advantages do cell walls provide prokaryotic cells?

The Nucleoid
All cellular life has a DNA genome organized into one or more chromosomes. Prokaryotic chromosomes are typically
circular, haploid (unpaired), and not bound by a complex nuclear membrane. Prokaryotic DNA and DNA-associated
proteins are concentrated within the nucleoid region of the cell (Figure 3.17). In general, prokaryotic DNA interacts
with nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs) that assist in the organization and packaging of the chromosome. In
bacteria, NAPs function similar to histones, which are the DNA-organizing proteins found in eukaryotic cells. In
archaea, the nucleoid is organized by either NAPs or histone-like DNA organizing proteins.

Figure 3.17 The nucleoid region (the area enclosed by the green dashed line) is a condensed area of DNA found
within prokaryotic cells. Because of the density of the area, it does not readily stain and appears lighter in color when
viewed with a transmission electron microscope.

Plasmids
Prokaryotic cells may also contain extrachromosomal DNA, or DNA that is not part of the chromosome. This
extrachromosomal DNA is found in plasmids, which are small, circular, double-stranded DNA molecules. Cells that
have plasmids often have hundreds of them within a single cell. Plasmids are more commonly found in bacteria;
however, plasmids have been found in archaea and eukaryotic organisms. Plasmids often carry genes that confer
advantageous traits such as antibiotic resistance; thus, they are important to the survival of the organism. We will
discuss plasmids in more detail in Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics.

Ribosomes
All cellular life synthesizes proteins, and organisms in all three domains of life possess ribosomes, structures
responsible protein synthesis. However, ribosomes in each of the three domains are structurally different. Ribosomes,
themselves, are constructed from proteins, along with ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Prokaryotic ribosomes are found in
the cytoplasm. They are called 70S ribosomes because they have a size of 70S (Figure 3.18), whereas eukaryotic
cytoplasmic ribosomes have a size of 80S. (The S stands for Svedberg unit, a measure of sedimentation in an
ultracentrifuge, which is based on size, shape, and surface qualities of the structure being analyzed). Although they
are the same size, bacterial and archaeal ribosomes have different proteins and rRNA molecules, and the archaeal
versions are more similar to their eukaryotic counterparts than to those found in bacteria.

108

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.18 Prokaryotic ribosomes (70S) are composed of two subunits: the 30S (small subunit) and the 50S (large
subunit), each of which are composed of protein and rRNA components.

Inclusions
As single-celled organisms living in unstable environments, some prokaryotic cells have the ability to store excess
nutrients within cytoplasmic structures called inclusions. Storing nutrients in a polymerized form is advantageous
because it reduces the buildup of osmotic pressure that occurs as a cell accumulates solutes. Various types of
inclusions store glycogen and starches, which contain carbon that cells can access for energy. Volutin granules,
also called metachromatic granules because of their staining characteristics, are inclusions that store polymerized
inorganic phosphate that can be used in metabolism and assist in the formation of biofilms. Microbes known to
contain volutin granules include the archaea Methanosarcina, the bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae, and the
unicellular eukaryotic alga Chlamydomonas. Sulfur granules, another type of inclusion, are found in sulfur bacteria
of the genus Thiobacillus; these granules store elemental sulfur, which the bacteria use for metabolism.
Occasionally, certain types of inclusions are surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer embedded with protein.
Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), which can be produced by species of Bacillus and Pseudomonas, is an example of
an inclusion that displays this type of monolayer structure. Industrially, PHB has also been used as a source of
biodegradable polymers for bioplastics. Several different types of inclusions are shown in Figure 3.19.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

109

Figure 3.19 Prokaryotic cells may have various types of inclusions. (a) A transmission electron micrograph of
polyhydroxybutryrate lipid droplets. (b) A light micrograph of volutin granules. (c) A phase-contrast micrograph of
sulfur granules. (d) A transmission electron micrograph of magnetosomes. (e) A transmission electron micrograph of
gas vacuoles. (credit b, c, d: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

Some prokaryotic cells have other types of inclusions that serve purposes other than nutrient storage. For example,
some prokaryotic cells produce gas vacuoles, accumulations of small, protein-lined vesicles of gas. These gas
vacuoles allow the prokaryotic cells that synthesize them to alter their buoyancy so that they can adjust their location
in the water column. Magnetotactic bacteria, such as Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum, contain magnetosomes,
which are inclusions of magnetic iron oxide or iron sulfide surrounded by a lipid layer. These allow cells to align along
a magnetic field, aiding their movement (Figure 3.19). Cyanobacteria such as Anabaena cylindrica and bacteria
such as Halothiobacillus neapolitanus produce carboxysome inclusions. Carboxysomes are composed of outer
shells of thousands of protein subunits. Their interior is filled with ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(RuBisCO) and carbonic anhydrase. Both of these compounds are used for carbon metabolism. Some prokaryotic
cells also possess carboxysomes that sequester functionally related enzymes in one location. These structures are
considered proto-organelles because they compartmentalize important compounds or chemical reactions, much like
many eukaryotic organelles.

Endospores
Bacterial cells are generally observed as vegetative cells, but some genera of bacteria have the ability to form
endospores, structures that essentially protect the bacterial genome in a dormant state when environmental conditions
are unfavorable. Endospores (not to be confused with the reproductive spores formed by fungi) allow some bacterial
cells to survive long periods without food or water, as well as exposure to chemicals, extreme temperatures, and even
radiation. Table 3.1 compares the characteristics of vegetative cells and endospores.

110

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Characteristics of Vegetative Cells versus Endospores
Vegetative Cells

Endospores

Sensitive to extreme temperatures
and radiation

Resistant to extreme temperatures and radiation

Gram-positive

Do not absorb Gram stain, only special endospore stains (see Staining
Microscopic Specimens)

Normal water content and
enzymatic activity

Dehydrated; no metabolic activity

Capable of active growth and
metabolism

Dormant; no growth or metabolic activity

Table 3.1

The process by which vegetative cells transform into endospores is called sporulation, and it generally begins when
nutrients become depleted or environmental conditions become otherwise unfavorable (Figure 3.20). The process
begins with the formation of a septum in the vegetative bacterial cell. The septum divides the cell asymmetrically,
separating a DNA forespore from the mother cell. The forespore, which will form the core of the endospore, is
essentially a copy of the cell’s chromosomes, and is separated from the mother cell by a second membrane. A cortex
gradually forms around the forespore by laying down layers of calcium and dipicolinic acid between membranes. A
protein spore coat then forms around the cortex while the DNA of the mother cell disintegrates. Further maturation of
the endospore occurs with the formation of an outermost exosporium. The endospore is released upon disintegration
of the mother cell, completing sporulation.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

111

Figure 3.20 (a) Sporulation begins following asymmetric cell division. The forespore becomes surrounded by a
double layer of membrane, a cortex, and a protein spore coat, before being released as a mature endospore upon
disintegration of the mother cell. (b) An electron micrograph of a Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans endospore.
(c) These Bacillus spp. cells are undergoing sporulation. The endospores have been visualized using Malachite
Green spore stain. (credit b: modification of work by Jonathan Eisen)

Endospores of certain species have been shown to persist in a dormant state for extended periods of time, up to
thousands of years.[17] However, when living conditions improve, endospores undergo germination, reentering a
vegetative state. After germination, the cell becomes metabolically active again and is able to carry out all of its
normal functions, including growth and cell division.
Not all bacteria have the ability to form endospores; however, there are a number of clinically significant endosporeforming gram-positive bacteria of the genera Bacillus and Clostridium. These include B. anthracis, the causative
agent of anthrax, which produces endospores capable of survive for many decades[18]; C. tetani (causes tetanus);
C. difficile (causes pseudomembranous colitis); C. perfringens (causes gas gangrene); and C. botulinum (causes
botulism). Pathogens such as these are particularly difficult to combat because their endospores are so hard to kill.
Special sterilization methods for endospore-forming bacteria are discussed in Control of Microbial Growth.

• What is an inclusion?
• What is the function of an endospore?

17. F. Rothfuss, M Bender, R Conrad. “Survival and Activity of Bacteria in a Deep, Aged Lake Sediment (Lake Constance).” Microbial
Ecology 33 no. 1 (1997):69–77.
18. R. Sinclair et al. “Persistence of Category A Select Agents in the Environment.” Applied and Environmental Microbiology 74 no. 3
(2008):555–563.

112

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Plasma Membrane
Structures that enclose the cytoplasm and internal structures of the cell are known collectively as the cell envelope.
In prokaryotic cells, the structures of the cell envelope vary depending on the type of cell and organism. Most
(but not all) prokaryotic cells have a cell wall, but the makeup of this cell wall varies. All cells (prokaryotic
and eukaryotic) have a plasma membrane (also called cytoplasmic membrane or cell membrane) that exhibits
selective permeability, allowing some molecules to enter or leave the cell while restricting the passage of others.
The structure of the plasma membrane is often described in terms of the fluid mosaic model, which refers to the
ability of membrane components to move fluidly within the plane of the membrane, as well as the mosaic-like
composition of the components, which include a diverse array of lipid and protein components (Figure 3.21). The
plasma membrane structure of most bacterial and eukaryotic cell types is a bilayer composed mainly of phospholipids
formed with ester linkages and proteins. These phospholipids and proteins have the ability to move laterally within
the plane of the membranes as well as between the two phospholipid layers.

Figure 3.21 The bacterial plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with a variety of embedded proteins that
perform various functions for the cell. Note the presence of glycoproteins and glycolipids, whose carbohydrate
components extend out from the surface of the cell. The abundance and arrangement of these proteins and lipids can
vary greatly between species.

Archaeal membranes are fundamentally different from bacterial and eukaryotic membranes in a few significant ways.
First, archaeal membrane phospholipids are formed with ether linkages, in contrast to the ester linkages found in
bacterial or eukaryotic cell membranes. Second, archaeal phospholipids have branched chains, whereas those of
bacterial and eukaryotic cells are straight chained. Finally, although some archaeal membranes can be formed of
bilayers like those found in bacteria and eukaryotes, other archaeal plasma membranes are lipid monolayers.
Proteins on the cell’s surface are important for a variety of functions, including cell-to-cell communication, and
sensing environmental conditions and pathogenic virulence factors. Membrane proteins and phospholipids may
have carbohydrates (sugars) associated with them and are called glycoproteins or glycolipids, respectively. These
glycoprotein and glycolipid complexes extend out from the surface of the cell, allowing the cell to interact with the
external environment (Figure 3.21). Glycoproteins and glycolipids in the plasma membrane can vary considerably
in chemical composition among archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes, allowing scientists to use them to characterize
unique species.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

113

Plasma membranes from different cells types also contain unique phospholipids, which contain fatty acids. As
described in Using Biochemistry to Identify Microorganisms, phospholipid-derived fatty acid analysis
(PLFA) profiles can be used to identify unique types of cells based on differences in fatty acids. Archaea, bacteria,
and eukaryotes each have a unique PFLA profile.

Membrane Transport Mechanisms
One of the most important functions of the plasma membrane is to control the transport of molecules into and
out of the cell. Internal conditions must be maintained within a certain range despite any changes in the external
environment. The transport of substances across the plasma membrane allows cells to do so.
Cells use various modes of transport across the plasma membrane. For example, molecules moving from a higher
concentration to a lower concentration with the concentration gradient are transported by simple diffusion, also known
as passive transport (Figure 3.22). Some small molecules, like carbon dioxide, may cross the membrane bilayer
directly by simple diffusion. However, charged molecules, as well as large molecules, need the help of carriers or
channels in the membrane. These structures ferry molecules across the membrane, a process known as facilitated
diffusion (Figure 3.23).
Active transport occurs when cells move molecules across their membrane against concentration gradients (Figure
3.24). A major difference between passive and active transport is that active transport requires adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) or other forms of energy to move molecules “uphill.” Therefore, active transport structures are often called
“pumps.”

Figure 3.22 Simple diffusion down a concentration gradient directly across the phospholipid bilayer. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)

114

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.23 Facilitated diffusion down a concentration gradient through a membrane protein. (credit: modification of
work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)

Figure 3.24 Active transport against a concentration gradient via a membrane pump that requires energy. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)

Group translocation also transports substances into bacterial cells. In this case, as a molecule moves into a cell
against its concentration gradient, it is chemically modified so that it does not require transport against an unfavorable
concentration gradient. A common example of this is the bacterial phosphotransferase system, a series of carriers that
phosphorylates (i.e., adds phosphate ions to) glucose or other sugars upon entry into cells. Since the phosphorylation
of sugars is required during the early stages of sugar metabolism, the phosphotransferase system is considered to be
an energy neutral system.

Photosynthetic Membrane Structures
Some prokaryotic cells, namely cyanobacteria and photosynthetic bacteria, have membrane structures that enable
them to perform photosynthesis. These structures consist of an infolding of the plasma membrane that encloses
photosynthetic pigments such as green chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls. In cyanobacteria, these membrane
structures are called thylakoids; in photosynthetic bacteria, they are called chromatophores, lamellae, or chlorosomes.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

115

Cell Wall
The primary function of the cell wall is to protect the cell from harsh conditions in the outside environment. When
present, there are notable similarities and differences among the cell walls of archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes.
The major component of bacterial cell walls is called peptidoglycan (or murein); it is only found in bacteria.
Structurally, peptidoglycan resembles a layer of meshwork or fabric (Figure 3.25). Each layer is composed of long
chains of alternating molecules of N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM). The structure
of the long chains has significant two-dimensional tensile strength due to the formation of peptide bridges that
connect NAG and NAM within each peptidoglycan layer. In gram-negative bacteria, tetrapeptide chains extending
from each NAM unit are directly cross-linked, whereas in gram-positive bacteria, these tetrapeptide chains are linked
by pentaglycine cross-bridges. Peptidoglycan subunits are made inside of the bacterial cell and then exported and
assembled in layers, giving the cell its shape.
Since peptidoglycan is unique to bacteria, many antibiotic drugs are designed to interfere with peptidoglycan
synthesis, weakening the cell wall and making bacterial cells more susceptible to the effects of osmotic pressure
(see Mechanisms of Antibacterial Drugs). In addition, certain cells of the human immune system are able
“recognize” bacterial pathogens by detecting peptidoglycan on the surface of a bacterial cell; these cells then engulf
and destroy the bacterial cell, using enzymes such as lysozyme, which breaks down and digests the peptidoglycan in
their cell walls (see Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis).

Figure 3.25 Peptidoglycan is composed of polymers of alternating NAM and NAG subunits, which are cross-linked
by peptide bridges linking NAM subunits from various glycan chains. This provides the cell wall with tensile strength
in two dimensions.

The Gram staining protocol (see Staining Microscopic Specimens) is used to differentiate two common
types of cell wall structures (Figure 3.26). Gram-positive cells have a cell wall consisting of many layers of
peptidoglycan totaling 30–100 nm in thickness. These peptidoglycan layers are commonly embedded with teichoic
acids (TAs), carbohydrate chains that extend through and beyond the peptidoglycan layer.[19] TA is thought to stabilize
peptidoglycan by increasing its rigidity. TA also plays a role in the ability of pathogenic gram-positive bacteria such
as Streptococcus to bind to certain proteins on the surface of host cells, enhancing their ability to cause infection. In
addition to peptidoglycan and TAs, bacteria of the family Mycobacteriaceae have an external layer of waxy mycolic
acids in their cell wall; as described in Staining Microscopic Specimens, these bacteria are referred to as acidfast, since acid-fast stains must be used to penetrate the mycolic acid layer for purposes of microscopy (Figure 3.27).

19. T.J. Silhavy, D. Kahne, S. Walker. “The Bacterial Cell Envelope.” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 2 no. 5 (2010):a000414.

116

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.26 Bacteria contain two common cell wall structural types. Gram-positive cell walls are structurally simple,
containing a thick layer of peptidoglycan with embedded teichoic acid external to the plasma membrane.[20] Gramnegative cell walls are structurally more complex, containing three layers: the inner membrane, a thin layer of
peptidoglycan, and an outer membrane containing lipopolysaccharide. (credit: modification of work by
“Franciscosp2”/Wikimedia Commons)

Figure 3.27 (a) Some gram-positive bacteria, including members of the Mycobacteriaceae, produce waxy mycolic
acids found exterior to their structurally-distinct peptidoglycan. (b) The acid-fast staining protocol detects the
presence of cell walls that are rich in mycolic acid. Acid-fast cells are stained red by carbolfuschin. (credit a:
modification of work by “Franciscosp2”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

Gram-negative cells have a much thinner layer of peptidoglycan (no more than about 4 nm thick[21]) than grampositive cells, and the overall structure of their cell envelope is more complex. In gram-negative cells, a gel-like
matrix occupies the periplasmic space between the cell wall and the plasma membrane, and there is a second
lipid bilayer called the outer membrane, which is external to the peptidoglycan layer (Figure 3.26). This outer
membrane is attached to the peptidoglycan by murein lipoprotein. The outer leaflet of the outer membrane contains
the molecule lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which functions as an endotoxin in infections involving gram-negative
bacteria, contributing to symptoms such as fever, hemorrhaging, and septic shock. Each LPS molecule is composed
20. B. Zuber et al. “Granular Layer in the Periplasmic Space of Gram-Positive Bacteria and Fine Structures of Enterococcus gallinarum and
Streptococcus gordonii Septa Revealed by Cryo-Electron Microscopy of Vitreous Sections.” Journal of Bacteriology 188 no. 18
(2006):6652–6660
21. L. Gana, S. Chena, G.J. Jensena. “Molecular Organization of Gram-Negative Peptidoglycan.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 105 no. 48 (2008):18953–18957.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

117

of Lipid A, a core polysaccharide, and an O side chain that is composed of sugar-like molecules that comprise the
external face of the LPS (Figure 3.28). The composition of the O side chain varies between different species and
strains of bacteria. Parts of the O side chain called antigens can be detected using serological or immunological tests
to identify specific pathogenic strains like Escherichia coli O157:H7, a deadly strain of bacteria that causes bloody
diarrhea and kidney failure.

Figure 3.28 The outer membrane of a gram-negative bacterial cell contains lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a toxin
composed of Lipid A embedded in the outer membrane, a core polysaccharide, and the O side chain.

Archaeal cell wall structure differs from that of bacteria in several significant ways. First, archaeal cell walls do not
contain peptidoglycan; instead, they contain a similar polymer called pseudopeptidoglycan (pseudomurein) in which
NAM is replaced with a different subunit. Other archaea may have a layer of glycoproteins or polysaccharides that
serves as the cell wall instead of pseudopeptidoglycan. Last, as is the case with some bacterial species, there are a few
archaea that appear to lack cell walls entirely.

Glycocalyces and S-Layers
Although most prokaryotic cells have cell walls, some may have additional cell envelope structures exterior to the
cell wall, such as glycocalyces and S-layers. A glycocalyx is a sugar coat, of which there are two important types:
capsules and slime layers. A capsule is an organized layer located outside of the cell wall and usually composed of
polysaccharides or proteins (Figure 3.29). A slime layer is a less tightly organized layer that is only loosely attached
to the cell wall and can be more easily washed off. Slime layers may be composed of polysaccharides, glycoproteins,
or glycolipids.
Glycocalyces allows cells to adhere to surfaces, aiding in the formation of biofilms (colonies of microbes that form in
layers on surfaces). In nature, most microbes live in mixed communities within biofilms, partly because the biofilm
affords them some level of protection. Biofilms generally hold water like a sponge, preventing desiccation. They
also protect cells from predation and hinder the action of antibiotics and disinfectants. All of these properties are

118

Chapter 3 | The Cell

advantageous to the microbes living in a biofilm, but they present challenges in a clinical setting, where the goal is
often to eliminate microbes.

Figure 3.29 (a) Capsules are a type of glycocalyx composed of an organized layer of polysaccharides. (b) A capsule
stain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a bacterial pathogen capable of causing many different types of infections in
humans. (credit b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

The ability to produce a capsule can contribute to a microbe’s pathogenicity (ability to cause disease) because
the capsule can make it more difficult for phagocytic cells (such as white blood cells) to engulf and kill the
microorganism. Streptococcus pneumoniae, for example, produces a capsule that is well known to aid in this
bacterium’s pathogenicity. As explained in Staining Microscopic specimens, capsules are difficult to stain for
microscopy; negative staining techniques are typically used.
An S-layer is another type of cell envelope structure; it is composed of a mixture of structural proteins and
glycoproteins. In bacteria, S-layers are found outside the cell wall, but in some archaea, the S-layer serves as the cell
wall. The exact function of S-layers is not entirely understood, and they are difficult to study; but available evidence
suggests that they may play a variety of functions in different prokaryotic cells, such as helping the cell withstand
osmotic pressure and, for certain pathogens, interacting with the host immune system.

Clinical Focus
Part 3
After diagnosing Barbara with pneumonia, the PA writes her a prescription for amoxicillin, a commonlyprescribed type of penicillin derivative. More than a week later, despite taking the full course as directed,
Barbara still feels weak and is not fully recovered, although she is still able to get through her daily activities.
She returns to the health center for a follow-up visit.
Many types of bacteria, fungi, and viruses can cause pneumonia. Amoxicillin targets the peptidoglycan of
bacterial cell walls. Since the amoxicillin has not resolved Barbara’s symptoms, the PA concludes that the
causative agent probably lacks peptidoglycan, meaning that the pathogen could be a virus, a fungus, or
a bacterium that lacks peptidoglycan. Another possibility is that the pathogen is a bacterium containing
peptidoglycan but has developed resistance to amoxicillin.

• How can the PA definitively identify the cause of Barbara’s pneumonia?
• What form of treatment should the PA prescribe, given that the amoxicillin was ineffective?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

119

Filamentous Appendages
Many bacterial cells have protein appendages embedded within their cell envelopes that extend outward, allowing
interaction with the environment. These appendages can attach to other surfaces, transfer DNA, or provide movement.
Filamentous appendages include fimbriae, pili, and flagella.

Fimbriae and Pili
Fimbriae and pili are structurally similar and, because differentiation between the two is problematic, these terms
are often used interchangeably.[22] [23] The term fimbriae commonly refers to short bristle-like proteins projecting
from the cell surface by the hundreds. Fimbriae enable a cell to attach to surfaces and to other cells. For pathogenic
bacteria, adherence to host cells is important for colonization, infectivity, and virulence. Adherence to surfaces is also
important in biofilm formation.
The term pili (singular: pilus) commonly refers to longer, less numerous protein appendages that aid in attachment to
surfaces (Figure 3.30). A specific type of pilus, called the F pilus or sex pilus, is important in the transfer of DNA
between bacterial cells, which occurs between members of the same generation when two cells physically transfer or
exchange parts of their respective genomes (see How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity).

Figure 3.30 Bacteria may produce two different types of protein appendages that aid in surface attachment.
Fimbriae typically are more numerous and shorter, whereas pili (shown here) are longer and less numerous per cell.
(credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

Micro Connections
Group A Strep
Before the structure and function of the various components of the bacterial cell envelope were well
understood, scientists were already using cell envelope characteristics to classify bacteria. In 1933, Rebecca
Lancefield proposed a method for serotyping various β-hemolytic strains of Streptococcus species using an
agglutination assay, a technique using the clumping of bacteria to detect specific cell-surface antigens. In doing
so, Lancefield discovered that one group of S. pyogenes, found in Group A, was associated with a variety of
human diseases. She determined that various strains of Group A strep could be distinguished from each other
based on variations in specific cell surface proteins that she named M proteins.
Today, more than 80 different strains of Group A strep have been identified based on M proteins. Various
strains of Group A strep are associated with a wide variety of human infections, including streptococcal

22. J.A. Garnetta et al. “Structural Insights Into the Biogenesis and Biofilm Formation by the Escherichia coli Common Pilus.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 no. 10 (2012):3950–3955.
23. T. Proft, E.N. Baker. “Pili in Gram-Negative and Gram-Positive Bacteria—Structure, Assembly and Their Role in Disease.” Cellular
and Molecular Life Sciences 66 (2009):613.

120

Chapter 3 | The Cell

pharyngitis (strep throat), impetigo, toxic shock syndrome, scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, and necrotizing
fasciitis. The M protein is an important virulence factor for Group A strep, helping these strains evade the
immune system. Changes in M proteins appear to alter the infectivity of a particular strain of Group A strep.

Flagella
Flagella are structures used by cells to move in aqueous environments. Bacterial flagella act like propellers. They are
stiff spiral filaments composed of flagellin protein subunits that extend outward from the cell and spin in solution.
The basal body is the motor for the flagellum and is embedded in the plasma membrane (Figure 3.31). A hook
region connects the basal body to the filament. Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria have different basal body
configurations due to differences in cell wall structure.
Different types of motile bacteria exhibit different arrangements of flagella (Figure 3.32). A bacterium with a
singular flagellum, typically located at one end of the cell (polar), is said to have a monotrichous flagellum. An
example of a monotrichously flagellated bacterial pathogen is Vibrio cholerae, the gram-negative bacterium that
causes cholera. Cells with amphitrichous flagella have a flagellum or tufts of flagella at each end. An example is
Spirillum minor, the cause of spirillary (Asian) rat-bite fever or sodoku. Cells with lophotrichous flagella have a tuft
at one end of the cell. The gram-negative bacillus Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen known for
causing many infections, including “swimmer’s ear” and burn wound infections, has lophotrichous flagella. Flagella
that cover the entire surface of a bacterial cell are called peritrichous flagella. The gram-negative bacterium E. coli
shows a peritrichous arrangement of flagella.

Figure 3.31 The basic structure of a bacterial flagellum consists of a basal body, hook, and filament. The basal body
composition and arrangement differ between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. (credit: modification of work
by “LadyofHats”/Mariana Ruiz Villareal)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

121

Figure 3.32 Flagellated bacteria may exhibit multiple arrangements of their flagella. Common arrangements include
monotrichous, amphitrichous, lophotrichous, or peritrichous.

Directional movement depends on the configuration of the flagella. Bacteria can move in response to a variety of
environmental signals, including light (phototaxis), magnetic fields (magnetotaxis) using magnetosomes, and, most
commonly, chemical gradients (chemotaxis). Purposeful movement toward a chemical attractant, like a food source,
or away from a repellent, like a poisonous chemical, is achieved by increasing the length of runs and decreasing the
length of tumbles. When running, flagella rotate in a counterclockwise direction, allowing the bacterial cell to move
forward. In a peritrichous bacterium, the flagella are all bundled together in a very streamlined way (Figure 3.33),
allowing for efficient movement. When tumbling, flagella are splayed out while rotating in a clockwise direction,
creating a looping motion and preventing meaningful forward movement but reorienting the cell toward the direction
of the attractant. When an attractant exists, runs and tumbles still occur; however, the length of runs is longer, while
the length of the tumbles is reduced, allowing overall movement toward the higher concentration of the attractant.
When no chemical gradient exists, the lengths of runs and tumbles are more equal, and overall movement is more
random (Figure 3.34).

Figure 3.33 Bacteria achieve directional movement by changing the rotation of their flagella. In a cell with
peritrichous flagella, the flagella bundle when they rotate in a counterclockwise direction, resulting in a run. However,
when the flagella rotate in a clockwise direction, the flagella are no longer bundled, resulting in tumbles.

122

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.34 Without a chemical gradient, flagellar rotation cycles between counterclockwise (run) and clockwise
(tumble) with no overall directional movement. However, when a chemical gradient of an attractant exists, the length
of runs is extended, while the length of tumbles is decreased. This leads to chemotaxis: an overall directional
movement toward the higher concentration of the attractant.

• What is the peptidoglycan layer and how does it differ between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria?
• Compare and contrast monotrichous, amphitrichous, lophotrichous, and peritrichous flagella.

3.4 Unique Characteristics of Eukaryotic Cells
Learning Objectives
• Explain the distinguishing characteristics of eukaryotic cells
• Describe internal and external structures of prokaryotic cells in terms of their physical structure, chemical

structure, and function
• Identify and describe structures and organelles unique to eukaryotic cells
• Compare and contrast similar structures found in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells

Eukaryotic organisms include protozoans, algae, fungi, plants, and animals. Some eukaryotic cells are independent,
single-celled microorganisms, whereas others are part of multicellular organisms. The cells of eukaryotic organisms
have several distinguishing characteristics. Above all, eukaryotic cells are defined by the presence of a nucleus
surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane. Also, eukaryotic cells are characterized by the presence of membranebound organelles in the cytoplasm. Organelles such as mitochondria, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi
apparatus, lysosomes, and peroxisomes are held in place by the cytoskeleton, an internal network that supports

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

123

transport of intracellular components and helps maintain cell shape (Figure 3.35). The genome of eukaryotic
cells is packaged in multiple, rod-shaped chromosomes as opposed to the single, circular-shaped chromosome that
characterizes most prokaryotic cells. Table 3.2 compares the characteristics of eukaryotic cell structures with those
of bacteria and archaea.

Figure 3.35 An illustration of a generalized, single-celled eukaryotic organism. Note that cells of eukaryotic
organisms vary greatly in terms of structure and function, and a particular cell may not have all of the structures
shown here.

Summary of Cell Structures
Cell Structure

Prokaryotes
Bacteria

Eukaryotes
Archaea

Size

~0.5–1 μM

~0.5–1 μM

~5–20 μM

Surface area-tovolume ratio

High

High

Low

Nucleus

No

No

Yes

Table 3.2

124

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Summary of Cell Structures
Cell Structure

Prokaryotes
Bacteria

Genome
characteristics

Cell division
Membrane lipid
composition

Eukaryotes
Archaea

• Single chromosome

• Single chromosome

• Multiple chromosomes

• Circular

• Circular

• Linear

• Haploid

• Haploid

• Haploid or diploid

• Lacks histones

• Contains histones

• Contains histones

Binary fission

Binary fission

• Ester-linked

• Ether-linked

• Ester-linked

• Straight-chain fatty
acids

• Branched isoprenoids

• Straight-chain fatty acids

• Bilayer or monolayer

• Sterols

• Bilayer
Cell wall
composition

Mitosis, meiosis

• Bilayer

• Peptidoglycan, or

• Pseudopeptidoglycan, or

• None

• Glycopeptide, or
• Polysaccharide, or
• Protein (S-layer), or
• None

• Cellulose (plants, some
algae)
• Chitin (molluscs, insects,
crustaceans, and fungi)
• Silica (some algae)
• Most others lack cell walls

Motility
structures

Rigid spiral flagella
composed of flagellin

Rigid spiral flagella composed
of archaeal flagellins

Flexible flagella and cilia
composed of microtubules

Membranebound
organelles

No

No

Yes

Endomembrane
system

No

No

Yes (ER, Golgi, lysosomes)

Ribosomes

70S

70S

• 80S in cytoplasm and
rough ER
• 70S in mitochondria,
chloroplasts

Table 3.2

Cell Morphologies
Eukaryotic cells display a wide variety of different cell morphologies. Possible shapes include spheroid, ovoid,
cuboidal, cylindrical, flat, lenticular, fusiform, discoidal, crescent, ring stellate, and polygonal (Figure 3.36). Some
eukaryotic cells are irregular in shape, and some are capable of changing shape. The shape of a particular type of
eukaryotic cell may be influenced by factors such as its primary function, the organization of its cytoskeleton, the
viscosity of its cytoplasm, the rigidity of its cell membrane or cell wall (if it has one), and the physical pressure
exerted on it by the surrounding environment and/or adjoining cells.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

125

Figure 3.36 Eukaryotic cells come in a variety of cell shapes. (a) Spheroid Chromulina alga. (b) Fusiform shaped
Trypanosoma. (c) Bell-shaped Vorticella. (d) Ovoid Paramecium. (e) Ring-shaped Plasmodium ovale. (credit a:
modification of work by NOAA; credit b, e: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Identify two differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells.

Nucleus
Unlike prokaryotic cells, in which DNA is loosely contained in the nucleoid region, eukaryotic cells possess a
nucleus, which is surrounded by a complex nuclear membrane that houses the DNA genome (Figure 3.37). By
containing the cell’s DNA, the nucleus ultimately controls all activities of the cell and also serves an essential role
in reproduction and heredity. Eukaryotic cells typically have their DNA organized into multiple linear chromosomes.
The DNA within the nucleus is highly organized and condensed to fit inside the nucleus, which is accomplished by
wrapping the DNA around proteins called histones.

126

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.37 Eukaryotic cells have a well-defined nucleus. The nucleus of this mammalian lung cell is the large, dark,
oval-shaped structure in the lower half of the image.

Although most eukaryotic cells have only one nucleus, exceptions exist. For example, protozoans of the genus
Paramecium typically have two complete nuclei: a small nucleus that is used for reproduction (micronucleus) and a
large nucleus that directs cellular metabolism (macronucleus). Additionally, some fungi transiently form cells with
two nuclei, called heterokaryotic cells, during sexual reproduction. Cells whose nuclei divide, but whose cytoplasm
does not, are called coenocytes.
The nucleus is bound by a complex nuclear membrane, often called the nuclear envelope, that consists of two
distinct lipid bilayers that are contiguous with each other (Figure 3.38). Despite these connections between the
inner and outer membranes, each membrane contains unique lipids and proteins on its inner and outer surfaces. The
nuclear envelope contains nuclear pores, which are large, rosette-shaped protein complexes that control the movement
of materials into and out of the nucleus. The overall shape of the nucleus is determined by the nuclear lamina,
a meshwork of intermediate filaments found just inside the nuclear envelope membranes. Outside the nucleus,
additional intermediate filaments form a looser mesh and serve to anchor the nucleus in position within the cell.

Figure 3.38 In this fluorescent microscope image, all the intermediate filaments have been stained with a bright
green fluorescent stain. The nuclear lamina is the intense bright green ring around the faint red nuclei.

Nucleolus
The nucleolus is a dense region within the nucleus where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) biosynthesis occurs. In addition,
the nucleolus is also the site where assembly of ribosomes begins. Preribosomal complexes are assembled from rRNA
and proteins in the nucleolus; they are then transported out to the cytoplasm, where ribosome assembly is completed
(Figure 3.39).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

127

Figure 3.39 (a) The nucleolus is the dark, dense area within the nucleus. It is the site of rRNA synthesis and
preribosomal assembly. (b) Electron micrograph showing the nucleolus.

Ribosomes
Ribosomes found in eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria or chloroplasts have 70S ribosomes—the same
size as prokaryotic ribosomes. However, nonorganelle-associated ribosomes in eukaryotic cells are 80S ribosomes,
composed of a 40S small subunit and a 60S large subunit. In terms of size and composition, this makes them distinct
from the ribosomes of prokaryotic cells.
The two types of nonorganelle-associated eukaryotic ribosomes are defined by their location in the cell: free
ribosomes and membrane-bound ribosomes. Free ribosomes are found in the cytoplasm and serve to synthesize
water-soluble proteins; membrane-bound ribosomes are found attached to the rough endoplasmic reticulum and make
proteins for insertion into the cell membrane or proteins destined for export from the cell.
The differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosomes are clinically relevant because certain antibiotic
drugs are designed to target one or the other. For example, cycloheximide targets eukaryotic action, whereas
chloramphenicol targets prokaryotic ribosomes.[24] Since human cells are eukaryotic, they generally are not harmed
by antibiotics that destroy the prokaryotic ribosomes in bacteria. However, sometimes negative side effects may occur
because mitochondria in human cells contain prokaryotic ribosomes.

Endomembrane System
The endomembrane system, unique to eukaryotic cells, is a series of membranous tubules, sacs, and flattened disks
that synthesize many cell components and move materials around within the cell (Figure 3.40). Because of their
larger cell size, eukaryotic cells require this system to transport materials that cannot be dispersed by diffusion alone.
The endomembrane system comprises several organelles and connections between them, including the endoplasmic
reticulum, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, and vesicles.

24. A.E. Barnhill, M.T. Brewer, S.A. Carlson. “Adverse Effects of Antimicrobials via Predictable or Idiosyncratic Inhibition of Host
Mitochondrial Components.” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 56 no. 8 (2012):4046–4051.

128

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.40 The endomembrane system is composed of a series of membranous intracellular structures that
facilitate movement of materials throughout the cell and to the cell membrane.

Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an interconnected array of tubules and cisternae (flattened sacs) with a single
lipid bilayer (Figure 3.41). The spaces inside of the cisternae are called lumen of the ER. There are two types of
ER, rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). These two different types of
ER are sites for the synthesis of distinctly different types of molecules. RER is studded with ribosomes bound on the
cytoplasmic side of the membrane. These ribosomes make proteins destined for the plasma membrane (Figure 3.41).
Following synthesis, these proteins are inserted into the membrane of the RER. Small sacs of the RER containing
these newly synthesized proteins then bud off as transport vesicles and move either to the Golgi apparatus for further
processing, directly to the plasma membrane, to the membrane of another organelle, or out of the cell. Transport
vesicles are single-lipid, bilayer, membranous spheres with hollow interiors that carry molecules. SER does not have
ribosomes and, therefore, appears “smooth.” It is involved in biosynthesis of lipids, carbohydrate metabolism, and
detoxification of toxic compounds within the cell.

Figure 3.41 The rough endoplasmic reticulum is studded with ribosomes for the synthesis of membrane proteins
(which give it its rough appearance).

Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus was discovered within the endomembrane system in 1898 by Italian scientist Camillo Golgi
(1843–1926), who developed a novel staining technique that showed stacked membrane structures within the cells
of Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria. The Golgi apparatus is composed of a series of membranous disks
called dictyosomes, each having a single lipid bilayer, that are stacked together (Figure 3.42).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

129

Enzymes in the Golgi apparatus modify lipids and proteins transported from the ER to the Golgi, often adding
carbohydrate components to them, producing glycolipids, glycoproteins, or proteoglycans. Glycolipids and
glycoproteins are often inserted into the plasma membrane and are important for signal recognition by other cells or
infectious particles. Different types of cells can be distinguished from one another by the structure and arrangement
of the glycolipids and glycoproteins contained in their plasma membranes. These glycolipids and glycoproteins
commonly also serve as cell surface receptors.
Transport vesicles leaving the ER fuse with a Golgi apparatus on its receiving, or cis, face. The proteins are processed
within the Golgi apparatus, and then additional transport vesicles containing the modified proteins and lipids pinch
off from the Golgi apparatus on its outgoing, or trans, face. These outgoing vesicles move to and fuse with the plasma
membrane or the membrane of other organelles.
Exocytosis is the process by which secretory vesicles (spherical membranous sacs) release their contents to the cell’s
exterior (Figure 3.42). All cells have constitutive secretory pathways in which secretory vesicles transport soluble
proteins that are released from the cell continually (constitutively). Certain specialized cells also have regulated
secretory pathways, which are used to store soluble proteins in secretory vesicles. Regulated secretion involves
substances that are only released in response to certain events or signals. For example, certain cells of the human
immune system (e.g., mast cells) secrete histamine in response to the presence of foreign objects or pathogens in the
body. Histamine is a compound that triggers various mechanisms used by the immune system to eliminate pathogens.

Figure 3.42 A transmission electron micrograph (left) of a Golgi apparatus in a white blood cell. The illustration
(right) shows the cup-shaped, stacked disks and several transport vesicles. The Golgi apparatus modifies lipids and
proteins, producing glycolipids and glycoproteins, respectively, which are commonly inserted into the plasma
membrane.

Lysosomes
In the 1960s, Belgian scientist Christian de Duve (1917–2013) discovered lysosomes, membrane-bound organelles of
the endomembrane system that contain digestive enzymes. Certain types of eukaryotic cells use lysosomes to break
down various particles, such as food, damaged organelles or cellular debris, microorganisms, or immune complexes.
Compartmentalization of the digestive enzymes within the lysosome allows the cell to efficiently digest matter
without harming the cytoplasmic components of the cell.

130

Chapter 3 | The Cell

• Name the components of the endomembrane system and describe the function of each component.

Peroxisomes
Christian de Duve is also credited with the discovery of peroxisomes, membrane-bound organelles that are not part
of the endomembrane system (Figure 3.43). Peroxisomes form independently in the cytoplasm from the synthesis
of peroxin proteins by free ribosomes and the incorporation of these peroxin proteins into existing peroxisomes.
Growing peroxisomes then divide by a process similar to binary fission.
Peroxisomes were first named for their ability to produce hydrogen peroxide, a highly reactive molecule that helps to
break down molecules such as uric acid, amino acids, and fatty acids. Peroxisomes also possess the enzyme catalase,
which can degrade hydrogen peroxide. Along with the SER, peroxisomes also play a role in lipid biosynthesis.
Like lysosomes, the compartmentalization of these degradative molecules within an organelle helps protect the
cytoplasmic contents from unwanted damage.
The peroxisomes of certain organisms are specialized to meet their particular functional needs. For example,
glyoxysomes are modified peroxisomes of yeasts and plant cells that perform several metabolic functions, including
the production of sugar molecules. Similarly, glycosomes are modified peroxisomes made by certain trypanosomes,
the pathogenic protozoans that cause Chagas disease and African sleeping sickness.

Figure 3.43 A transmission electron micrograph (left) of a cell containing a peroxisome. The illustration (right) shows
the location of peroxisomes in a cell. These eukaryotic structures play a role in lipid biosynthesis and breaking down
various molecules. They may also have other specialized functions depending on the cell type. (credit “micrograph”:
modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

Cytoskeleton
Eukaryotic cells have an internal cytoskeleton made of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules.
This matrix of fibers and tubes provides structural support as well as a network over which materials can be
transported within the cell and on which organelles can be anchored (Figure 3.44). For example, the process of
exocytosis involves the movement of a vesicle via the cytoskeletal network to the plasma membrane, where it can
release its contents.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

131

Figure 3.44 The cytoskeleton is a network of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules found
throughout the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell. In these fluorescently labeled animal cells, the microtubules are green,
the actin microfilaments are red, the nucleus is blue, and keratin (a type of intermediate filament) is yellow.

Microfilaments are composed of two intertwined strands of actin, each composed of actin monomers forming
filamentous cables 6 nm in diameter[25] (Figure 3.45). The actin filaments work together with motor proteins, like
myosin, to effect muscle contraction in animals or the amoeboid movement of some eukaryotic microbes. In ameboid
organisms, actin can be found in two forms: a stiffer, polymerized, gel form and a more fluid, unpolymerized soluble
form. Actin in the gel form creates stability in the ectoplasm, the gel-like area of cytoplasm just inside the plasma
membrane of ameboid protozoans.
Temporary extensions of the cytoplasmic membrane called pseudopodia (meaning “false feet”) are produced through
the forward flow of soluble actin filaments into the pseudopodia, followed by the gel-sol cycling of the actin
filaments, resulting in cell motility. Once the cytoplasm extends outward, forming a pseudopodium, the remaining
cytoplasm flows up to join the leading edge, thereby creating forward locomotion. Beyond amoeboid movement,
microfilaments are also involved in a variety of other processes in eukaryotic cells, including cytoplasmic streaming
(the movement or circulation of cytoplasm within the cell), cleavage furrow formation during cell division, and
muscle movement in animals (Figure 3.45). These functions are the result of the dynamic nature of microfilaments,
which can polymerize and depolymerize relatively easily in response to cellular signals, and their interactions with
molecular motors in different types of eukaryotic cells.

25. Fuchs E, Cleveland DW. “A Structural Scaffolding of Intermediate Filaments in Health and Disease.” Science 279 no. 5350
(1998):514–519.

132

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.45 (a) A microfilament is composed of a pair of actin filaments. (b) Each actin filament is a string of
polymerized actin monomers. (c) The dynamic nature of actin, due to its polymerization and depolymerization and its
association with myosin, allows microfilaments to be involved in a variety of cellular processes, including ameboid
movement, cytoplasmic streaming, contractile ring formation during cell division, and muscle contraction in animals.

Intermediate filaments (Figure 3.46) are a diverse group of cytoskeletal filaments that act as cables within the
cell. They are termed “intermediate” because their 10-nm diameter is thicker than that of actin but thinner than that
of microtubules.[26] They are composed of several strands of polymerized subunits that, in turn, are made up of a
wide variety of monomers. Intermediate filaments tend to be more permanent in the cell and maintain the position
of the nucleus. They also form the nuclear lamina (lining or layer) just inside the nuclear envelope. Additionally,
intermediate filaments play a role in anchoring cells together in animal tissues. The intermediate filament protein
desmin is found in desmosomes, the protein structures that join muscle cells together and help them resist external
physical forces. The intermediate filament protein keratin is a structural protein found in hair, skin, and nails.

26. E. Fuchs, D.W. Cleveland. “A Structural Scaffolding of Intermediate Filaments in Health and Disease.” Science 279 no. 5350
(1998):514–519.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

133

Figure 3.46 (a) Intermediate filaments are composed of multiple strands of polymerized subunits. They are more
permanent than other cytoskeletal structures and serve a variety of functions. (b) Intermediate filaments form much of
the nuclear lamina. (c) Intermediate filaments form the desmosomes between cells in some animal tissues. (credit c
“illustration”: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)

Microtubules (Figure 3.47) are a third type of cytoskeletal fiber composed of tubulin dimers (α tubulin and β
tubulin). These form hollow tubes 23 nm in diameter that are used as girders within the cytoskeleton.[27] Like
microfilaments, microtubules are dynamic and have the ability to rapidly assemble and disassemble. Microtubules
also work with motor proteins (such as dynein and kinesin) to move organelles and vesicles around within the
cytoplasm. Additionally, microtubules are the main components of eukaryotic flagella and cilia, composing both the
filament and the basal body components (Figure 3.54).

Figure 3.47 (a) Microtubules are hollow structures composed of polymerized tubulin dimers. (b) They are involved in
several cellular processes, including the movement of organelles throughout the cytoplasm. Motor proteins carry
organelles along microtubule tracks that crisscross the entire cell. (credit b: modification of work by National Institute
on Aging)

In addition, microtubules are involved in cell division, forming the mitotic spindle that serves to separate
chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis. The mitotic spindle is produced by two centrosomes, which are essentially
microtubule-organizing centers, at opposite ends of the cell. Each centrosome is composed of a pair of centrioles

27. E. Fuchs, D.W. Cleveland. “A Structural Scaffolding of Intermediate Filaments in Health and Disease.” Science 279 no. 5350
(1998):514–519.

134

Chapter 3 | The Cell

positioned at right angles to each other, and each centriole is an array of nine parallel microtubules arranged in triplets
(Figure 3.48).

Figure 3.48 (a) A centrosome is composed of two centrioles positioned at right angles to each other. Each centriole
is composed of nine triplets of microtubules held together by accessory proteins. (b) In animal cells, the centrosomes
(arrows) serve as microtubule-organizing centers of the mitotic spindle during mitosis.

• Compare and contrast the three types of cytoskeletal structures described in this section.

Mitochondria
The large, complex organelles in which aerobic cellular respiration occurs in eukaryotic cells are called mitochondria
(Figure 3.49). The term “mitochondrion” was first coined by German microbiologist Carl Benda in 1898 and was
later connected with the process of respiration by Otto Warburg in 1913. Scientists during the 1960s discovered that
mitochondria have their own genome and 70S ribosomes. The mitochondrial genome was found to be bacterial, when
it was sequenced in 1976. These findings ultimately supported the endosymbiotic theory proposed by Lynn Margulis,
which states that mitochondria originally arose through an endosymbiotic event in which a bacterium capable of
aerobic cellular respiration was taken up by phagocytosis into a host cell and remained as a viable intracellular
component.
Each mitochondrion has two lipid membranes. The outer membrane is a remnant of the original host cell’s membrane
structures. The inner membrane was derived from the bacterial plasma membrane. The electron transport chain
for aerobic respiration uses integral proteins embedded in the inner membrane. The mitochondrial matrix,
corresponding to the location of the original bacterium’s cytoplasm, is the current location of many metabolic
enzymes. It also contains mitochondrial DNA and 70S ribosomes. Invaginations of the inner membrane, called
cristae, evolved to increase surface area for the location of biochemical reactions. The folding patterns of the cristae
differ among various types of eukaryotic cells and are used to distinguish different eukaryotic organisms from each
other.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

135

Figure 3.49 Each mitochondrion is surrounded by two membranes, the inner of which is extensively folded into
cristae and is the site of the intermembrane space. The mitochondrial matrix contains the mitochondrial DNA,
ribosomes, and metabolic enzymes. The transmission electron micrograph of a mitochondrion, on the right, shows
both membranes, including cristae and the mitochondrial matrix. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work by
Matthew Britton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

Chloroplasts
Plant cells and algal cells contain chloroplasts, the organelles in which photosynthesis occurs (Figure 3.50). All
chloroplasts have at least three membrane systems: the outer membrane, the inner membrane, and the thylakoid
membrane system. Inside the outer and inner membranes is the chloroplast stroma, a gel-like fluid that makes up
much of a chloroplast’s volume, and in which the thylakoid system floats. The thylakoid system is a highly dynamic
collection of folded membrane sacs. It is where the green photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll is found and the light
reactions of photosynthesis occur. In most plant chloroplasts, the thylakoids are arranged in stacks called grana
(singular: granum), whereas in some algal chloroplasts, the thylakoids are free floating.

Figure 3.50 Photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts, which have an outer membrane and an inner membrane.
Stacks of thylakoids called grana form a third membrane layer.

Other organelles similar to mitochondria have arisen in other types of eukaryotes, but their roles differ.
Hydrogenosomes are found in some anaerobic eukaryotes and serve as the location of anaerobic hydrogen production.
Hydrogenosomes typically lack their own DNA and ribosomes. Kinetoplasts are a variation of the mitochondria found
in some eukaryotic pathogens. In these organisms, each cell has a single, long, branched mitochondrion in which
kinetoplast DNA, organized as multiple circular pieces of DNA, is found concentrated at one pole of the cell.

136

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Micro Connections
Mitochondria-Related Organelles in Protozoan Parasites
Many protozoans, including several protozoan parasites that cause infections in humans, can be identified
by their unusual appearance. Distinguishing features may include complex cell morphologies, the presence
of unique organelles, or the absence of common organelles. The protozoan parasites Giardia lamblia and
Trichomonas vaginalis are two examples.
G. lamblia, a frequent cause of diarrhea in humans and many other animals, is an anaerobic parasite
that possesses two nuclei and several flagella. Its Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum are greatly
reduced, and it lacks mitochondria completely. However, it does have organelles known as mitosomes, doublemembrane-bound organelles that appear to be severely reduced mitochondria. This has led scientists to
believe that G. lamblia’s ancestors once possessed mitochondria that evolved to become mitosomes. T.
vaginalis, which causes the sexually transmitted infection vaginitis, is another protozoan parasite that lacks
conventional mitochondria. Instead, it possesses hydrogenosomes, mitochondrial-related, double-membranebound organelles that produce molecular hydrogen used in cellular metabolism. Scientists believe that
hydrogenosomes, like mitosomes, also evolved from mitochondria.[28]

Plasma Membrane
The plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells is similar in structure to the prokaryotic plasma membrane in that it is
composed mainly of phospholipids forming a bilayer with embedded peripheral and integral proteins (Figure 3.51).
These membrane components move within the plane of the membrane according to the fluid mosaic model. However,
unlike the prokaryotic membrane, eukaryotic membranes contain sterols, including cholesterol, that alter membrane
fluidity. Additionally, many eukaryotic cells contain some specialized lipids, including sphingolipids, which are
thought to play a role in maintaining membrane stability as well as being involved in signal transduction pathways
and cell-to-cell communication.

28. N. Yarlett, J.H.P. Hackstein. “Hydrogenosomes: One Organelle, Multiple Origins.” BioScience 55 no. 8 (2005):657–658.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

137

Figure 3.51 The eukaryotic plasma membrane is composed of a lipid bilayer with many embedded or associated
proteins. It contains cholesterol for the maintenance of membrane, as well as glycoproteins and glycolipids that are
important in the recognition other cells or pathogens.

Membrane Transport Mechanisms
The processes of simple diffusion, facilitated diffusion, and active transport are used in both eukaryotic and
prokaryotic cells. However, eukaryotic cells also have the unique ability to perform various types of endocytosis,
the uptake of matter through plasma membrane invagination and vacuole/vesicle formation (Figure 3.52). A type
of endocytosis involving the engulfment of large particles through membrane invagination is called phagocytosis,
which means “cell eating.” In phagocytosis, particles (or other cells) are enclosed in a pocket within the membrane,
which then pinches off from the membrane to form a vacuole that completely surrounds the particle. Another type of
endocytosis is called pinocytosis, which means “cell drinking.” In pinocytosis, small, dissolved materials and liquids
are taken into the cell through small vesicles. Saprophytic fungi, for example, obtain their nutrients from dead and
decaying matter largely through pinocytosis.
Receptor-mediated endocytosis is a type of endocytosis that is initiated by specific molecules called ligands when
they bind to cell surface receptors on the membrane. Receptor-mediated endocytosis is the mechanism that peptide
and amine-derived hormones use to enter cells and is also used by various viruses and bacteria for entry into host
cells.

138

Chapter 3 | The Cell

Figure 3.52 Three variations of endocytosis are shown. (a) In phagocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds the
particle and pinches off to form an intracellular vacuole. (b) In pinocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds a small
volume of fluid and pinches off, forming a vesicle. (c) In receptor-mediated endocytosis, the uptake of substances is
targeted to a specific substance (a ligand) that binds at the receptor on the external cell membrane. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)

The process by which secretory vesicles release their contents to the cell’s exterior is called exocytosis. Vesicles move
toward the plasma membrane and then meld with the membrane, ejecting their contents out of the cell. Exocytosis is
used by cells to remove waste products and may also be used to release chemical signals that can be taken up by other
cells.

Cell Wall
In addition to a plasma membrane, some eukaryotic cells have a cell wall. Cells of fungi, algae, plants, and even
some protists have cell walls. Depending upon the type of eukaryotic cell, cell walls can be made of a wide range of
materials, including cellulose (fungi and plants); biogenic silica, calcium carbonate, agar, and carrageenan (protists
and algae); or chitin (fungi). In general, all cell walls provide structural stability for the cell and protection from
environmental stresses such as desiccation, changes in osmotic pressure, and traumatic injury.[29]

Extracellular Matrix
Cells of animals and some protozoans do not have cell walls to help maintain shape and provide structural stability.
Instead, these types of eukaryotic cells produce an extracellular matrix for this purpose. They secrete a sticky
mass of carbohydrates and proteins into the spaces between adjacent cells (Figure 3.53). Some protein components
assemble into a basement membrane to which the remaining extracellular matrix components adhere. Proteoglycans
typically form the bulky mass of the extracellular matrix while fibrous proteins, like collagen, provide strength. Both
proteoglycans and collagen are attached to fibronectin proteins, which, in turn, are attached to integrin proteins. These
integrin proteins interact with transmembrane proteins in the plasma membranes of eukaryotic cells that lack cell
walls.
In animal cells, the extracellular matrix allows cells within tissues to withstand external stresses and transmits signals
from the outside of the cell to the inside. The amount of extracellular matrix is quite extensive in various types of
29. M. Dudzick. “Protists.” OpenStax CNX. November 27, 2013. http://cnx.org/contents/f7048bb6-e462-459b-805c-ef291cf7049c@1

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

139

connective tissues, and variations in the extracellular matrix can give different types of tissues their distinct properties.
In addition, a host cell’s extracellular matrix is often the site where microbial pathogens attach themselves to establish
infection. For example, Streptococcus pyogenes, the bacterium that causes strep throat and various other infections,
binds to fibronectin in the extracellular matrix of the cells lining the oropharynx (upper region of the throat).

Figure 3.53 The extracellular matrix is composed of protein and carbohydrate components. It protects cells from
physical stresses and transmits signals arriving at the outside edges of the tissue to cells deeper within the tissue.

Flagella and Cilia
Some eukaryotic cells use flagella for locomotion; however, eukaryotic flagella are structurally distinct from those
found in prokaryotic cells. Whereas the prokaryotic flagellum is a stiff, rotating structure, a eukaryotic flagellum is
more like a flexible whip composed of nine parallel pairs of microtubules surrounding a central pair of microtubules.
This arrangement is referred to as a 9+2 array (Figure 3.54). The parallel microtubules use dynein motor proteins
to move relative to each other, causing the flagellum to bend.
Cilia (singular: cilium) are a similar external structure found in some eukaryotic cells. Unique to eukaryotes, cilia are
shorter than flagella and often cover the entire surface of a cell; however, they are structurally similar to flagella (a
9+2 array of microtubules) and use the same mechanism for movement. A structure called a basal body is found at
the base of each cilium and flagellum. The basal body, which attaches the cilium or flagellum to the cell, is composed
of an array of triplet microtubules similar to that of a centriole but embedded in the plasma membrane. Because of
their shorter length, cilia use a rapid, flexible, waving motion. In addition to motility, cilia may have other functions
such as sweeping particles past or into cells. For example, ciliated protozoans use the sweeping of cilia to move food

140

Chapter 3 | The Cell

particles into their mouthparts, and ciliated cells in the mammalian respiratory tract beat in synchrony to sweep mucus
and debris up and out of the lungs (Figure 3.54).

Figure 3.54 (a) Eukaryotic flagella and cilia are composed of a 9+2 array of microtubules, as seen in this
transmission electron micrograph cross-section. (b) The sliding of these microtubules relative to each other causes a
flagellum to bend. (c) An illustration of Trichomonas vaginalis, a flagellated protozoan parasite that causes vaginitis.
(d) Many protozoans, like this Paramecium, have numerous cilia that aid in locomotion as well as in feeding. Note the
mouth opening shown here. (credit d: modification of work by University of Vermont/National Institutes of Health)

• Explain how the cellular envelope of eukaryotic cells compares to that of prokaryotic cells.
• Explain the difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic flagella.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

141

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Since amoxicillin has not resolved Barbara’s case of pneumonia, the PA prescribes another antibiotic,
azithromycin, which targets bacterial ribosomes rather than peptidoglycan. After taking the azithromycin as
directed, Barbara’s symptoms resolve and she finally begins to feel like herself again. Presuming no drug
resistance to amoxicillin was involved, and given the effectiveness of azithromycin, the causative agent of
Barbara’s pneumonia is most likely Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Even though this bacterium is a prokaryotic
cell, it is not inhibited by amoxicillin because it does not have a cell wall and, therefore, does not make
peptidoglycan.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Summary
3.1 Spontaneous Generation
• The theory of spontaneous generation states that life arose from nonliving matter. It was a long-held belief
dating back to Aristotle and the ancient Greeks.
• Experimentation by Francesco Redi in the 17th century presented the first significant evidence refuting
spontaneous generation by showing that flies must have access to meat for maggots to develop on the
meat. Prominent scientists designed experiments and argued both in support of (John Needham) and against
(Lazzaro Spallanzani) spontaneous generation.
• Louis Pasteur is credited with conclusively disproving the theory of spontaneous generation with his famous
swan-neck flask experiment. He subsequently proposed that “life only comes from life.”
3.2 Foundations of Modern Cell Theory
• Although cells were first observed in the 1660s by Robert Hooke, cell theory was not well accepted for
another 200 years. The work of scientists such as Schleiden, Schwann, Remak, and Virchow contributed to its
acceptance.
• Endosymbiotic theory states that mitochondria and chloroplasts, organelles found in many types of
organisms, have their origins in bacteria. Significant structural and genetic information support this theory.
• The miasma theory of disease was widely accepted until the 19th century, when it was replaced by the germ
theory of disease thanks to the work of Semmelweis, Snow, Pasteur, Lister, and Koch, and others.
3.3 Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells
• Prokaryotic cells differ from eukaryotic cells in that their genetic material is contained in a nucleoid rather
than a membrane-bound nucleus. In addition, prokaryotic cells generally lack membrane-bound organelles.
• Prokaryotic cells of the same species typically share a similar cell morphology and cellular arrangement.
• Most prokaryotic cells have a cell wall that helps the organism maintain cellular morphology and protects it
against changes in osmotic pressure.
• Outside of the nucleoid, prokaryotic cells may contain extrachromosomal DNA in plasmids.
• Prokaryotic ribosomes that are found in the cytoplasm have a size of 70S.
• Some prokaryotic cells have inclusions that store nutrients or chemicals for other uses.
• Some prokaryotic cells are able to form endospores through sporulation to survive in a dormant state
when conditions are unfavorable. Endospores can germinate, transforming back into vegetative cells when
conditions improve.
• In prokaryotic cells, the cell envelope includes a plasma membrane and usually a cell wall.

142

Chapter 3 | The Cell

• Bacterial membranes are composed of phospholipids with integral or peripheral proteins. The fatty acid
components of these phospholipids are ester-linked and are often used to identify specific types of bacteria.
The proteins serve a variety of functions, including transport, cell-to-cell communication, and sensing
environmental conditions. Archaeal membranes are distinct in that they are composed of fatty acids that are
ether-linked to phospholipids.
• Some molecules can move across the bacterial membrane by simple diffusion, but most large molecules must
be actively transported through membrane structures using cellular energy.
• Prokaryotic cell walls may be composed of peptidoglycan (bacteria) or pseudopeptidoglycan (archaea).
• Gram-positive bacterial cells are characterized by a thick peptidoglycan layer, whereas gram-negative
bacterial cells are characterized by a thin peptidoglycan layer surrounded by an outer membrane.
• Some prokaryotic cells produce glycocalyx coatings, such as capsules and slime layers, that aid in attachment
to surfaces and/or evasion of the host immune system.
• Some prokaryotic cells have fimbriae or pili, filamentous appendages that aid in attachment to surfaces. Pili
are also used in the transfer of genetic material between cells.
• Some prokaryotic cells use one or more flagella to move through water. Peritrichous bacteria, which have
numerous flagella, use runs and tumbles to move purposefully in the direction of a chemical attractant.
3.4 Unique Characteristics of Eukaryotic Cells
• Eukaryotic cells are defined by the presence of a nucleus containing the DNA genome and bound by a nuclear
membrane (or nuclear envelope) composed of two lipid bilayers that regulate transport of materials into and
out of the nucleus through nuclear pores.
• Eukaryotic cell morphologies vary greatly and may be maintained by various structures, including the
cytoskeleton, the cell membrane, and/or the cell wall
• The nucleolus, located in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, is the site of ribosomal synthesis and the first stages
of ribosome assembly.
• Eukaryotic cells contain 80S ribosomes in the rough endoplasmic reticulum (membrane bound-ribosomes)
and cytoplasm (free ribosomes). They contain 70s ribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts.
• Eukaryotic cells have evolved an endomembrane system, containing membrane-bound organelles involved
in transport. These include vesicles, the endoplasmic reticulum, and the Golgi apparatus.
• The smooth endoplasmic reticulum plays a role in lipid biosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, and
detoxification of toxic compounds. The rough endoplasmic reticulum contains membrane-bound 80S
ribosomes that synthesize proteins destined for the cell membrane
• The Golgi apparatus processes proteins and lipids, typically through the addition of sugar molecules,
producing glycoproteins or glycolipids, components of the plasma membrane that are used in cell-to-cell
communication.
• Lysosomes contain digestive enzymes that break down small particles ingested by endocytosis, large particles
or cells ingested by phagocytosis, and damaged intracellular components.
• The cytoskeleton, composed of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules, provides
structural support in eukaryotic cells and serves as a network for transport of intracellular materials.
• Centrosomes are microtubule-organizing centers important in the formation of the mitotic spindle in mitosis.
• Mitochondria are the site of cellular respiration. They have two membranes: an outer membrane and an inner
membrane with cristae. The mitochondrial matrix, within the inner membrane, contains the mitochondrial
DNA, 70S ribosomes, and metabolic enzymes.
• The plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells is structurally similar to that found in prokaryotic cells, and
membrane components move according to the fluid mosaic model. However, eukaryotic membranes contain
sterols, which alter membrane fluidity, as well as glycoproteins and glycolipids, which help the cell recognize
other cells and infectious particles.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

143

• In addition to active transport and passive transport, eukaryotic cell membranes can take material into the cell
via endocytosis, or expel matter from the cell via exocytosis.
• Cells of fungi, algae, plants, and some protists have a cell wall, whereas cells of animals and some protozoans
have a sticky extracellular matrix that provides structural support and mediates cellular signaling.
• Eukaryotic flagella are structurally distinct from prokaryotic flagella but serve a similar purpose (locomotion).
Cilia are structurally similar to eukaryotic flagella, but shorter; they may be used for locomotion, feeding, or
movement of extracellular particles.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. Which of the following individuals argued in favor
of the theory of spontaneous generation?
a. Francesco Redi
b. Louis Pasteur
c. John Needham
d. Lazzaro Spallanzani
2. Which of the following individuals is credited for
definitively refuting the theory of spontaneous
generation using broth in swan-neck flask?
a. Aristotle
b. Jan Baptista van Helmont
c. John Needham
d. Louis Pasteur
3. Which of the following experimented with raw meat,
maggots, and flies in an attempt to disprove the theory
of spontaneous generation.
a. Aristotle
b. Lazzaro Spallanzani
c. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
d. Francesco Redi
4. Which of the following individuals did not
contribute to the establishment of cell theory?
a. Girolamo Fracastoro
b. Matthias Schleiden
c. Robert Remak
d. Robert Hooke
5. Whose proposal of the endosymbiotic theory of
mitochondrial and chloroplast origin was ultimately
accepted by the greater scientific community?
a. Rudolf Virchow
b. Ignaz Semmelweis
c. Lynn Margulis
d. Theodor Schwann

6. Which of the following developed a set of postulates
for determining whether a particular disease is caused by
a particular pathogen?
a. John Snow
b. Robert Koch
c. Joseph Lister
d. Louis Pasteur
7. Which of the following terms refers to a prokaryotic
cell that is comma shaped?
a. coccus
b. coccobacilli
c. vibrio
d. spirillum
8. Which bacterial structures are important for
adherence to surfaces? (Select all that apply.)
a. endospores
b. cell walls
c. fimbriae
d. capsules
e. flagella
9. Which of the following cell wall components is
unique to gram-negative cells?
a. lipopolysaccharide
b. teichoic acid
c. mycolic acid
d. peptidoglycan
10. Which of the following terms refers to a bacterial
cell having a single tuft of flagella at one end?
a. monotrichous
b. amphitrichous
c. peritrichous
d. lophotrichous
11. Bacterial cell walls are primarily composed of
which of the following?
a. phospholipid
b. protein
c. carbohydrate
d. peptidoglycan

144

Chapter 3 | The Cell

12. Which of the following organelles is not part of the
endomembrane system?
a. endoplasmic reticulum
b. Golgi apparatus
c. lysosome
d. peroxisome
13. Which type of cytoskeletal fiber is important in the
formation of the nuclear lamina?
a. microfilaments
b. intermediate filaments
c. microtubules
d. fibronectin
14. Sugar groups may be added to proteins in which of
the following?
a. smooth endoplasmic reticulum
b. rough endoplasmic reticulum
c. Golgi apparatus
d. lysosome
15. Which of the following structures of a eukaryotic
cell is not likely derived from endosymbiotic bacterium?
a.
b.
c.
d.

mitochondrial DNA
mitochondrial ribosomes
inner membrane
outer membrane

16. Which type of nutrient uptake involves the
engulfment of small dissolved molecules into vesicles?
a. active transport
b. pinocytosis
c. receptor-mediated endocytosis
d. facilitated diffusion
17. Which of the following is not composed of
microtubules?
a. desmosomes
b. centrioles
c. eukaryotic flagella
d. eukaryotic cilia
True/False

18. Exposure to air is necessary for microbial growth.
19. Bacteria have 80S ribosomes each composed of a 60S large subunit and a 40S small subunit.
20. Mitochondria in eukaryotic cells contain ribosomes that are structurally similar to those found in prokaryotic
cells.
Fill in the Blank

21. The assertion that “life only comes from life” was stated by Louis Pasteur in regard to his experiments that
definitively refuted the theory of ___________.
22. John Snow is known as the Father of _____________.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 3 | The Cell

145

23. The ____________ theory states that disease may originate from proximity to decomposing matter and is not
due to person-to-person contact.
24. The scientist who first described cells was _____________.
25. Prokaryotic cells that are rod-shaped are called _____________.
26. The type of inclusion containing polymerized inorganic phosphate is called _____________.
27. Peroxisomes typically produce _____________, a harsh chemical that helps break down molecules.
28. Microfilaments are composed of _____________ monomers.
Short Answer

29. Explain in your own words Pasteur’s swan-neck flask experiment.
30. Explain why the experiments of Needham and Spallanzani yielded in different results even though they used
similar methodologies.
31. How did the explanation of Virchow and Remak for the origin of cells differ from that of Schleiden and
Schwann?
32. What evidence exists that supports the endosymbiotic theory?
33. What were the differences in mortality rates due to puerperal fever that Ignaz Semmelweis observed? How did
he propose to reduce the occurrence of puerperal fever? Did it work?
34. What is the direction of water flow for a bacterial cell living in a hypotonic environment? How do cell walls help
bacteria living in such environments?
35. How do bacterial flagella respond to a chemical gradient of an attractant to move toward a higher concentration
of the chemical?
36. Label the parts of the prokaryotic cell.

37. What existing evidence supports the theory that mitochondria are of prokaryotic origin?
38. Why do eukaryotic cells require an endomembrane system?

146

Chapter 3 | The Cell

39. Name at least two ways that prokaryotic flagella are different from eukaryotic flagella.
Critical Thinking

40. What would the results of Pasteur’s swan-neck flask experiment have looked like if they supported the theory of
spontaneous generation?
41. Why are mitochondria and chloroplasts unable to multiply outside of a host cell?
42. Why was the work of Snow so important in supporting the germ theory?
43. Which of the following slides is a good example of staphylococci?

Figure 3.55 (credit a: modification of work by U.S. Department of Agriculture; credit b: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by NIAID)

44. Provide some examples of bacterial structures that might be used as antibiotic targets and explain why.
45. The causative agent of botulism, a deadly form of food poisoning, is an endospore-forming bacterium called
Clostridium botulinim. Why might it be difficult to kill this bacterium in contaminated food?
46. Label the lettered parts of this eukaryotic cell.

47. How are peroxisomes more like mitochondria than like the membrane-bound organelles of the endomembrane
system? How do they differ from mitochondria?
48. Why must the functions of both lysosomes and peroxisomes be compartmentalized?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

195

Chapter 5

The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.1 Malaria is a disease caused by a eukaryotic parasite transmitted to humans by mosquitos. Micrographs
(left and center) show a sporozoite life stage, trophozoites, and a schizont in a blood smear. On the right is depicted a
primary defense against mosquito-borne illnesses like malaria—mosquito netting. (credit left: modification of work by
Ute Frevert; credit middle: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit right:
modification of work by Tjeerd Wiersma)

Chapter Outline
5.1 Unicellular Eukaryotic Parasites
5.2 Parasitic Helminths
5.3 Fungi
5.4 Algae
5.5 Lichens

Introduction
Although bacteria and viruses account for a large number of the infectious diseases that afflict humans, many serious
illnesses are caused by eukaryotic organisms. One example is malaria, which is caused by Plasmodium, a eukaryotic
organism transmitted through mosquito bites. Malaria is a major cause of morbidity (illness) and mortality (death)
that threatens 3.4 billion people worldwide.[1] In severe cases, organ failure and blood or metabolic abnormalities
contribute to medical emergencies and sometimes death. Even after initial recovery, relapses may occur years later. In
countries where malaria is endemic, the disease represents a major public health challenge that can place a tremendous
strain on developing economies.
Worldwide, major efforts are underway to reduce malaria infections. Efforts include the distribution of insecticidetreated bed nets and the spraying of pesticides. Researchers are also making progress in their efforts to develop
effective vaccines.[2] The President’s Malaria Initiative, started in 2005, supports prevention and treatment. The Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation has a large initiative to eliminate malaria. Despite these efforts, malaria continues to
cause long-term morbidity (such as intellectual disabilities in children) and mortality (especially in children younger
than 5 years), so we still have far to go.
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Impact of Malaria.” September 22, 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/malaria_worldwide/
impact.html. Accessed January 18, 2016.
2. RTS, S Clinical Trials Partnership. “Efficacy and safety of RTS,S/AS01 malaria vaccine with or without a booster dose in infants and
children in Africa: final results of a phase 3, individually randomised, controlled trial.” The Lancet 23 April 2015. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60721-8.

196

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

5.1 Unicellular Eukaryotic Parasites
Learning Objectives
• Summarize the general characteristics of unicellular eukaryotic parasites
• Describe the general life cycles and modes of reproduction in unicellular eukaryotic parasites
• Identify challenges associated with classifying unicellular eukaryotes
• Explain the taxonomic scheme used for unicellular eukaryotes
• Give examples of infections caused by unicellular eukaryotes

Eukaryotic microbes are an extraordinarily diverse group, including species with a wide range of life cycles,
morphological specializations, and nutritional needs. Although more diseases are caused by viruses and bacteria than
by microscopic eukaryotes, these eukaryotes are responsible for some diseases of great public health importance.
For example, the protozoal disease malaria was responsible for 584,000 deaths worldwide (primarily children in
Africa) in 2013, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The protist parasite Giardia causes a diarrheal
illness (giardiasis) that is easily transmitted through contaminated water supplies. In the United States, Giardia is
the most common human intestinal parasite (Figure 5.3). Although it may seem surprising, parasitic worms are
included within the study of microbiology because identification depends on observation of microscopic adult worms
or eggs. Even in developed countries, these worms are important parasites of humans and of domestic animals. There
are fewer fungal pathogens, but these are important causes of illness, as well. On the other hand, fungi have been

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Upon arriving home from school, 7-year-old Sarah complains that a large spot on her arm will not stop itching.
She keeps scratching at it, drawing the attention of her parents. Looking more closely, they see that it is a
red circular spot with a raised red edge (Figure 5.2). The next day, Sarah’s parents take her to their doctor,
who examines the spot using a Wood’s lamp. A Wood’s lamp produces ultraviolet light that causes the spot on
Sarah’s arm to fluoresce, which confirms what the doctor already suspected: Sarah has a case of ringworm.
Sarah’s mother is mortified to hear that her daughter has a “worm.” How could this happen?

• What are some likely ways that Sarah might have contracted ringworm?

Figure 5.2 Ringworm presents as a raised, red ring on the skin. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

197

important in producing antimicrobial substances such as penicillin. In this chapter, we will examine characteristics of
protists, worms, and fungi while considering their roles in causing disease.

Figure 5.3 (a) A scanning electron micrograph shows many Giardia parasites in the trophozoite, or feeding stage, in
a gerbil intestine. (b) An individual trophozoite of G. lamblia, visualized here in a scanning electron micrograph. This
waterborne protist causes severe diarrhea when ingested. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

Characteristics of Protists
The word protist is a historical term that is now used informally to refer to a diverse group of microscopic eukaryotic
organisms. It is not considered a formal taxonomic term because the organisms it describes do not have a shared
evolutionary origin. Historically, the protists were informally grouped into the “animal-like” protozoans, the “plantlike” algae, and the “fungus-like” protists such as water molds. These three groups of protists differ greatly in terms
of their basic characteristics. For example, algae are photosynthetic organisms that can be unicellular or multicellular.
Protozoa, on the other hand, are nonphotosynthetic, motile organisms that are always unicellular. Other informal
terms may also be used to describe various groups of protists. For example, microorganisms that drift or float in
water, moved by currents, are referred to as plankton. Types of plankton include zooplankton, which are motile and
nonphotosynthetic, and phytoplankton, which are photosynthetic.
Protozoans inhabit a wide variety of habitats, both aquatic and terrestrial. Many are free-living, while others are
parasitic, carrying out a life cycle within a host or hosts and potentially causing illness. There are also beneficial
symbionts that provide metabolic services to their hosts. During the feeding and growth part of their life cycle, they
are called trophozoites; these feed on small particulate food sources such as bacteria. While some types of protozoa
exist exclusively in the trophozoite form, others can develop from trophozoite to an encapsulated cyst stage when
environmental conditions are too harsh for the trophozoite. A cyst is a cell with a protective wall, and the process by
which a trophozoite becomes a cyst is called encystment. When conditions become more favorable, these cysts are
triggered by environmental cues to become active again through excystment.
One protozoan genus capable of encystment is Eimeria, which includes some human and animal pathogens. Figure
5.4 illustrates the life cycle of Eimeria.

198

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.4 In the sexual/asexual life cycle of Eimeria, oocysts (inset) are shed in feces and may cause disease
when ingested by a new host. (credit “life cycle,” “micrograph”: modification of work by USDA)

Protozoans have a variety of reproductive mechanisms. Some protozoans reproduce asexually and others reproduce
sexually; still others are capable of both sexual and asexual reproduction. In protozoans, asexual reproduction occurs
by binary fission, budding, or schizogony. In schizogony, the nucleus of a cell divides multiple times before the cell
divides into many smaller cells. The products of schizogony are called merozoites and they are stored in structures
known as schizonts. Protozoans may also reproduce sexually, which increases genetic diversity and can lead to
complex life cycles. Protozoans can produce haploid gametes that fuse through syngamy. However, they can also
exchange genetic material by joining to exchange DNA in a process called conjugation. This is a different process
than the conjugation that occurs in bacteria. The term protist conjugation refers to a true form of eukaryotic sexual
reproduction between two cells of different mating types. It is found in ciliates, a group of protozoans, and is
described later in this subsection.
All protozoans have a plasma membrane, or plasmalemma, and some have bands of protein just inside the membrane
that add rigidity, forming a structure called the pellicle. Some protists, including protozoans, have distinct layers
of cytoplasm under the membrane. In these protists, the outer gel layer (with microfilaments of actin) is called the
ectoplasm. Inside this layer is a sol (fluid) region of cytoplasm called the endoplasm. These structures contribute to
complex cell shapes in some protozoans, whereas others (such as amoebas) have more flexible shapes (Figure 5.5).
Different groups of protozoans have specialized feeding structures. They may have a specialized structure for taking
in food through phagocytosis, called a cytostome, and a specialized structure for the exocytosis of wastes called a
cytoproct. Oral grooves leading to cytostomes are lined with hair-like cilia to sweep in food particles. Protozoans

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

199

are heterotrophic. Protozoans that are holozoic ingest whole food particles through phagocytosis. Forms that are
saprozoic ingest small, soluble food molecules.
Many protists have whip-like flagella or hair-like cilia made of microtubules that can be used for locomotion (Figure
5.5). Other protists use cytoplasmic extensions known as pseudopodia (“false feet”) to attach the cell to a surface;
they then allow cytoplasm to flow into the extension, thus moving themselves forward.
Protozoans have a variety of unique organelles and sometimes lack organelles found in other cells. Some have
contractile vacuoles, organelles that can be used to move water out of the cell for osmotic regulation (salt and water
balance) (Figure 5.5). Mitochondria may be absent in parasites or altered to kinetoplastids (modified mitochondria)
or hydrogenosomes (see Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells for more discussion of these structures).

Figure 5.5 (a) Paramecium spp. have hair-like appendages called cilia for locomotion. (b) Amoeba spp. use lobelike pseudopodia to anchor the cell to a solid surface and pull forward. (c) Euglena spp. use a whip-like structure
called a flagellum to propel the cell.

• What is the sequence of events in reproduction by schizogony and what are the cells produced called?

Taxonomy of Protists
The protists are a polyphyletic group, meaning they lack a shared evolutionary origin. Since the current taxonomy is
based on evolutionary history (as determined by biochemistry, morphology, and genetics), protists are scattered across
many different taxonomic groups within the domain Eukarya. Eukarya is currently divided into six supergroups that
are further divided into subgroups, as illustrated in (Figure 5.6). In this section, we will primarily be concerned
with the supergroups Amoebozoa, Excavata, and Chromalveolata; these supergroups include many protozoans of
clinical significance. The supergroups Opisthokonta and Rhizaria also include some protozoans, but few of clinical
significance. In addition to protozoans, Opisthokonta also includes animals and fungi, some of which we will discuss
in Parasitic Helminths and Fungi. Some examples of the Archaeplastida will be discussed in Algae. Figure 5.7
and Figure 5.8 summarize the characteristics of each supergroup and subgroup and list representatives of each.

200

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.6 This tree shows a proposed classification of the domain Eukarya based on evolutionary relationships.
Currently, the domain Eukarya is divided into six supergroups. Within each supergroup are multiple kingdoms. Dotted
lines indicate suggested evolutionary relationships that remain under debate.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.7

201

202

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.8

• Which supergroups contain the clinically significant protists?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

203

Amoebozoa
The supergroup Amoebozoa includes protozoans that use amoeboid movement. Actin microfilaments produce
pseudopodia, into which the remainder of the protoplasm flows, thereby moving the organism. The genus Entamoeba
includes commensal or parasitic species, including the medically important E. histolytica, which is transmitted by
cysts in feces and is the primary cause of amoebic dysentery. The notorious “brain-eating amoeba,” Naegleria fowleri,
is also classified within the Amoebozoa. This deadly parasite is found in warm, fresh water and causes primary
amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM). Another member of this group is Acanthamoeba, which can cause keratitis
(corneal inflammation) and blindness.
The Eumycetozoa are an unusual group of organisms called slime molds, which have previously been classified
as animals, fungi, and plants (Figure 5.9). Slime molds can be divided into two types: cellular slime molds and
plasmodial slime molds. The cellular slime molds exist as individual amoeboid cells that periodically aggregate
into a mobile slug. The aggregate then forms a fruiting body that produces haploid spores. Plasmodial slime molds
exist as large, multinucleate amoeboid cells that form reproductive stalks to produce spores that divide into gametes.
One cellular slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum, has been an important study organism for understanding cell
differentiation, because it has both single-celled and multicelled life stages, with the cells showing some degree
of differentiation in the multicelled form. Figure 5.10 and Figure 5.11 illustrate the life cycles of cellular and
plasmodial slime molds, respectively.

Figure 5.9 (a) The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum can be grown on agar in a Petri dish. In this image,
individual amoeboid cells (visible as small spheres) are streaming together to form an aggregation that is beginning to
rise in the upper right corner of the image. The primitively multicellular aggregation consists of individual cells that
each have their own nucleus. (b) Fuligo septica is a plasmodial slime mold. This brightly colored organism consists of
a large cell with many nuclei.

204

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.10 The life cycle of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum primarily involves individual amoebas
but includes the formation of a multinucleate plasmodium formed from a uninucleate zygote (the result of the fusion of
two individual amoeboid cells). The plasmodium is able to move and forms a fruiting body that generates haploid
spores. (credit “photo”: modification of work by “thatredhead4”/Flickr)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

205

Figure 5.11 Plasmodial slime molds exist as large multinucleate amoeboid cells that form reproductive stalks to
produce spores that divide into gametes.

Chromalveolata
The supergroup Chromalveolata is united by similar origins of its members’ plastids and includes the apicomplexans,
ciliates, diatoms, and dinoflagellates, among other groups (we will cover the diatoms and dinoflagellates in Algae).
The apicomplexans are intra- or extracellular parasites that have an apical complex at one end of the cell. The
apical complex is a concentration of organelles, vacuoles, and microtubules that allows the parasite to enter host
cells (Figure 5.12). Apicomplexans have complex life cycles that include an infective sporozoite that undergoes
schizogony to make many merozoites (see the example in Figure 5.4). Many are capable of infecting a variety of
animal cells, from insects to livestock to humans, and their life cycles often depend on transmission between multiple
hosts. The genus Plasmodium is an example of this group.

206

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.12 (a) Apicomplexans are parasitic protists. They have a characteristic apical complex that enables them
to infect host cells. (b) A colorized electron microscope image of a Plasmodium sporozoite. (credit b: modification of
work by Ute Frevert)

Other apicomplexans are also medically important. Cryptosporidium parvum causes intestinal symptoms and can
cause epidemic diarrhea when the cysts contaminate drinking water. Theileria (Babesia) microti, transmitted by the
tick Ixodes scapularis, causes recurring fever that can be fatal and is becoming a common transfusion-transmitted
pathogen in the United States (Theileria and Babesia are closely related genera and there is some debate about
the best classification). Finally, Toxoplasma gondii causes toxoplasmosis and can be transmitted from cat feces,
unwashed fruit and vegetables, or from undercooked meat. Because toxoplasmosis can be associated with serious
birth defects, pregnant women need to be aware of this risk and use caution if they are exposed to the feces of
potentially infected cats. A national survey found the frequency of individuals with antibodies for toxoplasmosis (and
thus who presumably have a current latent infection) in the United States to be 11%. Rates are much higher in other
countries, including some developed countries.[3] There is also evidence and a good deal of theorizing that the parasite
may be responsible for altering infected humans’ behavior and personality traits.[4]
The ciliates (Ciliaphora), also within the Chromalveolata, are a large, very diverse group characterized by the
presence of cilia on their cell surface. Although the cilia may be used for locomotion, they are often used for
feeding, as well, and some forms are nonmotile. Balantidium coli (Figure 5.13) is the only parasitic ciliate
that affects humans by causing intestinal illness, although it rarely causes serious medical issues except in the
immunocompromised (those having a weakened immune system). Perhaps the most familiar ciliate is Paramecium, a
motile organism with a clearly visible cytostome and cytoproct that is often studied in biology laboratories (Figure
5.14). Another ciliate, Stentor, is sessile and uses its cilia for feeding (Figure 5.15). Generally, these organisms
have a micronucleus that is diploid, somatic, and used for sexual reproduction by conjugation. They also have a
macronucleus that is derived from the micronucleus; the macronucleus becomes polyploid (multiple sets of duplicate
chromosomes), and has a reduced set of metabolic genes.
Ciliates are able to reproduce through conjugation, in which two cells attach to each other. In each cell, the diploid
micronuclei undergo meiosis, producing eight haploid nuclei each. Then, all but one of the haploid micronuclei and
the macronucleus disintegrate; the remaining (haploid) micronucleus undergoes mitosis. The two cells then exchange
one micronucleus each, which fuses with the remaining micronucleus present to form a new, genetically different,
3. J. Flegr et al. “Toxoplasmosis—A Global Threat. Correlation of Latent Toxoplasmosis With Specific Disease Burden in a Set of 88
Countries.” PloS ONE 9 no. 3 (2014):e90203.
4. J. Flegr. “Effects of Toxoplasma on Human Behavior.” Schizophrenia Bull 33, no. 3 (2007):757–760.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

207

diploid micronucleus. The diploid micronucleus undergoes two mitotic divisions, so each cell has four micronuclei,
and two of the four combine to form a new macronucleus. The chromosomes in the macronucleus then replicate
repeatedly, the macronucleus reaches its polyploid state, and the two cells separate. The two cells are now genetically
different from each other and from their previous versions.

Figure 5.13 This specimen of the ciliate Balantidium coli is a trophozoite form isolated from the gut of a primate. B.
coli is the only ciliate capable of parasitizing humans. (credit: modification of work by Kouassi RYW, McGraw SW, Yao
PK, Abou-Bacar A, Brunet J, Pesson B, Bonfoh B, N’goran EK & Candolfi E)

Figure 5.14 Paramecium has a primitive mouth (called an oral groove) to ingest food, and an anal pore to excrete it.
Contractile vacuoles allow the organism to excrete excess water. Cilia enable the organism to move.

208

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.15 This differential interference contrast micrograph (magnification: ×65) of Stentor roeselie shows cilia
present on the margins of the structure surrounding the cytostome; the cilia move food particles. (credit: modification
of work by “picturepest”/Flickr)

Öomycetes have similarities to fungi and were once classified with them. They are also called water molds. However,
they differ from fungi in several important ways. Öomycetes have cell walls of cellulose (unlike the chitinous cell
walls of fungi) and they are generally diploid, whereas the dominant life forms of fungi are typically haploid.
Phytophthora, the plant pathogen found in the soil that caused the Irish potato famine, is classified within this group
(Figure 5.16).

Figure 5.16 A saprobic oomycete, or water mold, engulfs a dead insect. (credit: modification of work by Thomas
Bresson)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

209

Link to Learning
Explore the procedures for detecting the presence of an apicomplexan in a
public water supply, at this (https://openstax.org/l/22detpreapicom) website.
This video (https://openstax.org/l/22feedstentor) shows the feeding of
Stentor.

Excavata
The third and final supergroup to be considered in this section is the Excavata, which includes primitive eukaryotes
and many parasites with limited metabolic abilities. These organisms have complex cell shapes and structures, often
including a depression on the surface of the cell called an excavate. The group Excavata includes the subgroups
Fornicata, Parabasalia, and Euglenozoa. The Fornicata lack mitochondria but have flagella. This group includes
Giardia lamblia (also known as G. intestinalis or G. duodenalis), a widespread pathogen that causes diarrheal
illness and can be spread through cysts from feces that contaminate water supplies (Figure 5.3). Parabasalia are
frequent animal endosymbionts; they live in the guts of animals like termites and cockroaches. They have basal
bodies and modified mitochondria (kinetoplastids). They also have a large, complex cell structure with an undulating
membrane and often have many flagella. The trichomonads (a subgroup of the Parabasalia) include pathogens such
as Trichomonas vaginalis, which causes the human sexually transmitted disease trichomoniasis. Trichomoniasis often
does not cause symptoms in men, but men are able to transmit the infection. In women, it causes vaginal discomfort
and discharge and may cause complications in pregnancy if left untreated.
The Euglenozoa are common in the environment and include photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic species. Members
of the genus Euglena are typically not pathogenic. Their cells have two flagella, a pellicle, a stigma (eyespot) to sense
light, and chloroplasts for photosynthesis (Figure 5.17). The pellicle of Euglena is made of a series of protein bands
surrounding the cell; it supports the cell membrane and gives the cell shape.
The Euglenozoa also include the trypanosomes, which are parasitic pathogens. The genus Trypanosoma includes
T. brucei, which causes African trypanosomiasis (African sleeping sickness and T. cruzi, which causes American
trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease). These tropical diseases are spread by insect bites. In African sleeping sickness, T.
brucei colonizes the blood and the brain after being transmitted via the bite of a tsetse fly (Glossina spp.) (Figure
5.18). The early symptoms include confusion, difficulty sleeping, and lack of coordination. Left untreated, it is fatal.

Figure 5.17 (a) This illustration of a Euglena shows the characteristic structures, such as the stigma and flagellum.
(b) The pellicle, under the cell membrane, gives the cell its distinctive shape and is visible in this image as delicate
parallel striations over the surface of the entire cell (especially visible over the grey contractile vacuole). (credit a:
modification of work by Claudio Miklos; credit b: modification of work by David Shykind)

210

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.18 Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African trypanosomiasis, spends part of its life cycle in the
tsetse fly and part in humans. (credit “illustration”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; credit “photo”: DPDx/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Chagas’ disease originated and is most common in Latin America. The disease is transmitted by Triatoma spp., insects
often called “kissing bugs,” and affects either the heart tissue or tissues of the digestive system. Untreated cases can
eventually lead to heart failure or significant digestive or neurological disorders.
The genus Leishmania includes trypanosomes that cause disfiguring skin disease and sometimes systemic illness as
well.

Eye on Ethics

Neglected Parasites
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is responsible for identifying public health priorities
in the United States and developing strategies to address areas of concern. As part of this mandate, the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

211

CDC has officially identified five parasitic diseases it considers to have been neglected (i.e., not adequately
studied). These neglected parasitic infections (NPIs) include toxoplasmosis, Chagas disease, toxocariasis
(a nematode infection transmitted primarily by infected dogs), cysticercosis (a disease caused by a tissue
infection of the tapeworm Taenia solium), and trichomoniasis (a sexually transmitted disease caused by the
parabasalid Trichomonas vaginalis).
The decision to name these specific diseases as NPIs means that the CDC will devote resources toward
improving awareness and developing better diagnostic testing and treatment through studies of available data.
The CDC may also advise on treatment of these diseases and assist in the distribution of medications that
might otherwise be difficult to obtain.[5]
Of course, the CDC does not have unlimited resources, so by prioritizing these five diseases, it is effectively
deprioritizing others. Given that many Americans have never heard of many of these NPIs, it is fair to ask
what criteria the CDC used in prioritizing diseases. According to the CDC, the factors considered were the
number of people infected, the severity of the illness, and whether the illness can be treated or prevented.
Although several of these NPIs may seem to be more common outside the United States, the CDC argues that
many cases in the United States likely go undiagnosed and untreated because so little is known about these
diseases.[6]
What criteria should be considered when prioritizing diseases for purposes of funding or research? Are those
identified by the CDC reasonable? What other factors could be considered? Should government agencies like
the CDC have the same criteria as private pharmaceutical research labs? What are the ethical implications of
deprioritizing other potentially neglected parasitic diseases such as leishmaniasis?

5.2 Parasitic Helminths
Learning Objectives
• Explain why we include the study of parasitic worms within the discipline of microbiology
• Compare the basic morphology of the major groups of parasitic helminthes
• Describe the characteristics of parasitic nematodes, and give an example of infective eggs and infective larvae
• Describe the characteristics of parasitic trematodes and cestodes, and give examples of each
• Identify examples of the primary causes of infections due to nematodes, trematodes, and cestodes
• Classify parasitic worms according to major groups

Parasitic helminths are animals that are often included within the study of microbiology because many species of
these worms are identified by their microscopic eggs and larvae. There are two major groups of parasitic helminths:
the roundworms (Nematoda) and flatworms (Platyhelminthes). Of the many species that exist in these groups, about
half are parasitic and some are important human pathogens. As animals, they are multicellular and have organ
systems. However, the parasitic species often have limited digestive tracts, nervous systems, and locomotor abilities.
Parasitic forms may have complex reproductive cycles with several different life stages and more than one type of
host. Some are monoecious, having both male and female reproductive organs in a single individual, while others are
dioecious, each having either male or female reproductive organs.

5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Neglected Parasitic Infections (NPIs) in the United States.” http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/
npi/. Last updated July 10, 2014.
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fact Sheet: Neglected Parasitic Infections in the United States.” http://www.cdc.gov/
parasites/resources/pdf/npi_factsheet.pdf

212

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Nematoda (Roundworms)
Phylum Nematoda (the roundworms) is a diverse group containing more than 15,000 species, of which several
are important human parasites (Figure 5.19). These unsegmented worms have a full digestive system even when
parasitic. Some are common intestinal parasites, and their eggs can sometimes be identified in feces or around the
anus of infected individuals. Ascaris lumbricoides is the largest nematode intestinal parasite found in humans; females
may reach lengths greater than 1 meter. A. lumbricoides is also very widespread, even in developed nations, although
it is now a relatively uncommon problem in the United States. It may cause symptoms ranging from relatively mild
(such as a cough and mild abdominal pain) to severe (such as intestinal blockage and impaired growth).

Figure 5.19 A micrograph of the nematode Enterobius vermicularis, also known as the pinworm. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Of all nematode infections in the United States, pinworm (caused by Enterobius vermicularis) is the most common.
Pinworm causes sleeplessness and itching around the anus, where the female worms lay their eggs during the night.
Toxocara canis and T. cati are nematodes found in dogs and cats, respectively, that can be transmitted to humans,
causing toxocariasis. Antibodies to these parasites have been found in approximately 13.9% of the U.S. population,
suggesting that exposure is common.[7] Infection can cause larval migrans, which can result in vision loss and eye
inflammation, or fever, fatigue, coughing, and abdominal pain, depending on whether the organism infects the eye
or the viscera. Another common nematode infection is hookworm, which is caused by Necator americanus (the
New World or North American hookworm) and Ancylostoma duodenale (the Old World hookworm). Symptoms of
hookworm infection can include abdominal pain, diarrhea, loss of appetite, weight loss, fatigue, and anemia.
Trichinellosis, also called trichinosis, caused by Trichinella spiralis, is contracted by consuming undercooked meat,
which releases the larvae and allows them to encyst in muscles. Infection can cause fever, muscle pains, and digestive
system problems; severe infections can lead to lack of coordination, breathing and heart problems, and even death.
Finally, heartworm in dogs and other animals is caused by the nematode Dirofilaria immitis, which is transmitted by
mosquitoes. Symptoms include fatigue and cough; when left untreated, death may result.

7. Won K, Kruszon-Moran D, Schantz P, Jones J. “National seroprevalence and risk factors for zoonotic Toxocara spp. infection.” In:
Abstracts of the 56th American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 2007 Nov 4-8.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

213

Clinical Focus
Part 2
The physician explains to Sarah’s mother that ringworm can be transferred between people through touch.
“It’s common in school children, because they often come in close contact with each other, but anyone can
become infected,” he adds. “Because you can transfer it through objects, locker rooms and public pools are
also a potential source of infection. It’s very common among wrestlers and athletes in other contact sports.”
Looking very uncomfortable, Sarah says to her mother “I want this worm out of me.”
The doctor laughs and says, “Sarah, you’re in luck because ringworm is just a name; it is not an actual worm.
You have nothing wriggling around under your skin.”
“Then what is it?” asks Sarah.

• What type of pathogen causes ringworm?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

• What is the most common nematode infection in the United States?

Platyhelminths (Flatworms)
Phylum Platyhelminthes (the platyhelminths) are flatworms. This group includes the flukes, tapeworms, and the
turbellarians, which include planarians. The flukes and tapeworms are medically important parasites (Figure 5.20).
The flukes (trematodes) are nonsegmented flatworms that have an oral sucker (Figure 5.21) (and sometimes a
second ventral sucker) and attach to the inner walls of intestines, lungs, large blood vessels, or the liver. Trematodes
have complex life cycles, often with multiple hosts. Several important examples are the liver flukes (Clonorchis
and Opisthorchis), the intestinal fluke (Fasciolopsis buski), and the oriental lung fluke (Paragonimus westermani).
Schistosomiasis is a serious parasitic disease, considered second in the scale of its impact on human populations only
to malaria. The parasites Schistosoma mansoni, S. haematobium, and S. japonicum, which are found in freshwater
snails, are responsible for schistosomiasis (Figure 5.22). Immature forms burrow through the skin into the blood.
They migrate to the lungs, then to the liver and, later, other organs. Symptoms include anemia, malnutrition, fever,
abdominal pain, fluid buildup, and sometimes death.

214

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.20 Phylum Platyhelminthes is divided into four classes. (a) Class Turbellaria includes the Bedford’s
flatworm (Pseudobiceros bedfordi), which is about 8–10 cm long. (b) The parasitic class Monogenea includes
Dactylogyrus spp. Worms in this genus are commonly called gill flukes. The specimen pictured here is about 0.2 mm
long and has two anchors, indicated by arrows, that it uses to latch onto the gills of host fish. (c) The Trematoda class
includes the common liver fluke Fasciola hepatica and the giant liver fluke Fascioloides magna (right). The F. magna
specimen shown here is about 7 cm long. (d) Class Cestoda includes tapeworms such as Taenia saginata, which
infects both cattle and humans and can reach lengths of 4–10 meters; the specimen shown here is about 4 meters
long. (credit c: modification of work by “Flukeman”/Wikimedia Commons)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

215

Figure 5.21 (a) The oral sucker is visible on the anterior end of this liver fluke, Opisthorchis viverrini. (b) This
micrograph shows the scolex of the cestode Taenia solium, also known as the pork tapeworm. The visible suckers
and hooks allow the worm to attach itself to the inner wall of the intestine. (credit a: modification of work by Sripa B,
Kaewkes S, Sithithaworn P, Mairiang E, Laha T, and Smout M; credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

The other medically important group of platyhelminths are commonly known as tapeworms (cestodes) and are
segmented flatworms that may have suckers or hooks at the scolex (head region) (Figure 5.21). Tapeworms use
these suckers or hooks to attach to the wall of the small intestine. The body of the worm is made up of segments
called proglottids that contain reproductive structures; these detach when the gametes are fertilized, releasing gravid
proglottids with eggs. Tapeworms often have an intermediate host that consumes the eggs, which then hatch into a
larval form called an oncosphere. The oncosphere migrates to a particular tissue or organ in the intermediate host,
where it forms cysticerci. After being eaten by the definitive host, the cysticerci develop into adult tapeworms in the
host's digestive system (Figure 5.23). Taenia saginata (the beef tapeworm) and T. solium (the pork tapeworm) enter
humans through ingestion of undercooked, contaminated meat. The adult worms develop and reside in the intestine,
but the larval stage may migrate and be found in other body locations such as skeletal and smooth muscle. The beef
tapeworm is relatively benign, although it can cause digestive problems and, occasionally, allergic reactions. The pork
tapeworm can cause more serious problems when the larvae leave the intestine and colonize other tissues, including
those of the central nervous system. Diphylobothrium latum is the largest human tapeworm and can be ingested in
undercooked fish. It can grow to a length of 15 meters. Echinococcus granulosus, the dog tapeworm, can parasitize
humans and uses dogs as an important host.

216

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.22 The life cycle of Schistosoma spp. includes several species of water snails, which serve as secondary
hosts. The parasite is transmitted to humans through contact with contaminated water and takes up residence in the
veins of the digestive system. Eggs escape the host in the urine or feces and infect a snail to complete the life cycle.
(credit “illustration”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “step 3 photo”:
modification of work by Fred A. Lewis, Yung-san Liang, Nithya Raghavan & Matty Knight)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

217

Figure 5.23 Life cycle of a tapeworm. (credit “illustration”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; credit “step 3 micrographs”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

• What group of medically important flatworms is segmented and what group is unsegmented?

218

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Micro Connections
Food for Worms?
For residents of temperate, developed countries, it may be difficult to imagine just how common helminth
infections are in the human population. In fact, they are quite common and even occur frequently in the United
States. Worldwide, approximately 807–1,221 million people are infected with Ascaris lumbricoides (perhaps
one-sixth of the human population) and far more are infected if all nematode species are considered.[8] Rates
of infection are relatively high even in industrialized nations. Approximately 604–795 million people are infected
with whipworm (Trichuris) worldwide (Trichuris can also infect dogs), and 576–740 million people are infected
with hookworm (Necator americanus and Ancylostoma duodenale).[9] Toxocara, a nematode parasite of dogs
and cats, is also able to infect humans. It is widespread in the United States, with about 10,000 symptomatic
cases annually. However, one study found 14% of the population (more than 40 million Americans) was
seropositive, meaning they had been exposed to the parasite at one time. More than 200 million people have
schistosomiasis worldwide. Most of the World Health Organization (WHO) neglected tropical diseases are
helminths. In some cases, helminths may cause subclinical illnesses, meaning the symptoms are so mild that
that they go unnoticed. In other cases, the effects may be more severe or chronic, leading to fluid accumulation
and organ damage. With so many people affected, these parasites constitute a major global public health
concern.

Micro Connections
Eradicating the Guinea Worm
Dracunculiasis, or Guinea worm disease, is caused by a nematode called Dracunculus medinensis. When
people consume contaminated water, water fleas (small crustaceans) containing the nematode larvae may be
ingested. These larvae migrate out of the intestine, mate, and move through the body until females eventually
emerge (generally through the feet). While Guinea worm disease is rarely fatal, it is extremely painful and can
be accompanied by secondary infections and edema (Figure 5.24).

Figure 5.24 The Guinea worm can be removed from a leg vein of an infected person by gradually winding it
around a stick, like this matchstick. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
An eradication campaign led by WHO, the CDC, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and the Carter
Center (founded by former U.S. president Jimmy Carter) has been extremely successful in reducing cases of
dracunculiasis. This has been possible because diagnosis is straightforward, there is an inexpensive method
of control, there is no animal reservoir, the water fleas are not airborne (they are restricted to still water),

8. Fenwick, A. “The global burden of neglected tropical diseases.” Public health 126 no.3 (Mar 2012): 233–6.
9. de Silva, N., et. al. (2003). “Soil-transmitted helminth infections: updating the global picture”. Trends in Parasitology 19 (December
2003): 547–51.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

219

the disease is geographically limited, and there has been a commitment from the governments involved.
Additionally, no vaccines or medication are required for treatment and prevention. In 1986, 3.5 million people
were estimated to be affected. After the eradication campaign, which included helping people in affected areas
learn to filter water with cloth, only four countries continue to report the disease (Chad, Mali, South Sudan, and
Ethiopia) with a total of 126 cases reported to WHO in 2014.[10]

5.3 Fungi
Learning Objectives
• Explain why the study of fungi such as yeast and molds is within the discipline of microbiology
• Describe the unique characteristics of fungi
• Describe examples of asexual and sexual reproduction of fungi
• Compare the major groups of fungi in this chapter, and give examples of each
• Identify examples of the primary causes of infections due to yeasts and molds
• Identify examples of toxin-producing fungi
• Classify fungal organisms according to major groups

The fungi comprise a diverse group of organisms that are heterotrophic and typically saprozoic. In addition to the
well-known macroscopic fungi (such as mushrooms and molds), many unicellular yeasts and spores of macroscopic
fungi are microscopic. For this reason, fungi are included within the field of microbiology.
Fungi are important to humans in a variety of ways. Both microscopic and macroscopic fungi have medical relevance,
with some pathogenic species that can cause mycoses (illnesses caused by fungi). Some pathogenic fungi are
opportunistic, meaning that they mainly cause infections when the host’s immune defenses are compromised and do
not normally cause illness in healthy individuals. Fungi are important in other ways. They act as decomposers in the
environment, and they are critical for the production of certain foods such as cheeses. Fungi are also major sources of
antibiotics, such as penicillin from the fungus Penicillium.

Characteristics of Fungi
Fungi have well-defined characteristics that set them apart from other organisms. Most multicellular fungal bodies,
commonly called molds, are made up of filaments called hyphae. Hyphae can form a tangled network called a
mycelium and form the thallus (body) of fleshy fungi. Hyphae that have walls between the cells are called septate
hyphae; hyphae that lack walls and cell membranes between the cells are called nonseptate or coenocytic hyphae).
(Figure 5.25).

10. World Health Organization. “South Sudan Reports Zero Cases of Guinea-Worm Disease for Seventh Consecutive Month.” 2016.
http://www.who.int/dracunculiasis/no_new_case_for_seventh_consecutive_months/en/. Accessed May 2, 2016.

220

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.25 Multicellular fungi (molds) form hyphae, which may be septate or nonseptate. Unicellular fungi (yeasts)
cells form pseudohyphae from individual yeast cells.

In contrast to molds, yeasts are unicellular fungi. The budding yeasts reproduce asexually by budding off a smaller
daughter cell; the resulting cells may sometimes stick together as a short chain or pseudohypha (Figure 5.25).
Candida albicans is a common yeast that forms pseudohyphae; it is associated with various infections in humans,
including vaginal yeast infections, oral thrush, and candidiasis of the skin.
Some fungi are dimorphic, having more than one appearance during their life cycle. These dimorphic fungi may
be able to appear as yeasts or molds, which can be important for infectivity. They are capable of changing their
appearance in response to environmental changes such as nutrient availability or fluctuations in temperature, growing
as a mold, for example, at 25 °C (77 °F), and as yeast cells at 37 °C (98.6 °F). This ability helps dimorphic fungi to
survive in diverse environments. Histoplasma capsulatum, the pathogen that causes histoplasmosis, a lung infection,
is an example of a dimorphic fungus (Figure 5.26).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

221

Figure 5.26 Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic fungus that grows in soil exposed to bird feces or bat feces
(guano) (top left). It can change forms to survive at different temperatures. In the outdoors, it typically grows as a
mycelium (as shown in the micrograph, bottom left), but when the spores are inhaled (right), it responds to the high
internal temperature of the body (37 °C [98.6 °F]) by turning into a yeast that can multiply in the lungs, causing the
chronic lung disease histoplasmosis. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

There are notable unique features in fungal cell walls and membranes. Fungal cell walls contain chitin, as opposed
to the cellulose found in the cell walls of plants and many protists. Additionally, whereas animals have cholesterol in
their cell membranes, fungal cell membranes have different sterols called ergosterols. Ergosterols are often exploited
as targets for antifungal drugs.
Fungal life cycles are unique and complex. Fungi reproduce sexually either through cross- or self-fertilization.
Haploid fungi form hyphae that have gametes at the tips. Two different mating types (represented as “+ type” and “–
type”) are involved. The cytoplasms of the + and – type gametes fuse (in an event called plasmogamy), producing
a cell with two distinct nuclei (a dikaryotic cell). Later, the nuclei fuse (in an event called karyogamy) to create
a diploid zygote. The zygote undergoes meiosis to form spores that germinate to start the haploid stage, which
eventually creates more haploid mycelia (Figure 5.27). Depending on the taxonomic group, these sexually produced
spores are known as zygospores (in Zygomycota), ascospores (in Ascomycota), or basidiospores (in Basidiomycota)
(Figure 5.28).
Fungi may also exhibit asexual reproduction by mitosis, mitosis with budding, fragmentation of hyphae, and
formation of asexual spores by mitosis. These spores are specialized cells that, depending on the organism, may have
unique characteristics for survival, reproduction, and dispersal. Fungi exhibit several types of asexual spores and these
can be important in classification.

222

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.27 Zygomycetes have sexual and asexual life cycles. In the sexual life cycle, + and – mating types
conjugate to form a zygosporangium.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

223

Figure 5.28 These images show asexually produced spores. (a) This brightfield micrograph shows the release of
spores from a sporangium at the end of a hypha called a sporangiophore. The organism is a Mucor sp. fungus, a
mold often found indoors. (b) Sporangia grow at the ends of stalks, which appear as the white fuzz seen on this bread
mold, Rhizopus stolonifer. The tips of bread mold are the dark, spore-containing sporangia. (credit a: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b right: modification of work by “Andrew”/Flickr)

• Is a dimorphic fungus a yeast or a mold? Explain.

Fungal Diversity
The fungi are very diverse, comprising seven major groups. Not all of the seven groups contain pathogens. Some
of these groups are generally associated with plants and include plant pathogens. For example, Urediniomycetes and
Ustilagomycetes include the plant rusts and smuts, respectively. These form reddish or dark masses, respectively, on
plants as rusts (red) or smuts (dark). Some species have substantial economic impact because of their ability to reduce
crop yields. Glomeromycota includes the mycorrhizal fungi, important symbionts with plant roots that can promote
plant growth by acting like an extended root system. The Glomeromycota are obligate symbionts, meaning that they
can only survive when associated with plant roots; the fungi receive carbohydrates from the plant and the plant
benefits from the increased ability to take up nutrients and minerals from the soil. The Chytridiomycetes (chytrids)
are small fungi, but are extremely ecologically important. Chytrids are generally aquatic and have flagellated, motile
gametes; specific types are implicated in amphibian declines around the world. Because of their medical importance,
we will focus on Zygomycota, Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and Microsporidia. Figure 5.33 summarizes the
characteristics of these medically important groups of fungi.
The Zygomycota (zygomycetes) are mainly saprophytes with coenocytic hyphae and haploid nuclei. They use
sporangiospores for asexual reproduction. The group name comes from the zygospores that they use for sexual
reproduction (Figure 5.27), which have hard walls formed from the fusion of reproductive cells from two
individuals. Zygomycetes are important for food science and as crop pathogens. One example is Rhizopus stolonifer
(Figure 5.28), an important bread mold that also causes rice seedling blight. Mucor is a genus of fungi that can
potentially cause necrotizing infections in humans, although most species are intolerant of temperatures found in
mammalian bodies (Figure 5.28).
The Ascomycota include fungi that are used as food (edible mushrooms, morels, and truffles), others that are common
causes of food spoilage (bread molds and plant pathogens), and still others that are human pathogens. Ascomycota
may have septate hyphae and cup-shaped fruiting bodies called ascocarps. Some genera of Ascomycota use sexually
produced ascospores as well as asexual spores called conidia, but sexual phases have not been discovered or
described for others. Some produce an ascus containing ascospores within an ascocarp (Figure 5.29).

224

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Examples of the Ascomycota include several bread molds and minor pathogens, as well as species capable of causing
more serious mycoses. Species in the genus Aspergillus are important causes of allergy and infection, and are useful in
research and in the production of certain fermented alcoholic beverages such as Japanese sake. The fungus Aspergillus
flavus, a contaminant of nuts and stored grains, produces an aflatoxin that is both a toxin and the most potent
known natural carcinogen. Neurospora crassa is of particular use in genetics research because the spores produced
by meiosis are kept inside the ascus in a row that reflects the cell divisions that produced them, giving a direct view
of segregation and assortment of genes (Figure 5.30). Penicillium produces the antibiotic penicillin (Figure 5.29).
Many species of ascomycetes are medically important. A large number of species in the genera Trichophyton,
Microsporum, and Epidermophyton are dermatophytes, pathogenic fungi capable of causing skin infections such as
athlete’s foot, jock itch, and ringworm. Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus that can cause blastomycosis,
a respiratory infection that, if left untreated, can become disseminated to other body sites, sometimes leading to death.
Another important respiratory pathogen is the dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum (Figure 5.26), which is
associated with birds and bats in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys. Coccidioides immitis causes the serious lung
disease Valley fever. Candida albicans, the most common cause of vaginal and other yeast infections, is also an
ascomycete fungus; it is a part of the normal microbiota of the skin, intestine, genital tract, and ear (Figure 5.29).
Ascomycetes also cause plant diseases, including ergot infections, Dutch elm disease, and powdery mildews.
Saccharomyces yeasts, including the baker’s yeast S. cerevisiae, are unicellular ascomycetes with haploid and diploid
stages (Figure 5.31). This and other Saccharomyces species are used for brewing beer.

Figure 5.29 (a) This brightfield micrograph shows ascospores being released from asci in the fungus Talaromyces
flavus var. flavus. (b) This electron micrograph shows the conidia (spores) borne on the conidiophore of Aspergillus, a
type of toxic fungus found mostly in soil and plants. (c) This brightfield micrograph shows the yeast Candida albicans,
the causative agent of candidiasis and thrush. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Figure 5.30 These ascospores, lined up within an ascus, are produced sexually. (credit: Peter G. Werner)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

225

Figure 5.31 The life cycle of an ascomycete is characterized by the production of asci during the sexual phase. The
haploid phase is the predominant phase of the life cycle.

The Basidiomycota (basidiomycetes) are fungi that have basidia (club-shaped structures) that produce basidiospores
(spores produced through budding) within fruiting bodies called basidiocarps (Figure 5.32). They are important
as decomposers and as food. This group includes rusts, stinkhorns, puffballs, and mushrooms. Several species are of
particular importance. Cryptococcus neoformans, a fungus commonly found as a yeast in the environment, can cause
serious lung infections when inhaled by individuals with weakened immune systems. The edible meadow mushroom,
Agricus campestris, is a basidiomycete, as is the poisonous mushroom Amanita phalloides, known as the death cap.
The deadly toxins produced by A. phalloides have been used to study transcription.

226

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.32 The life cycle of a basidiomycete alternates a haploid generation with a prolonged stage in which two
nuclei (dikaryon) are present in the hyphae.

Finally, the Microsporidia are unicellular fungi that are obligate intracellular parasites. They lack mitochondria,
peroxisomes, and centrioles, but their spores release a unique polar tubule that pierces the host cell membrane to
allow the fungus to gain entry into the cell. A number of microsporidia are human pathogens, and infections with
microsporidia are called microsporidiosis. One pathogenic species is Enterocystozoan bieneusi, which can cause
symptoms such as diarrhea, cholecystitis (inflammation of the gall bladder), and in rare cases, respiratory illness.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.33 (credit “Ascomycota”: modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; credit “Microsporidia”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

227

228

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

• Which group of fungi appears to be associated with the greatest number of human diseases?

Micro Connections
Eukaryotic Pathogens in Eukaryotic Hosts
When we think about antimicrobial medications, antibiotics such as penicillin often come to mind. Penicillin
and related antibiotics interfere with the synthesis of peptidoglycan cell walls, which effectively targets bacterial
cells. These antibiotics are useful because humans (like all eukaryotes) do not have peptidoglycan cell walls.
Developing medications that are effective against eukaryotic cells but not harmful to human cells is more
difficult. Despite huge morphological differences, the cells of humans, fungi, and protists are similar in terms of
their ribosomes, cytoskeletons, and cell membranes. As a result, it is more challenging to develop medications
that target protozoans and fungi in the same way that antibiotics target prokaryotes.
Fungicides have relatively limited modes of action. Because fungi have ergosterols (instead of cholesterol) in
their cell membranes, the different enzymes involved in sterol production can be a target of some medications.
The azole and morpholine fungicides interfere with the synthesis of membrane sterols. These are used widely
in agriculture (fenpropimorph) and clinically (e.g., miconazole). Some antifungal medications target the chitin
cell walls of fungi. Despite the success of these compounds in targeting fungi, antifungal medications for
systemic infections still tend to have more toxic side effects than antibiotics for bacteria.

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Sarah is relieved the ringworm is not an actual worm, but wants to know what it really is. The physician explains
that ringworm is a fungus. He tells her that she will not see mushrooms popping out of her skin, because this
fungus is more like the invisible part of a mushroom that hides in the soil. He reassures her that they are going
to get the fungus out of her too.
The doctor cleans and then carefully scrapes the lesion to place a specimen on a slide. By looking at it under a
microscope, the physician is able to confirm that a fungal infection is responsible for Sarah’s lesion. In Figure
5.34, it is possible to see macro- and microconidia in Trichophyton rubrum. Cell walls are also visible. Even
if the pathogen resembled a helminth under the microscope, the presence of cell walls would rule out the
possibility because animal cells lack cell walls.
The doctor prescribes an antifungal cream for Sarah’s mother to apply to the ringworm. Sarah’s mother asks,
“What should we do if it doesn’t go away?”

• Can all forms of ringworm be treated with the same antifungal medication?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

229

Figure 5.34 This micrograph shows hyphae (macroconidium) and microconidia of Trichophyton rubrum, a
dermatophyte responsible for fungal infections of the skin. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

5.4 Algae
Learning Objectives
• Explain why algae are included within the discipline of microbiology
• Describe the unique characteristics of algae
• Identify examples of toxin-producing algae
• Compare the major groups of algae in this chapter, and give examples of each
• Classify algal organisms according to major groups

The algae are autotrophic protists that can be unicellular or multicellular. These organisms are found in the
supergroups Chromalveolata (dinoflagellates, diatoms, golden algae, and brown algae) and Archaeplastida (red
algae and green algae). They are important ecologically and environmentally because they are responsible for the
production of approximately 70% of the oxygen and organic matter in aquatic environments. Some types of algae,
even those that are microscopic, are regularly eaten by humans and other animals. Additionally, algae are the source
for agar, agarose, and carrageenan, solidifying agents used in laboratories and in food production. Although algae
are typically not pathogenic, some produce toxins. Harmful algal blooms, which occur when algae grow quickly and
produce dense populations, can produce high concentrations of toxins that impair liver and nervous-system function
in aquatic animals and humans.
Like protozoans, algae often have complex cell structures. For instance, algal cells can have one or more chloroplasts
that contain structures called pyrenoids to synthesize and store starch. The chloroplasts themselves differ in their
number of membranes, indicative of secondary or rare tertiary endosymbiotic events. Primary chloroplasts have
two membranes—one from the original cyanobacteria that the ancestral eukaryotic cell engulfed, and one from
the plasma membrane of the engulfing cell. Chloroplasts in some lineages appear to have resulted from secondary
endosymbiosis, in which another cell engulfed a green or red algal cell that already had a primary chloroplast within
it. The engulfing cell destroyed everything except the chloroplast and possibly the cell membrane of its original cell,

230

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

leaving three or four membranes around the chloroplast. Different algal groups have different pigments, which are
reflected in common names such as red algae, brown algae, and green algae.
Some algae, the seaweeds, are macroscopic and may be confused with plants. Seaweeds can be red, brown, or green,
depending on their photosynthetic pigments. Green algae, in particular, share some important similarities with land
plants; however, there are also important distinctions. For example, seaweeds do not have true tissues or organs like
plants do. Additionally, seaweeds do not have a waxy cuticle to prevent desiccation. Algae can also be confused with
cyanobacteria, photosynthetic bacteria that bear a resemblance to algae; however, cyanobacteria are prokaryotes (see
Nonproteobacteria Gram-negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria).
Algae have a variety of life cycles. Reproduction may be asexual by mitosis or sexual using gametes.

Algal Diversity
Although the algae and protozoa were formerly separated taxonomically, they are now mixed into supergroups.
The algae are classified within the Chromalveolata and the Archaeplastida. Although the Euglenozoa (within the
supergroup Excavata) include photosynthetic organisms, these are not considered algae because they feed and are
motile.
The dinoflagellates and stramenopiles fall within the Chromalveolata. The dinoflagellates are mostly marine
organisms and are an important component of plankton. They have a variety of nutritional types and may be
phototrophic, heterotrophic, or mixotrophic. Those that are photosynthetic use chlorophyll a, chlorophyll c2, and
other photosynthetic pigments (Figure 5.35). They generally have two flagella, causing them to whirl (in fact,
the name dinoflagellate comes from the Greek word for “whirl”: dini). Some have cellulose plates forming a hard
outer covering, or theca, as armor. Additionally, some dinoflagellates produce neurotoxins that can cause paralysis in
humans or fish. Exposure can occur through contact with water containing the dinoflagellate toxins or by feeding on
organisms that have eaten dinoflagellates.
When a population of dinoflagellates becomes particularly dense, a red tide (a type of harmful algal bloom) can
occur. Red tides cause harm to marine life and to humans who consume contaminated marine life. Major toxin
producers include Gonyaulax and Alexandrium, both of which cause paralytic shellfish poisoning. Another species,
Pfiesteria piscicida, is known as a fish killer because, at certain parts of its life cycle, it can produce toxins harmful
to fish and it appears to be responsible for a suite of symptoms, including memory loss and confusion, in humans
exposed to water containing the species.

Figure 5.35 The dinoflagellates exhibit great diversity in shape. Many are encased in cellulose armor and have two
flagella that fit in grooves between the plates. Movement of these two perpendicular flagella causes a spinning
motion. (credit: modification of work by CSIRO)

The stramenopiles include the golden algae (Chrysophyta), the brown algae (Phaeophyta), and the diatoms
(Bacillariophyta). Stramenopiles have chlorophyll a, chlorophyll c1/c2, and fucoxanthin as photosynthetic pigments.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

231

Their storage carbohydrate is chrysolaminarin. While some lack cell walls, others have scales. Diatoms have
flagella and frustules, which are outer cell walls of crystallized silica; their fossilized remains are used to produce
diatomaceous earth, which has a range of uses such as filtration and insulation. Additionally, diatoms can reproduce
sexually or asexually. One diatom genus, Pseudo-nitzschia, is known to be associated with harmful algal blooms.
Brown algae (Phaeophyta) are multicellular marine seaweeds. Some can be extremely large, such as the giant kelp
(Laminaria). They have leaf-like blades, stalks, and structures called holdfasts that are used to attach to substrate.
However, these are not true leaves, stems, or roots (Figure 5.36). Their photosynthetic pigments are chlorophyll a,
chlorophyll c, β-carotene, and fucoxanthine. They use laminarin as a storage carbohydrate.
The Archaeplastids include the green algae (Chlorophyta), the red algae (Rhodophyta), another group of green algae
(Charophyta), and the land plants. The Charaphyta are the most similar to land plants because they share a mechanism
of cell division and an important biochemical pathway, among other traits that the other groups do not have. Like land
plants, the Charophyta and Chlorophyta have chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b as photosynthetic pigments, cellulose
cell walls, and starch as a carbohydrate storage molecule. Chlamydomonas is a green alga that has a single large
chloroplast, two flagella, and a stigma (eyespot); it is important in molecular biology research (Figure 5.37).
Chlorella is a nonmotile, large, unicellular alga, and Acetabularia is an even larger unicellular green alga. The size of
these organisms challenges the idea that all cells are small, and they have been used in genetics research since Joachim
Hämmerling (1901–1980) began to work with them in 1943. Volvox is a colonial, unicellular alga (Figure 5.37).
A larger, multicellular green alga is Ulva, also known as the sea lettuce because of its large, edible, green blades.
The range of life forms within the Chlorophyta—from unicellular to various levels of coloniality to multicellular
forms—has been a useful research model for understanding the evolution of multicellularity. The red algae are mainly
multicellular but include some unicellular forms. They have rigid cell walls containing agar or carrageenan, which
are useful as food solidifying agents and as a solidifier added to growth media for microbes.

232

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Figure 5.36 (a) These large multicellular kelps are members of the brown algae. Note the “leaves” and “stems” that
make them appear similar to green plants. (b) This is a species of red algae that is also multicellular. (c) The green
alga Halimeda incrassata, shown here growing on the sea floor in shallow water, appears to have plant-like
structures, but is not a true plant. (d) Bioluminesence, visible in the cresting wave in this picture, is a phenomenon of
certain dinoflagellates. (e) Diatoms (pictured in this micrograph) produce silicaceous tests (skeletons) that form
diatomaceous earths. (f) Colonial green algae, like volvox in these three micrographs, exhibit simple cooperative
associations of cells. (credit a, e: modification of work by NOAA; credit b: modification of work by Ed Bierman; credit
c: modification of work by James St. John; credit d: modification of work by “catalano82”/Flickr; credit f: modification
of work by Dr. Ralf Wagner)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

233

Figure 5.37 Chlamydomonas is a unicellular green alga.

• Which groups of algae are associated with harmful algal blooms?

5.5 Lichens
Learning Objectives
• Explain why lichens are included in the study of microbiology
• Describe the unique characteristics of a lichen and the role of each partner in the symbiotic relationship of a

lichen
• Describe ways in which lichens are beneficial to the environment

No one has to worry about getting sick from a lichen infection, but lichens are interesting from a microbiological
perspective and they are an important component of most terrestrial ecosystems. Lichens provide opportunities for
study of close relationships between unrelated microorganisms. Lichens contribute to soil production by breaking
down rock, and they are early colonizers in soilless environments such as lava flows. The cyanobacteria in some
lichens can fix nitrogen and act as a nitrogen source in some environments. Lichens are also important soil stabilizers
in some desert environments and they are an important winter food source for caribou and reindeer. Finally, lichens
produce compounds that have antibacterial effects, and further research may discover compounds that are medically
useful to humans.

Characteristics
A lichen is a combination of two organisms, a green alga or cyanobacterium and an ascomycete fungus, living in
a symbiotic relationship. Whereas algae normally grow only in aquatic or extremely moist environments, lichens
can potentially be found on almost any surface (especially rocks) or as epiphytes (meaning that they grow on other
plants).
In some ways, the symbiotic relationship between lichens and algae seems like a mutualism (a relationship in which
both organisms benefit). The fungus can obtain photosynthates from the algae or cyanobacterium and the algae or

234

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

cyanobacterium can grow in a drier environment than it could otherwise tolerate. However, most scientists consider
this symbiotic relationship to be a controlled parasitism (a relationship in which one organism benefits and the other
is harmed) because the photosynthetic organism grows less well than it would without the fungus. It is important to
note that such symbiotic interactions fall along a continuum between conflict and cooperation.
Lichens are slow growing and can live for centuries. They have been used in foods and to extract chemicals as dyes
or antimicrobial substances. Some are very sensitive to pollution and have been used as environmental indicators.
Lichens have a body called a thallus, an outer, tightly packed fungal layer called a cortex, and an inner, loosely packed
fungal layer called a medulla (Figure 5.38). Lichens use hyphal bundles called rhizines to attach to the substrate.

Figure 5.38 This cross-section of a lichen thallus shows its various components. The upper cortex of fungal hyphae
provides protection. Photosynthesis occurs in the algal zone. The medulla consists of fungal hyphae. The lower
cortex also provides protection. The rhizines anchor the thallus to the substrate.

Lichen Diversity
Lichens are classified as fungi and the fungal partners belong to the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota. Lichens can also
be grouped into types based on their morphology. There are three major types of lichens, although other types exist as
well. Lichens that are tightly attached to the substrate, giving them a crusty appearance, are called crustose lichens.
Those that have leaf-like lobes are foliose lichens; they may only be attached at one point in the growth form, and
they also have a second cortex below the medulla. Finally, fruticose lichens have rounded structures and an overall
branched appearance. Figure 5.39 shows an example of each of the forms of lichens.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

235

Figure 5.39 Examples of the three types of lichens are shown here. (a) This is a crustose lichen found mostly on
marine rocks, Caloplaca marina. (b) This is a foliose lichen, Flavoparmelia caperata. (c) This is a fruticose lichen,
Letharia vulpina, which is sufficiently poisonous that it was once used to make arrowheads. (credit b, c: modification
of work by Jason Hollinger)

• What types of organisms are found in lichens?
• What are the three growth forms of lichens?

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Sarah’s mother asks the doctor what she should do if the cream prescribed for Sarah’s ringworm does not
work. The doctor explains that ringworm is a general term for a condition caused by multiple species. The
first step is to take a scraping for examination under the microscope, which the doctor has already done. He
explains that he has identified the infection as a fungus, and that the antifungal cream works against the most
common fungi associated with ringworm. However, the cream may not work against some species of fungus.
If the cream is not working after a couple of weeks, Sarah should come in for another visit, at which time the
doctor will take steps to identify the species of the fungus.
Positive identification of dermatophytes requires culturing. For this purpose, Sabouraud’s agar may be used. In
the case of Sarah’s infection, which cleared up within 2 weeks of treatment, the culture would have a granular
texture and would appear pale pink on top and red underneath. These features suggest that the fungus is
Trichophyton rubrum, a common cause of ringworm.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Summary
5.1 Unicellular Eukaryotic Parasites
• Protists are a diverse, polyphyletic group of eukaryotic organisms.
• Protists may be unicellular or multicellular. They vary in how they get their nutrition, morphology, method of
locomotion, and mode of reproduction.

236

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

• Important structures of protists include contractile vacuoles, cilia, flagella, pellicles, and pseudopodia; some
lack organelles such as mitochondria.
• Taxonomy of protists is changing rapidly as relationships are reassessed using newer techniques.
• The protists include important pathogens and parasites.
5.2 Parasitic Helminths
• Helminth parasites are included within the study of microbiology because they are often identified by looking
for microscopic eggs and larvae.
• The two major groups of helminth parasites are the roundworms (Nematoda) and the flatworms
(Platyhelminthes).
• Nematodes are common intestinal parasites often transmitted through undercooked foods, although they are
also found in other environments.
• Platyhelminths include tapeworms and flukes, which are often transmitted through undercooked meat.
5.3 Fungi
• The fungi include diverse saprotrophic eukaryotic organisms with chitin cell walls
• Fungi can be unicellular or multicellular; some (like yeast) and fungal spores are microscopic, whereas some
are large and conspicuous
• Reproductive types are important in distinguishing fungal groups
• Medically important species exist in the four fungal groups Zygomycota, Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and
Microsporidia
• Members of Zygomycota, Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota produce deadly toxins
• Important differences in fungal cells, such as ergosterols in fungal membranes, can be targets for antifungal
medications, but similarities between human and fungal cells make it difficult to find targets for medications
and these medications often have toxic adverse effects
5.4 Algae
• Algae are a diverse group of photosynthetic eukaryotic protists
• Algae may be unicellular or multicellular
• Large, multicellular algae are called seaweeds but are not plants and lack plant-like tissues and organs
• Although algae have little pathogenicity, they may be associated with toxic algal blooms that can and aquatic
wildlife and contaminate seafood with toxins that cause paralysis
• Algae are important for producing agar, which is used as a solidifying agent in microbiological media, and
carrageenan, which is used as a solidifying agent
5.5 Lichens
• Lichens are a symbiotic association between a fungus and an algae or a cyanobacterium
• The symbiotic association found in lichens is currently considered to be a controlled parasitism, in which the
fungus benefits and the algae or cyanobacterium is harmed
• Lichens are slow growing and can live for centuries in a variety of habitats
• Lichens are environmentally important, helping to create soil, providing food, and acting as indicators of air
pollution

Review Questions

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

237

1. Which genus includes the causative agent for
malaria?
a. Euglena
b. Paramecium
c. Plasmodium
d. Trypanosoma

8. Which of the following is an ascomycete fungus
associated with bat droppings that can cause a
respiratory infection if inhaled?
a. Candida albicans
b. Histoplasma capsulatum
c. Rhizopus stolonifera
d. Trichophyton rubrum

2. Which protist is a concern because of its ability to
contaminate water supplies and cause diarrheal illness?
a. Plasmodium vivax
b. Toxoplasma gondii
c. Giardia lamblia
d. Trichomonas vaginalis

9. Which polysaccharide found in red algal cell walls is
a useful solidifying agent?
a. chitin
b. cellulose
c. phycoerythrin
d. agar

3. A fluke is classified within which of the following?
a. Nematoda
b. Rotifera
c. Platyhelminthes
d. Annelida

10. Which is the term for the hard outer covering of
some dinoflagellates?
a. theca
b. thallus
c. mycelium
d. shell

Multiple Choice

4. A nonsegmented worm is found during a routine
colonoscopy of an individual who reported having
abdominal cramps, nausea, and vomiting. This worm is
likely which of the following?
a. nematode
b. fluke
c. trematode
d. annelid
5. A segmented worm has male and female
reproductive organs in each segment. Some use hooks to
attach to the intestinal wall. Which type of worm is this?
a.
b.
c.
d.

fluke
nematode
cestode
annelid

6. Mushrooms are a type of which of the following?
a. conidia
b. ascus
c. polar tubule
d. basidiocarp
7. Which of the following is the most common cause of
human yeast infections?
a. Candida albicans
b. Blastomyces dermatitidis
c. Cryptococcus neoformans
d. Aspergillus fumigatus

11. Which protists are associated with red tides?
a. red algae
b. brown algae
c. dinoflagellates
d. green algae
12. You encounter a lichen with leafy structures. Which
term describes this lichen?
a. crustose
b. foliose
c. fruticose
d. agarose
13. Which of the following is the term for the outer
layer of a lichen?
a. the cortex
b. the medulla
c. the thallus
d. the theca
14. The fungus in a lichen is which of the following?
a. a basidiomycete
b. an ascomycete
c. a zygomycete
d. an apicomplexan

Fill in the Blank

15. The plasma membrane of a protist is called the __________.

238

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

16. Animals belong to the same supergroup as the kingdom __________.
17. Flukes are in class _________.
18. A species of worm in which there are distinct male and female individuals is described as _________.
19. Nonseptate hyphae are also called _________.
20. Unicellular fungi are called _________.
21. Some fungi have proven medically useful because they can be used to produce _________.
22. Structures in chloroplasts used to synthesize and store starch are called ________.
23. Algae with chloroplasts with three or four membranes are a result of ________ ________.
Short Answer

24. What are kinetoplastids?
25. Aside from a risk of birth defects, what other effect might a toxoplasmosis infection have?
26. What is the function of the ciliate macronucleus?
27. What is the best defense against tapeworm infection?
28. Which genera of fungi are common dermatophytes (fungi that cause skin infections)?
29. What is a dikaryotic cell?
30. What is a distinctive feature of diatoms?
31. Why are algae not considered parasitic?
32. Which groups contain the multicellular algae?
33. What are three ways that lichens are environmentally valuable?
Critical Thinking

34. The protist shown has which of the following?
a. pseudopodia
b. flagella
c. a shell
d. cilia

Figure 5.40 (credit: modification of work by Richard Robinson)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

239

35. Protist taxonomy has changed greatly in recent years as relationships have been re-examined using newer
approaches. How do newer approaches differ from older approaches?
36. What characteristics might make you think a protist could be pathogenic? Are certain nutritional characteristics,
methods of locomotion, or morphological differences likely to be associated with the ability to cause disease?
37. Given the life cycle of the Schistosoma parasite, suggest a method of prevention of the disease.
38. Which of the drawings shows septate hyphae?

39. Explain the benefit of research into the pathways involved in the synthesis of chitin in fungi.

240

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 5 | The Eukaryotes of Microbiology

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

241

Chapter 6

Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.1 The year 2014 saw the first large-scale outbreak of Ebola virus (electron micrograph, left) in human
populations in West Africa (right). Such epidemics are now widely reported and documented, but viral epidemics are
sure to have plagued human populations since the origin of our species. (credit left: modification of work by Thomas
W. Geisbert)

Chapter Outline
6.1 Viruses
6.2 The Viral Life Cycle
6.3 Isolation, Culture, and Identification of Viruses
6.4 Viroids, Virusoids, and Prions

Introduction
Public health measures in the developed world have dramatically reduced mortality from viral epidemics. But when
epidemics do occur, they can spread quickly with global air travel. In 2009, an outbreak of H1N1 influenza spread
across various continents. In early 2014, cases of Ebola in Guinea led to a massive epidemic in western Africa. This
included the case of an infected man who traveled to the United States, sparking fears the epidemic might spread
beyond Africa.
Until the late 1930s and the advent of the electron microscope, no one had seen a virus. Yet treatments for preventing
or curing viral infections were used and developed long before that. Historical records suggest that by the 17th
century, and perhaps earlier, inoculation (also known as variolation) was being used to prevent the viral disease
smallpox in various parts of the world. By the late 18th century, Englishman Edward Jenner was inoculating patients
with cowpox to prevent smallpox, a technique he coined vaccination.[1]
Today, the structure and genetics of viruses are well defined, yet new discoveries continue to reveal their complexities.
In this chapter, we will learn about the structure, classification, and cultivation of viruses, and how they impact their
hosts. In addition, we will learn about other infective particles such as viroids and prions.

1. S. Riedel “Edward Jenner and the History of Smallpox and Vaccination.” Baylor University Medical Center Proceedings 18, no. 1
(January 2005): 21–25.

242

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

6.1 Viruses
Learning Objectives
• Describe the general characteristics of viruses as pathogens
• Describe viral genomes
• Describe the general characteristics of viral life cycles
• Differentiate among bacteriophages, plant viruses, and animal viruses
• Describe the characteristics used to identify viruses as obligate intracellular parasites

Despite their small size, which prevented them from being seen with light microscopes, the discovery of a filterable
component smaller than a bacterium that causes tobacco mosaic disease (TMD) dates back to 1892.[2] At that time,
Dmitri Ivanovski, a Russian botanist, discovered the source of TMD by using a porcelain filtering device first
invented by Charles Chamberland and Louis Pasteur in Paris in 1884. Porcelain Chamberland filters have a pore size
of 0.1 µm, which is small enough to remove all bacteria ≥0.2 µm from any liquids passed through the device. An
extract obtained from TMD-infected tobacco plants was made to determine the cause of the disease. Initially, the
source of the disease was thought to be bacterial. It was surprising to everyone when Ivanovski, using a Chamberland
filter, found that the cause of TMD was not removed after passing the extract through the porcelain filter. So if a
bacterium was not the cause of TMD, what could be causing the disease? Ivanovski concluded the cause of TMD
must be an extremely small bacterium or bacterial spore. Other scientists, including Martinus Beijerinck, continued
investigating the cause of TMD. It was Beijerinck, in 1899, who eventually concluded the causative agent was not a
bacterium but, instead, possibly a chemical, like a biological poison we would describe today as a toxin. As a result,
the word virus, Latin for poison, was used to describe the cause of TMD a few years after Ivanovski’s initial discovery.
Even though he was not able to see the virus that caused TMD, and did not realize the cause was not a bacterium,
Ivanovski is credited as the original discoverer of viruses and a founder of the field of virology.
Today, we can see viruses using electron microscopes (Figure 6.2) and we know much more about them. Viruses are
distinct biological entities; however, their evolutionary origin is still a matter of speculation. In terms of taxonomy,
they are not included in the tree of life because they are acellular (not consisting of cells). In order to survive and
reproduce, viruses must infect a cellular host, making them obligate intracellular parasites. The genome of a virus

Clinical Focus
Part 1
David, a 45-year-old journalist, has just returned to the U.S. from travels in Russia, China, and Africa. He is
not feeling well, so he goes to his general practitioner complaining of weakness in his arms and legs, fever,
headache, noticeable agitation, and minor discomfort. He thinks it may be related to a dog bite he suffered
while interviewing a Chinese farmer. He is experiencing some prickling and itching sensations at the site of the
bite wound, but he tells the doctor that the dog seemed healthy and that he had not been concerned until now.
The doctor ordered a culture and sensitivity test to rule out bacterial infection of the wound, and the results
came back negative for any possible pathogenic bacteria.

• Based on this information, what additional tests should be performed on the patient?
• What type of treatment should the doctor recommend?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

2. H. Lecoq. “[Discovery of the First Virus, the Tobacco Mosaic Virus: 1892 or 1898?].” Comptes Rendus de l’Academie des Sciences –
Serie III – Sciences de la Vie 324, no. 10 (2001): 929–933.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

243

enters a host cell and directs the production of the viral components, proteins and nucleic acids, needed to form new
virus particles called virions. New virions are made in the host cell by assembly of viral components. The new virions
transport the viral genome to another host cell to carry out another round of infection. Table 6.1 summarizes the
properties of viruses.

Characteristics of Viruses
Infectious, acellular pathogens
Obligate intracellular parasites with host and cell-type specificity
DNA or RNA genome (never both)
Genome is surrounded by a protein capsid and, in some cases, a phospholipid membrane studded with viral
glycoproteins
Lack genes for many products needed for successful reproduction, requiring exploitation of host-cell genomes to
reproduce

Table 6.1

Figure 6.2 (a) Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) viewed with transmission electron microscope. (b) Plants infected with
tobacco mosaic disease (TMD), caused by TMV. (credit a: modification of work by USDA Agricultural Research
Service—scale-bar data from Matt Russell; credit b: modification of work by USDA Forest Service, Department of
Plant Pathology Archive North Carolina State University)

• Why was the first virus investigated mistaken for a toxin?

Hosts and Viral Transmission
Viruses can infect every type of host cell, including those of plants, animals, fungi, protists, bacteria, and archaea.
Most viruses will only be able to infect the cells of one or a few species of organism. This is called the host range.
However, having a wide host range is not common and viruses will typically only infect specific hosts and only
specific cell types within those hosts. The viruses that infect bacteria are called bacteriophages, or simply phages.
The word phage comes from the Greek word for devour. Other viruses are just identified by their host group, such
as animal or plant viruses. Once a cell is infected, the effects of the virus can vary depending on the type of virus.

244

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Viruses may cause abnormal growth of the cell or cell death, alter the cell’s genome, or cause little noticeable effect
in the cell.
Viruses can be transmitted through direct contact, indirect contact with fomites, or through a vector: an animal that
transmits a pathogen from one host to another. Arthropods such as mosquitoes, ticks, and flies, are typical vectors for
viral diseases, and they may act as mechanical vectors or biological vectors. Mechanical transmission occurs when
the arthropod carries a viral pathogen on the outside of its body and transmits it to a new host by physical contact.
Biological transmission occurs when the arthropod carries the viral pathogen inside its body and transmits it to the
new host through biting.
In humans, a wide variety of viruses are capable of causing various infections and diseases. Some of the deadliest
emerging pathogens in humans are viruses, yet we have few treatments or drugs to deal with viral infections, making
them difficult to eradicate.
Viruses that can be transmitted from an animal host to a human host can cause zoonoses. For example, the avian
influenza virus originates in birds, but can cause disease in humans. Reverse zoonoses are caused by infection of an
animal by a virus that originated in a human.

Micro Connections
Fighting Bacteria with Viruses
The emergence of superbugs, or multidrug resistant bacteria, has become a major challenge for
pharmaceutical companies and a serious health-care problem. According to a 2013 report by the US Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more than 2 million people are infected with drug-resistant bacteria
in the US annually, resulting in at least 23,000 deaths.[3] The continued use and overuse of antibiotics will likely
lead to the evolution of even more drug-resistant strains.
One potential solution is the use of phage therapy, a procedure that uses bacteria-killing viruses
(bacteriophages) to treat bacterial infections. Phage therapy is not a new idea. The discovery of
bacteriophages dates back to the early 20th century, and phage therapy was first used in Europe in 1915 by the
English bacteriologist Frederick Twort.[4] However, the subsequent discovery of penicillin and other antibiotics
led to the near abandonment of this form of therapy, except in the former Soviet Union and a few countries in
Eastern Europe. Interest in phage therapy outside of the countries of the former Soviet Union is only recently
re-emerging because of the rise in antibiotic-resistant bacteria.[5]
Phage therapy has some advantages over antibiotics in that phages kill only one specific bacterium, whereas
antibiotics kill not only the pathogen but also beneficial bacteria of the normal microbiota. Development of new
antibiotics is also expensive for drug companies and for patients, especially for those who live in countries with
high poverty rates.
Phages have also been used to prevent food spoilage. In 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration
approved the use of a solution containing six bacteriophages that can be sprayed on lunch meats such as
bologna, ham, and turkey to kill Listeria monocytogenes, a bacterium responsible for listeriosis, a form of
food poisoning. Some consumers have concerns about the use of phages on foods, however, especially
given the rising popularity of organic products. Foods that have been treated with phages must declare
“bacteriophage preparation” in the list of ingredients or include a label declaring that the meat has been “treated
with antimicrobial solution to reduce microorganisms.”[6]

3. US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United
States, 2013.” http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/ar-threats-2013-508.pdf (accessed September 22, 2015).
4. M. Clokie et al. “Phages in Nature.” Bacteriophage 1, no. 1 (2011): 31–45.
5. A. Sulakvelidze et al. “Bacteriophage Therapy.” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 45, no. 3 (2001): 649–659.
6. US Food and Drug Administration. “FDA Approval of Listeria-specific Bacteriophage Preparation on Ready-to-Eat (RTE) Meat and
Poultry Products.” http://www.fda.gov/food/ingredientspackaginglabeling/ucm083572.htm (accessed September 22, 2015).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

245

• Why do humans not have to be concerned about the presence of bacteriophages in their food?
• What are three ways that viruses can be transmitted between hosts?

Viral Structures
In general, virions (viral particles) are small and cannot be observed using a regular light microscope. They are much
smaller than prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells; this is an adaptation allowing viruses to infect these larger cells (see
Figure 6.3). The size of a virion can range from 20 nm for small viruses up to 900 nm for typical, large viruses (see
Figure 6.4). Recent discoveries, however, have identified new giant viral species, such as Pandoravirus salinus and
Pithovirus sibericum, with sizes approaching that of a bacterial cell.[7]

Figure 6.3 (a) In this transmission electron micrograph, a bacteriophage (a virus that infects bacteria) is dwarfed by
the bacterial cell it infects. (b) An illustration of the bacteriophage in the micrograph. (credit a: modification of work by
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, LBL, PBD)

7. N. Philippe et al. “Pandoraviruses: Amoeba Viruses with Genomes up to 2.5 Mb Reaching that of Parasitic Eukaryotes.” Science 341,
no. 6143 (2013): 281–286.

246

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.4 The size of a virus is small relative to the size of most bacterial and eukaryotic cells and their organelles.

In 1935, after the development of the electron microscope, Wendell Stanley was the first scientist to crystallize the
structure of the tobacco mosaic virus and discovered that it is composed of RNA and protein. In 1943, he isolated
Influenza B virus, which contributed to the development of an influenza (flu) vaccine. Stanley’s discoveries unlocked
the mystery of the nature of viruses that had been puzzling scientists for over 40 years and his contributions to the
field of virology led to him being awarded the Nobel Prize in 1946.
As a result of continuing research into the nature of viruses, we now know they consist of a nucleic acid (either RNA
or DNA, but never both) surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid (see Figure 6.5). The interior of the capsid is
not filled with cytosol, as in a cell, but instead it contains the bare necessities in terms of genome and enzymes needed
to direct the synthesis of new virions. Each capsid is composed of protein subunits called capsomeres made of one or
more different types of capsomere proteins that interlock to form the closely packed capsid.
There are two categories of viruses based on general composition. Viruses formed from only a nucleic acid and capsid
are called naked viruses or nonenveloped viruses. Viruses formed with a nucleic-acid packed capsid surrounded by
a lipid layer are called enveloped viruses (see Figure 6.5). The viral envelope is a small portion of phospholipid
membrane obtained as the virion buds from a host cell. The viral envelope may either be intracellular or cytoplasmic
in origin.
Extending outward and away from the capsid on some naked viruses and enveloped viruses are protein structures
called spikes. At the tips of these spikes are structures that allow the virus to attach and enter a cell, like the influenza
virus hemagglutinin spikes (H) or enzymes like the neuraminidase (N) influenza virus spikes that allow the virus to
detach from the cell surface during release of new virions. Influenza viruses are often identified by their H and N
spikes. For example, H1N1 influenza viruses were responsible for the pandemics in 1918 and 2009,[8] H2N2 for the
pandemic in 1957, and H3N2 for the pandemic in 1968.

8. J. Cohen. “What’s Old Is New: 1918 Virus Matches 2009 H1N1 Strain. Science 327, no. 5973 (2010): 1563–1564.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

247

Figure 6.5 (a) The naked atadenovirus uses spikes made of glycoproteins from its capsid to bind to host cells. (b)
The enveloped human immunodeficiency virus uses spikes made of glycoproteins embedded in its envelope to bind
to host cells (credit a “micrograph”: modification of work by NIAID; credit b “micrograph”: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Viruses vary in the shape of their capsids, which can be either helical, polyhedral, or complex. A helical capsid
forms the shape of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), a naked helical virus, and Ebola virus, an enveloped helical virus.
The capsid is cylindrical or rod shaped, with the genome fitting just inside the length of the capsid. Polyhedral
capsids form the shapes of poliovirus and rhinovirus, and consist of a nucleic acid surrounded by a polyhedral (manysided) capsid in the form of an icosahedron. An icosahedral capsid is a three-dimensional, 20-sided structure with
12 vertices. These capsids somewhat resemble a soccer ball. Both helical and polyhedral viruses can have envelopes.
Viral shapes seen in certain types of bacteriophages, such as T4 phage, and poxviruses, like vaccinia virus, may have
features of both polyhedral and helical viruses so they are described as a complex viral shape (see Figure 6.6). In
the bacteriophage complex form, the genome is located within the polyhedral head and the sheath connects the head
to the tail fibers and tail pins that help the virus attach to receptors on the host cell’s surface. Poxviruses that have
complex shapes are often brick shaped, with intricate surface characteristics not seen in the other categories of capsid.

248

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.6 Viral capsids can be (a) helical, (b) polyhedral, or (c) have a complex shape. (credit a “micrograph”:
modification of work by USDA ARS; credit b “micrograph”: modification of work by U.S. Department of Energy)

• Which types of viruses have spikes?

Classification and Taxonomy of Viruses
Although viruses are not classified in the three domains of life, their numbers are great enough to require
classification. Since 1971, the International Union of Microbiological Societies Virology Division has given the task
of developing, refining, and maintaining a universal virus taxonomy to the International Committee on Taxonomy of
Viruses (ICTV). Since viruses can mutate so quickly, it can be difficult to classify them into a genus and a species
epithet using the binomial nomenclature system. Thus, the ICTV’s viral nomenclature system classifies viruses into
families and genera based on viral genetics, chemistry, morphology, and mechanism of multiplication. To date, the
ICTV has classified known viruses in seven orders, 96 families, and 350 genera. Viral family names end in -viridae
(e.g, Parvoviridae) and genus names end in −virus (e.g., Parvovirus). The names of viral orders, families, and genera
are all italicized. When referring to a viral species, we often use a genus and species epithet such as Pandoravirus
dulcis or Pandoravirus salinus.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

249

The Baltimore classification system is an alternative to ICTV nomenclature. The Baltimore system classifies viruses
according to their genomes (DNA or RNA, single versus double stranded, and mode of replication). This system thus
creates seven groups of viruses that have common genetics and biology.

Link to Learning
Explore the latest virus taxonomy (https://www.openstax.org/l/22virustaxon)
at the ICTV website.

Aside from formal systems of nomenclature, viruses are often informally grouped into categories based on chemistry,
morphology, or other characteristics they share in common. Categories may include naked or enveloped structure,
single-stranded (ss) or double-stranded (ds) DNA or ss or ds RNA genomes, segmented or nonsegmented genomes,
and positive-strand (+) or negative-strand (−) RNA. For example, herpes viruses can be classified as a dsDNA
enveloped virus; human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a +ssRNA enveloped virus, and tobacco mosaic virus is
a +ssRNA virus. Other characteristics such as host specificity, tissue specificity, capsid shape, and special genes or
enzymes may also be used to describe groups of similar viruses. Table 6.2 lists some of the most common viruses
that are human pathogens by genome type.
Common Pathogenic Viruses
Genome

dsDNA,
enveloped

dsDNA,
naked

ssDNA,
naked

dsRNA,
naked

+ssRNA,
naked

Table 6.2

Family

Example Virus

Clinical Features

Poxviridae

Orthopoxvirus

Skin papules, pustules, lesions

Poxviridae

Parapoxvirus

Skin lesions

Herpesviridae

Simplexvirus

Cold sores, genital herpes, sexually
transmitted disease

Adenoviridae

Atadenovirus

Respiratory infection (common cold)

Papillomaviridae

Papillomavirus

Genital warts, cervical, vulvar, or vaginal
cancer

Reoviridae

Reovirus

Gastroenteritis severe diarrhea
(stomach flu)

Parvoviridae

Adeno-associated
dependoparvovirus A

Respiratory tract infection

Parvoviridae

Adeno-associated
dependoparvovirus B

Respiratory tract infection

Reoviridae

Rotavirus

Gastroenteritis

Picornaviridae

Enterovirus C

Poliomyelitis

Picornaviridae

Rhinovirus

Upper respiratory tract infection
(common cold)

Picornaviridae

Hepatovirus

Hepatitis

250

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Common Pathogenic Viruses
Genome

+ssRNA,
enveloped

−ssRNA,
enveloped

Family

Example Virus

Clinical Features

Togaviridae

Alphavirus

Encephalitis, hemorrhagic fever

Togaviridae

Rubivirus

Rubella

Retroviridae

Lentivirus

Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS)

Filoviridae

Zaire Ebolavirus

Hemorrhagic fever

Orthomyxoviridae

Influenzavirus A, B, C

Flu

Rhabdoviridae

Lyssavirus

Rabies

Table 6.2

• What are the types of virus genomes?

Classification of Viral Diseases
While the ICTV has been tasked with the biological classification of viruses, it has also played an important role in
the classification of diseases caused by viruses. To facilitate the tracking of virus-related human diseases, the ICTV
has created classifications that link to the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), the standard taxonomy of
disease that is maintained and updated by the World Health Organization (WHO). The ICD assigns an alphanumeric
code of up to six characters to every type of viral infection, as well as all other types of diseases, medical conditions,
and causes of death. This ICD code is used in conjunction with two other coding systems (the Current Procedural
Terminology, and the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System) to categorize patient conditions for treatment
and insurance reimbursement.
For example, when a patient seeks treatment for a viral infection, ICD codes are routinely used by clinicians to
order laboratory tests and prescribe treatments specific to the virus suspected of causing the illness. This ICD code
is then used by medical laboratories to identify tests that must be performed to confirm the diagnosis. The ICD
code is used by the health-care management system to verify that all treatments and laboratory work performed are
appropriate for the given virus. Medical coders use ICD codes to assign the proper code for procedures performed,
and medical billers, in turn, use this information to process claims for reimbursement by insurance companies. Vitalrecords keepers use ICD codes to record cause of death on death certificates, and epidemiologists used ICD codes to
calculate morbidity and mortality statistics.

• Identify two locations where you would likely find an ICD code.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

251

Clinical Focus
Part 2
David’s doctor was concerned that his symptoms included prickling and itching at the site of the dog bite;
these sensations could be early symptoms of rabies. Several tests are available to diagnose rabies in live
patients, but no single antemortem test is adequate. The doctor decided to take samples of David’s blood,
saliva, and skin for testing. The skin sample was taken from the nape of the neck (posterior side of the neck
near the hairline). It was about 6-mm long and contained at least 10 hair follicles, including the superficial
cutaneous nerve. An immunofluorescent staining technique was used on the skin biopsy specimen to detect
rabies antibodies in the cutaneous nerves at the base of the hair follicles. A test was also performed on a
serum sample from David’s blood to determine whether any antibodies for the rabies virus had been produced.
Meanwhile, the saliva sample was used for reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
analysis, a test that can detect the presence of viral nucleic acid (RNA). The blood tests came back positive
for the presence of rabies virus antigen, prompting David’s doctor to prescribe prophylactic treatment. David
is given a series of intramuscular injections of human rabies immunoglobulin along with a series of rabies
vaccines.

• Why does the immunofluorescent technique look for rabies antibodies rather than the rabies virus
itself?

• If David has contracted rabies, what is his prognosis?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

6.2 The Viral Life Cycle
Learning Objectives
• Describe the lytic and lysogenic life cycles
• Describe the replication process of animal viruses
• Describe unique characteristics of retroviruses and latent viruses
• Discuss human viruses and their virus-host cell interactions
• Explain the process of transduction
• Describe the replication process of plant viruses

All viruses depend on cells for reproduction and metabolic processes. By themselves, viruses do not encode for all
of the enzymes necessary for viral replication. But within a host cell, a virus can commandeer cellular machinery
to produce more viral particles. Bacteriophages replicate only in the cytoplasm, since prokaryotic cells do not have
a nucleus or organelles. In eukaryotic cells, most DNA viruses can replicate inside the nucleus, with an exception
observed in the large DNA viruses, such as the poxviruses, that can replicate in the cytoplasm. RNA viruses that
infect animal cells often replicate in the cytoplasm.

The Life Cycle of Viruses with Prokaryote Hosts
The life cycle of bacteriophages has been a good model for understanding how viruses affect the cells they infect,
since similar processes have been observed for eukaryotic viruses, which can cause immediate death of the cell or
establish a latent or chronic infection. Virulent phages typically lead to the death of the cell through cell lysis.
Temperate phages, on the other hand, can become part of a host chromosome and are replicated with the cell genome
until such time as they are induced to make newly assembled viruses, or progeny viruses.

252

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

The Lytic Cycle
During the lytic cycle of virulent phage, the bacteriophage takes over the cell, reproduces new phages, and destroys
the cell. T-even phage is a good example of a well-characterized class of virulent phages. There are five stages in the
bacteriophage lytic cycle (see Figure 6.7). Attachment is the first stage in the infection process in which the phage
interacts with specific bacterial surface receptors (e.g., lipopolysaccharides and OmpC protein on host surfaces). Most
phages have a narrow host range and may infect one species of bacteria or one strain within a species. This unique
recognition can be exploited for targeted treatment of bacterial infection by phage therapy or for phage typing to
identify unique bacterial subspecies or strains. The second stage of infection is entry or penetration. This occurs
through contraction of the tail sheath, which acts like a hypodermic needle to inject the viral genome through the cell
wall and membrane. The phage head and remaining components remain outside the bacteria.

Figure 6.7 A virulent phage shows only the lytic cycle pictured here. In the lytic cycle, the phage replicates and lyses
the host cell.

The third stage of infection is biosynthesis of new viral components. After entering the host cell, the virus synthesizes
virus-encoded endonucleases to degrade the bacterial chromosome. It then hijacks the host cell to replicate, transcribe,
and translate the necessary viral components (capsomeres, sheath, base plates, tail fibers, and viral enzymes) for the
assembly of new viruses. Polymerase genes are usually expressed early in the cycle, while capsid and tail proteins are
expressed later. During the maturation phase, new virions are created. To liberate free phages, the bacterial cell wall
is disrupted by phage proteins such as holin or lysozyme. The final stage is release. Mature viruses burst out of the
host cell in a process called lysis and the progeny viruses are liberated into the environment to infect new cells.

The Lysogenic Cycle
In a lysogenic cycle, the phage genome also enters the cell through attachment and penetration. A prime example of
a phage with this type of life cycle is the lambda phage. During the lysogenic cycle, instead of killing the host, the
phage genome integrates into the bacterial chromosome and becomes part of the host. The integrated phage genome is
called a prophage. A bacterial host with a prophage is called a lysogen. The process in which a bacterium is infected
by a temperate phage is called lysogeny. It is typical of temperate phages to be latent or inactive within the cell. As
the bacterium replicates its chromosome, it also replicates the phage’s DNA and passes it on to new daughter cells
during reproduction. The presence of the phage may alter the phenotype of the bacterium, since it can bring in extra
genes (e.g., toxin genes that can increase bacterial virulence). This change in the host phenotype is called lysogenic
conversion or phage conversion. Some bacteria, such as Vibrio cholerae and Clostridium botulinum, are less virulent
in the absence of the prophage. The phages infecting these bacteria carry the toxin genes in their genome and enhance
the virulence of the host when the toxin genes are expressed. In the case of V. cholera, phage encoded toxin can cause
severe diarrhea; in C. botulinum, the toxin can cause paralysis. During lysogeny, the prophage will persist in the host
chromosome until induction, which results in the excision of the viral genome from the host chromosome. After

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

253

induction has occurred the temperate phage can proceed through a lytic cycle and then undergo lysogeny in a newly
infected cell (see Figure 6.8).

Figure 6.8 A temperate bacteriophage has both lytic and lysogenic cycles. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is
incorporated into the host genome, forming a prophage, which is passed on to subsequent generations of cells.
Environmental stressors such as starvation or exposure to toxic chemicals may cause the prophage to be excised
and enter the lytic cycle.

Link to Learning
This video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22lysogeniclife) illustrates the stages
of the lysogenic life cycle of a bacteriophage and the transition to a lytic phase.

• Is a latent phage undetectable in a bacterium?

Transduction
Transduction occurs when a bacteriophage transfers bacterial DNA from one bacterium to another during sequential
infections. There are two types of transduction: generalized and specialized transduction. During the lytic cycle of
viral replication, the virus hijacks the host cell, degrades the host chromosome, and makes more viral genomes. As
it assembles and packages DNA into the phage head, packaging occasionally makes a mistake. Instead of packaging
viral DNA, it takes a random piece of host DNA and inserts it into the capsid. Once released, this virion will then

254

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

inject the former host’s DNA into a newly infected host. The asexual transfer of genetic information can allow for
DNA recombination to occur, thus providing the new host with new genes (e.g., an antibiotic-resistance gene, or a
sugar-metabolizing gene). Generalized transduction occurs when a random piece of bacterial chromosomal DNA
is transferred by the phage during the lytic cycle. Specialized transduction occurs at the end of the lysogenic cycle,
when the prophage is excised and the bacteriophage enters the lytic cycle. Since the phage is integrated into the host
genome, the prophage can replicate as part of the host. However, some conditions (e.g., ultraviolet light exposure
or chemical exposure) stimulate the prophage to undergo induction, causing the phage to excise from the genome,
enter the lytic cycle, and produce new phages to leave host cells. During the process of excision from the host
chromosome, a phage may occasionally remove some bacterial DNA near the site of viral integration. The phage and
host DNA from one end or both ends of the integration site are packaged within the capsid and are transferred to the
new, infected host. Since the DNA transferred by the phage is not randomly packaged but is instead a specific piece
of DNA near the site of integration, this mechanism of gene transfer is referred to as specialized transduction (see
Figure 6.9). The DNA can then recombine with host chromosome, giving the latter new characteristics. Transduction
seems to play an important role in the evolutionary process of bacteria, giving them a mechanism for asexual
exchange of genetic information.

Figure 6.9 This flowchart illustrates the mechanism of specialized transduction. An integrated phage excises,
bringing with it a piece of the DNA adjacent to its insertion point. On reinfection of a new bacterium, the phage DNA
integrates along with the genetic material acquired from the previous host.

• Which phage life cycle is associated with which forms of transduction?

Life Cycle of Viruses with Animal Hosts
Lytic animal viruses follow similar infection stages to bacteriophages: attachment, penetration, biosynthesis,
maturation, and release (see Figure 6.10). However, the mechanisms of penetration, nucleic-acid biosynthesis, and
release differ between bacterial and animal viruses. After binding to host receptors, animal viruses enter through
endocytosis (engulfment by the host cell) or through membrane fusion (viral envelope with the host cell membrane).
Many viruses are host specific, meaning they only infect a certain type of host; and most viruses only infect certain
types of cells within tissues. This specificity is called a tissue tropism. Examples of this are demonstrated by the
poliovirus, which exhibits tropism for the tissues of the brain and spinal cord, or the influenza virus, which has a
primary tropism for the respiratory tract.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

255

Figure 6.10 In influenza virus infection, viral glycoproteins attach the virus to a host epithelial cell. As a result, the
virus is engulfed. Viral RNA and viral proteins are made and assembled into new virions that are released by
budding.

Animal viruses do not always express their genes using the normal flow of genetic information—from DNA to RNA
to protein. Some viruses have a dsDNA genome like cellular organisms and can follow the normal flow. However,
others may have ssDNA, dsRNA, or ssRNA genomes. The nature of the genome determines how the genome is
replicated and expressed as viral proteins. If a genome is ssDNA, host enzymes will be used to synthesize a second
strand that is complementary to the genome strand, thus producing dsDNA. The dsDNA can now be replicated,
transcribed, and translated similar to host DNA.
If the viral genome is RNA, a different mechanism must be used. There are three types of RNA genome: dsRNA,
positive (+) single-strand (+ssRNA) or negative (−) single-strand RNA (−ssRNA). If a virus has a +ssRNA
genome, it can be translated directly to make viral proteins. Viral genomic +ssRNA acts like cellular mRNA.
However, if a virus contains a −ssRNA genome, the host ribosomes cannot translate it until the −ssRNA is replicated
into +ssRNA by viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) (see Figure 6.11). The RdRP is brought in by the
virus and can be used to make +ssRNA from the original −ssRNA genome. The RdRP is also an important enzyme
for the replication of dsRNA viruses, because it uses the negative strand of the double-stranded genome as a template
to create +ssRNA. The newly synthesized +ssRNA copies can then be translated by cellular ribosomes.

256

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.11 RNA viruses can contain +ssRNA that can be directly read by the ribosomes to synthesize viral
proteins. Viruses containing −ssRNA must first use the −ssRNA as a template for the synthesis of +ssRNA before
viral proteins can be synthesized.

An alternative mechanism for viral nucleic acid synthesis is observed in the retroviruses, which are +ssRNA viruses
(see Figure 6.12). Single-stranded RNA viruses such as HIV carry a special enzyme called reverse transcriptase
within the capsid that synthesizes a complementary ssDNA (cDNA) copy using the +ssRNA genome as a template.
The ssDNA is then made into dsDNA, which can integrate into the host chromosome and become a permanent part
of the host. The integrated viral genome is called a provirus. The virus now can remain in the host for a long time
to establish a chronic infection. The provirus stage is similar to the prophage stage in a bacterial infection during the
lysogenic cycle. However, unlike prophage, the provirus does not undergo excision after splicing into the genome.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

257

Figure 6.12 HIV, an enveloped, icosahedral retrovirus, attaches to a cell surface receptor of an immune cell and
fuses with the cell membrane. Viral contents are released into the cell, where viral enzymes convert the singlestranded RNA genome into DNA and incorporate it into the host genome. (credit: modification of work by NIAID, NIH)

258

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

• Is RNA-dependent RNA polymerase made from a viral gene or a host gene?

Persistent Infections
Persistent infection occurs when a virus is not completely cleared from the system of the host but stays in certain
tissues or organs of the infected person. The virus may remain silent or undergo productive infection without seriously
harming or killing the host. Mechanisms of persistent infection may involve the regulation of the viral or host gene
expressions or the alteration of the host immune response. The two primary categories of persistent infections are
latent infection and chronic infection. Examples of viruses that cause latent infections include herpes simplex virus
(oral and genital herpes), varicella-zoster virus (chickenpox and shingles), and Epstein-Barr virus (mononucleosis).
Hepatitis C virus and HIV are two examples of viruses that cause long-term chronic infections.

Latent Infection
Not all animal viruses undergo replication by the lytic cycle. There are viruses that are capable of remaining hidden
or dormant inside the cell in a process called latency. These types of viruses are known as latent viruses and may
cause latent infections. Viruses capable of latency may initially cause an acute infection before becoming dormant.
For example, the varicella-zoster virus infects many cells throughout the body and causes chickenpox, characterized
by a rash of blisters covering the skin. About 10 to 12 days postinfection, the disease resolves and the virus goes
dormant, living within nerve-cell ganglia for years. During this time, the virus does not kill the nerve cells or continue
replicating. It is not clear why the virus stops replicating within the nerve cells and expresses few viral proteins but, in
some cases, typically after many years of dormancy, the virus is reactivated and causes a new disease called shingles
(Figure 6.13). Whereas chickenpox affects many areas throughout the body, shingles is a nerve cell-specific disease
emerging from the ganglia in which the virus was dormant.

Figure 6.13 (a) Varicella-zoster, the virus that causes chickenpox, has an enveloped icosahedral capsid visible in
this transmission electron micrograph. Its double-stranded DNA genome becomes incorporated in the host DNA. (b)
After a period of latency, the virus can reactivate in the form of shingles, usually manifesting as a painful, localized
rash on one side of the body. (credit a: modification of work by Erskine Palmer and B.G. Partin—scale-bar data from
Matt Russell; credit b: modification of work by Rosmarie Voegtli)

Latent viruses may remain dormant by existing as circular viral genome molecules outside of the host chromosome.
Others become proviruses by integrating into the host genome. During dormancy, viruses do not cause any symptoms
of disease and may be difficult to detect. A patient may be unaware that he or she is carrying the virus unless a viral
diagnostic test has been performed.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

259

Chronic Infection
A chronic infection is a disease with symptoms that are recurrent or persistent over a long time. Some viral infections
can be chronic if the body is unable to eliminate the virus. HIV is an example of a virus that produces a chronic
infection, often after a long period of latency. Once a person becomes infected with HIV, the virus can be detected
in tissues continuously thereafter, but untreated patients often experience no symptoms for years. However, the
virus maintains chronic persistence through several mechanisms that interfere with immune function, including
preventing expression of viral antigens on the surface of infected cells, altering immune cells themselves, restricting
expression of viral genes, and rapidly changing viral antigens through mutation. Eventually, the damage to the
immune system results in progression of the disease leading to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The
various mechanisms that HIV uses to avoid being cleared by the immune system are also used by other chronically
infecting viruses, including the hepatitis C virus.

• In what two ways can a virus manage to maintain a persistent infection?

Life Cycle of Viruses with Plant Hosts
Plant viruses are more similar to animal viruses than they are to bacteriophages. Plant viruses may be enveloped
or non-enveloped. Like many animal viruses, plant viruses can have either a DNA or RNA genome and be single
stranded or double stranded. However, most plant viruses do not have a DNA genome; the majority have a +ssRNA
genome, which acts like messenger RNA (mRNA). Only a minority of plant viruses have other types of genomes.
Plant viruses may have a narrow or broad host range. For example, the citrus tristeza virus infects only a few plants
of the Citrus genus, whereas the cucumber mosaic virus infects thousands of plants of various plant families. Most
plant viruses are transmitted by contact between plants, or by fungi, nematodes, insects, or other arthropods that act as
mechanical vectors. However, some viruses can only be transferred by a specific type of insect vector; for example, a
particular virus might be transmitted by aphids but not whiteflies. In some cases, viruses may also enter healthy plants
through wounds, as might occur due to pruning or weather damage.
Viruses that infect plants are considered biotrophic parasites, which means that they can establish an infection without
killing the host, similar to what is observed in the lysogenic life cycles of bacteriophages. Viral infection can be
asymptomatic (latent) or can lead to cell death (lytic infection). The life cycle begins with the penetration of the virus
into the host cell. Next, the virus is uncoated within the cytoplasm of the cell when the capsid is removed. Depending
on the type of nucleic acid, cellular components are used to replicate the viral genome and synthesize viral proteins
for assembly of new virions. To establish a systemic infection, the virus must enter a part of the vascular system of
the plant, such as the phloem. The time required for systemic infection may vary from a few days to a few weeks
depending on the virus, the plant species, and the environmental conditions. The virus life cycle is complete when it
is transmitted from an infected plant to a healthy plant.

• What is the structure and genome of a typical plant virus?

Viral Growth Curve
Unlike the growth curve for a bacterial population, the growth curve for a virus population over its life cycle does not
follow a sigmoidal curve. During the initial stage, an inoculum of virus causes infection. In the eclipse phase, viruses
bind and penetrate the cells with no virions detected in the medium. The chief difference that next appears in the viral

260

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

growth curve compared to a bacterial growth curve occurs when virions are released from the lysed host cell at the
same time. Such an occurrence is called a burst, and the number of virions per bacterium released is described as the
burst size. In a one-step multiplication curve for bacteriophage, the host cells lyse, releasing many viral particles to
the medium, which leads to a very steep rise in viral titer (the number of virions per unit volume). If no viable host
cells remain, the viral particles begin to degrade during the decline of the culture (see Figure 6.14).

Figure 6.14 The one-step multiplication curve for a bacteriophage population follows three steps: 1) inoculation,
during which the virions attach to host cells; 2) eclipse, during which entry of the viral genome occurs; and 3) burst,
when sufficient numbers of new virions are produced and emerge from the host cell. The burst size is the maximum
number of virions produced per bacterium.

• What aspect of the life cycle of a virus leads to the sudden increase in the growth curve?

Eye on Ethics

Unregistered Treatments
Ebola is incurable and deadly. The outbreak in West Africa in 2014 was unprecedented, dwarfing other human
Ebola epidemics in the level of mortality. Of 24,666 suspected or confirmed cases reported, 10,179 people
died.[9]
No approved treatments or vaccines for Ebola are available. While some drugs have shown potential in
laboratory studies and animal models, they have not been tested in humans for safety and effectiveness. Not
only are these drugs untested or unregistered but they are also in short supply.
Given the great suffering and high mortality rates, it is fair to ask whether unregistered and untested
medications are better than none at all. Should such drugs be dispensed and, if so, who should receive them,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

in light of their extremely limited supplies? Is it ethical to treat untested drugs on patients with Ebola? On
the other hand, is it ethical to withhold potentially life-saving drugs from dying patients? Or should the drugs
perhaps be reserved for health-care providers working to contain the disease?
In August 2014, two infected US aid workers and a Spanish priest were treated with ZMapp, an unregistered
drug that had been tested in monkeys but not in humans. The two American aid workers recovered, but the
priest died. Later that month, the WHO released a report on the ethics of treating patients with the drug. Since
Ebola is often fatal, the panel reasoned that it is ethical to give the unregistered drugs and unethical to withhold
them for safety concerns. This situation is an example of “compassionate use” outside the well-established
system of regulation and governance of therapies.

Case in Point
Ebola in the US
On September 24, 2014, Thomas Eric Duncan arrived at the Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas
complaining of a fever, headache, vomiting, and diarrhea—symptoms commonly observed in patients with the
cold or the flu. After examination, an emergency department doctor diagnosed him with sinusitis, prescribed
some antibiotics, and sent him home. Two days later, Duncan returned to the hospital by ambulance. His
condition had deteriorated and additional blood tests confirmed that he has been infected with the Ebola virus.
Further investigations revealed that Duncan had just returned from Liberia, one of the countries in the midst
of a severe Ebola epidemic. On September 15, nine days before he showed up at the hospital in Dallas,
Duncan had helped transport an Ebola-stricken neighbor to a hospital in Liberia. The hospital continued to treat
Duncan, but he died several days after being admitted.
The timeline of the Duncan case is indicative of the life cycle of the Ebola virus. The incubation time for
Ebola ranges from 2 days to 21 days. Nine days passed between Duncan’s exposure to the virus infection
and the appearance of his symptoms. This corresponds, in part, to the eclipse period in the growth of the
virus population. During the eclipse phase, Duncan would have been unable to transmit the disease to others.
However, once an infected individual begins exhibiting symptoms, the disease becomes very contagious.
Ebola virus is transmitted through direct contact with droplets of bodily fluids such as saliva, blood, and vomit.
Duncan could conceivably have transmitted the disease to others at any time after he began having symptoms,
presumably some time before his arrival at the hospital in Dallas. Once a hospital realizes a patient like Duncan
is infected with Ebola virus, the patient is immediately quarantined, and public health officials initiate a back
trace to identify everyone with whom a patient like Duncan might have interacted during the period in which he
was showing symptoms.
Public health officials were able to track down 10 high-risk individuals (family members of Duncan) and 50
low-risk individuals to monitor them for signs of infection. None contracted the disease. However, one of the
nurses charged with Duncan’s care did become infected. This, along with Duncan’s initial misdiagnosis, made
it clear that US hospitals needed to provide additional training to medical personnel to prevent a possible Ebola
outbreak in the US.

• What types of training can prepare health professionals to contain emerging epidemics like the Ebola
outbreak of 2014?

• What is the difference between a contagious pathogen and an infectious pathogen?

9. World Health Organization. “WHO Ebola Data and Statistics.” March 18, 2005. http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.ebola-sitrep.ebolasummary-20150318?lang=en

261

262

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.15 Researchers working with Ebola virus use layers of defenses against accidental infection,
including protective clothing, breathing systems, and negative air-pressure cabinets for bench work. (credit:
modification of work by Randal J. Schoepp)

Link to Learning
For additional information about Ebola, please visit the CDC
(https://www.openstax.org/l/22ebolacdc) website.

6.3 Isolation, Culture, and Identification of Viruses
Learning Objectives
• Discuss why viruses were originally described as filterable agents
• Describe the cultivation of viruses and specimen collection and handling
• Compare in vivo and in vitro techniques used to cultivate viruses

At the beginning of this chapter, we described how porcelain Chamberland filters with pores small enough to allow
viruses to pass through were used to discover TMV. Today, porcelain filters have been replaced with membrane filters
and other devices used to isolate and identify viruses.

Isolation of Viruses
Unlike bacteria, many of which can be grown on an artificial nutrient medium, viruses require a living host cell for
replication. Infected host cells (eukaryotic or prokaryotic) can be cultured and grown, and then the growth medium
can be harvested as a source of virus. Virions in the liquid medium can be separated from the host cells by either
centrifugation or filtration. Filters can physically remove anything present in the solution that is larger than the
virions; the viruses can then be collected in the filtrate (see Figure 6.16).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

263

Figure 6.16 Membrane filters can be used to remove cells or viruses from a solution. (a) This scanning electron
micrograph shows rod-shaped bacterial cells captured on the surface of a membrane filter. Note differences in the
comparative size of the membrane pores and bacteria. Viruses will pass through this filter. (b) The size of the pores in
the filter determines what is captured on the surface of the filter (animal [red] and bacteria [blue]) and removed from
liquid passing through. Note the viruses (green) pass through the finer filter. (credit a: modification of work by U.S.
Department of Energy)

• What size filter pore is needed to collect a virus?

Cultivation of Viruses
Viruses can be grown in vivo (within a whole living organism, plant, or animal) or in vitro (outside a living organism
in cells in an artificial environment, such as a test tube, cell culture flask, or agar plate). Bacteriophages can be grown
in the presence of a dense layer of bacteria (also called a bacterial lawn) grown in a 0.7 % soft agar in a Petri dish or
flat (horizontal) flask (see Figure 6.17). The agar concentration is decreased from the 1.5% usually used in culturing
bacteria. The soft 0.7% agar allows the bacteriophages to easily diffuse through the medium. For lytic bacteriophages,
lysing of the bacterial hosts can then be readily observed when a clear zone called a plaque is detected (see Figure
6.17). As the phage kills the bacteria, many plaques are observed among the cloudy bacterial lawn.

264

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.17 (a) Flasks like this may be used to culture human or animal cells for viral culturing. (b) These plates
contain bacteriophage T4 grown on an Escherichia coli lawn. Clear plaques are visible where host bacterial cells
have been lysed. Viral titers increase on the plates to the left. (credit a: modification of work by National Institutes of
Health; credit b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

Animal viruses require cells within a host animal or tissue-culture cells derived from an animal. Animal virus
cultivation is important for 1) identification and diagnosis of pathogenic viruses in clinical specimens, 2) production
of vaccines, and 3) basic research studies. In vivo host sources can be a developing embryo in an embryonated bird’s
egg (e.g., chicken, turkey) or a whole animal. For example, most of the influenza vaccine manufactured for annual flu
vaccination programs is cultured in hens’ eggs.
The embryo or host animal serves as an incubator for viral replication (see Figure 6.18). Location within the embryo
or host animal is important. Many viruses have a tissue tropism, and must therefore be introduced into a specific
site for growth. Within an embryo, target sites include the amniotic cavity, the chorioallantoic membrane, or the yolk
sac. Viral infection may damage tissue membranes, producing lesions called pox; disrupt embryonic development; or
cause the death of the embryo.

Figure 6.18 (a) The cells within chicken eggs are used to culture different types of viruses. (b) Viruses can be
replicated in various locations within the egg, including the chorioallantoic membrane, the amniotic cavity, and the
yolk sac. (credit a: modification of work by “Chung Hoang”/YouTube)

For in vitro studies, various types of cells can be used to support the growth of viruses. A primary cell culture is
freshly prepared from animal organs or tissues. Cells are extracted from tissues by mechanical scraping or mincing to
release cells or by an enzymatic method using trypsin or collagenase to break up tissue and release single cells into
suspension. Because of anchorage-dependence requirements, primary cell cultures require a liquid culture medium
in a Petri dish or tissue-culture flask so cells have a solid surface such as glass or plastic for attachment and growth.
Primary cultures usually have a limited life span. When cells in a primary culture undergo mitosis and a sufficient
density of cells is produced, cells come in contact with other cells. When this cell-to-cell-contact occurs, mitosis is

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

265

triggered to stop. This is called contact inhibition and it prevents the density of the cells from becoming too high. To
prevent contact inhibition, cells from the primary cell culture must be transferred to another vessel with fresh growth
medium. This is called a secondary cell culture. Periodically, cell density must be reduced by pouring off some cells
and adding fresh medium to provide space and nutrients to maintain cell growth. In contrast to primary cell cultures,
continuous cell lines, usually derived from transformed cells or tumors, are often able to be subcultured many times
or even grown indefinitely (in which case they are called immortal). Continuous cell lines may not exhibit anchorage
dependency (they will grow in suspension) and may have lost their contact inhibition. As a result, continuous cell
lines can grow in piles or lumps resembling small tumor growths (see Figure 6.19).

Figure 6.19 Cells for culture are prepared by separating them from their tissue matrix. (a) Primary cell cultures grow
attached to the surface of the culture container. Contact inhibition slows the growth of the cells once they become too
dense and begin touching each other. At this point, growth can only be sustained by making a secondary culture. (b)
Continuous cell cultures are not affected by contact inhibition. They continue to grow regardless of cell density. (credit
“micrographs”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

An example of an immortal cell line is the HeLa cell line, which was originally cultivated from tumor cells obtained
from Henrietta Lacks, a patient who died of cervical cancer in 1951. HeLa cells were the first continuous tissueculture cell line and were used to establish tissue culture as an important technology for research in cell biology,
virology, and medicine. Prior to the discovery of HeLa cells, scientists were not able to establish tissue cultures with
any reliability or stability. More than six decades later, this cell line is still alive and being used for medical research.
See Eye on Ethics: The Immortal Cell Line of Henrietta Lacks to read more about this important cell line
and the controversial means by which it was obtained.

• What property of cells makes periodic dilutions of primary cell cultures necessary?

266

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Eye on Ethics

The Immortal Cell Line of Henrietta Lacks
In January 1951, Henrietta Lacks, a 30-year-old African American woman from Baltimore, was diagnosed with
cervical cancer at John Hopkins Hospital. We now know her cancer was caused by the human papillomavirus
(HPV). Cytopathic effects of the virus altered the characteristics of her cells in a process called transformation,
which gives the cells the ability to divide continuously. This ability, of course, resulted in a cancerous tumor that
eventually killed Mrs. Lacks in October at age 31. Before her death, samples of her cancerous cells were taken
without her knowledge or permission. The samples eventually ended up in the possession of Dr. George Gey,
a biomedical researcher at Johns Hopkins University. Gey was able to grow some of the cells from Lacks’s
sample, creating what is known today as the immortal HeLa cell line. These cells have the ability to live and
grow indefinitely and, even today, are still widely used in many areas of research.
According to Lacks’s husband, neither Henrietta nor the family gave the hospital permission to collect her
tissue specimen. Indeed, the family was not aware until 20 years after Lacks’s death that her cells were still
alive and actively being used for commercial and research purposes. Yet HeLa cells have been pivotal in
numerous research discoveries related to polio, cancer, and AIDS, among other diseases. The cells have also
been commercialized, although they have never themselves been patented. Despite this, Henrietta Lacks’s
estate has never benefited from the use of the cells, although, in 2013, the Lacks family was given control over
the publication of the genetic sequence of her cells.
This case raises several bioethical issues surrounding patients’ informed consent and the right to know. At the
time Lacks’s tissues were taken, there were no laws or guidelines about informed consent. Does that mean
she was treated fairly at the time? Certainly by today’s standards, the answer would be no. Harvesting tissue or
organs from a dying patient without consent is not only considered unethical but illegal, regardless of whether
such an act could save other patients’ lives. Is it ethical, then, for scientists to continue to use Lacks’s tissues
for research, even though they were obtained illegally by today’s standards?
Ethical or not, Lacks’s cells are widely used today for so many applications that it is impossible to list them all.
Is this a case in which the ends justify the means? Would Lacks be pleased to know about her contribution to
science and the millions of people who have benefited? Would she want her family to be compensated for the
commercial products that have been developed using her cells? Or would she feel violated and exploited by
the researchers who took part of her body without her consent? Because she was never asked, we will never
know.

Figure 6.20 A multiphoton fluorescence image of HeLa cells in culture. Various fluorescent stains have been
used to show the DNA (cyan), microtubules (green), and Golgi apparatus (orange). (credit: modification of
work by National Institutes of Health)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

267

Detection of a Virus
Regardless of the method of cultivation, once a virus has been introduced into a whole host organism, embryo, or
tissue-culture cell, a sample can be prepared from the infected host, embryo, or cell line for further analysis under a
brightfield, electron, or fluorescent microscope. Cytopathic effects (CPEs) are distinct observable cell abnormalities
due to viral infection. CPEs can include loss of adherence to the surface of the container, changes in cell shape from
flat to round, shrinkage of the nucleus, vacuoles in the cytoplasm, fusion of cytoplasmic membranes and the formation
of multinucleated syncytia, inclusion bodies in the nucleus or cytoplasm, and complete cell lysis (see Figure 6.21).
Further pathological changes include viral disruption of the host genome and altering normal cells into transformed
cells, which are the types of cells associated with carcinomas and sarcomas. The type or severity of the CPE depends
on the type of virus involved. Figure 6.21 lists CPEs for specific viruses.

268

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.21 (credit “micrographs”: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

269

Link to Learning
Watch this video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22virusesoncell) to learn about
the effects of viruses on cells.

Hemagglutination Assay
A serological assay is used to detect the presence of certain types of viruses in patient serum. Serum is the strawcolored liquid fraction of blood plasma from which clotting factors have been removed. Serum can be used in a direct
assay called a hemagglutination assay to detect specific types of viruses in the patient’s sample. Hemagglutination
is the agglutination (clumping) together of erythrocytes (red blood cells). Many viruses produce surface proteins
or spikes called hemagglutinins that can bind to receptors on the membranes of erythrocytes and cause the cells
to agglutinate. Hemagglutination is observable without using the microscope, but this method does not always
differentiate between infectious and noninfectious viral particles, since both can agglutinate erythrocytes.
To identify a specific pathogenic virus using hemagglutination, we must use an indirect approach. Proteins called
antibodies, generated by the patient’s immune system to fight a specific virus, can be used to bind to components
such as hemagglutinins that are uniquely associated with specific types of viruses. The binding of the antibodies with
the hemagglutinins found on the virus subsequently prevent erythrocytes from directly interacting with the virus. So
when erythrocytes are added to the antibody-coated viruses, there is no appearance of agglutination; agglutination has
been inhibited. We call these types of indirect assays for virus-specific antibodies hemagglutination inhibition (HAI)
assays. HAI can be used to detect the presence of antibodies specific to many types of viruses that may be causing or
have caused an infection in a patient even months or years after infection (see Figure 6.22). This assay is described
in greater detail in Agglutination Assays.

270

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.22 This chart shows the possible outcomes of a hemagglutination test. Row A: Erythrocytes do not bind
together and will sink to the bottom of the well plate; this becomes visible as a red dot in the center of the well. Row
B: Many viruses have hemagglutinins that causes agglutination of erythrocytes; the resulting hemagglutination forms
a lattice structure that results in red color throughout the well. Row C: Virus-specific antibody, the viruses, and the
erythrocytes are added to the well plate. The virus-specific antibodies inhibit agglutination, as can be seen as a red
dot in the bottom of the well. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What is the outcome of a positive HIA test?

Nucleic Acid Amplification Test
Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) are used in molecular biology to detect unique nucleic acid sequences of
viruses in patient samples. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is an NAAT used to detect the presence of viral DNA
in a patient’s tissue or body fluid sample. PCR is a technique that amplifies (i.e., synthesizes many copies) of a viral
DNA segment of interest. Using PCR, short nucleotide sequences called primers bind to specific sequences of viral
DNA, enabling identification of the virus.
Reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) is an NAAT used to detect the presence of RNA viruses. RT-PCR differs from
PCR in that the enzyme reverse transcriptase (RT) is used to make a cDNA from the small amount of viral RNA in
the specimen. The cDNA can then be amplified by PCR. Both PCR and RT-PCR are used to detect and confirm the
presence of the viral nucleic acid in patient specimens.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

271

Case in Point
HPV Scare
Michelle, a 21-year-old nursing student, came to the university clinic worried that she might have been exposed
to a sexually transmitted disease (STD). Her sexual partner had recently developed several bumps on the base
of his penis. He had put off going to the doctor, but Michelle suspects they are genital warts caused by HPV.
She is especially concerned because she knows that HPV not only causes warts but is a prominent cause of
cervical cancer. She and her partner always use condoms for contraception, but she is not confident that this
precaution will protect her from HPV.
Michelle’s physician finds no physical signs of genital warts or any other STDs, but recommends that Michelle
get a Pap smear along with an HPV test. The Pap smear will screen for abnormal cervical cells and the CPEs
associated with HPV; the HPV test will test for the presence of the virus. If both tests are negative, Michelle
can be more assured that she most likely has not become infected with HPV. However, her doctor suggests it
might be wise for Michelle to get vaccinated against HPV to protect herself from possible future exposure.

• Why does Michelle’s physician order two different tests instead of relying on one or the other?

Enzyme Immunoassay
Enzyme immunoassays (EIAs) rely on the ability of antibodies to detect and attach to specific biomolecules called
antigens. The detecting antibody attaches to the target antigen with a high degree of specificity in what might be a
complex mixture of biomolecules. Also included in this type of assay is a colorless enzyme attached to the detecting
antibody. The enzyme acts as a tag on the detecting antibody and can interact with a colorless substrate, leading to
the production of a colored end product. EIAs often rely on layers of antibodies to capture and react with antigens, all
of which are attached to a membrane filter (see Figure 6.23). EIAs for viral antigens are often used as preliminary
screening tests. If the results are positive, further confirmation will require tests with even greater sensitivity, such as
a western blot or an NAAT. EIAs are discussed in more detail in EIAs and ELISAs.

272

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.23 Similar to rapid, over-the-counter pregnancy tests, EIAs for viral antigens require a few drops of diluted
patient serum or plasma applied to a membrane filter. The membrane filter has been previously modified and
embedded with antibody to viral antigen and internal controls. Antibody conjugate is added to the filter, with the
targeted antibody attached to the antigen (in the case of a positive test). Excess conjugate is washed off the filter.
Substrate is added to activate the enzyme-mediated reaction to reveal the color change of a positive test. (credit:
modification of work by “Cavitri”/Wikimedia Commons)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

273

• What typically indicates a positive EIA test?

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Along with the RT/PCR analysis, David’s saliva was also collected for viral cultivation. In general, no single
diagnostic test is sufficient for antemortem diagnosis, since the results will depend on the sensitivity of the
assay, the quantity of virions present at the time of testing, and the timing of the assay, since release of
virions in the saliva can vary. As it turns out, the result was negative for viral cultivation from the saliva. This
is not surprising to David’s doctor, because one negative result is not an absolute indication of the absence of
infection. It may be that the number of virions in the saliva is low at the time of sampling. It is not unusual to
repeat the test at intervals to enhance the chance of detecting higher virus loads.

• Should David’s doctor modify his course of treatment based on these test results?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

6.4 Viroids, Virusoids, and Prions
Learning Objectives
• Describe viroids and their unique characteristics
• Describe virusoids and their unique characteristics
• Describe prions and their unique characteristics

Research attempts to discover the causative agents of previously uninvestigated diseases have led to the discovery
of nonliving disease agents quite different from viruses. These include particles consisting only of RNA or only of
protein that, nonetheless, are able to self-propagate at the expense of a host—a key similarity to viruses that allows
them to cause disease conditions. To date, these discoveries include viroids, virusoids, and the proteinaceous prions.

Viroids
In 1971, Theodor Diener, a pathologist working at the Agriculture Research Service, discovered an acellular particle
that he named a viroid, meaning “virus-like.” Viroids consist only of a short strand of circular RNA capable of selfreplication. The first viroid discovered was found to cause potato tuber spindle disease, which causes slower sprouting
and various deformities in potato plants (see Figure 6.24). Like viruses, potato spindle tuber viroids (PSTVs) take
control of the host machinery to replicate their RNA genome. Unlike viruses, viroids do not have a protein coat to
protect their genetic information.

274

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.24 These potatoes have been infected by the potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV), which is typically spread
when infected knives are used to cut healthy potatoes, which are then planted. (credit: Pamela Roberts, University of
Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, USDA ARS)

Viroids can result in devastating losses of commercially important agricultural food crops grown in fields and
orchards. Since the discovery of PSTV, other viroids have been discovered that cause diseases in plants. Tomato
planta macho viroid (TPMVd) infects tomato plants, which causes loss of chlorophyll, disfigured and brittle leaves,
and very small tomatoes, resulting in loss of productivity in this field crop. Avocado sunblotch viroid (ASBVd)
results in lower yields and poorer-quality fruit. ASBVd is the smallest viroid discovered thus far that infects plants.
Peach latent mosaic viroid (PLMVd) can cause necrosis of flower buds and branches, and wounding of ripened fruit,
which leads to fungal and bacterial growth in the fruit. PLMVd can also cause similar pathological changes in plums,
nectarines, apricots, and cherries, resulting in decreased productivity in these orchards, as well. Viroids, in general,
can be dispersed mechanically during crop maintenance or harvesting, vegetative reproduction, and possibly via seeds
and insects, resulting in a severe drop in food availability and devastating economic consequences.

• What is the genome of a viroid made of?

Virusoids
A second type of pathogenic RNA that can infect commercially important agricultural crops are the virusoids, which
are subviral particles best described as non–self-replicating ssRNAs. RNA replication of virusoids is similar to that
of viroids but, unlike viroids, virusoids require that the cell also be infected with a specific “helper” virus. There
are currently only five described types of virusoids and their associated helper viruses. The helper viruses are all
from the family of Sobemoviruses. An example of a helper virus is the subterranean clover mottle virus, which
has an associated virusoid packaged inside the viral capsid. Once the helper virus enters the host cell, the virusoids
are released and can be found free in plant cell cytoplasm, where they possess ribozyme activity. The helper virus
undergoes typical viral replication independent of the activity of the virusoid. The virusoid genomes are small, only
220 to 388 nucleotides long. A virusoid genome does not code for any proteins, but instead serves only to replicate
virusoid RNA.
Virusoids belong to a larger group of infectious agents called satellite RNAs, which are similar pathogenic RNAs
found in animals. Unlike the plant virusoids, satellite RNAs may encode for proteins; however, like plant virusoids,
satellite RNAs must coinfect with a helper virus to replicate. One satellite RNA that infects humans and that has been
described by some scientists as a virusoid is the hepatitis delta virus (HDV), which, by some reports, is also called
hepatitis delta virusoid. Much larger than a plant virusoid, HDV has a circular, ssRNA genome of 1,700 nucleotides
and can direct the biosynthesis of HDV-associated proteins. The HDV helper virus is the hepatitis B virus (HBV).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

275

Coinfection with HBV and HDV results in more severe pathological changes in the liver during infection, which is
how HDV was first discovered.

• What is the main difference between a viroid and a virusoid?

Prions
At one time, scientists believed that any infectious particle must contain DNA or RNA. Then, in 1982, Stanley
Prusiner, a medical doctor studying scrapie (a fatal, degenerative disease in sheep) discovered that the disease was
caused by proteinaceous infectious particles, or prions. Because proteins are acellular and do not contain DNA or
RNA, Prusiner’s findings were originally met with resistance and skepticism; however, his research was eventually
validated, and he received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1997.
A prion is a misfolded rogue form of a normal protein (PrPc) found in the cell. This rogue prion protein (PrPsc), which
may be caused by a genetic mutation or occur spontaneously, can be infectious, stimulating other endogenous normal
proteins to become misfolded, forming plaques (see Figure 6.25). Today, prions are known to cause various forms
of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) in human and animals. TSE is a rare degenerative disorder that
affects the brain and nervous system. The accumulation of rogue proteins causes the brain tissue to become spongelike, killing brain cells and forming holes in the tissue, leading to brain damage, loss of motor coordination, and
dementia (see Figure 6.26). Infected individuals are mentally impaired and become unable to move or speak. There
is no cure, and the disease progresses rapidly, eventually leading to death within a few months or years.

Figure 6.25 Endogenous normal prion protein (PrPc) is converted into the disease-causing form (PrPsc) when it
encounters this variant form of the protein. PrPsc may arise spontaneously in brain tissue, especially if a mutant form
of the protein is present, or it may originate from misfolded prions consumed in food that eventually find their way into
brain tissue. (credit b: modification of work by USDA)

276

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Figure 6.26 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a fatal disease that causes degeneration of neural tissue. (a) These
brain scans compare a normal brain to one with CJD. (b) Compared to a normal brain, the brain tissue of a CJD
patient is full of sponge-like lesions, which result from abnormal formations of prion protein. (credit a (right):
modification of work by Dr. Laughlin Dawes; credit b (top): modification of work by Suzanne Wakim; credit b (bottom):
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

TSEs in humans include kuru, fatal familial insomnia, Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease, and CreutzfeldtJakob disease (see Figure 6.26). TSEs in animals include mad cow disease, scrapie (in sheep and goats), and chronic
wasting disease (in elk and deer). TSEs can be transmitted between animals and from animals to humans by eating
contaminated meat or animal feed. Transmission between humans can occur through heredity (as is often the case with
GSS and CJD) or by contact with contaminated tissue, as might occur during a blood transfusion or organ transplant.
There is no evidence for transmission via casual contact with an infected person. Table 6.3 lists TSEs that affect
humans and their modes of transmission.
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs) in Humans
Disease

Mechanism(s) of Transmission[10]

Sporadic CJD (sCJD)

Not known; possibly by alteration of normal prior protein (PrP) to rogue form
due to somatic mutation

Variant CJD (vCJD)

Eating contaminated cattle products and by secondary bloodborne
transmission

Familial CJD (fCJD)

Mutation in germline PrP gene

Iatrogenic CJD (iCJD)

Contaminated neurosurgical instruments, corneal graft, gonadotrophic
hormone, and, secondarily, by blood transfusion

Kuru

Eating infected meat through ritualistic cannibalism

Gerstmann-StrausslerScheinker disease (GSS)

Mutation in germline PrP gene

Table 6.3

10. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Fact Sheet.” http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/
cjd/detail_cjd.htm (accessed December 31, 2015).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

277

Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs) in Humans
Disease
Fatal familial insomnia (FFI)

Mechanism(s) of Transmission
Mutation in germline PrP gene

Table 6.3

Prions are extremely difficult to destroy because they are resistant to heat, chemicals, and radiation. Even standard
sterilization procedures do not ensure the destruction of these particles. Currently, there is no treatment or cure for
TSE disease, and contaminated meats or infected animals must be handled according to federal guidelines to prevent
transmission.

• Does a prion have a genome?

Link to Learning
For more information on the handling of animals and prion-contaminated
materials, visit the guidelines published on the CDC
(https://www.openstax.org/l/22cdccontaminat) and WHO
(https://www.openstax.org/l/22whocontaminat) websites.

Clinical Focus
Resolution
A few days later, David’s doctor receives the results of the immunofluorescence test on his skin sample. The
test is negative for rabies antigen. A second viral antigen test on his saliva sample also comes back negative.
Despite these results, the doctor decides to continue David’s current course of treatment. Given the positive
RT-PCR test, it is best not to rule out a possible rabies infection.
Near the site of the bite, David receives an injection of rabies immunoglobulin, which attaches to and
inactivates any rabies virus that may be present in his tissues. Over the next 14 days, he receives a series of
four rabies-specific vaccinations in the arm. These vaccines activate David’s immune response and help his
body recognize and fight the virus. Thankfully, with treatment, David symptoms improve and he makes a full
recovery.
Not all rabies cases have such a fortunate outcome. In fact, rabies is usually fatal once the patient starts to
exhibit symptoms, and postbite treatments are mainly palliative (i.e., sedation and pain management).
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

278

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Summary
6.1 Viruses
• Viruses are generally ultramicroscopic, typically from 20 nm to 900 nm in length. Some large viruses have
been found.
• Virions are acellular and consist of a nucleic acid, DNA or RNA, but not both, surrounded by a protein capsid.
There may also be a phospholipid membrane surrounding the capsid.
• Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites.
• Viruses are known to infect various types of cells found in plants, animals, fungi, protists, bacteria, and
archaea. Viruses typically have limited host ranges and infect specific cell types.
• Viruses may have helical, polyhedral, or complex shapes.
• Classification of viruses is based on morphology, type of nucleic acid, host range, cell specificity, and enzymes
carried within the virion.
• Like other diseases, viral diseases are classified using ICD codes.
6.2 The Viral Life Cycle
• Many viruses target specific hosts or tissues. Some may have more than one host.
• Many viruses follow several stages to infect host cells. These stages include attachment, penetration,
uncoating, biosynthesis, maturation, and release.
• Bacteriophages have a lytic or lysogenic cycle. The lytic cycle leads to the death of the host, whereas the
lysogenic cycle leads to integration of phage into the host genome.
• Bacteriophages inject DNA into the host cell, whereas animal viruses enter by endocytosis or membrane
fusion.
• Animal viruses can undergo latency, similar to lysogeny for a bacteriophage.
• The majority of plant viruses are positive-strand ssRNA and can undergo latency, chronic, or lytic infection,
as observed for animal viruses.
• The growth curve of bacteriophage populations is a one-step multiplication curve and not a sigmoidal curve,
as compared to the bacterial growth curve.
• Bacteriophages transfer genetic information between hosts using either generalized or specialized
transduction.
6.3 Isolation, Culture, and Identification of Viruses
• Viral cultivation requires the presence of some form of host cell (whole organism, embryo, or cell culture).
• Viruses can be isolated from samples by filtration.
• Viral filtrate is a rich source of released virions.
• Bacteriophages are detected by presence of clear plaques on bacterial lawn.
• Animal and plant viruses are detected by cytopathic effects, molecular techniques (PCR, RT-PCR), enzyme
immunoassays, and serological assays (hemagglutination assay, hemagglutination inhibition assay).
6.4 Viroids, Virusoids, and Prions
• Other acellular agents such as viroids, virusoids, and prions also cause diseases. Viroids consist of small,
naked ssRNAs that cause diseases in plants. Virusoids are ssRNAs that require other helper viruses to
establish an infection. Prions are proteinaceous infectious particles that cause transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies.
• Prions are extremely resistant to chemicals, heat, and radiation.
• There are no treatments for prion infection.

Review Questions

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Multiple Choice

1. The component(s) of a virus that is/are extended
from the envelope for attachment is/are the:
a. capsomeres
b. spikes
c. nucleic acid
d. viral whiskers
2. Which of the following does a virus lack? Select all
that apply.
a. ribosomes
b. metabolic processes
c. nucleic acid
d. glycoprotein
3. The envelope of a virus is derived from the host’s
a. nucleic acids
b. membrane structures
c. cytoplasm
d. genome
4. In naming viruses, the family name ends with
________ and genus name ends with _________.
a. −virus; −viridae
b. −viridae; −virus
c. −virion; virus
d. −virus; virion
5. What is another name for a nonenveloped virus?
a. enveloped virus
b. provirus
c. naked virus
d. latent virus
6. Which of the following leads to the destruction of
the host cells?
a. lysogenic cycle
b. lytic cycle
c. prophage
d. temperate phage
7. A virus obtains its envelope during which of the
following phases?
a. attachment
b. penetration
c. assembly
d. release
8. Which of the following components is brought into
a cell by HIV?
a. a DNA-dependent DNA polymerase
b. RNA polymerase
c. ribosome
d. reverse transcriptase

279

9. A positive-strand RNA virus:
a. must first be converted to a mRNA before it can
be translated.
b. can be used directly to translate viral proteins.
c. will be degraded by host enzymes.
d. is not recognized by host ribosomes.
10. What is the name for the transfer of genetic
information from one bacterium to another bacterium by
a phage?
a. transduction
b. penetration
c. excision
d. translation
11. Which of the followings cannot be used to culture
viruses?
a. tissue culture
b. liquid medium only
c. embryo
d. animal host
12. Which of the following tests can be used to detect
the presence of a specific virus?
a. EIA
b. RT-PCR
c. PCR
d. all of the above
13. Which of the following is NOT a cytopathic effect?
a.
b.
c.
d.

transformation
cell fusion
mononucleated cell
inclusion bodies

14. Which of these infectious agents do not have
nucleic acid?
a. viroids
b. viruses
c. bacteria
d. prions
15. Which of the following is true of prions?
a. They can be inactivated by boiling at 100 °C.
b. They contain a capsid.
c. They are a rogue form of protein, PrP.
d. They can be reliably inactivated by an autoclave.

280

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

True/False

16. True or False: Scientists have identified viruses that are able to infect fungal cells.
Fill in the Blank

17. A virus that infects a bacterium is called a/an ___________________.
18. A/an __________ virus possesses characteristics of both a polyhedral and helical virus.
19. A virus containing only nucleic acid and a capsid is called a/an ___________________ virus or
__________________ virus.
20. The ____________ _____________ on the bacteriophage allow for binding to the bacterial cell.
21. An enzyme from HIV that can make a copy of DNA from RNA is called _______________________.
22. For lytic viruses, _________________ is a phase during a viral growth curve when the virus is not detected.
23. Viruses can be diagnosed and observed using a(n) _____________ microscope.
24. Cell abnormalities resulting from a viral infection are called ____________ _____________.
25. Both viroids and virusoids have a(n) _________ genome, but virusoids require a(n) _________ to reproduce.
Short Answer

26. Discuss the geometric differences among helical, polyhedral, and complex viruses.
27. What was the meaning of the word “virus” in the 1880s and why was it used to describe the cause of tobacco
mosaic disease?
28. Briefly explain the difference between the mechanism of entry of a T-even bacteriophage and an animal virus.
29. Discuss the difference between generalized and specialized transduction.
30. Differentiate between lytic and lysogenic cycles.
31. Briefly explain the various methods of culturing viruses.
32. Describe the disease symptoms observed in animals infected with prions.
Critical Thinking

33. Name each labeled part of the illustrated bacteriophage.

34. In terms of evolution, which do you think arises first? The virus or the host? Explain your answer.
35. Do you think it is possible to create a virus in the lab? Imagine that you are a mad scientist. Describe how you
would go about creating a new virus.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

36. Label the five stages of a bacteriophage infection in the figure:

37. Bacteriophages have lytic and lysogenic cycles. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages for the phage.
38. How does reverse transcriptase aid a retrovirus in establishing a chronic infection?
39. Discuss some methods by which plant viruses are transmitted from a diseased plant to a healthy one.
40. Label the components indicated by arrows.

Figure 6.27 (credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

41. What are some characteristics of the viruses that are similar to a computer virus?
42. Does a prion replicate? Explain.

281

282

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 6 | Acellular Pathogens

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

655

Chapter 15

Microbial Mechanisms of
Pathogenicity

Figure 15.1 Although medical professionals rely heavily on signs and symptoms to diagnose disease and prescribe
treatment, many diseases can produce similar signs and symptoms. (credit left: modification of work by U.S. Navy)

Chapter Outline
15.1 Characteristics of Infectious Disease
15.2 How Pathogens Cause Disease
15.3 Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens
15.4 Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic Pathogens

Introduction
Jane woke up one spring morning feeling not quite herself. Her throat felt a bit dry and she was sniffling. She
wondered why she felt so lousy. Was it because of a change in the weather? The pollen count? Was she coming down
with something? Did she catch a bug from her coworker who sneezed on her in the elevator yesterday?
The signs and symptoms we associate with illness can have many different causes. Sometimes they are the direct
result of a pathogenic infection, but in other cases they result from a response by our immune system to a pathogen
or another perceived threat. For example, in response to certain pathogens, the immune system may release pyrogens,
chemicals that cause the body temperature to rise, resulting in a fever. This response creates a less-than-favorable
environment for the pathogen, but it also makes us feel sick.
Medical professionals rely heavily on analysis of signs and symptoms to determine the cause of an ailment and
prescribe treatment. In some cases, signs and symptoms alone are enough to correctly identify the causative agent of
a disease, but since few diseases produce truly unique symptoms, it is often necessary to confirm the identity of the
infectious agent by other direct and indirect diagnostic methods.

656

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

15.1 Characteristics of Infectious Disease
Learning Objectives
• Distinguish between signs and symptoms of disease
• Explain the difference between a communicable disease and a noncommunicable disease
• Compare different types of infectious diseases, including iatrogenic, nosocomial, and zoonotic diseases
• Identify and describe the stages of an acute infectious disease in terms of number of pathogens present and

severity of signs and symptoms
A disease is any condition in which the normal structure or functions of the body are damaged or impaired. Physical
injuries or disabilities are not classified as disease, but there can be several causes for disease, including infection by a
pathogen, genetics (as in many cancers or deficiencies), noninfectious environmental causes, or inappropriate immune
responses. Our focus in this chapter will be on infectious diseases, although when diagnosing infectious diseases, it is
always important to consider possible noninfectious causes.

Signs and Symptoms of Disease
An infection is the successful colonization of a host by a microorganism. Infections can lead to disease, which causes
signs and symptoms resulting in a deviation from the normal structure or functioning of the host. Microorganisms that
can cause disease are known as pathogens.
The signs of disease are objective and measurable, and can be directly observed by a clinician. Vital signs, which are
used to measure the body’s basic functions, include body temperature (normally 37 °C [98.6 °F]), heart rate (normally
60–100 beats per minute), breathing rate (normally 12–18 breaths per minute), and blood pressure (normally between
90/60 and 120/80 mm Hg). Changes in any of the body’s vital signs may be indicative of disease. For example, having
a fever (a body temperature significantly higher than 37 °C or 98.6 °F) is a sign of disease because it can be measured.
In addition to changes in vital signs, other observable conditions may be considered signs of disease. For example,
the presence of antibodies in a patient’s serum (the liquid portion of blood that lacks clotting factors) can be observed
and measured through blood tests and, therefore, can be considered a sign. However, it is important to note that the
presence of antibodies is not always a sign of an active disease. Antibodies can remain in the body long after an
infection has resolved; also, they may develop in response to a pathogen that is in the body but not currently causing
disease.

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Michael, a 10-year-old boy in generally good health, went to a birthday party on Sunday with his family. He ate
many different foods but was the only one in the family to eat the undercooked hot dogs served by the hosts.
Monday morning, he woke up feeling achy and nauseous, and he was running a fever of 38 °C (100.4 °F). His
parents, assuming Michael had caught the flu, made him stay home from school and limited his activities. But
after 4 days, Michael began to experience severe headaches, and his fever spiked to 40 °C (104 °F). Growing
worried, his parents finally decide to take Michael to a nearby clinic.

• What signs and symptoms is Michael experiencing?
• What do these signs and symptoms tell us about the stage of Michael’s disease?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

657

Unlike signs, symptoms of disease are subjective. Symptoms are felt or experienced by the patient, but they cannot be
clinically confirmed or objectively measured. Examples of symptoms include nausea, loss of appetite, and pain. Such
symptoms are important to consider when diagnosing disease, but they are subject to memory bias and are difficult
to measure precisely. Some clinicians attempt to quantify symptoms by asking patients to assign a numerical value
to their symptoms. For example, the Wong-Baker Faces pain-rating scale asks patients to rate their pain on a scale
of 0–10. An alternative method of quantifying pain is measuring skin conductance fluctuations. These fluctuations
reflect sweating due to skin sympathetic nerve activity resulting from the stressor of pain. [1]
A specific group of signs and symptoms characteristic of a particular disease is called a syndrome. Many syndromes
are named using a nomenclature based on signs and symptoms or the location of the disease. Table 15.1 lists some
of the prefixes and suffixes commonly used in naming syndromes.
Nomenclature of Symptoms
Affix

Meaning

Example

cyto-

cell

cytopenia: reduction in the number of blood cells

hepat-

of the liver

hepatitis: inflammation of the liver

-pathy

disease

neuropathy: a disease affecting nerves

-emia

of the blood

bacteremia: presence of bacteria in blood

-itis

inflammation

colitis: inflammation of the colon

-lysis

destruction

hemolysis: destruction of red blood cells

-oma

tumor

lymphoma: cancer of the lymphatic system

-osis

diseased or abnormal condition

leukocytosis: abnormally high number of white blood cells

-derma

of the skin

keratoderma: a thickening of the skin

Table 15.1

Clinicians must rely on signs and on asking questions about symptoms, medical history, and the patient’s recent
activities to identify a particular disease and the potential causative agent. Diagnosis is complicated by the fact that
different microorganisms can cause similar signs and symptoms in a patient. For example, an individual presenting
with symptoms of diarrhea may have been infected by one of a wide variety of pathogenic microorganisms. Bacterial
pathogens associated with diarrheal disease include Vibrio cholerae, Listeria monocytogenes, Campylobacter jejuni,
and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC). Viral pathogens associated with diarrheal disease include norovirus
and rotavirus. Parasitic pathogens associated with diarrhea include Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum.
Likewise, fever is indicative of many types of infection, from the common cold to the deadly Ebola hemorrhagic
fever.
Finally, some diseases may be asymptomatic or subclinical, meaning they do not present any noticeable signs or
symptoms. For example, most individual infected with herpes simplex virus remain asymptomatic and are unaware
that they have been infected.

• Explain the difference between signs and symptoms.

1. F. Savino et al. “Pain Assessment in Children Undergoing Venipuncture: The Wong–Baker Faces Scale Versus Skin Conductance
Fluctuations.” PeerJ 1 (2013):e37; https://peerj.com/articles/37/

658

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Classifications of Disease
The World Health Organization’s (WHO) International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is used in clinical fields to
classify diseases and monitor morbidity (the number of cases of a disease) and mortality (the number of deaths due to
a disease). In this section, we will introduce terminology used by the ICD (and in health-care professions in general)
to describe and categorize various types of disease.
An infectious disease is any disease caused by the direct effect of a pathogen. A pathogen may be cellular (bacteria,
parasites, and fungi) or acellular (viruses, viroids, and prions). Some infectious diseases are also communicable,
meaning they are capable of being spread from person to person through either direct or indirect mechanisms. Some
infectious communicable diseases are also considered contagious diseases, meaning they are easily spread from
person to person. Not all contagious diseases are equally so; the degree to which a disease is contagious usually
depends on how the pathogen is transmitted. For example, measles is a highly contagious viral disease that can be
transmitted when an infected person coughs or sneezes and an uninfected person breathes in droplets containing
the virus. Gonorrhea is not as contagious as measles because transmission of the pathogen (Neisseria gonorrhoeae)
requires close intimate contact (usually sexual) between an infected person and an uninfected person.
Diseases that are contracted as the result of a medical procedure are known as iatrogenic diseases. Iatrogenic diseases
can occur after procedures involving wound treatments, catheterization, or surgery if the wound or surgical site
becomes contaminated. For example, an individual treated for a skin wound might acquire necrotizing fasciitis (an
aggressive, “flesh-eating” disease) if bandages or other dressings became contaminated by Clostridium perfringens
or one of several other bacteria that can cause this condition.
Diseases acquired in hospital settings are known as nosocomial diseases. Several factors contribute to the prevalence
and severity of nosocomial diseases. First, sick patients bring numerous pathogens into hospitals, and some of these
pathogens can be transmitted easily via improperly sterilized medical equipment, bed sheets, call buttons, door
handles, or by clinicians, nurses, or therapists who do not wash their hands before touching a patient. Second, many
hospital patients have weakened immune systems, making them more susceptible to infections. Compounding this,
the prevalence of antibiotics in hospital settings can select for drug-resistant bacteria that can cause very serious
infections that are difficult to treat.
Certain infectious diseases are not transmitted between humans directly but can be transmitted from animals to
humans. Such a disease is called zoonotic disease (or zoonosis). According to WHO, a zoonosis is a disease that
occurs when a pathogen is transferred from a vertebrate animal to a human; however, sometimes the term is defined
more broadly to include diseases transmitted by all animals (including invertebrates). For example, rabies is a viral
zoonotic disease spread from animals to humans through bites and contact with infected saliva. Many other zoonotic
diseases rely on insects or other arthropods for transmission. Examples include yellow fever (transmitted through the
bite of mosquitoes infected with yellow fever virus) and Rocky Mountain spotted fever (transmitted through the bite
of ticks infected with Rickettsia rickettsii).
In contrast to communicable infectious diseases, a noncommunicable infectious disease is not spread from one
person to another. One example is tetanus, caused by Clostridium tetani, a bacterium that produces endospores that
can survive in the soil for many years. This disease is typically only transmitted through contact with a skin wound; it
cannot be passed from an infected person to another person. Similarly, Legionnaires disease is caused by Legionella
pneumophila, a bacterium that lives within amoebae in moist locations like water-cooling towers. An individual may
contract Legionnaires disease via contact with the contaminated water, but once infected, the individual cannot pass
the pathogen to other individuals.
In addition to the wide variety of noncommunicable infectious diseases, noninfectious diseases (those not caused
by pathogens) are an important cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Noninfectious diseases can be caused
by a wide variety factors, including genetics, the environment, or immune system dysfunction, to name a few. For
example, sickle cell anemia is an inherited disease caused by a genetic mutation that can be passed from parent to
offspring (Figure 15.2). Other types of noninfectious diseases are listed in Table 15.2.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

659

Types of Noninfectious Diseases
Type

Definition

Example

Inherited

A genetic disease

Sickle cell anemia

Congenital

Disease that is present at or before birth

Down syndrome

Degenerative

Progressive, irreversible loss of function

Parkinson disease (affecting central nervous
system)

Nutritional
deficiency

Impaired body function due to lack of
nutrients

Scurvy (vitamin C deficiency)

Endocrine

Disease involving malfunction of glands
that release hormones to regulate body
functions

Hypothyroidism – thyroid does not produce
enough thyroid hormone, which is important for
metabolism

Neoplastic

Abnormal growth (benign or malignant)

Some forms of cancer

Idiopathic

Disease for which the cause is unknown

Idiopathic juxtafoveal retinal telangiectasia
(dilated, twisted blood vessels in the retina of the
eye)

Table 15.2

Figure 15.2 Blood smears showing two diseases of the blood. (a) Malaria is an infectious, zoonotic disease caused
by the protozoan pathogen Plasmodium falciparum (shown here) and several other species of the genus
Plasmodium. It is transmitted by mosquitoes to humans. (b) Sickle cell disease is a noninfectious genetic disorder
that results in abnormally shaped red blood cells, which can stick together and obstruct the flow of blood through the
circulatory system. It is not caused by a pathogen, but rather a genetic mutation. (credit a: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Ed Uthman)

660

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Link to Learning
Lists of common infectious diseases can be found at the following Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (https://openstax.org/l/22CDCdis) (CDC),
World Health Organization (https://openstax.org/l/22WHOdis) (WHO), and
International Classification of Diseases (https://openstax.org/l/
22WHOclass) websites.

• Describe how a disease can be infectious but not contagious.
• Explain the difference between iatrogenic disease and nosocomial disease.

Periods of Disease
The five periods of disease (sometimes referred to as stages or phases) include the incubation, prodromal, illness,
decline, and convalescence periods (Figure 15.3). The incubation period occurs in an acute disease after the initial
entry of the pathogen into the host (patient). It is during this time the pathogen begins multiplying in the host.
However, there are insufficient numbers of pathogen particles (cells or viruses) present to cause signs and symptoms
of disease. Incubation periods can vary from a day or two in acute disease to months or years in chronic disease,
depending upon the pathogen. Factors involved in determining the length of the incubation period are diverse, and
can include strength of the pathogen, strength of the host immune defenses, site of infection, type of infection, and
the size infectious dose received. During this incubation period, the patient is unaware that a disease is beginning to
develop.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

661

Figure 15.3 The progression of an infectious disease can be divided into five periods, which are related to the
number of pathogen particles (red) and the severity of signs and symptoms (blue).

The prodromal period occurs after the incubation period. During this phase, the pathogen continues to multiply and
the host begins to experience general signs and symptoms of illness, which typically result from activation of the
immune system, such as fever, pain, soreness, swelling, or inflammation. Usually, such signs and symptoms are too
general to indicate a particular disease. Following the prodromal period is the period of illness, during which the
signs and symptoms of disease are most obvious and severe.
The period of illness is followed by the period of decline, during which the number of pathogen particles begins to
decrease, and the signs and symptoms of illness begin to decline. However, during the decline period, patients may
become susceptible to developing secondary infections because their immune systems have been weakened by the
primary infection. The final period is known as the period of convalescence. During this stage, the patient generally
returns to normal functions, although some diseases may inflict permanent damage that the body cannot fully repair.
Infectious diseases can be contagious during all five of the periods of disease. Which periods of disease are more
likely to associated with transmissibility of an infection depends upon the disease, the pathogen, and the mechanisms
by which the disease develops and progresses. For example, with meningitis (infection of the lining of brain), the
periods of infectivity depend on the type of pathogen causing the infection. Patients with bacterial meningitis are
contagious during the incubation period for up to a week before the onset of the prodromal period, whereas patients
with viral meningitis become contagious when the first signs and symptoms of the prodromal period appear. With
many viral diseases associated with rashes (e.g., chickenpox, measles, rubella, roseola), patients are contagious during
the incubation period up to a week before the rash develops. In contrast, with many respiratory infections (e.g., colds,
influenza, diphtheria, strep throat, and pertussis) the patient becomes contagious with the onset of the prodromal
period. Depending upon the pathogen, the disease, and the individual infected, transmission can still occur during the
periods of decline, convalescence, and even long after signs and symptoms of the disease disappear. For example, an
individual recovering from a diarrheal disease may continue to carry and shed the pathogen in feces for some time,
posing a risk of transmission to others through direct contact or indirect contact (e.g., through contaminated objects
or food).

662

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

• Name some of the factors that can affect the length of the incubation period of a particular disease.

Acute and Chronic Diseases
The duration of the period of illness can vary greatly, depending on the pathogen, effectiveness of the immune
response in the host, and any medical treatment received. For an acute disease, pathologic changes occur over a
relatively short time (e.g., hours, days, or a few weeks) and involve a rapid onset of disease conditions. For example,
influenza (caused by Influenzavirus) is considered an acute disease because the incubation period is approximately
1–2 days. Infected individuals can spread influenza to others for approximately 5 days after becoming ill. After
approximately 1 week, individuals enter the period of decline.
For a chronic disease, pathologic changes can occur over longer time spans (e.g., months, years, or a lifetime). For
example, chronic gastritis (inflammation of the lining of the stomach) is caused by the gram-negative bacterium
Helicobacter pylori. H. pylori is able to colonize the stomach and persist in its highly acidic environment by
producing the enzyme urease, which modifies the local acidity, allowing the bacteria to survive indefinitely.[2]
Consequently, H. pylori infections can recur indefinitely unless the infection is cleared using antibiotics.[3] Hepatitis
B virus can cause a chronic infection in some patients who do not eliminate the virus after the acute illness. A chronic
infection with hepatitis B virus is characterized by the continued production of infectious virus for 6 months or longer
after the acute infection, as measured by the presence of viral antigen in blood samples.
In latent diseases, as opposed to chronic infections, the causal pathogen goes dormant for extended periods of
time with no active replication. Examples of diseases that go into a latent state after the acute infection include
herpes (herpes simplex viruses [HSV-1 and HSV-2]), chickenpox (varicella-zoster virus [VZV]), and mononucleosis
(Epstein-Barr virus [EBV]). HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV evade the host immune system by residing in a latent form
within cells of the nervous system for long periods of time, but they can reactivate to become active infections during
times of stress and immunosuppression. For example, an initial infection by VZV may result in a case of childhood
chickenpox, followed by a long period of latency. The virus may reactivate decades later, causing episodes of shingles
in adulthood. EBV goes into latency in B cells of the immune system and possibly epithelial cells; it can reactivate
years later to produce B-cell lymphoma.

• Explain the difference between latent disease and chronic disease.

2. J.G. Kusters et al. Pathogenesis of Helicobacter pylori Infection. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 19 no. 3 (2006):449–490.
3. N.R. Salama et al. “Life in the Human Stomach: Persistence Strategies of the Bacterial Pathogen Helicobacter pylori.” Nature Reviews
Microbiology 11 (2013):385–399.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

663

15.2 How Pathogens Cause Disease
Learning Objectives
• Summarize Koch’s postulates and molecular Koch’s postulates, respectively, and explain their significance and

limitations
• Explain the concept of pathogenicity (virulence) in terms of infectious and lethal dose
• Distinguish between primary and opportunistic pathogens and identify specific examples of each
• Summarize the stages of pathogenesis
• Explain the roles of portals of entry and exit in the transmission of disease and identify specific examples of

these portals
For most infectious diseases, the ability to accurately identify the causative pathogen is a critical step in finding or
prescribing effective treatments. Today’s physicians, patients, and researchers owe a sizable debt to the physician
Robert Koch (1843–1910), who devised a systematic approach for confirming causative relationships between
diseases and specific pathogens.

Koch’s Postulates
In 1884, Koch published four postulates (Table 15.3) that summarized his method for determining whether a
particular microorganism was the cause of a particular disease. Each of Koch’s postulates represents a criterion that
must be met before a disease can be positively linked with a pathogen. In order to determine whether the criteria are
met, tests are performed on laboratory animals and cultures from healthy and diseased animals are compared (Figure
15.4).
Koch’s Postulates
(1) The suspected pathogen must be found in every case of disease and not be found in healthy individuals.
(2) The suspected pathogen can be isolated and grown in pure culture.
(3) A healthy test subject infected with the suspected pathogen must develop the same signs and symptoms of
disease as seen in postulate 1.
(4) The pathogen must be re-isolated from the new host and must be identical to the pathogen from postulate 2.

Table 15.3

664

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Figure 15.4 The steps for confirming that a pathogen is the cause of a particular disease using Koch’s postulates.

In many ways, Koch’s postulates are still central to our current understanding of the causes of disease. However,
advances in microbiology have revealed some important limitations in Koch’s criteria. Koch made several
assumptions that we now know are untrue in many cases. The first relates to postulate 1, which assumes that
pathogens are only found in diseased, not healthy, individuals. This is not true for many pathogens. For example, H.
pylori, described earlier in this chapter as a pathogen causing chronic gastritis, is also part of the normal microbiota of
the stomach in many healthy humans who never develop gastritis. It is estimated that upwards of 50% of the human
population acquires H. pylori early in life, with most maintaining it as part of the normal microbiota for the rest of
their life without ever developing disease.
Koch’s second faulty assumption was that all healthy test subjects are equally susceptible to disease. We now know
that individuals are not equally susceptible to disease. Individuals are unique in terms of their microbiota and the
state of their immune system at any given time. The makeup of the resident microbiota can influence an individual’s
susceptibility to an infection. Members of the normal microbiota play an important role in immunity by inhibiting the
growth of transient pathogens. In some cases, the microbiota may prevent a pathogen from establishing an infection;
in others, it may not prevent an infection altogether but may influence the severity or type of signs and symptoms.
As a result, two individuals with the same disease may not always present with the same signs and symptoms. In
addition, some individuals have stronger immune systems than others. Individuals with immune systems weakened
by age or an unrelated illness are much more susceptible to certain infections than individuals with strong immune
systems.
Koch also assumed that all pathogens are microorganisms that can be grown in pure culture (postulate 2) and that
animals could serve as reliable models for human disease. However, we now know that not all pathogens can be
grown in pure culture, and many human diseases cannot be reliably replicated in animal hosts. Viruses and certain

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

665

bacteria, including Rickettsia and Chlamydia, are obligate intracellular pathogens that can grow only when inside a
host cell. If a microbe cannot be cultured, a researcher cannot move past postulate 2. Likewise, without a suitable
nonhuman host, a researcher cannot evaluate postulate 2 without deliberately infecting humans, which presents
obvious ethical concerns. AIDS is an example of such a disease because the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
only causes disease in humans.

• Briefly summarize the limitations of Koch’s postulates.

Molecular Koch’s Postulates
In 1988, Stanley Falkow (1934–) proposed a revised form of Koch’s postulates known as molecular Koch’s
postulates. These are listed in the left column of Table 15.4. The premise for molecular Koch’s postulates is not in
the ability to isolate a particular pathogen but rather to identify a gene that may cause the organism to be pathogenic.
Falkow’s modifications to Koch’s original postulates explain not only infections caused by intracellular pathogens but
also the existence of pathogenic strains of organisms that are usually nonpathogenic. For example, the predominant
form of the bacterium Escherichia coli is a member of the normal microbiota of the human intestine and is generally
considered harmless. However, there are pathogenic strains of E. coli such as enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) and
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (O157:H7) (EHEC). We now know ETEC and EHEC exist because of the acquisition of
new genes by the once-harmless E. coli, which, in the form of these pathogenic strains, is now capable of producing
toxins and causing illness. The pathogenic forms resulted from minor genetic changes. The right-side column of
Table 15.4 illustrates how molecular Koch’s postulates can be applied to identify EHEC as a pathogenic bacterium.
Molecular Koch’s Postulates Applied to EHEC
Molecular Koch’s Postulates

Application to EHEC

(1) The phenotype (sign or symptom of
disease) should be associated only with
pathogenic strains of a species.

EHEC causes intestinal inflammation and diarrhea, whereas
nonpathogenic strains of E. coli do not.

(2) Inactivation of the suspected gene(s)
associated with pathogenicity should result
in a measurable loss of pathogenicity.

One of the genes in EHEC encodes for Shiga toxin, a bacterial
toxin (poison) that inhibits protein synthesis. Inactivating this
gene reduces the bacteria’s ability to cause disease.

(3) Reversion of the inactive gene should
restore the disease phenotype.

By adding the gene that encodes the toxin back into the genome
(e.g., with a phage or plasmid), EHEC’s ability to cause disease
is restored.

Table 15.4

As with Koch’s original postulates, the molecular Koch’s postulates have limitations. For example, genetic
manipulation of some pathogens is not possible using current methods of molecular genetics. In a similar vein, some
diseases do not have suitable animal models, which limits the utility of both the original and molecular postulates.

• Explain the differences between Koch’s original postulates and the molecular Koch’s postulates.

666

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Pathogenicity and Virulence
The ability of a microbial agent to cause disease is called pathogenicity, and the degree to which an organism is
pathogenic is called virulence. Virulence is a continuum. On one end of the spectrum are organisms that are avirulent
(not harmful) and on the other are organisms that are highly virulent. Highly virulent pathogens will almost always
lead to a disease state when introduced to the body, and some may even cause multi-organ and body system failure in
healthy individuals. Less virulent pathogens may cause an initial infection, but may not always cause severe illness.
Pathogens with low virulence would more likely result in mild signs and symptoms of disease, such as low-grade
fever, headache, or muscle aches. Some individuals might even be asymptomatic.
An example of a highly virulent microorganism is Bacillus anthracis, the pathogen responsible for anthrax. B.
anthracis can produce different forms of disease, depending on the route of transmission (e.g., cutaneous injection,
inhalation, ingestion). The most serious form of anthrax is inhalation anthrax. After B. anthracis spores are inhaled,
they germinate. An active infection develops and the bacteria release potent toxins that cause edema (fluid buildup in
tissues), hypoxia (a condition preventing oxygen from reaching tissues), and necrosis (cell death and inflammation).
Signs and symptoms of inhalation anthrax include high fever, difficulty breathing, vomiting and coughing up
blood, and severe chest pains suggestive of a heart attack. With inhalation anthrax, the toxins and bacteria enter
the bloodstream, which can lead to multi-organ failure and death of the patient. If a gene (or genes) involved in
pathogenesis is inactivated, the bacteria become less virulent or nonpathogenic.
Virulence of a pathogen can be quantified using controlled experiments with laboratory animals. Two important
indicators of virulence are the median infectious dose (ID50) and the median lethal dose (LD50), both of which
are typically determined experimentally using animal models. The ID50 is the number of pathogen cells or virions
required to cause active infection in 50% of inoculated animals. The LD50 is the number of pathogenic cells, virions,
or amount of toxin required to kill 50% of infected animals. To calculate these values, each group of animals is
inoculated with one of a range of known numbers of pathogen cells or virions. In graphs like the one shown in
Figure 15.5, the percentage of animals that have been infected (for ID50) or killed (for LD50) is plotted against
the concentration of pathogen inoculated. Figure 15.5 represents data graphed from a hypothetical experiment
measuring the LD50 of a pathogen. Interpretation of the data from this graph indicates that the LD50 of the pathogen
for the test animals is 104 pathogen cells or virions (depending upon the pathogen studied).

Figure 15.5 A graph like this is used to determine LD50 by plotting pathogen concentration against the percent of
infected test animals that have died. In this example, the LD50 = 104 pathogenic particles.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

667

Table 15.5 lists selected foodborne pathogens and their ID50 values in humans (as determined from epidemiologic
data and studies on human volunteers). Keep in mind that these are median values. The actual infective dose for an
individual can vary widely, depending on factors such as route of entry; the age, health, and immune status of the
host; and environmental and pathogen-specific factors such as susceptibility to the acidic pH of the stomach. It is also
important to note that a pathogen’s infective dose does not necessarily correlate with disease severity. For example,
just a single cell of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium can result in an active infection. The resultant disease,
Salmonella gastroenteritis or salmonellosis, can cause nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, but has a mortality rate of less
than 1% in healthy adults. In contrast, S. enterica serotype Typhi has a much higher ID50, typically requiring as many
as 1,000 cells to produce infection. However, this serotype causes typhoid fever, a much more systemic and severe
disease that has a mortality rate as high as 10% in untreated individuals.
ID50 for Selected Foodborne Diseases[4]
Pathogen

ID50
Viruses

Hepatitis A virus

10–100

Norovirus

1–10

Rotavirus

10–100
Bacteria

Escherichia coli, enterohemorrhagic (EHEC, serotype O157)

10–100

E. coli, enteroinvasive (EIEC)

200–5,000

E. coli, enteropathogenic (EPEC)

10,000,000–10,000,000,000

E. coli, enterotoxigenic (ETEC)

10,000,000–10,000,000,000

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi

<1,000

S. enterica serovar Typhimurium

≥1

Shigella dysenteriae

10–200

Vibrio cholerae (serotypes O139, O1)

1,000,000

V. parahemolyticus

100,000,000
Protozoa

Giardia lamblia
Cryptosporidium parvum

1
10–100

Table 15.5

• What is the difference between a pathogen’s infective dose and lethal dose?
• Which is more closely related to the severity of a disease?

4. Food and Drug Administration. “Bad Bug Book, Foodborne Pathogenic Microorganisms and Natural Toxins.” 2nd ed. Silver Spring,
MD: US Food and Drug Administration; 2012.

668

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Primary Pathogens versus Opportunistic Pathogens
Pathogens can be classified as either primary pathogens or opportunistic pathogens. A primary pathogen can cause
disease in a host regardless of the host’s resident microbiota or immune system. An opportunistic pathogen, by
contrast, can only cause disease in situations that compromise the host’s defenses, such as the body’s protective
barriers, immune system, or normal microbiota. Individuals susceptible to opportunistic infections include the very
young, the elderly, women who are pregnant, patients undergoing chemotherapy, people with immunodeficiencies
(such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]), patients who are recovering from surgery, and those who
have had a breach of protective barriers (such as a severe wound or burn).
An example of a primary pathogen is enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), which produces a virulence factor known
as Shiga toxin. This toxin inhibits protein synthesis, leading to severe and bloody diarrhea, inflammation, and
renal failure, even in patients with healthy immune systems. Staphylococcus epidermidis, on the other hand, is an
opportunistic pathogen that is among the most frequent causes of nosocomial disease.[5] S. epidermidis is a member of
the normal microbiota of the skin, where it is generally avirulent. However, in hospitals, it can also grow in biofilms
that form on catheters, implants, or other devices that are inserted into the body during surgical procedures. Once
inside the body, S. epidermidis can cause serious infections such as endocarditis, and it produces virulence factors that
promote the persistence of such infections.
Other members of the normal microbiota can also cause opportunistic infections under certain conditions. This often
occurs when microbes that reside harmlessly in one body location end up in a different body system, where they cause
disease. For example, E. coli normally found in the large intestine can cause a urinary tract infection if it enters the
bladder. This is the leading cause of urinary tract infections among women.
Members of the normal microbiota may also cause disease when a shift in the environment of the body leads to
overgrowth of a particular microorganism. For example, the yeast Candida is part of the normal microbiota of the
skin, mouth, intestine, and vagina, but its population is kept in check by other organisms of the microbiota. If an
individual is taking antibacterial medications, however, bacteria that would normally inhibit the growth of Candida
can be killed off, leading to a sudden growth in the population of Candida, which is not affected by antibacterial
medications because it is a fungus. An overgrowth of Candida can manifest as oral thrush (growth on mouth, throat,
and tongue), a vaginal yeast infection, or cutaneous candidiasis. Other scenarios can also provide opportunities for
Candida infections. Untreated diabetes can result in a high concentration of glucose in the saliva, which provides
an optimal environment for the growth of Candida, resulting in thrush. Immunodeficiencies such as those seen in
patients with HIV, AIDS, and cancer also lead to higher incidence of thrush. Vaginal yeast infections can result from
decreases in estrogen levels during the menstruation or menopause. The amount of glycogen available to lactobacilli
in the vagina is controlled by levels of estrogen; when estrogen levels are low, lactobacilli produce less lactic acid.
The resultant increase in vaginal pH allows overgrowth of Candida in the vagina.

• Explain the difference between a primary pathogen and an opportunistic pathogen.
• Describe some conditions under which an opportunistic infection can occur.

Stages of Pathogenesis
To cause disease, a pathogen must successfully achieve four steps or stages of pathogenesis: exposure (contact),
adhesion (colonization), invasion, and infection. The pathogen must be able to gain entry to the host, travel to the
location where it can establish an infection, evade or overcome the host’s immune response, and cause damage (i.e.,
disease) to the host. In many cases, the cycle is completed when the pathogen exits the host and is transmitted to a
new host.
5. M. Otto. “Staphylococcus epidermidis--The ‘Accidental’ Pathogen.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 7 no. 8 (2009):555–567.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

669

Exposure
An encounter with a potential pathogen is known as exposure or contact. The food we eat and the objects we handle
are all ways that we can come into contact with potential pathogens. Yet, not all contacts result in infection and
disease. For a pathogen to cause disease, it needs to be able to gain access into host tissue. An anatomic site through
which pathogens can pass into host tissue is called a portal of entry. These are locations where the host cells are in
direct contact with the external environment. Major portals of entry are identified in Figure 15.6 and include the
skin, mucous membranes, and parenteral routes.

Figure 15.6 Shown are different portals of entry where pathogens can gain access into the body. With the exception
of the placenta, many of these locations are directly exposed to the external environment.

Mucosal surfaces are the most important portals of entry for microbes; these include the mucous membranes of the
respiratory tract, the gastrointestinal tract, and the genitourinary tract. Although most mucosal surfaces are in the
interior of the body, some are contiguous with the external skin at various body openings, including the eyes, nose,
mouth, urethra, and anus.
Most pathogens are suited to a particular portal of entry. A pathogen’s portal specificity is determined by the
organism’s environmental adaptions and by the enzymes and toxins they secrete. The respiratory and gastrointestinal
tracts are particularly vulnerable portals of entry because particles that include microorganisms are constantly inhaled
or ingested, respectively.
Pathogens can also enter through a breach in the protective barriers of the skin and mucous membranes. Pathogens
that enter the body in this way are said to enter by the parenteral route. For example, the skin is a good natural barrier

670

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

to pathogens, but breaks in the skin (e.g., wounds, insect bites, animal bites, needle pricks) can provide a parenteral
portal of entry for microorganisms.
In pregnant women, the placenta normally prevents microorganisms from passing from the mother to the fetus.
However, a few pathogens are capable of crossing the blood-placental barrier. The gram-positive bacterium Listeria
monocytogenes, which causes the foodborne disease listeriosis, is one example that poses a serious risk to the fetus
and can sometimes lead to spontaneous abortion. Other pathogens that can pass the placental barrier to infect the fetus
are known collectively by the acronym TORCH (Table 15.6).
Transmission of infectious diseases from mother to baby is also a concern at the time of birth when the baby passes
through the birth canal. Babies whose mothers have active chlamydia or gonorrhea infections may be exposed to
the causative pathogens in the vagina, which can result in eye infections that lead to blindness. To prevent this, it is
standard practice to administer antibiotic drops to infants’ eyes shortly after birth.
Pathogens Capable of Crossing the Placental Barrier (TORCH Infections)
Disease

Pathogen

T

Toxoplasmosis

Toxoplasma gondii (protozoan)

O[6]

Syphilis
Chickenpox
Hepatitis B
HIV
Fifth disease (erythema infectiosum)

Treponema pallidum (bacterium)
Varicella-zoster virus (human herpesvirus 3)
Hepatitis B virus (hepadnavirus)
Retrovirus
Parvovirus B19

R

Rubella (German measles)

Togavirus

C

Cytomegalovirus

Human herpesvirus 5

H

Herpes

Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) 1 and 2

Table 15.6

Clinical Focus
Part 2
At the clinic, a physician takes down Michael’s medical history and asks about his activities and diet over the
past week. Upon learning that Michael became sick the day after the party, the physician orders a blood test to
check for pathogens associated with foodborne diseases. After tests confirm that presence of a gram-positive
rod in Michael’s blood, he is given an injection of a broad-spectrum antibiotic and sent to a nearby hospital,
where he is admitted as a patient. There he is to receive additional intravenous antibiotic therapy and fluids.

• Is this bacterium in Michael’s blood part of normal microbiota?
• What portal of entry did the bacteria use to cause this infection?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Adhesion
Following the initial exposure, the pathogen adheres at the portal of entry. The term adhesion refers to the capability
of pathogenic microbes to attach to the cells of the body using adhesion factors, and different pathogens use various
mechanisms to adhere to the cells of host tissues.

6. The O in TORCH stands for “other.”

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

671

Molecules (either proteins or carbohydrates) called adhesins are found on the surface of certain pathogens and bind to
specific receptors (glycoproteins) on host cells. Adhesins are present on the fimbriae and flagella of bacteria, the cilia
of protozoa, and the capsids or membranes of viruses. Protozoans can also use hooks and barbs for adhesion; spike
proteins on viruses also enhance viral adhesion. The production of glycocalyces (slime layers and capsules) (Figure
15.7), with their high sugar and protein content, can also allow certain bacterial pathogens to attach to cells.
Biofilm growth can also act as an adhesion factor. A biofilm is a community of bacteria that produce a glycocalyx,
known as extrapolymeric substance (EPS), that allows the biofilm to attach to a surface. Persistent Pseudomonas
aeruginosa infections are common in patients suffering from cystic fibrosis, burn wounds, and middle-ear infections
(otitis media) because P. aeruginosa produces a biofilm. The EPS allows the bacteria to adhere to the host cells and
makes it harder for the host to physically remove the pathogen. The EPS not only allows for attachment but provides
protection against the immune system and antibiotic treatments, preventing antibiotics from reaching the bacterial
cells within the biofilm. In addition, not all bacteria in a biofilm are rapidly growing; some are in stationary phase.
Since antibiotics are most effective against rapidly growing bacteria, portions of bacteria in a biofilm are protected
against antibiotics.[7]

Figure 15.7 Glycocalyx produced by bacteria in a biofilm allows the cells to adhere to host tissues and to medical
devices such as the catheter surface shown here. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Invasion
Once adhesion is successful, invasion can proceed. Invasion involves the dissemination of a pathogen throughout
local tissues or the body. Pathogens may produce exoenzymes or toxins, which serve as virulence factors that allow
them to colonize and damage host tissues as they spread deeper into the body. Pathogens may also produce virulence
factors that protect them against immune system defenses. A pathogen’s specific virulence factors determine the
degree of tissue damage that occurs. Figure 15.8 shows the invasion of H. pylori into the tissues of the stomach,
causing damage as it progresses.

7. D. Davies. “Understanding Biofilm Resistance to Antibacterial Agents.” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2 (2003):114–122.

672

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Figure 15.8 H. pylori is able to invade the lining of the stomach by producing virulence factors that enable it pass
through the mucin layer covering epithelial cells. (credit: modification of work by Zina Deretsky, National Science
Foundation)

Intracellular pathogens achieve invasion by entering the host’s cells and reproducing. Some are obligate intracellular
pathogens (meaning they can only reproduce inside of host cells) and others are facultative intracellular pathogens
(meaning they can reproduce either inside or outside of host cells). By entering the host cells, intracellular pathogens
are able to evade some mechanisms of the immune system while also exploiting the nutrients in the host cell.
Entry to a cell can occur by endocytosis. For most kinds of host cells, pathogens use one of two different mechanisms
for endocytosis and entry. One mechanism relies on effector proteins secreted by the pathogen; these effector proteins
trigger entry into the host cell. This is the method that Salmonella and Shigella use when invading intestinal epithelial
cells. When these pathogens come in contact with epithelial cells in the intestine, they secrete effector molecules
that cause protrusions of membrane ruffles that bring the bacterial cell in. This process is called membrane ruffling.
The second mechanism relies on surface proteins expressed on the pathogen that bind to receptors on the host cell,
resulting in entry. For example, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis produces a surface protein known as invasin that binds
to beta-1 integrins expressed on the surface of host cells.
Some host cells, such as white blood cells and other phagocytes of the immune system, actively endocytose pathogens
in a process called phagocytosis. Although phagocytosis allows the pathogen to gain entry to the host cell, in
most cases, the host cell kills and degrades the pathogen by using digestive enzymes. Normally, when a pathogen
is ingested by a phagocyte, it is enclosed within a phagosome in the cytoplasm; the phagosome fuses with a
lysosome to form a phagolysosome, where digestive enzymes kill the pathogen (see Pathogen Recognition and
Phagocytosis). However, some intracellular pathogens have the ability to survive and multiply within phagocytes.
Examples include Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella; these bacteria produce proteins that lyse the phagosome
before it fuses with the lysosome, allowing the bacteria to escape into the phagocyte’s cytoplasm where they can
multiply. Bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Legionella pneumophila, and Salmonella species use a
slightly different mechanism to evade being digested by the phagocyte. These bacteria prevent the fusion of the
phagosome with the lysosome, thus remaining alive and dividing within the phagosome.

Infection
Following invasion, successful multiplication of the pathogen leads to infection. Infections can be described as local,
focal, or systemic, depending on the extent of the infection. A local infection is confined to a small area of the body,
typically near the portal of entry. For example, a hair follicle infected by Staphylococcus aureus infection may result
in a boil around the site of infection, but the bacterium is largely contained to this small location. Other examples of

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

673

local infections that involve more extensive tissue involvement include urinary tract infections confined to the bladder
or pneumonia confined to the lungs.
In a focal infection, a localized pathogen, or the toxins it produces, can spread to a secondary location. For example,
a dental hygienist nicking the gum with a sharp tool can lead to a local infection in the gum by Streptococcus bacteria
of the normal oral microbiota. These Streptococcus spp. may then gain access to the bloodstream and make their way
to other locations in the body, resulting in a secondary infection.
When an infection becomes disseminated throughout the body, we call it a systemic infection. For example, infection
by the varicella-zoster virus typically gains entry through a mucous membrane of the upper respiratory system. It then
spreads throughout the body, resulting in the classic red skin lesions associated with chickenpox. Since these lesions
are not sites of initial infection, they are signs of a systemic infection.
Sometimes a primary infection, the initial infection caused by one pathogen, can lead to a secondary infection
by another pathogen. For example, the immune system of a patient with a primary infection by HIV becomes
compromised, making the patient more susceptible to secondary diseases like oral thrush and others caused by
opportunistic pathogens. Similarly, a primary infection by Influenzavirus damages and decreases the defense
mechanisms of the lungs, making patients more susceptible to a secondary pneumonia by a bacterial pathogen like
Haemophilus influenzae or Streptococcus pneumoniae. Some secondary infections can even develop as a result of
treatment for a primary infection. Antibiotic therapy targeting the primary pathogen can cause collateral damage to
the normal microbiota, creating an opening for opportunistic pathogens (see Case in Point: A Secondary Yeast
Infection).

Case in Point
A Secondary Yeast Infection
Anita, a 36-year-old mother of three, goes to an urgent care center complaining of pelvic pressure, frequent
and painful urination, abdominal cramps, and occasional blood-tinged urine. Suspecting a urinary tract
infection (UTI), the physician requests a urine sample and sends it to the lab for a urinalysis. Since it will
take approximately 24 hours to get the results of the culturing, the physician immediately starts Anita on the
antibiotic ciprofloxacin. The next day, the microbiology lab confirms the presence of E. coli in Anita’s urine,
which is consistent with the presumptive diagnosis. However, the antimicrobial susceptibility test indicates that
ciprofloxacin would not effectively treat Anita’s UTI, so the physician prescribes a different antibiotic.
After taking her antibiotics for 1 week, Anita returns to the clinic complaining that the prescription is not working.
Although the painful urination has subsided, she is now experiencing vaginal itching, burning, and discharge.
After a brief examination, the physician explains to Anita that the antibiotics were likely successful in killing the
E. coli responsible for her UTI; however, in the process, they also wiped out many of the “good” bacteria in
Anita’s normal microbiota. The new symptoms that Anita has reported are consistent with a secondary yeast
infection by Candida albicans, an opportunistic fungus that normally resides in the vagina but is inhibited by
the bacteria that normally reside in the same environment.
To confirm this diagnosis, a microscope slide of a direct vaginal smear is prepared from the discharge to
check for the presence of yeast. A sample of the discharge accompanies this slide to the microbiology lab to
determine if there has been an increase in the population of yeast causing vaginitis. After the microbiology lab
confirms the diagnosis, the physician prescribes an antifungal drug for Anita to use to eliminate her secondary
yeast infection.

• Why was Candida not killed by the antibiotics prescribed for the UTI?

674

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

• List three conditions that could lead to a secondary infection.

Transmission of Disease
For a pathogen to persist, it must put itself in a position to be transmitted to a new host, leaving the infected host
through a portal of exit (Figure 15.9). As with portals of entry, many pathogens are adapted to use a particular portal
of exit. Similar to portals of entry, the most common portals of exit include the skin and the respiratory, urogenital,
and gastrointestinal tracts. Coughing and sneezing can expel pathogens from the respiratory tract. A single sneeze can
send thousands of virus particles into the air. Secretions and excretions can transport pathogens out of other portals of
exit. Feces, urine, semen, vaginal secretions, tears, sweat, and shed skin cells can all serve as vehicles for a pathogen
to leave the body. Pathogens that rely on insect vectors for transmission exit the body in the blood extracted by a
biting insect. Similarly, some pathogens exit the body in blood extracted by needles.

Figure 15.9 Pathogens leave the body of an infected host through various portals of exit to infect new hosts.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

675

15.3 Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens
Learning Objectives
• Explain how virulence factors contribute to signs and symptoms of infectious disease
• Differentiate between endotoxins and exotoxins
• Describe and differentiate between various types of exotoxins
• Describe the mechanisms viruses use for adhesion and antigenic variation

In the previous section, we explained that some pathogens are more virulent than others. This is due to the unique
virulence factors produced by individual pathogens, which determine the extent and severity of disease they may
cause. A pathogen’s virulence factors are encoded by genes that can be identified using molecular Koch’s postulates.
When genes encoding virulence factors are inactivated, virulence in the pathogen is diminished. In this section,
we examine various types and specific examples of virulence factors and how they contribute to each step of
pathogenesis.

Virulence Factors for Adhesion
As discussed in the previous section, the first two steps in pathogenesis are exposure and adhesion. Recall that an
adhesin is a protein or glycoprotein found on the surface of a pathogen that attaches to receptors on the host cell.
Adhesins are found on bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoan pathogens. One example of a bacterial adhesin is type
1 fimbrial adhesin, a molecule found on the tips of fimbriae of enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC). Recall that fimbriae
are hairlike protein bristles on the cell surface. Type 1 fimbrial adhesin allows the fimbriae of ETEC cells to attach to
the mannose glycans expressed on intestinal epithelial cells. Table 15.7 lists common adhesins found in some of the
pathogens we have discussed or will be seeing later in this chapter.
Some Bacterial Adhesins and Their Host Attachment Sites
Pathogen

Disease

Adhesin

Attachment Site

Streptococcus pyogenes

Strep throat

Protein F

Respiratory epithelial
cells

Streptococcus mutans

Dental caries

Adhesin P1

Teeth

Neisseria gonorrhoeae

Gonorrhea

Type IV pili

Urethral epithelial cells

Enterotoxigenic E. coli
(ETEC)

Traveler’s
diarrhea

Type 1 fimbriae

Intestinal epithelial cells

Vibrio cholerae

Cholera

N-methylphenylalanine
pili

Intestinal epithelial cells

Table 15.7

Clinical Focus
Part 3
The presence of bacteria in Michael’s blood is a sign of infection, since blood is normally sterile. There is no
indication that the bacteria entered the blood through an injury. Instead, it appears the portal of entry was the
gastrointestinal route. Based on Michael’s symptoms, the results of his blood test, and the fact that Michael

676

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

was the only one in the family to partake of the hot dogs, the physician suspects that Michael is suffering from
a case of listeriosis.
Listeria monocytogenes, the facultative intracellular pathogen that causes listeriosis, is a common contaminant
in ready-to-eat foods such as lunch meats and dairy products. Once ingested, these bacteria invade intestinal
epithelial cells and translocate to the liver, where they grow inside hepatic cells. Listeriosis is fatal in about one
in five normal healthy people, and mortality rates are slightly higher in patients with pre-existing conditions that
weaken the immune response. A cluster of virulence genes encoded on a pathogenicity island is responsible
for the pathogenicity of L. monocytogenes. These genes are regulated by a transcriptional factor known as
peptide chain release factor 1 (PrfA). One of the genes regulated by PrfA is hyl, which encodes a toxin known
as listeriolysin O (LLO), which allows the bacterium to escape vacuoles upon entry into a host cell. A second
gene regulated by PrfA is actA, which encodes for a surface protein known as actin assembly-inducing protein
(ActA). ActA is expressed on the surface of Listeria and polymerizes host actin. This enables the bacterium
to produce actin tails, move around the cell’s cytoplasm, and spread from cell to cell without exiting into the
extracellular compartment.
Michael’s condition has begun to worsen. He is now experiencing a stiff neck and hemiparesis (weakness of
one side of the body). Concerned that the infection is spreading, the physician decides to conduct additional
tests to determine what is causing these new symptoms.

• What kind of pathogen causes listeriosis, and what virulence factors contribute to the signs and
symptoms Michael is experiencing?

• Is it likely that the infection will spread from Michael’s blood? If so, how might this explain his new
symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Bacterial Exoenzymes and Toxins as Virulence Factors
After exposure and adhesion, the next step in pathogenesis is invasion, which can involve enzymes and toxins. Many
pathogens achieve invasion by entering the bloodstream, an effective means of dissemination because blood vessels
pass close to every cell in the body. The downside of this mechanism of dispersal is that the blood also includes
numerous elements of the immune system. Various terms ending in –emia are used to describe the presence of
pathogens in the bloodstream. The presence of bacteria in blood is called bacteremia. Bacteremia involving pyogens
(pus-forming bacteria) is called pyemia. When viruses are found in the blood, it is called viremia. The term toxemia
describes the condition when toxins are found in the blood. If bacteria are both present and multiplying in the blood,
this condition is called septicemia.
Patients with septicemia are described as septic, which can lead to shock, a life-threatening decrease in blood pressure
(systolic pressure <90 mm Hg) that prevents cells and organs from receiving enough oxygen and nutrients. Some
bacteria can cause shock through the release of toxins (virulence factors that can cause tissue damage) and lead to
low blood pressure. Gram-negative bacteria are engulfed by immune system phagocytes, which then release tumor
necrosis factor, a molecule involved in inflammation and fever. Tumor necrosis factor binds to blood capillaries to
increase their permeability, allowing fluids to pass out of blood vessels and into tissues, causing swelling, or edema
(Figure 15.10). With high concentrations of tumor necrosis factor, the inflammatory reaction is severe and enough
fluid is lost from the circulatory system that blood pressure decreases to dangerously low levels. This can have dire
consequences because the heart, lungs, and kidneys rely on normal blood pressure for proper function; thus, multiorgan failure, shock, and death can occur.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

677

Figure 15.10 This patient has edema in the tissue of the right hand. Such swelling can occur when bacteria cause
the release of pro-inflammatory molecules from immune cells and these molecules cause an increased permeability
of blood vessels, allowing fluid to escape the bloodstream and enter tissue.

Exoenzymes
Some pathogens produce extracellular enzymes, or exoenzymes, that enable them to invade host cells and deeper
tissues. Exoenzymes have a wide variety of targets. Some general classes of exoenzymes and associated pathogens
are listed in Table 15.8. Each of these exoenzymes functions in the context of a particular tissue structure to facilitate
invasion or support its own growth and defend against the immune system. For example, hyaluronidase S, an
enzyme produced by pathogens like Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Clostridium perfringens,
degrades the glycoside hylauronan (hyaluronic acid), which acts as an intercellular cement between adjacent cells in
connective tissue (Figure 15.11). This allows the pathogen to pass through the tissue layers at the portal of entry
and disseminate elsewhere in the body (Figure 15.11).
Some Classes of Exoenzymes and Their Targets
Class

Example

Glycohydrolases

Hyaluronidase S in
Staphylococcus
aureus

Degrades hyaluronic acid that cements cells together to promote
spreading through tissues

Nucleases

DNAse produced
by S. aureus

Degrades DNA released by dying cells (bacteria and host cells) that
can trap the bacteria, thus promoting spread

Phospholipases

Phospholipase C
of Bacillus
anthracis

Degrades phospholipid bilayer of host cells, causing cellular lysis,
and degrade membrane of phagosomes to enable escape into the
cytoplasm

Proteases

Collagenase in
Clostridium
perfringens

Degrades collagen in connective tissue to promote spread

Table 15.8

Function

678

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Figure 15.11 (a) Hyaluronan is a polymer found in the layers of epidermis that connect adjacent cells. (b)
Hyaluronidase produced by bacteria degrades this adhesive polymer in the extracellular matrix, allowing passage
between cells that would otherwise be blocked.

Pathogen-produced nucleases, such as DNAse produced by S. aureus, degrade extracellular DNA as a means of
escape and spreading through tissue. As bacterial and host cells die at the site of infection, they lyse and release their
intracellular contents. The DNA chromosome is the largest of the intracellular molecules, and masses of extracellular
DNA can trap bacteria and prevent their spread. S. aureus produces a DNAse to degrade the mesh of extracellular
DNA so it can escape and spread to adjacent tissues. This strategy is also used by S. aureus and other pathogens to
degrade and escape webs of extracellular DNA produced by immune system phagocytes to trap the bacteria.
Enzymes that degrade the phospholipids of cell membranes are called phospholipases. Their actions are specific in
regard to the type of phospholipids they act upon and where they enzymatically cleave the molecules. The pathogen
responsible for anthrax, B. anthracis, produces phospholipase C. When B. anthracis is ingested by phagocytic cells of
the immune system, phospholipase C degrades the membrane of the phagosome before it can fuse with the lysosome,
allowing the pathogen to escape into the cytoplasm and multiply. Phospholipases can also target the membrane that
encloses the phagosome within phagocytic cells. As described earlier in this chapter, this is the mechanism used
by intracellular pathogens such as L. monocytogenes and Rickettsia to escape the phagosome and multiply within
the cytoplasm of phagocytic cells. The role of phospholipases in bacterial virulence is not restricted to phagosomal
escape. Many pathogens produce phospholipases that act to degrade cell membranes and cause lysis of target cells.
These phospholipases are involved in lysis of red blood cells, white blood cells, and tissue cells.
Bacterial pathogens also produce various protein-digesting enzymes, or proteases. Proteases can be classified
according to their substrate target (e.g., serine proteases target proteins with the amino acid serine) or if they contain
metals in their active site (e.g., zinc metalloproteases contain a zinc ion, which is necessary for enzymatic activity).
One example of a protease that contains a metal ion is the exoenzyme collagenase. Collagenase digests collagen,
the dominant protein in connective tissue. Collagen can be found in the extracellular matrix, especially near mucosal
membranes, blood vessels, nerves, and in the layers of the skin. Similar to hyaluronidase, collagenase allows the
pathogen to penetrate and spread through the host tissue by digesting this connective tissue protein. The collagenase
produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium perfringens, for example, allows the bacterium to make its
way through the tissue layers and subsequently enter and multiply in the blood (septicemia). C. perfringens then
uses toxins and a phospholipase to cause cellular lysis and necrosis. Once the host cells have died, the bacterium
produces gas by fermenting the muscle carbohydrates. The widespread necrosis of tissue and accompanying gas are
characteristic of the condition known as gas gangrene (Figure 15.12).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

679

Figure 15.12 The illustration depicts a blood vessel with a single layer of endothelial cells surrounding the lumen
and dense connective tissue (shown in red) surrounding the endothelial cell layer. Collagenase produced by C.
perfringens degrades the collagen between the endothelial cells, allowing the bacteria to enter the bloodstream.
(credit illustration: modification of work by Bruce Blaus; credit micrograph: Micrograph provided by the Regents of
University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)

Link to Learning
Two types of cell death are apoptosis and necrosis. Visit this website
(https://openstax.org/l/22CellDeath) to learn more about the differences
between these mechanisms of cell death and their causes.

Toxins
In addition to exoenzymes, certain pathogens are able to produce toxins, biological poisons that assist in their ability
to invade and cause damage to tissues. The ability of a pathogen to produce toxins to cause damage to host cells is
called toxigenicity.
Toxins can be categorized as endotoxins or exotoxins. The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) found on the outer membrane
of gram-negative bacteria is called endotoxin (Figure 15.13). During infection and disease, gram-negative bacterial
pathogens release endotoxin either when the cell dies, resulting in the disintegration of the membrane, or when the
bacterium undergoes binary fission. The lipid component of endotoxin, lipid A, is responsible for the toxic properties
of the LPS molecule. Lipid A is relatively conserved across different genera of gram-negative bacteria; therefore,
the toxic properties of lipid A are similar regardless of the gram-negative pathogen. In a manner similar to that of
tumor necrosis factor, lipid A triggers the immune system’s inflammatory response (see Inflammation and Fever).
If the concentration of endotoxin in the body is low, the inflammatory response may provide the host an effective
defense against infection; on the other hand, high concentrations of endotoxin in the blood can cause an excessive
inflammatory response, leading to a severe drop in blood pressure, multi-organ failure, and death.

680

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Figure 15.13 Lipopolysaccharide is composed of lipid A, a core glycolipid, and an O-specific polysaccharide side
chain. Lipid A is the toxic component that promotes inflammation and fever.

A classic method of detecting endotoxin is by using the Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) test. In this procedure,
the blood cells (amebocytes) of the horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus) is mixed with a patient’s serum. The
amebocytes will react to the presence of any endotoxin. This reaction can be observed either chromogenically (color)
or by looking for coagulation (clotting reaction) to occur within the serum. An alternative method that has been used
is an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that uses antibodies to detect the presence of endotoxin.
Unlike the toxic lipid A of endotoxin, exotoxins are protein molecules that are produced by a wide variety of living
pathogenic bacteria. Although some gram-negative pathogens produce exotoxins, the majority are produced by grampositive pathogens. Exotoxins differ from endotoxin in several other key characteristics, summarized in Table 15.9.
In contrast to endotoxin, which stimulates a general systemic inflammatory response when released, exotoxins are
much more specific in their action and the cells they interact with. Each exotoxin targets specific receptors on specific
cells and damages those cells through unique molecular mechanisms. Endotoxin remains stable at high temperatures,
and requires heating at 121 °C (250 °F) for 45 minutes to inactivate. By contrast, most exotoxins are heat labile
because of their protein structure, and many are denatured (inactivated) at temperatures above 41 °C (106 °F).
As discussed earlier, endotoxin can stimulate a lethal inflammatory response at very high concentrations and has
a measured LD50 of 0.24 mg/kg. By contrast, very small concentrations of exotoxins can be lethal. For example,
botulinum toxin, which causes botulism, has an LD50 of 0.000001 mg/kg (240,000 times more lethal than endotoxin).
Comparison of Endotoxin and Exotoxins Produced by Bacteria
Characteristic

Endotoxin

Exotoxin

Source

Gram-negative bacteria

Gram-positive (primarily) and gram-negative bacteria

Composition

Lipid A component of
lipopolysaccharide

Protein

Effect on host

General systemic symptoms
of inflammation and fever

Specific damage to cells dependent upon receptor-mediated
targeting of cells and specific mechanisms of action

Heat stability

Heat stable

Most are heat labile, but some are heat stable

LD50

High

Low

Table 15.9

The exotoxins can be grouped into three categories based on their target: intracellular targeting, membrane disrupting,
and superantigens. Table 15.10 provides examples of well-characterized toxins within each of these three categories.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

681

Some Common Exotoxins and Associated Bacterial Pathogens
Category
Intracellulartargeting
toxins

Membranedisrupting
toxins

Superantigens

Example

Pathogen

Mechanism and Disease

Cholera toxin

Vibrio cholerae

Activation of adenylate cyclase in intestinal cells,
causing increased levels of cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) and secretion of fluids and
electrolytes out of cell, causing diarrhea

Tetanus toxin

Clostridium
tetani

Inhibits the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters in
the central nervous system, causing spastic paralysis

Botulinum
toxin

Clostridium
botulinum

Inhibits release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine
from neurons, resulting in flaccid paralysis

Diphtheria
toxin

Corynebacterium
diphtheriae

Inhibition of protein synthesis, causing cellular death

Streptolysin

Streptococcus
pyogenes

Proteins that assemble into pores in cell membranes,
disrupting their function and killing the cell

Pneumolysin

Streptococcus
pneumoniae

Alpha-toxin

Staphylococcus
aureus

Alpha-toxin

Clostridium
perfringens

Phospholipase
C

Pseudomonas
aeruginosa

Beta-toxin

Staphylococcus
aureus

Toxic shock
syndrome
toxin

Staphylococcus
aureus

Streptococcal
mitogenic
exotoxin

Streptococcus
pyogenes

Streptococcal
pyrogenic
toxins

Streptococcus
pyogenes

Phospholipases that degrade cell membrane
phospholipids, disrupting membrane function and
killing the cell

Stimulates excessive activation of immune system
cells and release of cytokines (chemical mediators)
from immune system cells. Life-threatening fever,
inflammation, and shock are the result.

Table 15.10

The intracellular targeting toxins comprise two components: A for activity and B for binding. Thus, these types of
toxins are known as A-B exotoxins (Figure 15.14). The B component is responsible for the cellular specificity of
the toxin and mediates the initial attachment of the toxin to specific cell surface receptors. Once the A-B toxin binds
to the host cell, it is brought into the cell by endocytosis and entrapped in a vacuole. The A and B subunits separate
as the vacuole acidifies. The A subunit then enters the cell cytoplasm and interferes with the specific internal cellular
function that it targets.

682

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Figure 15.14 (a) In A-B toxins, the B component binds to the host cell through its interaction with specific cell
surface receptors. (b) The toxin is brought in through endocytosis. (c) Once inside the vacuole, the A component
(active component) separates from the B component and the A component gains access to the cytoplasm. (credit:
modification of work by “Biology Discussion Forum”/YouTube)

Four unique examples of A-B toxins are the diphtheria, cholera, botulinum, and tetanus toxins. The diphtheria toxin
is produced by the gram-positive bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the causative agent of nasopharyngeal
and cutaneous diphtheria. After the A subunit of the diphtheria toxin separates and gains access to the cytoplasm, it
facilitates the transfer of adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribose onto an elongation-factor protein (EF-2) that is needed
for protein synthesis. Hence, diphtheria toxin inhibits protein synthesis in the host cell, ultimately killing the cell
(Figure 15.15).

Figure 15.15 The mechanism of the diphtheria toxin inhibiting protein synthesis. The A subunit inactivates
elongation factor 2 by transferring an ADP-ribose. This stops protein elongation, inhibiting protein synthesis and
killing the cell.

Cholera toxin is an enterotoxin produced by the gram-negative bacterium Vibrio cholerae and is composed of one
A subunit and five B subunits. The mechanism of action of the cholera toxin is complex. The B subunits bind to
receptors on the intestinal epithelial cell of the small intestine. After gaining entry into the cytoplasm of the epithelial
cell, the A subunit activates an intracellular G protein. The activated G protein, in turn, leads to the activation of
the enzyme adenyl cyclase, which begins to produce an increase in the concentration of cyclic AMP (a secondary
messenger molecule). The increased cAMP disrupts the normal physiology of the intestinal epithelial cells and causes

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

683

them to secrete excessive amounts of fluid and electrolytes into the lumen of the intestinal tract, resulting in severe
“rice-water stool” diarrhea characteristic of cholera.
Botulinum toxin (also known as botox) is a neurotoxin produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium
botulinum. It is the most acutely toxic substance known to date. The toxin is composed of a light A subunit and
heavy protein chain B subunit. The B subunit binds to neurons to allow botulinum toxin to enter the neurons at
the neuromuscular junction. The A subunit acts as a protease, cleaving proteins involved in the neuron’s release
of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter molecule. Normally, neurons release acetylcholine to induce muscle fiber
contractions. The toxin’s ability to block acetylcholine release results in the inhibition of muscle contractions,
leading to muscle relaxation. This has the potential to stop breathing and cause death. Because of its action, low
concentrations of botox are used for cosmetic and medical procedures, including the removal of wrinkles and
treatment of overactive bladder.

Link to Learning
Click this link (https://openstax.org/l/22pathochol) to see an animation of how
the cholera toxin functions.
Click this link (https://openstax.org/l/22Botulin) to see an animation of how
the botulinum toxin functions.

Another neurotoxin is tetanus toxin, which is produced by the gram-positive bacterium Clostridium tetani. This toxin
also has a light A subunit and heavy protein chain B subunit. Unlike botulinum toxin, tetanus toxin binds to inhibitory
interneurons, which are responsible for release of the inhibitory neurotransmitters glycine and gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA). Normally, these neurotransmitters bind to neurons at the neuromuscular junction, resulting in the
inhibition of acetylcholine release. Tetanus toxin inhibits the release of glycine and GABA from the interneuron,
resulting in permanent muscle contraction. The first symptom is typically stiffness of the jaw (lockjaw). Violent
muscle spasms in other parts of the body follow, typically culminating with respiratory failure and death. Figure
15.16 shows the actions of both botulinum and tetanus toxins.

684

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Figure 15.16 Mechanisms of botulinum and tetanus toxins. (credit micrographs: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)

Membrane-disrupting toxins affect cell membrane function either by forming pores or by disrupting the phospholipid
bilayer in host cell membranes. Two types of membrane-disrupting exotoxins are hemolysins and leukocidins, which
form pores in cell membranes, causing leakage of the cytoplasmic contents and cell lysis. These toxins were originally
thought to target red blood cells (erythrocytes) and white blood cells (leukocytes), respectively, but we now know they
can affect other cells as well. The gram-positive bacterium Streptococcus pyogenes produces streptolysins, watersoluble hemolysins that bind to the cholesterol moieties in the host cell membrane to form a pore. The two types of
streptolysins, O and S, are categorized by their ability to cause hemolysis in erythrocytes in the absence or presence
of oxygen. Streptolysin O is not active in the presence of oxygen, whereas streptolysin S is active in the presence of
oxygen. Other important pore-forming membrane-disrupting toxins include alpha toxin of Staphylococcus aureus and
pneumolysin of Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Bacterial phospholipases are membrane-disrupting toxins that degrade the phospholipid bilayer of cell membranes
rather than forming pores. We have already discussed the phospholipases associated with B. anthracis, L.
pneumophila, and Rickettsia species that enable these bacteria to effect the lysis of phagosomes. These same
phospholipases are also hemolysins. Other phospholipases that function as hemolysins include the alpha toxin of
Clostridium perfringens, phospholipase C of P. aeruginosa, and beta toxin of Staphylococcus aureus.
Some strains of S. aureus also produce a leukocidin called Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL). PVL consists of two
subunits, S and F. The S component acts like the B subunit of an A-B exotoxin in that it binds to glycolipids on the
outer plasma membrane of animal cells. The F-component acts like the A subunit of an A-B exotoxin and carries the
enzymatic activity. The toxin inserts and assembles into a pore in the membrane. Genes that encode PVL are more
frequently present in S. aureus strains that cause skin infections and pneumonia.[8] PVL promotes skin infections by

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

685

causing edema, erythema (reddening of the skin due to blood vessel dilation), and skin necrosis. PVL has also been
shown to cause necrotizing pneumonia. PVL promotes pro-inflammatory and cytotoxic effects on alveolar leukocytes.
This results in the release of enzymes from the leukocytes, which, in turn, cause damage to lung tissue.
The third class of exotoxins is the superantigens. These are exotoxins that trigger an excessive, nonspecific
stimulation of immune cells to secrete cytokines (chemical messengers). The excessive production of cytokines,
often called a cytokine storm, elicits a strong immune and inflammatory response that can cause life-threatening
high fevers, low blood pressure, multi-organ failure, shock, and death. The prototype superantigen is the toxic shock
syndrome toxin of S. aureus. Most toxic shock syndrome cases are associated with vaginal colonization by toxinproducing S. aureus in menstruating women; however, colonization of other body sites can also occur. Some strains
of Streptococcus pyogenes also produce superantigens; they are referred to as the streptococcal mitogenic exotoxins
and the streptococcal pyrogenic toxins.

• Describe how exoenzymes contribute to bacterial invasion.
• Explain the difference between exotoxins and endotoxin.
• Name the three classes of exotoxins.

Virulence Factors for Survival in the Host and Immune Evasion
Evading the immune system is also important to invasiveness. Bacteria use a variety of virulence factors to evade
phagocytosis by cells of the immune system. For example, many bacteria produce capsules, which are used in
adhesion but also aid in immune evasion by preventing ingestion by phagocytes. The composition of the capsule
prevents immune cells from being able to adhere and then phagocytose the cell. In addition, the capsule makes the
bacterial cell much larger, making it harder for immune cells to engulf the pathogen (Figure 15.17). A notable
capsule-producing bacterium is the gram-positive pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae, which causes pneumococcal
pneumonia, meningitis, septicemia, and other respiratory tract infections. Encapsulated strains of S. pneumoniae are
more virulent than nonencapsulated strains and are more likely to invade the bloodstream and cause septicemia and
meningitis.
Some pathogens can also produce proteases to protect themselves against phagocytosis. As described in Adaptive
Specific Host Defenses, the human immune system produces antibodies that bind to surface molecules found on
specific bacteria (e.g., capsules, fimbriae, flagella, LPS). This binding initiates phagocytosis and other mechanisms
of antibacterial killing and clearance. Proteases combat antibody-mediated killing and clearance by attacking and
digesting the antibody molecules (Figure 15.17).
In addition to capsules and proteases, some bacterial pathogens produce other virulence factors that allow them to
evade the immune system. The fimbriae of certain species of Streptococcus contain M protein, which alters the
surface of Streptococcus and inhibits phagocytosis by blocking the binding of the complement molecules that assist
phagocytes in ingesting bacterial pathogens. The acid-fast bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis (the causative
agent of tuberculosis) produces a waxy substance known as mycolic acid in its cell envelope. When it is engulfed
by phagocytes in the lung, the protective mycolic acid coat enables the bacterium to resist some of the killing
mechanisms within the phagolysosome.

8. V. Meka. “Panton-Valentine Leukocidin.” http://www.antimicrobe.org/h04c.files/history/PVL-S-aureus.asp

686

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Figure 15.17 (a) A micrograph of capsules around bacterial cells. (b) Antibodies normally function by binding to
antigens, molecules on the surface of pathogenic bacteria. Phagocytes then bind to the antibody, initiating
phagocytosis. (c) Some bacteria also produce proteases, virulence factors that break down host antibodies to evade
phagocytosis. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Some bacteria produce virulence factors that promote infection by exploiting molecules naturally produced by the
host. For example, most strains of Staphylococcus aureus produce the exoenzyme coagulase, which exploits the
natural mechanism of blood clotting to evade the immune system. Normally, blood clotting is triggered in response to
blood vessel damage; platelets begin to plug the clot, and a cascade of reactions occurs in which fibrinogen, a soluble
protein made by the liver, is cleaved into fibrin. Fibrin is an insoluble, thread-like protein that binds to blood platelets,
cross-links, and contracts to form a mesh of clumped platelets and red blood cells. The resulting clot prevents further
loss of blood from the damaged blood vessels. However, if bacteria release coagulase into the bloodstream, the
fibrinogen-to-fibrin cascade is triggered in the absence of blood vessel damage. The resulting clot coats the bacteria
in fibrin, protecting the bacteria from exposure to phagocytic immune cells circulating in the bloodstream.
Whereas coagulase causes blood to clot, kinases have the opposite effect by triggering the conversion of plasminogen
to plasmin, which is involved in the digestion of fibrin clots. By digesting a clot, kinases allow pathogens trapped in
the clot to escape and spread, similar to the way that collagenase, hyaluronidase, and DNAse facilitate the spread of
infection. Examples of kinases include staphylokinases and streptokinases, produced by Staphylococcus aureus and
Streptococcus pyogenes, respectively. It is intriguing that S. aureus can produce both coagulase to promote clotting
and staphylokinase to stimulate the digestion of clots. The action of the coagulase provides an important protective
barrier from the immune system, but when nutrient supplies are diminished or other conditions signal a need for the
pathogen to escape and spread, the production of staphylokinase can initiate this process.
A final mechanism that pathogens can use to protect themselves against the immune system is called antigenic
variation, which is the alteration of surface proteins so that a pathogen is no longer recognized by the host’s immune
system. For example, the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative agent of Lyme disease, contains a surface
lipoprotein known as VlsE. Because of genetic recombination during DNA replication and repair, this bacterial
protein undergoes antigenic variation. Each time fever occurs, the VlsE protein in B. burgdorferi can differ so
much that antibodies against previous VlsE sequences are not effective. It is believed that this variation in the VlsE
contributes to the ability B. burgdorferi to cause chronic disease. Another important human bacterial pathogen that
uses antigenic variation to avoid the immune system is Neisseria gonorrhoeae, which causes the sexually transmitted
disease gonorrhea. This bacterium is well known for its ability to undergo antigenic variation of its type IV pili to
avoid immune defenses.

• Name at least two ways that a capsule provides protection from the immune system.
• Besides capsules, name two other virulence factors used by bacteria to evade the immune system.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

687

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Based on Michael’s reported symptoms of stiff neck and hemiparesis, the physician suspects that the infection
may have spread to his nervous system. The physician decides to order a spinal tap to look for any bacteria
that may have invaded the meninges and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which would normally be sterile. To
perform the spinal tap, Michael’s lower back is swabbed with an iodine antiseptic and then covered with a
sterile sheet. The needle is aseptically removed from the manufacturer’s sealed plastic packaging by the
clinician’s gloved hands. The needle is inserted and a small volume of fluid is drawn into an attached sample
tube. The tube is removed, capped and a prepared label with Michael’s data is affixed to it. This STAT (urgent
or immediate analysis required) specimen is divided into three separate sterile tubes, each with 1 mL of CSF.
These tubes are immediately taken to the hospital’s lab, where they are analyzed in the clinical chemistry,
hematology, and microbiology departments. The preliminary results from all three departments indicate there is
a cerebrospinal infection occurring, with the microbiology department reporting the presence of a gram-positive
rod in Michael’s CSF.
These results confirm what his physician had suspected: Michael’s new symptoms are the result of meningitis,
acute inflammation of the membranes that protect the brain and spinal cord. Because meningitis can be life
threatening and because the first antibiotic therapy was not effective in preventing the spread of infection,
Michael is prescribed an aggressive course of two antibiotics, ampicillin and gentamicin, to be delivered
intravenously. Michael remains in the hospital for several days for supportive care and for observation. After a
week, he is allowed to return home for bed rest and oral antibiotics. After 3 weeks of this treatment, he makes
a full recovery.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Viral Virulence
Although viral pathogens are not similar to bacterial pathogens in terms of structure, some of the properties that
contribute to their virulence are similar. Viruses use adhesins to facilitate adhesion to host cells, and certain enveloped
viruses rely on antigenic variation to avoid the host immune defenses. These virulence factors are discussed in more
detail in the following sections.

Viral Adhesins
One of the first steps in any viral infection is adhesion of the virus to specific receptors on the surface of cells.
This process is mediated by adhesins that are part of the viral capsid or membrane envelope. The interaction of viral
adhesins with specific cell receptors defines the tropism (preferential targeting) of viruses for specific cells, tissues,
and organs in the body. The spike protein hemagglutinin found on Influenzavirus is an example of a viral adhesin;
it allows the virus to bind to the sialic acid on the membrane of host respiratory and intestinal cells. Another viral
adhesin is the glycoprotein gp20, found on HIV. For HIV to infect cells of the immune system, it must interact with
two receptors on the surface of cells. The first interaction involves binding between gp120 and the CD4 cellular
marker that is found on some essential immune system cells. However, before viral entry into the cell can occur,
a second interaction between gp120 and one of two chemokine receptors (CCR5 and CXCR4) must occur. Table
15.11 lists the adhesins for some common viral pathogens and the specific sites to which these adhesins allow viruses
to attach.

688

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

Some Viral Adhesins and Their Host Attachment Sites
Pathogen

Disease

Adhesin

Attachment Site

Influenzavirus

Influenza

Hemagglutinin

Sialic acid of respiratory and intestinal cells

Herpes simplex virus
I or II

Oral herpes,
genital herpes

Glycoproteins
gB, gC, gD

Heparan sulfate on mucosal surfaces of the
mouth and genitals

Human
immunodeficiency
virus

HIV/AIDS

Glycoprotein
gp120

CD4 and CCR5 or CXCR4 of immune
system cells

Table 15.11

Antigenic Variation in Viruses
Antigenic variation also occurs in certain types of enveloped viruses, including influenza viruses, which exhibit two
forms of antigenic variation: antigenic drift and antigenic shift (Figure 15.18). Antigenic drift is the result of point
mutations causing slight changes in the spike proteins hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N). On the other hand,
antigenic shift is a major change in spike proteins due to gene reassortment. This reassortment for antigenic shift
occurs typically when two different influenza viruses infect the same host.
The rate of antigenic variation in influenza viruses is very high, making it difficult for the immune system to recognize
the many different strains of Influenzavirus. Although the body may develop immunity to one strain through natural
exposure or vaccination, antigenic variation results in the continual emergence of new strains that the immune system
will not recognize. This is the main reason that vaccines against Influenzavirus must be given annually. Each year’s
influenza vaccine provides protection against the most prevalent strains for that year, but new or different strains may
be more prevalent the following year.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

689

Figure 15.18 Antigenic drift and antigenic shift in influenza viruses. (a) In antigenic drift, mutations in the genes for
the surface proteins neuraminidase and/or hemagglutinin result in small antigenic changes over time. (b) In antigenic
shift, simultaneous infection of a cell with two different influenza viruses results in mixing of the genes. The resultant
virus possesses a mixture of the proteins of the original viruses. Influenza pandemics can often be traced to antigenic
shifts.

Link to Learning
For another explanation of how antigenic shift and drift (https://openstax.org/
l/22Antigenic) occur, watch this video.

• Describe the role of adhesins in viral tropism.
• Explain the difference between antigenic drift and antigenic shift.

690

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

15.4 Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic Pathogens
Learning Objectives
• Describe virulence factors unique to fungi and parasites
• Compare virulence factors of fungi and bacteria
• Explain the difference between protozoan parasites and helminths
• Describe how helminths evade the host immune system

Although fungi and parasites are important pathogens causing infectious diseases, their pathogenic mechanisms and
virulence factors are not as well characterized as those of bacteria. Despite the relative lack of detailed mechanisms,
the stages of pathogenesis and general mechanisms of virulence involved in disease production by these pathogens
are similar to those of bacteria.

Fungal Virulence
Pathogenic fungi can produce virulence factors that are similar to the bacterial virulence factors that have been
discussed earlier in this chapter. In this section, we will look at the virulence factors associated with species of
Candida, Cryptococcus, Claviceps, and Aspergillus.
Candida albicans is an opportunistic fungal pathogen and causative agent of oral thrush, vaginal yeast infections, and
cutaneous candidiasis. Candida produces adhesins (surface glycoproteins) that bind to the phospholipids of epithelial
and endothelial cells. To assist in spread and tissue invasion, Candida produces proteases and phospholipases (i.e.,
exoenzymes). One of these proteases degrades keratin, a structural protein found on epithelial cells, enhancing the
ability of the fungus to invade host tissue. In animal studies, it has been shown that the addition of a protease inhibitor
led to attenuation of Candida infection.[9] Similarly, the phospholipases can affect the integrity of host cell membranes
to facilitate invasion.
The main virulence factor for Cryptococcus, a fungus that causes pneumonia and meningitis, is capsule production.
The polysaccharide glucuronoxylomannan is the principal constituent of the Cryptococcus capsule. Similar to
encapsulated bacterial cells, encapsulated Cryptococcus cells are more resistant to phagocytosis than nonencapsulated
Cryptococcus, which are effectively phagocytosed and, therefore, less virulent.
Like some bacteria, many fungi produce exotoxins. Fungal toxins are called mycotoxins. Claviceps purpurea, a
fungus that grows on rye and related grains, produces a mycotoxin called ergot toxin, an alkaloid responsible for the
disease known as ergotism. There are two forms of ergotism: gangrenous and convulsive. In gangrenous ergotism,
the ergot toxin causes vasoconstriction, resulting in improper blood flow to the extremities, eventually leading to
gangrene. A famous outbreak of gangrenous ergotism occurred in Eastern Europe during the 5th century AD due to
the consumption of rye contaminated with C. purpurea. In convulsive ergotism, the toxin targets the central nervous
system, causing mania and hallucinations.
The mycotoxin aflatoxin is a virulence factor produced by the fungus Aspergillus, an opportunistic pathogen that can
enter the body via contaminated food or by inhalation. Inhalation of the fungus can lead to the chronic pulmonary
disease aspergillosis, characterized by fever, bloody sputum, and/or asthma. Aflatoxin acts in the host as both a
mutagen (a substance that causes mutations in DNA) and a carcinogen (a substance involved in causing cancer), and
has been associated with the development of liver cancer. Aflatoxin has also been shown to cross the blood-placental
barrier.[10] A second mycotoxin produced by Aspergillus is gliotoxin. This toxin promotes virulence by inducing host
cells to self-destruct and by evading the host’s immune response by inhibiting the function of phagocytic cells as well
as the pro-inflammatory response. Like Candida, Aspergillus also produces several proteases. One is elastase, which
breaks down the protein elastin found in the connective tissue of the lung, leading to the development of lung disease.
9. K. Fallon et al. “Role of Aspartic Proteases in Disseminated Candida albicans Infection in Mice.” Infection and Immunity 65 no. 2
(1997):551–556.
10. C.P. Wild et al. “In-utero exposure to aflatoxin in west Africa.” Lancet 337 no. 8757 (1991):1602.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

691

Another is catalase, an enzyme that protects the fungus from hydrogen peroxide produced by the immune system to
destroy pathogens.

• List virulence factors common to bacteria and fungi.
• What functions do mycotoxins perform to help fungi survive in the host?

Protozoan Virulence
Protozoan pathogens are unicellular eukaryotic parasites that have virulence factors and pathogenic mechanisms
analogous to prokaryotic and viral pathogens, including adhesins, toxins, antigenic variation, and the ability to survive
inside phagocytic vesicles.
Protozoans often have unique features for attaching to host cells. The protozoan Giardia lamblia, which causes the
intestinal disease giardiasis, uses a large adhesive disc composed of microtubules to attach to the intestinal mucosa.
During adhesion, the flagella of G. lamblia move in a manner that draws fluid out from under the disc, resulting in
an area of lower pressure that facilitates adhesion to epithelial cells. Giardia does not invade the intestinal cells but
rather causes inflammation (possibly through the release of cytopathic substances that cause damage to the cells) and
shortens the intestinal villi, inhibiting absorption of nutrients.
Some protozoans are capable of antigenic variation. The obligate intracellular pathogen Plasmodium falciparum (one
of the causative agents of malaria) resides inside red blood cells, where it produces an adhesin membrane protein
known as PfEMP1. This protein is expressed on the surface of the infected erythrocytes, causing blood cells to stick
to each other and to the walls of blood vessels. This process impedes blood flow, sometimes leading to organ failure,
anemia, jaundice (yellowing of skin and sclera of the eyes due to buildup of bilirubin from lysed red blood cells),
and, subsequently, death. Although PfEMP1 can be recognized by the host’s immune system, antigenic variations in
the structure of the protein over time prevent it from being easily recognized and eliminated. This allows malaria to
persist as a chronic infection in many individuals.
The virulence factors of Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African sleeping sickness, include the abilities
to form capsules and undergo antigenic variation. T. brucei evades phagocytosis by producing a dense glycoprotein
coat that resembles a bacterial capsule. Over time, host antibodies are produced that recognize this coat, but T. brucei
is able to alter the structure of the glycoprotein to evade recognition.

• Explain how antigenic variation by protozoan pathogens helps them survive in the host.

Helminth Virulence
Helminths, or parasitic worms, are multicellular eukaryotic parasites that depend heavily on virulence factors that
allow them to gain entry to host tissues. For example, the aquatic larval form of Schistosoma mansoni, which causes
schistosomiasis, penetrates intact skin with the aid of proteases that degrade skin proteins, including elastin.
To survive within the host long enough to perpetuate their often-complex life cycles, helminths need to evade the
immune system. Some helminths are so large that the immune system is ineffective against them. Others, such as
adult roundworms (which cause trichinosis, ascariasis, and other diseases), are protected by a tough outer cuticle.
Over the course of their life cycles, the surface characteristics of the parasites vary, which may help prevent an
effective immune response. Some helminths express polysaccharides called glycans on their external surface; because

692

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

these glycans resemble molecules produced by host cells, the immune system fails to recognize and attack the
helminth as a foreign body. This “glycan gimmickry,” as it has been called, serves as a protective cloak that allows
the helminth to escape detection by the immune system.[11]
In addition to evading host defenses, helminths can actively suppress the immune system. S. mansoni, for example,
degrades host antibodies with proteases. Helminths produce many other substances that suppress elements of both
innate nonspecific and adaptive specific host defenses. They also release large amounts of material into the host that
may locally overwhelm the immune system or cause it to respond inappropriately.

• Describe how helminths avoid being destroyed by the host immune system.

Summary
15.1 Characteristics of Infectious Disease
• In an infection, a microorganism enters a host and begins to multiply. Some infections cause disease, which
is any deviation from the normal function or structure of the host.
• Signs of a disease are objective and are measured. Symptoms of a disease are subjective and are reported by
the patient.
• Diseases can either be noninfectious (due to genetics and environment) or infectious (due to pathogens).
Some infectious diseases are communicable (transmissible between individuals) or contagious (easily
transmissible between individuals); others are noncommunicable, but may be contracted via contact with
environmental reservoirs or animals (zoonoses)
• Nosocomial diseases are contracted in hospital settings, whereas iatrogenic disease are the direct result of a
medical procedure
• An acute disease is short in duration, whereas a chronic disease lasts for months or years. Latent diseases
last for years, but are distinguished from chronic diseases by the lack of active replication during extended
dormant periods.
• The periods of disease include the incubation period, the prodromal period, the period of illness, the
period of decline, and the period of convalescence. These periods are marked by changes in the number of
infectious agents and the severity of signs and symptoms.
15.2 How Pathogens Cause Disease
• Koch’s postulates are used to determine whether a particular microorganism is a pathogen. Molecular
Koch’s postulates are used to determine what genes contribute to a pathogen’s ability to cause disease.
• Virulence, the degree to which a pathogen can cause disease, can be quantified by calculating either the ID50
or LD50 of a pathogen on a given population.
• Primary pathogens are capable of causing pathological changes associated with disease in a healthy
individual, whereas opportunistic pathogens can only cause disease when the individual is compromised by
a break in protective barriers or immunosuppression.
• Infections and disease can be caused by pathogens in the environment or microbes in an individual’s resident
microbiota.
• Infections can be classified as local, focal, or systemic depending on the extent to which the pathogen spreads
in the body.

11. I. van Die, R.D. Cummings. “Glycan Gimmickry by Parasitic Helminths: A Strategy for Modulating the Host Immune Response?”
Glycobiology 20 no. 1 (2010):2–12.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

693

• A secondary infection can sometimes occur after the host’s defenses or normal microbiota are compromised
by a primary infection or antibiotic treatment.
• Pathogens enter the body through portals of entry and leave through portals of exit. The stages of
pathogenesis include exposure, adhesion, invasion, infection, and transmission.
15.3 Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens
• Virulence factors contribute to a pathogen’s ability to cause disease.
• Exoenzymes and toxins allow pathogens to invade host tissue and cause tissue damage. Exoenzymes are
classified according to the macromolecule they target and exotoxins are classified based on their mechanism
of action.
• Bacterial toxins include endotoxin and exotoxins. Endotoxin is the lipid A component of the LPS of the gramnegative cell envelope. Exotoxins are proteins secreted mainly by gram-positive bacteria, but also are secreted
by gram-negative bacteria.
• Bacterial pathogens may evade the host immune response by producing capsules to avoid phagocytosis,
surviving the intracellular environment of phagocytes, degrading antibodies, or through antigenic variation.
• Viral pathogens use adhesins for initiating infections and antigenic variation to avoid immune defenses.
• Influenza viruses use both antigenic drift and antigenic shift to avoid being recognized by the immune
system.
15.4 Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic Pathogens
• Fungal and parasitic pathogens use pathogenic mechanisms and virulence factors that are similar to those of
bacterial pathogens
• Fungi initiate infections through the interaction of adhesins with receptors on host cells. Some fungi produce
toxins and exoenzymes involved in disease production and capsules that provide protection of phagocytosis.
• Protozoa adhere to target cells through complex mechanisms and can cause cellular damage through release
of cytopathic substances. Some protozoa avoid the immune system through antigenic variation and production
of capsules.
• Helminthic worms are able to avoid the immune system by coating their exteriors with glycan molecules that
make them look like host cells or by suppressing the immune system.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. Which of the following would be a sign of an
infection?
a. muscle aches
b. headache
c. fever
d. nausea
2. Which of the following is an example of a
noncommunicable infectious disease?
a. infection with a respiratory virus
b. food poisoning due to a preformed bacterial
toxin in food
c. skin infection acquired from a dog bite
d. infection acquired from the stick of a
contaminated needle

3. During an oral surgery, the surgeon nicked the
patient’s gum with a sharp instrument. This allowed
Streptococcus, a bacterium normally present in the
mouth, to gain access to the blood. As a result, the
patient developed bacterial endocarditis (an infection of
the heart). Which type of disease is this?
a. iatrogenic
b. nosocomial
c. vectors
d. zoonotic
4. Which period is the stage of disease during which the
patient begins to present general signs and symptoms?
a. convalescence
b. incubation
c. illness
d. prodromal

694

5. A communicable disease that can be easily
transmitted from person to person is which type of
disease?
a. contagious
b. iatrogenic
c. acute
d. nosocomial
6. Which of the following is a pathogen that could not
be identified by the original Koch’s postulates?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
c. Human immunodeficiency virus
d. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
7. Pathogen A has an ID50 of 50 particles, pathogen
B has an ID50 of 1,000 particles, and pathogen C has
an ID50 of 1 × 106 particles. Which pathogen is most
virulent?
a. pathogen A
b. pathogen B
c. pathogen C
8. Which of the following choices lists the steps of
pathogenesis in the correct order?
a. invasion, infection, adhesion, exposure
b. adhesion, exposure, infection, invasion
c. exposure, adhesion, invasion, infection
d. disease, infection, exposure, invasion
9. Which of the following would be a virulence factor
of a pathogen?
a. a surface protein allowing the pathogen to bind
to host cells
b. a secondary host the pathogen can infect
c. a surface protein the host immune system
recognizes
d. the ability to form a provirus

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

11. Which of the following applies to hyaluronidase?
a. It acts as a spreading factor.
b. It promotes blood clotting.
c. It is an example of an adhesin.
d. It is produced by immune cells to target
pathogens.
12. Phospholipases are enzymes that do which of the
following?
a. degrade antibodies
b. promote pathogen spread through connective
tissue.
c. degrade nucleic acid to promote spread of
pathogen
d. degrade cell membranes to allow pathogens to
escape phagosomes
13. Which of the following is a major virulence factor
for the fungal pathogen Cryptococcus?
a. hemolysin
b. capsule
c. collagenase
d. fimbriae
14. Which of the following pathogens undergoes
antigenic variation to avoid immune defenses?
a. Candida
b. Cryptococcus
c. Plasmodium
d. Giardia

10. You have recently identified a new toxin. It is
produced by a gram-negative bacterium. It is composed
mostly of protein, has high toxicity, and is not heat
stable. You also discover that it targets liver cells. Based
on these characteristics, how would you classify this
toxin?
a. superantigen
b. endotoxin
c. exotoxin
d. leukocidin
Fill in the Blank

15. A difference between an acute disease and chronic disease is that chronic diseases have an extended period of
__________.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

695

16. A person steps on a rusty nail and develops tetanus. In this case, the person has acquired a(n) __________
disease.
17. A(n) __________ pathogen causes disease only when conditions are favorable for the microorganism because of
transfer to an inappropriate body site or weakened immunity in an individual.
18. The concentration of pathogen needed to kill 50% of an infected group of test animals is the __________.
19. A(n) __________ infection is a small region of infection from which a pathogen may move to another part of
the body to establish a second infection.
20. Cilia, fimbriae, and pili are all examples of structures used by microbes for __________.
21. The glycoprotein adhesion gp120 on HIV must interact with __________ on some immune cells as the first step
in the process of infecting the cell.
22. Adhesins are usually located on __________ of the pathogen and are composed mainly of __________ and
__________.
23. The Shiga and diphtheria toxins target __________ in host cells.
24. Antigenic __________ is the result of reassortment of genes responsible for the production of influenza virus
spike proteins between different virus particles while in the same host, whereas antigenic __________ is the result of
point mutations in the spike proteins.
25. Candida can invade tissue by producing the exoenzymes __________ and __________.
26. The larval form of Schistosoma mansoni uses a __________ to help it gain entry through intact skin.
Short Answer

27. Brian goes to the hospital after not feeling well for a week. He has a fever of 38 °C (100.4 °F) and complains of
nausea and a constant migraine. Distinguish between the signs and symptoms of disease in Brian’s case.
28. Describe the virulence factors associated with the fungal pathogen Aspergillus.
29. Explain how helminths evade the immune system.
Critical Thinking

30. Two periods of acute disease are the periods of illness and period of decline. (a) In what way are both of these
periods similar? (b) In terms of quantity of pathogen, in what way are these periods different? (c) What initiates the
period of decline?
31. In July 2015, a report[12] was released indicating the gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa was
found on hospital sinks 10 years after the initial outbreak in a neonatal intensive care unit. P. aeruginosa usually
causes localized ear and eye infections but can cause pneumonia or septicemia in vulnerable individuals like newborn
babies. Explain how the current discovery of the presence of this reported P. aeruginosa could lead to a recurrence of
nosocomial disease.
32. Diseases that involve biofilm-producing bacteria are of serious concern. They are not as easily treated compared
with those involving free-floating (or planktonic) bacteria. Explain three reasons why biofilm formers are more
pathogenic.
33. A microbiologist has identified a new gram-negative pathogen that causes liver disease in rats. She suspects that
the bacterium’s fimbriae are a virulence factor. Describe how molecular Koch’s postulates could be used to test this
hypothesis.
12. C. Owens. “P. aeruginosa survives in sinks 10 years after hospital outbreak.” 2015. http://www.healio.com/infectious-disease/
nosocomial-infections/news/online/%7B5afba909-56d9-48cc-a9b0-ffe4568161e8%7D/p-aeruginosa-survives-in-sinks-10-years-afterhospital-outbreak

696

Chapter 15 | Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity

34. Acupuncture is a form of alternative medicine that is used for pain relief. Explain how acupuncture could
facilitate exposure to pathogens.

35. Two types of toxins are hemolysins and leukocidins. (a) How are these toxins similar? (b) How do they differ?
36. Imagine that a mutation in the gene encoding the cholera toxin was made. This mutation affects the A-subunit,
preventing it from interacting with any host protein. (a) Would the toxin be able to enter into the intestinal epithelial
cell? (b) Would the toxin be able to cause diarrhea?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

729

Chapter 17

Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.1 Varicella, or chickenpox, is caused by the highly contagious varicella-zoster virus. The characteristic
rash seen here is partly a result of inflammation associated with the body’s immune response to the virus.
Inflammation is a response mechanism of innate immunity that helps the body fight off a wide range of infections.
(credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Chapter Outline
17.1 Physical Defenses
17.2 Chemical Defenses
17.3 Cellular Defenses
17.4 Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis
17.5 Inflammation and Fever

Introduction
Despite relatively constant exposure to pathogenic microbes in the environment, humans do not generally suffer from
constant infection or disease. Under most circumstances, the body is able to defend itself from the threat of infection
thanks to a complex immune system designed to repel, kill, and expel disease-causing invaders. Immunity as a whole
can be described as two interrelated parts: nonspecific innate immunity, which is the subject of this chapter, and
specific adaptive host defenses, which are discussed in the next chapter.
The nonspecific innate immune response provides a first line of defense that can often prevent infections from gaining
a solid foothold in the body. These defenses are described as nonspecific because they do not target any specific
pathogen; rather, they defend against a wide range of potential pathogens. They are called innate because they are
built-in mechanisms of the human organism. Unlike the specific adaptive defenses, they are not acquired over time
and they have no “memory” (they do not improve after repeated exposures to specific pathogens).
Broadly speaking, nonspecific innate defenses provide an immediate (or very rapid) response against potential
pathogens. However, these responses are neither perfect nor impenetrable. They can be circumvented by pathogens

730

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

on occasion, and sometimes they can even cause damage to the body, contributing to the signs and symptoms of
infection (Figure 17.1).

17.1 Physical Defenses
Learning Objectives
• Describe the various physical barriers and mechanical defenses that protect the human body against infection

and disease
• Describe the role of microbiota as a first-line defense against infection and disease

Nonspecific innate immunity can be characterized as a multifaceted system of defenses that targets invading
pathogens in a nonspecific manner. In this chapter, we have divided the numerous defenses that make up this system
into three categories: physical defenses, chemical defenses, and cellular defenses. However, it is important to keep
in mind that these defenses do not function independently, and the categories often overlap. Table 17.1 provides an
overview of the nonspecific defenses discussed in this chapter.
Overview of Nonspecific Innate Immune Defenses
Physical barriers
Physical defenses

Mechanical defenses
Microbiome
Chemicals and enzymes in body fluids
Antimicrobial peptides

Chemical defenses

Plasma protein mediators
Cytokines
Inflammation-eliciting mediators

Cellular defenses

Granulocytes
Agranulocytes

Table 17.1

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Angela, a 25-year-old female patient in the emergency department, is having some trouble communicating
verbally because of shortness of breath. A nurse observes constriction and swelling of the airway and labored
breathing. The nurse asks Angela if she has a history of asthma or allergies. Angela shakes her head no, but
there is fear in her eyes. With some difficulty, she explains that her father died suddenly at age 27, when she
was just a little girl, of a similar respiratory attack. The underlying cause had never been identified.

• What are some possible causes of constriction and swelling of the airway?
• What causes swelling of body tissues in general?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

731

Physical defenses provide the body’s most basic form of nonspecific defense. They include physical barriers to
microbes, such as the skin and mucous membranes, as well as mechanical defenses that physically remove microbes
and debris from areas of the body where they might cause harm or infection. In addition, the microbiome provides
a measure of physical protection against disease, as microbes of the normal microbiota compete with pathogens for
nutrients and cellular binding sites necessary to cause infection.

Physical Barriers
Physical barriers play an important role in preventing microbes from reaching tissues that are susceptible to infection.
At the cellular level, barriers consist of cells that are tightly joined to prevent invaders from crossing through to
deeper tissue. For example, the endothelial cells that line blood vessels have very tight cell-to-cell junctions, blocking
microbes from gaining access to the bloodstream. Cell junctions are generally composed of cell membrane proteins
that may connect with the extracellular matrix or with complementary proteins from neighboring cells. Tissues in
various parts of the body have different types of cell junctions. These include tight junctions, desmosomes, and
gap junctions, as illustrated in Figure 17.2. Invading microorganisms may attempt to break down these substances
chemically, using enzymes such as proteases that can cause structural damage to create a point of entry for pathogens.

Figure 17.2 There are multiple types of cell junctions in human tissue, three of which are shown here. Tight
junctions rivet two adjacent cells together, preventing or limiting material exchange through the spaces between
them. Desmosomes have intermediate fibers that act like shoelaces, tying two cells together, allowing small materials
to pass through the resulting spaces. Gap junctions are channels between two cells that permit their communication
via signals. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)

The Skin Barrier
One of the body’s most important physical barriers is the skin barrier, which is composed of three layers of closely
packed cells. The thin upper layer is called the epidermis. A second, thicker layer, called the dermis, contains hair
follicles, sweat glands, nerves, and blood vessels. A layer of fatty tissue called the hypodermis lies beneath the dermis
and contains blood and lymph vessels (Figure 17.3).

732

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.3 Human skin has three layers, the epidermis, the dermis, and the hypodermis, which provide a thick
barrier between microbes outside the body and deeper tissues. Dead skin cells on the surface of the epidermis are
continually shed, taking with them microbes on the skin’s surface. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes
of Health)

The topmost layer of skin, the epidermis, consists of cells that are packed with keratin. These dead cells remain as
a tightly connected, dense layer of protein-filled cell husks on the surface of the skin. The keratin makes the skin’s
surface mechanically tough and resistant to degradation by bacterial enzymes. Fatty acids on the skin’s surface create
a dry, salty, and acidic environment that inhibits the growth of some microbes and is highly resistant to breakdown by
bacterial enzymes. In addition, the dead cells of the epidermis are frequently shed, along with any microbes that may
be clinging to them. Shed skin cells are continually replaced with new cells from below, providing a new barrier that
will soon be shed in the same way.
Infections can occur when the skin barrier is compromised or broken. A wound can serve as a point of entry for
opportunistic pathogens, which can infect the skin tissue surrounding the wound and possibly spread to deeper tissues.

Case in Point
Every Rose Has its Thorn
Mike, a gardener from southern California, recently noticed a small red bump on his left forearm. Initially, he
did not think much of it, but soon it grew larger and then ulcerated (opened up), becoming a painful lesion that
extended across a large part of his forearm (Figure 17.4). He went to an urgent care facility, where a physician
asked about his occupation. When he said he was a landscaper, the physician immediately suspected a
case of sporotrichosis, a type of fungal infection known as rose gardener’s disease because it often afflicts
landscapers and gardening enthusiasts.
Under most conditions, fungi cannot produce skin infections in healthy individuals. Fungi grow filaments known
as hyphae, which are not particularly invasive and can be easily kept at bay by the physical barriers of the skin
and mucous membranes. However, small wounds in the skin, such as those caused by thorns, can provide an
opening for opportunistic pathogens like Sporothrix schenkii, a soil-dwelling fungus and the causative agent
of rose gardener’s disease. Once it breaches the skin barrier, S. schenkii can infect the skin and underlying

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

733

tissues, producing ulcerated lesions like Mike’s. Compounding matters, other pathogens may enter the infected
tissue, causing secondary bacterial infections.
Luckily, rose gardener’s disease is treatable. Mike’s physician wrote him a prescription for some antifungal
drugs as well as a course of antibiotics to combat secondary bacterial infections. His lesions eventually healed,
and Mike returned to work with a new appreciation for gloves and protective clothing.

Figure 17.4 Rose gardener’s disease can occur when the fungus Sporothrix schenkii breaches the skin
through small cuts, such as might be inflicted by thorns. (credit left: modification of work by Elisa Self; credit
right: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Mucous Membranes
The mucous membranes lining the nose, mouth, lungs, and urinary and digestive tracts provide another nonspecific
barrier against potential pathogens. Mucous membranes consist of a layer of epithelial cells bound by tight junctions.
The epithelial cells secrete a moist, sticky substance called mucus, which covers and protects the more fragile
cell layers beneath it and traps debris and particulate matter, including microbes. Mucus secretions also contain
antimicrobial peptides.
In many regions of the body, mechanical actions serve to flush mucus (along with trapped or dead microbes) out of the
body or away from potential sites of infection. For example, in the respiratory system, inhalation can bring microbes,
dust, mold spores, and other small airborne debris into the body. This debris becomes trapped in the mucus lining the
respiratory tract, a layer known as the mucociliary blanket. The epithelial cells lining the upper parts of the respiratory
tract are called ciliated epithelial cells because they have hair-like appendages known as cilia. Movement of the cilia
propels debris-laden mucus out and away from the lungs. The expelled mucus is then swallowed and destroyed in
the stomach, or coughed up, or sneezed out (Figure 17.5). This system of removal is often called the mucociliary
escalator.

734

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.5 This scanning electron micrograph shows ciliated and nonciliated epithelial cells from the human
trachea. The mucociliary escalator pushes mucus away from the lungs, along with any debris or microorganisms that
may be trapped in the sticky mucus, and the mucus moves up to the esophagus where it can be removed by
swallowing.

The mucociliary escalator is such an effective barrier to microbes that the lungs, the lowermost (and most sensitive)
portion of the respiratory tract, were long considered to be a sterile environment in healthy individuals. Only recently
has research suggested that healthy lungs may have a small normal microbiota. Disruption of the mucociliary
escalator by the damaging effects of smoking or diseases such as cystic fibrosis can lead to increased colonization of
bacteria in the lower respiratory tract and frequent infections, which highlights the importance of this physical barrier
to host defenses.
Like the respiratory tract, the digestive tract is a portal of entry through which microbes enter the body, and the
mucous membranes lining the digestive tract provide a nonspecific physical barrier against ingested microbes. The
intestinal tract is lined with epithelial cells, interspersed with mucus-secreting goblet cells (Figure 17.6). This mucus
mixes with material received from the stomach, trapping foodborne microbes and debris. The mechanical action of
peristalsis, a series of muscular contractions in the digestive tract, moves the sloughed mucus and other material
through the intestines, rectum, and anus, excreting the material in feces.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

735

Figure 17.6 Goblet cells produce and secrete mucus. The arrows in this micrograph point to the mucus-secreting
goblet cells (magnification 1600⨯) in the intestinal epithelium. (credit micrograph: Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)

Endothelia
The epithelial cells lining the urogenital tract, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and certain other tissues are known
as endothelia. These tightly packed cells provide a particularly effective frontline barrier against invaders. The
endothelia of the blood-brain barrier, for example, protect the central nervous system (CNS), which consists of
the brain and the spinal cord. The CNS is one of the most sensitive and important areas of the body, as microbial
infection of the CNS can quickly lead to serious and often fatal inflammation. The cell junctions in the blood vessels
traveling through the CNS are some of the tightest and toughest in the body, preventing any transient microbes in the
bloodstream from entering the CNS. This keeps the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds and bathes the brain and spinal
cord sterile under normal conditions.

• Describe how the mucociliary escalator functions.
• Name two places you would find endothelia.

Mechanical Defenses
In addition to physical barriers that keep microbes out, the body has a number of mechanical defenses that physically
remove pathogens from the body, preventing them from taking up residence. We have already discussed several
examples of mechanical defenses, including the shedding of skin cells, the expulsion of mucus via the mucociliary
escalator, and the excretion of feces through intestinal peristalsis. Other important examples of mechanical defenses
include the flushing action of urine and tears, which both serve to carry microbes away from the body. The flushing
action of urine is largely responsible for the normally sterile environment of the urinary tract, which includes the

736

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

kidneys, ureters, and urinary bladder. Urine passing out of the body washes out transient microorganisms, preventing
them from taking up residence. The eyes also have physical barriers and mechanical mechanisms for preventing
infections. The eyelashes and eyelids prevent dust and airborne microorganisms from reaching the surface of the eye.
Any microbes or debris that make it past these physical barriers may be flushed out by the mechanical action of
blinking, which bathes the eye in tears, washing debris away (Figure 17.7).

Figure 17.7 Tears flush microbes away from the surface of the eye. Urine washes microbes out of the urinary tract
as it passes through; as a result, the urinary system is normally sterile.

• Name two mechanical defenses that protect the eyes.

Microbiome
In various regions of the body, resident microbiota serve as an important first-line defense against invading pathogens.
Through their occupation of cellular binding sites and competition for available nutrients, the resident microbiota
prevent the critical early steps of pathogen attachment and proliferation required for the establishment of an infection.
For example, in the vagina, members of the resident microbiota compete with opportunistic pathogens like the yeast
Candida. This competition prevents infections by limiting the availability of nutrients, thus inhibiting the growth of
Candida, keeping its population in check. Similar competitions occur between the microbiota and potential pathogens
on the skin, in the upper respiratory tract, and in the gastrointestinal tract. As will be discussed later in this chapter,
the resident microbiota also contribute to the chemical defenses of the innate nonspecific host defenses.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

737

The importance of the normal microbiota in host defenses is highlighted by the increased susceptibility to infectious
diseases when the microbiota is disrupted or eliminated. Treatment with antibiotics can significantly deplete the
normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract, providing an advantage for pathogenic bacteria to colonize and cause
diarrheal infection. In the case of diarrhea caused by Clostridium difficile, the infection can be severe and potentially
lethal. One strategy for treating C. difficile infections is fecal transplantation, which involves the transfer of fecal
material from a donor (screened for potential pathogens) into the intestines of the recipient patient as a method of
restoring the normal microbiota and combating C. difficile infections.
Table 17.2 provides a summary of the physical defenses discussed in this section.
Physical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate Immunity
Defense

Examples

Function

Cellular
barriers

Skin, mucous membranes, endothelial cells

Deny entry to pathogens

Mechanical
defenses

Shedding of skin cells, mucociliary sweeping, peristalsis,
flushing action of urine and tears

Remove pathogens from potential
sites of infection

Microbiome

Resident bacteria of the skin, upper respiratory tract,
gastrointestinal tract, and genitourinary tract

Compete with pathogens for cellular
binding sites and nutrients

Table 17.2

• List two ways resident microbiota defend against pathogens.

17.2 Chemical Defenses
Learning Objectives
• Describe how enzymes in body fluids provide protection against infection or disease
• List and describe the function of antimicrobial peptides, complement components, cytokines, and acute-phase

proteins
• Describe similarities and differences among classic, alternate, and lectin complement pathways

In addition to physical defenses, the innate nonspecific immune system uses a number of chemical mediators that
inhibit microbial invaders. The term “chemical mediators” encompasses a wide array of substances found in various
body fluids and tissues throughout the body. Chemical mediators may work alone or in conjunction with each other
to inhibit microbial colonization and infection.
Some chemical mediators are endogenously produced, meaning they are produced by human body cells; others are
produced exogenously, meaning that they are produced by certain microbes that are part of the microbiome. Some
mediators are produced continually, bathing the area in the antimicrobial substance; others are produced or activated
primarily in response to some stimulus, such as the presence of microbes.

Chemical and Enzymatic Mediators Found in Body Fluids
Fluids produced by the skin include examples of both endogenous and exogenous mediators. Sebaceous glands in
the dermis secrete an oil called sebum that is released onto the skin surface through hair follicles. This sebum is

738

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

an endogenous mediator, providing an additional layer of defense by helping seal off the pore of the hair follicle,
preventing bacteria on the skin’s surface from invading sweat glands and surrounding tissue (Figure 17.8). Certain
members of the microbiome, such as the bacterium Propionibacterium acnes and the fungus Malassezia, among
others, can use lipase enzymes to degrade sebum, using it as a food source. This produces oleic acid, which creates
a mildly acidic environment on the surface of the skin that is inhospitable to many pathogenic microbes. Oleic acid
is an example of an exogenously produced mediator because it is produced by resident microbes and not directly by
body cells.

Figure 17.8 Sebaceous glands secrete sebum, a chemical mediator that lubricates and protect the skin from
invading microbes. Sebum is also a food source for resident microbes that produce oleic acid, an exogenously
produced mediator. (credit micrograph: Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School
© 2012)

Environmental factors that affect the microbiota of the skin can have a direct impact on the production of chemical
mediators. Low humidity or decreased sebum production, for example, could make the skin less habitable for
microbes that produce oleic acid, thus making the skin more susceptible to pathogens normally inhibited by the skin’s
low pH. Many skin moisturizers are formulated to counter such effects by restoring moisture and essential oils to the
skin.
The digestive tract also produces a large number of chemical mediators that inhibit or kill microbes. In the oral
cavity, saliva contains mediators such as lactoperoxidase enzymes, and mucus secreted by the esophagus contains
the antibacterial enzyme lysozyme. In the stomach, highly acidic gastric fluid kills most microbes. In the lower
digestive tract, the intestines have pancreatic and intestinal enzymes, antibacterial peptides (cryptins), bile produced
from the liver, and specialized Paneth cells that produce lysozyme. Together, these mediators are able to eliminate
most pathogens that manage to survive the acidic environment of the stomach.
In the urinary tract, urine flushes microbes out of the body during urination. Furthermore, the slight acidity of urine
(the average pH is about 6) inhibits the growth of many microbes and potential pathogens in the urinary tract.
The female reproductive system employs lactate, an exogenously produced chemical mediator, to inhibit microbial
growth. The cells and tissue layers composing the vagina produce glycogen, a branched and more complex polymer
of glucose. Lactobacilli in the area ferment glycogen to produce lactate, lowering the pH in the vagina and inhibiting
transient microbiota, opportunistic pathogens like Candida (a yeast associated with vaginal infections), and other
pathogens responsible for sexually transmitted diseases.
In the eyes, tears contain the chemical mediators lysozyme and lactoferrin, both of which are capable of eliminating
microbes that have found their way to the surface of the eyes. Lysozyme cleaves the bond between NAG and NAM

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

739

in peptidoglycan, a component of the cell wall in bacteria. It is more effective against gram-positive bacteria, which
lack the protective outer membrane associated with gram-negative bacteria. Lactoferrin inhibits microbial growth by
chemically binding and sequestering iron. This effectually starves many microbes that require iron for growth.
In the ears, cerumen (earwax) exhibits antimicrobial properties due to the presence of fatty acids, which lower the pH
to between 3 and 5.
The respiratory tract uses various chemical mediators in the nasal passages, trachea, and lungs. The mucus produced
in the nasal passages contains a mix of antimicrobial molecules similar to those found in tears and saliva (e.g.,
lysozyme, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase). Secretions in the trachea and lungs also contain lysozyme and lactoferrin, as
well as a diverse group of additional chemical mediators, such as the lipoprotein complex called surfactant, which has
antibacterial properties.

• Explain the difference between endogenous and exogenous mediators
• Describe how pH affects antimicrobial defenses

Antimicrobial Peptides
The antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are a special class of nonspecific cell-derived mediators with broad-spectrum
antimicrobial properties. Some AMPs are produced routinely by the body, whereas others are primarily produced (or
produced in greater quantities) in response to the presence of an invading pathogen. Research has begun exploring
how AMPs can be used in the diagnosis and treatment of disease.
AMPs may induce cell damage in microorganisms in a variety of ways, including by inflicting damage to membranes,
destroying DNA and RNA, or interfering with cell-wall synthesis. Depending on the specific antimicrobial
mechanism, a particular AMP may inhibit only certain groups of microbes (e.g., gram-positive or gram-negative
bacteria) or it may be more broadly effective against bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses. Many AMPs are found on
the skin, but they can also be found in other regions of the body.
A family of AMPs called defensins can be produced by epithelial cells throughout the body as well as by cellular
defenses such as macrophages and neutrophils (see Cellular Defenses). Defensins may be secreted or act inside
host cells; they combat microorganisms by damaging their plasma membranes. AMPs called bacteriocins are
produced exogenously by certain members of the resident microbiota within the gastrointestinal tract. The genes
coding for these types of AMPs are often carried on plasmids and can be passed between different species within the
resident microbiota through lateral or horizontal gene transfer.
There are numerous other AMPs throughout the body. The characteristics of a few of the more significant AMPs are
summarized in Table 17.3.
Characteristics of Selected Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs)
AMP

Secreted by

Body site

Pathogens
inhibited

Mode of action

Bacteriocins

Resident microbiota

Gastrointestinal
tract

Bacteria

Disrupt membrane

Cathelicidin

Epithelial cells,
macrophages, and other
cell types

Skin

Bacteria and
fungi

Disrupts membrane

Table 17.3

740

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Characteristics of Selected Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs)
AMP

Secreted by

Body site

Pathogens
inhibited

Mode of action

Defensins

Epithelial cells,
macrophages, neutrophils

Throughout the
body

Fungi, bacteria,
and many viruses

Disrupt membrane

Dermicidin

Sweat glands

Skin

Bacteria and
fungi

Disrupts membrane
integrity and ion
channels

Histatins

Salivary glands

Oral cavity

Fungi

Disrupt intracellular
function

Table 17.3

• Why are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) considered nonspecific defenses?

Plasma Protein Mediators
Many nonspecific innate immune factors are found in plasma, the fluid portion of blood. Plasma contains electrolytes,
sugars, lipids, and proteins, each of which helps to maintain homeostasis (i.e., stable internal body functioning), and
contains the proteins involved in the clotting of blood. Additional proteins found in blood plasma, such as acute-phase
proteins, complement proteins, and cytokines, are involved in the nonspecific innate immune response.

Micro Connections
Plasma versus Serum
There are two terms for the fluid portion of blood: plasma and serum. How do they differ if they are both fluid
and lack cells? The fluid portion of blood left over after coagulation (blood cell clotting) has taken place is
serum. Although molecules such as many vitamins, electrolytes, certain sugars, complement proteins, and
antibodies are still present in serum, clotting factors are largely depleted. Plasma, conversely, still contains
all the clotting elements. To obtain plasma from blood, an anticoagulant must be used to prevent clotting.
Examples of anticoagulants include heparin and ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Because clotting is
inhibited, once obtained, the sample must be gently spun down in a centrifuge. The heavier, denser blood cells
form a pellet at the bottom of a centrifuge tube, while the fluid plasma portion, which is lighter and less dense,
remains above the cell pellet.

Acute-Phase Proteins
The acute-phase proteins are another class of antimicrobial mediators. Acute-phase proteins are primarily produced
in the liver and secreted into the blood in response to inflammatory molecules from the immune system. Examples
of acute-phase proteins include C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A, ferritin, transferrin, fibrinogen, and mannosebinding lectin. Each of these proteins has a different chemical structure and inhibits or destroys microbes in some way
(Table 17.4).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

741

Some Acute-Phase Proteins and Their Functions
C-reactive protein
Serum amyloid A
Ferritin
Transferrin

Coats bacteria (opsonization), preparing them for ingestion by phagocytes

Bind and sequester iron, thereby inhibiting the growth of pathogens

Fibrinogen

Involved in formation of blood clots that trap bacterial pathogens

Mannose-binding lectin

Activates complement cascade

Table 17.4

The Complement System
The complement system is a group of plasma protein mediators that can act as an innate nonspecific defense while
also serving to connect innate and adaptive immunity (discussed in the next chapter). The complement system is
composed of more than 30 proteins (including C1 through C9) that normally circulate as precursor proteins in blood.
These precursor proteins become activated when stimulated or triggered by a variety of factors, including the presence
of microorganisms. Complement proteins are considered part of innate nonspecific immunity because they are always
present in the blood and tissue fluids, allowing them to be activated quickly. Also, when activated through the
alternative pathway (described later in this section), complement proteins target pathogens in a nonspecific manner.
The process by which circulating complement precursors become functional is called complement activation. This
process is a cascade that can be triggered by one of three different mechanisms, known as the alternative, classical,
and lectin pathways.
The alternative pathway is initiated by the spontaneous activation of the complement protein C3. The hydrolysis of
C3 produces two products, C3a and C3b. When no invader microbes are present, C3b is very quickly degraded in
a hydrolysis reaction using the water in the blood. However, if invading microbes are present, C3b attaches to the
surface of these microbes. Once attached, C3b will recruit other complement proteins in a cascade (Figure 17.9).
The classical pathway provides a more efficient mechanism of activating the complement cascade, but it depends
upon the production of antibodies by the specific adaptive immune defenses. To initiate the classical pathway, a
specific antibody must first bind to the pathogen to form an antibody-antigen complex. This activates the first protein
in the complement cascade, the C1 complex. The C1 complex is a multipart protein complex, and each component
participates in the full activation of the overall complex. Following recruitment and activation of the C1 complex, the
remaining classical pathway complement proteins are recruited and activated in a cascading sequence (Figure 17.9).
The lectin activation pathway is similar to the classical pathway, but it is triggered by the binding of mannose-binding
lectin, an acute-phase protein, to carbohydrates on the microbial surface. Like other acute-phase proteins, lectins are
produced by liver cells and are commonly upregulated in response to inflammatory signals received by the body
during an infection (Figure 17.9).

742

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.9 The three complement activation pathways have different triggers, as shown here, but all three result in
the activation of the complement protein C3, which produces C3a and C3b. The latter binds to the surface of the
target cell and then works with other complement proteins to cleave C5 into C5a and C5b. C5b also binds to the cell
surface and then recruits C6 through C9; these molecules form a ring structure called the membrane attack complex
(MAC), which punches through the cell membrane of the invading pathogen, causing it to swell and burst.

Although each complement activation pathway is initiated in a different way, they all provide the same protective
outcomes: opsonization, inflammation, chemotaxis, and cytolysis. The term opsonization refers to the coating of a
pathogen by a chemical substance (called an opsonin) that allows phagocytic cells to recognize, engulf, and destroy
it more easily. Opsonins from the complement cascade include C1q, C3b, and C4b. Additional important opsonins
include mannose-binding proteins and antibodies. The complement fragments C3a and C5a are well-characterized
anaphylatoxins with potent proinflammatory functions. Anaphylatoxins activate mast cells, causing degranulation
and the release of inflammatory chemical signals, including mediators that cause vasodilation and increased vascular
permeability. C5a is also one of the most potent chemoattractants for neutrophils and other white blood cells, cellular
defenses that will be discussed in the next section.
The complement proteins C6, C7, C8, and C9 assemble into a membrane attack complex (MAC), which allows
C9 to polymerize into pores in the membranes of gram-negative bacteria. These pores allow water, ions, and other
molecules to move freely in and out of the targeted cells, eventually leading to cell lysis and death of the pathogen
(Figure 17.9). However, the MAC is only effective against gram-negative bacteria; it cannot penetrate the thick layer
of peptidoglycan associated with cell walls of gram-positive bacteria. Since the MAC does not pose a lethal threat to
gram-positive bacterial pathogens, complement-mediated opsonization is more important for their clearance.

Cytokines
Cytokines are soluble proteins that act as communication signals between cells. In a nonspecific innate immune
response, various cytokines may be released to stimulate production of chemical mediators or other cell functions,
such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, inhibition of cell division, apoptosis, and chemotaxis.
When a cytokine binds to its target receptor, the effect can vary widely depending on the type of cytokine and the type
of cell or receptor to which it has bound. The function of a particular cytokine can be described as autocrine, paracrine,
or endocrine (Figure 17.10). In autocrine function, the same cell that releases the cytokine is the recipient of the
signal; in other words, autocrine function is a form of self-stimulation by a cell. In contrast, paracrine function
involves the release of cytokines from one cell to other nearby cells, stimulating some response from the recipient
cells. Last, endocrine function occurs when cells release cytokines into the bloodstream to be carried to target cells
much farther away.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

743

Figure 17.10 Autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine actions describe which cells are targeted by cytokines and how
far the cytokines must travel to bind to their intended target cells’ receptors.

Three important classes of cytokines are the interleukins, chemokines, and interferons. The interleukins were
originally thought to be produced only by leukocytes (white blood cells) and to only stimulate leukocytes, thus
the reasons for their name. Although interleukins are involved in modulating almost every function of the immune
system, their role in the body is not restricted to immunity. Interleukins are also produced by and stimulate a variety
of cells unrelated to immune defenses.
The chemokines are chemotactic factors that recruit leukocytes to sites of infection, tissue damage, and inflammation.
In contrast to more general chemotactic factors, like complement factor C5a, chemokines are very specific in the
subsets of leukocytes they recruit.
Interferons are a diverse group of immune signaling molecules and are especially important in our defense against
viruses. Type I interferons (interferon-α and interferon-β) are produced and released by cells infected with virus.
These interferons stimulate nearby cells to stop production of mRNA, destroy RNA already produced, and reduce
protein synthesis. These cellular changes inhibit viral replication and production of mature virus, slowing the spread
of the virus. Type I interferons also stimulate various immune cells involved in viral clearance to more aggressively
attack virus-infected cells. Type II interferon (interferon-γ) is an important activator of immune cells (Figure 17.11).

744

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.11 Interferons are cytokines released by a cell infected with a virus. Interferon-α and interferon-β signal
uninfected neighboring cells to inhibit mRNA synthesis, destroy RNA, and reduce protein synthesis (top arrow).
Interferon-α and interferon-β also promote apoptosis in cells infected with the virus (middle arrow). Interferon-γ alerts
neighboring immune cells to an attack (bottom arrow). Although interferons do not cure the cell releasing them or
other infected cells, which will soon die, their release may prevent additional cells from becoming infected, thus
stemming the infection.

Inflammation-Eliciting Mediators
Many of the chemical mediators discussed in this section contribute in some way to inflammation and fever, which
are nonspecific immune responses discussed in more detail in Inflammation and Fever. Cytokines stimulate the
production of acute-phase proteins such as C-reactive protein and mannose-binding lectin in the liver. These acutephase proteins act as opsonins, activating complement cascades through the lectin pathway.
Some cytokines also bind mast cells and basophils, inducing them to release histamine, a proinflammatory
compound. Histamine receptors are found on a variety of cells and mediate proinflammatory events, such as
bronchoconstriction (tightening of the airways) and smooth muscle contraction.
In addition to histamine, mast cells may release other chemical mediators, such as leukotrienes. Leukotrienes
are lipid-based proinflammatory mediators that are produced from the metabolism of arachidonic acid in the
cell membrane of leukocytes and tissue cells. Compared with the proinflammatory effects of histamine, those of
leukotrienes are more potent and longer lasting. Together, these chemical mediators can induce coughing, vomiting,
and diarrhea, which serve to expel pathogens from the body.
Certain cytokines also stimulate the production of prostaglandins, chemical mediators that promote the inflammatory
effects of kinins and histamines. Prostaglandins can also help to set the body temperature higher, leading to fever,
which promotes the activities of white blood cells and slightly inhibits the growth of pathogenic microbes (see
Inflammation and Fever).
Another inflammatory mediator, bradykinin, contributes to edema, which occurs when fluids and leukocytes leak
out of the bloodstream and into tissues. It binds to receptors on cells in the capillary walls, causing the capillaries to
dilate and become more permeable to fluids.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

745

• What do the three complement activation pathways have in common?
• Explain autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine signals.
• Name two important inflammation-eliciting mediators.

Clinical Focus
Part 2
To relieve the constriction of her airways, Angela is immediately treated with antihistamines and administered
corticosteroids through an inhaler, and then monitored for a period of time. Though her condition does not
worsen, the drugs do not seem to be alleviating her condition. She is admitted to the hospital for further
observation, testing, and treatment.
Following admission, a clinician conducts allergy testing to try to determine if something in her environment
might be triggering an allergic inflammatory response. A doctor orders blood analysis to check for levels of
particular cytokines. A sputum sample is also taken and sent to the lab for microbial staining, culturing, and
identification of pathogens that could be causing an infection.

• Which aspects of the innate immune system could be contributing to Angela’s airway constriction?
• Why was Angela treated with antihistamines?
• Why would the doctor be interested in levels of cytokines in Angela’s blood?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Table 17.5 provides a summary of the chemical defenses discussed in this section.
Chemical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate Immunity
Defense
Chemicals
and enzymes
in body fluids

Antimicrobial
peptides

Table 17.5

Examples

Function

Sebum from sebaceous glands

Provides oil barrier protecting hair follicle pores from
pathogens

Oleic acid from sebum and skin
microbiota

Lowers pH to inhibit pathogens

Lysozyme in secretions

Kills bacteria by attacking cell wall

Acid in stomach, urine, and vagina

Inhibits or kills bacteria

Digestive enzymes and bile

Kill bacteria

Lactoferrin and transferrin

Bind and sequester iron, inhibiting bacterial growth

Surfactant in lungs

Kills bacteria

Defensins, bacteriocins,
dermicidin, cathelicidin, histatins,

Kill bacteria by attacking membranes or interfering with
cell functions

746

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Chemical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate Immunity
Defense
Plasma
protein
mediators

Cytokines

Inflammationeliciting
mediators

Examples

Function

Acute-phase proteins (C-reactive
protein, serum amyloid A, ferritin,
fibrinogen, transferrin, and
mannose-binding lectin)

Inhibit the growth of bacteria and assist in the trapping
and killing of bacteria

Complements C3b and C4b

Opsonization of pathogens to aid phagocytosis

Complement C5a

Chemoattractant for phagocytes

Complements C3a and C5a

Proinflammatory anaphylatoxins

Interleukins

Stimulate and modulate most functions of immune
system

Chemokines

Recruit white blood cells to infected area

Interferons

Alert cells to viral infection, induce apoptosis of virusinfected cells, induce antiviral defenses in infected and
nearby uninfected cells, stimulate immune cells to attack
virus-infected cells

Histamine

Promotes vasodilation, bronchoconstriction, smooth
muscle contraction, increased secretion and mucus
production

Leukotrienes

Promote inflammation; stronger and longer lasting than
histamine

Prostaglandins

Promote inflammation and fever

Bradykinin

Increases vasodilation and vascular permeability,
leading to edema

Table 17.5

17.3 Cellular Defenses
Learning Objectives
• Identify and describe the components of blood
• Explain the process by which the formed elements of blood are formed (hematopoiesis)
• Describe the characteristics of formed elements found in peripheral blood, as well as their respective functions

within the innate immune system
In the previous section, we discussed some of the chemical mediators found in plasma, the fluid portion of blood. The
nonfluid portion of blood consists of various types of formed elements, so called because they are all formed from the
same stem cells found in bone marrow. The three major categories of formed elements are: red blood cells (RBCs),
also called erythrocytes; platelets, also called thrombocytes; and white blood cells (WBCs), also called leukocytes.
Red blood cells are primarily responsible for carrying oxygen to tissues. Platelets are cellular fragments that
participate in blood clot formation and tissue repair. Several different types of WBCs participate in various
nonspecific mechanisms of innate and adaptive immunity. In this section, we will focus primarily on the innate
mechanisms of various types of WBCs.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

747

Hematopoiesis
All of the formed elements of blood are derived from pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone
marrow. As the HSCs make copies of themselves in the bone marrow, individual cells receive different cues from
the body that control how they develop and mature. As a result, the HSCs differentiate into different types of blood
cells that, once mature, circulate in peripheral blood. This process of differentiation, called hematopoiesis, is shown
in more detail in Figure 17.12.
In terms of sheer numbers, the vast majority of HSCs become erythrocytes. Much smaller numbers become
leukocytes and platelets. Leukocytes can be further subdivided into granulocytes, which are characterized by
numerous granules visible in the cytoplasm, and agranulocytes, which lack granules. Figure 17.13 provides an
overview of the various types of formed elements, including their relative numbers, primary function, and lifespans.

Figure 17.12 All the formed elements of the blood arise by differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells in the bone
marrow.

748

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.13 Formed elements of blood include erythrocytes (red blood cells), leukocytes (white blood cells), and
platelets.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

749

Granulocytes
The various types of granulocytes can be distinguished from one another in a blood smear by the appearance of
their nuclei and the contents of their granules, which confer different traits, functions, and staining properties. The
neutrophils, also called polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), have a nucleus with three to five lobes and small,
numerous, lilac-colored granules. Each lobe of the nucleus is connected by a thin strand of material to the other lobes.
The eosinophils have fewer lobes in the nucleus (typically 2–3) and larger granules that stain reddish-orange. The
basophils have a two-lobed nucleus and large granules that stain dark blue or purple (Figure 17.14).

Figure 17.14 Granulocytes can be distinguished by the number of lobes in their nuclei and the staining properties of
their granules. (credit “neutrophil” micrograph: modification of work by Ed Uthman)

Neutrophils (PMNs)
Neutrophils (PMNs) are frequently involved in the elimination and destruction of extracellular bacteria. They are
capable of migrating through the walls of blood vessels to areas of bacterial infection and tissue damage, where
they seek out and kill infectious bacteria. PMN granules contain a variety of defensins and hydrolytic enzymes
that help them destroy bacteria through phagocytosis (described in more detail in Pathogen Recognition and
Phagocytosis) In addition, when many neutrophils are brought into an infected area, they can be stimulated to
release toxic molecules into the surrounding tissue to better clear infectious agents. This is called degranulation.
Another mechanism used by neutrophils is neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which are extruded meshes of
chromatin that are closely associated with antimicrobial granule proteins and components. Chromatin is DNA with
associated proteins (usually histone proteins, around which DNA wraps for organization and packing within a cell).
By creating and releasing a mesh or lattice-like structure of chromatin that is coupled with antimicrobial proteins,
the neutrophils can mount a highly concentrated and efficient attack against nearby pathogens. Proteins frequently
associated with NETs include lactoferrin, gelatinase, cathepsin G, and myeloperoxidase. Each has a different means
of promoting antimicrobial activity, helping neutrophils eliminate pathogens. The toxic proteins in NETs may kill
some of the body’s own cells along with invading pathogens. However, this collateral damage can be repaired after
the danger of the infection has been eliminated.
As neutrophils fight an infection, a visible accumulation of leukocytes, cellular debris, and bacteria at the site of
infection can be observed. This buildup is what we call pus (also known as purulent or suppurative discharge
or drainage). The presence of pus is a sign that the immune defenses have been activated against an infection;

750

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

historically, some physicians believed that inducing pus formation could actually promote the healing of wounds.
The practice of promoting “laudable pus” (by, for instance, wrapping a wound in greasy wool soaked in wine) dates
back to the ancient physician Galen in the 2nd century AD, and was practiced in variant forms until the 17th century
(though it was not universally accepted). Today, this method is no longer practiced because we now know that it is
not effective. Although a small amount of pus formation can indicate a strong immune response, artificially inducing
pus formation does not promote recovery.

Eosinophils
Eosinophils are granulocytes that protect against protozoa and helminths; they also play a role in allergic reactions.
The granules of eosinophils, which readily absorb the acidic reddish dye eosin, contain histamine, degradative
enzymes, and a compound known as major basic protein (MBP) (Figure 17.14). MBP binds to the surface
carbohydrates of parasites, and this binding is associated with disruption of the cell membrane and membrane
permeability.

Basophils
Basophils have cytoplasmic granules of varied size and are named for their granules’ ability to absorb the basic
dye methylene blue (Figure 17.14). Their stimulation and degranulation can result from multiple triggering events.
Activated complement fragments C3a and C5a, produced in the activation cascades of complement proteins, act as
anaphylatoxins by inducing degranulation of basophils and inflammatory responses. This cell type is important in
allergic reactions and other responses that involve inflammation. One of the most abundant components of basophil
granules is histamine, which is released along with other chemical factors when the basophil is stimulated. These
chemicals can be chemotactic and can help to open the gaps between cells in the blood vessels. Other mechanisms for
basophil triggering require the assistance of antibodies, as discussed in B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity.

Mast Cells
Hematopoiesis also gives rise to mast cells, which appear to be derived from the same common myeloid progenitor
cell as neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils. Functionally, mast cells are very similar to basophils, containing many
of the same components in their granules (e.g., histamine) and playing a similar role in allergic responses and other
inflammatory reactions. However, unlike basophils, mast cells leave the circulating blood and are most frequently
found residing in tissues. They are often associated with blood vessels and nerves or found close to surfaces that
interface with the external environment, such as the skin and mucous membranes in various regions of the body
(Figure 17.15).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

751

Figure 17.15 Mast cells function similarly to basophils by inducing and promoting inflammatory responses. (a) This
figure shows mast cells in blood. In a blood smear, they are difficult to differentiate from basophils (b). Unlike
basophils, mast cells migrate from the blood into various tissues. (credit right: modification of work by Greenland JR,
Xu X, Sayah DM, Liu FC, Jones KD, Looney MR, Caughey GH)

• Describe the granules and nuclei of neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells.
• Name three antimicrobial mechanisms of neutrophils

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Angela’s tests come back negative for all common allergens, and her sputum samples contain no abnormal
presence of pathogenic microbes or elevated levels of members of the normal respiratory microbiota. She
does, however, have elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines in her blood.
The swelling of her airway has still not responded to treatment with antihistamines or corticosteroids. Additional
blood work shows that Angela has a mildly elevated white blood cell count but normal antibody levels. Also,
she has a lower-than-normal level of the complement protein C4.

• What does this new information reveal about the cause of Angela’s constricted airways?
• What are some possible conditions that could lead to low levels of complement proteins?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Agranulocytes
As their name suggests, agranulocytes lack visible granules in the cytoplasm. Agranulocytes can be categorized as
lymphocytes or monocytes (Figure 17.13). Among the lymphocytes are natural killer cells, which play an important
role in nonspecific innate immune defenses. Lymphocytes also include the B cells and T cells, which are discussed
in the next chapter because they are central players in the specific adaptive immune defenses. The monocytes
differentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells, which are collectively referred to as the mononuclear phagocyte
system.

752

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Natural Killer Cells
Most lymphocytes are primarily involved in the specific adaptive immune response, and thus will be discussed
in the following chapter. An exception is the natural killer cells (NK cells); these mononuclear lymphocytes use
nonspecific mechanisms to recognize and destroy cells that are abnormal in some way. Cancer cells and cells infected
with viruses are two examples of cellular abnormalities that are targeted by NK cells. Recognition of such cells
involves a complex process of identifying inhibitory and activating molecular markers on the surface of the target cell.
Molecular markers that make up the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are expressed by healthy cells as an
indication of “self.” This will be covered in more detail in next chapter. NK cells are able to recognize normal MHC
markers on the surface of healthy cells, and these MHC markers serve as an inhibitory signal preventing NK cell
activation. However, cancer cells and virus-infected cells actively diminish or eliminate expression of MHC markers
on their surface. When these MHC markers are diminished or absent, the NK cell interprets this as an abnormality
and a cell in distress. This is one part of the NK cell activation process (Figure 17.16). NK cells are also activated by
binding to activating molecular molecules on the target cell. These activating molecular molecules include “altered
self” or “nonself” molecules. When a NK cell recognizes a decrease in inhibitory normal MHC molecules and an
increase in activating molecules on the surface of a cell, the NK cell will be activated to eliminate the cell in distress.

Figure 17.16 Natural killer (NK) cells are inhibited by the presence of the major histocompatibility cell (MHC)
receptor on healthy cells. Cancer cells and virus-infected cells have reduced expression of MHC and increased
expression of activating molecules. When a NK cell recognizes decreased MHC and increased activating molecules,
it will kill the abnormal cell.

Once a cell has been recognized as a target, the NK cell can use several different mechanisms to kill its target.
For example, it may express cytotoxic membrane proteins and cytokines that stimulate the target cell to undergo
apoptosis, or controlled cell suicide. NK cells may also use perforin-mediated cytotoxicity to induce apoptosis in

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

753

target cells. This mechanism relies on two toxins released from granules in the cytoplasm of the NK cell: perforin,
a protein that creates pores in the target cell, and granzymes, proteases that enter through the pores into the target
cell’s cytoplasm, where they trigger a cascade of protein activation that leads to apoptosis. The NK cell binds to the
abnormal target cell, releases its destructive payload, and detaches from the target cell. While the target cell undergoes
apoptosis, the NK cell synthesizes more perforin and proteases to use on its next target.
NK cells contain these toxic compounds in granules in their cytoplasm. When stained, the granules are azurophilic
and can be visualized under a light microscope (Figure 17.17). Even though they have granules, NK cells are
not considered granulocytes because their granules are far less numerous than those found in true granulocytes.
Furthermore, NK cells have a different lineage than granulocytes, arising from lymphoid rather than myeloid stem
cells (Figure 17.12).

Figure 17.17 Natural killer cell with perforin-containing granules. (credit: modification of work by Rolstad B)

Monocytes
The largest of the white blood cells, monocytes have a nucleus that lacks lobes, and they also lack granules in the
cytoplasm (Figure 17.18). Nevertheless, they are effective phagocytes, engulfing pathogens and apoptotic cells to
help fight infection.
When monocytes leave the bloodstream and enter a specific body tissue, they differentiate into tissue-specific
phagocytes called macrophages and dendritic cells. They are particularly important residents of lymphoid tissue,
as well as nonlymphoid sites and organs. Macrophages and dendritic cells can reside in body tissues for significant
lengths of time. Macrophages in specific body tissues develop characteristics suited to the particular tissue. Not only
do they provide immune protection for the tissue in which they reside but they also support normal function of their
neighboring tissue cells through the production of cytokines. Macrophages are given tissue-specific names, and a few
examples of tissue-specific macrophages are listed in Table 17.6. Dendritic cells are important sentinels residing
in the skin and mucous membranes, which are portals of entry for many pathogens. Monocytes, macrophages, and
dendritic cells are all highly phagocytic and important promoters of the immune response through their production
and release of cytokines. These cells provide an essential bridge between innate and adaptive immune responses, as
discussed in the next section as well as the next chapter.

754

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.18 Monocytes are large, agranular white blood cells with a nucleus that lacks lobes. When monocytes
leave the bloodstream, they differentiate and become macrophages with tissue-specific properties. (credit left:
modification of work by Armed Forces Institute of Pathology; credit right: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

Macrophages Found in Various Body Tissues
Tissue

Macrophage

Brain and central nervous system

Microglial cells

Liver

Kupffer cells

Lungs

Alveolar macrophages (dust cells)

Peritoneal cavity

Peritoneal macrophages

Table 17.6

• Describe the signals that activate natural killer cells.
• What is the difference between monocytes and macrophages?

17.4 Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis
Learning Objectives
• Explain how leukocytes migrate from peripheral blood into infected tissues
• Explain the mechanisms by which leukocytes recognize pathogens
• Explain the process of phagocytosis and the mechanisms by which phagocytes destroy and degrade pathogens

Several of the cell types discussed in the previous section can be described as phagocytes—cells whose main function
is to seek, ingest, and kill pathogens. This process, called phagocytosis, was first observed in starfish in the 1880s by
Nobel Prize-winning zoologist Ilya Metchnikoff (1845–1916), who made the connection to white blood cells (WBCs)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

755

in humans and other animals. At the time, Pasteur and other scientists believed that WBCs were spreading pathogens
rather than killing them (which is true for some diseases, such as tuberculosis). But in most cases, phagocytes provide
a strong, swift, and effective defense against a broad range of microbes, making them a critical component of innate
nonspecific immunity. This section will focus on the mechanisms by which phagocytes are able to seek, recognize,
and destroy pathogens.

Extravasation (Diapedesis) of Leukocytes
Some phagocytes are leukocytes (WBCs) that normally circulate in the bloodstream. To reach pathogens located
in infected tissue, leukocytes must pass through the walls of small capillary blood vessels within tissues. This
process, called extravasation, or diapedesis, is initiated by complement factor C5a, as well as cytokines released
into the immediate vicinity by resident macrophages and tissue cells responding to the presence of the infectious
agent (Figure 17.19). Similar to C5a, many of these cytokines are proinflammatory and chemotactic, and they
bind to cells of small capillary blood vessels, initiating a response in the endothelial cells lining the inside of the
blood vessel walls. This response involves the upregulation and expression of various cellular adhesion molecules
and receptors. Leukocytes passing through will stick slightly to the adhesion molecules, slowing down and rolling
along the blood vessel walls near the infected area. When they reach a cellular junction, they will bind to even
more of these adhesion molecules, flattening out and squeezing through the cellular junction in a process known as
transendothelial migration. This mechanism of “rolling adhesion” allows leukocytes to exit the bloodstream and
enter the infected areas, where they can begin phagocytosing the invading pathogens.
Note that extravasation does not occur in arteries or veins. These blood vessels are surrounded by thicker, multilayer
protective walls, in contrast to the thin single-cell-layer walls of capillaries. Furthermore, the blood flow in arteries is
too turbulent to allow for rolling adhesion. Also, some leukocytes tend to respond to an infection more quickly than
others. The first to arrive typically are neutrophils, often within hours of a bacterial infection. By contract, monocytes
may take several days to leave the bloodstream and differentiate into macrophages.

756

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.19 Damaged cells and macrophages that have ingested pathogens release cytokines that are
proinflammatory and chemotactic for leukocytes. In addition, activation of complement at the site of infection results in
production of the chemotactic and proinflammatory C5a. Leukocytes exit the blood vessel and follow the
chemoattractant signal of cytokines and C5a to the site of infection. Granulocytes such as neutrophils release
chemicals that destroy pathogens. They are also capable of phagocytosis and intracellular killing of bacterial
pathogens.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

757

Link to Learning
Watch the following videos on leukocyte extravasation (https://openstax.org/
l/22leukextrvid) and leukocyte rolling (https://openstax.org/l/22leukrollvid)
to learn more.

• Explain the role of adhesion molecules in the process of extravasation.

Pathogen Recognition
As described in the previous section, opsonization of pathogens by antibody; complement factors C1q, C3b, and
C4b; and lectins can assist phagocytic cells in recognition of pathogens and attachment to initiate phagocytosis.
However, not all pathogen recognition is opsonin dependent. Phagocytes can also recognize molecular structures that
are common to many groups of pathogenic microbes. Such structures are called pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs). Common PAMPs include the following:
• peptidoglycan, found in bacterial cell walls;
• flagellin, a protein found in bacterial flagella;
• lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria;
• lipopeptides, molecules expressed by most bacteria; and
• nucleic acids such as viral DNA or RNA.

Like numerous other PAMPs, these substances are integral to the structure of broad classes of microbes.
The structures that allow phagocytic cells to detect PAMPs are called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). One
group of PRRs is the toll-like receptors (TLRs), which bind to various PAMPs and communicate with the nucleus
of the phagocyte to elicit a response. Many TLRs (and other PRRs) are located on the surface of a phagocyte, but
some can also be found embedded in the membranes of interior compartments and organelles (Figure 17.20). These
interior PRRs can be useful for the binding and recognition of intracellular pathogens that may have gained access
to the inside of the cell before phagocytosis could take place. Viral nucleic acids, for example, might encounter an
interior PRR, triggering production of the antiviral cytokine interferon.
In addition to providing the first step of pathogen recognition, the interaction between PAMPs and PRRs on
macrophages provides an intracellular signal that activates the phagocyte, causing it to transition from a dormant
state of readiness and slow proliferation to a state of hyperactivity, proliferation, production/secretion of cytokines,
and enhanced intracellular killing. PRRs on macrophages also respond to chemical distress signals from damaged
or stressed cells. This allows macrophages to extend their responses beyond protection from infectious diseases to a
broader role in the inflammatory response initiated from injuries or other diseases.

758

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.20 Phagocytic cells contain pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) capable of recognizing various
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). These PRRs can be found on the plasma membrane or in internal
phagosomes. When a PRR recognizes a PAMP, it sends a signal to the nucleus that activates genes involved in
phagocytosis, cellular proliferation, production and secretion of antiviral interferons and proinflammatory cytokines,
and enhanced intracellular killing.

• Name four pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
• Describe the process of phagocyte activation.

Pathogen Degradation
Once pathogen recognition and attachment occurs, the pathogen is engulfed in a vesicle and brought into the internal
compartment of the phagocyte in a process called phagocytosis (Figure 17.21). PRRs can aid in phagocytosis by
first binding to the pathogen’s surface, but phagocytes are also capable of engulfing nearby items even if they are not
bound to specific receptors. To engulf the pathogen, the phagocyte forms a pseudopod that wraps around the pathogen
and then pinches it off into a membrane vesicle called a phagosome. Acidification of the phagosome (pH decreases to
the range of 4–5) provides an important early antibacterial mechanism. The phagosome containing the pathogen fuses
with one or more lysosomes, forming a phagolysosome. Formation of the phagolysosome enhances the acidification,
which is essential for activation of pH-dependent digestive lysosomal enzymes and production of hydrogen peroxide
and toxic reactive oxygen species. Lysosomal enzymes such as lysozyme, phospholipase, and proteases digest the
pathogen. Other enzymes are involved a respiratory burst. During the respiratory burst, phagocytes will increase their
uptake and consumption of oxygen, but not for energy production. The increased oxygen consumption is focused on
the production of superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, and other reactive oxygen species that are
antibacterial.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

759

In addition to the reactive oxygen species produced by the respiratory burst, reactive nitrogen compounds with
cytotoxic (cell-killing) potential can also form. For example, nitric oxide can react with superoxide to form
peroxynitrite, a highly reactive nitrogen compound with degrading capabilities similar to those of the reactive oxygen
species. Some phagocytes even contain an internal storehouse of microbicidal defensin proteins (e.g., neutrophil
granules). These destructive forces can be released into the area around the cell to degrade microbes externally.
Neutrophils, especially, can be quite efficient at this secondary antimicrobial mechanism.
Once degradation is complete, leftover waste products are excreted from the cell in an exocytic vesicle. However, it is
important to note that not all remains of the pathogen are excreted as waste. Macrophages and dendritic cells are also
antigen-presenting cells involved in the specific adaptive immune response. These cells further process the remains
of the degraded pathogen and present key antigens (specific pathogen proteins) on their cellular surface. This is an
important step for stimulation of some adaptive immune responses, as will be discussed in more detail in the next
chapter.

Figure 17.21 The stages of phagocytosis include the engulfment of a pathogen, the formation of a phagosome, the
digestion of the pathogenic particle in the phagolysosome, and the expulsion of undigested materials from the cell.

Link to Learning
Visit this link (https://openstax.org/l/22phagpathvid) to view a phagocyte
chasing and engulfing a pathogen.

• What is the difference between a phagosome and a lysosome?

760

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Micro Connections
When Phagocytosis Fails
Although phagocytosis successfully destroys many pathogens, some are able to survive and even exploit
this defense mechanism to multiply in the body and cause widespread infection. Protozoans of the genus
Leishmania are one example. These obligate intracellular parasites are flagellates transmitted to humans by
the bite of a sand fly. Infections cause serious and sometimes disfiguring sores and ulcers in the skin and
other tissues (Figure 17.22). Worldwide, an estimated 1.3 million people are newly infected with leishmaniasis
annually.[1]
Salivary peptides from the sand fly activate host macrophages at the site of their bite. The classic or
alternate pathway for complement activation ensues with C3b opsonization of the parasite. Leishmania cells
are phagocytosed, lose their flagella, and multiply in a form known as an amastigote (Leishman-Donovan
body) within the phagolysosome. Although many other pathogens are destroyed in the phagolysosome,
survival of the Leishmania amastigotes is maintained by the presence of surface lipophosphoglycan and
acid phosphatase. These substances inhibit the macrophage respiratory burst and lysosomal enzymes. The
parasite then multiplies inside the cell and lyses the infected macrophage, releasing the amastigotes to infect
other macrophages within the same host. Should another sand fly bite an infected person, it might ingest
amastigotes and then transmit them to another individual through another bite.
There are several different forms of leishmaniasis. The most common is a localized cutaneous form of the
illness caused by L. tropica, which typically resolves spontaneously over time but with some significant
lymphocyte infiltration and permanent scarring. A mucocutaneous form of the disease, caused by L. viannia
brasilienfsis, produces lesions in the tissue of the nose and mouth and can be life threatening. A visceral form
of the illness can be caused by several of the different Leishmania species. It affects various organ systems
and causes abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen. Irregular fevers, anemia, liver dysfunction, and
weight loss are all signs and symptoms of visceral leishmaniasis. If left untreated, it is typically fatal.

Figure 17.22 (a) Cutaneous leishmaniasis is a disfiguring disease caused by the intracellular flagellate
Leishmania tropica, transmitted by the bite of a sand fly. (b) This light micrograph of a sample taken from a
skin lesion shows a large cell, which is a macrophage infected with L. tropica amastigotes (arrows). The
amastigotes have lost their flagella but their nuclei are visible. Soon the amastigotes will lyse the macrophage
and be engulfed by other phagocytes, spreading the infection. (credit a: modification of work by Otis Historical
Archives of “National Museum of Health & Medicine”; credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

1. World Health Organization. “Leishmaniasis.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs375/en/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

761

17.5 Inflammation and Fever
Learning Objectives
• Identify the signs of inflammation and fever and explain why they occur
• Explain the advantages and risks posed by inflammatory responses

The inflammatory response, or inflammation, is triggered by a cascade of chemical mediators and cellular responses
that may occur when cells are damaged and stressed or when pathogens successfully breach the physical barriers
of the innate immune system. Although inflammation is typically associated with negative consequences of injury
or disease, it is a necessary process insofar as it allows for recruitment of the cellular defenses needed to eliminate
pathogens, remove damaged and dead cells, and initiate repair mechanisms. Excessive inflammation, however, can
result in local tissue damage and, in severe cases, may even become deadly.

Acute Inflammation
An early, if not immediate, response to tissue injury is acute inflammation. Immediately following an injury,
vasoconstriction of blood vessels will occur to minimize blood loss. The amount of vasoconstriction is related to the
amount of vascular injury, but it is usually brief. Vasoconstriction is followed by vasodilation and increased vascular
permeability, as a direct result of the release of histamine from resident mast cells. Increased blood flow and vascular
permeability can dilute toxins and bacterial products at the site of injury or infection. They also contribute to the five
observable signs associated with the inflammatory response: erythema (redness), edema (swelling), heat, pain, and
altered function. Vasodilation and increased vascular permeability are also associated with an influx of phagocytes
at the site of injury and/or infection. This can enhance the inflammatory response because phagocytes may release
proinflammatory chemicals when they are activated by cellular distress signals released from damaged cells, by
PAMPs, or by opsonins on the surface of pathogens. Activation of the complement system can further enhance the
inflammatory response through the production of the anaphylatoxin C5a. Figure 17.23 illustrates a typical case of
acute inflammation at the site of a skin wound.

Figure 17.23 (a) Mast cells detect injury to nearby cells and release histamine, initiating an inflammatory response.
(b) Histamine increases blood flow to the wound site, and increased vascular permeability allows fluid, proteins,
phagocytes, and other immune cells to enter infected tissue. These events result in the swelling and reddening of the
injured site, and the increased blood flow to the injured site causes it to feel warm. Inflammation is also associated
with pain due to these events stimulating nerve pain receptors in the tissue. The interaction of phagocyte PRRs with
cellular distress signals and PAMPs and opsonins on the surface of pathogens leads to the release of more
proinflammatory chemicals, enhancing the inflammatory response.

762

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

During the period of inflammation, the release of bradykinin causes capillaries to remain dilated, flooding tissues with
fluids and leading to edema. Increasing numbers of neutrophils are recruited to the area to fight pathogens. As the
fight rages on, pus forms from the accumulation of neutrophils, dead cells, tissue fluids, and lymph. Typically, after a
few days, macrophages will help to clear out this pus. Eventually, tissue repair can begin in the wounded area.

Chronic Inflammation
When acute inflammation is unable to clear an infectious pathogen, chronic inflammation may occur. This often
results in an ongoing (and sometimes futile) lower-level battle between the host organism and the pathogen. The
wounded area may heal at a superficial level, but pathogens may still be present in deeper tissues, stimulating ongoing
inflammation. Additionally, chronic inflammation may be involved in the progression of degenerative neurological
diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, heart disease, and metastatic cancer.
Chronic inflammation may lead to the formation of granulomas, pockets of infected tissue walled off and surrounded
by WBCs. Macrophages and other phagocytes wage an unsuccessful battle to eliminate the pathogens and dead
cellular materials within a granuloma. One example of a disease that produces chronic inflammation is tuberculosis,
which results in the formation of granulomas in lung tissues. A tubercular granuloma is called a tubercle (Figure
17.24). Tuberculosis will be covered in more detail in Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract.
Chronic inflammation is not just associated with bacterial infections. Chronic inflammation can be an important cause
of tissue damage from viral infections. The extensive scarring observed with hepatitis C infections and liver cirrhosis
is the result of chronic inflammation.

Figure 17.24 A tubercle is a granuloma in the lung tissue of a patient with tuberculosis. In this micrograph, white
blood cells (stained purple) have walled off a pocket of tissue infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Granulomas
also occur in many other forms of disease. (credit: modification of work by Piotrowski WJ, Górski P, Duda-Szymańska
J, Kwiatkowska S)

• Name the five signs of inflammation.
• Is a granuloma an acute or chronic form of inflammation? Explain.

Micro Connections
Chronic Edema
In addition to granulomas, chronic inflammation can also result in long-term edema. A condition known
as lymphatic filariasis (also known as elephantiasis) provides an extreme example. Lymphatic filariasis is

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

763

caused by microscopic nematodes (parasitic worms) whose larvae are transmitted between human hosts
by mosquitoes. Adult worms live in the lymphatic vessels, where their presence stimulates infiltration by
lymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils, and thrombocytes (a condition known as lymphangitis). Because of the
chronic nature of the illness, granulomas, fibrosis, and blocking of the lymphatic system may eventually occur.
Over time, these blockages may worsen with repeated infections over decades, leading to skin thickened
with edema and fibrosis. Lymph (extracellular tissue fluid) may spill out of the lymphatic areas and back into
tissues, causing extreme swelling (Figure 17.25). Secondary bacterial infections commonly follow. Because it
is a disease caused by a parasite, eosinophilia (a dramatic rise in the number of eosinophils in the blood) is
characteristic of acute infection. However, this increase in antiparasite granulocytes is not sufficient to clear the
infection in many cases.
Lymphatic filariasis affects an estimated 120 million people worldwide, mostly concentrated in Africa and
Asia.[2] Improved sanitation and mosquito control can reduce transmission rates.

Figure 17.25 Elephantiasis (chronic edema) of the legs due to filariasis. (credit: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Fever
A fever is an inflammatory response that extends beyond the site of infection and affects the entire body, resulting
in an overall increase in body temperature. Body temperature is normally regulated and maintained by the
hypothalamus, an anatomical section of the brain that functions to maintain homeostasis in the body. However,
certain bacterial or viral infections can result in the production of pyrogens, chemicals that effectively alter the
“thermostat setting” of the hypothalamus to elevate body temperature and cause fever. Pyrogens may be exogenous
or endogenous. For example, the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS), produced by gram-negative bacteria, is an
exogenous pyrogen that may induce the leukocytes to release endogenous pyrogens such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6,
interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). In a cascading effect, these molecules can then lead to the
release of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) from other cells, resetting the hypothalamus to initiate fever (Figure 17.26).
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites–Lymphatic Filiariasis.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/lymphaticfilariasis/
gen_info/faqs.html.

764

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Figure 17.26 The role of the hypothalamus in the inflammatory response. Macrophages recognize pathogens in an
area and release cytokines that trigger inflammation. The cytokines also send a signal up the vagus nerve to the
hypothalamus.

Like other forms of inflammation, a fever enhances the innate immune defenses by stimulating leukocytes to kill
pathogens. The rise in body temperature also may inhibit the growth of many pathogens since human pathogens are
mesophiles with optimum growth occurring around 35 °C (95 °F). In addition, some studies suggest that fever may
also stimulate release of iron-sequestering compounds from the liver, thereby starving out microbes that rely on iron
for growth.[3]
During fever, the skin may appear pale due to vasoconstriction of the blood vessels in the skin, which is mediated
by the hypothalamus to divert blood flow away from extremities, minimizing the loss of heat and raising the core
temperature. The hypothalamus will also stimulate shivering of muscles, another effective mechanism of generating
heat and raising the core temperature.
The crisis phase occurs when the fever breaks. The hypothalamus stimulates vasodilation, resulting in a return of
blood flow to the skin and a subsequent release of heat from the body. The hypothalamus also stimulates sweating,
which cools the skin as the sweat evaporates.
Although a low-level fever may help an individual overcome an illness, in some instances, this immune response
can be too strong, causing tissue and organ damage and, in severe cases, even death. The inflammatory response to
bacterial superantigens is one scenario in which a life-threatening fever may develop. Superantigens are bacterial or
viral proteins that can cause an excessive activation of T cells from the specific adaptive immune defense, as well as
an excessive release of cytokines that overstimulates the inflammatory response. For example, Staphylococcus aureus
and Streptococcus pyogenes are capable of producing superantigens that cause toxic shock syndrome and scarlet
fever, respectively. Both of these conditions can be associated with very high, life-threatening fevers in excess of 42
°C (108 °F).

• Explain the difference between exogenous and endogenous pyrogens.
• How does a fever inhibit pathogens?

3. N. Parrow et al. “Sequestration and Scavenging of Iron in Infection.” Infection and Immunity 81 no. 10 (2013):3503–3514

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

765

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Given her father’s premature death, Angela’s doctor suspects that she has hereditary angioedema, a genetic
disorder that compromises the function of C1 inhibitor protein. Patients with this genetic abnormality may have
occasional episodes of swelling in various parts of the body. In Angela’s case, the swelling has occurred in the
respiratory tract, leading to difficulty breathing. Swelling may also occur in the gastrointestinal tract, causing
abdominal cramping, diarrhea, and vomiting, or in the muscles of the face or limbs. This swelling may be
nonresponsive to steroid treatment and is often misdiagnosed as an allergy.
Because there are three types of hereditary angioedema, the doctor orders a more specific blood test to look
for levels of C1-INH, as well as a functional assay of Angela’s C1 inhibitors. The results suggest that Angela
has type I hereditary angioedema, which accounts for 80%–85% of all cases. This form of the disorder is
caused by a deficiency in C1 esterase inhibitors, the proteins that normally help suppress activation of the
complement system. When these proteins are deficient or nonfunctional, overstimulation of the system can
lead to production of inflammatory anaphylatoxins, which results in swelling and fluid buildup in tissues.
There is no cure for hereditary angioedema, but timely treatment with purified and concentrated C1-INH from
blood donors can be effective, preventing tragic outcomes like the one suffered by Angela’s father. A number
of therapeutic drugs, either currently approved or in late-stage human trials, may also be considered as options
for treatment in the near future. These drugs work by inhibiting inflammatory molecules or the receptors for
inflammatory molecules.
Thankfully, Angela’s condition was quickly diagnosed and treated. Although she may experience additional
episodes in the future, her prognosis is good and she can expect to live a relatively normal life provided she
seeks treatment at the onset of symptoms.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Summary
17.1 Physical Defenses
• Nonspecific innate immunity provides a first line of defense against infection by nonspecifically blocking
entry of microbes and targeting them for destruction or removal from the body.
• The physical defenses of innate immunity include physical barriers, mechanical actions that remove microbes
and debris, and the microbiome, which competes with and inhibits the growth of pathogens.
• The skin, mucous membranes, and endothelia throughout the body serve as physical barriers that prevent
microbes from reaching potential sites of infection. Tight cell junctions in these tissues prevent microbes from
passing through.
• Microbes trapped in dead skin cells or mucus are removed from the body by mechanical actions such
as shedding of skin cells, mucociliary sweeping, coughing, peristalsis, and flushing of bodily fluids (e.g.,
urination, tears)
• The resident microbiota provide a physical defense by occupying available cellular binding sites and
competing with pathogens for available nutrients.
17.2 Chemical Defenses
• Numerous chemical mediators produced endogenously and exogenously exhibit nonspecific antimicrobial
functions.
• Many chemical mediators are found in body fluids such as sebum, saliva, mucus, gastric and intestinal fluids,
urine, tears, cerumen, and vaginal secretions.

766

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

• Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) found on the skin and in other areas of the body are largely produced
in response to the presence of pathogens. These include dermcidin, cathelicidin, defensins, histatins, and
bacteriocins.
• Plasma contains various proteins that serve as chemical mediators, including acute-phase proteins,
complement proteins, and cytokines.
• The complement system involves numerous precursor proteins that circulate in plasma. These proteins
become activated in a cascading sequence in the presence of microbes, resulting in the opsonization of
pathogens, chemoattraction of leukocytes, induction of inflammation, and cytolysis through the formation of
a membrane attack complex (MAC).
• Cytokines are proteins that facilitate various nonspecific responses by innate immune cells, including
production of other chemical mediators, cell proliferation, cell death, and differentiation.
• Cytokines play a key role in the inflammatory response, triggering production of inflammation-eliciting
mediators such as acute-phase proteins, histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and bradykinin.
17.3 Cellular Defenses
• The formed elements of the blood include red blood cells (erythrocytes), white blood cells (leukocytes), and
platelets (thrombocytes). Of these, leukocytes are primarily involved in the immune response.
• All formed elements originate in the bone marrow as stem cells (HSCs) that differentiate through
hematopoiesis.
• Granulocytes are leukocytes characterized by a lobed nucleus and granules in the cytoplasm. These include
neutrophils (PMNs), eosinophils, and basophils.
• Neutrophils are the leukocytes found in the largest numbers in the bloodstream and they primarily fight
bacterial infections.
• Eosinophils target parasitic infections. Eosinophils and basophils are involved in allergic reactions. Both
release histamine and other proinflammatory compounds from their granules upon stimulation.
• Mast cells function similarly to basophils but can be found in tissues outside the bloodstream.
• Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that recognize and kill abnormal or infected cells by releasing
proteins that trigger apoptosis.
• Monocytes are large, mononuclear leukocytes that circulate in the bloodstream. They may leave the
bloodstream and take up residence in body tissues, where they differentiate and become tissue-specific
macrophages and dendritic cells.
17.4 Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis
• Phagocytes are cells that recognize pathogens and destroy them through phagocytosis.
• Recognition often takes place by the use of phagocyte receptors that bind molecules commonly found on
pathogens, known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
• The receptors that bind PAMPs are called pattern recognition receptors, or PRRs. Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) are one type of PRR found on phagocytes.
• Extravasation of white blood cells from the bloodstream into infected tissue occurs through the process of
transendothelial migration.
• Phagocytes degrade pathogens through phagocytosis, which involves engulfing the pathogen, killing and
digesting it within a phagolysosome, and then excreting undigested matter.
17.5 Inflammation and Fever
• Inflammation results from the collective response of chemical mediators and cellular defenses to an injury or
infection.
• Acute inflammation is short lived and localized to the site of injury or infection. Chronic inflammation
occurs when the inflammatory response is unsuccessful, and may result in the formation of granulomas (e.g.,
with tuberculosis) and scarring (e.g., with hepatitis C viral infections and liver cirrhosis).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

767

• The five cardinal signs of inflammation are erythema, edema, heat, pain, and altered function. These largely
result from innate responses that draw increased blood flow to the injured or infected tissue.
• Fever is a system-wide sign of inflammation that raises the body temperature and stimulates the immune
response.
• Both inflammation and fever can be harmful if the inflammatory response is too severe.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. Which of the following best describes the innate
nonspecific immune system?
a. a targeted and highly specific response to a
single pathogen or molecule
b. a generalized and nonspecific set of defenses
against a class or group of pathogens
c. a set of barrier mechanisms that adapts to
specific pathogens after repeated exposure
d. the production of antibody molecules against
pathogens
2. Which of the following constantly sheds dead cells
along with any microbes that may be attached to those
cells?
a. epidermis
b. dermis
c. hypodermis
d. mucous membrane
3. Which of the following uses a particularly dense
suite of tight junctions to prevent microbes from
entering the underlying tissue?
a. the mucociliary escalator
b. the epidermis
c. the blood-brain barrier
d. the urethra
4. Which of the following serve as chemical signals
between cells and stimulate a wide range of nonspecific
defenses?
a. cytokines
b. antimicrobial peptides
c. complement proteins
d. antibodies
5. Bacteriocins and defensins are types of which of the
following?
a. leukotrienes
b. cytokines
c. inflammation-eliciting mediators
d. antimicrobial peptides

6. Which of the following chemical mediators is
secreted onto the surface of the skin?
a. cerumen
b. sebum
c. gastric acid
d. prostaglandin
7. Identify the complement activation pathway that is
triggered by the binding of an acute-phase protein to a
pathogen.
a. classical
b. alternate
c. lectin
d. cathelicidin
8.
Histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and
bradykinin are examples of which of the following?
a. chemical mediators primarily found in the
digestive system
b. chemical mediators that promote inflammation
c. antimicrobial peptides found on the skin
d. complement proteins that form MACs
9. White blood cells are also referred to as which of the
following?
a. platelets
b. erythrocytes
c. leukocytes
d. megakaryocytes
10. Hematopoiesis occurs inwhich of the following?
a. liver
b. bone marrow
c. kidneys
d. central nervous system
11. Granulocytes are which type of cell?
a. lymphocyte
b. erythrocyte
c. megakaryocyte
d. leukocyte

768

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

12. PAMPs would be found on the surface of which of
the following?
a. pathogen
b. phagocyte
c. skin cell
d. blood vessel wall
13. ________ on phagocytes bind to PAMPs on
bacteria, which triggers the uptake and destruction of the
bacterial pathogens?
a. PRRs
b. AMPs
c. PAMPs
d. PMNs
14. Which of the following best characterizes the mode
of pathogen recognition for opsonin-dependent
phagocytosis?
a. Opsonins produced by a pathogen attract
phagocytes through chemotaxis.
b. A PAMP on the pathogen’s surface is recognized
by a phagocyte’s toll-like receptors.
c. A pathogen is first coated with a molecule such
as a complement protein, which allows it to be
recognized by phagocytes.
d. A pathogen is coated with a molecule such as a
complement protein that immediately lyses the
cell.
15. Which refers to swelling as a result of
inflammation?
a. erythema
b. edema
c. granuloma
d. vasodilation
16. Which type of inflammation occurs at the site of an
injury or infection?
a. acute
b. chronic
c. endogenous
d. exogenous
Matching

17. Match each cell type with its description.
___natural killer
cell

A. stains with basic dye methylene blue, has large amounts of histamine in granules, and
facilitates allergic responses and inflammation

___basophil

B. stains with acidic dye eosin, has histamine and major basic protein in granules, and
facilitates responses to protozoa and helminths

___macrophage

C. recognizes abnormal cells, binds to them, and releases perforin and granzyme molecules,
which induce apoptosis

___eosinophil

D. large agranular phagocyte that resides in tissues such as the brain and lungs

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

769

18. Match each cellular defense with the infection it would most likely target.
___natural killer cell

A. virus-infected cell

___neutrophil

B. tapeworm in the intestines

___eosinophil

C. bacteria in a skin lesion

Fill in the Blank

19. The muscular contraction of the intestines that results in movement of material through the digestive tract is
called ________.
20. ______ are the hair-like appendages of cells lining parts of the respiratory tract that sweep debris away from the
lungs.
21. Secretions that bathe and moisten the interior of the intestines are produced by _______ cells.
22. ________ are antimicrobial peptides produced by members of the normal microbiota.
23. ________ is the fluid portion of a blood sample that has been drawn in the presence of an anticoagulant
compound.
24. The process by which cells are drawn or attracted to an area by a microbe invader is known as ________.
25. Platelets are also called ________.
26. The cell in the bone marrow that gives rise to all other blood cell types is the ________.
27. PMNs are another name for ________.
28. Kupffer cells residing in the liver are a type of ________.
29. _____________ are similar to basophils, but reside in tissues rather than circulating in the blood.
30. ________, also known as diapedesis, refers to the exit from the bloodstream of neutrophils and other circulating
leukocytes.
31. Toll-like receptors are examples of ________.
32. A(n) ________ is a walled-off area of infected tissue that exhibits chronic inflammation.
33. The ________ is the part of the body responsible for regulating body temperature.
34. Heat and redness, or ________, occur when the small blood vessels in an inflamed area dilate (open up), bringing
more blood much closer to the surface of the skin.
Short Answer

35. Differentiate a physical barrier from a mechanical removal mechanism and give an example of each.
36. Identify some ways that pathogens can breach the physical barriers of the innate immune system.
37. Differentiate the main activation methods of the classic, alternative, and lectin complement cascades.
38. What are the four protective outcomes of complement activation?
39. Explain the difference between plasma and the formed elements of the blood.
40. List three ways that a neutrophil can destroy an infectious bacterium.
41. Briefly summarize the events leading up to and including the process of transendothelial migration.
42. Differentiate exogenous and endogenous pyrogens, and provide an example of each.

770

Chapter 17 | Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses

Critical Thinking

43. Neutrophils can sometimes kill human cells along with pathogens when they release the toxic contents of their
granules into the surrounding tissue. Likewise, natural killer cells target human cells for destruction. Explain why it
is advantageous for the immune system to have cells that can kill human cells as well as pathogens.
44. Refer to Figure 17.13. In a blood smear taken from a healthy patient, which type of leukocyte would you expect
to observe in the highest numbers?
45. If a gram-negative bacterial infection reaches the bloodstream, large quantities of LPS can be released into the
blood, resulting in a syndrome called septic shock. Death due to septic shock is a real danger. The overwhelming
immune and inflammatory responses that occur with septic shock can cause a perilous drop in blood pressure;
intravascular blood clotting; development of thrombi and emboli that block blood vessels, leading to tissue death;
failure of multiple organs; and death of the patient. Identify and characterize two to three therapies that might be
useful in stopping the dangerous events and outcomes of septic shock once it has begun, given what you have learned
about inflammation and innate immunity in this chapter.
46. In Lubeck, Germany, in 1930, a group of 251 infants was accidentally administered a tainted vaccine for
tuberculosis that contained live Mycobacterium tuberculosis. This vaccine was administered orally, directly exposing
the infants to the deadly bacterium. Many of these infants contracted tuberculosis, and some died. However, 44 of the
infants never contracted tuberculosis. Based on your knowledge of the innate immune system, what innate defenses
might have inhibited M. tuberculosis enough to prevent these infants from contracting the disease?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

771

Chapter 18

Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Figure 18.1 Polio was once a common disease with potentially serious consequences, including paralysis.
Vaccination has all but eliminated the disease from most countries around the world. An iron-lung ward, such as the
one shown in this 1953 photograph, housed patients paralyzed from polio and unable to breathe for themselves.

Chapter Outline
18.1 Overview of Specific Adaptive Immunity
18.2 Major Histocompatibility Complexes and Antigen-Presenting Cells
18.3 T Lymphocytes and Cellular Immunity
18.4 B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity
18.5 Vaccines

Introduction
People living in developed nations and born in the 1960s or later may have difficulty understanding the once heavy
burden of devastating infectious diseases. For example, smallpox, a deadly viral disease, once destroyed entire
civilizations but has since been eradicated. Thanks to the vaccination efforts by multiple groups, including the World
Health Organization, Rotary International, and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), smallpox has not
been diagnosed in a patient since 1977. Polio is another excellent example. This crippling viral disease paralyzed
patients, who were often kept alive in “iron lung wards” as recently as the 1950s (Figure 18.1). Today, vaccination
against polio has nearly eradicated the disease. Vaccines have also reduced the prevalence of once-common infectious
diseases such as chickenpox, German measles, measles, mumps, and whooping cough. The success of these and other
vaccines is due to the very specific and adaptive host defenses that are the focus of this chapter.
Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses described innate immunity against microbial pathogens. Higher animals,
such as humans, also possess an adaptive immune defense, which is highly specific for individual microbial
pathogens. This specific adaptive immunity is acquired through active infection or vaccination and serves as an
important defense against pathogens that evade the defenses of innate immunity.

772

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

18.1 Overview of Specific Adaptive Immunity
Learning Objectives
• Define memory, primary response, secondary response, and specificity
• Distinguish between humoral and cellular immunity
• Differentiate between antigens, epitopes, and haptens
• Describe the structure and function of antibodies and distinguish between the different classes of antibodies

Adaptive immunity is defined by two important characteristics: specificity and memory. Specificity refers to the
adaptive immune system’s ability to target specific pathogens, and memory refers to its ability to quickly respond to
pathogens to which it has previously been exposed. For example, when an individual recovers from chickenpox, the
body develops a memory of the infection that will specifically protect it from the causative agent, the varicella-zoster
virus, if it is exposed to the virus again later.
Specificity and memory are achieved by essentially programming certain cells involved in the immune response to
respond rapidly to subsequent exposures of the pathogen. This programming occurs as a result of the first exposure to
a pathogen or vaccine, which triggers a primary response. Subsequent exposures result in a secondary response that
is faster and stronger as a result of the body’s memory of the first exposure (Figure 18.2). This secondary response,
however, is specific to the pathogen in question. For example, exposure to one virus (e.g., varicella-zoster virus) will
not provide protection against other viral diseases (e.g., measles, mumps, or polio).
Adaptive specific immunity involves the actions of two distinct cell types: B lymphocytes (B cells) and T
lymphocytes (T cells). Although B cells and T cells arise from a common hematopoietic stem cell differentiation
pathway (see Figure 17.12), their sites of maturation and their roles in adaptive immunity are very different.
B cells mature in the bone marrow and are responsible for the production of glycoproteins called antibodies, or
immunoglobulins. Antibodies are involved in the body’s defense against pathogens and toxins in the extracellular
environment. Mechanisms of adaptive specific immunity that involve B cells and antibody production are referred to
as humoral immunity. The maturation of T cells occurs in the thymus. T cells function as the central orchestrator
of both innate and adaptive immune responses. They are also responsible for destruction of cells infected with
intracellular pathogens. The targeting and destruction of intracellular pathogens by T cells is called cell-mediated
immunity, or cellular immunity.

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Olivia, a one-year old infant, is brought to the emergency room by her parents, who report her symptoms:
excessive crying, irritability, sensitivity to light, unusual lethargy, and vomiting. A physician feels swollen lymph
nodes in Olivia’s throat and armpits. In addition, the area of the abdomen over the spleen is swollen and tender.

• What do these symptoms suggest?
• What tests might be ordered to try to diagnose the problem?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

773

Figure 18.2 This graph illustrates the primary and secondary immune responses related to antibody production after
an initial and secondary exposure to an antigen. Notice that the secondary response is faster and provides a much
higher concentration of antibody.

• List the two defining characteristics of adaptive immunity.
• Explain the difference between a primary and secondary immune response.
• How do humoral and cellular immunity differ?

Antigens
Activation of the adaptive immune defenses is triggered by pathogen-specific molecular structures called antigens.
Antigens are similar to the pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) discussed in Pathogen Recognition
and Phagocytosis; however, whereas PAMPs are molecular structures found on numerous pathogens, antigens are
unique to a specific pathogen. The antigens that stimulate adaptive immunity to chickenpox, for example, are unique
to the varicella-zoster virus but significantly different from the antigens associated with other viral pathogens.
The term antigen was initially used to describe molecules that stimulate the production of antibodies; in fact, the term
comes from a combination of the words antibody and generator, and a molecule that stimulates antibody production
is said to be antigenic. However, the role of antigens is not limited to humoral immunity and the production of
antibodies; antigens also play an essential role in stimulating cellular immunity, and for this reason antigens are
sometimes more accurately referred to as immunogens. In this text, however, we will typically refer to them as
antigens.
Pathogens possess a variety of structures that may contain antigens. For example, antigens from bacterial cells may
be associated with their capsules, cell walls, fimbriae, flagella, or pili. Bacterial antigens may also be associated with
extracellular toxins and enzymes that they secrete. Viruses possess a variety of antigens associated with their capsids,
envelopes, and the spike structures they use for attachment to cells.
Antigens may belong to any number of molecular classes, including carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids, proteins,
and combinations of these molecules. Antigens of different classes vary in their ability to stimulate adaptive immune
defenses as well as in the type of response they stimulate (humoral or cellular). The structural complexity of an
antigenic molecule is an important factor in its antigenic potential. In general, more complex molecules are more
effective as antigens. For example, the three-dimensional complex structure of proteins make them the most effective
and potent antigens, capable of stimulating both humoral and cellular immunity. In comparison, carbohydrates are

774

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

less complex in structure and therefore less effective as antigens; they can only stimulate humoral immune defenses.
Lipids and nucleic acids are the least antigenic molecules, and in some cases may only become antigenic when
combined with proteins or carbohydrates to form glycolipids, lipoproteins, or nucleoproteins.
One reason the three-dimensional complexity of antigens is so important is that antibodies and T cells do not
recognize and interact with an entire antigen but with smaller exposed regions on the surface of antigens called
epitopes. A single antigen may possess several different epitopes (Figure 18.3), and different antibodies may bind
to different epitopes on the same antigen (Figure 18.4). For example, the bacterial flagellum is a large, complex
protein structure that can possess hundreds or even thousands of epitopes with unique three-dimensional structures.
Moreover, flagella from different bacterial species (or even strains of the same species) contain unique epitopes that
can only be bound by specific antibodies.
An antigen’s size is another important factor in its antigenic potential. Whereas large antigenic structures like flagella
possess multiple epitopes, some molecules are too small to be antigenic by themselves. Such molecules, called
haptens, are essentially free epitopes that are not part of the complex three-dimensional structure of a larger antigen.
For a hapten to become antigenic, it must first attach to a larger carrier molecule (usually a protein) to produce
a conjugate antigen. The hapten-specific antibodies produced in response to the conjugate antigen are then able
to interact with unconjugated free hapten molecules. Haptens are not known to be associated with any specific
pathogens, but they are responsible for some allergic responses. For example, the hapten urushiol, a molecule found
in the oil of plants that cause poison ivy, causes an immune response that can result in a severe rash (called contact
dermatitis). Similarly, the hapten penicillin can cause allergic reactions to drugs in the penicillin class.

Figure 18.3 An antigen is a macromolecule that reacts with components of the immune system. A given antigen
may contain several motifs that are recognized by immune cells.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

775

Figure 18.4 A typical protein antigen has multiple epitopes, shown by the ability of three different antibodies to bind
to different epitopes of the same antigen.

• What is the difference between an antigen and an epitope?
• What factors affect an antigen’s antigenic potential?
• Why are haptens typically not antigenic, and how do they become antigenic?

Antibodies
Antibodies (also called immunoglobulins) are glycoproteins that are present in both the blood and tissue fluids. The
basic structure of an antibody monomer consists of four protein chains held together by disulfide bonds (Figure
18.5). A disulfide bond is a covalent bond between the sulfhydryl R groups found on two cysteine amino acids.
The two largest chains are identical to each other and are called the heavy chains. The two smaller chains are also
identical to each other and are called the light chains. Joined together, the heavy and light chains form a basic Yshaped structure.
The two ‘arms’ of the Y-shaped antibody molecule are known as the Fab region, for “fragment of antigen binding.”
The far end of the Fab region is the variable region, which serves as the site of antigen binding. The amino acid
sequence in the variable region dictates the three-dimensional structure, and thus the specific three-dimensional
epitope to which the Fab region is capable of binding. Although the epitope specificity of the Fab regions is identical
for each arm of a single antibody molecule, this region displays a high degree of variability between antibodies with

776

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

different epitope specificities. Binding to the Fab region is necessary for neutralization of pathogens, agglutination or
aggregation of pathogens, and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
The constant region of the antibody molecule includes the trunk of the Y and lower portion of each arm of the Y.
The trunk of the Y is also called the Fc region, for “fragment of crystallization,” and is the site of complement factor
binding and binding to phagocytic cells during antibody-mediated opsonization.

Figure 18.5 (a) The typical four-chain structure of a generic antibody monomer. (b) The corresponding threedimensional structure of the antibody IgG. (credit b: modification of work by Tim Vickers)

• Describe the different functions of the Fab region and the Fc region.

Antibody Classes
The constant region of an antibody molecule determines its class, or isotype. The five classes of antibodies are IgG,
IgM, IgA, IgD, and IgE. Each class possesses unique heavy chains designated by Greek letters γ, μ, α, δ, and ε,
respectively. Antibody classes also exhibit important differences in abundance in serum, arrangement, body sites of
action, functional roles, and size (Figure 18.6).
IgG is a monomer that is by far the most abundant antibody in human blood, accounting for about 80% of total serum
antibody. IgG penetrates efficiently into tissue spaces, and is the only antibody class with the ability to cross the
placental barrier, providing passive immunity to the developing fetus during pregnancy. IgG is also the most versatile
antibody class in terms of its role in the body’s defense against pathogens.
IgM is initially produced in a monomeric membrane-bound form that serves as an antigen-binding receptor on B
cells. The secreted form of IgM assembles into a pentamer with five monomers of IgM bound together by a protein
structure called the J chain. Although the location of the J chain relative to the Fc regions of the five monomers
prevents IgM from performing some of the functions of IgG, the ten available Fab sites associated with a pentameric
IgM make it an important antibody in the body’s arsenal of defenses. IgM is the first antibody produced and secreted
by B cells during the primary and secondary immune responses, making pathogen-specific IgM a valuable diagnostic
marker during active or recent infections.
IgA accounts for about 13% of total serum antibody, and secretory IgA is the most common and abundant antibody
class found in the mucus secretions that protect the mucous membranes. IgA can also be found in other secretions
such as breast milk, tears, and saliva. Secretory IgA is assembled into a dimeric form with two monomers joined by a

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

777

protein structure called the secretory component. One of the important functions of secretory IgA is to trap pathogens
in mucus so that they can later be eliminated from the body.
Similar to IgM, IgD is a membrane-bound monomer found on the surface of B cells, where it serves as an antigenbinding receptor. However, IgD is not secreted by B cells, and only trace amounts are detected in serum. These trace
amounts most likely come from the degradation of old B cells and the release of IgD molecules from their cytoplasmic
membranes.
IgE is the least abundant antibody class in serum. Like IgG, it is secreted as a monomer, but its role in adaptive
immunity is restricted to anti-parasitic defenses. The Fc region of IgE binds to basophils and mast cells. The
Fab region of the bound IgE then interacts with specific antigen epitopes, causing the cells to release potent proinflammatory mediators. The inflammatory reaction resulting from the activation of mast cells and basophils aids in
the defense against parasites, but this reaction is also central to allergic reactions (see Diseases of the Immune
System.

Figure 18.6

778

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

• What part of an antibody molecule determines its class?
• What class of antibody is involved in protection against parasites?
• Describe the difference in structure between IgM and IgG.

Antigen-Antibody Interactions
Different classes of antibody play important roles in the body’s defense against pathogens. These functions include
neutralization of pathogens, opsonization for phagocytosis, agglutination, complement activation, and antibodydependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. For most of these functions, antibodies also provide an important link between
adaptive specific immunity and innate nonspecific immunity.
Neutralization involves the binding of certain antibodies (IgG, IgM, or IgA) to epitopes on the surface of pathogens
or toxins, preventing their attachment to cells. For example, Secretory IgA can bind to specific pathogens and block
initial attachment to intestinal mucosal cells. Similarly, specific antibodies can bind to certain toxins, blocking them
from attaching to target cells and thus neutralizing their toxic effects. Viruses can be neutralized and prevented from
infecting a cell by the same mechanism (Figure 18.7).
As described in Chemical Defenses, opsonization is the coating of a pathogen with molecules, such as complement
factors, C-reactive protein, and serum amyloid A, to assist in phagocyte binding to facilitate phagocytosis. IgG
antibodies also serve as excellent opsonins, binding their Fab sites to specific epitopes on the surface of pathogens.
Phagocytic cells such as macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils have receptors on their surfaces that recognize
and bind to the Fc portion of the IgG molecules; thus, IgG helps such phagocytes attach to and engulf the pathogens
they have bound (Figure 18.8).
Agglutination or aggregation involves the cross-linking of pathogens by antibodies to create large aggregates
(Figure 18.9). IgG has two Fab antigen-binding sites, which can bind to two separate pathogen cells, clumping them
together. When multiple IgG antibodies are involved, large aggregates can develop; these aggregates are easier for
the kidneys and spleen to filter from the blood and easier for phagocytes to ingest for destruction. The pentameric
structure of IgM provides ten Fab binding sites per molecule, making it the most efficient antibody for agglutination.

Figure 18.7 Neutralization involves the binding of specific antibodies to antigens found on bacteria, viruses, and
toxins, preventing them from attaching to target cells.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

779

Figure 18.8 Antibodies serve as opsonins and inhibit infection by tagging pathogens for destruction by
macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils. These phagocytic cells use Fc receptors to bind to IgG-opsonized
pathogens and initiate the first step of attachment before phagocytosis.

Figure 18.9 Antibodies, especially IgM antibodies, agglutinate bacteria by binding to epitopes on two or more
bacteria simultaneously. When multiple pathogens and antibodies are present, aggregates form when the binding
sites of antibodies bind with separate pathogens.

Another important function of antibodies is activation of the complement cascade. As discussed in the previous
chapter, the complement system is an important component of the innate defenses, promoting the inflammatory
response, recruiting phagocytes to site of infection, enhancing phagocytosis by opsonization, and killing gramnegative bacterial pathogens with the membrane attack complex (MAC). Complement activation can occur through
three different pathways (see Figure 17.9), but the most efficient is the classical pathway, which requires the initial
binding of IgG or IgM antibodies to the surface of a pathogen cell, allowing for recruitment and activation of the C1
complex.
Yet another important function of antibodies is antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), which
enhances killing of pathogens that are too large to be phagocytosed. This process is best characterized for natural
killer cells (NK cells), as shown in Figure 18.10, but it can also involve macrophages and eosinophils. ADCC occurs

780

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

when the Fab region of an IgG antibody binds to a large pathogen; Fc receptors on effector cells (e.g., NK cells) then
bind to the Fc region of the antibody, bringing them into close proximity with the target pathogen. The effector cell
then secretes powerful cytotoxins (e.g., perforin and granzymes) that kill the pathogen.

Figure 18.10 In this example of ADCC, antibodies bind to a large pathogenic cell that is too big for phagocytosis and
then bind to Fc receptors on the membrane of a natural killer cell. This interaction brings the NK cell into close
proximity, where it can kill the pathogen through release of lethal extracellular cytotoxins.

• Where is IgA normally found?
• Which class of antibody crosses the placenta, providing protection to the fetus?
• Compare the mechanisms of opsonization and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.

18.2 Major Histocompatibility Complexes and AntigenPresenting Cells
Learning Objectives
• Identify cells that express MHC I and/or MHC II molecules and describe the structures and cellular location of

MHC I and MHC II molecules
• Identify the cells that are antigen-presenting cells
• Describe the process of antigen processing and presentation with MHC I and MHC II

As discussed in Cellular Defenses, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules are expressed on the
surface of healthy cells, identifying them as normal and “self” to natural killer (NK) cells. MHC molecules also play
an important role in the presentation of foreign antigens, which is a critical step in the activation of T cells and thus
an important mechanism of the adaptive immune system.

Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a collection of genes coding for MHC molecules found on the
surface of all nucleated cells of the body. In humans, the MHC genes are also referred to as human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) genes. Mature red blood cells, which lack a nucleus, are the only cells that do not express MHC molecules on
their surface.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

781

There are two classes of MHC molecules involved in adaptive immunity, MHC I and MHC II (Figure 18.11).
MHC I molecules are found on all nucleated cells; they present normal self-antigens as well as abnormal or nonself
pathogens to the effector T cells involved in cellular immunity. In contrast, MHC II molecules are only found on
macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells; they present abnormal or nonself pathogen antigens for the initial activation
of T cells.
Both types of MHC molecules are transmembrane glycoproteins that assemble as dimers in the cytoplasmic
membrane of cells, but their structures are quite different. MHC I molecules are composed of a longer α protein chain
coupled with a smaller β2 microglobulin protein, and only the α chain spans the cytoplasmic membrane. The α chain
of the MHC I molecule folds into three separate domains: α1, α2 and α3. MHC II molecules are composed of two
protein chains (an α and a β chain) that are approximately similar in length. Both chains of the MHC II molecule
possess portions that span the plasma membrane, and each chain folds into two separate domains: α1 and α2, and β1,
and β2. In order to present abnormal or non-self-antigens to T cells, MHC molecules have a cleft that serves as the
antigen-binding site near the “top” (or outermost) portion of the MHC-I or MHC-II dimer. For MHC I, the antigenbinding cleft is formed by the α1 and α2 domains, whereas for MHC II, the cleft is formed by the α1 and β1 domains
(Figure 18.11).

Figure 18.11 MHC I are found on all nucleated body cells, and MHC II are found on macrophages, dendritic cells,
and B cells (along with MHC I). The antigen-binding cleft of MHC I is formed by domains α 1 and α2. The antigenbinding cleft of MHC II is formed by domains α1 and β1.

• Compare the structures of the MHC I and MHC II molecules.

Antigen-Presenting Cells (APCs)
All nucleated cells in the body have mechanisms for processing and presenting antigens in association with MHC
molecules. This signals the immune system, indicating whether the cell is normal and healthy or infected with an
intracellular pathogen. However, only macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells have the ability to present antigens
specifically for the purpose of activating T cells; for this reason, these types of cells are sometimes referred to as
antigen-presenting cells (APCs).
While all APCs play a similar role in adaptive immunity, there are some important differences to consider.
Macrophages and dendritic cells are phagocytes that ingest and kill pathogens that penetrate the first-line barriers (i.e.,
skin and mucous membranes). B cells, on the other hand, do not function as phagocytes but play a primary role in

782

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

the production and secretion of antibodies. In addition, whereas macrophages and dendritic cells recognize pathogens
through nonspecific receptor interactions (e.g., PAMPs, toll-like receptors, and receptors for opsonizing complement
or antibody), B cells interact with foreign pathogens or their free antigens using antigen-specific immunoglobulin as
receptors (monomeric IgD and IgM). When the immunoglobulin receptors bind to an antigen, the B cell internalizes
the antigen by endocytosis before processing and presentting the antigen to T cells.

Antigen Presentation with MHC II Molecules
MHC II molecules are only found on the surface of APCs. Macrophages and dendritic cells use similar mechanisms
for processing and presentation of antigens and their epitopes in association with MHC II; B cells use somewhat
different mechanisms that will be described further in B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity. For now, we
will focus on the steps of the process as they pertain to dendritic cells.
After a dendritic cell recognizes and attaches to a pathogen cell, the pathogen is internalized by phagocytosis and is
initially contained within a phagosome. Lysosomes containing antimicrobial enzymes and chemicals fuse with the
phagosome to create a phagolysosome, where degradation of the pathogen for antigen processing begins. Proteases
(protein-degrading) are especially important in antigen processing because only protein antigen epitopes are presented
to T cells by MHC II (Figure 18.12).
APCs do not present all possible epitopes to T cells; only a selection of the most antigenic or immunodominant
epitopes are presented. The mechanism by which epitopes are selected for processing and presentation by an APC
is complicated and not well understood; however, once the most antigenic, immunodominant epitopes have been
processed, they associate within the antigen-binding cleft of MHC II molecules and are translocated to the cell surface
of the dendritic cell for presentation to T cells.

Figure 18.12 A dendritic cell phagocytoses a bacterial cell and brings it into a phagosome. Lysosomes fuse with the
phagosome to create a phagolysosome, where antimicrobial chemicals and enzymes degrade the bacterial cell.
Proteases process bacterial antigens, and the most antigenic epitopes are selected and presented on the cell’s
surface in conjunction with MHC II molecules. T cells recognize the presented antigens and are thus activated.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

783

• What are the three kinds of APCs?
• What role to MHC II molecules play in antigen presentation?
• What is the role of antigen presentation in adaptive immunity?

Antigen Presentation with MHC I Molecules
MHC I molecules, found on all normal, healthy, nucleated cells, signal to the immune system that the cell is a
normal “self” cell. In a healthy cell, proteins normally found in the cytoplasm are degraded by proteasomes (enzyme
complexes responsible for degradation and processing of proteins) and processed into self-antigen epitopes; these
self-antigen epitopes bind within the MHC I antigen-binding cleft and are then presented on the cell surface. Immune
cells, such as NK cells, recognize these self-antigens and do not target the cell for destruction. However, if a cell
becomes infected with an intracellular pathogen (e.g., a virus), protein antigens specific to the pathogen are processed
in the proteasomes and bind with MHC I molecules for presentation on the cell surface. This presentation of pathogenspecific antigens with MHC I signals that the infected cell must be targeted for destruction along with the pathogen.
Before elimination of infected cells can begin, APCs must first activate the T cells involved in cellular immunity. If
an intracellular pathogen directly infects the cytoplasm of an APC, then the processing and presentation of antigens
can occur as described (in proteasomes and on the cell surface with MHC I). However, if the intracellular pathogen
does not directly infect APCs, an alternative strategy called cross-presentation is utilized. In cross-presentation,
antigens are brought into the APC by mechanisms normally leading to presentation with MHC II (i.e., through
phagocytosis), but the antigen is presented on an MHC I molecule for CD8 T cells. The exact mechanisms by which
cross-presentation occur are not yet well understood, but it appears that cross-presentation is primarily a function of
dendritic cells and not macrophages or B cells.

• Compare and contrast antigen processing and presentation associated with MHC I and MHC II molecules.
• What is cross-presentation, and when is it likely to occur?

18.3 T Lymphocytes and Cellular Immunity
Learning Objectives
• Describe the process of T-cell maturation and thymic selection
• Explain the genetic events that lead to diversity of T-cell receptors
• Compare and contrast the various classes and subtypes of T cells in terms of activation and function
• Explain the mechanism by which superantigens effect unregulated T-cell activation

As explained in Overview of Specific Adaptive Immunity, the antibodies involved in humoral immunity often
bind pathogens and toxins before they can attach to and invade host cells. Thus, humoral immunity is primarily
concerned with fighting pathogens in extracellular spaces. However, pathogens that have already gained entry to host
cells are largely protected from the humoral antibody-mediated defenses. Cellular immunity, on the other hand, targets
and eliminates intracellular pathogens through the actions of T lymphocytes, or T cells (Figure 18.13). T cells also
play a more central role in orchestrating the overall adaptive immune response (humoral as well as cellular) along
with the cellular defenses of innate immunity.

784

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Figure 18.13 This scanning electron micrograph shows a T lymphocyte, which is responsible for the cell-mediated
immune response. The spike-like membrane structures increase surface area, allowing for greater interaction with
other cell types and their signals. (credit: modification of work by NCI)

T Cell Production and Maturation
T cells, like all other white blood cells involved in innate and adaptive immunity, are formed from multipotent
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow (see Figure 17.12). However, unlike the white blood cells
of innate immunity, eventual T cells differentiate first into lymphoid stem cells that then become small, immature
lymphocytes, sometimes called lymphoblasts. The first steps of differentiation occur in the red marrow of bones
(Figure 18.14), after which immature T lymphocytes enter the bloodstream and travel to the thymus for the final
steps of maturation (Figure 18.15). Once in the thymus, the immature T lymphocytes are referred to as thymocytes.
The maturation of thymocytes within the thymus can be divided into tree critical steps of positive and negative
selection, collectively referred to as thymic selection. The first step of thymic selection occurs in the cortex of the
thymus and involves the development of a functional T-cell receptor (TCR) that is required for activation by APCs.
Thymocytes with defective TCRs are removed by negative selection through the induction of apoptosis (programmed
controlled cell death). The second step of thymic selection also occurs in the cortex and involves the positive selection
of thymocytes that will interact appropriately with MHC molecules. Thymocytes that can interact appropriately with
MHC molecules receive a positive stimulation that moves them further through the process of maturation, whereas
thymocytes that do not interact appropriately are not stimulated and are eliminated by apoptosis. The third and
final step of thymic selection occurs in both the cortex and medulla and involves negative selection to remove selfreacting thymocytes, those that react to self-antigens, by apoptosis. This final step is sometimes referred to as central
tolerance because it prevents self-reacting T cells from reaching the bloodstream and potentially causing autoimmune
disease, which occurs when the immune system attacks healthy “self” cells.
Despite central tolerance, some self-reactive T cells generally escape the thymus and enter the peripheral bloodstream.
Therefore, a second line of defense called peripheral tolerance is needed to protect against autoimmune disease.
Peripheral tolerance involves mechanisms of anergy and inhibition of self-reactive T cells by regulatory T cells.
Anergy refers to a state of nonresponsiveness to antigen stimulation. In the case of self-reactive T cells that escape
the thymus, lack of an essential co-stimulatory signal required for activation causes anergy and prevents autoimmune
activation. Regulatory T cells participate in peripheral tolerance by inhibiting the activation and function of selfreactive T cells and by secreting anti-inflammatory cytokines.
It is not completely understood what events specifically direct maturation of thymocytes into regulatory T cells.
Current theories suggest the critical events may occur during the third step of thymic selection, when most self-

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

785

reactive T cells are eliminated. Regulatory T cells may receive a unique signal that is below the threshold required
to target them for negative selection and apoptosis. Consequently, these cells continue to mature and then exit the
thymus, armed to inhibit the activation of self-reactive T cells.
It has been estimated that the three steps of thymic selection eliminate 98% of thymocytes. The remaining 2% that
exit the thymus migrate through the bloodstream and lymphatic system to sites of secondary lymphoid organs/tissues,
such as the lymph nodes, spleen, and tonsils (Figure 18.15), where they await activation through the presentation of
specific antigens by APCs. Until they are activated, they are known as mature naïve T cells.

Figure 18.14 (a) Red bone marrow can be found in the head of the femur (thighbone) and is also present in the flat
bones of the body, such as the ilium and the scapula. (b) Red bone marrow is the site of production and differentiation
of many formed elements of blood, including erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets. The yellow bone marrow is
populated primarily with adipose cells.

Figure 18.15 The thymus is a bi-lobed, H-shaped glandular organ that is located just above the heart. It is
surrounded by a fibrous capsule of connective tissue. The darkly staining cortex and the lighter staining medulla of
individual lobules are clearly visible in the light micrograph of the thymus of a newborn (top right, LM × 100). (credit
micrograph: modification of micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)

786

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

• What anatomical sites are involved in T cell production and maturation?
• What are the three steps involved in thymic selection?
• Why are central tolerance and peripheral tolerance important? What do they prevent?

Classes of T Cells
T cells can be categorized into three distinct classes: helper T cells, regulatory T cells, and cytotoxic T cells. These
classes are differentiated based on their expression of certain surface molecules, their mode of activation, and their
functional roles in adaptive immunity (Table 18.1).
All T cells produce cluster of differentiation (CD) molecules, cell surface glycoproteins that can be used to
identify and distinguish between the various types of white blood cells. Although T cells can produce a variety of
CD molecules, CD4 and CD8 are the two most important used for differentiation of the classes. Helper T cells
and regulatory T cells are characterized by the expression of CD4 on their surface, whereas cytotoxic T cells are
characterized by the expression of CD8.
Classes of T cells can also be distinguished by the specific MHC molecules and APCs with which they interact for
activation. Helper T cells and regulatory T cells can only be activated by APCs presenting antigens associated with
MHC II. In contrast, cytotoxic T cells recognize antigens presented in association with MHC I, either by APCs or by
nucleated cells infected with an intracellular pathogen.
The different classes of T cells also play different functional roles in the immune system. Helper T cells serve as
the central orchestrators that help activate and direct functions of humoral and cellular immunity. In addition, helper
T cells enhance the pathogen-killing functions of macrophages and NK cells of innate immunity. In contrast, the
primary role of regulatory T cells is to prevent undesirable and potentially damaging immune responses. Their role
in peripheral tolerance, for example, protects against autoimmune disorders, as discussed earlier. Finally, cytotoxic T
cells are the primary effector cells for cellular immunity. They recognize and target cells that have been infected by
intracellular pathogens, destroying infected cells along with the pathogens inside.
Classes of T Cells
Class

Helper T
cells

Surface
CD
Molecules
CD4

Activation

APCs presenting antigens associated
with MHC II

Functions

Orchestrate humoral and cellular
immunity
Involved in the activation of
macrophages and NK cells

Regulatory
T cells

CD4

APCs presenting antigens associated
with MHC II

Involved in peripheral tolerance and
prevention of autoimmune responses

Cytotoxic
T cells

CD8

APCs or infected nucleated cells
presenting antigens associated with
MHC I

Destroy cells infected with intracellular
pathogens

Table 18.1

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

787

• What are the unique functions of the three classes of T cells?
• Which T cells can be activated by antigens presented by cells other than APCs?

T-Cell Receptors
For both helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells, activation is a complex process that requires the interactions of multiple
molecules and exposure to cytokines. The T-cell receptor (TCR) is involved in the first step of pathogen epitope
recognition during the activation process.
The TCR comes from the same receptor family as the antibodies IgD and IgM, the antigen receptors on the B
cell membrane surface, and thus shares common structural elements. Similar to antibodies, the TCR has a variable
region and a constant region, and the variable region provides the antigen-binding site (Figure 18.16). However,
the structure of TCR is smaller and less complex than the immunoglobulin molecules (Figure 18.5). Whereas
immunoglobulins have four peptide chains and Y-shaped structures, the TCR consists of just two peptide chains (α
and β chains), both of which span the cytoplasmic membrane of the T cell.
TCRs are epitope-specific, and it has been estimated that 25 million T cells with unique epitope-binding TCRs are
required to protect an individual against a wide range of microbial pathogens. Because the human genome only
contains about 25,000 genes, we know that each specific TCR cannot be encoded by its own set of genes. This raises
the question of how such a vast population of T cells with millions of specific TCRs can be achieved. The answer is
a process called genetic rearrangement, which occurs in the thymus during the first step of thymic selection.
The genes that code for the variable regions of the TCR are divided into distinct gene segments called variable (V),
diversity (D), and joining (J) segments. The genes segments associated with the α chain of the TCR consist 70 or
more different Vα segments and 61 different Jα segments. The gene segments associated with the β chain of the TCR
consist of 52 different Vβ segments, two different Dβ segments, and 13 different Jβ segments. During the development
of the functional TCR in the thymus, genetic rearrangement in a T cell brings together one Vα segment and one Jα
segment to code for the variable region of the α chain. Similarly, genetic rearrangement brings one of the Vβ segments
together with one of the Dβ segments and one of thetJβ segments to code for the variable region of the β chain. All
the possible combinations of rearrangements between different segments of V, D, and J provide the genetic diversity
required to produce millions of TCRs with unique epitope-specific variable regions.

788

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Figure 18.16 A T-cell receptor spans the cytoplasmic membrane and projects variable binding regions into the
extracellular space to bind processed antigens associated with MHC I or MHC II molecules.

• What are the similarities and differences between TCRs and immunoglobulins?
• What process is used to provide millions of unique TCR binding sites?

Activation and Differentiation of Helper T Cells
Helper T cells can only be activated by APCs presenting processed foreign epitopes in association with MHC II. The
first step in the activation process is TCR recognition of the specific foreign epitope presented within the MHC II
antigen-binding cleft. The second step involves the interaction of CD4 on the helper T cell with a region of the MHC
II molecule separate from the antigen-binding cleft. This second interaction anchors the MHC II-TCR complex and
ensures that the helper T cell is recognizing both the foreign (“nonself”) epitope and “self” antigen of the APC; both
recognitions are required for activation of the cell. In the third step, the APC and T cell secrete cytokines that activate
the helper T cell. The activated helper T cell then proliferates, dividing by mitosis to produce clonal naïve helper T
cells that differentiate into subtypes with different functions (Figure 18.17).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

789

Figure 18.17 This illustration depicts the activation of a naïve (unactivated) helper T cell by an antigen-presenting
cell and the subsequent proliferation and differentiation of the activated T cell into different subtypes.

Activated helper T cells can differentiate into one of four distinct subtypes, summarized in Table 18.2. The
differentiation process is directed by APC-secreted cytokines. Depending on which APC-secreted cytokines interact
with an activated helper T cell, the cell may differentiate into a T helper 1 (TH1) cell, a T helper 2 (TH2) cell, or
a memory helper T cell. The two types of helper T cells are relatively short-lived effector cells, meaning that they
perform various functions of the immediate immune response. In contrast, memory helper T cells are relatively long
lived; they are programmed to “remember” a specific antigen or epitope in order to mount a rapid, strong, secondary
response to subsequent exposures.
TH1 cells secrete their own cytokines that are involved in stimulating and orchestrating other cells involved in
adaptive and innate immunity. For example, they stimulate cytotoxic T cells, enhancing their killing of infected cells
and promoting differentiation into memory cytotoxic T cells. TH1 cells also stimulate macrophages and neutrophils
to become more effective in their killing of intracellular bacteria. They can also stimulate NK cells to become more
effective at killing target cells.
TH2 cells play an important role in orchestrating the humoral immune response through their secretion of cytokines
that activate B cells and direct B cell differentiation and antibody production. Various cytokines produced by TH2
cells orchestrate antibody class switching, which allows B cells to switch between the production of IgM, IgG,
IgA, and IgE as needed to carry out specific antibody functions and to provide pathogen-specific humoral immune
responses.
A third subtype of helper T cells called TH17 cells was discovered through observations that immunity to some
infections is not associated with TH1 or TH2 cells. TH17 cells and the cytokines they produce appear to be specifically
responsible for the body’s defense against chronic mucocutaneous infections. Patients who lack sufficient TH17 cells
in the mucosa (e.g., HIV patients) may be more susceptible to bacteremia and gastrointestinal infections. [1]
1. Blaschitz C., Raffatellu M. “Th17 cytokines and the gut mucosal barrier.” J Clin Immunol. 2010 Mar; 30(2):196-203. doi: 10.1007/
s10875-010-9368-7.

790

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Subtypes of Helper T Cells
Subtype
TH1 cells

Functions
Stimulate cytotoxic T cells and produce memory cytotoxic T cells
Stimulate macrophages and neutrophils (PMNs) for more effective intracellular killing of
pathogens
Stimulate NK cells to kill more effectively

TH2 cells

Stimulate B cell activation and differentiation into plasma cells and memory B cells
Direct antibody class switching in B cells

TH17 cells

Stimulate immunity to specific infections such as chronic mucocutaneous infections

Memory helper T
cells

“Remember” a specific pathogen and mount a strong, rapid secondary response upon reexposure

Table 18.2

Activation and Differentiation of Cytotoxic T Cells
Cytotoxic T cells (also referred to as cytotoxic T lymphocytes, or CTLs) are activated by APCs in a three-step process
similar to that of helper T cells. The key difference is that the activation of cytotoxic T cells involves recognition
of an antigen presented with MHC I (as opposed to MHC II) and interaction of CD8 (as opposed to CD4) with the
receptor complex. After the successful co-recognition of foreign epitope and self-antigen, the production of cytokines
by the APC and the cytotoxic T cell activate clonal proliferation and differentiation. Activated cytotoxic T cells can
differentiate into effector cytotoxic T cells that target pathogens for destruction or memory cells that are ready to
respond to subsequent exposures.
As noted, proliferation and differentiation of cytotoxic T cells is also stimulated by cytokines secreted from TH1 cells
activated by the same foreign epitope. The co-stimulation that comes from these TH1 cells is provided by secreted
cytokines. Although it is possible for activation of cytotoxic T cells to occur without stimulation from TH1 cells, the
activation is not as effective or long-lasting.
Once activated, cytotoxic T cells serve as the effector cells of cellular immunity, recognizing and kill cells infected
with intracellular pathogens through a mechanism very similar to that of NK cells. However, whereas NK cells
recognize nonspecific signals of cell stress or abnormality, cytotoxic T cells recognize infected cells through antigen
presentation of pathogen-specific epitopes associated with MHC I. Once an infected cell is recognized, the TCR of
the cytotoxic T cell binds to the epitope and releases perforin and granzymes that destroy the infected cell (Figure
18.18). Perforin is a protein that creates pores in the target cell, and granzymes are proteases that enter the pores
and induce apoptosis. This mechanism of programmed cell death is a controlled and efficient means of destroying
and removing infected cells without releasing the pathogens inside to infect neighboring cells, as might occur if the
infected cells were simply lysed.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

791

Figure 18.18 This figure illustrates the activation of a naïve (unactivated) cytotoxic T cell (CTL) by an antigenpresenting MHC I molecule on an infected body cell. Once activated, the CTL releases perforin and granzymes that
invade the infected cell and induce controlled cell death, or apoptosis.

Link to Learning
In this video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22cytoTcellapop) , you can see a
cytotoxic T cell inducing apoptosis in a target cell.

• Compare and contrast the activation of helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells.
• What are the different functions of helper T cell subtypes?
• What is the mechanism of CTL-mediated destruction of infected cells?

Superantigens and Unregulated Activation of T Cells
When T cell activation is controlled and regulated, the result is a protective response that is effective in combating
infections. However, if T cell activation is unregulated and excessive, the result can be a life-threatening. Certain
bacterial and viral pathogens produce toxins known as superantigens (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and
Viral Pathogens) that can trigger such an unregulated response. Known bacterial superantigens include toxic shock
syndrome toxin (TSST), staphylococcal enterotoxins, streptococcal pyrogenic toxins, streptococcal superantigen, and
the streptococcal mitogenic exotoxin. Viruses known to produce superantigens include Epstein-Barr virus (human
herpesvirus 4), cytomegalovirus (human herpesvirus 5), and others.

792

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

The mechanism of T cell activation by superantigens involves their simultaneous binding to MHC II molecules of
APCs and the variable region of the TCR β chain. This binding occurs outside of the antigen-binding cleft of MHC II,
so the superantigen will bridge together and activate MHC II and TCR without specific foreign epitope recognition
(Figure 18.19). The result is an excessive, uncontrolled release of cytokines, often called a cytokine storm, which
stimulates an excessive inflammatory response. This can lead to a dangerous decrease in blood pressure, shock, multiorgan failure, and potentially, death.

Figure 18.19 (a) The macrophage in this figure is presenting a foreign epitope that does not match the TCR of the T
cell. Because the T cell does not recognize the epitope, it is not activated. (b) The macrophage in this figure is
presenting a superantigen that is not recognized by the TCR of the T cell, yet the superantigen still is able to bridge
and bind the MHC II and TCR molecules. This nonspecific, uncontrolled activation of the T cell results in an excessive
release of cytokines that activate other T cells and cause excessive inflammation. (credit: modification of work by
“Microbiotic”/YouTube)

• What are examples of superantigens?
• How does a superantigen activate a helper T cell?
• What effect does a superantigen have on a T cell?

Case in Point
Superantigens
Melissa, an otherwise healthy 22-year-old woman, is brought to the emergency room by her concerned
boyfriend. She complains of a sudden onset of high fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle aches. In her initial
interview, she tells the attending physician that she is on hormonal birth control and also is two days into the
menstruation portion of her cycle. She is on no other medications and is not abusing any drugs or alcohol. She
is not a smoker. She is not diabetic and does not currently have an infection of any kind to her knowledge.
While waiting in the emergency room, Melissa’s blood pressure begins to drop dramatically and her mental
state deteriorates to general confusion. The physician believes she is likely suffering from toxic shock
syndrome (TSS). TSS is caused by the toxin TSST-1, a superantigen associated with Staphylococcus aureus,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

793

and improper tampon use is a common cause of infections leading to TSS. The superantigen inappropriately
stimulates widespread T cell activation and excessive cytokine release, resulting in a massive and systemic
inflammatory response that can be fatal.
Vaginal or cervical swabs may be taken to confirm the presence of the microbe, but these tests are not critical
to perform based on Melissa’s symptoms and medical history. The physician prescribes rehydration, supportive
therapy, and antibiotics to stem the bacterial infection. She also prescribes drugs to increase Melissa’s blood
pressure. Melissa spends three days in the hospital undergoing treatment; in addition, her kidney function is
monitored because of the high risk of kidney failure associated with TSS. After 72 hours, Melissa is well enough
to be discharged to continue her recovery at home.

• In what way would antibiotic therapy help to combat a superantigen?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Olivia’s swollen lymph nodes, abdomen, and spleen suggest a strong immune response to a systemic infection
in progress. In addition, little Olivia is reluctant to turn her head and appears to be experiencing severe neck
pain. The physician orders a complete blood count, blood culture, and lumbar puncture. The cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) obtained appears cloudy and is further evaluated by Gram stain assessment and culturing for
potential bacterial pathogens. The complete blood count indicates elevated numbers of white blood cells in
Olivia’s bloodstream. The white blood cell increases are recorded at 28.5 K/µL (normal range: 6.0–17.5 K/µL).
The neutrophil percentage was recorded as 60% (normal range: 23–45%). Glucose levels in the CSF were
registered at 30 mg/100 mL (normal range: 50–80 mg/100 mL). The WBC count in the CSF was 1,163/mm3
(normal range: 5–20/mm3).

• Based on these results, do you have a preliminary diagnosis?
• What is a recommended treatment based on this preliminary diagnosis?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

18.4 B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity
Learning Objectives
• Describe the production and maturation of B cells
• Compare the structure of B-cell receptors and T-cell receptors
• Compare T-dependent and T-independent activation of B cells
• Compare the primary and secondary antibody responses

Humoral immunity refers to mechanisms of the adaptive immune defenses that are mediated by antibodies secreted by
B lymphocytes, or B cells. This section will focus on B cells and discuss their production and maturation, receptors,
and mechanisms of activation.

B Cell Production and Maturation
Like T cells, B cells are formed from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow and follow
a pathway through lymphoid stem cell and lymphoblast (see Figure 17.12). Unlike T cells, however, lymphoblasts

794

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

destined to become B cells do not leave the bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation. Rather, eventual B
cells continue to mature in the bone marrow.
The first step of B cell maturation is an assessment of the functionality of their antigen-binding receptors. This occurs
through positive selection for B cells with normal functional receptors. A mechanism of negative selection is then
used to eliminate self-reacting B cells and minimize the risk of autoimmunity. Negative selection of self-reacting B
cells can involve elimination by apoptosis, editing or modification of the receptors so they are no longer self-reactive,
or induction of anergy in the B cell. Immature B cells that pass the selection in the bone marrow then travel to the
spleen for their final stages of maturation. There they become naïve mature B cells, i.e., mature B cells that have not
yet been activated.

• Compare the maturation of B cells with the maturation of T cells.

B-Cell Receptors
Like T cells, B cells possess antigen-specific receptors with diverse specificities. Although they rely on T cells for
optimum function, B cells can be activated without help from T cells. B-cell receptors (BCRs) for naïve mature
B cells are membrane-bound monomeric forms of IgD and IgM. They have two identical heavy chains and two
identical light chains connected by disulfide bonds into a basic “Y” shape (Figure 18.20). The trunk of the Y-shaped
molecule, the constant region of the two heavy chains, spans the B cell membrane. The two antigen-binding sites
exposed to the exterior of the B cell are involved in the binding of specific pathogen epitopes to initiate the activation
process. It is estimated that each naïve mature B cell has upwards of 100,000 BCRs on its membrane, and each of
these BCRs has an identical epitope-binding specificity.
In order to be prepared to react to a wide range of microbial epitopes, B cells, like T cells, use genetic rearrangement
of hundreds of gene segments to provide the necessary diversity of receptor specificities. The variable region of the
BCR heavy chain is made up of V, D, and J segments, similar to the β chain of the TCR. The variable region of the
BCR light chain is made up of V and J segments, similar to the α chain of the TCR. Genetic rearrangement of all
possible combinations of V-J-D (heavy chain) and V-J (light chain) provides for millions of unique antigen-binding
sites for the BCR and for the antibodies secreted after activation.
One important difference between BCRs and TCRs is the way they can interact with antigenic epitopes. Whereas
TCRs can only interact with antigenic epitopes that are presented within the antigen-binding cleft of MHC I or MHC
II, BCRs do not require antigen presentation with MHC; they can interact with epitopes on free antigens or with
epitopes displayed on the surface of intact pathogens. Another important difference is that TCRs only recognize
protein epitopes, whereas BCRs can recognize epitopes associated with different molecular classes (e.g., proteins,
polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides).
Activation of B cells occurs through different mechanisms depending on the molecular class of the antigen. Activation
of a B cell by a protein antigen requires the B cell to function as an APC, presenting the protein epitopes with MHC II
to helper T cells. Because of their dependence on T cells for activation of B cells, protein antigens are classified as Tdependent antigens. In contrast, polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides, and other nonprotein antigens are considered
T-independent antigens because they can activate B cells without antigen processing and presentation to T cells.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

795

Figure 18.20 B-cell receptors are embedded in the membranes of B cells. The variable regions of all of the
receptors on a single cell bind the same specific antigen.

• What types of molecules serve as the BCR?
• What are the differences between TCRs and BCRs with respect to antigen recognition?
• Which molecule classes are T-dependent antigens and which are T-independent antigens?

T Cell-Independent Activation of B cells
Activation of B cells without the cooperation of helper T cells is referred to as T cell-independent activation and
occurs when BCRs interact with T-independent antigens. T-independent antigens (e.g., polysaccharide capsules,
lipopolysaccharide) have repetitive epitope units within their structure, and this repetition allows for the cross-linkage
of multiple BCRs, providing the first signal for activation (Figure 18.21). Because T cells are not involved, the
second signal has to come from other sources, such as interactions of toll-like receptors with PAMPs or interactions
with factors from the complement system.
Once a B cell is activated, it undergoes clonal proliferation and daughter cells differentiate into plasma cells.
Plasma cells are antibody factories that secrete large quantities of antibodies. After differentiation, the surface BCRs
disappear and the plasma cell secretes pentameric IgM molecules that have the same antigen specificity as the BCRs
(Figure 18.21).
The T cell-independent response is short-lived and does not result in the production of memory B cells. Thus it will
not result in a secondary response to subsequent exposures to T-independent antigens.

796

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Figure 18.21 T-independent antigens have repeating epitopes that can induce B cell recognition and activation
without involvement from T cells. A second signal, such as interaction of TLRs with PAMPs (not shown), is also
required for activation of the B cell. Once activated, the B cell proliferates and differentiates into antibody-secreting
plasma cells.

• What are the two signals required for T cell-independent activation of B cells?
• What is the function of a plasma cell?

T Cell-Dependent Activation of B cells
T cell-dependent activation of B cells is more complex than T cell-independent activation, but the resulting immune
response is stronger and develops memory. T cell-dependent activation can occur either in response to free protein
antigens or to protein antigens associated with an intact pathogen. Interaction between the BCRs on a naïve mature
B cell and a free protein antigen stimulate internalization of the antigen, whereas interaction with antigens associated
with an intact pathogen initiates the extraction of the antigen from the pathogen before internalization. Once
internalized inside the B cell, the protein antigen is processed and presented with MHC II. The presented antigen is
then recognized by helper T cells specific to the same antigen. The TCR of the helper T cell recognizes the foreign
antigen, and the T cell’s CD4 molecule interacts with MHC II on the B cell. The coordination between B cells and
helper T cells that are specific to the same antigen is referred to as linked recognition.
Once activated by linked recognition, TH2 cells produce and secrete cytokines that activate the B cell and cause
proliferation into clonal daughter cells. After several rounds of proliferation, additional cytokines provided by the
TH2 cells stimulate the differentiation of activated B cell clones into memory B cells, which will quickly respond
to subsequent exposures to the same protein epitope, and plasma cells that lose their membrane BCRs and initially
secrete pentameric IgM (Figure 18.22).
After initial secretion of IgM, cytokines secreted by TH2 cells stimulate the plasma cells to switch from IgM
production to production of IgG, IgA, or IgE. This process, called class switching or isotype switching, allows plasma
cells cloned from the same activated B cell to produce a variety of antibody classes with the same epitope specificity.
Class switching is accomplished by genetic rearrangement of gene segments encoding the constant region, which
determines an antibody’s class. The variable region is not changed, so the new class of antibody retains the original
epitope specificity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

797

Figure 18.22 In T cell-dependent activation of B cells, the B cell recognizes and internalizes an antigen and
presents it to a helper T cell that is specific to the same antigen. The helper T cell interacts with the antigen presented
by the B cell, which activates the T cell and stimulates the release of cytokines that then activate the B cell. Activation
of the B cell triggers proliferation and differentiation into B cells and plasma cells.

• What steps are required for T cell-dependent activation of B cells?
• What is antibody class switching and why is it important?

Primary and Secondary Responses
T cell-dependent activation of B cells plays an important role in both the primary and secondary responses associated
with adaptive immunity. With the first exposure to a protein antigen, a T cell-dependent primary antibody response
occurs. The initial stage of the primary response is a lag period, or latent period, of approximately 10 days, during
which no antibody can be detected in serum. This lag period is the time required for all of the steps of the primary

798

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

response, including naïve mature B cell binding of antigen with BCRs, antigen processing and presentation, helper T
cell activation, B cell activation, and clonal proliferation. The end of the lag period is characterized by a rise in IgM
levels in the serum, as TH2 cells stimulate B cell differentiation into plasma cells. IgM levels reach their peak around
14 days after primary antigen exposure; at about this same time, TH2 stimulates antibody class switching, and IgM
levels in serum begin to decline. Meanwhile, levels of IgG increase until they reach a peak about three weeks into the
primary response (Figure 18.23).
During the primary response, some of the cloned B cells are differentiated into memory B cells programmed to
respond to subsequent exposures. This secondary response occurs more quickly and forcefully than the primary
response. The lag period is decreased to only a few days and the production of IgG is significantly higher than
observed for the primary response (Figure 18.23). In addition, the antibodies produced during the secondary
response are more effective and bind with higher affinity to the targeted epitopes. Plasma cells produced during
secondary responses live longer than those produced during the primary response, so levels of specific antibody
remain elevated for a longer period of time.

Figure 18.23 Compared to the primary response, the secondary antibody response occurs more quickly and
produces antibody levels that are higher and more sustained. The secondary response mostly involves IgG.

• What events occur during the lag period of the primary antibody response?
• Why do antibody levels remain elevated longer during the secondary antibody response?

18.5 Vaccines
Learning Objectives
• Compare the various kinds of artificial immunity
• Differentiate between variolation and vaccination
• Describe different types of vaccines and explain their respective advantages and disadvantages

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

799

For many diseases, prevention is the best form of treatment, and few strategies for disease prevention are as effective
as vaccination. Vaccination is a form of artificial immunity. By artificially stimulating the adaptive immune defenses,
a vaccine triggers memory cell production similar to that which would occur during a primary response. In so doing,
the patient is able to mount a strong secondary response upon exposure to the pathogen—but without having to first
suffer through an initial infection. In this section, we will explore several different kinds of artificial immunity along
with various types of vaccines and the mechanisms by which they induce artificial immunity.

Classifications of Adaptive Immunity
All forms of adaptive immunity can be described as either active or passive. Active immunity refers to the activation
of an individual’s own adaptive immune defenses, whereas passive immunity refers to the transfer of adaptive
immune defenses from another individual or animal. Active and passive immunity can be further subdivided based
on whether the protection is acquired naturally or artificially.
Natural active immunity is adaptive immunity that develops after natural exposure to a pathogen (Figure 18.24).
Examples would include the lifelong immunity that develops after recovery from a chickenpox or measles infection
(although an acute infection is not always necessary to activate adaptive immunity). The length of time that an
individual is protected can vary substantially depending upon the pathogen and antigens involved. For example,
activation of adaptive immunity by protein spike structures during an intracellular viral infection can activate lifelong
immunity, whereas activation by carbohydrate capsule antigens during an extracellular bacterial infection may
activate shorter-term immunity.
Natural passive immunity involves the natural passage of antibodies from a mother to her child before and after
birth. IgG is the only antibody class that can cross the placenta from mother’s blood to the fetal blood supply. Placental
transfer of IgG is an important passive immune defense for the infant, lasting up to six months after birth. Secretory
IgA can also be transferred from mother to infant through breast milk.
Artificial passive immunity refers to the transfer of antibodies produced by a donor (human or animal) to another
individual. This transfer of antibodies may be done as a prophylactic measure (i.e., to prevent disease after exposure
to a pathogen) or as a strategy for treating an active infection. For example, artificial passive immunity is commonly
used for post-exposure prophylaxis against rabies, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and chickenpox (in high risk individuals).
Active infections treated by artificial passive immunity include cytomegalovirus infections in immunocompromised
patients and Ebola virus infections. In 1995, eight patients in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with active Ebola
infections were treated with blood transfusions from patients who were recovering from Ebola. Only one of the eight
patients died (a 12.5% mortality rate), which was much lower than the expected 80% mortality rate for Ebola in
untreated patients.[2] Artificial passive immunity is also used for the treatment of diseases caused by bacterial toxins,
including tetanus, botulism, and diphtheria.
Artificial active immunity is the foundation for vaccination. It involves the activation of adaptive immunity through
the deliberate exposure of an individual to weakened or inactivated pathogens, or preparations consisting of key
pathogen antigens.

2. K. Mupapa, M. Massamba, K. Kibadi, K. Kivula, A. Bwaka, M. Kipasa, R. Colebunders, J. J. Muyembe-Tamfum. “Treatment of Ebola
Hemorrhagic Fever with Blood Transfusions from Convalescent Patients.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 179 Suppl. (1999): S18–S23.

800

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Figure 18.24 The four classifications of immunity. (credit top left photo: modification of work by USDA; credit top
right photo: modification of work by “Michaelberry”/Wikimedia; credit bottom left photo: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit bottom right photo: modification of work by Friskila Silitonga,
Indonesia, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What is the difference between active and passive immunity?
• What kind of immunity is conferred by a vaccine?

Herd Immunity
The four kinds of immunity just described result from an individual’s adaptive immune system. For any given
disease, an individual may be considered immune or susceptible depending on his or her ability to mount an effective
immune response upon exposure. Thus, any given population is likely to have some individuals who are immune and
other individuals who are susceptible. If a population has very few susceptible individuals, even those susceptible
individuals will be protected by a phenomenon called herd immunity. Herd immunity has nothing to do with an
individual’s ability to mount an effective immune response; rather, it occurs because there are too few susceptible
individuals in a population for the disease to spread effectively.
Vaccination programs create herd immunity by greatly reducing the number of susceptible individuals in a population.
Even if some individuals in the population are not vaccinated, as long as a certain percentage is immune (either
naturally or artificially), the few susceptible individuals are unlikely to be exposed to the pathogen. However, because
new individuals are constantly entering populations (for example, through birth or relocation), vaccination programs
are necessary to maintain herd immunity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

801

Eye on Ethics

Vaccination: Obligation or Choice
A growing number of parents are choosing not to vaccinate their children. They are dubbed “antivaxxers,” and
the majority of them believe that vaccines are a cause of autism (or other disease conditions), a link that has
now been thoroughly disproven. Others object to vaccines on religious or moral grounds (e.g., the argument
that Gardasil vaccination against HPV may promote sexual promiscuity), on personal ethical grounds (e.g., a
conscientious objection to any medical intervention), or on political grounds (e.g., the notion that mandatory
vaccinations are a violation of individual liberties).[3]
It is believed that this growing number of unvaccinated individuals has led to new outbreaks of whooping cough
and measles. We would expect that herd immunity would protect those unvaccinated in our population, but
herd immunity can only be maintained if enough individuals are being vaccinated.
Vaccination is clearly beneficial for public health. But from the individual parent’s perspective the view can
be murkier. Vaccines, like all medical interventions, have associated risks, and while the risks of vaccination
may be extremely low compared to the risks of infection, parents may not always understand or accept the
consensus of the medical community. Do such parents have a right to withhold vaccination from their children?
Should they be allowed to put their children—and society at large—at risk?
Many governments insist on childhood vaccinations as a condition for entering public school, but it has become
easy in most states to opt out of the requirement or to keep children out of the public system. Since the 1970s,
West Virginia and Mississippi have had in place a stringent requirement for childhood vaccination, without
exceptions, and neither state has had a case of measles since the early 1990s. California lawmakers recently
passed a similar law in response to a measles outbreak in 2015, making it much more difficult for parents to
opt out of vaccines if their children are attending public schools. Given this track record and renewed legislative
efforts, should other states adopt similarly strict requirements?
What role should health-care providers play in promoting or enforcing universal vaccination? Studies have
shown that many parents’ minds can be changed in response to information delivered by health-care workers,
but is it the place of health-care workers to try to persuade parents to have their children vaccinated? Some
health-care providers are understandably reluctant to treat unvaccinated patients. Do they have the right to
refuse service to patients who decline vaccines? Do insurance companies have the right to deny coverage to
antivaxxers? These are all ethical questions that policymakers may be forced to address as more parents skirt
vaccination norms.

Variolation and Vaccination
Thousands of years ago, it was first recognized that individuals who survived a smallpox infection were immune to
subsequent infections. The practice of inoculating individuals to actively protect them from smallpox appears to have
originated in the 10th century in China, when the practice of variolation was described (Figure 18.25). Variolation
refers to the deliberate inoculation of individuals with infectious material from scabs or pustules of smallpox victims.
Infectious materials were either injected into the skin or introduced through the nasal route. The infection that
developed was usually milder than naturally acquired smallpox, and recovery from the milder infection provided
protection against the more serious disease.
Although the majority of individuals treated by variolation developed only mild infections, the practice was not
without risks. More serious and sometimes fatal infections did occur, and because smallpox was contagious,
3. Elizabeth Yale. “Why Anti-Vaccination Movements Can Never Be Tamed.” Religion & Politics, July 22, 2014.
http://religionandpolitics.org/2014/07/22/why-anti-vaccination-movements-can-never-be-tamed.

802

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

infections resulting from variolation could lead to epidemics. Even so, the practice of variolation for smallpox
prevention spread to other regions, including India, Africa, and Europe.

Figure 18.25 Variolation for smallpox originated in the Far East and the practice later spread to Europe and Africa.
This Japanese relief depicts a patient receiving a smallpox variolation from the physician Ogata Shunsaku
(1748–1810).

Although variolation had been practiced for centuries, the English physician Edward Jenner (1749–1823) is generally
credited with developing the modern process of vaccination. Jenner observed that milkmaids who developed cowpox,
a disease similar to smallpox but milder, were immune to the more serious smallpox. This led Jenner to hypothesize
that exposure to a less virulent pathogen could provide immune protection against a more virulent pathogen, providing
a safer alternative to variolation. In 1796, Jenner tested his hypothesis by obtaining infectious samples from a
milkmaid’s active cowpox lesion and injecting the materials into a young boy (Figure 18.26). The boy developed a
mild infection that included a low-grade fever, discomfort in his axillae (armpit) and loss of appetite. When the boy
was later infected with infectious samples from smallpox lesions, he did not contract smallpox.[4] This new approach
was termed vaccination, a name deriving from the use of cowpox (Latin vacca meaning “cow”) to protect against
smallpox. Today, we know that Jenner’s vaccine worked because the cowpox virus is genetically and antigenically
related to the Variola viruses that caused smallpox. Exposure to cowpox antigens resulted in a primary response and
the production of memory cells that identical or related epitopes of Variola virus upon a later exposure to smallpox.
The success of Jenner’s smallpox vaccination led other scientists to develop vaccines for other diseases. Perhaps the
most notable was Louis Pasteur, who developed vaccines for rabies, cholera, and anthrax. During the 20th and 21st
centuries, effective vaccines were developed to prevent a wide range of diseases caused by viruses (e.g., chickenpox
and shingles, hepatitis, measles, mumps, polio, and yellow fever) and bacteria (e.g., diphtheria, pneumococcal
pneumonia, tetanus, and whooping cough,).

4. N. J. Willis. “Edward Jenner and the Eradication of Smallpox.” Scottish Medical Journal 42 (1997): 118–121.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

803

Figure 18.26 (a) A painting of Edward Jenner depicts a cow and a milkmaid in the background. (b) Lesions on a
patient infected with cowpox, a zoonotic disease caused by a virus closely related to the one that causes smallpox.
(credit b: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What is the difference between variolation and vaccination for smallpox?
• Explain why vaccination is less risky than variolation.

Classes of Vaccines
For a vaccine to provide protection against a disease, it must expose an individual to pathogen-specific antigens
that will stimulate a protective adaptive immune response. By its very nature, this entails some risk. As with any
pharmaceutical drug, vaccines have the potential to cause adverse effects. However, the ideal vaccine causes no severe
adverse effects and poses no risk of contracting the disease that it is intended to prevent. Various types of vaccines
have been developed with these goals in mind. These different classes of vaccines are described in the next section
and summarized in Table 18.3.

Live Attenuated Vaccines
Live attenuated vaccines expose an individual to a weakened strain of a pathogen with the goal of establishing
a subclinical infection that will activate the adaptive immune defenses. Pathogens are attenuated to decrease their
virulence using methods such as genetic manipulation (to eliminate key virulence factors) or long-term culturing in
an unnatural host or environment (to promote mutations and decrease virulence).
By establishing an active infection, live attenuated vaccines stimulate a more comprehensive immune response than
some other types of vaccines. Live attenuated vaccines activate both cellular and humoral immunity and stimulate the
development of memory for long-lasting immunity. In some cases, vaccination of one individual with a live attenuated
pathogen can even lead to natural transmission of the attenuated pathogen to other individuals. This can cause the
other individuals to also develop an active, subclinical infection that activates their adaptive immune defenses.
Disadvantages associated with live attenuated vaccines include the challenges associated with long-term storage and
transport as well as the potential for a patient to develop signs and symptoms of disease during the active infection
(particularly in immunocompromised patients). There is also a risk of the attenuated pathogen reverting back to full
virulence. Table 18.3 lists examples live attenuated vaccines.

804

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Inactivated Vaccines
Inactivated vaccines contain whole pathogens that have been killed or inactivated with heat, chemicals, or radiation.
For inactivated vaccines to be effective, the inactivation process must not affect the structure of key antigens on the
pathogen.
Because the pathogen is killed or inactive, inactivated vaccines do not produce an active infection, and the resulting
immune response is weaker and less comprehensive than that provoked by a live attenuated vaccine. Typically the
response involves only humoral immunity, and the pathogen cannot be transmitted to other individuals. In addition,
inactivated vaccines usually require higher doses and multiple boosters, possibly causing inflammatory reactions at
the site of injection.
Despite these disadvantages, inactivated vaccines do have the advantages of long-term storage stability and ease of
transport. Also, there is no risk of causing severe active infections. However, inactivated vaccines are not without
their side effects. Table 18.3 lists examples of inactivated vaccines.

Subunit Vaccines
Whereas live attenuated and inactive vaccines expose an individual to a weakened or dead pathogen, subunit
vaccines only expose the patient to the key antigens of a pathogen—not whole cells or viruses. Subunit vaccines can
be produced either by chemically degrading a pathogen and isolating its key antigens or by producing the antigens
through genetic engineering. Because these vaccines contain only the essential antigens of a pathogen, the risk of side
effects is relatively low. Table 18.3 lists examples of subunit vaccines.

Toxoid Vaccines
Like subunit vaccines, toxoid vaccines do not introduce a whole pathogen to the patient; they contain inactivated
bacterial toxins, called toxoids. Toxoid vaccines are used to prevent diseases in which bacterial toxins play an
important role in pathogenesis. These vaccines activate humoral immunity that neutralizes the toxins. Table 18.3
lists examples of toxoid vaccines.

Conjugate Vaccines
A conjugate vaccine is a type of subunit vaccine that consists of a protein conjugated to a capsule polysaccharide.
Conjugate vaccines have been developed to enhance the efficacy of subunit vaccines against pathogens that have
protective polysaccharide capsules that help them evade phagocytosis, causing invasive infections that can lead
to meningitis and other serious conditions. The subunit vaccines against these pathogens introduce T-independent
capsular polysaccharide antigens that result in the production of antibodies that can opsonize the capsule and thus
combat the infection; however, children under the age of two years do not respond effectively to these vaccines.
Children do respond effectively when vaccinated with the conjugate vaccine, in which a protein with T-dependent
antigens is conjugated to the capsule polysaccharide. The conjugated protein-polysaccharide antigen stimulates
production of antibodies against both the protein and the capsule polysaccharide. Table 18.3 lists examples of
conjugate vaccines.
Classes of Vaccines
Class

Description

Advantages

Disadvantages

Live
attenuated

Weakened strain of
whole pathogen

Cellular and
humoral
immunity

Difficult to store and
transport

Long-lasting
immunity

Risk of infection in
immunocompromised
patients

Table 18.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Examples
Chickenpox, German measles,
measles, mumps, tuberculosis,
typhoid fever, yellow fever

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

805

Classes of Vaccines
Class

Inactivated

Subunit

Description

Advantages

Disadvantages

Transmission
to contacts

Risk of reversion

Whole pathogen
killed or inactivated
with heat,
chemicals, or
radiation

Ease of
storage and
transport

Weaker immunity
(humoral only)

No risk of
severe active
infection

Higher doses and
more boosters
required

Immunogenic
antigens

Lower risk of
side effects

Limited longevity
Multiple doses
required

Examples

Cholera, hepatitis A, influenza,
plague, rabies

Anthrax, hepatitis B, influenza,
meningitis, papillomavirus,
pneumococcal pneumonia,
whooping cough

No protection against
antigenic variation
Toxoid

Inactivated bacterial
toxin

Humoral
immunity to
neutralize
toxin

Does not prevent
infection

Botulism, diphtheria, pertussis,
tetanus

Conjugate

Capsule
polysaccharide
conjugated to
protein

T-dependent
response to
capsule

Costly to produce

Meningitis
(Haemophilus influenzae,
Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Neisseria meningitides)

Better
response in
young
children

May interfere with
other vaccines

No protection against
antigenic variation

Table 18.3

• What is the risk associated with a live attenuated vaccine?
• Why is a conjugated vaccine necessary in some cases?

Micro Connections
DNA Vaccines
DNA vaccines represent a relatively new and promising approach to vaccination. A DNA vaccine is produced
by incorporating genes for antigens into a recombinant plasmid vaccine. Introduction of the DNA vaccine into
a patient leads to uptake of the recombinant plasmid by some of the patient’s cells, followed by transcription
and translation of antigens and presentation of these antigens with MHC I to activate adaptive immunity. This
results in the stimulation of both humoral and cellular immunity without the risk of active disease associated
with live attenuated vaccines.

806

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Although most DNA vaccines for humans are still in development, it is likely that they will become more
prevalent in the near future as researchers are working on engineering DNA vaccines that will activate adaptive
immunity against several different pathogens at once. First-generation DNA vaccines tested in the 1990s
looked promising in animal models but were disappointing when tested in human subjects. Poor cellular uptake
of the DNA plasmids was one of the major problems impacting their efficacy. Trials of second-generation DNA
vaccines have been more promising thanks to new techniques for enhancing cellular uptake and optimizing
antigens. DNA vaccines for various cancers and viral pathogens such as HIV, HPV, and hepatitis B and C are
currently in development.
Some DNA vaccines are already in use. In 2005, a DNA vaccine against West Nile virus was approved for
use in horses in the United States. Canada has also approved a DNA vaccine to protect fish from infectious
hematopoietic necrosis virus.[5] A DNA vaccine against Japanese encephalitis virus was approved for use in
humans in 2010 in Australia.[6]

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Based on Olivia’s symptoms, her physician made a preliminary diagnosis of bacterial meningitis without waiting
for positive identification from the blood and CSF samples sent to the lab. Olivia was admitted to the hospital
and treated with intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics and rehydration therapy. Over the next several days,
her condition began to improve, and new blood samples and lumbar puncture samples showed an absence
of microbes in the blood and CSF with levels of white blood cells returning to normal. During this time, the lab
produced a positive identification of Neisseria meningitidis, the causative agent of meningococcal meningitis,
in her original CSF sample.
N. meningitidis produces a polysaccharide capsule that serves as a virulence factor. N. meningitidis tends to
affect infants after they begin to lose the natural passive immunity provided by maternal antibodies. At one year
of age, Olivia’s maternal IgG antibodies would have disappeared, and she would not have developed memory
cells capable of recognizing antigens associated with the polysaccharide capsule of the N. meningitidis. As
a result, her adaptive immune system was unable to produce protective antibodies to combat the infection,
and without antibiotics she may not have survived. Olivia’s infection likely would have been avoided altogether
had she been vaccinated. A conjugate vaccine to prevent meningococcal meningitis is available and approved
for infants as young as two months of age. However, current vaccination schedules in the United States
recommend that the vaccine be administered at age 11–12 with a booster at age 16.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

5. M. Alonso and J. C. Leong. “Licensed DNA Vaccines Against Infectious Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus (IHNV).” Recent Patents on
DNA & Gene Sequences (Discontinued) 7 no. 1 (2013): 62–65, issn 1872-2156/2212-3431. doi 10.2174/1872215611307010009.
6. S.B. Halstead and S. J. Thomas. “New Japanese Encephalitis Vaccines: Alternatives to Production in Mouse Brain.” Expert Review of
Vaccines 10 no. 3 (2011): 355–64.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

807

Link to Learning
In countries with developed public health systems, many vaccines are routinely
administered to children and adults. Vaccine schedules are changed periodically,
based on new information and research results gathered by public health
agencies. In the United States, the CDC publishes schedules and other
updated information (https://www.openstax.org/l/22CDCVacSched) about
vaccines.

Summary
18.1 Overview of Specific Adaptive Immunity
• Adaptive immunity is an acquired defense against foreign pathogens that is characterized by specificity and
memory. The first exposure to an antigen stimulates a primary response, and subsequent exposures stimulate
a faster and strong secondary response.
• Adaptive immunity is a dual system involving humoral immunity (antibodies produced by B cells) and
cellular immunity (T cells directed against intracellular pathogens).
• Antigens, also called immunogens, are molecules that activate adaptive immunity. A single antigen possesses
smaller epitopes, each capable of inducing a specific adaptive immune response.
• An antigen’s ability to stimulate an immune response depends on several factors, including its molecular class,
molecular complexity, and size.
• Antibodies (immunoglobulins) are Y-shaped glycoproteins with two Fab sites for binding antigens and an Fc
portion involved in complement activation and opsonization.
• The five classes of antibody are IgM, IgG, IgA, IgE, and IgD, each differing in size, arrangement, location
within the body, and function. The five primary functions of antibodies are neutralization, opsonization,
agglutination, complement activation, and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC).
18.2 Major Histocompatibility Complexes and Antigen-Presenting Cells
• Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a collection of genes coding for glycoprotein molecules
expressed on the surface of all nucleated cells.
• MHC I molecules are expressed on all nucleated cells and are essential for presentation of normal “self”
antigens. Cells that become infected by intracellular pathogens can present foreign antigens on MHC I as well,
marking the infected cell for destruction.
• MHC II molecules are expressed only on the surface of antigen-presenting cells (macrophages, dendritic
cells, and B cells). Antigen presentation with MHC II is essential for the activation of T cells.
• Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) primarily ingest pathogens by phagocytosis, destroy them in the
phagolysosomes, process the protein antigens, and select the most antigenic/immunodominant epitopes with
MHC II for presentation to T cells.
• Cross-presentation is a mechanism of antigen presentation and T-cell activation used by dendritic cells not
directly infected by the pathogen; it involves phagocytosis of the pathogen but presentation on MHC I rather
than MHC II.
18.3 T Lymphocytes and Cellular Immunity
• Immature T lymphocytes are produced in the red bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation.
• Thymic selection is a three-step process of negative and positive selection that determines which T cells will
mature and exit the thymus into the peripheral bloodstream.

808

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

• Central tolerance involves negative selection of self-reactive T cells in the thymus, and peripheral tolerance
involves anergy and regulatory T cells that prevent self-reactive immune responses and autoimmunity.
• The TCR is similar in structure to immunoglobulins, but less complex. Millions of unique epitope-binding
TCRs are encoded through a process of genetic rearrangement of V, D, and J gene segments.
• T cells can be divided into three classes—helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells, and regulatory T cells—based
on their expression of CD4 or CD8, the MHC molecules with which they interact for activation, and their
respective functions.
• Activated helper T cells differentiate into TH1, TH2, TH17, or memory T cell subtypes. Differentiation is
directed by the specific cytokines to which they are exposed. TH1, TH2, and TH17 perform different functions
related to stimulation of adaptive and innate immune defenses. Memory T cells are long-lived cells that can
respond quickly to secondary exposures.
• Once activated, cytotoxic T cells target and kill cells infected with intracellular pathogens. Killing requires
recognition of specific pathogen epitopes presented on the cell surface using MHC I molecules. Killing is
mediated by perforin and granzymes that induce apoptosis.
• Superantigens are bacterial or viral proteins that cause a nonspecific activation of helper T cells, leading to
an excessive release of cytokines (cytokine storm) and a systemic, potentially fatal inflammatory response.
18.4 B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity
• B lymphocytes or B cells produce antibodies involved in humoral immunity. B cells are produced in the bone
marrow, where the initial stages of maturation occur, and travel to the spleen for final steps of maturation into
naïve mature B cells.
• B-cell receptors (BCRs) are membrane-bound monomeric forms of IgD and IgM that bind specific antigen
epitopes with their Fab antigen-binding regions. Diversity of antigen binding specificity is created by genetic
rearrangement of V, D, and J segments similar to the mechanism used for TCR diversity.
• Protein antigens are called T-dependent antigens because they can only activate B cells with the cooperation
of helper T cells. Other molecule classes do not require T cell cooperation and are called T-independent
antigens.
• T cell-independent activation of B cells involves cross-linkage of BCRs by repetitive nonprotein antigen
epitopes. It is characterized by the production of IgM by plasma cells and does not produce memory B cells.
• T cell-dependent activation of B cells involves processing and presentation of protein antigens to helper T
cells, activation of the B cells by cytokines secreted from activated TH2 cells, and plasma cells that produce
different classes of antibodies as a result of class switching. Memory B cells are also produced.
• Secondary exposures to T-dependent antigens result in a secondary antibody response initiated by memory
B cells. The secondary response develops more quickly and produces higher and more sustained levels of
antibody with higher affinity for the specific antigen.
18.5 Vaccines
• Adaptive immunity can be divided into four distinct classifications: natural active immunity, natural
passive immunity, artificial passive immunity, and artificial active immunity.
• Artificial active immunity is the foundation for vaccination and vaccine development. Vaccination programs
not only confer artificial immunity on individuals, but also foster herd immunity in populations.
• Variolation against smallpox originated in the 10th century in China, but the procedure was risky because
it could cause the disease it was intended to prevent. Modern vaccination was developed by Edward Jenner,
who developed the practice of inoculating patients with infectious materials from cowpox lesions to prevent
smallpox.
• Live attenuated vaccines and inactivated vaccines contain whole pathogens that are weak, killed, or
inactivated. Subunit vaccines, toxoid vaccines, and conjugate vaccines contain acellular components with
antigens that stimulate an immune response.

Review Questions

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

Multiple Choice

1. Antibodies are produced by ________.
a. plasma cells
b. T cells
c. bone marrow
d. B cells
2. Cellular adaptive immunity is carried out by
________.
a. B cells
b. T cells
c. bone marrow
d. neutrophils
3. A single antigen molecule may be composed of
many individual ________.
a. T-cell receptors
b. B-cell receptors
c. MHC II
d. epitopes
4. Which class of molecules is the most antigenic?
a. polysaccharides
b. lipids
c. proteins
d. carbohydrates
5. MHC I molecules present
a. processed foreign antigens from proteasomes.
b. processed self-antigens from phagolysosome.
c. antibodies.
d. T cell antigens.
6. MHC II molecules present
a. processed self-antigens from proteasomes.
b. processed
foreign
antigens
from
phagolysosomes.
c. antibodies.
d. T cell receptors.
7. Which type of antigen-presenting molecule is found
on all nucleated cells?
a. MHC II
b. MHC I
c. antibodies
d. B-cell receptors
8. Which type of antigen-presenting molecule is found
only on macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells?
a. MHC I
b. MHC II
c. T-cell receptors
d. B-cell receptors

809

9. What is a superantigen?
a. a protein that is highly efficient at stimulating
a single type of productive and specific T cell
response
b. a protein produced by antigen-presenting cells to
enhance their presentation capabilities
c. a protein produced by T cells as a way of
increasing the antigen activation they receive
from antigen-presenting cells
d. a protein that activates T cells in a nonspecific
and uncontrolled manner
10. To what does the TCR of a helper T cell bind?
a. antigens presented with MHC I molecules
b. antigens presented with MHC II molecules
c. free antigen in a soluble form
d. haptens only
11. Cytotoxic T cells will bind with their TCR to which
of the following?
a. antigens presented with MHC I molecules
b. antigens presented with MHC II molecules
c. free antigen in a soluble form
d. haptens only
12. A ________ molecule is a glycoprotein used to
identify and distinguish white blood cells.
a. T-cell receptor
b. B-cell receptor
c. MHC I
d. cluster of differentiation
13. Name the T helper cell subset involved in antibody
production.
a. TH1
b. TH2
c. TH17
d. CTL
14. Which of the following would be a T-dependent
antigen?
a. lipopolysaccharide
b. glycolipid
c. protein
d. carbohydrate
15. Which of the following would be a BCR?
a. CD4
b. MHC II
c. MHC I
d. IgD

810

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

16. Which of the following does not occur during the
lag period of the primary antibody response?
a. activation of helper T cells
b. class switching to IgG
c. presentation of antigen with MHC II
d. binding of antigen to BCRs
17. A patient is bitten by a dog with confirmed rabies
infection. After treating the bite wound, the physician
injects the patient with antibodies that are specific for
the rabies virus to prevent the development of an active
infection. This is an example of:
a. Natural active immunity
b. Artificial active immunity
c. Natural passive immunity
d. Artificial passive immunity
18. A patient gets a cold, and recovers a few days later.
The patient's classmates come down with the same cold
roughly a week later, but the original patient does not get
the same cold again. This is an example of:
a. Natural active immunity
b. Artificial active immunity
c. Natural passive immunity
d. Artificial passive immunity
Matching

19. Match the antibody class with its description.
___IgA

A. This class of antibody is the only one that can cross the placenta.

___IgD

B. This class of antibody is the first to appear after activation of B cells.

___IgE

C. This class of antibody is involved in the defense against parasitic infections and involved in allergic
responses.

___IgG

D. This class of antibody is found in very large amounts in mucus secretions.

___IgM

E. This class of antibody is not secreted by B cells but is expressed on the surface of naïve B cells.

20. Match each type of vaccine with the corresponding example.
___inactivated vaccine

A. Weakened influenza virions that can only replicate in the slightly lower
temperatures of the nasal passages are sprayed into the nose. They do not cause
serious flu symptoms, but still produce an active infection that induces a protective
adaptive immune response.

___live attenuated vaccine

B. Tetanus toxin molecules are harvested and chemically treated to render them
harmless. They are then injected into a patient’s arm.

___toxoid vaccine

C. Influenza virus particles grown in chicken eggs are harvested and chemically
treated to render them noninfectious. These immunogenic particles are then
purified and packaged and administered as an injection.

___subunit vaccine

D. The gene for hepatitis B virus surface antigen is inserted into a yeast genome.
The modified yeast is grown and the virus protein is produced, harvested, purified,
and used in a vaccine.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

811

Fill in the Blank

21. There are two critically important aspects of adaptive immunity. The first is specificity, while the second is
________.
22. ________ immunity involves the production of antibody molecules that bind to specific antigens.
23. The heavy chains of an antibody molecule contain ________ region segments, which help to determine its class
or isotype.
24. The variable regions of the heavy and light chains form the ________ sites of an antibody.
25. MHC molecules are used for antigen ________ to T cells.
26. MHC II molecules are made up of two subunits (α and β) of approximately equal size, whereas MHC I molecules
consist of a larger α subunit and a smaller subunit called ________.
27. A ________ T cell will become activated by presentation of foreign antigen associated with an MHC I molecule.
28. A ________ T cell will become activated by presentation of foreign antigen in association with an MHC II
molecule.
29. A TCR is a protein dimer embedded in the plasma membrane of a T cell. The ________ region of each of the
two protein chains is what gives it the capability to bind to a presented antigen.
30. Peripheral tolerance mechanisms function on T cells after they mature and exit the ________.
31. Both ________ and effector T cells are produced during differentiation of activated T cells.
32. ________ antigens can stimulate B cells to become activated but require cytokine assistance delivered by helper
T cells.
33. T-independent antigens can stimulate B cells to become activated and secrete antibodies without assistance from
helper T cells. These antigens possess ________ antigenic epitopes that cross-link BCRs.
34. A(n) ________ pathogen is in a weakened state; it is still capable of stimulating an immune response but does
not cause a disease.
35. ________ immunity occurs when antibodies from one individual are harvested and given to another to protect
against disease or treat active disease.
36. In the practice of ________, scabs from smallpox victims were used to immunize susceptible individuals against
smallpox.
Short Answer

37. What is the difference between humoral and cellular adaptive immunity?
38. What is the difference between an antigen and a hapten?
39. Describe the mechanism of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
40. What is the basic difference in effector function between helper and cytotoxic T cells?
41. What necessary interactions are required for activation of helper T cells and activation/effector function of
cytotoxic T cells?
42. Briefly compare the pros and cons of inactivated versus live attenuated vaccines.
Critical Thinking

43. Which mechanism of antigen presentation would be used to present antigens from a cell infected with a virus?

812

Chapter 18 | Adaptive Specific Host Defenses

44. Which pathway of antigen presentation would be used to present antigens from an extracellular bacterial
infection?
45. A patient lacks the ability to make functioning T cells because of a genetic disorder. Would this patient’s B cells
be able to produce antibodies in response to an infection? Explain your answer.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

813

Chapter 19

Diseases of the Immune System

Figure 19.1 Bee stings and other allergens can cause life-threatening, systemic allergic reactions. Sensitive
individuals may need to carry an epinephrine auto-injector (e.g., EpiPen) in case of a sting. A bee-sting allergy is an
example of an immune response that is harmful to the host rather than protective; epinephrine counteracts the severe
drop in blood pressure that can result from the immune response. (credit right: modification of work by Carol
Bleistine)

Chapter Outline
19.1 Hypersensitivities
19.2 Autoimmune Disorders
19.3 Organ Transplantation and Rejection
19.4 Immunodeficiency
19.5 Cancer Immunobiology and Immunotherapy

Introduction
An allergic reaction is an immune response to a type of antigen called an allergen. Allergens can be found in many
different items, from peanuts and insect stings to latex and some drugs. Unlike other kinds of antigens, allergens are
not necessarily associated with pathogenic microbes, and many allergens provoke no immune response at all in most
people.
Allergic responses vary in severity. Some are mild and localized, like hay fever or hives, but others can result in
systemic, life-threatening reactions. Anaphylaxis, for example, is a rapidly developing allergic reaction that can cause
a dangerous drop in blood pressure and severe swelling of the throat that may close off the airway.
Allergies are just one example of how the immune system—the system normally responsible for preventing
disease—can actually cause or mediate disease symptoms. In this chapter, we will further explore allergies and other
disorders of the immune system, including hypersensitivity reactions, autoimmune diseases, transplant rejection, and
diseases associated with immunodeficiency.

814

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

19.1 Hypersensitivities
Learning Objectives
• Identify and compare the distinguishing characteristics, mechanisms, and major examples of type I, II, III, and

IV hypersensitivities
In Adaptive Specific Host Defenses, we discussed the mechanisms by which adaptive immune defenses, both
humoral and cellular, protect us from infectious diseases. However, these same protective immune defenses can also
be responsible for undesirable reactions called hypersensitivity reactions. Hypersensitivity reactions are classified by
their immune mechanism.
• Type I hypersensitivity reactions involve immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibody against soluble antigen, triggering

mast cell degranulation.
• Type II hypersensitivity reactions involve IgG and IgM antibodies directed against cellular antigens, leading

to cell damage mediated by other immune system effectors.
• Type III hypersensitivity reactions involve the interactions of IgG, IgM, and, occasionally, IgA[1] antibodies

with antigen to form immune complexes. Accumulation of immune complexes in tissue leads to tissue damage
mediated by other immune system effectors.
• Type IV hypersensitivity reactions are T-cell–mediated reactions that can involve tissue damage mediated by

activated macrophages and cytotoxic T cells.

Type I Hypersensitivities
When a presensitized individual is exposed to an allergen, it can lead to a rapid immune response that occurs
almost immediately. Such a response is called an allergy and is classified as a type I hypersensitivity. Allergens
may be seemingly harmless substances such as animal dander, molds, or pollen. Allergens may also be substances
considered innately more hazardous, such as insect venom or therapeutic drugs. Food intolerances can also yield
allergic reactions as individuals become sensitized to foods such as peanuts or shellfish (Figure 19.2). Regardless
of the allergen, the first exposure activates a primary IgE antibody response that sensitizes an individual to type I
hypersensitivity reaction upon subsequent exposure.

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Kerry, a 40-year-old airline pilot, has made an appointment with her primary care physician to discuss a rash
that develops whenever she spends time in the sun. As she explains to her physician, it does not seem
like sunburn. She is careful not to spend too much time in the sun and she uses sunscreen. Despite these
precautions, the rash still appears, manifesting as red, raised patches that get slightly scaly. The rash persists
for 7 to 10 days each time, and it seems to largely go away on its own. Lately, the rashes have also begun to
appear on her cheeks and above her eyes on either side of her forehead.

• Is Kerry right to be concerned, or should she simply be more careful about sun exposure?
• Are there conditions that might be brought on by sun exposure that Kerry’s physician should be
considering?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

1. D.S. Strayer et al (eds). Rubin’s Pathology: Clinicopathologic Foundations of Medicine. 7th ed. 2Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams
& Wilkins, 2014.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

815

Figure 19.2 (a) Allergens in plant pollen, shown here in a colorized electron micrograph, may trigger allergic rhinitis
or hay fever in sensitive individuals. (b) Skin rashes are often associated with allergic reactions. (c) Peanuts can be
eaten safely by most people but can provoke severe allergic reactions in sensitive individuals.

For susceptible individuals, a first exposure to an allergen activates a strong TH2 cell response (Figure 19.3).
Cytokines interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 from the TH2 cells activate B cells specific to the same allergen, resulting in
clonal proliferation, differentiation into plasma cells, and antibody-class switch from production of IgM to production
of IgE. The fragment crystallizable (Fc) regions of the IgE antibodies bind to specific receptors on the surface of
mast cells throughout the body. It is estimated that each mast cell can bind up to 500,000 IgE molecules, with each
IgE molecule having two allergen-specific fragment antigen-binding (Fab) sites available for binding allergen on
subsequent exposures. By the time this occurs, the allergen is often no longer present and there is no allergic reaction,
but the mast cells are primed for a subsequent exposure and the individual is sensitized to the allergen.
On subsequent exposure, allergens bind to multiple IgE molecules on mast cells, cross-linking the IgE molecules.
Within minutes, this cross-linking of IgE activates the mast cells and triggers degranulation, a reaction in which the
contents of the granules in the mast cell are released into the extracellular environment. Preformed components that
are released from granules include histamine, serotonin, and bradykinin (Table 19.1). The activated mast cells also
release newly formed lipid mediators (leukotrienes and prostaglandins from membrane arachadonic acid metabolism)
and cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (Table 19.2).
The chemical mediators released by mast cells collectively cause the inflammation and signs and symptoms
associated with type I hypersensitivity reactions. Histamine stimulates mucus secretion in nasal passages and tear
formation from lacrimal glands, promoting the runny nose and watery eyes of allergies. Interaction of histamine
with nerve endings causes itching and sneezing. The vasodilation caused by several of the mediators can result in
hives, headaches, angioedema (swelling that often affects the lips, throat, and tongue), and hypotension (low blood
pressure). Bronchiole constriction caused by some of the chemical mediators leads to wheezing, dyspnea (difficulty
breathing), coughing, and, in more severe cases, cyanosis (bluish color to the skin or mucous membranes). Vomiting
can result from stimulation of the vomiting center in the cerebellum by histamine and serotonin. Histamine can also
cause relaxation of intestinal smooth muscles and diarrhea.
Selected Preformed Components of Mast Cell Granules
Granule
Component

Activity

Heparin

Stimulates the generation of bradykinin, which causes increased vascular permeability,
vasodilation, bronchiole constriction, and increased mucus secretion

Histamine

Causes smooth-muscle contraction, increases vascular permeability, increases mucus and tear
formation

Serotonin

Increases vascular permeability, causes vasodilation and smooth-muscle contraction

Table 19.1

816

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Selected Newly Formed Chemical Mediators of Inflammation and Allergic Response
Chemical
Mediator

Activity

Leukotriene

Causes smooth-muscle contraction and mucus secretion, increases vascular
permeability

Prostaglandin

Causes smooth-muscle contraction and vasodilation

TNF-α (cytokine)

Causes inflammation and stimulates cytokine production by other cell types

Table 19.2

Figure 19.3 On first exposure to an allergen in a susceptible individual, antigen-presenting cells process and
present allergen epitopes with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II to T helper cells. B cells also process and
present the same allergen epitope to TH2 cells, which release cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 to stimulate proliferation and
differentiation into IgE-secreting plasma cells. The IgE molecules bind to mast cells with their Fc region, sensitizing
the mast cells for activation with subsequent exposure to the allergen. With each subsequent exposure, the allergen
cross-links IgE molecules on the mast cells, activating the mast cells and causing the release of preformed chemical
mediators from granules (degranulation), as well as newly formed chemical mediators that collectively cause the
signs and symptoms of type I hypersensitivity reactions.

Type I hypersensitivity reactions can be either localized or systemic. Localized type I hypersensitivity reactions
include hay fever rhinitis, hives, and asthma (Table 19.3). Systemic type I hypersensitivity reactions are referred to
as anaphylaxis or anaphylactic shock. Although anaphylaxis shares many symptoms common with the localized
type I hypersensitivity reactions, the swelling of the tongue and trachea, blockage of airways, dangerous drop in blood

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

817

pressure, and development of shock can make anaphylaxis especially severe and life-threatening. In fact, death can
occur within minutes of onset of signs and symptoms.
Late-phase reactions in type I hypersensitivities may develop 4–12 hours after the early phase and are mediated by
eosinophils, neutrophils, and lymphocytes that have been recruited by chemotactic factors released from mast cells.
Activation of these recruited cells leads to the release of more chemical mediators that cause tissue damage and latephase symptoms of swelling and redness of the skin, coughing, wheezing, and nasal discharge.
Individuals who possess genes for maladaptive traits, such as intense type I hypersensitivity reactions to otherwise
harmless components of the environment, would be expected to suffer reduced reproductive success. With this kind
of evolutionary selective pressure, such traits would not be expected to persist in a population. This suggests that
type I hypersensitivities may have an adaptive function. There is evidence that the IgE produced during type I
hypersensitivity reactions is actually meant to counter helminth infections[2]. Helminths are one of few organisms
that possess proteins that are targeted by IgE. In addition, there is evidence that helminth infections at a young age
reduce the likelihood of type I hypersensitivities to innocuous substances later in life. Thus it may be that allergies
are an unfortunate consequence of strong selection in the mammalian lineage or earlier for a defense against parasitic
worms.
Type I Hypersensitivities
Common
Name

Cause

Signs and Symptoms

Allergy-induced
asthma

Inhalation of allergens

Constriction of bronchi, labored breathing, coughing, chills,
body aches

Anaphylaxis

Systemic reaction to
allergens

Hives, itching, swelling of tongue and throat, nausea, vomiting,
low blood pressure, shock

Hay fever

Inhalation of mold or
pollen

Runny nose, watery eyes, sneezing

Hives (urticaria)

Food or drug allergens,
insect stings

Raised, bumpy skin rash with itching; bumps may converge into
large raised areas

Table 19.3

• What are the cells that cause a type I hypersensitivity reaction?
• Describe the differences between immediate and late-phase type I hypersensitivity reactions.
• List the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis.

Micro Connections
The Hygiene Hypothesis
In most modern societies, good hygiene is associated with regular bathing, and good health with cleanliness.
But some recent studies suggest that the association between health and clean living may be a faulty one.

2. C.M. Fitzsimmons et al. “Helminth Allergens, Parasite-Specific IgE, and Its Protective Role in Human Immunity.” Frontier in
Immunology 5 (2015):47.

818

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Some go so far as to suggest that children should be encouraged to play in the dirt—or even eat dirt[3]—for
the benefit of their health. This recommendation is based on the so-called hygiene hypothesis, which proposes
that childhood exposure to antigens from a diverse range of microbes leads to a better-functioning immune
system later in life.
The hygiene hypothesis was first suggested in 1989 by David Strachan[4], who observed an inverse
relationship between the number of older children in a family and the incidence of hay fever. Although hay fever
in children had increased dramatically during the mid-20th century, incidence was significantly lower in families
with more children. Strachan proposed that the lower incidence of allergies in large families could be linked
to infections acquired from older siblings, suggesting that these infections made children less susceptible to
allergies. Strachan also argued that trends toward smaller families and a greater emphasis on cleanliness
in the 20th century had decreased exposure to pathogens and thus led to higher overall rates of allergies,
asthma, and other immune disorders.
Other researchers have observed an inverse relationship between the incidence of immune disorders and
infectious diseases that are now rare in industrialized countries but still common in less industrialized
countries.[5] In developed nations, children under the age of 5 years are not exposed to many of the microbes,
molecules, and antigens they almost certainly would have encountered a century ago. The lack of early
challenges to the immune system by organisms with which humans and their ancestors evolved may result in
failures in immune system functioning later in life.

Type II (Cytotoxic) Hypersensitivities
Immune reactions categorized as type II hypersensitivities, or cytotoxic hypersensitivities, are mediated by IgG
and IgM antibodies binding to cell-surface antigens or matrix-associated antigens on basement membranes. These
antibodies can either activate complement, resulting in an inflammatory response and lysis of the targeted cells, or
they can be involved in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) with cytotoxic T cells.
In some cases, the antigen may be a self-antigen, in which case the reaction would also be described as an autoimmune
disease. (Autoimmune diseases are described in Autoimmune Disorders). In other cases, antibodies may bind to
naturally occurring, but exogenous, cell-surface molecules such as antigens associated with blood typing found on
red blood cells (RBCs). This leads to the coating of the RBCs by antibodies, activation of the complement cascade,
and complement-mediated lysis of RBCs, as well as opsonization of RBCs for phagocytosis. Two examples of type
II hypersensitivity reactions involving RBCs are hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR) and hemolytic disease of the
newborn (HDN). These type II hypersensitivity reactions, which will be discussed in greater detail, are summarized
in Table 19.4.
Immunohematology is the study of blood and blood-forming tissue in relation to the immune response. Antibodyinitiated responses against blood cells are type II hypersensitivities, thus falling into the field of immunohematology.
For students first learning about immunohematology, understanding the immunological mechanisms involved is made
even more challenging by the complex nomenclature system used to identify different blood-group antigens, often
called blood types. The first blood-group antigens either used alphabetical names or were named for the first person
known to produce antibodies to the red blood cell antigen (e.g., Kell, Duffy, or Diego). However, in 1980, the
International Society of Blood Transfusion (ISBT) Working Party on Terminology created a standard for blood-group
terminology in an attempt to more consistently identify newly discovered blood group antigens. New antigens are
now given a number and assigned to a blood-group system, collection, or series. However, even with this effort,
blood-group nomenclature is still inconsistent.

3. S.T. Weiss. “Eat Dirt—The Hygiene Hypothesis and Allergic Diseases.” New England Journal of Medicine 347 no. 12 (2002):930–931.
4. D.P. Strachan “Hay Fever, Hygiene, and Household Size.” British Medical Journal 299 no. 6710 (1989):1259.
5. H. Okada et al. “The ‘Hygiene Hypothesis’ for Autoimmune and Allergic Diseases: An Update.” Clinical & Experimental Immunology
160 no. 1 (2010):1–9.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

819

Common Type II Hypersensitivities
Common Name

Cause

Signs and Symptoms

Hemolytic
disease of the
newborn (HDN)

IgG from mother crosses the
placenta, targeting the fetus’ RBCs
for destruction

Anemia, edema, enlarged liver or spleen, hydrops
(fluid in body cavity), leading to death of newborn
in severe cases

Hemolytic
transfusion
reactions (HTR)

IgG and IgM bind to antigens on
transfused RBCs, targeting donor
RBCs for destruction

Fever, jaundice, hypotension, disseminated
intravascular coagulation, possibly leading to
kidney failure and death

Table 19.4

ABO Blood Group Incompatibility
The recognition that individuals have different blood types was first described by Karl Landsteiner (1868–1943) in
the early 1900s, based on his observation that serum from one person could cause a clumping of RBCs from another.
These studies led Landsteiner to the identification of four distinct blood types. Subsequent research by other scientists
determined that the four blood types were based on the presence or absence of surface glycoproteins “A” and “B,”
and this provided the foundation for the ABO blood group system that is still in use today (Figure 19.4). The
functions of these antigens are unknown, but some have been associated with normal biochemical functions of the
cell. Furthermore, ABO blood types are inherited as alleles (one from each parent), and they display patterns of
dominant and codominant inheritance. The alleles for A and B blood types are codominant to each other, and both
are dominant over blood type O. Therefore, individuals with genotypes of AA or AO have type A blood and express
the A glycoprotein antigen on the surface of their RBCs. People with genotypes of BB or BO have type B blood and
express the B glycoprotein antigen on the surface of their RBCs. Those with a genotype of AB have type AB blood
and express both A and B glycoprotein antigens on the surface of their RBCs. Finally, individuals with a genotype of
OO have type O blood and lack A and B glycoproteins on the surface of their RBCs.
It is important to note that the RBCs of all four ABO blood types share a common protein receptor molecule, and
it is the addition of specific carbohydrates to the protein receptors that determines A, B, and AB blood types. The
genes that are inherited for the A, B, and AB blood types encode enzymes that add the carbohydrate component to
the protein receptor. Individuals with O blood type still have the protein receptor but lack the enzymes that would add
carbohydrates that would make their red blood cell type A, B, or AB.
IgM antibodies in plasma that cross-react with blood group antigens not present on an individual’s own RBCs are
called isohemagglutinins (Figure 19.4). Isohemagglutinins are produced within the first few weeks after birth and
persist throughout life. These antibodies are produced in response to exposure to environmental antigens from food
and microorganisms. A person with type A blood has A antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-B
antibodies to environmental antigens that resemble the carbohydrate component of B antigens. A person with type B
blood has B antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-A antibodies to environmental antigens that
are similar to the carbohydrate component of A antigens. People with blood type O lack both A and B antigens on
their RBCs and, therefore, produce both anti-A and anti-B antibodies. Conversely, people with AB blood type have
both A and B antigens on their RBCs and, therefore, lack anti-A and anti-B antibodies.

820

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Figure 19.4

A patient may require a blood transfusion because they lack sufficient RBCs (anemia) or because they have
experienced significant loss of blood volume through trauma or disease. Although the blood transfusion is given to
help the patient, it is essential that the patient receive a transfusion with matching ABO blood type. A transfusion with
an incompatible ABO blood type may lead to a strong, potentially lethal type II hypersensitivity cytotoxic response
called hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR) (Figure 19.5).
For instance, if a person with type B blood receives a transfusion of type A blood, their anti-A antibodies will bind to
and agglutinate the transfused RBCs. In addition, activation of the classical complement cascade will lead to a strong
inflammatory response, and the complement membrane attack complex (MAC) will mediate massive hemolysis of
the transfused RBCs. The debris from damaged and destroyed RBCs can occlude blood vessels in the alveoli of the
lungs and the glomeruli of the kidneys. Within 1 to 24 hours of an incompatible transfusion, the patient experiences
fever, chills, pruritus (itching), urticaria (hives), dyspnea, hemoglobinuria (hemoglobin in the urine), and hypotension
(low blood pressure). In the most serious reactions, dangerously low blood pressure can lead to shock, multi-organ
failure, and death of the patient.
Hospitals, medical centers, and associated clinical laboratories typically use hemovigilance systems to minimize the
risk of HTRs due to clerical error. Hemovigilance systems are procedures that track transfusion information from the
donor source and blood products obtained to the follow-up of recipient patients. Hemovigilance systems used in many
countries identify HTRs and their outcomes through mandatory reporting (e.g., to the Food and Drug Administration
in the United States), and this information is valuable to help prevent such occurrences in the future. For example,
if an HTR is found to be the result of laboratory or clerical error, additional blood products collected from the donor
at that time can be located and labeled correctly to avoid additional HTRs. As a result of these measures, HTRassociated deaths in the United States occur in about one per 2 million transfused units. [6]

6. E.C. Vamvakas, M.A. Blajchman. “Transfusion-Related Mortality: The Ongoing Risks of Allogeneic Blood Transfusion and the
Available Strategies for Their Prevention.” Blood 113 no. 15 (2009):3406–3417.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

821

Figure 19.5 A type II hypersensitivity hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR) leading to hemolytic anemia. Blood from
a type A donor is administered to a patient with type B blood. The anti-A isohemagglutinin IgM antibodies in the
recipient bind to and agglutinate the incoming donor type A red blood cells. The bound anti-A antibodies activate the
classical complement cascade, resulting in destruction of the donor red blood cells.

Rh Factors
Many different types of erythrocyte antigens have been discovered since the description of the ABO red cell antigens.
The second most frequently described RBC antigens are Rh factors, named after the rhesus macaque (Macaca
mulatta) factors identified by Karl Landsteiner and Alexander Weiner in 1940. The Rh system of RBC antigens is the
most complex and immunogenic blood group system, with more than 50 specificities identified to date. Of all the Rh
antigens, the one designated Rho (Weiner) or D (Fisher-Race) is the most immunogenic. Cells are classified as Rh
positive (Rh+) if the Rho/D antigen is present or as Rh negative (Rh−) if the Rho/D antigen is absent. In contrast to the
carbohydrate molecules that distinguish the ABO blood groups and are the targets of IgM isohemagglutinins in HTRs,
the Rh factor antigens are proteins. As discussed in B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity, protein antigens
activate B cells and antibody production through a T-cell–dependent mechanism, and the TH2 cells stimulate class
switching from IgM to other antibody classes. In the case of Rh factor antigens, TH2 cells stimulate class switching
to IgG, and this has important implications for the mechanism of HDN.
Like ABO incompatibilities, blood transfusions from a donor with the wrong Rh factor antigens can cause a type II
hypersensitivity HTR. However, in contrast to the IgM isohemagglutinins produced early in life through exposure
to environmental antigens, production of anti-Rh factor antibodies requires the exposure of an individual with Rh−
blood to Rh+ positive RBCs and activation of a primary antibody response. Although this primary antibody response
can cause an HTR in the transfusion patient, the hemolytic reaction would be delayed up to 2 weeks during the
extended lag period of a primary antibody response (B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity). However, if
the patient receives a subsequent transfusion with Rh+ RBCs, a more rapid HTR would occur with anti-Rh factor
antibody already present in the blood. Furthermore, the rapid secondary antibody response would provide even more
anti-Rh factor antibodies for the HTR.
Rh factor incompatibility between mother and fetus can also cause a type II hypersensitivity hemolytic reaction,
referred to as hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) (Figure 19.6). If an Rh− woman carries an Rh+ baby to
term, the mother’s immune system can be exposed to Rh+ fetal red blood cells. This exposure will usually occur
during the last trimester of pregnancy and during the delivery process. If this exposure occurs, the Rh+ fetal RBCs
will activate a primary adaptive immune response in the mother, and anti-Rh factor IgG antibodies will be produced.
IgG antibodies are the only class of antibody that can cross the placenta from mother to fetus; however, in most cases,
the first Rh+ baby is unaffected by these antibodies because the first exposure typically occurs late enough in the

822

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

pregnancy that the mother does not have time to mount a sufficient primary antibody response before the baby is
born.
If a subsequent pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus occurs, however, the mother’s second exposure to the Rh factor antigens
causes a strong secondary antibody response that produces larger quantities of anti-Rh factor IgG. These antibodies
can cross the placenta from mother to fetus and cause HDN, a potentially lethal condition for the baby (Figure 19.6).
Prior to the development of techniques for diagnosis and prevention, Rh factor incompatibility was the most common
cause of HDN, resulting in thousands of infant deaths each year worldwide.[7] For this reason, the Rh factors of
prospective parents are regularly screened, and treatments have been developed to prevent HDN caused by Rh
incompatibility. To prevent Rh factor-mediated HDN, human Rho(D) immune globulin (e.g., RhoGAM) is injected
intravenously or intramuscularly into the mother during the 28th week of pregnancy and within 72 hours after
delivery. Additional doses may be administered after events that may result in transplacental hemorrhage (e.g.,
umbilical blood sampling, chorionic villus sampling, abdominal trauma, amniocentesis). This treatment is initiated
during the first pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus. The anti-Rh antibodies in Rho(D) immune globulin will bind to the Rh
factor of any fetal RBCs that gain access to the mother’s bloodstream, preventing these Rh+ cells from activating the
mother’s primary antibody response. Without a primary anti-Rh factor antibody response, the next pregnancy with an
Rh+ will have minimal risk of HDN. However, the mother will need to be retreated with Rho(D) immune globulin
during that pregnancy to prevent a primary anti-Rh antibody response that could threaten subsequent pregnancies.

Figure 19.6 (a) When an Rh− mother has an Rh+ fetus, fetal erythrocytes are introduced into the mother’s
circulatory system before or during birth, leading to production of anti-Rh IgG antibodies. These antibodies remain in
the mother and, if she becomes pregnant with a second Rh+ baby, they can cross the placenta and attach to fetal
Rh+ erythrocytes. Complement-mediated hemolysis of fetal erythrocytes results in a lack of sufficient cells for proper
oxygenation of the fetus. (b) HDN can be prevented by administering Rho(D) immune globulin during and after each
pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus. The immune globulin binds fetal Rh+ RBCs that gain access to the mother’s
bloodstream, preventing activation of her primary immune response.

7. G. Reali. “Forty Years of Anti-D Immunoprophylaxis.” Blood Transfusion 5 no. 1 (2007):3–6.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

823

Link to Learning
Use this interactive Blood Typing Game (https://openstax.org/l/
22actbloodtyping) to reinforce your knowledge of blood typing.

• What happens to cells that possess incompatible antigens in a type II hypersensitivity reaction?
• Describe hemolytic disease of the newborn and explain how it can be prevented.

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Kerry’s primary care physician is not sure why Kerry seems to develop rashes after spending time in the sun,
so she orders a urinalysis and basic blood tests. The results reveal that Kerry has proteinuria (abnormal protein
levels in the urine), hemoglobinuria (excess hemoglobin in the urine), and a low hematocrit (RBC count). These
tests suggest that Kerry is suffering from a mild bout of hemolytic anemia. The physician suspects that the
problem might be autoimmune, so she refers Kerry to a rheumatologist for additional testing and diagnosis.

• Rheumatologists specialize in musculoskeletal diseases such as arthritis, osteoporosis, and joint pain.
Why might Kerry’s physician refer her to this particular type of specialist even though she is exhibiting
none of these symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Type III Hypersensitivities
Type III hypersensitivities are immune-complex reactions that were first characterized by Nicolas Maurice Arthus
(1862–1945) in 1903. To produce antibodies for experimental procedures, Arthus immunized rabbits by injecting
them with serum from horses. However, while immunizing rabbits repeatedly with horse serum, Arthus noticed a
previously unreported and unexpected localized subcutaneous hemorrhage with edema at the site of injection. This
reaction developed within 3 to10 hours after injection. This localized reaction to non-self serum proteins was called
an Arthus reaction. An Arthus reaction occurs when soluble antigens bind with IgG in a ratio that results in the
accumulation of antigen-antibody aggregates called immune complexes.
A unique characteristic of type III hypersensitivity is antibody excess (primarily IgG), coupled with a relatively low
concentration of antigen, resulting in the formation of small immune complexes that deposit on the surface of the
epithelial cells lining the inner lumen of small blood vessels or on the surfaces of tissues (Figure 19.7). This immune
complex accumulation leads to a cascade of inflammatory events that include the following:
1. IgG binding to antibody receptors on localized mast cells, resulting in mast-cell degranulation
2. Complement activation with production of pro-inflammatory C3a and C5a (see Chemical Defenses)
3. Increased blood-vessel permeability with chemotactic recruitment of neutrophils and macrophages

824

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Because these immune complexes are not an optimal size and are deposited on cell surfaces, they cannot be
phagocytosed in the usual way by neutrophils and macrophages, which, in turn, are often described as “frustrated.”
Although phagocytosis does not occur, neutrophil degranulation results in the release of lysosomal enzymes that cause
extracellular destruction of the immune complex, damaging localized cells in the process. Activation of coagulation
pathways also occurs, resulting in thrombi (blood clots) that occlude blood vessels and cause ischemia that can lead
to vascular necrosis and localized hemorrhage.
Systemic type III hypersensitivity (serum sickness) occurs when immune complexes deposit in various body sites,
resulting in a more generalized systemic inflammatory response. These immune complexes involve non-self proteins
such as antibodies produced in animals for artificial passive immunity (see Vaccines), certain drugs, or microbial
antigens that are continuously released over time during chronic infections (e.g., subacute bacterial endocarditis,
chronic viral hepatitis). The mechanisms of serum sickness are similar to those described in localized type III
hypersensitivity but involve widespread activation of mast cells, complement, neutrophils, and macrophages, which
causes tissue destruction in areas such as the kidneys, joints, and blood vessels. As a result of tissue destruction,
symptoms of serum sickness include chills, fever, rash, vasculitis, and arthritis. Development of glomerulonephritis
or hepatitis is also possible.
Autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis can also involve
damaging type III hypersensitivity reactions when auto-antibodies form immune complexes with self antigens. These
conditions are discussed in Autoimmune Disorders.

Figure 19.7 Type III hypersensitivities and the systems they affect. (a) Immune complexes form and deposit in
tissue. Complement activation, stimulation of an inflammatory response, and recruitment and activation of neutrophils
result in damage to blood vessels, heart tissue, joints, skin, and/or kidneys. (b) If the kidneys are damaged by a type
III hypersensitivity reaction, dialysis may be required.

• Why is antibody excess important in type III hypersensitivity?
• Describe the differences between the Arthus reaction and serum sickness.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

825

Micro Connections
Diphtheria Antitoxin
Antibacterial sera are much less commonly used now than in the past, having been replaced by toxoid
vaccines. However, a diphtheria antitoxin produced in horses is one example of such a treatment that is still
used in some parts of the world. Although it is not licensed by the FDA for use in the United States, diphtheria
antitoxin can be used to treat cases of diphtheria, which are caused by the bacterium Corynebacterium
diphtheriae.[8] The treatment is not without risks, however. Serum sickness can occur when the patient
develops an immune response to non-self horse proteins. Immune complexes are formed between the horse
proteins and circulating antibodies when the two exist in certain proportions. These immune complexes can
deposit in organs, causing damage such as arthritis, nephritis, rash, and fever. Serum sickness is usually
transient with no permanent damage unless the patient is chronically exposed to the antigen, which can
then result in irreversible damage to body sites such as joints and kidneys. Over time, phagocytic cells such
as macrophages are able to clear the horse serum antigens, which results in improvement of the patient’s
condition and a decrease in symptoms as the immune response dissipates.

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Kerry does not make it to the rheumatologist. She has a seizure as she is leaving her primary care physician’s
office. She is quickly rushed to the emergency department, where her primary care physician relates her
medical history and recent test results. The emergency department physician calls in the rheumatologist on
staff at the hospital for consultation. Based on the symptoms and test results, the rheumatologist suspects that
Kerry has lupus and orders a pair of blood tests: an antinuclear antibody test (ANA) to look for antibodies that
bind to DNA and another test that looks for antibodies that bind to a self-antigen called the Smith antigen (Sm).

• Based on the blood tests ordered, what type of reaction does the rheumatologist suspect is causing
Kerry’s seizure?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Type IV Hypersensitivities
Type IV hypersensitivities are not mediated by antibodies like the other three types of hypersensitivities. Rather,
type IV hypersensitivities are regulated by T cells and involve the action of effector cells. These types of
hypersensitivities can be organized into three subcategories based on T-cell subtype, type of antigen, and the resulting
effector mechanism (Table 19.5).
In the first type IV subcategory, CD4 TH1-mediated reactions are described as delayed-type hypersensitivities (DTH).
The sensitization step involves the introduction of antigen into the skin and phagocytosis by local antigen presenting
cells (APCs). The APCs activate helper T cells, stimulating clonal proliferation and differentiation into memory
TH1 cells. Upon subsequent exposure to the antigen, these sensitized memory TH1 cells release cytokines that
activate macrophages, and activated macrophages are responsible for much of the tissue damage. Examples of this
TH1-mediated hypersensitivity are observed in tuberculin the Mantoux skin test and contact dermatitis, such as
occurs in latex allergy reactions.

8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Diphtheria Antitoxin.” http://www.cdc.gov/diphtheria/dat.html. Accessed March 25, 2016.

826

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

In the second type IV subcategory, CD4 TH2-mediated reactions result in chronic asthma or chronic allergic rhinitis.
In these cases, the soluble antigen is first inhaled, resulting in eosinophil recruitment and activation with the release
of cytokines and inflammatory mediators.
In the third type IV subcategory, CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediated reactions are associated with tissue
transplant rejection and contact dermatitis (Figure 19.8). For this form of cell-mediated hypersensitivity, APCs
process and present the antigen with MHC I to naïve CD8 T cells. When these naïve CD8 T cells are activated, they
proliferate and differentiate into CTLs. Activated TH1 cells can also enhance the activation of the CTLs. The activated
CTLs then target and induce granzyme-mediated apoptosis in cells presenting the same antigen with MHC I. These
target cells could be “self” cells that have absorbed the foreign antigen (such as with contact dermatitis due to poison
ivy), or they could be transplanted tissue cells displaying foreign antigen from the donor.

Figure 19.8 Exposure to hapten antigens in poison ivy can cause contact dermatitis, a type IV hypersensitivity. (a)
The first exposure to poison ivy does not result in a reaction. However, sensitization stimulates helper T cells, leading
to production of memory helper T cells that can become reactivated on future exposures. (b) Upon secondary
exposure, the memory helper T cells become reactivated, producing inflammatory cytokines that stimulate
macrophages and cytotoxic T cells to induce an inflammatory lesion at the exposed site. This lesion, which will persist
until the allergen is removed, can inflict significant tissue damage if it continues long enough.

Type IV Hypersensitivities
Subcategory

Antigen

Effector Mechanism

Examples

1

Soluble
antigen

Activated macrophages damage
tissue and promote inflammatory
response

Contact dermatitis (e.g., exposure to
latex) and delayed-type hypersensitivity
(e.g., tuberculin reaction)

2

Soluble
antigen

Eosinophil recruitment and
activation release cytokines and
pro-inflammatory chemicals

Chronic asthma and chronic allergic
rhinitis

Table 19.5

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

827

Type IV Hypersensitivities
Subcategory
3

Antigen
Cellassociated
antigen

Effector Mechanism
CTL-mediated cytotoxicity

Examples
Contact dermatitis (e.g., contact with
poison ivy) and tissue-transplant rejection

Table 19.5

• Describe the three subtypes of type IV hypersensitivity.
• Explain how T cells contribute to tissue damage in type IV hypersensitivity.

Micro Connections
Using Delayed Hypersensitivity to Test for TB
Austrian pediatrician Clemans von Pirquet (1874–1929) first described allergy mechanisms, including type
III serum sickness.[9] His interest led to the development of a test for tuberculosis (TB), using the tuberculin
antigen, based on earlier work identifying the TB pathogen performed by Robert Koch. Pirquet’s method
involved scarification, which results in simultaneous multiple punctures, using a device with an array of needles
to break the skin numerous times in a small area. The device Pirquet used was similar to the tine test device
with four needles seen in Figure 19.9.
The tips of all the needles in the array are coated with tuberculin, a protein extract of TB bacteria, effectively
introducing the tuberculin into the skin. One to 3 days later, the area can be examined for a delayed
hypersensitivity reaction, signs of which include swelling and redness.
As you can imagine, scarification was not a pleasant experience,[10] and the numerous skin punctures put
the patient at risk of developing bacterial infection of the skin. Mantoux modified Pirquet’s test to use a single
subcutaneous injection of purified tuberculin material. A positive test, which is indicated by a delayed localized
swelling at the injection site, does not necessarily mean that the patient is currently infected with active TB.
Because type IV (delayed-type) hypersensitivity is mediated by reactivation of memory T cells, such cells may
have been created recently (due to an active current infection) or years prior (if a patient had TB and had
spontaneously cleared it, or if it had gone into latency). However, the test can be used to confirm infection in
cases in which symptoms in the patient or findings on a radiograph suggest its presence.

9. B. Huber “100 Jahre Allergie: Clemens von Pirquet–sein Allergiebegriff und das ihm zugrunde liegende Krankheitsverständnis.” Wiener
Klinische Wochenschrift 118 no. 19–20 (2006):573–579.
10. C.A. Stewart. “The Pirquet Test: Comparison of the Scarification and the Puncture Methods of Application.” Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine 35 no. 3 (1928):388–391.

828

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Figure 19.9 The modern version of Pirquet’s scarification is the tine test, which uses devices like this to
administer tuberculin antigen into the skin, usually on the inside of the forearm. The tine test is considered
less reliable than the Mantoux test. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
Some disease caused by hypersensitivities are not caused exclusively by one type. For example, hypersensitivity
pneumonitis (HP), which is often an occupational or environmental disease, occurs when the lungs become inflamed
due to an allergic reaction to inhaled dust, endospores, bird feathers, bird droppings, molds, or chemicals. HP goes by
many different names associated with various forms of exposure (Figure 19.10). HP associated with bird droppings
is sometimes called pigeon fancier’s lung or poultry worker’s lung—both common in bird breeders and handlers.
Cheese handler’s disease, farmer’s lung, sauna takers' disease, and hot-tub lung are other names for HP associated
with exposure to molds in various environments.
Pathology associated with HP can be due to both type III (mediated by immune complexes) and type IV (mediated
by TH1 cells and macrophages) hypersensitivities. Repeated exposure to allergens can cause alveolitis due to the
formation of immune complexes in the alveolar wall of the lung accompanied by fluid accumulation, and the
formation of granulomas and other lesions in the lung as a result of TH1-mediated macrophage activation. Alveolitis
with fluid and granuloma formation results in poor oxygen perfusion in the alveoli, which, in turn, can cause
symptoms such as coughing, dyspnea, chills, fever, sweating, myalgias, headache, and nausea. Symptoms may occur
as quickly as 2 hours after exposure and can persist for weeks if left untreated.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Figure 19.10 Occupational exposure to dust, mold, and other allergens can result in hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
(a) People exposed daily to large numbers of birds may be susceptible to poultry worker’s lung. (b) Workers in a
cheese factory may become sensitized to different types of molds and develop cheese handler’s disease. (credit a:
modification of work by The Global Orphan Project)

• Explain why hypersensitivity pneumonitis is considered an occupational disease.

Figure 19.11 summarizes the mechanisms and effects of each type of hypersensitivity discussed in this section.

829

830

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Figure 19.11 Components of the immune system cause four types of hypersensitivities. Notice that types I–III are Bcell/antibody-mediated hypersensitivities, whereas type IV hypersensitivity is exclusively a T-cell phenomenon.

Diagnosis of Hypersensitivities
Diagnosis of type I hypersensitivities is a complex process requiring several diagnostic tests in addition to a welldocumented patient history. Serum IgE levels can be measured, but elevated IgE alone does not confirm allergic
disease. As part of the process to identify the antigens responsible for a type I reaction allergy, testing through a
prick puncture skin test (PPST) or an intradermal test can be performed. PPST is carried out with the introduction of
allergens in a series of superficial skin pricks on the patient’s back or arms (Figure 19.12). PPSTs are considered to
be the most convenient and least expensive way to diagnose allergies, according to the US Joint Council of Allergy
and the European Academy of Allergy and Immunology. The second type of testing, the intradermal test, requires
injection into the dermis with a small needle. This needle, also known as a tuberculin needle, is attached to a syringe
containing a small amount of allergen. Both the PPST and the intradermal tests are observed for 15–20 minutes for
a wheal-flare reaction to the allergens. Measurement of any wheal (a raised, itchy bump) and flare (redness) within
minutes indicates a type I hypersensitivity, and the larger the wheal-flare reaction, the greater the patient’s sensitivity
to the allergen.
Type III hypersensitivities can often be misdiagnosed because of their nonspecific inflammatory nature. The
symptoms are easily visible, but they may be associated with any of a number of other diseases. A strong,
comprehensive patient history is crucial to proper and accurate diagnosis. Tests used to establish the diagnosis
of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (resulting from type III hypersensitivity) include bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL),
pulmonary function tests, and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

831

Figure 19.12 Results of an allergy skin-prick test to test for type I hypersensitivity to a group of potential allergens. A
positive result is indicated by a raised area (wheal) and surrounding redness (flare). (credit: modification of work by
“OakleyOriginals”/Flickr)

• Describe the prick puncture skin test.
• Explain why type III hypersensitivities can be difficult to diagnose.

Treatments of Hypersensitivities
Allergic reactions can be treated in various ways. Prevention of allergic reactions can be achieved by desensitization
(hyposensitization) therapy, which can be used to reduce the hypersensitivity reaction through repeated injections of
allergens. Extremely dilute concentrations of known allergens (determined from the allergen tests) are injected into
the patient at prescribed intervals (e.g., weekly). The quantity of allergen delivered by the shots is slowly increased
over a buildup period until an effective dose is determined and that dose is maintained for the duration of treatment,
which can last years. Patients are usually encouraged to remain in the doctor’s office for 30 minutes after receiving
the injection in case the allergens administered cause a severe systemic reaction. Doctors’ offices that administer
desensitization therapy must be prepared to provide resuscitation and drug treatment in the case of such an event.
Desensitization therapy is used for insect sting allergies and environmental allergies. The allergy shots elicit the
production of different interleukins and IgG antibody responses instead of IgE. When excess allergen-specific IgG
antibodies are produced and bind to the allergen, they can act as blocking antibodies to neutralize the allergen before
it can bind IgE on mast cells. There are early studies using oral therapy for desensitization of food allergies that are
promising.[11][12] These studies involve feeding children who have allergies tiny amounts of the allergen (e.g., peanut
11. C.L. Schneider et al. “A Pilot Study of Omalizumab to Facilitate Rapid Oral Desensitization in High-Risk Peanut-Allergic Patients.”
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 132 no. 6 (2013):1368–1374.
12. P. Varshney et al. “A Randomized Controlled Study of Peanut Oral Immunotherapy: Clinical Desensitization and Modulation of the
Allergic Response.” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 127 no. 3 (2011):654–660.

832

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

flour) or related proteins over time. Many of the subjects show reduced severity of reaction to the food allergen after
the therapy.
There are also therapies designed to treat severe allergic reactions. Emergency systemic anaphylaxis is treated initially
with an epinephrine injection, which can counteract the drop in blood pressure. Individuals with known severe
allergies often carry a self-administering auto-injector that can be used in case of exposure to the allergen (e.g., an
insect sting or accidental ingestion of a food that causes a severe reaction). By self-administering an epinephrine shot
(or sometimes two), the patient can stem the reaction long enough to seek medical attention. Follow-up treatment
generally involves giving the patient antihistamines and slow-acting corticosteroids for several days after the reaction
to prevent potential late-phase reactions. However, the effects of antihistamine and corticosteroid treatment are not
well studied and are used based on theoretical considerations.
Treatment of milder allergic reactions typically involves antihistamines and other anti-inflammatory drugs. A variety
of antihistamine drugs are available, in both prescription and over-the-counter strengths. There are also
antileukotriene and antiprostaglandin drugs that can be used in tandem with antihistamine drugs in a combined (and
more effective) therapy regime.
Treatments of type III hypersensitivities include preventing further exposure to the antigen and the use of antiinflammatory drugs. Some conditions can be resolved when exposure to the antigen is prevented. Anti-inflammatory
corticosteroid inhalers can also be used to diminish inflammation to allow lung lesions to heal. Systemic
corticosteroid treatment, oral or intravenous, is also common for type III hypersensitivities affecting body systems.
Treatment of hypersensitivity pneumonitis includes avoiding the allergen, along with the possible addition of
prescription steroids such as prednisone to reduce inflammation.
Treatment of type IV hypersensitivities includes antihistamines, anti-inflammatory drugs, analgesics, and, if possible,
eliminating further exposure to the antigen.

• Describe desensitization therapy.
• Explain the role of epinephrine in treatment of hypersensitivity reactions.

19.2 Autoimmune Disorders
Learning Objectives
• Explain why autoimmune disorders develop
• Provide a few examples of organ-specific and systemic autoimmune diseases

In 1970, artist Walt Kelly developed a poster promoting Earth Day, featuring a character from Pogo, his daily
newspaper comic strip. In the poster, Pogo looks out across a litter-strewn forest and says wryly, “We have met the
enemy and he is us.” Pogo was not talking about the human immune system, but he very well could have been.
Although the immune system protects the body by attacking invading “enemies” (pathogens), in some cases, the
immune system can mistakenly identify the body’s own cells as the enemy, resulting in autoimmune disease.
Autoimmune diseases are those in which the body is attacked by its own specific adaptive immune response. In
normal, healthy states, the immune system induces tolerance, which is a lack of an anti-self immune response.
However, with autoimmunity, there is a loss of immune tolerance, and the mechanisms responsible for autoimmune
diseases include type II, III, and IV hypersensitivity reactions. Autoimmune diseases can have a variety of mixed
symptoms that flare up and disappear, making diagnosis difficult.
The causes of autoimmune disease are a combination of the individual's genetic makeup and the effect of
environmental influences, such as sunlight, infections, medications, and environmental chemicals. However, the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

833

vagueness of this list reflects our poor understanding of the etiology of these diseases. Except in a very few specific
diseases, the initiation event(s) of most autoimmune states has not been fully characterized.
There are several possible causes for the origin of autoimmune diseases and autoimmunity is likely due to several
factors. Evidence now suggests that regulatory T and B cells play an essential role in the maintenance of tolerance
and prevention of autoimmune responses. The regulatory T cells are especially important for inhibiting autoreactive
T cells that are not eliminated during thymic selection and escape the thymus (see T Lymphocytes and Cellular
Immunity). In addition, antigen mimicry between pathogen antigens and our own self antigens can lead to crossreactivity and autoimmunity. Hidden self-antigens may become exposed because of trauma, drug interactions, or
disease states, and trigger an autoimmune response. All of these factors could contribute to autoimmunity. Ultimately,
damage to tissues and organs in the autoimmune disease state comes as a result of inflammatory responses that are
inappropriate; therefore, treatment often includes immunosuppressive drugs and corticosteroids.

Organ-Specific Autoimmune Diseases
Some autoimmune diseases are considered organ specific, meaning that the immune system targets specific organs
or tissues. Examples of organ-specific autoimmune diseases include celiac disease, Graves disease, Hashimoto
thyroiditis, type I diabetes mellitus, and Addison disease.

Celiac Disease
Celiac disease is largely a disease of the small intestine, although other organs may be affected. People in their 30s and
40s, and children are most commonly affected, but celiac disease can begin at any age. It results from a reaction to
proteins, commonly called gluten, found mainly in wheat, barley, rye, and some other grains. The disease has several
genetic causes (predispositions) and poorly understood environmental influences. On exposure to gluten, the body
produces various autoantibodies and an inflammatory response. The inflammatory response in the small intestine
leads to a reduction in the depth of the microvilli of the mucosa, which hinders absorption and can lead to weight loss
and anemia. The disease is also characterized by diarrhea and abdominal pain, symptoms that are often misdiagnosed
as irritable bowel syndrome.
Diagnosis of celiac disease is accomplished from serological tests for the presence of primarily IgA antibodies
to components of gluten, the transglutinaminase enzyme, and autoantibodies to endomysium, a connective tissue
surrounding muscle fibers. Serological tests are typically followed up with endoscopy and biopsy of the duodenal
mucosa. Serological screening surveys have found about 1% of individuals in the United Kingdom are positive even
though they do not all display symptoms.[13] This early recognition allows for more careful monitoring and prevention
of severe disease.
Celiac disease is treated with complete removal of gluten-containing foods from the diet, which results in improved
symptoms and reduced risk of complications. Other theoretical approaches include breeding grains that do not contain
the immunologically reactive components or developing dietary supplements that contain enzymes that break down
the protein components that cause the immune response.[14]

Disorders of the Thyroid
Graves disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in the United States. Symptoms of Graves disease
result from the production of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) also called TSH-receptor antibody. TSI
targets and binds to the receptor for thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), which is naturally produced by the
pituitary gland. TSI may cause conflicting symptoms because it may stimulate the thyroid to make too much thyroid
hormone or block thyroid hormone production entirely, making diagnosis more difficult. Signs and symptoms of
Graves disease include heat intolerance, rapid and irregular heartbeat, weight loss, goiter (a swollen thyroid gland,

13. D.A. Van Heel, J. West. “Recent Advances in Coeliac Disease.” Gut 55 no. 7 (2006):1037—1046.
14. ibid.

834

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

protruding under the skin of the throat [Figure 19.13]) and exophthalmia (bulging eyes) often referred to as Graves
ophthalmopathy (Figure 19.14).
The most common cause of hypothyroidism in the United States is Hashimoto thyroiditis, also called chronic
lymphocytic thyroiditis. Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis often develop a spectrum of different diseases because
they are more likely to develop additional autoimmune diseases such as Addison disease (discussed later in this
section), type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and celiac disease. Hashimoto thyroiditis is a TH1 cell-mediated disease
that occurs when the thyroid gland is attacked by cytotoxic lymphocytes, macrophages, and autoantibodies. This
autoimmune response leads to numerous symptoms that include goiter (Figure 19.13), cold intolerance, muscle
weakness, painful and stiff joints, depression, and memory loss.

Figure 19.13 Goiter, a hypertrophy of the thyroid, is a symptom of Graves disease and Hashimoto thyroiditis.

Figure 19.14 Exophthalmia, or Graves ophthalmopathy, is a sign of Graves disease. (credit: modification of work by
Jonathan Trobe, University of Michigan Kellogg Eye Center)

Type 1 Diabetes
Juvenile diabetes, or type 1 diabetes mellitus, is usually diagnosed in children and young adults. It is a T-celldependent autoimmune disease characterized by the selective destruction of the β cells of the islets of Langerhans
in the pancreas by CD4 TH1-mediated CD8 T cells, anti-β-cell antibodies, and macrophage activity. There is also
evidence that viral infections can have either a potentiating or inhibitory role in the development of type 1 diabetes
(T1D) mellitus. The destruction of the β cells causes a lack of insulin production by the pancreas. In T1D, βcell destruction may take place over several years, but symptoms of hyperglycemia, extreme increase in thirst and
urination, weight loss, and extreme fatigue usually have a sudden onset, and diagnosis usually does not occur until
most β cells have already been destroyed.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

835

Autoimmune Addison Disease
Destruction of the adrenal glands (the glands lying above the kidneys that produce glucocorticoids,
mineralocorticoids, and sex steroids) is the cause of Addison disease, also called primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI).
Today, up to 80% of Addison disease cases are diagnosed as autoimmune Addison disease (AAD), which is caused
by an autoimmune response to adrenal tissues disrupting adrenal function. Disruption of adrenal function causes
impaired metabolic processes that require normal steroid hormone levels, causing signs and symptoms throughout
the body. There is evidence that both humoral and CD4 TH1-driven CD8 T-cell–mediated immune mechanisms
are directed at the adrenal cortex in AAD. There is also evidence that the autoimmune response is associated with
autoimmune destruction of other endocrine glands as well, such as the pancreas and thyroid, conditions collectively
referred to as autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS). In up to 80% of patients with AAD, antibodies are
produced to three enzymes involved in steroid synthesis: 21-hydroxylase (21-OH), 17α-hydroxylase, and cholesterol
side-chain–cleaving enzyme.[15] The most common autoantibody found in AAD is to 21-OH, and antibodies to any of
the key enzymes for steroid production are diagnostic for AAD. The adrenal cortex cells are targeted, destroyed, and
replaced with fibrous tissue by immune-mediated inflammation. In some patients, at least 90% of the adrenal cortex
is destroyed before symptoms become diagnostic.
Symptoms of AAD include weakness, nausea, decreased appetite, weight loss, hyperpigmentation (Figure 19.15),
hyperkalemia (elevated blood potassium levels), hyponatremia (decreased blood sodium levels), hypoglycemia
(decreased levels of blood sugar), hypotension (decreased blood pressure), anemia, lymphocytosis (decreased levels
of white blood cells), and fatigue. Under extreme stress, such as surgery, accidental trauma, or infection, patients
with AAD may experience an adrenal crisis that causes the patient to vomit, experience abdominal pain, back or leg
cramps, and even severe hypotension leading to shock.

Figure 19.15 Hyperpigmentation is a sign of Addison disease. (credit: modification of work by Petros Perros)

• What are the names of autoimmune diseases that interfere with hormone gland function?
• Describe how the mechanisms of Graves disease and Hashimoto thyroiditis differ.
• Name the cells that are destroyed in type 1 diabetes mellitus and describe the result.

15. P. Martorell et al. “Autoimmunity in Addison’s Disease.” Netherlands Journal of Medicine 60 no. 7 (2002):269—275.

836

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Systemic Autoimmune Diseases
Whereas organ-specific autoimmune diseases target specific organs or tissues, systemic autoimmune diseases are
more generalized, targeting multiple organs or tissues throughout the body. Examples of systemic autoimmune
diseases include multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune central nervous system disease that affects the brain and spinal cord.
Lesions in multiple locations within the central nervous system are a hallmark of multiple sclerosis and are caused
by infiltration of immune cells across the blood-brain barrier. The immune cells include T cells that promote
inflammation, demyelination, and neuron degeneration, all of which disrupt neuronal signaling. Symptoms of MS
include visual disturbances; muscle weakness; difficulty with coordination and balance; sensations such as numbness,
prickling, or “pins and needles”; and cognitive and memory problems.

Myasthenia Gravis
Autoantibodies directed against acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) in the synaptic cleft of neuromuscular junctions
lead to myasthenia gravis (Figure 19.16). Anti-AChR antibodies are high-affinity IgGs and their synthesis requires
activated CD4 T cells to interact with and stimulate B cells. Once produced, the anti-AChR antibodies affect
neuromuscular transmission by at least three mechanisms:
• Complement binding and activation at the neuromuscular junction
• Accelerated AChR endocytosis of molecules cross-linked by antibodies
• Functional AChR blocking, which prevents normal acetylcholine attachment to, and activation of, AChR

Regardless of the mechanism, the effect of anti-AChR is extreme muscle weakness and potentially death through
respiratory arrest in severe cases.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

837

Figure 19.16 Myasthenia gravis and impaired muscle contraction. (a) Normal release of the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine stimulates muscle contraction. (b) In myasthenia gravis, autoantibodies block the receptors for
acetylcholine (AChr) on muscle cells, resulting in paralysis.

Psoriasis
Psoriasis is a skin disease that causes itchy or sore patches of thick, red skin with silvery scales on elbows, knees,
scalp, back, face, palms, feet, and sometimes other areas. Some individuals with psoriasis also get a form of arthritis
called psoriatic arthritis, in which the joints can become inflamed. Psoriasis results from the complex interplay
between keratinocytes, dendritic cells, and T cells, and the cytokines produced by these various cells. In a process
called cell turnover, skin cells that grow deep in the skin rise to the surface. Normally, this process takes a month. In
psoriasis, as a result of cytokine activation, cell turnover happens in just a few days. The thick inflamed patches of
skin that are characteristic of psoriasis develop because the skin cells rise too fast.

Rheumatoid Arthritis
The most common chronic inflammatory joint disease is rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (Figure 19.17) and it is still
a major medical challenge because of unsolved questions related to the environmental and genetic causes of the
disease. RA involves type III hypersensitivity reactions and the activation of CD4 T cells, resulting in chronic release
of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). The activated CD4 T cells also
stimulate the production of rheumatoid factor (RF) antibodies and anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (antiCCP) that form immune complexes. Increased levels of acute-phase proteins, such as C-reactive protein (CRP), are
also produced as part of the inflammatory process and participate in complement fixation with the antibodies on the
immune complexes. The formation of immune complexes and reaction to the immune factors cause an inflammatory
process in joints, particularly in the hands, feet, and legs. Diagnosis of RA is based on elevated levels of RF, antiCCP, quantitative CRP, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (modified Westergren). In addition, radiographs,

838

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

ultrasound, or magnetic resonance imaging scans can identify joint damage, such as erosions, a loss of bone within
the joint, and narrowing of joint space.

Figure 19.17 The radiograph (left) and photograph (right) show damage to the hands typical of rheumatoid arthritis.
(credit right: modification of work by “handarmdoc”/Flickr)

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
The damage and pathology of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is caused by type III hypersensitivity reactions.
Autoantibodies produced in SLE are directed against nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. Anti-nuclear antibodies
(ANAs) are present in more than 95% of patients with SLE,[16] with additional autoantibodies including antidouble–stranded DNA (ds-DNA) and anti-Sm antibodies (antibodies to small nuclear ribonucleoprotein). Anti-dsDNA and anti-Sm antibodies are unique to patients with SLE; thus, their presence is included in the classification
criteria of SLE. Cellular interaction with autoantibodies leads to nuclear and cellular destruction, with components
released after cell death leading to the formation of immune complexes.
Because autoantibodies in SLE can target a wide variety of cells, symptoms of SLE can occur in many body locations.
However, the most common symptoms include fatigue, fever with no other cause, hair loss, and a sunlight-sensitive
"butterfly" or wolf-mask (lupus) rash that is found in about 50% of people with SLE (Figure 19.18). The rash is most
often seen over the cheeks and bridge of the nose, but can be widespread. Other symptoms may appear depending
on affected areas. The joints may be affected, leading to arthritis of the fingers, hands, wrists, and knees. Effects on
the brain and nervous system can lead to headaches, numbness, tingling, seizures, vision problems, and personality
changes. There may also be abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, arrhythmias, shortness of breath, and blood in the
sputum. Effects on the skin can lead to additional areas of skin lesions, and vasoconstriction can cause color changes
in the fingers when they are cold (Raynaud phenomenon). Effects on the kidneys can lead to edema in the legs
and weight gain. A diagnosis of SLE depends on identification of four of 11 of the most common symptoms and
confirmed production of an array of autoantibodies unique to SLE. A positive test for ANAs alone is not diagnostic.

16. C.C. Mok, C.S. Lau. “Pathogenesis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.” Journal of Clinical Pathology 56 no. 7 (2003):481—490.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

839

Figure 19.18 (a) Systemic lupus erythematosus is characterized by autoimmunity to the individual’s own DNA and/
or proteins. (b) This patient is presenting with a butterfly rash, one of the characteristic signs of lupus. (credit a:
modification of work by Mikael Häggström; credit b: modification of work by Shrestha D, Dhakal AK, Shiva RK,
Shakya A, Shah SC, Shakya H)

• List the ways antibodies contribute to the pathogenesis of myasthenia gravis.
• Explain why rheumatoid arthritis is considered a type III hypersensitivity.
• Describe the symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus and explain why they affect so many different parts
of the body.

• What is recognized as an antigen in myasthenia gravis?

Table 19.6 summarizes the causes, signs, and symptoms of select autoimmune diseases.

840

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Select Autoimmune Diseases
Disease

Cause

Signs and Symptoms

Addison
disease

Destruction of adrenal gland cells by cytotoxic
T cells

Weakness, nausea, hypotension, fatigue;
adrenal crisis with severe pain in abdomen,
lower back, and legs; circulatory system
collapse, kidney failure

Celiac disease

Antibodies to gluten become autoantibodies
that target cells of the small intestine

Severe diarrhea, abdominal pain, anemia,
malnutrition

Diabetes
mellitus
(type I)

Cytotoxic T-cell destruction of the insulinproducing β cells of the pancreas

Hyperglycemia, extreme increase in thirst
and urination, weight loss, extreme fatigue

Graves
disease

Autoantibodies target thyroid-stimulating
hormone receptors, resulting in
overstimulation of the thyroid

Hyperthyroidism with rapid and irregular
heartbeat, heat intolerance, weight loss,
goiter, exophthalmia

Hashimoto
thyroiditis

Thyroid gland is attacked by cytotoxic T cells,
lymphocytes, macrophages, and
autoantibodies

Thyroiditis with goiter, cold intolerance,
muscle weakness, painful and stiff joints,
depression, memory loss

Multiple
sclerosis (MS)

Cytotoxic T-cell destruction of the myelin
sheath surrounding nerve axons in the central
nervous system

Visual disturbances, muscle weakness,
impaired coordination and balance,
numbness, prickling or “pins and needles”
sensations, impaired cognitive function and
memory

Myasthenia
gravis

Autoantibodies directed against acetylcholine
receptors within the neuromuscular junction

Extreme muscle weakness eventually
leading to fatal respiratory arrest

Psoriasis

Cytokine activation of keratinocytes causes
rapid and excessive epidermal cell turnover

Itchy or sore patches of thick, red skin with
silvery scales; commonly affects elbows,
knees, scalp, back, face, palms, feet

Rheumatoid
arthritis

Autoantibodies, immune complexes,
complement activation, phagocytes, and T
cells damage membranes and bone in joints

Joint inflammation, pain and disfigurement,
chronic systemic inflammation

Systemic
lupus
erythematosus
(SLE)

Autoantibodies directed against nuclear and
cytoplasmic molecules form immune
complexes that deposit in tissues. Phagocytic
cells and complement activation cause tissue
damage and inflammation

Fatigue, fever, joint pain and swelling, hair
loss, anemia, clotting, a sunlight-sensitive
"butterfly" rash, skin lesions,
photosensitivity, decreased kidney function,
memory loss, confusion, depression

Table 19.6

19.3 Organ Transplantation and Rejection
Learning Objectives
• Explain why human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) are important in tissue transplantation
• Explain the types of grafts possible and their potential for interaction with the immune system
• Describe what occurs during graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)

A graft is the transplantation of an organ or tissue to a different location, with the goal of replacing a missing or
damaged organ or tissue. Grafts are typically moved without their attachments to the circulatory system and must
reestablish these, in addition to the other connections and interactions with their new surrounding tissues. There

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

841

are different types of grafts depending on the source of the new tissue or organ. Tissues that are transplanted from
one genetically distinct individual to another within the same species are called allografts. An interesting variant
of the allograft is an isograft, in which tissue from one twin is transplanted to another. As long as the twins are
monozygotic (therefore, essentially genetically identical), the transplanted tissue is virtually never rejected. If tissues
are transplanted from one area on an individual to another area on the same individual (e.g., a skin graft on a
burn patient), it is known as an autograft. If tissues from an animal are transplanted into a human, this is called a
xenograft.

Transplant Rejection
The different types of grafts described above have varying risks for rejection (Table 19.7). Rejection occurs when
the recipient’s immune system recognizes the donor tissue as foreign (non-self), triggering an immune response. The
major histocompatibility complex markers MHC I and MHC II, more specifically identified as human leukocyte
antigens (HLAs), play a role in transplant rejection. The HLAs expressed in tissue transplanted from a genetically
different individual or species may be recognized as non-self molecules by the host’s dendritic cells. If this occurs,
the dendritic cells will process and present the foreign HLAs to the host’s helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells, thereby
activating them. Cytotoxic T cells then target and kill the grafted cells through the same mechanism they use to kill
virus-infected cells; helper T cells may also release cytokines that activate macrophages to kill graft cells.
Types of Tissue and Organ Grafts and Their Complications
Graft

Procedure

Complications

Autograft

From self to self

No rejection concerns

Isograft

From identical twin to twin

Little concern of rejection

Allograft

From relative or nonrelative to individual

Rejection possible

Xenograft

From animal to human

Rejection possible

Table 19.7

With the three highly polymorphic MHC I genes in humans (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C) determining compatibility,
each with many alleles segregating in a population, odds are extremely low that a randomly chosen donor will match
a recipient's six-allele genotype (the two alleles at each locus are expressed codominantly). This is why a parent or a
sibling may be the best donor in many situations—a genetic match between the MHC genes is much more likely and
the organ is much less likely to be rejected.
Although matching all of the MHC genes can lower the risk for rejection, there are a number of additional gene
products that also play a role in stimulating responses against grafted tissue. Because of this, no non-self grafted tissue
is likely to completely avoid rejection. However, the more similar the MHC gene match, the more likely the graft is to
be tolerated for a longer time. Most transplant recipients, even those with tissues well matched to their MHC genes,
require treatment with immunosuppressant drugs for the rest of their lives. This can make them more vulnerable than
the general population to complications from infectious diseases. It can also result in transplant-related malignancies
because the body’s normal defenses against cancer cells are being suppressed.

• What part of the immune response is responsible for graft rejection?
• Explain why blood relatives are preferred as organ donors.
• Describe the role of immunosuppression in transplantation.

842

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Graft-versus-Host Disease
A form of rejection called graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) primarily occurs in recipients of bone marrow
transplants and peripheral blood stem cells. GHVD presents a unique situation because the transplanted tissue is
capable of producing immune cells; APCs in the donated bone marrow may recognize the host cells as non-self,
leading to activation of the donor cytotoxic T cells. Once activated, the donor’s T cells attack the recipient cells,
causing acute GVHD.
Acute GVHD typically develops within weeks after a bone marrow transplant, causing tissue damage affecting the
skin, gastrointestinal tract, liver, and eyes. In addition, acute GVHD may also lead to a cytokine storm, an unregulated
secretion of cytokines that may be fatal. In addition to acute GVHD, there is also the risk for chronic GVHD
developing months after the bone marrow transplant. The mechanisms responsible for chronic GVHD are not well
understood.
To minimize the risk of GVHD, it is critically important to match the HLAs of the host and donor as closely as
possible in bone marrow transplants. In addition, the donated bone marrow is processed before grafting to remove as
many donor APCs and T cells as possible, leaving mostly hematopoietic stem cells.

• Why does GVHD occur in specifically in bone marrow transplants?
• What cells are responsible for GVHD?

The Future of Transplantation
Historically speaking, the practice of transplanting tissues—and the complications that can accompany such
procedures—is a relatively recent development. It was not until 1954 that the first successful organ transplantation
between two humans was achieved. Yet the field of organ transplantation has progressed rapidly since that time.
Nonetheless, the practice of transplanting non-self tissues may soon become obsolete. Scientists are now attempting
to develop methods by which new organs may be grown in vitro from an individual’s own harvested cells to replace
damaged or abnormal ones. Because organs produced in this way would contain the individual’s own cells, they could
be transplanted into the individual without risk for rejection.
An alternative approach that is gaining renewed research interest is genetic modification of donor animals, such as
pigs, to provide transplantable organs that do not elicit an immune response in the recipient. The approach involves
excising the genes in the pig (in the embryo) that are most responsible for the rejection reaction after transplantation.
Finding these genes and effectively removing them is a challenge, however. So too is identifying and neutralizing
risks from viral sequences that might be embedded in the pig genome, posing a risk for infection in the human
recipient.

Link to Learning
There are currently more than a dozen different tissues and organs used in
human transplantations. Learn more about them at this (https://openstax.org/l/
22organstransp) website.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

843

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Kerry's tests come back positive, confirming a diagnosis of lupus, a disease that occurs 10 times more
frequently in women than men. SLE cannot be cured, but there are various therapies available for reducing
and managing its symptoms. Specific therapies are prescribed based on the particular symptoms presenting
in the patient. Kerry's rheumatologist starts her therapy with a low dose of corticosteroids to reduce her
rashes. She also prescribes a low dose of hydroxychloroquine, an anti-inflammatory drug that is used to
treat inflammation in patients with RA, childhood arthritis, SLE, and other autoimmune diseases. Although the
mechanism of action of hydroxychloroquine is not well defined, it appears that this drug interferes with the
processes of antigen processing and activation of autoimmunity. Because of its mechanism, the effects of
hydroxychloroquine are not as immediate as that of other anti-inflammatory drugs, but it is still considered a
good companion therapy for SLE. Kerry’s doctor also advises her to limit her exposure to sunlight, because
photosensitivity to sunlight may precipitate rashes.
Over the next 6 months, Kerry follows her treatment plan and her symptoms do not return. However, future
flare-ups are likely to occur. She will need to continue her treatment for the rest of her life and seek medical
attention whenever new symptoms develop.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

19.4 Immunodeficiency
Learning Objectives
• Compare the causes of primary and secondary immunodeficiencies
• Describe treatments for primary and secondary immunodeficiencies

Immunodeficiencies are inherited (primary) or acquired (secondary) disorders in which elements of host immune
defenses are either absent or functionally defective. In developed countries, most immunodeficiencies are inherited,
and they are usually first seen in the clinic as recurrent or overwhelming infections in infants. However, on
a global scale, malnutrition is the most common cause of immunodeficiency and would be categorized as an
acquired immunodeficiency. Acquired immunodeficiencies are more likely to develop later in life, and the pathogenic
mechanisms of many remain obscure.

Primary Immunodeficiency
Primary immunodeficiencies, which number more than 250, are caused by inherited defects of either nonspecific
innate or specific adaptive immune defenses. In general, patients born with primary immunodeficiency (PI)
commonly have an increased susceptibility to infection. This susceptibility can become apparent shortly after
birth or in early childhood for some individuals, whereas other patients develop symptoms later in life. Some
primary immunodeficiencies are due to a defect of a single cellular or humoral component of the immune system;
others may result from defects of more than one component. Examples of primary immunodeficiencies include
chronic granulomatous disease, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, selective IgA deficiency, and severe combined
immunodeficiency disease.

Chronic Granulomatous Disease
The causes of chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) are defects in the NADPH oxidase system of phagocytic cells,
including neutrophils and macrophages, that prevent the production of superoxide radicals in phagolysosomes. The
inability to produce superoxide radicals impairs the antibacterial activity of phagocytes. As a result, infections in

844

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

patients with CGD persist longer, leading to a chronic local inflammation called a granuloma. Microorganisms that
are the most common causes of infections in patients with CGD include Aspergillus spp., Staphylococcus aureus,
Chromobacterium violaceum, Serratia marcescens, and Salmonella typhimurium.

X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia
Deficiencies in B cells due to defective differentiation lead to a lack of specific antibody production known as
X-linked agammaglobulinemia. In 1952, Ogden C. Bruton (1908–2003) described the first immunodeficiency in
a boy whose immune system failed to produce antibodies. This defect is inherited on the X chromosome and is
characterized by the absence of immunoglobulin in the serum; it is called Bruton X-linked agammaglobulinemia
(XLA). The defective gene, BTK, in XLA is now known to encode a tyrosine kinase called Bruton tyrosine
kinase (Btk). In patients whose B cells are unable to produce sufficient amounts of Btk, the B-cell maturation
and differentiation halts at the pre-B-cell stage of growth. B-cell maturation and differentiation beyond the pre-Bcell stage of growth is required for immunoglobulin production. Patients who lack antibody production suffer from
recurrent infections almost exclusively due to extracellular pathogens that cause pyogenic infections: Haemophilus
influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, S. pyogenes, and S. aureus. Because cell-mediated immunity is not impaired,
these patients are not particularly vulnerable to infections caused by viruses or intracellular pathogens.

Selective IgA Deficiency
The most common inherited form of immunoglobulin deficiency is selective IgA deficiency, affecting about one in
800 people. Individuals with selective IgA deficiency produce normal levels of IgG and IgM, but are not able to
produce secretory IgA. IgA deficiency predisposes these individuals to lung and gastrointestinal infections for which
secretory IgA is normally an important defense mechanism. Infections in the lungs and gastrointestinal tract can
involve a variety of pathogens, including H. influenzae, S. pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis, S. aureus, Giardia
lamblia, or pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli.

Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Patients who suffer from severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) have B-cell and T-cell defects that impair
T-cell dependent antibody responses as well as cell-mediated immune responses. Patients with SCID also cannot
develop immunological memory, so vaccines provide them no protection, and live attenuated vaccines (e.g., for
varicella-zoster, measles virus, rotavirus, poliovirus) can actually cause the infection they are intended to prevent.
The most common form is X-linked SCID, which accounts for nearly 50% of all cases and occurs primarily in males.
Patients with SCID are typically diagnosed within the first few months of life after developing severe, often lifethreatening, opportunistic infection by Candida spp., Pneumocystis jirovecii, or pathogenic strains of E. coli.
Without treatment, babies with SCID do not typically survive infancy. In some cases, a bone marrow transplant
may successfully correct the defects in lymphocyte development that lead to the SCID phenotype, by replacing the
defective component. However, this treatment approach is not without risks, as demonstrated by the famous case of
David Vetter (1971–1984), better known as “Bubble Boy” (Figure 19.19). Vetter, a patient with SCID who lived in
a protective plastic bubble to prevent exposure to opportunistic microbes, received a bone marrow transplant from
his sister. Because of a latent Epstein-Barr virus infection in her bone marrow, however, he developed mononucleosis
and died of Burkitt lymphoma at the age of 12 years.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

845

Figure 19.19 David Vetter, popularly known as “The Bubble Boy,” was born with SCID and lived most of his life
isolated inside a plastic bubble. Here he is shown outside the bubble in a suit specially built for him by NASA. (credit:
NASA Johnson Space Center)

• What is the fundamental cause of a primary immunodeficiency?
• Explain why patients with chronic granulomatous disease are especially susceptible to bacterial infections.
• Explain why individuals with selective IgA deficiency are susceptible to respiratory and gastrointestinal
infections.

Secondary Immunodeficiency
A secondary immunodeficiency occurs as a result an acquired impairment of function of B cells, T cells, or both.
Secondary immunodeficiencies can be caused by:
• Systemic disorders such as diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, hepatitis, or HIV infection
• Immunosuppressive treatments such as cytotoxic chemotherapy, bone marrow ablation before transplantation,

or radiation therapy
• Prolonged critical illness due to infection, surgery, or trauma in the very young, elderly, or hospitalized

patients
Unlike primary immunodeficiencies, which have a genetic basis, secondary immunodeficiencies are often reversible
if the underlying cause is resolved. Patients with secondary immunodeficiencies develop an increased susceptibility
to an otherwise benign infection by opportunistic pathogens such as Candida spp., P. jirovecii, and Cryptosporidium.
HIV infection and the associated acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) are the best-known secondary
immunodeficiencies. AIDS is characterized by profound CD4 T-cell lymphopenia (decrease in lymphocytes). The
decrease in CD4 T cells is the result of various mechanisms, including HIV-induced pyroptosis (a type of apoptosis
that stimulates an inflammatory response), viral cytopathic effect, and cytotoxicity to HIV-infected cells.
The most common cause of secondary immunodeficiency worldwide is severe malnutrition, which affects both
innate and adaptive immunity. More research and information are needed for the more common causes of secondary
immunodeficiency; however, the number of new discoveries in AIDS research far exceeds that of any other single

846

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

cause of secondary immunodeficiency. AIDS research has paid off extremely well in terms of discoveries and
treatments; increased research into the most common cause of immunodeficiency, malnutrition, would likely be as
beneficial.

• What is the most common cause of secondary immunodeficiencies?
• Explain why secondary immunodeficiencies can sometimes be reversed.

Case in Point
An Immunocompromised Host
Benjamin, a 50-year-old male patient who has been receiving chemotherapy to treat his chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML), a disease characterized by massive overproduction of nonfunctional, malignant myelocytic
leukocytes that crowd out other, healthy leukocytes, is seen in the emergency department. He is complaining
of a productive, wet cough, dyspnea, and fatigue. On examination, his pulse is 120 beats per minute (bpm)
(normal range is 60–100 bpm) and weak, and his blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg (normal is 120/80 mm Hg).
During auscultation, a distinct crackling can be heard in his lungs as he breathes, and his pulse-oximeter level
(a measurement of blood-oxygen saturation) is 80% (normal is 95%–100%). He has a fever; his temperature
is 38.9 °C (102 °F). Sputum cultures and blood samples are obtained and sent to the lab, but Benjamin goes
into respiratory distress and dies before the results can be obtained.
Benjamin’s death was a result of a combination of his immune system being compromised by his leukemia and
his chemotherapy treatment further weakening his ability to mount an immune response. CML (and leukemia
in general) and corresponding chemotherapy cause a decrease in the number of leukocytes capable of normal
function, leading to secondary immunodeficiency. This increases the risk for opportunistic bacterial, viral,
protozoal, and fungal infections that could include Staphylococcus, enteroviruses, Pneumocystis, Giardia, or
Candida. Benjamin’s symptoms were suggestive of bacterial pneumonia, but his leukemia and chemotherapy
likely complicated and contributed to the severity of the pneumonia, resulting in his death. Because his
leukemia was overproducing certain white blood cells, and those overproduced white blood cells were largely
nonfunctional or abnormal in their function, he did not have the proper immune system blood cells to help him
fight off the infection.

Table 19.8 summarizes primary and secondary immunodeficiencies, their effects on immune function, and typical
outcomes.
Primary and Secondary Immunodeficiencies
Disease
Primary
immunodeficiencies

Effect on Immune Function

Outcomes

Chronic
granulomatous
disease

Impaired killing of bacteria
within the phagolysosome of
neutrophils and
macrophages

Chronic infections and
granulomas

Selective IgA
deficiency

Inability to produce secretory
IgA

Predisposition to lung and
gastrointestinal infections

Table 19.8

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

847

Primary and Secondary Immunodeficiencies
Disease

Secondary
immunodeficiencies

Effect on Immune Function

Outcomes

Severe combined
immunodeficiency
disease (SCID)

Deficient humoral and cellmediated immune responses

Early development of severe
and life-threatening
opportunistic infections

X-linked
agammaglobulinemia

Flawed differentiation of B
cells and absence of specific
antibodies

Recurrent infections almost
exclusively due to pathogens
that cause pyogenic infections

Immunosuppressive
therapies (e.g.,
chemotherapy,
radiotherapy)

Impaired humoral and/or cellmediated immune responses

Opportunistic infections, rare
cancers

Malnutrition

Impaired humoral and/or cellmediated immune responses

Opportunistic infections, rare
cancers

Viral infection (e.g.,
HIV)

Impaired cell-mediated
immune responses due to
CD4 T-cell lymphopenia

Opportunistic infections, rare
cancers

Table 19.8

19.5 Cancer Immunobiology and Immunotherapy
Learning Objectives
• Explain how the adaptive specific immune response responds to tumors
• Discuss the risks and benefits of tumor vaccines

Cancer involves a loss of the ability of cells to control their cell cycle, the stages each eukaryotic cell goes through
as it grows and then divides. When this control is lost, the affected cells rapidly divide and often lose the ability to
differentiate into the cell type appropriate for their location in the body. In addition, they lose contact inhibition and
can start to grow on top of each other. This can result in formation of a tumor. It is important to make a distinction
here: The term “cancer” is used to describe the diseases resulting from loss of cell-cycle regulation and subsequent
cell proliferation. But the term “tumor” is more general. A “tumor” is an abnormal mass of cells, and a tumor can be
benign (not cancerous) or malignant (cancerous).
Traditional cancer treatment uses radiation and/or chemotherapy to destroy cancer cells; however, these treatments
can have unwanted side effects because they harm normal cells as well as cancer cells. Newer, promising therapies
attempt to enlist the patient’s immune system to target cancer cells specifically. It is known that the immune system
can recognize and destroy cancerous cells, and some researchers and immunologists also believe, based on the
results of their experiments, that many cancers are eliminated by the body’s own defenses before they can become
a health problem. This idea is not universally accepted by researchers, however, and needs further investigation for
verification.

Cell-Mediated Response to Tumors
Cell-mediated immune responses can be directed against cancer cells, many of which do not have the normal
complement of self-proteins, making them a target for elimination. Abnormal cancer cells may also present tumor
antigens. These tumor antigens are not a part of the screening process used to eliminate lymphocytes during
development; thus, even though they are self-antigens, they can stimulate and drive adaptive immune responses
against abnormal cells.

848

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Presentation of tumor antigens can stimulate naïve helper T cells to become activated by cytokines such as IL-12 and
differentiate into TH1 cells. TH1 cells release cytokines that can activate natural killer (NK) cells and enhance the
killing of activated cytotoxic T cells. Both NK cells and cytotoxic T cells can recognize and target cancer cells, and
induce apoptosis through the action of perforins and granzymes. In addition, activated cytotoxic T cells can bind to
cell-surface proteins on abnormal cells and induce apoptosis by a second killing mechanism called the CD95 (Fas)
cytotoxic pathway.
Despite these mechanisms for removing cancerous cells from the body, cancer remains a common cause of death.
Unfortunately, malignant tumors tend to actively suppress the immune response in various ways. In some cancers,
the immune cells themselves are cancerous. In leukemia, lymphocytes that would normally facilitate the immune
response become abnormal. In other cancers, the cancerous cells can become resistant to induction of apoptosis. This
may occur through the expression of membrane proteins that shut off cytotoxic T cells or that induce regulatory T
cells that can shut down immune responses.
The mechanisms by which cancer cells alter immune responses are still not yet fully understood, and this is a very
active area of research. As scientists’ understanding of adaptive immunity improves, cancer therapies that harness the
body’s immune defenses may someday be more successful in treating and eliminating cancer.

• How do cancer cells suppress the immune system?
• Describe how the immune system recognizes and destroys cancer cells.

Cancer Vaccines
There are two types of cancer vaccines: preventive and therapeutic. Preventive vaccines are used to prevent cancer
from occurring, whereas therapeutic vaccines are used to treat patients with cancer. Most preventive cancer vaccines
target viral infections that are known to lead to cancer. These include vaccines against human papillomavirus (HPV)
and hepatitis B, which help prevent cervical and liver cancer, respectively.
Most therapeutic cancer vaccines are in the experimental stage. They exploit tumor-specific antigens to stimulate the
immune system to selectively attack cancer cells. Specifically, they aim to enhance TH1 function and interaction with
cytotoxic T cells, which, in turn, results in more effective attack on abnormal tumor cells. In some cases, researchers
have used genetic engineering to develop antitumor vaccines in an approach similar to that used for DNA vaccines
(see Micro Connections: DNA vaccines). The vaccine contains a recombinant plasmid with genes for tumor
antigens; theoretically, the tumor gene would not induce new cancer because it is not functional, but it could trick the
immune system into targeting the tumor gene product as a foreign invader.
The first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine was sipuleucel-T (Provenge), approved in 2010 to treat certain
cases of prostate cancer.[17] This unconventional vaccine is custom designed using the patient’s own cells. APCs are
removed from the patient and cultured with a tumor-specific molecule; the cells are then returned to the patient.
This approach appears to enhance the patient’s immune response against the cancer cells. Another therapeutic cancer
vaccine (talimogene laherparepvec, also called T-VEC or Imlygic) was approved by the FDA in 2015 for treatment of
melanoma, a form of skin cancer. This vaccine contains a virus that is injected into tumors, where it infects and lyses
the tumor cells. The virus also induces a response in lesions or tumors besides those into which the vaccine is injected,
indicating that it is stimulating a more general (as opposed to local) antitumor immune response in the patient.

17. National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. "Cancer Vaccines." http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/
vaccines-fact-sheet#q8. Accessed on May 20, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

849

• Explain the difference between preventative and therapeutic cancer vaccines.
• Describe at least two different approaches to developing therapeutic anti-cancer vaccines.

Micro Connections
Using Viruses to Cure Cancer
Viruses typically destroy the cells they infect—a fact responsible for any number of human diseases. But
the cell-killing powers of viruses may yet prove to be the cure for some types of cancer, which is generally
treated by attempting to rid the body of cancerous cells. Several clinical trials are studying the effects of
viruses targeted at cancer cells. Reolysin, a drug currently in testing phases, uses reoviruses (respiratory
enteric orphan viruses) that can infect and kill cells that have an activated Ras-signaling pathway, a common
mutation in cancerous cells. Viruses such as rubeola (the measles virus) can also be genetically engineered
to aggressively attack tumor cells. These modified viruses not only bind more specifically to receptors
overexpressed on cancer cells, they also carry genes driven by promoters that are only turned on within cancer
cells. Herpesvirus and others have also been modified in this way.

Summary
19.1 Hypersensitivities
• An allergy is an adaptive immune response, sometimes life-threatening, to an allergen.
• Type I hypersensitivity requires sensitization of mast cells with IgE, involving an initial IgE antibody
response and IgE attachment to mast cells. On second exposure to an allergen, cross-linking of IgE molecules
on mast cells triggers degranulation and release of preformed and newly formed chemical mediators of
inflammation. Type I hypersensitivity may be localized and relatively minor (hives and hay fever) or systemwide and dangerous (systemic anaphylaxis).
• Type II hypersensitivities result from antibodies binding to antigens on cells and initiating cytotoxic
responses. Examples include hemolytic transfusion reaction and hemolytic disease of the newborn.
• Type III hypersensitivities result from formation and accumulation of immune complexes in tissues,
stimulating damaging inflammatory responses.
• Type IV hypersensitivities are not mediated by antibodies, but by helper T-cell activation of macrophages,
eosinophils, and cytotoxic T cells.
19.2 Autoimmune Disorders
• Autoimmune diseases result from a breakdown in immunological tolerance. The actual induction event(s) for
autoimmune states are largely unknown.
• Some autoimmune diseases attack specific organs, whereas others are more systemic.
• Organ-specific autoimmune diseases include celiac disease, Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, type I
diabetes mellitus, and Addison disease.
• Systemic autoimmune diseases include multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, psoriasis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
• Treatments for autoimmune diseases generally involve anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs.

850

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

19.3 Organ Transplantation and Rejection
• Grafts and transplants can be classified as autografts, isografts, allografts, or xenografts based on the
genetic differences between the donor’s and recipient’s tissues.
• Genetic differences, especially among the MHC (HLA) genes, will dictate the likelihood that rejection of the
transplanted tissue will occur.
• Transplant recipients usually require immunosuppressive therapy to avoid rejection, even with good genetic
matching. This can create additional problems when immune responses are needed to fight off infectious
agents and prevent cancer.
• Graft-versus-host disease can occur in bone marrow transplants, as the mature T cells in the transplant itself
recognize the recipient’s tissues as foreign.
• Transplantation methods and technology have improved greatly in recent decades and may move into new
areas with the use of stem cell technology to avoid the need for genetic matching of MHC molecules.
19.4 Immunodeficiency
• Primary immunodeficiencies are caused by genetic abnormalities; secondary immunodeficiencies are
acquired through disease, diet, or environmental exposures
• Primary immunodeficiencies may result from flaws in phagocyte killing of innate immunity, or impairment of
T cells and B cells.
• Primary immunodeficiencies include chronic granulomatous disease, X-linked agammaglobulinemia,
selective IgA deficiency, and severe combined immunodeficiency disease.
• Secondary immunodeficiencies result from environmentally induced defects in B cells and/or T cells.
• Causes for secondary immunodeficiencies include malnutrition, viral infection, diabetes, prolonged infections,
and chemical or radiation exposure.
19.5 Cancer Immunobiology and Immunotherapy
• Cancer results from a loss of control of the cell cycle, resulting in uncontrolled cell proliferation and a loss of
the ability to differentiate.
• Adaptive and innate immune responses are engaged by tumor antigens, self-molecules only found on
abnormal cells. These adaptive responses stimulate helper T cells to activate cytotoxic T cells and NK cells of
innate immunity that will seek and destroy cancer cells.
• New anticancer therapies are in development that will exploit natural adaptive immunity anticancer responses.
These include external stimulation of cytotoxic T cells and therapeutic vaccines that assist or enhance the
immune response.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. Which of the following is the type of cell largely
responsible for type I hypersensitivity responses?
a. erythrocyte
b. mast cell
c. T lymphocyte
d. antibody
2. Type I hypersensitivities require which of the
following initial priming events to occur?
a. sensitization
b. secondary immune response
c. cellular trauma
d. degranulation

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

3. Which of the following are the main mediators/
initiators of type II hypersensitivity reactions?
a. antibodies
b. mast cells
c. erythrocytes
d. histamines
4. Inflammatory molecules are released by mast cells
in type I hypersensitivities; type II hypersensitivities,
however, are characterized by which of the following?
a. cell lysis (cytotoxicity)
b. strong antibody reactions against antigens
c. leukotriene release upon stimulation
d. localized tissue reactions, such as hives

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

5. An immune complex is an aggregate of which of the
following?
a. antibody molecules
b. antigen molecules
c. antibody and antigen molecules
d. histamine molecules
6. Which of the following is a common treatment for
type III hypersensitivity reactions?
a. anti-inflammatory steroid treatments
b. antihistamine treatments
c. hyposensitization injections of allergens
d. RhoGAM injections
7. Which of the following induces a type III
hypersensitivity?
a. release of inflammatory molecules from mast
cells
b. accumulation of immune complexes in tissues
and small blood vessels
c. destruction of cells bound by antigens
d. destruction of cells bound by antibodies
8. Which one of the following is not an example of a
type IV hypersensitivity?
a. latex allergy
b. Contact dermatitis (e.g., contact with poison ivy)
c. a positive tuberculin skin test
d. hemolytic disease of the newborn
9. Which of the following is an example of an organspecific autoimmune disease?
a. rheumatoid arthritis
b. psoriasis
c. Addison disease
d. myasthenia gravis
10. Which of the following is an example of a systemic
autoimmune disease?
a. Hashimoto thyroiditis
b. type I diabetes mellitus
c. Graves disease
d. myasthenia gravis
11. Which of the following is a genetic disease that
results in lack of production of antibodies?
a. agammaglobulinemia
b. myasthenia gravis
c. HIV/AIDS
d. chronic granulomatous disease

851

12. Which of the following is a genetic disease that
results in almost no adaptive immunity due to lack of B
and/ or T cells?
a. agammaglobulinemia
b. severe combined immunodeficiency
c. HIV/AIDS
d. chronic granulomatous disease
13. All but which one of the following are examples of
secondary immunodeficiencies?
a. HIV/AIDS
b. malnutrition
c. chronic granulomatous disease
d. immunosuppression due to measles infection
14. Cancer results when a mutation leads to which of
the following?
a. cell death
b. apoptosis
c. loss of cell-cycle control
d. shutdown of the cell cycle
15.
Tumor antigens are ________ that are
inappropriately expressed and found on abnormal cells.
a. self antigens
b. foreign antigens
c. antibodies
d. T-cell receptors

852

Chapter 19 | Diseases of the Immune System

Matching

16. Match the graft with its description.
___autograft

A. donor is a different species than the recipient

___allograft

B. donor and recipient are the same individual

___xenograft

C. donor is an identical twin of the recipient

___isograft

D. donor is the same species as the recipient, but genetically different

Fill in the Blank

17. Antibodies involved in type I hypersensitivities are of the ________ class.
18. Allergy shots work by shifting antibody responses to produce ________ antibodies.
19. A person who is blood type A would have IgM hemagglutinin antibodies against type ________ red blood cells
in their plasma.
20. The itchy and blistering rash that develops with contact to poison ivy is caused by a type ________
hypersensitivity reaction.
21. The thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin that acts like thyroid-stimulating hormone and causes Graves disease
is an antibody to the ________.
22. For a transplant to have the best chances of avoiding rejection, the genes coding for the ________ molecules
should be closely matched between donor and recipient.
23. Because it is a “transplant” that can include APCs and T cells from the donor, a bone marrow transplant may
induce a very specific type of rejection known as ________ disease.
24. Diseases due to ________ abnormalities are termed primary immunodeficiencies.
25. A secondary immunodeficiency is ________, rather than genetic.
26. A ________ cancer vaccine is one that stops the disease from occurring in the first place.
27. A ________ cancer vaccine is one that will help to treat the disease after it has occurred.
Short Answer

28. Although both type I and type II hypersensitivities involve antibodies as immune effectors, different mechanisms
are involved with these different hypersensitivities. Differentiate the two.
29. What types of antibodies are most common in type III hypersensitivities, and why?
30. Why is a parent usually a better match for transplanted tissue to a donor than a random individual of the same
species?
31. Compare the treatments for primary and secondary immunodeficiencies.
32. How can tumor antigens be effectively targeted without inducing an autoimmune (anti-self) response?
Critical Thinking

33. Patients are frequently given instructions to avoid allergy medications for a period of time prior to allergy testing.
Why would this be important?
34. In some areas of the world, a tuberculosis vaccine known as bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is used. It is not
used in the United States. Every person who has received this vaccine and mounted a protective response will have
a positive reaction in a tuberculin skin test. Why? What does this mean for the usefulness of this skin test in those
countries where this vaccine is used?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

549

Chapter 13

Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.1 Most environments, including cars, are not sterile. A study[1] analyzed 11 locations within 18 different
cars to determine the number of microbial colony-forming units (CFUs) present. The center console harbored by far
the most microbes (506 CFUs), possibly because that is where drinks are placed (and often spilled). Frequently
touched sites also had high concentrations. (credit “photo”: modification of work by Jeff Wilcox)

Chapter Outline
13.1 Controlling Microbial Growth
13.2 Using Physical Methods to Control Microorganisms
13.3 Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms
13.4 Testing the Effectiveness of Antiseptics and Disinfectants

Introduction
How clean is clean? People wash their cars and vacuum the carpets, but most would not want to eat from these
surfaces. Similarly, we might eat with silverware cleaned in a dishwasher, but we could not use the same dishwasher
to clean surgical instruments. As these examples illustrate, “clean” is a relative term. Car washing, vacuuming, and
dishwashing all reduce the microbial load on the items treated, thus making them “cleaner.” But whether they are
“clean enough” depends on their intended use. Because people do not normally eat from cars or carpets, these items
do not require the same level of cleanliness that silverware does. Likewise, because silverware is not used for invasive
surgery, these utensils do not require the same level of cleanliness as surgical equipment, which requires sterilization
to prevent infection.
Why not play it safe and sterilize everything? Sterilizing everything we come in contact with is impractical, as well as
potentially dangerous. As this chapter will demonstrate, sterilization protocols often require time- and labor-intensive
treatments that may degrade the quality of the item being treated or have toxic effects on users. Therefore, the user
must consider the item’s intended application when choosing a cleaning method to ensure that it is “clean enough.”

1. R.E. Stephenson et al. “Elucidation of Bacteria Found in Car Interiors and Strategies to Reduce the Presence of Potential Pathogens.”
Biofouling 30 no. 3 (2014):337–346.

550

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

13.1 Controlling Microbial Growth
Learning Objectives
• Compare disinfectants, antiseptics, and sterilants
• Describe the principles of controlling the presence of microorganisms through sterilization and disinfection
• Differentiate between microorganisms of various biological safety levels and explain methods used for handling

microbes at each level
To prevent the spread of human disease, it is necessary to control the growth and abundance of microbes in or on
various items frequently used by humans. Inanimate items, such as doorknobs, toys, or towels, which may harbor
microbes and aid in disease transmission, are called fomites. Two factors heavily influence the level of cleanliness
required for a particular fomite and, hence, the protocol chosen to achieve this level. The first factor is the application
for which the item will be used. For example, invasive applications that require insertion into the human body require
a much higher level of cleanliness than applications that do not. The second factor is the level of resistance to
antimicrobial treatment by potential pathogens. For example, foods preserved by canning often become contaminated
with the bacterium Clostridium botulinum, which produces the neurotoxin that causes botulism. Because C. botulinum
can produce endospores that can survive harsh conditions, extreme temperatures and pressures must be used to
eliminate the endospores. Other organisms may not require such extreme measures and can be controlled by a
procedure such as washing clothes in a laundry machine.

Laboratory Biological Safety Levels
For researchers or laboratory personnel working with pathogens, the risks associated with specific pathogens
determine the levels of cleanliness and control required. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) have established four classification levels, called “biological safety levels”
(BSLs). Various organizations around the world, including the World Health Organization (WHO) and the European
Union (EU), use a similar classification scheme. According to the CDC, the BSL is determined by the agent’s
infectivity, ease of transmission, and potential disease severity, as well as the type of work being done with the
agent.[2]

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Roberta is a 46-year-old real estate agent who recently underwent a cholecystectomy (surgery to remove
painful gallstones). The surgery was performed laparoscopically with the aid of a duodenoscope, a specialized
endoscope that allows surgeons to see inside the body with the aid of a tiny camera. On returning home
from the hospital, Roberta developed abdominal pain and a high fever. She also experienced a burning
sensation during urination and noticed blood in her urine. She notified her surgeon of these symptoms, per her
postoperative instructions.

• What are some possible causes of Roberta’s symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

2. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Recognizing the Biosafety Levels.” http://www.cdc.gov/training/quicklearns/biosafety/.
Accessed June 7, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

551

Each BSL requires a different level of biocontainment to prevent contamination and spread of infectious agents
to laboratory personnel and, ultimately, the community. For example, the lowest BSL, BSL-1, requires the fewest
precautions because it applies to situations with the lowest risk for microbial infection.
BSL-1 agents are those that generally do not cause infection in healthy human adults. These include noninfectious
bacteria, such as nonpathogenic strains of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, and viruses known to infect animals
other than humans, such as baculoviruses (insect viruses). Because working with BSL-1 agents poses very little risk,
few precautions are necessary. Laboratory workers use standard aseptic technique and may work with these agents at
an open laboratory bench or table, wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) such as a laboratory coat, goggles,
and gloves, as needed. Other than a sink for handwashing and doors to separate the laboratory from the rest of the
building, no additional modifications are needed.
Agents classified as BSL-2 include those that pose moderate risk to laboratory workers and the community, and
are typically “indigenous,” meaning that they are commonly found in that geographical area. These include bacteria
such as Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella spp., and viruses like hepatitis, mumps, and measles viruses. BSL-2
laboratories require additional precautions beyond those of BSL-1, including restricted access; required PPE,
including a face shield in some circumstances; and the use of biological safety cabinets for procedures that may
disperse agents through the air (called “aerosolization”). BSL-2 laboratories are equipped with self-closing doors,
an eyewash station, and an autoclave, which is a specialized device for sterilizing materials with pressurized steam
before use or disposal. BSL-1 laboratories may also have an autoclave.
BSL-3 agents have the potential to cause lethal infections by inhalation. These may be either indigenous or “exotic,”
meaning that they are derived from a foreign location, and include pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
Bacillus anthracis, West Nile virus, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Because of the serious nature of the
infections caused by BSL-3 agents, laboratories working with them require restricted access. Laboratory workers are
under medical surveillance, possibly receiving vaccinations for the microbes with which they work. In addition to the
standard PPE already mentioned, laboratory personnel in BSL-3 laboratories must also wear a respirator and work
with microbes and infectious agents in a biological safety cabinet at all times. BSL-3 laboratories require a handsfree sink, an eyewash station near the exit, and two sets of self-closing and locking doors at the entrance. These
laboratories are equipped with directional airflow, meaning that clean air is pulled through the laboratory from clean
areas to potentially contaminated areas. This air cannot be recirculated, so a constant supply of clean air is required.
BSL-4 agents are the most dangerous and often fatal. These microbes are typically exotic, are easily transmitted by
inhalation, and cause infections for which there are no treatments or vaccinations. Examples include Ebola virus
and Marburg virus, both of which cause hemorrhagic fevers, and smallpox virus. There are only a small number of
laboratories in the United States and around the world appropriately equipped to work with these agents. In addition to
BSL-3 precautions, laboratory workers in BSL-4 facilities must also change their clothing on entering the laboratory,
shower on exiting, and decontaminate all material on exiting. While working in the laboratory, they must either wear
a full-body protective suit with a designated air supply or conduct all work within a biological safety cabinet with a
high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA)-filtered air supply and a doubly HEPA-filtered exhaust. If wearing a suit, the
air pressure within the suit must be higher than that outside the suit, so that if a leak in the suit occurs, laboratory air
that may be contaminated cannot be drawn into the suit (Figure 13.2). The laboratory itself must be located either
in a separate building or in an isolated portion of a building and have its own air supply and exhaust system, as well
as its own decontamination system. The BSLs are summarized in Figure 13.3.

552

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.2 A protective suit like this one is an additional precaution for those who work in BSL-4 laboratories. This
suit has its own air supply and maintains a positive pressure relative to the outside, so that if a leak occurs, air will
flow out of the suit, not into it from the laboratory. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

553

Figure 13.3 The CDC classifies infectious agents into four biosafety levels based on potential risk to laboratory
personnel and the community. Each level requires a progressively greater level of precaution. (credit “pyramid”:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Link to Learning
To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22cdcfourbsls) about the four BSLs,
visit the CDC’s website.

• What are some factors used to determine the BSL necessary for working with a specific pathogen?

Sterilization
The most extreme protocols for microbial control aim to achieve sterilization: the complete removal or killing of all
vegetative cells, endospores, and viruses from the targeted item or environment. Sterilization protocols are generally
reserved for laboratory, medical, manufacturing, and food industry settings, where it may be imperative for certain
items to be completely free of potentially infectious agents. Sterilization can be accomplished through either physical

554

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

means, such as exposure to high heat, pressure, or filtration through an appropriate filter, or by chemical means.
Chemicals that can be used to achieve sterilization are called sterilants. Sterilants effectively kill all microbes and
viruses, and, with appropriate exposure time, can also kill endospores.
For many clinical purposes, aseptic technique is necessary to prevent contamination of sterile surfaces. Aseptic
technique involves a combination of protocols that collectively maintain sterility, or asepsis, thus preventing
contamination of the patient with microbes and infectious agents. Failure to practice aseptic technique during many
types of clinical procedures may introduce microbes to the patient’s body and put the patient at risk for sepsis,
a systemic inflammatory response to an infection that results in high fever, increased heart and respiratory rates,
shock, and, possibly, death. Medical procedures that carry risk of contamination must be performed in a sterile
field, a designated area that is kept free of all vegetative microbes, endospores, and viruses. Sterile fields are created
according to protocols requiring the use of sterilized materials, such as packaging and drapings, and strict procedures
for washing and application of sterilants. Other protocols are followed to maintain the sterile field while the medical
procedure is being performed.
One food sterilization protocol, commercial sterilization, uses heat at a temperature low enough to preserve food
quality but high enough to destroy common pathogens responsible for food poisoning, such as C. botulinum. Because
C. botulinum and its endospores are commonly found in soil, they may easily contaminate crops during harvesting,
and these endospores can later germinate within the anaerobic environment once foods are canned. Metal cans of
food contaminated with C. botulinum will bulge due to the microbe’s production of gases; contaminated jars of food
typically bulge at the metal lid. To eliminate the risk for C. botulinum contamination, commercial food-canning
protocols are designed with a large margin of error. They assume an impossibly large population of endospores (1012
per can) and aim to reduce this population to 1 endospore per can to ensure the safety of canned foods. For example,
low- and medium-acid foods are heated to 121 °C for a minimum of 2.52 minutes, which is the time it would take
to reduce a population of 1012 endospores per can down to 1 endospore at this temperature. Even so, commercial
sterilization does not eliminate the presence of all microbes; rather, it targets those pathogens that cause spoilage and
foodborne diseases, while allowing many nonpathogenic organisms to survive. Therefore, “sterilization” is somewhat
of a misnomer in this context, and commercial sterilization may be more accurately described as “quasi-sterilization.”

• What is the difference between sterilization and aseptic technique?

Link to Learning
The Association of Surgical Technologists publishes standards
(https://openstax.org/l/22ASTstanasepte) for aseptic technique, including
creating and maintaining a sterile field.

Other Methods of Control
Sterilization protocols require procedures that are not practical, or necessary, in many settings. Various other methods
are used in clinical and nonclinical settings to reduce the microbial load on items. Although the terms for these
methods are often used interchangeably, there are important distinctions (Figure 13.4).
The process of disinfection inactivates most microbes on the surface of a fomite by using antimicrobial chemicals or
heat. Because some microbes remain, the disinfected item is not considered sterile. Ideally, disinfectants should be
fast acting, stable, easy to prepare, inexpensive, and easy to use. An example of a natural disinfectant is vinegar; its

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

555

acidity kills most microbes. Chemical disinfectants, such as chlorine bleach or products containing chlorine, are used
to clean nonliving surfaces such as laboratory benches, clinical surfaces, and bathroom sinks. Typical disinfection
does not lead to sterilization because endospores tend to survive even when all vegetative cells have been killed.
Unlike disinfectants, antiseptics are antimicrobial chemicals safe for use on living skin or tissues. Examples
of antiseptics include hydrogen peroxide and isopropyl alcohol. The process of applying an antiseptic is called
antisepsis. In addition to the characteristics of a good disinfectant, antiseptics must also be selectively effective
against microorganisms and able to penetrate tissue deeply without causing tissue damage.
The type of protocol required to achieve the desired level of cleanliness depends on the particular item to be cleaned.
For example, those used clinically are categorized as critical, semicritical, and noncritical. Critical items must be
sterile because they will be used inside the body, often penetrating sterile tissues or the bloodstream; examples of
critical items include surgical instruments, catheters, and intravenous fluids. Gastrointestinal endoscopes and various
types of equipment for respiratory therapies are examples of semicritical items; they may contact mucous membranes
or nonintact skin but do not penetrate tissues. Semicritical items do not typically need to be sterilized but do require
a high level of disinfection. Items that may contact but not penetrate intact skin are noncritical items; examples are
bed linens, furniture, crutches, stethoscopes, and blood pressure cuffs. These articles need to be clean but not highly
disinfected.
The act of handwashing is an example of degerming, in which microbial numbers are significantly reduced by
gently scrubbing living tissue, most commonly skin, with a mild chemical (e.g., soap) to avoid the transmission of
pathogenic microbes. Wiping the skin with an alcohol swab at an injection site is another example of degerming.
These degerming methods remove most (but not all) microbes from the skin’s surface.
The term sanitization refers to the cleansing of fomites to remove enough microbes to achieve levels deemed safe for
public health. For example, commercial dishwashers used in the food service industry typically use very hot water and
air for washing and drying; the high temperatures kill most microbes, sanitizing the dishes. Surfaces in hospital rooms
are commonly sanitized using a chemical disinfectant to prevent disease transmission between patients. Figure 13.4
summarizes common protocols, definitions, applications, and agents used to control microbial growth.

556

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.4

• What is the difference between a disinfectant and an antiseptic?
• Which is most effective at removing microbes from a product: sanitization, degerming, or sterilization?
Explain.

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Roberta’s physician suspected that a bacterial infection was responsible for her sudden-onset high fever,
abdominal pain, and bloody urine. Based on these symptoms, the physician diagnosed a urinary tract infection
(UTI). A wide variety of bacteria may cause UTIs, which typically occur when bacteria from the lower
gastrointestinal tract are introduced to the urinary tract. However, Roberta’s recent gallstone surgery caused
the physician to suspect that she had contracted a nosocomial (hospital-acquired) infection during her surgery.
The physician took a urine sample and ordered a urine culture to check for the presence of white blood
cells, red blood cells, and bacteria. The results of this test would help determine the cause of the infection.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

557

The physician also prescribed a course of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin, confident that it would clear Roberta’s
infection.

• What are some possible ways that bacteria could have been introduced to Roberta’s urinary tract
during her surgery?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Measuring Microbial Control
Physical and chemical methods of microbial control that kill the targeted microorganism are identified by the suffix
-cide (or -cidal). The prefix indicates the type of microbe or infectious agent killed by the treatment method:
bactericides kill bacteria, viricides kill or inactivate viruses, and fungicides kill fungi. Other methods do not kill
organisms but, instead, stop their growth, making their population static; such methods are identified by the suffix stat (or -static). For example, bacteriostatic treatments inhibit the growth of bacteria, whereas fungistatic treatments
inhibit the growth of fungi. Factors that determine whether a particular treatment is -cidal or -static include the types
of microorganisms targeted, the concentration of the chemical used, and the nature of the treatment applied.
Although -static treatments do not actually kill infectious agents, they are often less toxic to humans and other
animals, and may also better preserve the integrity of the item treated. Such treatments are typically sufficient to keep
the microbial population of an item in check. The reduced toxicity of some of these -static chemicals also allows them
to be impregnated safely into plastics to prevent the growth of microbes on these surfaces. Such plastics are used in
products such as toys for children and cutting boards for food preparation. When used to treat an infection, -static
treatments are typically sufficient in an otherwise healthy individual, preventing the pathogen from multiplying, thus
allowing the individual’s immune system to clear the infection.
The degree of microbial control can be evaluated using a microbial death curve to describe the progress and
effectiveness of a particular protocol. When exposed to a particular microbial control protocol, a fixed percentage of
the microbes within the population will die. Because the rate of killing remains constant even when the population
size varies, the percentage killed is more useful information than the absolute number of microbes killed. Death
curves are often plotted as semilog plots just like microbial growth curves because the reduction in microorganisms
is typically logarithmic (Figure 13.5). The amount of time it takes for a specific protocol to produce a one orderof-magnitude decrease in the number of organisms, or the death of 90% of the population, is called the decimal
reduction time (DRT) or D-value.

558

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.5 Microbial death is logarithmic and easily observed using a semilog plot instead of an arithmetic one.
The decimal reduction time (D-value) is the time it takes to kill 90% of the population (a 1-log decrease in the total
population) when exposed to a specific microbial control protocol, as indicated by the purple bracket.

Several factors contribute to the effectiveness of a disinfecting agent or microbial control protocol. First, as
demonstrated in Figure 13.5, the length of time of exposure is important. Longer exposure times kill more
microbes. Because microbial death of a population exposed to a specific protocol is logarithmic, it takes longer
to kill a high-population load than a low-population load exposed to the same protocol. A shorter treatment time
(measured in multiples of the D-value) is needed when starting with a smaller number of organisms. Effectiveness
also depends on the susceptibility of the agent to that disinfecting agent or protocol. The concentration of disinfecting
agent or intensity of exposure is also important. For example, higher temperatures and higher concentrations of
disinfectants kill microbes more quickly and effectively. Conditions that limit contact between the agent and the
targeted cells cells—for example, the presence of bodily fluids, tissue, organic debris (e.g., mud or feces), or biofilms
on surfaces—increase the cleaning time or intensity of the microbial control protocol required to reach the desired
level of cleanliness. All these factors must be considered when choosing the appropriate protocol to control microbial
growth in a given situation.

• What are two possible reasons for choosing a bacteriostatic treatment over a bactericidal one?
• Name at least two factors that can compromise the effectiveness of a disinfecting agent.

13.2 Using Physical Methods to Control Microorganisms
Learning Objectives
• Understand and compare various physical methods of controlling microbial growth, including heating,

refrigeration, freezing, high-pressure treatment, desiccation, lyophilization, irradiation, and filtration

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

559

For thousands of years, humans have used various physical methods of microbial control for food preservation.
Common control methods include the application of high temperatures, radiation, filtration, and desiccation (drying),
among others. Many of these methods nonspecifically kill cells by disrupting membranes, changing membrane
permeability, or damaging proteins and nucleic acids by denaturation, degradation, or chemical modification. Various
physical methods used for microbial control are described in this section.

Heat
Heating is one of the most common—and oldest—forms of microbial control. It is used in simple techniques like
cooking and canning. Heat can kill microbes by altering their membranes and denaturing proteins. The thermal death
point (TDP) of a microorganism is the lowest temperature at which all microbes are killed in a 10-minute exposure.
Different microorganisms will respond differently to high temperatures, with some (e.g., endospore-formers such as
C. botulinum) being more heat tolerant. A similar parameter, the thermal death time (TDT), is the length of time
needed to kill all microorganisms in a sample at a given temperature. These parameters are often used to describe
sterilization procedures that use high heat, such as autoclaving. Boiling is one of the oldest methods of moist-heat
control of microbes, and it is typically quite effective at killing vegetative cells and some viruses. However, boiling
is less effective at killing endospores; some endospores are able to survive up to 20 hours of boiling. Additionally,
boiling may be less effective at higher altitudes, where the boiling point of water is lower and the boiling time needed
to kill microbes is therefore longer. For these reasons, boiling is not considered a useful sterilization technique in the
laboratory or clinical setting.
Many different heating protocols can be used for sterilization in the laboratory or clinic, and these protocols can be
broken down into two main categories: dry-heat sterilization and moist-heat sterilization. Aseptic technique in
the laboratory typically involves some dry-heat sterilization protocols using direct application of high heat, such as
sterilizing inoculating loops (Figure 13.6). Incineration at very high temperatures destroys all microorganisms. Dry
heat can also be applied for relatively long periods of time (at least 2 hours) at temperatures up to 170 °C by using a
dry-heat sterilizer, such as an oven. However, moist-heat sterilization is typically the more effective protocol because
it penetrates cells better than dry heat does.

Figure 13.6 (a) Sterilizing a loop, often referred to as “flaming a loop,” is a common component of aseptic technique
in the microbiology laboratory and is used to incinerate any microorganisms on the loop. (b) Alternatively, a
bactericinerator may be used to reduce aerosolization of microbes and remove the presence of an open flame in the
laboratory. These are examples of dry-heat sterilization by the direct application of high heat capable of incineration.
(credit a: modification of work by Anh-Hue Tu; credit b: modification of work by Brian Forster)

560

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Autoclaves
Autoclaves rely on moist-heat sterilization. They are used to raise temperatures above the boiling point of water
to sterilize items such as surgical equipment from vegetative cells, viruses, and especially endospores, which are
known to survive boiling temperatures, without damaging the items. Charles Chamberland (1851–1908) designed the
modern autoclave in 1879 while working in the laboratory of Louis Pasteur. The autoclave is still considered the most
effective method of sterilization (Figure 13.7). Outside laboratory and clinical settings, large industrial autoclaves
called retorts allow for moist-heat sterilization on a large scale.
In general, the air in the chamber of an autoclave is removed and replaced with increasing amounts of steam
trapped within the enclosed chamber, resulting in increased interior pressure and temperatures above the boiling
point of water. The two main types of autoclaves differ in the way that air is removed from the chamber. In gravity
displacement autoclaves, steam is introduced into the chamber from the top or sides. Air, which is heavier than steam,
sinks to the bottom of the chamber, where it is forced out through a vent. Complete displacement of air is difficult,
especially in larger loads, so longer cycles may be required for such loads. In prevacuum sterilizers, air is removed
completely using a high-speed vacuum before introducing steam into the chamber. Because air is more completely
eliminated, the steam can more easily penetrate wrapped items. Many autoclaves are capable of both gravity and
prevacuum cycles, using the former for the decontamination of waste and sterilization of media and unwrapped
glassware, and the latter for sterilization of packaged instruments.

Figure 13.7 (a) An autoclave is commonly used for sterilization in the laboratory and in clinical settings. By
displacing the air in the chamber with increasing amounts of steam, pressure increases, and temperatures exceeding
100 °C can be achieved, allowing for complete sterilization. (b) A researcher programs an autoclave to sterilize a
sample. (credit a: modification of work by Courtney Harrington; credit b: modification of work by Lackemeyer MG,
Kok-Mercado Fd, Wada J, Bollinger L, Kindrachuk J, Wahl-Jensen V, Kuhn JH, Jahrling PB)

Standard operating temperatures for autoclaves are 121 °C or, in some cases, 132 °C, typically at a pressure of 15 to
20 pounds per square inch (psi). The length of exposure depends on the volume and nature of material being sterilized,
but it is typically 20 minutes or more, with larger volumes requiring longer exposure times to ensure sufficient heat
transfer to the materials being sterilized. The steam must directly contact the liquids or dry materials being sterilized,
so containers are left loosely closed and instruments are loosely wrapped in paper or foil. The key to autoclaving is
that the temperature must be high enough to kill endospores to achieve complete sterilization.
Because sterilization is so important to safe medical and laboratory protocols, quality control is essential. Autoclaves
may be equipped with recorders to document the pressures and temperatures achieved during each run. Additionally,
internal indicators of various types should be autoclaved along with the materials to be sterilized to ensure that
the proper sterilization temperature has been reached (Figure 13.8). One common type of indicator is the use of
heat-sensitive autoclave tape, which has white stripes that turn black when the appropriate temperature is achieved

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

561

during a successful autoclave run. This type of indicator is relatively inexpensive and can be used during every run.
However, autoclave tape provides no indication of length of exposure, so it cannot be used as an indicator of sterility.
Another type of indicator, a biological indicator spore test, uses either a strip of paper or a liquid suspension of the
endospores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus to determine whether the endospores are killed by the process. The
endospores of the obligate thermophilic bacterium G. stearothermophilus are the gold standard used for this purpose
because of their extreme heat resistance. Biological spore indicators can also be used to test the effectiveness of other
sterilization protocols, including ethylene oxide, dry heat, formaldehyde, gamma radiation, and hydrogen peroxide
plasma sterilization using either G. stearothermophilus, Bacillus atrophaeus, B. subtilis, or B. pumilus spores. In the
case of validating autoclave function, the endospores are incubated after autoclaving to ensure no viable endospores
remain. Bacterial growth subsequent to endospore germination can be monitored by biological indicator spore tests
that detect acid metabolites or fluorescence produced by enzymes derived from viable G. stearothermophilus. A third
type of autoclave indicator is the Diack tube, a glass ampule containing a temperature-sensitive pellet that melts
at the proper sterilization temperature. Spore strips or Diack tubes are used periodically to ensure the autoclave is
functioning properly.

Figure 13.8 The white strips on autoclave tape (left tube) turn dark during a successful autoclave run (right tube).
(credit: modification of work by Brian Forster)

Pasteurization
Although complete sterilization is ideal for many medical applications, it is not always practical for other applications
and may also alter the quality of the product. Boiling and autoclaving are not ideal ways to control microbial growth
in many foods because these methods may ruin the consistency and other organoleptic (sensory) qualities of the food.
Pasteurization is a form of microbial control for food that uses heat but does not render the food sterile. Traditional
pasteurization kills pathogens and reduces the number of spoilage-causing microbes while maintaining food quality.
The process of pasteurization was first developed by Louis Pasteur in the 1860s as a method for preventing the
spoilage of beer and wine. Today, pasteurization is most commonly used to kill heat-sensitive pathogens in milk and
other food products (e.g., apple juice and honey) (Figure 13.9). However, because pasteurized food products are not
sterile, they will eventually spoil.

562

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

The methods used for milk pasteurization balance the temperature and the length of time of treatment. One method,
high-temperature short-time (HTST) pasteurization, exposes milk to a temperature of 72 °C for 15 seconds, which
lowers bacterial numbers while preserving the quality of the milk. An alternative is ultra-high-temperature (UHT)
pasteurization, in which the milk is exposed to a temperature of 138 °C for 2 or more seconds. UHT pasteurized milk
can be stored for a long time in sealed containers without being refrigerated; however, the very high temperatures
alter the proteins in the milk, causing slight changes in the taste and smell. Still, this method of pasteurization is
advantageous in regions where access to refrigeration is limited.

Figure 13.9 Two different methods of pasteurization, HTST and UHT, are commonly used to kill pathogens
associated with milk spoilage. (credit left: modification of work by Mark Hillary; credit right: modification of work by
Kerry Ceszyk)

• In an autoclave, how are temperatures above boiling achieved?
• How would the onset of spoilage compare between HTST-pasteurized and UHT-pasteurized milk?
• Why is boiling not used as a sterilization method in a clinical setting?

Refrigeration and Freezing
Just as high temperatures are effective for controlling microbial growth, exposing microbes to low temperatures can
also be an easy and effective method of microbial control, with the exception of psychrophiles, which prefer cold
temperatures (see Temperature and Microbial Growth). Refrigerators used in home kitchens or in the laboratory
maintain temperatures between 0 °C and 7 °C. This temperature range inhibits microbial metabolism, slowing the
growth of microorganisms significantly and helping preserve refrigerated products such as foods or medical supplies.
Certain types of laboratory cultures can be preserved by refrigeration for later use.
Freezing below −2 °C may stop microbial growth and even kill susceptible organisms. According to the US
Department of Agriculture (USDA), the only safe ways that frozen foods can be thawed are in the refrigerator,
immersed in cold water changed every 30 minutes, or in the microwave, keeping the food at temperatures not

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

563

conducive for bacterial growth.[3] In addition, halted bacterial growth can restart in thawed foods, so thawed foods
should be treated like fresh perishables.
Bacterial cultures and medical specimens requiring long-term storage or transport are often frozen at ultra-low
temperatures of −70 °C or lower. These ultra-low temperatures can be achieved by storing specimens on dry ice in
an ultra-low freezer or in special liquid nitrogen tanks, which maintain temperatures lower than −196 °C (Figure
13.10).

Figure 13.10 Cultures and other medical specimens can be stored for long periods at ultra-low temperatures. (a) An
ultra-low freezer maintains temperatures at or below −70 °C. (b) Even lower temperatures can be achieved through
freezing and storage in liquid nitrogen. (credit a: modification of work by “Expert Infantry”/Flickr; credit b: modification
of work by USDA)

• Does placing food in a refrigerator kill bacteria on the food?

Pressure
Exposure to high pressure kills many microbes. In the food industry, high-pressure processing (also called
pascalization) is used to kill bacteria, yeast, molds, parasites, and viruses in foods while maintaining food quality
and extending shelf life. The application of high pressure between 100 and 800 MPa (sea level atmospheric pressure
is about 0.1 MPa) is sufficient to kill vegetative cells by protein denaturation, but endospores may survive these
pressures.[4][5]

3. US Department of Agriculture. “Freezing and Food Safety.” 2013. http://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsis/topics/food-safety-education/
get-answers/food-safety-fact-sheets/safe-food-handling/freezing-and-food-safety/CT_Index. Accessed June 8, 2016.
4. C. Ferstl. “High Pressure Processing: Insights on Technology and Regulatory Requirements.” Food for Thought/White Paper. Series
Volume 10. Livermore, CA: The National Food Lab; July 2013.
5. US Food and Drug Administration. “Kinetics of Microbial Inactivation for Alternative Food Processing Technologies: High Pressure
Processing.” 2000. http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodScienceResearch/SafePracticesforFoodProcesses/ucm101456.htm. Accessed July 19,
2106.

564

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

In clinical settings, hyperbaric oxygen therapy is sometimes used to treat infections. In this form of therapy, a patient
breathes pure oxygen at a pressure higher than normal atmospheric pressure, typically between 1 and 3 atmospheres
(atm). This is achieved by placing the patient in a hyperbaric chamber or by supplying the pressurized oxygen through
a breathing tube. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy helps increase oxygen saturation in tissues that become hypoxic due to
infection and inflammation. This increased oxygen concentration enhances the body’s immune response by increasing
the activities of neutrophils and macrophages, white blood cells that fight infections. Increased oxygen levels also
contribute to the formation of toxic free radicals that inhibit the growth of oxygen-sensitive or anaerobic bacteria like
as Clostridium perfringens, a common cause of gas gangrene. In C. perfringens infections, hyperbaric oxygen therapy
can also reduce secretion of a bacterial toxin that causes tissue destruction. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy also seems to
enhance the effectiveness of antibiotic treatments. Unfortunately, some rare risks include oxygen toxicity and effects
on delicate tissues, such as the eyes, middle ear, and lungs, which may be damaged by the increased air pressure.
High pressure processing is not commonly used for disinfection or sterilization of fomites. Although the application
of pressure and steam in an autoclave is effective for killing endospores, it is the high temperature achieved, and not
the pressure directly, that results in endospore death.

Case in Point
A Streak of Bad Potluck
One Monday in spring 2015, an Ohio woman began to experience blurred, double vision; difficulty swallowing;
and drooping eyelids. She was rushed to the emergency department of her local hospital. During the
examination, she began to experience abdominal cramping, nausea, paralysis, dry mouth, weakness of facial
muscles, and difficulty speaking and breathing. Based on these symptoms, the hospital’s incident command
center was activated, and Ohio public health officials were notified of a possible case of botulism. Meanwhile,
other patients with similar symptoms began showing up at other local hospitals. Because of the suspicion
of botulism, antitoxin was shipped overnight from the CDC to these medical facilities, to be administered to
the affected patients. The first patient died of respiratory failure as a result of paralysis, and about half of
the remaining victims required additional hospitalization following antitoxin administration, with at least two
requiring ventilators for breathing.
Public health officials investigated each of the cases and determined that all of the patients had attended the
same church potluck the day before. Moreover, they traced the source of the outbreak to a potato salad made
with home-canned potatoes. More than likely, the potatoes were canned using boiling water, a method that
allows endospores of Clostridium botulinum to survive. C. botulinum produces botulinum toxin, a neurotoxin
that is often deadly once ingested. According to the CDC, the Ohio case was the largest botulism outbreak in
the United States in nearly 40 years.[6]
Killing C. botulinum endospores requires a minimum temperature of 116 °C (240 °F), well above the boiling
point of water. This temperature can only be reached in a pressure canner, which is recommended for home
canning of low-acid foods such as meat, fish, poultry, and vegetables (Figure 13.11). Additionally, the CDC
recommends boiling home-canned foods for about 10 minutes before consumption. Since the botulinum toxin
is heat labile (meaning that it is denatured by heat), 10 minutes of boiling will render nonfunctional any
botulinum toxin that the food may contain.

6. CL McCarty et al. “Large Outbreak of Botulism Associated with a Church Potluck Meal-Ohio, 2015.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report 64, no. 29 (2015):802–803.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

565

Figure 13.11 (a) Clostridium botulinum is the causative agent of botulism. (b) A pressure canner is
recommended for home canning because endospores of C. botulinum can survive temperatures above the
boiling point of water. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:
modification of work by National Center for Home Food Preservation)

Link to Learning
To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22cdccanathome) about proper homecanning techniques, visit the CDC’s website.

Desiccation
Drying, also known as desiccation or dehydration, is a method that has been used for millennia to preserve foods
such as raisins, prunes, and jerky. It works because all cells, including microbes, require water for their metabolism
and survival. Although drying controls microbial growth, it might not kill all microbes or their endospores, which
may start to regrow when conditions are more favorable and water content is restored.
In some cases, foods are dried in the sun, relying on evaporation to achieve desiccation. Freeze-drying, or
lyophilization, is another method of dessication in which an item is rapidly frozen (“snap-frozen”) and placed
under vacuum so that water is lost by sublimation. Lyophilization combines both exposure to cold temperatures and
desiccation, making it quite effective for controlling microbial growth. In addition, lyophilization causes less damage
to an item than conventional desiccation and better preserves the item’s original qualities. Lyophilized items may
be stored at room temperature if packaged appropriately to prevent moisture acquisition. Lyophilization is used for
preservation in the food industry and is also used in the laboratory for the long-term storage and transportation of
microbial cultures.

566

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

The water content of foods and materials, called the water activity, can be lowered without physical drying by the
addition of solutes such as salts or sugars. At very high concentrations of salts or sugars, the amount of available
water in microbial cells is reduced dramatically because water will be drawn from an area of low solute concentration
(inside the cell) to an area of high solute concentration (outside the cell) (Figure 13.12). Many microorganisms
do not survive these conditions of high osmotic pressure. Honey, for example, is 80% sucrose, an environment in
which very few microorganisms are capable of growing, thereby eliminating the need for refrigeration. Salted meats
and fish, like ham and cod, respectively, were critically important foods before the age of refrigeration. Fruits were
preserved by adding sugar, making jams and jellies. However, certain microbes, such as molds and yeasts, tend to be
more tolerant of desiccation and high osmotic pressures, and, thus, may still contaminate these types of foods.

Figure 13.12 (a) The addition of a solute creates a hypertonic environment, drawing water out of cells. (b) Some
foods can be dried directly, like raisins and jerky. Other foods are dried with the addition of salt, as in the case of
salted fish, or sugar, as in the case of jam. (credit a: modification of work by “Bruce Blaus”/Wikimedia Commons;
credit raisins: modification of work by Christian Schnettelker; credit jerky: modification of work by Larry Jacobsen;
credit salted fish: modification of work by “The Photographer”/Wikimedia Commons; credit jam: modification of work
by Kim Becker)

• How does the addition of salt or sugar to food affect its water activity?

Radiation
Radiation in various forms, from high-energy radiation to sunlight, can be used to kill microbes or inhibit their
growth. Ionizing radiation includes X-rays, gamma rays, and high-energy electron beams. Ionizing radiation is
strong enough to pass into the cell, where it alters molecular structures and damages cell components. For example,
ionizing radiation introduces double-strand breaks in DNA molecules. This may directly cause DNA mutations
to occur, or mutations may be introduced when the cell attempts to repair the DNA damage. As these mutations
accumulate, they eventually lead to cell death.
Both X-rays and gamma rays easily penetrate paper and plastic and can therefore be used to sterilize many packaged
materials. In the laboratory, ionizing radiation is commonly used to sterilize materials that cannot be autoclaved, such
as plastic Petri dishes and disposable plastic inoculating loops. For clinical use, ionizing radiation is used to sterilize
gloves, intravenous tubing, and other latex and plastic items used for patient care. Ionizing radiation is also used for
the sterilization of other types of delicate, heat-sensitive materials used clinically, including tissues for transplantation,
pharmaceutical drugs, and medical equipment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

567

In Europe, gamma irradiation for food preservation is widely used, although it has been slow to catch on in the United
States (see the Micro Connections box on this topic). Packaged dried spices are also often gamma-irradiated.
Because of their ability to penetrate paper, plastic, thin sheets of wood and metal, and tissue, great care must be taken
when using X-rays and gamma irradiation. These types of ionizing irradiation cannot penetrate thick layers of iron or
lead, so these metals are commonly used to protect humans who may be potentially exposed.
Another type of radiation, nonionizing radiation, is commonly used for sterilization and uses less energy than
ionizing radiation. It does not penetrate cells or packaging. Ultraviolet (UV) light is one example; it causes thymine
dimers to form between adjacent thymines within a single strand of DNA (Figure 13.13). When DNA polymerase
encounters the thymine dimer, it does not always incorporate the appropriate complementary nucleotides (two
adenines), and this leads to formation of mutations that can ultimately kill microorganisms.
UV light can be used effectively by both consumers and laboratory personnel to control microbial growth. UV
lamps are now commonly incorporated into water purification systems for use in homes. In addition, small portable
UV lights are commonly used by campers to purify water from natural environments before drinking. Germicidal
lamps are also used in surgical suites, biological safety cabinets, and transfer hoods, typically emitting UV light at a
wavelength of 260 nm. Because UV light does not penetrate surfaces and will not pass through plastics or glass, cells
must be exposed directly to the light source.
Sunlight has a very broad spectrum that includes UV and visible light. In some cases, sunlight can be effective against
certain bacteria because of both the formation of thymine dimers by UV light and by the production of reactive
oxygen products induced in low amounts by exposure to visible light.

Figure 13.13 (a) UV radiation causes the formation of thymine dimers in DNA, leading to lethal mutations in the
exposed microbes. (b) Germicidal lamps that emit UV light are commonly used in the laboratory to sterilize
equipment.

• What are two advantages of ionizing radiation as a sterilization method?
• How does the effectiveness of ionizing radiation compare with that of nonionizing radiation?

568

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Micro Connections
Irradiated Food: Would You Eat That?
Of all the ways to prevent food spoilage and foodborne illness, gamma irradiation may be the most
unappetizing. Although gamma irradiation is a proven method of eliminating potentially harmful microbes from
food, the public has yet to buy in. Most of their concerns, however, stem from misinformation and a poor
understanding of the basic principles of radiation.
The most common method of irradiation is to expose food to cobalt-60 or cesium-137 by passing it through a
radiation chamber on a conveyor belt. The food does not directly contact the radioactive material and does not
become radioactive itself. Thus, there is no risk for exposure to radioactive material through eating gammairradiated foods. Additionally, irradiated foods are not significantly altered in terms of nutritional quality, aside
from the loss of certain vitamins, which is also exacerbated by extended storage. Alterations in taste or smell
may occur in irradiated foods with high fat content, such as fatty meats and dairy products, but this effect can
be minimized by using lower doses of radiation at colder temperatures.
In the United States, the CDC, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) have deemed irradiation safe and effective for various types of meats, poultry, shellfish, fresh fruits and
vegetables, eggs with shells, and spices and seasonings. Gamma irradiation of foods has also been approved
for use in many other countries, including France, the Netherlands, Portugal, Israel, Russia, China, Thailand,
Belgium, Australia, and South Africa. To help ameliorate consumer concern and assist with education efforts,
irradiated foods are now clearly labeled and marked with the international irradiation symbol, called the “radura”
(Figure 13.14). Consumer acceptance seems to be rising, as indicated by several recent studies.[7]

Figure 13.14 (a) Foods are exposed to gamma radiation by passage on a conveyor belt through a radiation
chamber. (b) Gamma-irradiated foods must be clearly labeled and display the irradiation symbol, known as
the “radura.” (credit a, b: modification of work by U.S. Department of Agriculture)

Sonication
The use of high-frequency ultrasound waves to disrupt cell structures is called sonication. Application of ultrasound
waves causes rapid changes in pressure within the intracellular liquid; this leads to cavitation, the formation of
bubbles inside the cell, which can disrupt cell structures and eventually cause the cell to lyse or collapse. Sonication is
useful in the laboratory for efficiently lysing cells to release their contents for further research; outside the laboratory,
sonication is used for cleaning surgical instruments, lenses, and a variety of other objects such as coins, tools, and
musical instruments.

7. AM Johnson et al. “Consumer Acceptance of Electron-Beam Irradiated Ready-to-Eat Poultry Meats.” Food Processing Preservation, 28
no. 4 (2004):302–319.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

569

Filtration
Filtration is a method of physically separating microbes from samples. Air is commonly filtered through highefficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters (Figure 13.15). HEPA filters have effective pore sizes of 0.3 µm, small
enough to capture bacterial cells, endospores, and many viruses, as air passes through these filters, nearly sterilizing
the air on the other side of the filter. HEPA filters have a variety of applications and are used widely in clinical
settings, in cars and airplanes, and even in the home. For example, they may be found in vacuum cleaners, heating
and air-conditioning systems, and air purifiers.

Figure 13.15 (a) HEPA filters like this one remove microbes, endospores, and viruses as air flows through them. (b)
A schematic of a HEPA filter. (credit a: modification of work by CSIRO; credit b: modification of work by
“LadyofHats”/Mariana Ruiz Villareal)

Biological Safety Cabinets
Biological safety cabinets are a good example of the use of HEPA filters. HEPA filters in biological safety cabinets
(BSCs) are used to remove particulates in the air either entering the cabinet (air intake), leaving the cabinet
(air exhaust), or treating both the intake and exhaust. Use of an air-intake HEPA filter prevents environmental
contaminants from entering the BSC, creating a clean area for handling biological materials. Use of an air-exhaust
HEPA filter prevents laboratory pathogens from contaminating the laboratory, thus maintaining a safe work area for
laboratory personnel.
There are three classes of BSCs: I, II, and III. Each class is designed to provide a different level of protection for
laboratory personnel and the environment; BSC II and III are also designed to protect the materials or devices in the
cabinet. Table 13.1 summarizes the level of safety provided by each class of BSC for each BSL.
Biological Risks and BSCs
Biological Risk
Assessed

BSC Class

Protection of
Personnel

Protection of
Environment

Protection of
Product

BSL-1, BSL-2,
BSL-3

I

Yes

Yes

No

BSL-1, BSL-2,
BSL-3

II

Yes

Yes

Yes

Table 13.1

570

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Biological Risks and BSCs
Biological Risk
Assessed
BSL-4

BSC Class
III; II when used in suit
room with suit

Protection of
Personnel
Yes

Protection of
Environment
Yes

Protection of
Product
Yes

Table 13.1

Class I BSCs protect laboratory workers and the environment from a low to moderate risk for exposure to biological
agents used in the laboratory. Air is drawn into the cabinet and then filtered before exiting through the building’s
exhaust system. Class II BSCs use directional air flow and partial barrier systems to contain infectious agents. Class
III BSCs are designed for working with highly infectious agents like those used in BSL-4 laboratories. They are
gas tight, and materials entering or exiting the cabinet must be passed through a double-door system, allowing the
intervening space to be decontaminated between uses. All air is passed through one or two HEPA filters and an
air incineration system before being exhausted directly to the outdoors (not through the building’s exhaust system).
Personnel can manipulate materials inside the Class III cabinet by using long rubber gloves sealed to the cabinet.

Link to Learning
This video (https://openstax.org/l/22BSCsdesvideo) shows how BSCs are
designed and explains how they protect personnel, the environment, and the
product.

Filtration in Hospitals
HEPA filters are also commonly used in hospitals and surgical suites to prevent contamination and the spread of
airborne microbes through ventilation systems. HEPA filtration systems may be designed for entire buildings or for
individual rooms. For example, burn units, operating rooms, or isolation units may require special HEPA-filtration
systems to remove opportunistic pathogens from the environment because patients in these rooms are particularly
vulnerable to infection.

Membrane Filters
Filtration can also be used to remove microbes from liquid samples using membrane filtration. Membrane filters for
liquids function similarly to HEPA filters for air. Typically, membrane filters that are used to remove bacteria have an
effective pore size of 0.2 µm, smaller than the average size of a bacterium (1 µm), but filters with smaller pore sizes
are available for more specific needs. Membrane filtration is useful for removing bacteria from various types of heatsensitive solutions used in the laboratory, such as antibiotic solutions and vitamin solutions. Large volumes of culture
media may also be filter sterilized rather than autoclaved to protect heat-sensitive components. Often when filtering
small volumes, syringe filters are used, but vacuum filters are typically used for filtering larger volumes (Figure
13.16).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

571

Figure 13.16 Membrane filters come in a variety of sizes, depending on the volume of solution being filtered. (a)
Larger volumes are filtered in units like these. The solution is drawn through the filter by connecting the unit to a
vacuum. (b) Smaller volumes are often filtered using syringe filters, which are units that fit on the end of a syringe. In
this case, the solution is pushed through by depressing the syringe’s plunger. (credit a, b: modification of work by
Brian Forster)

• Would membrane filtration with a 0.2-µm filter likely remove viruses from a solution? Explain.
• Name at least two common uses of HEPA filtration in clinical or laboratory settings.

Figure 13.17 and Figure 13.18 summarize the physical methods of control discussed in this section.

572

Figure 13.17

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

573

Figure 13.18

13.3 Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms
Learning Objectives
• Understand and compare various chemicals used to control microbial growth, including their uses, advantages

and disadvantages, chemical structure, and mode of action
In addition to physical methods of microbial control, chemicals are also used to control microbial growth. A wide
variety of chemicals can be used as disinfectants or antiseptics. When choosing which to use, it is important to
consider the type of microbe targeted; how clean the item needs to be; the disinfectant’s effect on the item’s integrity;
its safety to animals, humans, and the environment; its expense; and its ease of use. This section describes the variety
of chemicals used as disinfectants and antiseptics, including their mechanisms of action and common uses.

Phenolics
In the 1800s, scientists began experimenting with a variety of chemicals for disinfection. In the 1860s, British surgeon
Joseph Lister (1827–1912) began using carbolic acid, known as phenol, as a disinfectant for the treatment of surgical
wounds (see Foundations of Modern Cell Theory). In 1879, Lister’s work inspired the American chemist Joseph
Lawrence (1836–1909) to develop Listerine, an alcohol-based mixture of several related compounds that is still used
today as an oral antiseptic. Today, carbolic acid is no longer used as a surgical disinfectant because it is a skin irritant,
but the chemical compounds found in antiseptic mouthwashes and throat lozenges are called phenolics.
Chemically, phenol consists of a benzene ring with an –OH group, and phenolics are compounds that have this group
as part of their chemical structure (Figure 13.19). Phenolics such as thymol and eucalyptol occur naturally in plants.
Other phenolics can be derived from creosote, a component of coal tar. Phenolics tend to be stable, persistent on
surfaces, and less toxic than phenol. They inhibit microbial growth by denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes.

574

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.19 Phenol and phenolic compounds have been used to control microbial growth. (a) Chemical structure of
phenol, also known as carbolic acid. (b) o-Phenylphenol, a type of phenolic, has been used as a disinfectant as well
as to control bacterial and fungal growth on harvested citrus fruits. (c) Hexachlorophene, another phenol, known as a
bisphenol (two rings), is the active ingredient in pHisoHex.

Since Lister’s time, several phenolic compounds have been used to control microbial growth. Phenolics like cresols
(methylated phenols) and o-phenylphenol were active ingredients in various formulations of Lysol since its invention
in 1889. o-Phenylphenol was also commonly used in agriculture to control bacterial and fungal growth on harvested
crops, especially citrus fruits, but its use in the United States is now far more limited. The bisphenol hexachlorophene,
a disinfectant, is the active ingredient in pHisoHex, a topical cleansing detergent widely used for handwashing
in hospital settings. pHisoHex is particularly effective against gram-positive bacteria, including those causing
staphylococcal and streptococcal skin infections. pHisoHex was formerly used for bathing infants, but this practice
has been discontinued because it has been shown that exposure to hexachlorophene can lead to neurological problems.
Triclosan is another bisphenol compound that has seen widespread application in antibacterial products over the
last several decades. Initially used in toothpastes, triclosan is now commonly used in hand soaps and is frequently
impregnated into a wide variety of other products, including cutting boards, knives, shower curtains, clothing, and
concrete, to make them antimicrobial. It is particularly effective against gram-positive bacteria on the skin, as well as
certain gram-negative bacteria and yeasts.[8]

Micro Connections
Triclosan: Antibacterial Overkill?
Hand soaps and other cleaning products are often marketed as “antibacterial,” suggesting that they provide a
level of cleanliness superior to that of conventional soaps and cleansers. But are the antibacterial ingredients
in these products really safe and effective?
About 75% of antibacterial liquid hand soaps and 30% of bar soaps contain the chemical triclosan, a phenolic,
(Figure 13.20).[9] Triclosan blocks an enzyme in the bacterial fatty acid-biosynthesis pathway that is not found
in the comparable human pathway. Although the use of triclosan in the home increased dramatically during
the 1990s, more than 40 years of research by the FDA have turned up no conclusive evidence that washing
with triclosan-containing products provides increased health benefits compared with washing with traditional
soap. Although some studies indicate that fewer bacteria may remain on a person’s hands after washing with
triclosan-based soap, compared with traditional soap, no evidence points to any reduction in the transmission
of bacteria that cause respiratory and gastrointestinal illness. In short, soaps with triclosan may remove or kill
a few more germs but not enough to reduce the spread of disease.
Perhaps more disturbing, some clear risks associated with triclosan-based soaps have come to light. The
widespread use of triclosan has led to an increase in triclosan-resistant bacterial strains, including those
of clinical importance, such as Salmonella enterica; this resistance may render triclosan useless as an
antibacterial in the long run.[10][11] Bacteria can easily gain resistance to triclosan through a change to a single

8. US Food and Drug Administration. “Triclosan: What Consumers Should Know.” 2015. http://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/
ConsumerUpdates/ucm205999.htm. Accessed June 9, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

575

gene encoding the targeted enzyme in the bacterial fatty acid-synthesis pathway. Other disinfectants with a
less specific mode of action are much less prone to engendering resistance because it would take much more
than a single genetic change.
Use of triclosan over the last several decades has also led to a buildup of the chemical in the environment.
Triclosan in hand soap is directly introduced into wastewater and sewage systems as a result of the
handwashing process. There, its antibacterial properties can inhibit or kill bacteria responsible for the
decomposition of sewage, causing septic systems to clog and back up. Eventually, triclosan in wastewater
finds its way into surface waters, streams, lakes, sediments, and soils, disrupting natural populations of
bacteria that carry out important environmental functions, such as inhibiting algae. Triclosan also finds its way
into the bodies of amphibians and fish, where it can act as an endocrine disruptor. Detectable levels of triclosan
have also been found in various human bodily fluids, including breast milk, plasma, and urine.[12] In fact, a
study conducted by the CDC found detectable levels of triclosan in the urine of 75% of 2,517 people tested in
2003–2004.[13] This finding is even more troubling given the evidence that triclosan may affect immune function
in humans.[14]
In December 2013, the FDA gave soap manufacturers until 2016 to prove that antibacterial soaps provide
a significant benefit over traditional soaps; if unable to do so, manufacturers will be forced to remove these
products from the market.

Figure 13.20 Triclosan is a common ingredient in antibacterial soaps despite evidence that it poses
environmental and health risks and offers no significant health benefit compared to conventional soaps.
(credit b, c: modification of work by FDA)

9. J. Stromberg. “Five Reasons Why You Should Probably Stop Using Antibacterial Soap.” Smithsonian.com January 3, 2014.
http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/five-reasons-why-you-should-probably-stop-using-antibacterial-soap-180948078/?no-ist.
Accessed June 9, 2016.
10. SP Yazdankhah et al. “Triclosan and Antimicrobial Resistance in Bacteria: An Overview.” Microbial Drug Resistance 12 no. 2
(2006):83–90.
11. L. Birošová, M. Mikulášová. “Development of Triclosan and Antibiotic Resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.”
Journal of Medical Microbiology 58 no. 4 (2009):436–441.
12. AB Dann, A. Hontela. “Triclosan: Environmental Exposure, Toxicity and Mechanisms of Action.” Journal of Applied Toxicology 31 no.
4 (2011):285–311.
13. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Triclosan Fact Sheet.” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/
Triclosan_FactSheet.html. Accessed June 9, 2016.
14. EM Clayton et al. “The Impact of Bisphenol A and Triclosan on Immune Parameters in the US Population, NHANES 2003-2006.”
Environmental Health Perspectives 119 no. 3 (2011):390.

576

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

• Why is triclosan more like an antibiotic than a traditional disinfectant?

Heavy Metals
Some of the first chemical disinfectants and antiseptics to be used were heavy metals. Heavy metals kill microbes
by binding to proteins, thus inhibiting enzymatic activity (Figure 13.21). Heavy metals are oligodynamic, meaning
that very small concentrations show significant antimicrobial activity. Ions of heavy metals bind to sulfur-containing
amino acids strongly and bioaccumulate within cells, allowing these metals to reach high localized concentrations.
This causes proteins to denature.
Heavy metals are not selectively toxic to microbial cells. They may bioaccumulate in human or animal cells, as
well, and excessive concentrations can have toxic effects on humans. If too much silver accumulates in the body, for
example, it can result in a condition called argyria, in which the skin turns irreversibly blue-gray. One way to reduce
the potential toxicity of heavy metals is by carefully controlling the duration of exposure and concentration of the
heavy metal.

Figure 13.21 Heavy metals denature proteins, impairing cell function and, thus, giving them strong antimicrobial
properties. (a) Copper in fixtures like this door handle kills microbes that otherwise might accumulate on frequently
touched surfaces. (b) Eating utensils contain small amounts of silver to inhibit microbial growth. (c) Copper commonly
lines incubators to minimize contamination of cell cultures stored inside. (d) Antiseptic mouthwashes commonly
contain zinc chloride. (e) This patient is suffering from argyria, an irreversible condition caused by bioaccumulation of
silver in the body. (credit b: modification of work by “Shoshanah”/Flickr; credit e: modification of work by Herbert L.
Fred and Hendrik A. van Dijk)

Mercury
Mercury is an example of a heavy metal that has been used for many years to control microbial growth. It was used
for many centuries to treat syphilis. Mercury compounds like mercuric chloride are mainly bacteriostatic and have
a very broad spectrum of activity. Various forms of mercury bind to sulfur-containing amino acids within proteins,
inhibiting their functions.
In recent decades, the use of such compounds has diminished because of mercury’s toxicity. It is toxic to the central
nervous, digestive, and renal systems at high concentrations, and has negative environmental effects, including
bioaccumulation in fish. Topical antiseptics such as mercurochrome, which contains mercury in low concentrations,
and merthiolate, a tincture (a solution of mercury dissolved in alcohol) were once commonly used. However, because
of concerns about using mercury compounds, these antiseptics are no longer sold in the United States.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

577

Silver
Silver has long been used as an antiseptic. In ancient times, drinking water was stored in silver jugs.[15] Silvadene
cream is commonly used to treat topical wounds and is particularly helpful in preventing infection in burn wounds.
Silver nitrate drops were once routinely applied to the eyes of newborns to protect against ophthalmia neonatorum,
eye infections that can occur due to exposure to pathogens in the birth canal, but antibiotic creams are more
now commonly used. Silver is often combined with antibiotics, making the antibiotics thousands of times more
effective.[16] Silver is also commonly incorporated into catheters and bandages, rendering them antimicrobial;
however, there is evidence that heavy metals may also enhance selection for antibiotic resistance. [17]

Copper, Nickel, and Zinc
Several other heavy metals also exhibit antimicrobial activity. Copper sulfate is a common algicide used to control
algal growth in swimming pools and fish tanks. The use of metallic copper to minimize microbial growth is also
becoming more widespread. Copper linings in incubators help reduce contamination of cell cultures. The use of
copper pots for water storage in underdeveloped countries is being investigated as a way to combat diarrheal diseases.
Copper coatings are also becoming popular for frequently handled objects such as doorknobs, cabinet hardware, and
other fixtures in health-care facilities in an attempt to reduce the spread of microbes.
Nickel and zinc coatings are now being used in a similar way. Other forms of zinc, including zinc chloride and zinc
oxide, are also used commercially. Zinc chloride is quite safe for humans and is commonly found in mouthwashes,
substantially increasing their length of effectiveness. Zinc oxide is found in a variety of products, including topical
antiseptic creams such as calamine lotion, diaper ointments, baby powder, and dandruff shampoos.

• Why are many heavy metals both antimicrobial and toxic to humans?

Halogens
Other chemicals commonly used for disinfection are the halogens iodine, chlorine, and fluorine. Iodine works by
oxidizing cellular components, including sulfur-containing amino acids, nucleotides, and fatty acids, and destabilizing
the macromolecules that contain these molecules. It is often used as a topical tincture, but it may cause staining or skin
irritation. An iodophor is a compound of iodine complexed with an organic molecule, thereby increasing iodine’s
stability and, in turn, its efficacy. One common iodophor is povidone-iodine, which includes a wetting agent that
releases iodine relatively slowly. Betadine is a brand of povidone-iodine commonly used as a hand scrub by medical
personnel before surgery and for topical antisepsis of a patient’s skin before incision (Figure 13.22).

15. N. Silvestry-Rodriguez et al. “Silver as a Disinfectant.” In Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, pp. 23-45. Edited
by GW Ware and DM Whitacre. New York: Springer, 2007.
16. B. Owens. “Silver Makes Antibiotics Thousands of Times More Effective.” Nature June 19 2013. http://www.nature.com/news/silvermakes-antibiotics-thousands-of-times-more-effective-1.13232
17. C. Seiler, TU Berendonk. “Heavy Metal Driven Co-Selection of Antibiotic Resistance in Soil and Water Bodies Impacted by
Agriculture and Aquaculture.” Frontiers in Microbiology 3 (2012):399.

578

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.22 (a) Betadine is a solution of the iodophor povidone-iodine. (b) It is commonly used as a topical
antiseptic on a patient’s skin before incision during surgery. (credit b: modification of work by Andrew Ratto)

Chlorine is another halogen commonly used for disinfection. When chlorine gas is mixed with water, it produces a
strong oxidant called hypochlorous acid, which is uncharged and enters cells easily. Chlorine gas is commonly used in
municipal drinking water and wastewater treatment plants, with the resulting hypochlorous acid producing the actual
antimicrobial effect. Those working at water treatment facilities need to take great care to minimize personal exposure
to chlorine gas. Sodium hypochlorite is the chemical component of common household bleach, and it is also used
for a wide variety of disinfecting purposes. Hypochlorite salts, including sodium and calcium hypochlorites, are used
to disinfect swimming pools. Chlorine gas, sodium hypochlorite, and calcium hypochlorite are also commonly used
disinfectants in the food processing and restaurant industries to reduce the spread of foodborne diseases. Workers in
these industries also need to take care to use these products correctly to ensure their own safety as well as the safety of
consumers. A recent joint statement published by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations
and WHO indicated that none of the many beneficial uses of chlorine products in food processing to reduce the spread
of foodborne illness posed risks to consumers.[18]
Another class of chlorinated compounds called chloramines are widely used as disinfectants. Chloramines are
relatively stable, releasing chlorine over long periods time. Chloramines are derivatives of ammonia by substitution
of one, two, or all three hydrogen atoms with chlorine atoms (Figure 13.23).

Figure 13.23 Monochloroamine, one of the chloramines, is derived from ammonia by the replacement of one
hydrogen atom with a chlorine atom.

Chloramines and other cholorine compounds may be used for disinfection of drinking water, and chloramine tablets
are frequently used by the military for this purpose. After a natural disaster or other event that compromises the public
water supply, the CDC recommends disinfecting tap water by adding small amounts of regular household bleach.
Recent research suggests that sodium dichloroisocyanurate (NaDCC) may also be a good alternative for drinking
water disinfection. Currently, NaDCC tablets are available for general use and for use by the military, campers, or
those with emergency needs; for these uses, NaDCC is preferable to chloramine tablets. Chlorine dioxide, a gaseous
agent used for fumigation and sterilization of enclosed areas, is also commonly used for the disinfection of water.
Although chlorinated compounds are relatively effective disinfectants, they have their disadvantages. Some may
irritate the skin, nose, or eyes of some individuals, and they may not completely eliminate certain hardy organisms
18. World Health Organization. “Benefits and Risks of the Use of Chlorine-Containing Disinfectants in Food Production and Food
Processing: Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meeting.” Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2009.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

579

from contaminated drinking water. The fungus Cryptosporidium, for example, has a protective outer shell that makes
it resistant to chlorinated disinfectants. Thus, boiling of drinking water in emergency situations is recommended when
possible.
The halogen fluorine is also known to have antimicrobial properties that contribute to the prevention of dental caries
(cavities).[19] Fluoride is the main active ingredient of toothpaste and is also commonly added to tap water to help
communities maintain oral health. Chemically, fluoride can become incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth
enamel, making it more resistant to corrosive acids produced by the fermentation of oral microbes. Fluoride also
enhances the uptake of calcium and phosphate ions in tooth enamel, promoting remineralization. In addition to
strengthening enamel, fluoride also seems to be bacteriostatic. It accumulates in plaque-forming bacteria, interfering
with their metabolism and reducing their production of the acids that contribute to tooth decay.

• What is a benefit of a chloramine over hypochlorite for disinfecting?

Alcohols
Alcohols make up another group of chemicals commonly used as disinfectants and antiseptics. They work by rapidly
denaturing proteins, which inhibits cell metabolism, and by disrupting membranes, which leads to cell lysis. Once
denatured, the proteins may potentially refold if enough water is present in the solution. Alcohols are typically used
at concentrations of about 70% aqueous solution and, in fact, work better in aqueous solutions than 100% alcohol
solutions. This is because alcohols coagulate proteins. In higher alcohol concentrations, rapid coagulation of surface
proteins prevents effective penetration of cells. The most commonly used alcohols for disinfection are ethyl alcohol
(ethanol) and isopropyl alcohol (isopropanol, rubbing alcohol) (Figure 13.24).
Alcohols tend to be bactericidal and fungicidal, but may also be viricidal for enveloped viruses only. Although
alcohols are not sporicidal, they do inhibit the processes of sporulation and germination. Alcohols are volatile and
dry quickly, but they may also cause skin irritation because they dehydrate the skin at the site of application. One
common clinical use of alcohols is swabbing the skin for degerming before needle injection. Alcohols also are the
active ingredients in instant hand sanitizers, which have gained popularity in recent years. The alcohol in these
hand sanitizers works both by denaturing proteins and by disrupting the microbial cell membrane, but will not work
effectively in the presence of visible dirt.
Last, alcohols are used to make tinctures with other antiseptics, such as the iodine tinctures discussed previously in
this chapter. All in all, alcohols are inexpensive and quite effective for the disinfection of a broad range of vegetative
microbes. However, one disadvantage of alcohols is their high volatility, limiting their effectiveness to immediately
after application.

19. RE Marquis. “Antimicrobial Actions of Fluoride for Oral Bacteria.” Canadian Journal of Microbiology 41 no. 11 (1995):955–964.

580

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.24 (a) Ethyl alcohol, the intoxicating ingredient found in alcoholic drinks, is also used commonly as a
disinfectant. (b) Isopropyl alcohol, also called rubbing alcohol, has a related molecular structure and is another
commonly used disinfectant. (credit a photo: modification of work by D Coetzee; credit b photo: modification of work
by Craig Spurrier)

• Name at least three advantages of alcohols as disinfectants.
• Describe several specific applications of alcohols used in disinfectant products.

Surfactants
Surface-active agents, or surfactants, are a group of chemical compounds that lower the surface tension of water.
Surfactants are the major ingredients in soaps and detergents. Soaps are salts of long-chain fatty acids and have both
polar and nonpolar regions, allowing them to interact with polar and nonpolar regions in other molecules (Figure
13.25). They can interact with nonpolar oils and grease to create emulsions in water, loosening and lifting away
dirt and microbes from surfaces and skin. Soaps do not kill or inhibit microbial growth and so are not considered
antiseptics or disinfectants. However, proper use of soaps mechanically carries away microorganisms, effectively
degerming a surface. Some soaps contain added bacteriostatic agents such as triclocarban or cloflucarban, compounds
structurally related to triclosan, that introduce antiseptic or disinfectant properties to the soaps.

Figure 13.25 Soaps are the salts (sodium salt in the illustration) of fatty acids and have the ability to emulsify lipids,
fats, and oils by interacting with water through their hydrophilic heads and with the lipid at their hydrophobic tails.

Soaps, however, often form films that are difficult to rinse away, especially in hard water, which contains high
concentrations of calcium and magnesium mineral salts. Detergents contain synthetic surfactant molecules with both
polar and nonpolar regions that have strong cleansing activity but are more soluble, even in hard water, and, therefore,
leave behind no soapy deposits. Anionic detergents, such as those used for laundry, have a negatively charged anion
at one end attached to a long hydrophobic chain, whereas cationic detergents have a positively charged cation instead.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

581

Cationic detergents include an important class of disinfectants and antiseptics called the quaternary ammonium
salts (quats), named for the characteristic quaternary nitrogen atom that confers the positive charge (Figure 13.26).
Overall, quats have properties similar to phospholipids, having hydrophilic and hydrophobic ends. As such, quats
have the ability to insert into the bacterial phospholipid bilayer and disrupt membrane integrity. The cationic
charge of quats appears to confer their antimicrobial properties, which are diminished when neutralized. Quats have
several useful properties. They are stable, nontoxic, inexpensive, colorless, odorless, and tasteless. They tend to be
bactericidal by disrupting membranes. They are also active against fungi, protozoans, and enveloped viruses, but
endospores are unaffected. In clinical settings, they may be used as antiseptics or to disinfect surfaces. Mixtures of
quats are also commonly found in household cleaners and disinfectants, including many current formulations of Lysol
brand products, which contain benzalkonium chlorides as the active ingredients. Benzalkonium chlorides, along with
the quat cetylpyrimidine chloride, are also found in products such as skin antiseptics, oral rinses, and mouthwashes.

Figure 13.26 (a) Two common quats are benzylalkonium chloride and cetylpyrimidine chloride. Note the
hydrophobic nonpolar carbon chain at one end and the nitrogen-containing cationic component at the other end. (b)
Quats are able to infiltrate the phospholipid plasma membranes of bacterial cells and disrupt their integrity, leading to
death of the cell.

• Why are soaps not considered disinfectants?

Micro Connections
Handwashing the Right Way
Handwashing is critical for public health and should be emphasized in a clinical setting. For the general public,
the CDC recommends handwashing before, during, and after food handling; before eating; before and after
interacting with someone who is ill; before and after treating a wound; after using the toilet or changing diapers;

582

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

after coughing, sneezing, or blowing the nose; after handling garbage; and after interacting with an animal, its
feed, or its waste. Figure 13.27 illustrates the five steps of proper handwashing recommended by the CDC.
Handwashing is even more important for health-care workers, who should wash their hands thoroughly
between every patient contact, after the removal of gloves, after contact with bodily fluids and potentially
infectious fomites, and before and after assisting a surgeon with invasive procedures. Even with the use of
proper surgical attire, including gloves, scrubbing for surgery is more involved than routine handwashing. The
goal of surgical scrubbing is to reduce the normal microbiota on the skin’s surface to prevent the introduction
of these microbes into a patient’s surgical wounds.
There is no single widely accepted protocol for surgical scrubbing. Protocols for length of time spent scrubbing
may depend on the antimicrobial used; health-care workers should always check the manufacturer’s
recommendations. According to the Association of Surgical Technologists (AST), surgical scrubs may be
performed with or without the use of brushes (Figure 13.27).

Figure 13.27 (a) The CDC recommends five steps as part of typical handwashing for the general public. (b)
Surgical scrubbing is more extensive, requiring scrubbing starting from the fingertips, extending to the hands
and forearms, and then up beyond the elbows, as shown here. (credit a: modification of work by World Health
Organization)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

583

Link to Learning
To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22CDChandwash) about proper
handwashing, visit the CDC’s website.

Bisbiguanides
Bisbiguanides were first synthesized in the 20th century and are cationic (positively charged) molecules known
for their antiseptic properties (Figure 13.28). One important bisbiguanide antiseptic is chlorhexidine. It has
broad-spectrum activity against yeasts, gram-positive bacteria, and gram-negative bacteria, with the exception of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which may develop resistance on repeated exposure.[20] Chlorhexidine disrupts cell
membranes and is bacteriostatic at lower concentrations or bactericidal at higher concentrations, in which it actually
causes the cells’ cytoplasmic contents to congeal. It also has activity against enveloped viruses. However,
chlorhexidine is poorly effective against Mycobacterium tuberculosis and nonenveloped viruses, and it is not
sporicidal. Chlorhexidine is typically used in the clinical setting as a surgical scrub and for other handwashing needs
for medical personnel, as well as for topical antisepsis for patients before surgery or needle injection. It is more
persistent than iodophors, providing long-lasting antimicrobial activity. Chlorhexidine solutions may also be used
as oral rinses after oral procedures or to treat gingivitis. Another bisbiguanide, alexidine, is gaining popularity as a
surgical scrub and an oral rinse because it acts faster than chlorhexidine.

Figure 13.28 The bisbiguanides chlorhexadine and alexidine are cationic antiseptic compounds commonly used as
surgical scrubs.

• What two effects does chlorhexidine have on bacterial cells?

Alkylating Agents
The alkylating agents are a group of strong disinfecting chemicals that act by replacing a hydrogen atom within
a molecule with an alkyl group (CnH2n+1), thereby inactivating enzymes and nucleic acids (Figure 13.29). The
alkylating agent formaldehyde (CH2OH) is commonly used in solution at a concentration of 37% (known as formalin)
or as a gaseous disinfectant and biocide. It is a strong, broad-spectrum disinfectant and biocide that has the ability
to kill bacteria, viruses, fungi, and endospores, leading to sterilization at low temperatures, which is sometimes a
convenient alternative to the more labor-intensive heat sterilization methods. It also cross-links proteins and has been
20. L. Thomas et al. “Development of Resistance to Chlorhexidine Diacetate in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the Effect of a ‘Residual’
Concentration.” Journal of Hospital Infection 46 no. 4 (2000):297–303.

584

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

widely used as a chemical fixative. Because of this, it is used for the storage of tissue specimens and as an embalming
fluid. It also has been used to inactivate infectious agents in vaccine preparation. Formaldehyde is very irritating to
living tissues and is also carcinogenic; therefore, it is not used as an antiseptic.
Glutaraldehyde is structurally similar to formaldehyde but has two reactive aldehyde groups, allowing it to act more
quickly than formaldehyde. It is commonly used as a 2% solution for sterilization and is marketed under the brand
name Cidex. It is used to disinfect a variety of surfaces and surgical and medical equipment. However, similar to
formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde irritates the skin and is not used as an antiseptic.
A new type of disinfectant gaining popularity for the disinfection of medical equipment is o-phthalaldehyde (OPA),
which is found in some newer formulations of Cidex and similar products, replacing glutaraldehyde. oPhthalaldehyde also has two reactive aldehyde groups, but they are linked by an aromatic bridge. o-Phthalaldehyde is
thought to work similarly to glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde, but is much less irritating to skin and nasal passages,
produces a minimal odor, does not require processing before use, and is more effective against mycobacteria.
Ethylene oxide is a type of alkylating agent that is used for gaseous sterilization. It is highly penetrating and
can sterilize items within plastic bags such as catheters, disposable items in laboratories and clinical settings (like
packaged Petri dishes), and other pieces of equipment. Ethylene oxide exposure is a form of cold sterilization, making
it useful for the sterilization of heat-sensitive items. Great care needs to be taken with the use of ethylene oxide,
however; it is carcinogenic, like the other alkylating agents, and is also highly explosive. With careful use and
proper aeration of the products after treatment, ethylene oxide is highly effective, and ethylene oxide sterilizers are
commonly found in medical settings for sterilizing packaged materials.
β-Propionolactone is an alkylating agent with a different chemical structure than the others already discussed. Like
other alkylating agents, β-propionolactone binds to DNA, thereby inactivating it (Figure 13.29). It is a clear liquid
with a strong odor and has the ability to kill endospores. As such, it has been used in either liquid form or as a vapor
for the sterilization of medical instruments and tissue grafts, and it is a common component of vaccines, used to
maintain their sterility. It has also been used for the sterilization of nutrient broth, as well as blood plasma, milk, and
water. It is quickly metabolized by animals and humans to lactic acid. It is also an irritant, however, and may lead to
permanent damage of the eyes, kidneys, or liver. Additionally, it has been shown to be carcinogenic in animals; thus,
precautions are necessary to minimize human exposure to β-propionolactone.[21]

21. Institute of Medicine. “Long-Term Health Effects of Participation in Project SHAD (Shipboard Hazard and Defense).” Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press, 2007.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

585

Figure 13.29 (a) Alkylating agents replace hydrogen atoms with alkyl groups. Here, guanine is alkylated, resulting in
its hydrogen bonding with thymine, instead of cytosine. (b) The chemical structures of several alkylating agents.

• What chemical reaction do alkylating agents participate in?
• Why are alkylating agents not used as antiseptics?

Micro Connections
Diehard Prions
Prions, the acellular, misfolded proteins responsible for incurable and fatal diseases such as kuru and
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (see Viroids, Virusoids, and Prions), are notoriously difficult to destroy. Prions
are extremely resistant to heat, chemicals, and radiation. They are also extremely infectious and deadly; thus,
handling and disposing of prion-infected items requires extensive training and extreme caution.
Typical methods of disinfection can reduce but not eliminate the infectivity of prions. Autoclaving is not
completely effective, nor are chemicals such as phenol, alcohols, formalin, and β-propiolactone. Even when
fixed in formalin, affected brain and spinal cord tissues remain infectious.
Personnel who handle contaminated specimens or equipment or work with infected patients must wear a
protective coat, face protection, and cut-resistant gloves. Any contact with skin must be immediately washed
with detergent and warm water without scrubbing. The skin should then be washed with 1 N NaOH or a

586

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

1:10 dilution of bleach for 1 minute. Contaminated waste must be incinerated or autoclaved in a strong basic
solution, and instruments must be cleaned and soaked in a strong basic solution.

Link to Learning
For more information on the handling of animals and prion-contaminated
materials, visit the guidelines published on the CDC (https://openstax.org/l/
22CDChandanipri) and WHO (https://openstax.org/l/22WHOhandanipri)
websites.

Peroxygens
Peroxygens are strong oxidizing agents that can be used as disinfectants or antiseptics. The most widely used
peroxygen is hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which is often used in solution to disinfect surfaces and may also be used as
a gaseous agent. Hydrogen peroxide solutions are inexpensive skin antiseptics that break down into water and oxygen
gas, both of which are environmentally safe. This decomposition is accelerated in the presence of light, so hydrogen
peroxide solutions typically are sold in brown or opaque bottles. One disadvantage of using hydrogen peroxide as an
antiseptic is that it also causes damage to skin that may delay healing or lead to scarring. Contact lens cleaners often
include hydrogen peroxide as a disinfectant.
Hydrogen peroxide works by producing free radicals that damage cellular macromolecules. Hydrogen peroxide has
broad-spectrum activity, working against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (with slightly greater efficacy
against gram-positive bacteria), fungi, viruses, and endospores. However, bacteria that produce the oxygendetoxifying enzymes catalase or peroxidase may have inherent tolerance to low hydrogen peroxide concentrations
(Figure 13.30). To kill endospores, the length of exposure or concentration of solutions of hydrogen peroxide must
be increased. Gaseous hydrogen peroxide has greater efficacy and can be used as a sterilant for rooms or equipment.

Figure 13.30 Catalase enzymatically converts highly reactive hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) into water and oxygen.
Hydrogen peroxide can be used to clean wounds. Hydrogen peroxide is used to sterilize items such as contact
lenses. (credit photos: modification of work by Kerry Ceszyk)

Plasma, a hot, ionized gas, described as the fourth state of matter, is useful for sterilizing equipment because
it penetrates surfaces and kills vegetative cells and endospores. Hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid, another
commonly used peroxygen, each may be introduced as a plasma. Peracetic acid can be used as a liquid or plasma
sterilant insofar as it readily kills endospores, is more effective than hydrogen peroxide even at rather low

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

587

concentrations, and is immune to inactivation by catalases and peroxidases. It also breaks down to environmentally
innocuous compounds; in this case, acetic acid and oxygen.
Other examples of peroxygens include benzoyl peroxide and carbamide peroxide. Benzoyl peroxide is a peroxygen
that used in acne medication solutions. It kills the bacterium Propionibacterium acnes, which is associated with
acne. Carbamide peroxide, an ingredient used in toothpaste, is a peroxygen that combats oral biofilms that cause
tooth discoloration and halitosis (bad breath).[22] Last, ozone gas is a peroxygen with disinfectant qualities and is
used to clean air or water supplies. Overall, peroxygens are highly effective and commonly used, with no associated
environmental hazard.

• How do peroxides kill cells?

Supercritical Fluids
Within the last 15 years, the use of supercritical fluids, especially supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2), has gained
popularity for certain sterilizing applications. When carbon dioxide is brought to approximately 10 times atmospheric
pressure, it reaches a supercritical state that has physical properties between those of liquids and gases. Materials put
into a chamber in which carbon dioxide is pressurized in this way can be sterilized because of the ability of scCO2 to
penetrate surfaces.
Supercritical carbon dioxide works by penetrating cells and forming carbonic acid, thereby lowering the cell pH
considerably. This technique is effective against vegetative cells and is also used in combination with peracetic acid
to kill endospores. Its efficacy can also be augmented with increased temperature or by rapid cycles of pressurization
and depressurization, which more likely produce cell lysis.
Benefits of scCO2 include the nonreactive, nontoxic, and nonflammable properties of carbon dioxide, and this
protocol is effective at low temperatures. Unlike other methods, such as heat and irradiation, that can degrade the
object being sterilized, the use of scCO2 preserves the object’s integrity and is commonly used for treating foods
(including spices and juices) and medical devices such as endoscopes. It is also gaining popularity for disinfecting
tissues such as skin, bones, tendons, and ligaments prior to transplantation. scCO2 can also be used for pest control
because it can kill insect eggs and larvae within products.

• Why is the use of supercritical carbon dioxide gaining popularity for commercial and medical uses?

Chemical Food Preservatives
Chemical preservatives are used to inhibit microbial growth and minimize spoilage in some foods. Commonly used
chemical preservatives include sorbic acid, benzoic acid, and propionic acid, and their more soluble salts potassium
sorbate, sodium benzoate, and calcium propionate, all of which are used to control the growth of molds in acidic
foods. Each of these preservatives is nontoxic and readily metabolized by humans. They are also flavorless, so they
do not compromise the flavor of the foods they preserve.
Sorbic and benzoic acids exhibit increased efficacy as the pH decreases. Sorbic acid is thought to work by inhibiting
various cellular enzymes, including those in the citric acid cycle, as well as catalases and peroxidases. It is added as
22. Yao, C.S. et al. “In vitro antibacterial effect of carbamide peroxide on oral biofilm.” Journal of Oral Microbiology Jun 12, 2013.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3682087/. doi: 10.3402/jom.v5i0.20392.

588

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

a preservative in a wide variety of foods, including dairy, bread, fruit, and vegetable products. Benzoic acid is found
naturally in many types of fruits and berries, spices, and fermented products. It is thought to work by decreasing
intracellular pH, interfering with mechanisms such as oxidative phosphorylation and the uptake of molecules such as
amino acids into cells. Foods preserved with benzoic acid or sodium benzoate include fruit juices, jams, ice creams,
pastries, soft drinks, chewing gum, and pickles.
Propionic acid is thought to both inhibit enzymes and decrease intracellular pH, working similarly to benzoic acid.
However, propionic acid is a more effective preservative at a higher pH than either sorbic acid or benzoic acid.
Propionic acid is naturally produced by some cheeses during their ripening and is added to other types of cheese and
baked goods to prevent mold contamination. It is also added to raw dough to prevent contamination by the bacterium
Bacillus mesentericus, which causes bread to become ropy.
Other commonly used chemical preservatives include sulfur dioxide and nitrites. Sulfur dioxide prevents browning
of foods and is used for the preservation of dried fruits; it has been used in winemaking since ancient times. Sulfur
dioxide gas dissolves in water readily, forming sulfites. Although sulfites can be metabolized by the body, some
people have sulfite allergies, including asthmatic reactions. Additionally, sulfites degrade thiamine, an important
nutrient in some foods. The mode of action of sulfites is not entirely clear, but they may interfere with the disulfide
bond (see Figure 7.21) formation in proteins, inhibiting enzymatic activity. Alternatively, they may reduce the
intracellular pH of the cell, interfering with proton motive force-driven mechanisms.
Nitrites are added to processed meats to maintain color and stop the germination of Clostridium botulinum
endospores. Nitrites are reduced to nitric oxide, which reacts with heme groups and iron-sulfur groups. When nitric
oxide reacts with the heme group within the myoglobin of meats, a red product forms, giving meat its red color.
Alternatively, it is thought that when nitric acid reacts with the iron-sulfur enzyme ferredoxin within bacteria, this
electron transport-chain carrier is destroyed, preventing ATP synthesis. Nitrosamines, however, are carcinogenic and
can be produced through exposure of nitrite-preserved meats (e.g., hot dogs, lunch meat, breakfast sausage, bacon,
meat in canned soups) to heat during cooking.

Natural Chemical Food Preservatives
The discovery of natural antimicrobial substances produced by other microbes has added to the arsenal of
preservatives used in food. Nisin is an antimicrobial peptide produced by the bacterium Lactococcus lactis and is
particularly effective against gram-positive organisms. Nisin works by disrupting cell wall production, leaving cells
more prone to lysis. It is used to preserve cheeses, meats, and beverages.
Natamycin is an antifungal macrolide antibiotic produced by the bacterium Streptomyces natalensis. It was approved
by the FDA in 1982 and is used to prevent fungal growth in various types of dairy products, including cottage cheese,
sliced cheese, and shredded cheese. Natamycin is also used for meat preservation in countries outside the United
States.

• What are the advantages and drawbacks of using sulfites and nitrites as food preservatives?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

589

13.4 Testing the Effectiveness of Antiseptics and
Disinfectants
Learning Objectives
• Describe why the phenol coefficient is used
• Compare and contrast the disk-diffusion, use-dilution, and in-use methods for testing the effectiveness of

antiseptics, disinfectants, and sterilants
The effectiveness of various chemical disinfectants is reflected in the terms used to describe them. Chemical
disinfectants are grouped by the power of their activity, with each category reflecting the types of microbes and
viruses its component disinfectants are effective against. High-level germicides have the ability to kill vegetative
cells, fungi, viruses, and endospores, leading to sterilization, with extended use. Intermediate-level germicides, as
their name suggests, are less effective against endospores and certain viruses, and low-level germicides kill only
vegetative cells and certain enveloped viruses, and are ineffective against endospores.
However, several environmental conditions influence the potency of an antimicrobial agent and its effectiveness. For
example, length of exposure is particularly important, with longer exposure increasing efficacy. Similarly, the
concentration of the chemical agent is also important, with higher concentrations being more effective than lower
ones. Temperature, pH, and other factors can also affect the potency of a disinfecting agent.
One method to determine the effectiveness of a chemical agent includes swabbing surfaces before and after use to
confirm whether a sterile field was maintained during use. Additional tests are described in the sections that follow.
These tests allow for the maintenance of appropriate disinfection protocols in clinical settings, controlling microbial
growth to protect patients, health-care workers, and the community.

Phenol Coefficient
The effectiveness of a disinfectant or antiseptic can be determined in a number of ways. Historically, a chemical
agent’s effectiveness was often compared with that of phenol, the first chemical agent used by Joseph Lister. In 1903,
British chemists Samuel Rideal (1863–1929) and J. T. Ainslie Walker (1868–1930) established a protocol to compare
the effectiveness of a variety of chemicals with that of phenol, using as their test organisms Staphylococcus aureus
(a gram-positive bacterium) and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (a gram-negative bacterium). They exposed the
test bacteria to the antimicrobial chemical solutions diluted in water for 7.5 minutes. They then calculated a phenol
coefficient for each chemical for each of the two bacteria tested. A phenol coefficient of 1.0 means that the chemical
agent has about the same level of effectiveness as phenol. A chemical agent with a phenol coefficient of less than 1.0
is less effective than phenol. An example is formalin, with phenol coefficients of 0.3 (S. aureus) and 0.7 (S. enterica
serovar Typhi). A chemical agent with a phenol coefficient greater than 1.0 is more effective than phenol, such as
chloramine, with phenol coefficients of 133 and 100, respectively. Although the phenol coefficient was once a useful
measure of effectiveness, it is no longer commonly used because the conditions and organisms used were arbitrarily
chosen.

• What are the differences between the three levels of disinfectant effectiveness?

Disk-Diffusion Method
The disk-diffusion method involves applying different chemicals to separate, sterile filter paper disks (Figure
13.31). The disks are then placed on an agar plate that has been inoculated with the targeted bacterium and the
chemicals diffuse out of the disks into the agar where the bacteria have been inoculated. As the “lawn” of bacteria

590

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

grows, zones of inhibition of microbial growth are observed as clear areas around the disks. Although there are other
factors that contribute to the sizes of zones of inhibition (e.g., whether the agent is water soluble and able to diffuse
in the agar), larger zones typically correlate to increased inhibition effectiveness of the chemical agent. The diameter
across each zone is measured in millimeters.

Figure 13.31 A disk-diffusion assay is used to determine the effectiveness of chemical agents against a particular
microbe. (a) A plate is inoculated with various antimicrobial discs. The zone of inhibition around each disc indicates
how effective that antimicrobial is against the particular species being tested. (b) On these plates, four antimicrobial
agents are tested for efficacy in killing Pseudomonas aeruginosa (left) and Staphylococcus aureus (right). These
antimicrobials are much more effective at killing S. aureus, as indicated by the size of the zones of inhibition. (credit
b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

• When comparing the activities of two disinfectants against the same microbe, using the disk-diffusion assay,
and assuming both are water soluble and can easily diffuse in the agar, would a more effective disinfectant
have a larger zone of inhibition or a smaller one?

Use-Dilution Test
Other methods are also used for measuring the effectiveness of a chemical agent in clinical settings. The use-dilution
test is commonly used to determine a chemical’s disinfection effectiveness on an inanimate surface. For this test, a
cylinder of stainless steel is dipped in a culture of the targeted microorganism and then dried. The cylinder is then
dipped in solutions of disinfectant at various concentrations for a specified amount of time. Finally, the cylinder is
transferred to a new test tube containing fresh sterile medium that does not contain disinfectant, and this test tube is
incubated. Bacterial survival is demonstrated by the presence of turbidity in the medium, whereas killing of the target
organism on the cylinder by the disinfectant will produce no turbidity.
The Association of Official Agricultural Chemists International (AOAC), a nonprofit group that establishes many
protocol standards, has determined that a minimum of 59 of 60 replicates must show no growth in such a test to
achieve a passing result, and the results must be repeatable from different batches of disinfectant and when performed
on different days. Disinfectant manufacturers perform use-dilution tests to validate the efficacy claims for their
products, as designated by the EPA.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

591

• Is the use-dilution test performed in a clinical setting? Why?

In-Use Test
An in-use test can determine whether an actively used solution of disinfectant in a clinical setting is microbially
contaminated (Figure 13.32). A 1-mL sample of the used disinfectant is diluted into 9 mL of sterile broth medium
that also contains a compound to inactivate the disinfectant. Ten drops, totaling approximately 0.2 mL of this mixture,
are then inoculated onto each of two agar plates. One plate is incubated at 37 °C for 3 days and the other is incubated
at room temperature for 7 days. The plates are monitored for growth of microbial colonies. Growth of five or
more colonies on either plate suggests that viable microbial cells existed in the disinfectant solution and that it is
contaminated. Such in-use tests monitor the effectiveness of disinfectants in the clinical setting.

Figure 13.32 Used disinfectant solutions in a clinical setting can be checked with the in-use test for contamination
with microbes.

• What does a positive in-use test indicate?

592

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Despite antibiotic treatment, Roberta’s symptoms worsened. She developed pyelonephritis, a severe kidney
infection, and was rehospitalized in the intensive care unit (ICU). Her condition continued to deteriorate, and
she developed symptoms of septic shock. At this point, her physician ordered a culture from her urine to
determine the exact cause of her infection, as well as a drug sensitivity test to determine what antibiotics
would be effective against the causative bacterium. The results of this test indicated resistance to a wide
range of antibiotics, including the carbapenems, a class of antibiotics that are used as the last resort for
many types of bacterial infections. This was an alarming outcome, suggesting that Roberta’s infection was
caused by a so-called superbug: a bacterial strain that has developed resistance to the majority of commonly
used antibiotics. In this case, the causative agent belonged to the carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae
(CRE), a drug-resistant family of bacteria normally found in the digestive system (Figure 13.33). When CRE is
introduced to other body systems, as might occur through improperly cleaned surgical instruments, catheters,
or endoscopes, aggressive infections can occur.
CRE infections are notoriously difficult to treat, with a 40%–50% fatality rate. To treat her kidney infection and
septic shock, Roberta was treated with dialysis, intravenous fluids, and medications to maintain blood pressure
and prevent blood clotting. She was also started on aggressive treatment with intravenous administration of a
new drug called tigecycline, which has been successful in treating infections caused by drug-resistant bacteria.
After several weeks in the ICU, Roberta recovered from her CRE infection. However, public health officials
soon noticed that Roberta’s case was not isolated. Several patients who underwent similar procedures at the
same hospital also developed CRE infections, some dying as a result. Ultimately, the source of the infection
was traced to the duodenoscopes used in the procedures. Despite the hospital staff meticulously following
manufacturer protocols for disinfection, bacteria, including CRE, remained within the instruments and were
introduced to patients during procedures.

Figure 13.33 CRE is an extremely drug-resistant strain of bacteria that is typically associated with
nosocomial infections. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Eye on Ethics

Who Is Responsible?
Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae infections due to contaminated endoscopes have become a highprofile problem in recent years. Several CRE outbreaks have been traced to endoscopes, including a case
at Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in early 2015 in which 179 patients may have been exposed to a
contaminated endoscope. Seven of the patients developed infections, and two later died. Several lawsuits
have been filed against Olympus, the manufacturer of the endoscopes. Some claim that Olympus did not
obtain FDA approval for design changes that may have led to contamination, and others claim that the
manufacturer knowingly withheld information from hospitals concerning defects in the endoscopes.
Lawsuits like these raise difficult-to-answer questions about liability. Invasive procedures are inherently risky,
but negative outcomes can be minimized by strict adherence to established protocols. Who is responsible,
however, when negative outcomes occur due to flawed protocols or faulty equipment? Can hospitals or healthcare workers be held liable if they have strictly followed a flawed procedure? Should manufacturers be held
liable—and perhaps be driven out of business—if their lifesaving equipment fails or is found defective? What is
the government’s role in ensuring that use and maintenance of medical equipment and protocols are fail-safe?
Protocols for cleaning or sterilizing medical equipment are often developed by government agencies like the
FDA, and other groups, like the AOAC, a nonprofit scientific organization that establishes many protocols for
standard use globally. These procedures and protocols are then adopted by medical device and equipment
manufacturers. Ultimately, the end-users (hospitals and their staff) are responsible for following these
procedures and can be held liable if a breach occurs and patients become ill from improperly cleaned
equipment.
Unfortunately, protocols are not infallible, and sometimes it takes negative outcomes to reveal their flaws.
In 2008, the FDA had approved a disinfection protocol for endoscopes, using glutaraldehyde (at a lower
concentration when mixed with phenol), o-phthalaldehyde, hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid, and a mix of
hydrogen peroxide with peracetic acid. However, subsequent CRE outbreaks from endoscope use showed
that this protocol alone was inadequate.
As a result of CRE outbreaks, hospitals, manufacturers, and the FDA are investigating solutions. Many
hospitals are instituting more rigorous cleaning procedures than those mandated by the FDA. Manufacturers
are looking for ways to redesign duodenoscopes to minimize hard-to-reach crevices where bacteria can
escape disinfectants, and the FDA is updating its protocols. In February 2015, the FDA added new
recommendations for careful hand cleaning of the duodenoscope elevator mechanism (the location where
microbes are most likely to escape disinfection), and issued more careful documentation about quality control
of disinfection protocols (Figure 13.34).
There is no guarantee that new procedures, protocols, or equipment will completely eliminate the risk
for infection associated with endoscopes. Yet these devices are used successfully in 500,000–650,000
procedures annually in the United States, many of them lifesaving. At what point do the risks outweigh the
benefits of these devices, and who should be held responsible when negative outcomes occur?

593

594

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Figure 13.34 The elevator mechanism in a duodenoscope contains crevices that are difficult to disinfect.
Pathogens that survive disinfection protocols can be passed from one patient to another, causing serious
infections. (credit “photos”: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Summary
13.1 Controlling Microbial Growth
• Inanimate items that may harbor microbes and aid in their transmission are called fomites. The level of
cleanliness required for a fomite depends both on the item’s use and the infectious agent with which the item
may be contaminated.
• The CDC and the NIH have established four biological safety levels (BSLs) for laboratories performing
research on infectious agents. Each level is designed to protect laboratory personnel and the community. These
BSLs are determined by the agent’s infectivity, ease of transmission, and potential disease severity, as well as
the type of work being performed with the agent.
• Disinfection removes potential pathogens from a fomite, whereas antisepsis uses antimicrobial chemicals
safe enough for tissues; in both cases, microbial load is reduced, but microbes may remain unless the chemical
used is strong enough to be a sterilant.
• The amount of cleanliness (sterilization versus high-level disinfection versus general cleanliness) required for
items used clinically depends on whether the item will come into contact with sterile tissues (critical item),
mucous membranes (semicritical item), or intact skin (noncritical item).
• Medical procedures with a risk for contamination should be carried out in a sterile field maintained by proper
aseptic technique to prevent sepsis.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

595

• Sterilization is necessary for some medical applications as well as in the food industry, where endospores of
Clostridium botulinum are killed through commercial sterilization protocols.
• Physical or chemical methods to control microbial growth that result in death of the microbe are indicated by
the suffixes -cide or -cidal (e.g., as with bactericides, viricides, and fungicides), whereas those that inhibit
microbial growth are indicated by the suffixes -stat or-static (e.g., bacteriostatic, fungistatic).
• Microbial death curves display the logarithmic decline of living microbes exposed to a method of microbial
control. The time it takes for a protocol to yield a 1-log (90%) reduction in the microbial population is the
decimal reduction time, or D-value.
• When choosing a microbial control protocol, factors to consider include the length of exposure time, the type
of microbe targeted, its susceptibility to the protocol, the intensity of the treatment, the presence of organics
that may interfere with the protocol, and the environmental conditions that may alter the effectiveness of the
protocol.
13.2 Using Physical Methods to Control Microorganisms
• Heat is a widely used and highly effective method for controlling microbial growth.
• Dry-heat sterilization protocols are used commonly in aseptic techniques in the laboratory. However, moistheat sterilization is typically the more effective protocol because it penetrates cells better than dry heat does.
• Pasteurization is used to kill pathogens and reduce the number of microbes that cause food spoilage. Hightemperature, short-time pasteurization is commonly used to pasteurize milk that will be refrigerated; ultrahigh temperature pasteurization can be used to pasteurize milk for long-term storage without refrigeration.
• Refrigeration slows microbial growth; freezing stops growth, killing some organisms. Laboratory and medical
specimens may be frozen on dry ice or at ultra-low temperatures for storage and transport.
• High-pressure processing can be used to kill microbes in food. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy to increase oxygen
saturation has also been used to treat certain infections.
• Desiccation has long been used to preserve foods and is accelerated through the addition of salt or sugar,
which decrease water activity in foods.
• Lyophilization combines cold exposure and desiccation for the long-term storage of foods and laboratory
materials, but microbes remain and can be rehydrated.
• Ionizing radiation, including gamma irradiation, is an effective way to sterilize heat-sensitive and packaged
materials. Nonionizing radiation, like ultraviolet light, is unable to penetrate surfaces but is useful for surface
sterilization.
• HEPA filtration is commonly used in hospital ventilation systems and biological safety cabinets in
laboratories to prevent transmission of airborne microbes. Membrane filtration is commonly used to remove
bacteria from heat-sensitive solutions.
13.3 Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms
• Heavy metals, including mercury, silver, copper, and zinc, have long been used for disinfection and
preservation, although some have toxicity and environmental risks associated with them.
• Halogens, including chlorine, fluorine, and iodine, are also commonly used for disinfection. Chlorine
compounds, including sodium hypochlorite, chloramines, and chlorine dioxide, are commonly used for
water disinfection. Iodine, in both tincture and iodophor forms, is an effective antiseptic.
• Alcohols, including ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol, are commonly used antiseptics that act by denaturing
proteins and disrupting membranes.
• Phenolics are stable, long-acting disinfectants that denature proteins and disrupt membranes. They are
commonly found in household cleaners, mouthwashes, and hospital disinfectants, and are also used to
preserve harvested crops.
• The phenolic compound triclosan, found in antibacterial soaps, plastics, and textiles is technically an
antibiotic because of its specific mode of action of inhibiting bacterial fatty-acid synthesis..

596

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

• Surfactants, including soaps and detergents, lower the surface tension of water to create emulsions that
mechanically carry away microbes. Soaps are long-chain fatty acids, whereas detergents are synthetic
surfactants.
• Quaternary ammonium compounds (quats) are cationic detergents that disrupt membranes. They are used
in household cleaners, skin disinfectants, oral rinses, and mouthwashes.
• Bisbiguanides disrupt cell membranes, causing cell contents to gel. Chlorhexidine and alexidine are
commonly used for surgical scrubs, for handwashing in clinical settings, and in prescription oral rinses.
• Alkylating agents effectively sterilize materials at low temperatures but are carcinogenic and may also
irritate tissue. Glutaraldehyde and o-phthalaldehyde are used as hospital disinfectants but not as antiseptics.
Formaldehyde is used for the storage of tissue specimens, as an embalming fluid, and in vaccine preparation
to inactivate infectious agents. Ethylene oxide is a gas sterilant that can permeate heat-sensitive packaged
materials, but it is also explosive and carcinogenic.
• Peroxygens, including hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid, benzoyl peroxide, and ozone gas, are strong
oxidizing agents that produce free radicals in cells, damaging their macromolecules. They are environmentally
safe and are highly effective disinfectants and antiseptics.
• Pressurized carbon dioxide in the form of a supercritical fluid easily permeates packaged materials and
cells, forming carbonic acid and lowering intracellular pH. Supercritical carbon dioxide is nonreactive,
nontoxic, nonflammable, and effective at low temperatures for sterilization of medical devices, implants, and
transplanted tissues.
• Chemical preservatives are added to a variety of foods. Sorbic acid, benzoic acid, propionic acid, and their
more soluble salts inhibit enzymes or reduce intracellular pH.
• Sulfites are used in winemaking and food processing to prevent browning of foods.
• Nitrites are used to preserve meats and maintain color, but cooking nitrite-preserved meats may produce
carcinogenic nitrosamines.
• Nisin and natamycin are naturally produced preservatives used in cheeses and meats. Nisin is effective
against gram-positive bacteria and natamycin against fungi.
13.4 Testing the Effectiveness of Antiseptics and Disinfectants
• Chemical disinfectants are grouped by the types of microbes and infectious agents they are effective against.
High-level germicides kill vegetative cells, fungi, viruses, and endospores, and can ultimately lead to
sterilization. Intermediate-level germicides cannot kill all viruses and are less effective against endospores.
Low-level germicides kill vegetative cells and some enveloped viruses, but are ineffective against
endospores.
• The effectiveness of a disinfectant is influenced by several factors, including length of exposure, concentration
of disinfectant, temperature, and pH.
• Historically, the effectiveness of a chemical disinfectant was compared with that of phenol at killing
Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, and a phenol coefficient was calculated.
• The disk-diffusion method is used to test the effectiveness of a chemical disinfectant against a particular
microbe.
• The use-dilution test determines the effectiveness of a disinfectant on a surface. In-use tests can determine
whether disinfectant solutions are being used correctly in clinical settings.

Review Questions

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

597

1. Which of the following types of medical items
requires sterilization?
a. needles
b. bed linens
c. respiratory masks
d. blood pressure cuffs

8. Which of the following microbial control methods
does not actually kill microbes or inhibit their growth
but instead removes them physically from samples?
a. filtration
b. desiccation
c. lyophilization
d. nonionizing radiation

2. Which of the following is suitable for use on tissues
for microbial control to prevent infection?
a. disinfectant
b. antiseptic
c. sterilant
d. water

9. Which of the following refers to a disinfecting
chemical dissolved in alcohol?
a. iodophor
b. tincture
c. phenolic
d. peroxygen

3. Which biosafety level is appropriate for research
with microbes or infectious agents that pose moderate
risk to laboratory workers and the community, and are
typically indigenous?
a. BSL-1
b. BSL-2
c. BSL-3
d. BSL-4

10. Which of the following peroxygens is widely used
as a household disinfectant, is inexpensive, and breaks
down into water and oxygen gas?
a. hydrogen peroxide
b. peracetic acid
c. benzoyl peroxide
d. ozone

Multiple Choice

4. Which of the following best describes a microbial
control protocol that inhibits the growth of molds and
yeast?
a. bacteriostatic
b. fungicidal
c. bactericidal
d. fungistatic
5. The decimal reduction time refers to the amount of
time it takes to which of the following?
a. reduce a microbial population by 10%
b. reduce a microbial population by 0.1%
c. reduce a microbial population by 90%
d. completely eliminate a microbial population
6. Which of the following methods brings about cell
lysis due to cavitation induced by rapid localized
pressure changes?
a. microwaving
b. gamma irradiation
c. ultraviolet radiation
d. sonication
7. Which of the following terms is used to describe the
time required to kill all of the microbes within a sample
at a given temperature?
a. D-value
b. thermal death point
c. thermal death time
d. decimal reduction time

11. Which of the following chemical food preservatives
is used in the wine industry but may cause asthmatic
reactions in some individuals?
a. nitrites
b. sulfites
c. propionic acid
d. benzoic acid
12. Bleach is an example of which group of chemicals
used for disinfection?
a. heavy metals
b. halogens
c. quats
d. bisbiguanides
13. Which chemical disinfectant works by methylating
enzymes and nucleic acids and is known for being toxic
and carcinogenic?
a. sorbic acid
b. triclosan
c. formaldehyde
d. hexaclorophene
14. Which type of test is used to determine whether
disinfectant solutions actively used in a clinical setting
are being used correctly?
a. disk-diffusion assay
b. phenol coefficient test
c. in-use test
d. use-dilution test

598

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

15. The effectiveness of chemical disinfectants has
historically been compared to that of which of the
following?
a. phenol
b. ethyl alcohol
c. bleach
d. formaldehyde
16. Which of the following refers to a germicide that
can kill vegetative cells and certain enveloped viruses
but not endospores?
a. high-level germicide
b. intermediate-level germicide
c. low-level germicide
d. sterilant
True/False

17. Sanitization leaves an object free of microbes.
18. Ionizing radiation can penetrate surfaces, but nonionizing radiation cannot.
19. Moist-heat sterilization protocols require the use of higher temperatures for longer periods of time than do dryheat sterilization protocols do.
20. Soaps are classified as disinfectants.
21. Mercury-based compounds have fallen out of favor for use as preservatives and antiseptics.
Fill in the Blank

22. A medical item that comes into contact with intact skin and does not penetrate sterile tissues or come into contact
with mucous membranes is called a(n) ________ item.
23. The goal of ________ ________ protocols is to rid canned produce of Clostridium botulinum endospores.
24. In an autoclave, the application of pressure to ________ is increased to allow the steam to achieve temperatures
above the boiling point of water.
25. Doorknobs and other surfaces in clinical settings are often coated with ________, ________, or ________ to
prevent the transmission of microbes.
26. If a chemical disinfectant is more effective than phenol, then its phenol coefficient would be ________ than 1.0.
27. If used for extended periods of time, ________ germicides may lead to sterility.
28. In the disk-diffusion assay, a large zone of inhibition around a disk to which a chemical disinfectant has been
applied indicates ________ of the test microbe to the chemical disinfectant.
Short Answer

29. What are some characteristics of microbes and infectious agents that would require handling in a BSL-3
laboratory?
30. What is the purpose of degerming? Does it completely eliminate microbes?
31. What are some factors that alter the effectiveness of a disinfectant?
32. What is the advantage of HTST pasteurization compared with sterilization? What is an advantage of UHT
treatment?
33. How does the addition of salt or sugar help preserve food?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

599

34. Which is more effective at killing microbes: autoclaving or freezing? Explain.
35. Which solution of ethyl alcohol is more effective at inhibiting microbial growth: a 70% solution or a 100%
solution? Why?
36. When might a gas treatment be used to control microbial growth instead of autoclaving? What are some
examples?
37. What is the advantage of using an iodophor rather than iodine or an iodine tincture?
38. Why were chemical disinfectants once commonly compared with phenol?
39. Why is length of exposure to a chemical disinfectant important for its activity?
Critical Thinking

40. When plotting microbial death curves, how might they look different for bactericidal versus bacteriostatic
treatments?
41. What are the benefits of cleaning something to a level of cleanliness beyond what is required? What are some
possible disadvantages of doing so?
42. In 2001, endospores of Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax, were sent to government officials and
news agencies via the mail. In response, the US Postal Service began to irradiate mail with UV light. Was this an
effective strategy? Why or why not?
43. Looking at Figure 13.29 and reviewing the functional groups in Figure 7.6, which alkylating agent shown
lacks an aldehyde group?
44. Do you think naturally produced antimicrobial products like nisin and natamycin should replace sorbic acid for
food preservation? Why or why not?
45. Why is the use of skin disinfecting compounds required for surgical scrubbing and not for everyday
handwashing?
46. What are some advantages of use-dilution and in-use tests compared with the disk-diffusion assay?

600

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 13 | Control of Microbial Growth

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

601

Chapter 14

Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.1 First mass produced in the 1940s, penicillin was instrumental in saving millions of lives during World
War II and was considered a wonder drug.[1] Today, overprescription of antibiotics (especially for childhood illnesses)
has contributed to the evolution of drug-resistant pathogens. (credit left: modification of work by Chemical Heritage
Foundation; credit right: modification of work by U.S. Department of Defense)

Chapter Outline
14.1 History of Chemotherapy and Antimicrobial Discovery
14.2 Fundamentals of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
14.3 Mechanisms of Antibacterial Drugs
14.4 Mechanisms of Other Antimicrobial Drugs
14.5 Drug Resistance
14.6 Testing the Effectiveness of Antimicrobials
14.7 Current Strategies for Antimicrobial Discovery

Introduction
In nature, some microbes produce substances that inhibit or kill other microbes that might otherwise compete for the
same resources. Humans have successfully exploited these abilities, using microbes to mass-produce substances that
can be used as antimicrobial drugs. Since their discovery, antimicrobial drugs have saved countless lives, and they
remain an essential tool for treating and controlling infectious disease. But their widespread and often unnecessary
use has had an unintended side effect: the rise of multidrug-resistant microbial strains. In this chapter, we will discuss
how antimicrobial drugs work, why microbes develop resistance, and what health professionals can do to encourage
responsible use of antimicrobials.

1. “Treatment of War Wounds: A Historical Review.” Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 467 no. 8 (2009):2168–2191.

602

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

14.1 History of Chemotherapy and Antimicrobial
Discovery
Learning Objectives
• Compare and contrast natural, semisynthetic, and synthetic antimicrobial drugs
• Describe the chemotherapeutic approaches of ancient societies
• Describe the historically important individuals and events that led to the development of antimicrobial drugs

Most people associate the term chemotherapy with treatments for cancer. However, chemotherapy is actually a
broader term that refers to any use of chemicals or drugs to treat disease. Chemotherapy may involve drugs that target
cancerous cells or tissues, or it may involve antimicrobial drugs that target infectious microorganisms. Antimicrobial
drugs typically work by destroying or interfering with microbial structures and enzymes, either killing microbial cells
or inhibiting of their growth. But before we examine how these drugs work, we will briefly explore the history of
humans’ use of antimicrobials for the purpose of chemotherapy.

Use of Antimicrobials in Ancient Societies
Although the discovery of antimicrobials and their subsequent widespread use is commonly associated with modern
medicine, there is evidence that humans have been exposed to antimicrobial compounds for millennia. Chemical
analyses of the skeletal remains of people from Nubia[2] (now found in present-day Sudan) dating from between
350 and 550 AD have shown residue of the antimicrobial agent tetracycline in high enough quantities to suggest the
purposeful fermentation of tetracycline-producing Streptomyces during the beer-making process. The resulting beer,
which was thick and gruel-like, was used to treat a variety of ailments in both adults and children, including gum
disease and wounds. The antimicrobial properties of certain plants may also have been recognized by various cultures
around the world, including Indian and Chinese herbalists (Figure 14.2) who have long used plants for a wide
variety of medical purposes. Healers of many cultures understood the antimicrobial properties of fungi and their use

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Marisa, a 52-year-old woman, was suffering from severe abdominal pain, swollen lymph nodes, fatigue,
and a fever. She had just returned home from visiting extended family in her native country of Cambodia.
While abroad, she received medical care in neighboring Vietnam for a compressed spinal cord. She still had
discomfort when leaving Cambodia, but the pain increased as her trip home continued and her husband drove
her straight from the airport to the emergency room.
Her doctor considers whether Marisa could be suffering from appendicitis, a urinary tract infection (UTI), or
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). However, each of those conditions is typically preceded or accompanied by
additional symptoms. He considers the treatment she received in Vietnam for her compressed spinal cord, but
abdominal pain is not usually associated with spinal cord compression. He examines her health history further.

• What type of infection or other condition may be responsible?
• What type of lab tests might the doctor order?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

2. M.L. Nelson et al. “Brief Communication: Mass Spectroscopic Characterization of Tetracycline in the Skeletal Remains of an Ancient
Population from Sudanese Nubia 350–550 CE.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 143 no. 1 (2010):151–154.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

603

of moldy bread or other mold-containing products to treat wounds has been well documented for centuries.[3] Today,
while about 80% of the world’s population still relies on plant-derived medicines,[4] scientists are now discovering
the active compounds conferring the medicinal benefits contained in many of these traditionally used plants.

Figure 14.2 For millennia, Chinese herbalists have used many different species of plants for the treatment of a wide
variety of human ailments.

• Give examples of how antimicrobials were used in ancient societies.

The First Antimicrobial Drugs
Societies relied on traditional medicine for thousands of years; however, the first half of the 20th century brought
an era of strategic drug discovery. In the early 1900s, the German physician and scientist Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915)
set out to discover or synthesize chemical compounds capable of killing infectious microbes without harming
the patient. In 1909, after screening more than 600 arsenic-containing compounds, Ehrlich’s assistant Sahachiro
Hata (1873–1938) found one such “magic bullet.” Compound 606 targeted the bacterium Treponema pallidum, the
causative agent of syphilis. Compound 606 was found to successfully cure syphilis in rabbits and soon after was
marketed under the name Salvarsan as a remedy for the disease in humans (Figure 14.3). Ehrlich’s innovative
approach of systematically screening a wide variety of compounds remains a common strategy for the discovery of
new antimicrobial agents even today.

3. M. Wainwright. “Moulds in Ancient and More Recent Medicine.” Mycologist 3 no. 1 (1989):21–23.
4. S. Verma, S.P. Singh. “Current and Future Status of Herbal Medicines.” Veterinary World 1 no. 11 (2008):347–350.

604

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.3 Paul Ehrlich was influential in the discovery of Compound 606, an antimicrobial agent that proved to be
an effective treatment for syphilis.

A few decades later, German scientists Josef Klarer, Fritz Mietzsch, and Gerhard Domagk discovered the antibacterial
activity of a synthetic dye, prontosil, that could treat streptococcal and staphylococcal infections in mice. Domagk’s
own daughter was one of the first human recipients of the drug, which completely cured her of a severe streptococcal
infection that had resulted from a poke with an embroidery needle. Gerhard Domagk (1895–1964) was awarded
the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1939 for his work with prontosil and sulfanilamide, the active breakdown product
of prontosil in the body. Sulfanilamide, the first synthetic antimicrobial created, served as the foundation for the
chemical development of a family of sulfa drugs. A synthetic antimicrobial is a drug that is developed from a
chemical not found in nature. The success of the sulfa drugs led to the discovery and production of additional
important classes of synthetic antimicrobials, including the quinolines and oxazolidinones.
A few years before the discovery of prontosil, scientist Alexander Fleming (1881–1955) made his own accidental
discovery that turned out to be monumental. In 1928, Fleming returned from holiday and examined some old plates
of staphylococci in his research laboratory at St. Mary’s Hospital in London. He observed that contaminating mold
growth (subsequently identified as a strain of Penicillium notatum) inhibited staphylococcal growth on one plate.
Fleming, therefore, is credited with the discovery of penicillin, the first natural antibiotic, (Figure 14.4). Further
experimentation showed that penicillin from the mold was antibacterial against streptococci, meningococci, and
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the causative agent of diphtheria.
Fleming and his colleagues were credited with discovering and identifying penicillin, but its isolation and mass
production were accomplished by a team of researchers at Oxford University under the direction of Howard Florey
(1898–1968) and Ernst Chain (1906–1979) (Figure 14.4). In 1940, the research team purified penicillin and reported
its success as an antimicrobial agent against streptococcal infections in mice. Their subsequent work with human
subjects also showed penicillin to be very effective. Because of their important work, Fleming, Florey, and Chain
were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1945.
In the early 1940s, scientist Dorothy Hodgkin (1910–1994), who studied crystallography at Oxford University, used
X-rays to analyze the structure of a variety of natural products. In 1946, she determined the structure of penicillin,
for which she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964. Once the structure was understood, scientists could
modify it to produce a variety of semisynthetic penicillins. A semisynthetic antimicrobial is a chemically modified

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

605

derivative of a natural antibiotic. The chemical modifications are generally designed to increase the range of bacteria
targeted, increase stability, decrease toxicity, or confer other properties beneficial for treating infections.
Penicillin is only one example of a natural antibiotic. Also in the 1940s, Selman Waksman (1888–1973) (Figure
14.5), a prominent soil microbiologist at Rutgers University, led a research team that discovered several
antimicrobials, including actinomycin, streptomycin, and neomycin. The discoveries of these antimicrobials stemmed
from Waksman’s study of fungi and the Actinobacteria, including soil bacteria in the genus Streptomyces, known for
their natural production of a wide variety of antimicrobials. His work earned him the Nobel Prize in Physiology and
Medicine in 1952. The actinomycetes are the source of more than half of all natural antibiotics[5] and continue to serve
as an excellent reservoir for the discovery of novel antimicrobial agents. Some researchers argue that we have not yet
come close to tapping the full antimicrobial potential of this group.[6]

Figure 14.4 (a) Alexander Fleming was the first to discover a naturally produced antimicrobial, penicillin, in 1928. (b)
Howard Florey and Ernst Chain discovered how to scale up penicillin production. Then they figured out how to purify
it and showed its efficacy as an antimicrobial in animal and human trials in the early 1940s.

5. J. Berdy. “Bioactive Microbial Metabolites.” The Journal of Antibiotics 58 no. 1 (2005):1–26.
6. M. Baltz. “Antimicrobials from Actinomycetes: Back to the Future.” Microbe 2 no. 3 (2007):125–131.

606

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.5 Selman Waksman was the first to show the vast antimicrobial production capabilities of a group of soil
bacteria, the actinomycetes.

• Why is the soil a reservoir for antimicrobial resistance genes?

14.2 Fundamentals of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
Learning Objectives
• Contrast bacteriostatic versus bactericidal antibacterial activities
• Contrast broad-spectrum drugs versus narrow-spectrum drugs
• Explain the significance of superinfections
• Discuss the significance of dosage and the route of administration of a drug
• Identify factors and variables that can influence the side effects of a drug
• Describe the significance of positive and negative interactions between drugs

Several factors are important in choosing the most appropriate antimicrobial drug therapy, including bacteriostatic
versus bactericidal mechanisms, spectrum of activity, dosage and route of administration, the potential for side
effects, and the potential interactions between drugs. The following discussion will focus primarily on antibacterial
drugs, but the concepts translate to other antimicrobial classes.

Bacteriostatic Versus Bactericidal
Antibacterial drugs can be either bacteriostatic or bactericidal in their interactions with target bacteria. Bacteriostatic
drugs cause a reversible inhibition of growth, with bacterial growth restarting after elimination of the drug. By
contrast, bactericidal drugs kill their target bacteria. The decision of whether to use a bacteriostatic or bactericidal

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

607

drugs depends on the type of infection and the immune status of the patient. In a patient with strong immune
defenses, bacteriostatic and bactericidal drugs can be effective in achieving clinical cure. However, when a patient
is immunocompromised, a bactericidal drug is essential for the successful treatment of infections. Regardless of the
immune status of the patient, life-threatening infections such as acute endocarditis require the use of a bactericidal
drug.

Spectrum of Activity
The spectrum of activity of an antibacterial drug relates to diversity of targeted bacteria. A narrow-spectrum
antimicrobial targets only specific subsets of bacterial pathogens. For example, some narrow-spectrum drugs only
target gram-positive bacteria, whereas others target only gram-negative bacteria. If the pathogen causing an infection
has been identified, it is best to use a narrow-spectrum antimicrobial and minimize collateral damage to the normal
microbiota. A broad-spectrum antimicrobial targets a wide variety of bacterial pathogens, including both grampositive and gram-negative species, and is frequently used as empiric therapy to cover a wide range of potential
pathogens while waiting on the laboratory identification of the infecting pathogen. Broad-spectrum antimicrobials are
also used for polymicrobic infections (mixed infection with multiple bacterial species), or as prophylactic prevention
of infections with surgery/invasive procedures. Finally, broad-spectrum antimicrobials may be selected to treat an
infection when a narrow-spectrum drug fails because of development of drug resistance by the target pathogen.
The risk associated with using broad-spectrum antimicrobials is that they will also target a broad spectrum of the
normal microbiota, increasing the risk of a superinfection, a secondary infection in a patient having a preexisting
infection. A superinfection develops when the antibacterial intended for the preexisting infection kills the protective
microbiota, allowing another pathogen resistant to the antibacterial to proliferate and cause a secondary infection
(Figure 14.6). Common examples of superinfections that develop as a result of antimicrobial usage include yeast
infections (candidiasis) and pseudomembranous colitis caused by Clostridium difficile, which can be fatal.

Figure 14.6 Broad-spectrum antimicrobial use may lead to the development of a superinfection. (credit: modification
of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What is a superinfection and how does one arise?

Dosage and Route of Administration
The amount of medication given during a certain time interval is the dosage, and it must be determined carefully to
ensure that optimum therapeutic drug levels are achieved at the site of infection without causing significant toxicity
(side effects) to the patient. Each drug class is associated with a variety of potential side effects, and some of these
are described for specific drugs later in this chapter. Despite best efforts to optimize dosing, allergic reactions and
other potentially serious side effects do occur. Therefore, the goal is to select the optimum dosage that will minimize

608

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

the risk of side effects while still achieving clinical cure, and there are important factors to consider when selecting
the best dose and dosage interval. For example, in children, dose is based upon the patient’s mass. However, the
same is not true for adults and children 12 years of age and older, for which there is typically a single standard dose
regardless of the patient’s mass. With the great variability in adult body mass, some experts have argued that mass
should be considered for all patients when determining appropriate dosage.[7] An additional consideration is how
drugs are metabolized and eliminated from the body. In general, patients with a history of liver or kidney dysfunction
may experience reduced drug metabolism or clearance from the body, resulting in increased drug levels that may lead
to toxicity and make them more prone to side effects.
There are also some factors specific to the drugs themselves that influence appropriate dose and time interval between
doses. For example, the half-life, or rate at which 50% of a drug is eliminated from the plasma, can vary significantly
between drugs. Some drugs have a short half-life of only 1 hour and must be given multiple times a day, whereas other
drugs have half-lives exceeding 12 hours and can be given as a single dose every 24 hours. Although a longer half-life
can be considered an advantage for an antibacterial when it comes to convenient dosing intervals, the longer half-life
can also be a concern for a drug that has serious side effects because drug levels may remain toxic for a longer time.
Last, some drugs are dose dependent, meaning they are more effective when administered in large doses to provide
high levels for a short time at the site of infection. Others are time dependent, meaning they are more effective when
lower optimum levels are maintained over a longer period of time.
The route of administration, the method used to introduce a drug into the body, is also an important consideration for
drug therapy. Drugs that can be administered orally are generally preferred because patients can more conveniently
take these drugs at home. However, some drugs are not absorbed easily from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract into the
bloodstream. These drugs are often useful for treating diseases of the intestinal tract, such as tapeworms treated
with niclosamide, or for decontaminating the bowel, as with colistin. Some drugs that are not absorbed easily, such
as bacitracin, polymyxin, and several antifungals, are available as topical preparations for treatment of superficial
skin infections. Sometimes, patients may not initially be able to take oral medications because of their illness (e.g.,
vomiting, intubation for respirator). When this occurs, and when a chosen drug is not absorbed in the GI tract,
administration of the drug by a parenteral route (intravenous or intramuscular injection) is preferred and typically
is performed in health-care settings. For most drugs, the plasma levels achieved by intravenous administration is
substantially higher than levels achieved by oral or intramuscular administration, and this can also be an important
consideration when choosing the route of administration for treating an infection (Figure 14.7).

7. M.E. Falagas, D.E. Karageorgopoulos. “Adjustment of Dosing of Antimicrobial Agents for Bodyweight in Adults.” The Lancet 375 no.
9710 (2010):248–251.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

609

Figure 14.7 On this graph, t0 represents the time at which a drug dose is administered. The curves illustrate how
plasma concentration of the drug changes over specific intervals of time (t1 through t4). As the graph shows, when a
drug is administered intravenously, the concentration peaks very quickly and then gradually decreases. When drugs
are administered orally or intramuscularly, it takes longer for the concentration to reach its peak.

• List five factors to consider when determining the dosage of a drug.
• Name some typical side effects associated with drugs and identify some factors that might contribute to these
side effects.

Drug Interactions
For the optimum treatment of some infections, two antibacterial drugs may be administered together to provide
a synergistic interaction that is better than the efficacy of either drug alone. A classic example of synergistic
combinations is trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim). Individually, these two drugs provide only
bacteriostatic inhibition of bacterial growth, but combined, the drugs are bactericidal.
Whereas synergistic drug interactions provide a benefit to the patient, antagonistic interactions produce harmful
effects. Antagonism can occur between two antimicrobials or between antimicrobials and nonantimicrobials being
used to treat other conditions. The effects vary depending on the drugs involved, but antagonistic interactions may
cause loss of drug activity, decreased therapeutic levels due to increased metabolism and elimination, or increased
potential for toxicity due to decreased metabolism and elimination. As an example, some antibacterials are absorbed
most effectively from the acidic environment of the stomach. If a patient takes antacids, however, this increases the
pH of the stomach and negatively impacts the absorption of these antimicrobials, decreasing their effectiveness in
treating an infection. Studies have also shown an association between use of some antimicrobials and failure of oral
contraceptives.[8]

8. B.D. Dickinson et al. “Drug Interactions between Oral Contraceptives and Antibiotics.” Obstetrics & Gynecology 98, no. 5
(2001):853–860.

610

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

• Explain the difference between synergistic and antagonistic drug interactions.

Eye on Ethics

Resistance Police
In the United States and many other countries, most antimicrobial drugs are self-administered by patients at
home. Unfortunately, many patients stop taking antimicrobials once their symptoms dissipate and they feel
better. If a 10-day course of treatment is prescribed, many patients only take the drug for 5 or 6 days, unaware
of the negative consequences of not completing the full course of treatment. A shorter course of treatment not
only fails to kill the target organisms to expected levels, it also selects for drug-resistant variants within the
target population and within the patient’s microbiota.
Patients’ nonadherence especially amplifies drug resistance when the recommended course of treatment is
long. Treatment for tuberculosis (TB) is a case in point, with the recommended treatment lasting from 6 months
to a year. The CDC estimates that about one-third of the world’s population is infected with TB, most living
in underdeveloped or underserved regions where antimicrobial drugs are available over the counter. In such
countries, there may be even lower rates of adherence than in developed areas. Nonadherence leads to
antibiotic resistance and more difficulty in controlling pathogens. As a direct result, the emergence of multidrugresistant and extensively drug-resistant strains of TB is becoming a huge problem.
Overprescription of antimicrobials also contributes to antibiotic resistance. Patients often demand antibiotics for
diseases that do not require them, like viral colds and ear infections. Pharmaceutical companies aggressively
market drugs to physicians and clinics, making it easy for them to give free samples to patients, and some
pharmacies even offer certain antibiotics free to low-income patients with a prescription.
In recent years, various initiatives have aimed to educate parents and clinicians about the judicious use
of antibiotics. However, a recent study showed that, between 2000 and 2013, the parental expectation for
antimicrobial prescriptions for children actually increased (Figure 14.8).
One possible solution is a regimen called directly observed therapy (DOT), which involves the supervised
administration of medications to patients. Patients are either required to visit a health-care facility to receive
their medications, or health-care providers must administer medication in patients’ homes or another
designated location. DOT has been implemented in many cases for the treatment of TB and has been shown
to be effective; indeed, DOT is an integral part of WHO’s global strategy for eradicating TB.[9],[10] But is
this a practical strategy for all antibiotics? Would patients taking penicillin, for example, be more or less
likely to adhere to the full course of treatment if they had to travel to a health-care facility for each dose?
And who would pay for the increased cost associated with DOT? When it comes to overprescription, should
someone be policing physicians or drug companies to enforce best practices? What group should assume this
responsibility, and what penalties would be effective in discouraging overprescription?

9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Tuberculosis (TB).” http://www.cdc.gov/tb/education/ssmodules/module9/ss9reading2.htm.
Accessed June 2, 2016.
10. World Health Organization. “Tuberculosis (TB): The Five Elements of DOTS.” http://www.who.int/tb/dots/whatisdots/en/. Accessed
June 2, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

611

Figure 14.8 This graph indicates trends in parental expectations related to prescription of antibiotics based
on a recent study.[11] Among parents of Medicaid-insured children, there was a clear upward trend in parental
expectations for prescription antibiotics. Expectations were relatively stable (and lesser) among parents
whose children were commercially insured, suggesting that these parents were somewhat better informed
than those with Medicaid-insured children.

14.3 Mechanisms of Antibacterial Drugs
Learning Objective
• Describe the mechanisms of action associated with drugs that inhibit cell wall biosynthesis, protein synthesis,

membrane function, nucleic acid synthesis, and metabolic pathways
An important quality for an antimicrobial drug is selective toxicity, meaning that it selectively kills or inhibits the
growth of microbial targets while causing minimal or no harm to the host. Most antimicrobial drugs currently in
clinical use are antibacterial because the prokaryotic cell provides a greater variety of unique targets for selective
toxicity, in comparison to fungi, parasites, and viruses. Each class of antibacterial drugs has a unique mode of action
(the way in which a drug affects microbes at the cellular level), and these are summarized in Figure 14.9 and Table
14.1.

11. Vaz, L.E., et al. “Prevalence of Parental Misconceptions About Antibiotic Use.” Pediatrics 136 no.2 (August 2015). DOI: 10.1542/
peds.2015-0883.

612

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.9 There are several classes of antibacterial compounds that are typically classified based on their
bacterial target.

Common Antibacterial Drugs by Mode of Action
Mode of Action
Inhibit cell wall biosynthesis

Target

Drug Class

Penicillin-binding proteins

β-lactams: penicillins, cephalosporins,
monobactams, carbapenems

Peptidoglycan subunits

Glycopeptides

Peptidoglycan subunit
transport

Bacitracin

30S ribosomal subunit

Aminoglycosides, tetracyclines

50S ribosomal subunit

Macrolides, lincosamides,
chloramphenicol, oxazolidinones

Lipopolysaccharide, inner
and outer membranes

Polymyxin B, colistin, daptomycin

RNA

Rifamycin

DNA

Fluoroquinolones

Folic acid synthesis enzyme

Sulfonamides, trimethoprim

Antimetabolites

Mycolic acid synthesis
enzyme

Isonicotinic acid hydrazide

Mycobacterial adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) synthase inhibitor

Mycobacterial ATP
synthase

Diarylquinoline

Inhibit biosynthesis of proteins

Disrupt membranes

Inhibit nucleic acid synthesis

Table 14.1

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

613

Inhibitors of Cell Wall Biosynthesis
Several different classes of antibacterials block steps in the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan, making cells more
susceptible to osmotic lysis (Table 14.2). Therefore, antibacterials that target cell wall biosynthesis are bactericidal
in their action. Because human cells do not make peptidoglycan, this mode of action is an excellent example of
selective toxicity.
Penicillin, the first antibiotic discovered, is one of several antibacterials within a class called β-lactams. This group
of compounds includes the penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, and carbapenems, and is characterized by
the presence of a β-lactam ring found within the central structure of the drug molecule (Figure 14.10). The βlactam antibacterials block the crosslinking of peptide chains during the biosynthesis of new peptidoglycan in the
bacterial cell wall. They are able to block this process because the β-lactam structure is similar to the structure of
the peptidoglycan subunit component that is recognized by the crosslinking transpeptidase enzyme, also known as a
penicillin-binding protein (PBP). Although the β-lactam ring must remain unchanged for these drugs to retain their
antibacterial activity, strategic chemical changes to the R groups have allowed for development of a wide variety of
semisynthetic β-lactam drugs with increased potency, expanded spectrum of activity, and longer half-lives for better
dosing, among other characteristics.
Penicillin G and penicillin V are natural antibiotics from fungi and are primarily active against gram-positive bacterial
pathogens, and a few gram-negative bacterial pathogens such as Pasteurella multocida. Figure 14.10 summarizes
the semisynthetic development of some of the penicillins. Adding an amino group (-NH2) to penicillin G created
the aminopenicillins (i.e., ampicillin and amoxicillin) that have increased spectrum of activity against more gramnegative pathogens. Furthermore, the addition of a hydroxyl group (-OH) to amoxicillin increased acid stability,
which allows for improved oral absorption. Methicillin is a semisynthetic penicillin that was developed to address the
spread of enzymes (penicillinases) that were inactivating the other penicillins. Changing the R group of penicillin G
to the more bulky dimethoxyphenyl group provided protection of the β-lactam ring from enzymatic destruction by
penicillinases, giving us the first penicillinase-resistant penicillin.
Similar to the penicillins, cephalosporins contain a β-lactam ring (Figure 14.10) and block the transpeptidase
activity of penicillin-binding proteins. However, the β-lactam ring of cephalosporins is fused to a six-member ring,
rather than the five-member ring found in penicillins. This chemical difference provides cephalosporins with an
increased resistance to enzymatic inactivation by β-lactamases. The drug cephalosporin C was originally isolated
from the fungus Cephalosporium acremonium in the 1950s and has a similar spectrum of activity to that of penicillin
against gram-positive bacteria but is active against more gram-negative bacteria than penicillin. Another important
structural difference is that cephalosporin C possesses two R groups, compared with just one R group for penicillin,
and this provides for greater diversity in chemical alterations and development of semisynthetic cephalosporins. The
family of semisynthetic cephalosporins is much larger than the penicillins, and these drugs have been classified
into generations based primarily on their spectrum of activity, increasing in spectrum from the narrow-spectrum,
first-generation cephalosporins to the broad-spectrum, fourth-generation cephalosporins. A new fifth-generation
cephalosporin has been developed that is active against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
The carbapenems and monobactams also have a β-lactam ring as part of their core structure, and they inhibit the
transpeptidase activity of penicillin-binding proteins. The only monobactam used clinically is aztreonam. It is a
narrow-spectrum antibacterial with activity only against gram-negative bacteria. In contrast, the carbapenem family
includes a variety of semisynthetic drugs (imipenem, meropenem, and doripenem) that provide very broad-spectrum
activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial pathogens.
The drug vancomycin, a member of a class of compounds called the glycopeptides, was discovered in the 1950s
as a natural antibiotic from the actinomycete Amycolatopsis orientalis. Similar to the β-lactams, vancomycin inhibits
cell wall biosynthesis and is bactericidal. However, in contrast to the β-lactams, the structure of vancomycin is
not similar to that of cell-wall peptidoglycan subunits and does not directly inactivate penicillin-binding proteins.
Rather, vancomycin is a very large, complex molecule that binds to the end of the peptide chain of cell wall
precursors, creating a structural blockage that prevents the cell wall subunits from being incorporated into the
growing N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM-NAG) backbone of the peptidoglycan structure
(transglycosylation). Vancomycin also structurally blocks transpeptidation. Vancomycin is bactericidal against gram-

614

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

positive bacterial pathogens, but it is not active against gram-negative bacteria because of its inability to penetrate the
protective outer membrane.
The drug bacitracin consists of a group of structurally similar peptide antibiotics originally isolated from Bacillus
subtilis. Bacitracin blocks the activity of a specific cell-membrane molecule that is responsible for the movement of
peptidoglycan precursors from the cytoplasm to the exterior of the cell, ultimately preventing their incorporation into
the cell wall. Bacitracin is effective against a wide range of bacteria, including gram-positive organisms found on
the skin, such as Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. Although it may be administered orally or intramuscularly in
some circumstances, bacitracin has been shown to be nephrotoxic (damaging to the kidneys). Therefore, it is more
commonly combined with neomycin and polymyxin in topical ointments such as Neosporin.

Figure 14.10 Penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, and carbapenems all contain a β-lactam ring, the site of
attack by inactivating β-lactamase enzymes. Although they all share the same nucleus, various penicillins differ from
each other in the structure of their R groups. Chemical changes to the R groups provided increased spectrum of
activity, acid stability, and resistance to β-lactamase degradation.

Drugs that Inhibit Bacterial Cell Wall Synthesis
Mechanism of Action
Interact directly with
PBPs and inhibit
transpeptidase activity

Drug Class
Penicillins

Specific
Drugs
Penicillin G,
penicillin V

Table 14.2

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Natural or
Semisynthetic
Natural

Spectrum of Activity
Narrow-spectrum against
gram-positive and a few
gram-negative bacteria

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

615

Drugs that Inhibit Bacterial Cell Wall Synthesis
Mechanism of Action

Drug Class

Natural or
Semisynthetic

Spectrum of Activity

Ampicillin,
amoxicillin

Semisynthetic

Narrow-spectrum against
gram-positive bacteria but
with increased gramnegative spectrum

Methicillin

Semisynthetic

Narrow-spectrum against
gram-positive bacteria
only, including strains
producing penicillinase

Cephalosporin
C

Natural

Narrow-spectrum similar
to penicillin but with
increased gram-negative
spectrum

Firstgeneration
cephalosporins

Semisynthetic

Narrow-spectrum similar
to cephalosporin C

Secondgeneration
cephalosporins

Semisynthetic

Narrow-spectrum but with
increased gram-negative
spectrum compared with
first generation

Third- and
fourthgeneration
cephalosporins

Semisynthetic

Broad-spectrum against
gram-positive and gramnegative bacteria,
including some βlactamase producers

Fifthgeneration
cephalosporins

Semisynthetic

Broad-spectrum against
gram-positive and gramnegative bacteria,
including MRSA

Monobactams

Aztreonam

Semisynthetic

Narrow-spectrum against
gram-negative bacteria,
including some βlactamase producers

Carbapenems

Imipenem,
meropenem,
doripenem

Semisynthetic

Broadest spectrum of the
β-lactams against grampositive and gramnegative bacteria,
including many βlactamase producers

Glycopeptides

Vancomycin

Natural

Narrow spectrum against
gram-positive bacteria
only, including multidrugresistant strains

Cephalosporins

Large molecules that
bind to the peptide chain
of peptidoglycan
subunits, blocking
transglycosylation and
transpeptidation

Table 14.2

Specific
Drugs

616

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Drugs that Inhibit Bacterial Cell Wall Synthesis
Mechanism of Action
Block transport of
peptidoglycan subunits
across cytoplasmic
membrane

Drug Class
Bacitracin

Specific
Drugs
Bacitracin

Natural or
Semisynthetic
Natural

Spectrum of Activity
Broad-spectrum against
gram-positive and gramnegative bacteria

Table 14.2

• Describe the mode of action of β-lactams.

Inhibitors of Protein Biosynthesis
The cytoplasmic ribosomes found in animal cells (80S) are structurally distinct from those found in bacterial
cells (70S), making protein biosynthesis a good selective target for antibacterial drugs. Several types of protein
biosynthesis inhibitors are discussed in this section and are summarized in Figure 14.11.

Protein Synthesis Inhibitors That Bind the 30S Subunit
Aminoglycosides are large, highly polar antibacterial drugs that bind to the 30S subunit of bacterial ribosomes,
impairing the proofreading ability of the ribosomal complex. This impairment causes mismatches between codons
and anticodons, resulting in the production of proteins with incorrect amino acids and shortened proteins that insert
into the cytoplasmic membrane. Disruption of the cytoplasmic membrane by the faulty proteins kills the bacterial
cells. The aminoglycosides, which include drugs such as streptomycin, gentamicin, neomycin, and kanamycin, are
potent broad-spectrum antibacterials. However, aminoglycosides have been shown to be nephrotoxic (damaging to
kidney), neurotoxic (damaging to the nervous system), and ototoxic (damaging to the ear).
Another class of antibacterial compounds that bind to the 30S subunit is the tetracyclines. In contrast to
aminoglycosides, these drugs are bacteriostatic and inhibit protein synthesis by blocking the association of tRNAs
with the ribosome during translation. Naturally occurring tetracyclines produced by various strains of Streptomyces
were first discovered in the 1940s, and several semisynthetic tetracyclines, including doxycycline and tigecycline
have also been produced. Although the tetracyclines are broad spectrum in their coverage of bacterial pathogens, side
effects that can limit their use include phototoxicity, permanent discoloration of developing teeth, and liver toxicity
with high doses or in patients with kidney impairment.

Protein Synthesis Inhibitors That Bind the 50S Subunit
There are several classes of antibacterial drugs that work through binding to the 50S subunit of bacterial ribosomes.
The macrolide antibacterial drugs have a large, complex ring structure and are part of a larger class of naturally
produced secondary metabolites called polyketides, complex compounds produced in a stepwise fashion through
the repeated addition of two-carbon units by a mechanism similar to that used for fatty acid synthesis. Macrolides
are broad-spectrum, bacteriostatic drugs that block elongation of proteins by inhibiting peptide bond formation
between specific combinations of amino acids. The first macrolide was erythromycin. It was isolated in 1952 from
Streptomyces erythreus and prevents translocation. Semisynthetic macrolides include azithromycin and telithromycin.
Compared with erythromycin, azithromycin has a broader spectrum of activity, fewer side effects, and a significantly
longer half-life (1.5 hours for erythromycin versus 68 hours for azithromycin) that allows for once-daily dosing and
a short 3-day course of therapy (i.e., Zpac formulation) for most infections. Telithromycin is the first semisynthetic

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

617

within the class known as ketolides. Although telithromycin shows increased potency and activity against macrolideresistant pathogens, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has limited its use to treatment of communityacquired pneumonia and requires the strongest “black box warning” label for the drug because of serious
hepatotoxicity.
The lincosamides include the naturally produced lincomycin and semisynthetic clindamycin. Although structurally
distinct from macrolides, lincosamides are similar in their mode of action to the macrolides through binding to the 50S
ribosomal subunit and preventing peptide bond formation. Lincosamides are particularly active against streptococcal
and staphylococcal infections.
The drug chloramphenicol represents yet another structurally distinct class of antibacterials that also bind to
the 50S ribosome, inhibiting peptide bond formation. Chloramphenicol, produced by Streptomyces venezuelae,
was discovered in 1947; in 1949, it became the first broad-spectrum antibiotic that was approved by the FDA.
Although it is a natural antibiotic, it is also easily synthesized and was the first antibacterial drug synthetically
mass produced. As a result of its mass production, broad-spectrum coverage, and ability to penetrate into tissues
efficiently, chloramphenicol was historically used to treat a wide range of infections, from meningitis to typhoid
fever to conjunctivitis. Unfortunately, serious side effects, such as lethal gray baby syndrome, and suppression
of bone marrow production, have limited its clinical role. Chloramphenicol also causes anemia in two different
ways. One mechanism involves the targeting of mitochondrial ribosomes within hematopoietic stem cells, causing a
reversible, dose-dependent suppression of blood cell production. Once chloramphenicol dosing is discontinued, blood
cell production returns to normal. This mechanism highlights the similarity between 70S ribosomes of bacteria and
the 70S ribosomes within our mitochondria. The second mechanism of anemia is idiosyncratic (i.e., the mechanism
is not understood), and involves an irreversible lethal loss of blood cell production known as aplastic anemia. This
mechanism of aplastic anemia is not dose dependent and can develop after therapy has stopped. Because of toxicity
concerns, chloramphenicol usage in humans is now rare in the United States and is limited to severe infections unable
to be treated by less toxic antibiotics. Because its side effects are much less severe in animals, it is used in veterinary
medicine.
The oxazolidinones, including linezolid, are a new broad-spectrum class of synthetic protein synthesis inhibitors
that bind to the 50S ribosomal subunit of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. However, their mechanism
of action seems somewhat different from that of the other 50S subunit-binding protein synthesis inhibitors already
discussed. Instead, they seem to interfere with formation of the initiation complex (association of the 50S subunit, 30S
subunit, and other factors) for translation, and they prevent translocation of the growing protein from the ribosomal
A site to the P site. Table 14.3 summarizes the protein synthesis inhibitors.

618

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.11 The major classes of protein synthesis inhibitors target the 30S or 50S subunits of cytoplasmic
ribosomes.

Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Protein Synthesis
Molecular
Target

Mechanism of Action

Drug Class

30S
subunit

Causes mismatches
between codons and
anticodons, leading to
faulty proteins that
insert into and disrupt
cytoplasmic membrane

50S
subunit

Specific Drugs

Bacteriostatic
or
Bactericidal

Spectrum
of
Activity

Aminoglycosides

Streptomycin,
gentamicin,
neomycin,
kanamycin

Bactericidal

Broad
spectrum

Blocks association of
tRNAs with ribosome

Tetracyclines

Tetracycline,
doxycycline,
tigecycline

Bacteriostatic

Broad
spectrum

Blocks peptide bond
formation between
amino acids

Macrolides

Erythromycin,
azithromycin,
telithromycin

Bacteriostatic

Broad
spectrum

Lincosamides

Lincomycin,
clindamycin

Bacteriostatic

Narrow
spectrum

Not applicable

Chloramphenicol

Bacteriostatic

Broad
spectrum

Oxazolidinones

Linezolid

Bacteriostatic

Broad
spectrum

Interferes with the
formation of the
initiation complex
between 50S and 30S
subunits and other
factors.

Table 14.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

619

• Compare and contrast the different types of protein synthesis inhibitors.

Inhibitors of Membrane Function
A small group of antibacterials target the bacterial membrane as their mode of action (Table 14.4). The polymyxins
are natural polypeptide antibiotics that were first discovered in 1947 as products of Bacillus polymyxa; only
polymyxin B and polymyxin E (colistin) have been used clinically. They are lipophilic with detergent-like properties
and interact with the lipopolysaccharide component of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, ultimately
disrupting both their outer and inner membranes and killing the bacterial cells. Unfortunately, the membrane-targeting
mechanism is not a selective toxicity, and these drugs also target and damage the membrane of cells in the kidney and
nervous system when administered systemically. Because of these serious side effects and their poor absorption from
the digestive tract, polymyxin B is used in over-the-counter topical antibiotic ointments (e.g., Neosporin), and oral
colistin was historically used only for bowel decontamination to prevent infections originating from bowel microbes
in immunocompromised patients or for those undergoing certain abdominal surgeries. However, the emergence and
spread of multidrug-resistant pathogens has led to increased use of intravenous colistin in hospitals, often as a drug of
last resort to treat serious infections. The antibacterial daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide produced by Streptomyces
roseosporus that seems to work like the polymyxins, inserting in the bacterial cell membrane and disrupting it.
However, in contrast to polymyxin B and colistin, which target only gram-negative bacteria, daptomycin specifically
targets gram-positive bacteria. It is typically administered intravenously and seems to be well tolerated, showing
reversible toxicity in skeletal muscles.
Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Membrane Function
Mechanism of Action

Drug
Class

Interacts with lipopolysaccharide
in the outer membrane of gramnegative bacteria, killing the cell
through the eventual disruption of
the outer membrane and
cytoplasmic membrane

Polymyxins

Table 14.4

Specific
Drugs

Spectrum of
Activity

Clinical Use

Polymyxin
B

Narrow
spectrum
against gramnegative
bacteria,
including
multidrugresistant
strains

Topical preparations to
prevent infections in
wounds

Polymyxin
E (colistin)

Narrow
spectrum
against gramnegative
bacteria,
including
multidrugresistant
strains

Oral dosing to
decontaminate bowels to
prevent infections in
immunocompromised
patients or patients
undergoing invasive
surgery/procedures.
Intravenous dosing to
treat serious systemic
infections caused by
multidrug-resistant
pathogens

620

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Membrane Function
Mechanism of Action
Inserts into the cytoplasmic
membrane of gram-positive
bacteria, disrupting the
membrane and killing the cell

Drug
Class

Specific
Drugs

Spectrum of
Activity

Lipopeptide

Daptomycin

Narrow
spectrum
against grampositive
bacteria,
including
multidrugresistant
strains

Clinical Use
Complicated skin and
skin-structure infections
and bacteremia caused
by gram-positive
pathogens, including
MRSA

Table 14.4

• How do polymyxins inhibit membrane function?

Inhibitors of Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Some antibacterial drugs work by inhibiting nucleic acid synthesis (Table 14.5). For example, metronidazole is a
semisynthetic member of the nitroimidazole family that is also an antiprotozoan. It interferes with DNA replication
in target cells. The drug rifampin is a semisynthetic member of the rifamycin family and functions by blocking
RNA polymerase activity in bacteria. The RNA polymerase enzymes in bacteria are structurally different from those
in eukaryotes, providing for selective toxicity against bacterial cells. It is used for the treatment of a variety of
infections, but its primary use, often in a cocktail with other antibacterial drugs, is against mycobacteria that cause
tuberculosis. Despite the selectivity of its mechanism, rifampin can induce liver enzymes to increase metabolism of
other drugs being administered (antagonism), leading to hepatotoxicity (liver toxicity) and negatively influencing the
bioavailability and therapeutic effect of the companion drugs.
One member of the quinolone family, a group of synthetic antimicrobials, is nalidixic acid. It was discovered in
1962 as a byproduct during the synthesis of chloroquine, an antimalarial drug. Nalidixic acid selectively inhibits
the activity of bacterial DNA gyrase, blocking DNA replication. Chemical modifications to the original quinolone
backbone have resulted in the production of fluoroquinolones, like ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin, which also inhibit
the activity of DNA gyrase. Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin are effective against a broad spectrum of gram-positive
or gram-negative bacteria, and are among the most commonly prescribed antibiotics used to treat a wide range
of infections, including urinary tract infections, respiratory infections, abdominal infections, and skin infections.
However, despite their selective toxicity against DNA gyrase, side effects associated with different fluoroquinolones
include phototoxicity, neurotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, glucose metabolism dysfunction, and increased risk for tendon
rupture.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

621

Drugs That Inhibit Bacterial Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Mechanisms of
Action

Drug Class

Specific
Drugs

Spectrum of activity

Clinical
Use

Inhibits bacterial
RNA polymerase
activity and
blocks
transcription,
killing the cell

Rifamycin

Rifampin

Narrow spectrum with activity
against gram-positive and limited
numbers of gram-negative bacteria.
Also active against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Combination
therapy for
treatment of
tuberculosis

Inhibits the
activity of DNA
gyrase and
blocks DNA
replication, killing
the cell

Fluoroquinolones

Ciprofloxacin,
ofloxacin,
moxifloxacin

Broad spectrum against grampositive and gram-negative bacteria

Wide variety
of skin and
systemic
infections

Table 14.5

• Why do inhibitors of bacterial nucleic acid synthesis not target host cells?

Inhibitors of Metabolic Pathways
Some synthetic drugs control bacterial infections by functioning as antimetabolites, competitive inhibitors for
bacterial metabolic enzymes (Table 14.6). The sulfonamides (sulfa drugs) are the oldest synthetic antibacterial
agents and are structural analogues of para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), an early intermediate in folic acid synthesis
(Figure 14.12). By inhibiting the enzyme involved in the production of dihydrofolic acid, sulfonamides block
bacterial biosynthesis of folic acid and, subsequently, pyrimidines and purines required for nucleic acid synthesis.
This mechanism of action provides bacteriostatic inhibition of growth against a wide spectrum of gram-positive
and gram-negative pathogens. Because humans obtain folic acid from food instead of synthesizing it intracellularly,
sulfonamides are selectively toxic for bacteria. However, allergic reactions to sulfa drugs are common. The sulfones
are structurally similar to sulfonamides but are not commonly used today except for the treatment of Hansen’s disease
(leprosy).
Trimethoprim is a synthetic antimicrobial compound that serves as an antimetabolite within the same folic acid
synthesis pathway as sulfonamides. However, trimethoprim is a structural analogue of dihydrofolic acid and inhibits
a later step in the metabolic pathway (Figure 14.12). Trimethoprim is used in combination with the sulfa drug
sulfamethoxazole to treat urinary tract infections, ear infections, and bronchitis. As discussed, the combination of
trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole is an example of antibacterial synergy. When used alone, each antimetabolite only
decreases production of folic acid to a level where bacteriostatic inhibition of growth occurs. However, when used in
combination, inhibition of both steps in the metabolic pathway decreases folic acid synthesis to a level that is lethal
to the bacterial cell. Because of the importance of folic acid during fetal development, sulfa drugs and trimethoprim
use should be carefully considered during early pregnancy.
The drug isoniazid is an antimetabolite with specific toxicity for mycobacteria and has long been used in combination
with rifampin or streptomycin in the treatment of tuberculosis. It is administered as a prodrug, requiring activation
through the action of an intracellular bacterial peroxidase enzyme, forming isoniazid-nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD) and isoniazid-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), ultimately preventing the
synthesis of mycolic acid, which is essential for mycobacterial cell walls. Possible side effects of isoniazid use include
hepatotoxicity, neurotoxicity, and hematologic toxicity (anemia).

622

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.12 Sulfonamides and trimethoprim are examples of antimetabolites that interfere in the bacterial synthesis
of folic acid by blocking purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, thus inhibiting bacterial growth.

Antimetabolite Drugs
Metabolic
Pathway
Target
Folic acid
synthesis

Mechanism of Action

Drug Class

Specific Drugs

Inhibits the enzyme
involved in production of
dihydrofolic acid

Sulfonamides

Sulfamethoxazole

Sulfones

Dapsone

Inhibits the enzyme
involved in the production
of tetrahydrofolic acid

Not
applicable

Trimethoprim

Table 14.6

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Spectrum of Activity

Broad spectrum against
gram-positive and gramnegative bacteria
Broad spectrum against
gram-positive and gramnegative bacteria

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

623

Antimetabolite Drugs
Metabolic
Pathway
Target
Mycolic
acid
synthesis

Mechanism of Action

Interferes with the
synthesis of mycolic acid

Drug Class

Not
applicable

Specific Drugs

Isoniazid

Spectrum of Activity

Narrow spectrum against
Mycobacterium spp.,
including M. tuberculosis

Table 14.6

• How do sulfonamides and trimethoprim selectively target bacteria?

Inhibitor of ATP Synthase
Bedaquiline, representing the synthetic antibacterial class of compounds called the diarylquinolones, uses a novel
mode of action that specifically inhibits mycobacterial growth. Although the specific mechanism has yet to be
elucidated, this compound appears to interfere with the function of ATP synthases, perhaps by interfering with the
use of the hydrogen ion gradient for ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation, leading to reduced ATP production.
Due to its side effects, including hepatotoxicity and potentially lethal heart arrhythmia, its use is reserved for serious,
otherwise untreatable cases of tuberculosis.

Link to Learning
To learn more about the general principles of antimicrobial therapy and bacterial
modes of action, visit Michigan State University’s Antimicrobial Resistance
Learning Site (https://openstax.org/l/22MSUantireslea) , particularly pages 6
through 9.

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Reading thorough Marisa’s health history, the doctor noticed that during her hospitalization in Vietnam, she
was catheterized and received the antimicrobial drugs ceftazidime and metronidazole. Upon learning this, the
doctor ordered a CT scan of Marisa’s abdomen to rule out appendicitis; the doctor also requested blood work
to see if she had an elevated white blood cell count, and ordered a urine analysis test and urine culture to look
for the presence of white blood cells, red blood cells, and bacteria.
Marisa’s urine sample came back positive for the presence of bacteria, indicating a urinary tract infection (UTI).
The doctor prescribed ciprofloxacin. In the meantime, her urine was cultured to grow the bacterium for further
testing.

• What types of antimicrobials are typically prescribed for UTIs?

624

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

• Based upon the antimicrobial drugs she was given in Vietnam, which of the antimicrobials for treatment
of a UTI would you predict to be ineffective?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

14.4 Mechanisms of Other Antimicrobial Drugs
Learning Objective
• Explain the differences between modes of action of drugs that target fungi, protozoa, helminths, and viruses

Because fungi, protozoa, and helminths are eukaryotic, their cells are very similar to human cells, making it more
difficult to develop drugs with selective toxicity. Additionally, viruses replicate within human host cells, making it
difficult to develop drugs that are selectively toxic to viruses or virus-infected cells. Despite these challenges, there
are antimicrobial drugs that target fungi, protozoa, helminths, and viruses, and some even target more than one type
of microbe. Table 14.7, Table 14.8, Table 14.9, and Table 14.10 provide examples for antimicrobial drugs in
these various classes.

Antifungal Drugs
The most common mode of action for antifungal drugs is the disruption of the cell membrane. Antifungals take
advantage of small differences between fungi and humans in the biochemical pathways that synthesize sterols. The
sterols are important in maintaining proper membrane fluidity and, hence, proper function of the cell membrane. For
most fungi, the predominant membrane sterol is ergosterol. Because human cell membranes use cholesterol, instead
of ergosterol, antifungal drugs that target ergosterol synthesis are selectively toxic (Figure 14.13).

Figure 14.13 The predominant sterol found in human cells is cholesterol, whereas the predominant sterol found in
fungi is ergosterol, making ergosterol a good target for antifungal drug development.

The imidazoles are synthetic fungicides that disrupt ergosterol biosynthesis; they are commonly used in medical
applications and also in agriculture to keep seeds and harvested crops from molding. Examples include miconazole,
ketoconazole, and clotrimazole, which are used to treat fungal skin infections such as ringworm, specifically
tinea pedis (athlete’s foot), tinea cruris (jock itch), and tinea corporis. These infections are commonly caused
by dermatophytes of the genera Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, and Microsporum. Miconazole is also used
predominantly for the treatment of vaginal yeast infections caused by the fungus Candida, and ketoconazole is used
for the treatment of tinea versicolor and dandruff, which both can be caused by the fungus Malassezia.
The triazole drugs, including fluconazole, also inhibit ergosterol biosynthesis. However, they can be administered
orally or intravenously for the treatment of several types of systemic yeast infections, including oral thrush and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

625

cryptococcal meningitis, both of which are prevalent in patients with AIDS. The triazoles also exhibit more selective
toxicity, compared with the imidazoles, and are associated with fewer side effects.
The allylamines, a structurally different class of synthetic antifungal drugs, inhibit an earlier step in ergosterol
biosynthesis. The most commonly used allylamine is terbinafine (marketed under the brand name Lamisil), which
is used topically for the treatment of dermatophytic skin infections like athlete’s foot, ringworm, and jock itch. Oral
treatment with terbinafine is also used for the treatment of fingernail and toenail fungus, but it can be associated with
the rare side effect of hepatotoxicity.
The polyenes are a class of antifungal agents naturally produced by certain actinomycete soil bacteria and are
structurally related to macrolides. These large, lipophilic molecules bind to ergosterol in fungal cytoplasmic
membranes, thus creating pores. Common examples include nystatin and amphotericin B. Nystatin is typically used
as a topical treatment for yeast infections of the skin, mouth, and vagina, but may also be used for intestinal
fungal infections. The drug amphotericin B is used for systemic fungal infections like aspergillosis, cryptococcal
meningitis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and candidiasis. Amphotericin B was the only antifungal drug available
for several decades, but its use is associated with some serious side effects, including nephrotoxicity (kidney toxicity).
Amphotericin B is often used in combination with flucytosine, a fluorinated pyrimidine analog that is converted by a
fungal-specific enzyme into a toxic product that interferes with both DNA replication and protein synthesis in fungi.
Flucytosine is also associated with hepatotoxicity (liver toxicity) and bone marrow depression.
Beyond targeting ergosterol in fungal cell membranes, there are a few antifungal drugs that target other fungal
structures (Figure 14.14). The echinocandins, including caspofungin, are a group of naturally produced antifungal
compounds that block the synthesis of β(1→3) glucan found in fungal cell walls but not found in human cells. This
drug class has the nickname “penicillin for fungi.” Caspofungin is used for the treatment of aspergillosis as well as
systemic yeast infections.
Although chitin is only a minor constituent of fungal cell walls, it is also absent in human cells, making it a selective
target. The polyoxins and nikkomycins are naturally produced antifungals that target chitin synthesis. Polyoxins are
used to control fungi for agricultural purposes, and nikkomycin Z is currently under development for use in humans
to treat yeast infections and Valley fever (coccidioidomycosis), a fungal disease prevalent in the southwestern US.[12]
The naturally produced antifungal griseofulvin is thought to specifically disrupt fungal cell division by interfering
with microtubules involved in spindle formation during mitosis. It was one of the first antifungals, but its use
is associated with hepatotoxicity. It is typically administered orally to treat various types of dermatophytic skin
infections when other topical antifungal treatments are ineffective.
There are a few drugs that act as antimetabolites against fungal processes. For example, atovaquone, a representative
of the naphthoquinone drug class, is a semisynthetic antimetabolite for fungal and protozoal versions of a
mitochondrial cytochrome important in electron transport. Structurally, it is an analog of coenzyme Q, with which
it competes for electron binding. It is particularly useful for the treatment of Pneumocystis pneumonia caused by
Pneumocystis jirovecii. The antibacterial sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim combination also acts as an antimetabolite
against P. jirovecii.
Table 14.7 shows the various therapeutic classes of antifungal drugs, categorized by mode of action, with examples
of each.

12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Valley Fever: Awareness Is Key.” http://www.cdc.gov/features/valleyfever/. Accessed
June 1, 2016.

626

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.14 Antifungal drugs target several different cell structures. (credit right: modification of work by “Maya and
Rike”/Wikimedia Commons)

Common Antifungal Drugs
Mechanism of Action
Inhibit ergosterol synthesis

Bind ergosterol in the cell
membrane and create pores
that disrupt the membrane

Inhibit cell wall synthesis

Inhibit microtubules and cell
division

Drug Class

Specific
Drugs

Clinical Uses

Imidazoles

Miconazole,
ketoconazole,
clotrimazole

Fungal skin infections and vaginal yeast
infections

Triazoles

Fluconazole

Systemic yeast infections, oral thrush,
and cryptococcal meningitis

Allylamines

Terbinafine

Dermatophytic skin infections (athlete’s
foot, ring worm, jock itch), and infections
of fingernails and toenails

Polyenes

Nystatin

Used topically for yeast infections of
skin, mouth, and vagina; also used for
fungal infections of the intestine

Amphotericin B

Variety systemic fungal infections

Echinocandins

Caspofungin

Aspergillosis and systemic yeast
infections

Not applicable

Nikkomycin Z

Coccidioidomycosis (Valley fever) and
yeast infections

Not applicable

Griseofulvin

Dermatophytic skin infections

Table 14.7

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

• How is disruption of ergosterol biosynthesis an effective mode of action for antifungals?

Case in Point
Treating a Fungal Infection of the Lungs
Jack, a 48-year-old engineer, is HIV positive but generally healthy thanks to antiretroviral therapy (ART).
However, after a particularly intense week at work, he developed a fever and a dry cough. He assumed
that he just had a cold or mild flu due to overexertion and didn’t think much of it. However, after about a
week, he began to experience fatigue, weight loss, and shortness of breath. He decided to visit his physician,
who found that Jack had a low level of blood oxygenation. The physician ordered blood testing, a chest Xray, and the collection of an induced sputum sample for analysis. His X-ray showed a fine cloudiness and
several pneumatoceles (thin-walled pockets of air), which indicated Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP), a type
of pneumonia caused by the fungus Pneumocystis jirovecii. Jack’s physician admitted him to the hospital and
prescribed Bactrim, a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, to be administered intravenously.
P. jirovecii is a yeast-like fungus with a life cycle similar to that of protozoans. As such, it was classified
as a protozoan until the 1980s. It lives only in the lung tissue of infected persons and is transmitted from
person to person, with many people exposed as children. Typically, P. jirovecii only causes pneumonia in
immunocompromised individuals. Healthy people may carry the fungus in their lungs with no symptoms of
disease. PCP is particularly problematic among HIV patients with compromised immune systems.
PCP is usually treated with oral or intravenous Bactrim, but atovaquone or pentamidine (another antiparasitic
drug) are alternatives. If not treated, PCP can progress, leading to a collapsed lung and nearly 100% mortality.
Even with antimicrobial drug therapy, PCP still is responsible for 10% of HIV-related deaths.
The cytological examination, using direct immunofluorescence assay (DFA), of a smear from Jack’s sputum
sample confirmed the presence of P. jirovecii (Figure 14.15). Additionally, the results of Jack’s blood tests
revealed that his white blood cell count had dipped, making him more susceptible to the fungus. His physician
reviewed his ART regimen and made adjustments. After a few days of hospitalization, Jack was released to
continue his antimicrobial therapy at home. With the adjustments to his ART therapy, Jack’s CD4 counts began
to increase and he was able to go back to work.

Figure 14.15 Microscopic examination of an induced sputum sample or bronchoaveolar lavage sample
typically reveals the organism, as shown here. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

627

628

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Antiprotozoan Drugs
There are a few mechanisms by which antiprotozoan drugs target infectious protozoans (Table 14.9). Some are
antimetabolites, such as atovaquone, proguanil, and artemisinins. Atovaquone, in addition to being antifungal, blocks
electron transport in protozoans and is used for the treatment of protozoan infections including malaria, babesiosis,
and toxoplasmosis. Proguanil is another synthetic antimetabolite that is processed in parasitic cells into its active
form, which inhibits protozoan folic acid synthesis. It is often used in combination with atovaquone, and the
combination is marketed as Malarone for both malaria treatment and prevention.
Artemisinin, a plant-derived antifungal first discovered by Chinese scientists in the 1970s, is quite effective against
malaria. Semisynthetic derivatives of artemisinin are more water soluble than the natural version, which makes
them more bioavailable. Although the exact mechanism of action is unclear, artemisinins appear to act as prodrugs
that are metabolized by target cells to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) that damage target cells. Due to the
rise in resistance to antimalarial drugs, artemisinins are also commonly used in combination with other antimalarial
compounds in artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT).
Several antimetabolites are used for the treatment of toxoplasmosis caused by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii. The
synthetic sulfa drug sulfadiazine competitively inhibits an enzyme in folic acid production in parasites and can be
used to treat malaria and toxoplasmosis. Pyrimethamine is a synthetic drug that inhibits a different enzyme in the
folic acid production pathway and is often used in combination with sulfadoxine (another sulfa drug) for the treatment
of malaria or in combination with sulfadiazine for the treatment of toxoplasmosis. Side effects of pyrimethamine
include decreased bone marrow activity that may cause increased bruising and low red blood cell counts. When
toxicity is a concern, spiramycin, a macrolide protein synthesis inhibitor, is typically administered for the treatment
of toxoplasmosis.
Two classes of antiprotozoan drugs interfere with nucleic acid synthesis: nitroimidazoles and quinolines.
Nitroimidazoles, including semisynthetic metronidazole, which was discussed previously as an antibacterial drug,
and synthetic tinidazole, are useful in combating a wide variety of protozoan pathogens, such as Giardia lamblia,
Entamoeba histolytica, and Trichomonas vaginalis. Upon introduction into these cells in low-oxygen environments,
nitroimidazoles become activated and introduce DNA strand breakage, interfering with DNA replication in target
cells. Unfortunately, metronidazole is associated with carcinogenesis (the development of cancer) in humans.
Another type of synthetic antiprotozoan drug that has long been thought to specifically interfere with DNA replication
in certain pathogens is pentamidine. It has historically been used for the treatment of African sleeping sickness
(caused by the protozoan Trypanosoma brucei) and leishmaniasis (caused by protozoa of the genus Leishmania), but
it is also an alternative treatment for the fungus Pneumocystis. Some studies indicate that it specifically binds to the
DNA found within kinetoplasts (kDNA; long mitochondrion-like structures unique to trypanosomes), leading to the
cleavage of kDNA. However, nuclear DNA of both the parasite and host remain unaffected. It also appears to bind
to tRNA, inhibiting the addition of amino acids to tRNA, thus preventing protein synthesis. Possible side effects of
pentamidine use include pancreatic dysfunction and liver damage.
The quinolines are a class of synthetic compounds related to quinine, which has a long history of use against malaria.
Quinolines are thought to interfere with heme detoxification, which is necessary for the parasite’s effective breakdown
of hemoglobin into amino acids inside red blood cells. The synthetic derivatives chloroquine, quinacrine (also called
mepacrine), and mefloquine are commonly used as antimalarials, and chloroquine is also used to treat amebiasis
typically caused by Entamoeba histolytica. Long-term prophylactic use of chloroquine or mefloquine may result
in serious side effects, including hallucinations or cardiac issues. Patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency experience severe anemia when treated with chloroquine.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

629

Common Antiprotozoan Drugs
Mechanism of Action

Drug Class

Specific
Drugs

Clinical Uses

Inhibit electron
transport in
mitochondria

Naphthoquinone

Atovaquone

Malaria, babesiosis, and toxoplasmosis

Inhibit folic acid
synthesis

Not applicable

Proquanil

Combination therapy with atovaquone for
malaria treatment and prevention

Sulfonamide

Sulfadiazine

Malaria and toxoplasmosis

Not applicable

Pyrimethamine

Combination therapy with sulfadoxine (sulfa
drug) for malaria

Produces damaging
reactive oxygen
species

Not applicable

Artemisinin

Combination therapy to treat malaria

Inhibit DNA synthesis

Nitroimidazoles

Metronidazole,
tinidazole

Infections caused by Giardia lamblia,
Entamoeba histolytica, and Trichomonas
vaginalis

Not applicable

Pentamidine

African sleeping sickness and leishmaniasis

Quinolines

Chloroquine

Malaria and infections with E. histolytica

Mepacrine,
mefloquine

Malaria

Inhibit heme
detoxification

Table 14.8

• List two modes of action for antiprotozoan drugs.

Antihelminthic Drugs
Because helminths are multicellular eukaryotes like humans, developing drugs with selective toxicity against them
is extremely challenging. Despite this, several effective classes have been developed (Table 14.9). Synthetic
benzimidazoles, like mebendazole and albendazole, bind to helminthic β-tubulin, preventing microtubule
formation. Microtubules in the intestinal cells of the worms seem to be particularly affected, leading to a reduction
in glucose uptake. Besides their activity against a broad range of helminths, benzimidazoles are also active against
many protozoans, fungi, and viruses, and their use for inhibiting mitosis and cell cycle progression in cancer cells is
under study.[13] Possible side effects of their use include liver damage and bone marrow suppression.
The avermectins are members of the macrolide family that were first discovered from a Japanese soil isolate,
Streptomyces avermectinius. A more potent semisynthetic derivative of avermectin is ivermectin, which binds to
glutamate-gated chloride channels specific to invertebrates including helminths, blocking neuronal transmission and
causing starvation, paralysis, and death of the worms. Ivermectin is used to treat roundworm diseases, including
onchocerciasis (also called river blindness, caused by the worm Onchocerca volvulus) and strongyloidiasis (caused

13. B. Chu et al. “A Benzimidazole Derivative Exhibiting Antitumor Activity Blocks EGFR and HER2 Activity and Upregulates DR5 in
Breast Cancer Cells.” Cell Death and Disease 6 (2015):e1686

630

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

by the worm Strongyloides stercoralis or S. fuelleborni). Ivermectin also can also treat parasitic insects like mites,
lice, and bed bugs, and is nontoxic to humans.
Niclosamide is a synthetic drug that has been used for over 50 years to treat tapeworm infections. Although its
mode of action is not entirely clear, niclosamide appears to inhibit ATP formation under anaerobic conditions and
inhibit oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria of its target pathogens. Niclosamide is not absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract, thus it can achieve high localized intestinal concentrations in patients. Recently, it has been
shown to also have antibacterial, antiviral, and antitumor activities.[14][15][16]
Another synthetic antihelminthic drug is praziquantel, which used for the treatment of parasitic tapeworms and liver
flukes, and is particularly useful for the treatment of schistosomiasis (caused by blood flukes from three genera of
Schistosoma). Its mode of action remains unclear, but it appears to cause the influx of calcium into the worm, resulting
in intense spasm and paralysis of the worm. It is often used as a preferred alternative to niclosamide in the treatment
of tapeworms when gastrointestinal discomfort limits niclosamide use.
The thioxanthenones, another class of synthetic drugs structurally related to quinine, exhibit antischistosomal activity
by inhibiting RNA synthesis. The thioxanthenone lucanthone and its metabolite hycanthone were the first used
clinically, but serious neurological, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and hepatic side effects led to their
discontinuation. Oxamniquine, a less toxic derivative of hycanthone, is only effective against S. mansoni, one
of the three species known to cause schistosomiasis in humans. Praziquantel was developed to target the other
two schistosome species, but concerns about increasing resistance have renewed interest in developing additional
derivatives of oxamniquine to target all three clinically important schistosome species.
Common Antihelminthic Drugs
Mechanism of Action

Drug Class

Specific
Drugs

Clinical Uses

Inhibit microtubule
formation, reducing
glucose uptake

Benzimidazoles

Mebendazole,
albendazole

Variety of helminth infections

Block neuronal
transmission, causing
paralysis and starvation

Avermectins

Ivermectin

Roundworm diseases, including river
blindness and strongyloidiasis, and
treatment of parasitic insects

Inhibit ATP production

Not applicable

Niclosamide

Intestinal tapeworm infections

Induce calcium influx

Not applicable

Praziquantel

Schistosomiasis (blood flukes)

Inhibit RNA synthesis

Thioxanthenones

Lucanthone,
hycanthone,
oxamniquine

Schistosomiasis (blood flukes)

Table 14.9

• Why are antihelminthic drugs difficult to develop?

14. J.-X. Pan et al. “Niclosamide, An Old Antihelminthic Agent, Demonstrates Antitumor Activity by Blocking Multiple Signaling
Pathways of Cancer Stem Cells.” Chinese Journal of Cancer 31 no. 4 (2012):178–184.
15. F. Imperi et al. “New Life for an Old Drug: The Anthelmintic Drug Niclosamide Inhibits Pseudomonas aeruginosa Quorum Sensing.”
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 57 no. 2 (2013):996-1005.
16. A. Jurgeit et al. “Niclosamide Is a Proton Carrier and Targets Acidic Endosomes with Broad Antiviral Effects.” PLoS Pathogens 8 no.
10 (2012):e1002976.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

631

Antiviral Drugs
Unlike the complex structure of fungi, protozoa, and helminths, viral structure is simple, consisting of nucleic
acid, a protein coat, viral enzymes, and, sometimes, a lipid envelope. Furthermore, viruses are obligate intracellular
pathogens that use the host’s cellular machinery to replicate. These characteristics make it difficult to develop drugs
with selective toxicity against viruses.
Many antiviral drugs are nucleoside analogs and function by inhibiting nucleic acid biosynthesis. For example,
acyclovir (marketed as Zovirax) is a synthetic analog of the nucleoside guanosine (Figure 14.16). It is activated
by the herpes simplex viral enzyme thymidine kinase and, when added to a growing DNA strand during replication,
causes chain termination. Its specificity for virus-infected cells comes from both the need for a viral enzyme to
activate it and the increased affinity of the activated form for viral DNA polymerase compared to host cell DNA
polymerase. Acyclovir and its derivatives are frequently used for the treatment of herpes virus infections, including
genital herpes, chickenpox, shingles, Epstein-Barr virus infections, and cytomegalovirus infections. Acyclovir can be
administered either topically or systemically, depending on the infection. One possible side effect of its use includes
nephrotoxicity. The drug adenine-arabinoside, marketed as vidarabine, is a synthetic analog to deoxyadenosine that
has a mechanism of action similar to that of acyclovir. It is also effective for the treatment of various human herpes
viruses. However, because of possible side effects involving low white blood cell counts and neurotoxicity, treatment
with acyclovir is now preferred.
Ribavirin, another synthetic guanosine analog, works by a mechanism of action that is not entirely clear. It appears
to interfere with both DNA and RNA synthesis, perhaps by reducing intracellular pools of guanosine triphosphate
(GTP). Ribavarin also appears to inhibit the RNA polymerase of hepatitis C virus. It is primarily used for the
treatment of the RNA viruses like hepatitis C (in combination therapy with interferon) and respiratory syncytial
virus. Possible side effects of ribavirin use include anemia and developmental effects on unborn children in pregnant
patients. In recent years, another nucleotide analog, sofosbuvir (Solvaldi), has also been developed for the treatment
of hepatitis C. Sofosbuvir is a uridine analog that interferes with viral polymerase activity. It is commonly
coadministered with ribavirin, with and without interferon.
Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis is not the only target of synthetic antivirals. Although the mode of action of
amantadine and its relative rimantadine are not entirely clear, these drugs appear to bind to a transmembrane protein
that is involved in the escape of the influenza virus from endosomes. Blocking escape of the virus also prevents viral
RNA release into host cells and subsequent viral replication. Increasing resistance has limited the use of amantadine
and rimantadine in the treatment of influenza A. Use of amantadine can result in neurological side effects, but the side
effects of rimantadine seem less severe. Interestingly, because of their effects on brain chemicals such as dopamine
and NMDA (N-methyl D-aspartate), amantadine and rimantadine are also used for the treatment of Parkinson’s
disease.
Neuraminidase inhibitors, including olsetamivir (Tamiflu), zanamivir (Relenza), and peramivir (Rapivab),
specifically target influenza viruses by blocking the activity of influenza virus neuraminidase, preventing the release
of the virus from infected cells. These three antivirals can decrease flu symptoms and shorten the duration of illness,
but they differ in their modes of administration: olsetamivir is administered orally, zanamivir is inhaled, and peramivir
is administered intravenously. Resistance to these neuraminidase inhibitors still seems to be minimal.
Pleconaril is a synthetic antiviral under development that showed promise for the treatment of picornaviruses.
Use of pleconaril for the treatment of the common cold caused by rhinoviruses was not approved by the FDA
in 2002 because of lack of proven effectiveness, lack of stability, and association with irregular menstruation. Its
further development for this purpose was halted in 2007. However, pleconaril is still being investigated for use
in the treatment of life-threatening complications of enteroviruses, such as meningitis and sepsis. It is also being
investigated for use in the global eradication of a specific enterovirus, polio.[17] Pleconaril seems to work by binding
to the viral capsid and preventing the uncoating of viral particles inside host cells during viral infection.
Viruses with complex life cycles, such as HIV, can be more difficult to treat. First, HIV targets CD4-positive white
blood cells, which are necessary for a normal immune response to infection. Second, HIV is a retrovirus, meaning
17. M.J. Abzug. “The Enteroviruses: Problems in Need of Treatments.” Journal of Infection 68 no. S1 (2014):108–14.

632

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

that it converts its RNA genome into a DNA copy that integrates into the host cell’s genome, thus hiding within host
cell DNA. Third, the HIV reverse transcriptase lacks proofreading activity and introduces mutations that allow for
rapid development of antiviral drug resistance. To help prevent the emergence of resistance, a combination of specific
synthetic antiviral drugs is typically used in ART for HIV (Figure 14.17).
The reverse transcriptase inhibitors block the early step of converting viral RNA genome into DNA, and can
include competitive nucleoside analog inhibitors (e.g., azidothymidine/zidovudine, or AZT) and non-nucleoside
noncompetitive inhibitors (e.g., etravirine) that bind reverse transcriptase and cause an inactivating conformational
change. Drugs called protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir) block the processing of viral proteins and prevent viral
maturation. Protease inhibitors are also being developed for the treatment of other viral types.[18] For example,
simeprevir (Olysio) has been approved for the treatment of hepatitis C and is administered with ribavirin and
interferon in combination therapy. The integrase inhibitors (e.g., raltegravir), block the activity of the HIV integrase
responsible for the recombination of a DNA copy of the viral genome into the host cell chromosome. Additional drug
classes for HIV treatment include the CCR5 antagonists and the fusion inhibitors (e.g., enfuviritide), which prevent
the binding of HIV to the host cell coreceptor (chemokine receptor type 5 [CCR5]) and the merging of the viral
envelope with the host cell membrane, respectively. Table 14.10 shows the various therapeutic classes of antiviral
drugs, categorized by mode of action, with examples of each.

18. B.L. Pearlman. “Protease Inhibitors for the Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis C Genotype-1 Infection: The New Standard of Care.” Lancet
Infectious Diseases 12 no. 9 (2012):717–728.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

633

Figure 14.16 Acyclovir is a structural analog of guanosine. It is specifically activated by the viral enzyme thymidine
kinase and then preferentially binds to viral DNA polymerase, leading to chain termination during DNA replication.

634

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.17 Antiretroviral therapy (ART) is typically used for the treatment of HIV. The targets of drug classes
currently in use are shown here. (credit: modification of work by Thomas Splettstoesser)

Common Antiviral Drugs
Mechanism of Action

Drug

Clinical Uses

Acyclovir

Herpes virus infections

Azidothymidine/
zidovudine (AZT)

HIV infections

Ribavirin

Hepatitis C virus and respiratory syncytial
virus infections

Vidarabine

Herpes virus infections

Sofosbuvir

Hepatitis C virus infections

Non-nucleoside noncompetitive
inhibition

Etravirine

HIV infections

Inhibit escape of virus from
endosomes

Amantadine,
rimantadine

Infections with influenza virus

Inhibit neuraminadase

Olsetamivir, zanamivir,
peramivir

Infections with influenza virus

Nucleoside analog inhibition of nucleic
acid synthesis

Table 14.10

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

635

Common Antiviral Drugs
Mechanism of Action

Drug

Clinical Uses

Inhibit viral uncoating

Pleconaril

Serious enterovirus infections

Inhibition of protease

Ritonavir

HIV infections

Simeprevir

Hepatitis C virus infections

Inhibition of integrase

Raltegravir

HIV infections

Inhibition of membrane fusion

Enfuviritide

HIV infections

Table 14.10

• Why is HIV difficult to treat with antivirals?

Link to Learning
To learn more about the various classes of antiretroviral drugs used in the ART
of HIV infection, explore each of the drugs in the HIV drug classes provided by
US Department of Health and Human Services at this (https://openstax.org/l/
22HIVUSDepthea) website.

14.5 Drug Resistance
Learning Objectives
• Explain the concept of drug resistance
• Describe how microorganisms develop or acquire drug resistance
• Describe the different mechanisms of antimicrobial drug resistance

Antimicrobial resistance is not a new phenomenon. In nature, microbes are constantly evolving in order to overcome
the antimicrobial compounds produced by other microorganisms. Human development of antimicrobial drugs and
their widespread clinical use has simply provided another selective pressure that promotes further evolution. Several
important factors can accelerate the evolution of drug resistance. These include the overuse and misuse of
antimicrobials, inappropriate use of antimicrobials, subtherapeutic dosing, and patient noncompliance with the
recommended course of treatment.
Exposure of a pathogen to an antimicrobial compound can select for chromosomal mutations conferring resistance,
which can be transferred vertically to subsequent microbial generations and eventually become predominant in a
microbial population that is repeatedly exposed to the antimicrobial. Alternatively, many genes responsible for drug
resistance are found on plasmids or in transposons that can be transferred easily between microbes through horizontal
gene transfer (see How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity). Transposons also have the ability
to move resistance genes between plasmids and chromosomes to further promote the spread of resistance.

636

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Mechanisms for Drug Resistance
There are several common mechanisms for drug resistance, which are summarized in Figure 14.18. These
mechanisms include enzymatic modification of the drug, modification of the antimicrobial target, and prevention of
drug penetration or accumulation.

Figure 14.18 There are multiple strategies that microbes use to develop resistance to antimicrobial drugs. (Not
shown: target overproduction, target mimicry, and enzymatic bypass). (credit: modification of work by Gerard D
Wright)

Drug Modification or Inactivation
Resistance genes may code for enzymes that chemically modify an antimicrobial, thereby inactivating it, or destroy
an antimicrobial through hydrolysis. Resistance to many types of antimicrobials occurs through this mechanism. For
example, aminoglycoside resistance can occur through enzymatic transfer of chemical groups to the drug molecule,
impairing the binding of the drug to its bacterial target. For β-lactams, bacterial resistance can involve the enzymatic
hydrolysis of the β-lactam bond within the β-lactam ring of the drug molecule. Once the β-lactam bond is broken,
the drug loses its antibacterial activity. This mechanism of resistance is mediated by β-lactamases, which are the
most common mechanism of β-lactam resistance. Inactivation of rifampin commonly occurs through glycosylation,
phosphorylation, or adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ribosylation, and resistance to macrolides and lincosamides can
also occur due to enzymatic inactivation of the drug or modification.

Prevention of Cellular Uptake or Efflux
Microbes may develop resistance mechanisms that involve inhibiting the accumulation of an antimicrobial drug,
which then prevents the drug from reaching its cellular target. This strategy is common among gram-negative

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

637

pathogens and can involve changes in outer membrane lipid composition, porin channel selectivity, and/or porin
channel concentrations. For example, a common mechanism of carbapenem resistance among Pseudomonas
aeruginosa is to decrease the amount of its OprD porin, which is the primary portal of entry for carbapenems through
the outer membrane of this pathogen. Additionally, many gram-positive and gram-negative pathogenic bacteria
produce efflux pumps that actively transport an antimicrobial drug out of the cell and prevent the accumulation of
drug to a level that would be antibacterial. For example, resistance to β-lactams, tetracyclines, and fluoroquinolones
commonly occurs through active efflux out of the cell, and it is rather common for a single efflux pump to have the
ability to translocate multiple types of antimicrobials.

Target Modification
Because antimicrobial drugs have very specific targets, structural changes to those targets can prevent drug binding,
rendering the drug ineffective. Through spontaneous mutations in the genes encoding antibacterial drug targets,
bacteria have an evolutionary advantage that allows them to develop resistance to drugs. This mechanism of resistance
development is quite common. Genetic changes impacting the active site of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) can
inhibit the binding of β-lactam drugs and provide resistance to multiple drugs within this class. This mechanism is
very common among strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae, which alter their own PBPs through genetic mechanisms.
In contrast, strains of Staphylococcus aureus develop resistance to methicillin (MRSA) through the acquisition of
a new low-affinity PBP, rather than structurally alter their existing PBPs. Not only does this new low-affinity PBP
provide resistance to methicillin but it provides resistance to virtually all β-lactam drugs, with the exception of the
newer fifth-generation cephalosporins designed specifically to kill MRSA. Other examples of this resistance strategy
include alterations in
• ribosome subunits, providing resistance to macrolides, tetracyclines, and aminoglycosides;
• lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structure, providing resistance to polymyxins;
• RNA polymerase, providing resistance to rifampin;
• DNA gyrase, providing resistance to fluoroquinolones;
• metabolic enzymes, providing resistance to sulfa drugs, sulfones, and trimethoprim; and
• peptidoglycan subunit peptide chains, providing resistance to glycopeptides.

Target Overproduction or Enzymatic Bypass
When an antimicrobial drug functions as an antimetabolite, targeting a specific enzyme to inhibit its activity, there
are additional ways that microbial resistance may occur. First, the microbe may overproduce the target enzyme such
that there is a sufficient amount of antimicrobial-free enzyme to carry out the proper enzymatic reaction. Second,
the bacterial cell may develop a bypass that circumvents the need for the functional target enzyme. Both of these
strategies have been found as mechanisms of sulfonamide resistance. Vancomycin resistance among S. aureus has
been shown to involve the decreased cross-linkage of peptide chains in the bacterial cell wall, which provides an
increase in targets for vancomycin to bind to in the outer cell wall. Increased binding of vancomycin in the outer cell
wall provides a blockage that prevents free drug molecules from penetrating to where they can block new cell wall
synthesis.

Target Mimicry
A recently discovered mechanism of resistance called target mimicry involves the production of proteins that bind
and sequester drugs, preventing the drugs from binding to their target. For example, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
produces a protein with regular pentapeptide repeats that appears to mimic the structure of DNA. This protein binds
fluoroquinolones, sequestering them and keeping them from binding to DNA, providing M. tuberculosis resistance
to fluoroquinolones. Proteins that mimic the A-site of the bacterial ribosome have been found to contribute to
aminoglycoside resistance as well.[19]

638

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

• List several mechanisms for drug resistance.

Multidrug-Resistant Microbes and Cross Resistance
From a clinical perspective, our greatest concerns are multidrug-resistant microbes (MDRs) and cross resistance.
MDRs are colloquially known as “superbugs” and carry one or more resistance mechanism(s), making them resistant
to multiple antimicrobials. In cross-resistance, a single resistance mechanism confers resistance to multiple
antimicrobial drugs. For example, having an efflux pump that can export multiple antimicrobial drugs is a common
way for microbes to be resistant to multiple drugs by using a single resistance mechanism. In recent years, several
clinically important superbugs have emerged, and the CDC reports that superbugs are responsible for more than 2
million infections in the US annually, resulting in at least 23,000 fatalities.[20] Several of the superbugs discussed in
the following sections have been dubbed the ESKAPE pathogens. This acronym refers to the names of the pathogens
(Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Enterobacter spp.) but it is also fitting in that these pathogens are able to “escape” many conventional
forms of antimicrobial therapy. As such, infections by ESKAPE pathogens can be difficult to treat and they cause a
large number of nosocomial infections.

Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
Methicillin, a semisynthetic penicillin, was designed to resist inactivation by β-lactamases. Unfortunately, soon after
the introduction of methicillin to clinical practice, methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus appeared and started to
spread. The mechanism of resistance, acquisition of a new low-affinity PBP, provided S. aureus with resistance to
all available β-lactams. Strains of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) are widespread opportunistic pathogens
and a particular concern for skin and other wound infections, but may also cause pneumonia and septicemia.
Although originally a problem in health-care settings (hospital-acquired MRSA [HA-MRSA]), MRSA infections are
now also acquired through contact with contaminated members of the general public, called community-associated
MRSA (CA-MRSA). Approximately one-third of the population carries S. aureus as a member of their normal nasal
microbiota without illness, and about 6% of these strains are methicillin resistant. [21][22]

Micro Connections
Clavulanic Acid: Penicillin’s Little Helper
With the introduction of penicillin in the early 1940s, and its subsequent mass production, society began to
think of antibiotics as miracle cures for a wide range of infectious diseases. Unfortunately, as early as 1945,
penicillin resistance was first documented and started to spread. Greater than 90% of current S. aureus clinical
isolates are resistant to penicillin.[23]

19. D.H. Fong, A.M. Berghuis. “Substrate Promiscuity of an Aminoglycoside Antibiotic Resistance Enzyme Via Target Mimicry.” EMBO
Journal 21 no. 10 (2002):2323–2331.
20. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Antibiotic/Antimicrobial Resistance.” http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/index.html.
Accessed June 2, 2016.
21. A.S. Kalokhe et al. “Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis Drug Susceptibility and Molecular Diagnostic Testing: A Review of the
Literature. American Journal of the Medical Sciences 345 no. 2 (2013):143–148.
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA): General Information About MRSA
in the Community.” http://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/community/index.html. Accessed June 2, 2016

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

639

Although developing new antimicrobial drugs is one solution to this problem, scientists have explored new
approaches, including the development of compounds that inactivate resistance mechanisms. The
development of clavulanic acid represents an early example of this strategy. Clavulanic acid is a molecule
produced by the bacterium Streptococcus clavuligerus. It contains a β-lactam ring, making it structurally similar
to penicillin and other β-lactams, but shows no clinical effectiveness when administered on its own. Instead,
clavulanic acid binds irreversibly within the active site of β-lactamases and prevents them from inactivating a
coadministered penicillin.
Clavulanic acid was first developed in the 1970s and was mass marketed in combination with amoxicillin
beginning in the 1980s under the brand name Augmentin. As is typically the case, resistance to the amoxicillinclavulanic acid combination soon appeared. Resistance most commonly results from bacteria increasing
production of their β-lactamase and overwhelming the inhibitory effects of clavulanic acid, mutating their βlactamase so it is no longer inhibited by clavulanic acid, or from acquiring a new β-lactamase that is not
inhibited by clavulanic acid. Despite increasing resistance concerns, clavulanic acid and related β-lactamase
inhibitors (sulbactam and tazobactam) represent an important new strategy: the development of compounds
that directly inhibit antimicrobial resistance-conferring enzymes.

Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci and Staphylococcus aureus
Vancomycin is only effective against gram-positive organisms, and it is used to treat wound infections, septic
infections, endocarditis, and meningitis that are caused by pathogens resistant to other antibiotics. It is considered
one of the last lines of defense against such resistant infections, including MRSA. With the rise of antibiotic
resistance in the 1970s and 1980s, vancomycin use increased, and it is not surprising that we saw the emergence and
spread of vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA), and vancomycinintermediate S. aureus (VISA). The mechanism of vancomycin resistance among enterococci is target modification
involving a structural change to the peptide component of the peptidoglycan subunits, preventing vancomycin from
binding. These strains are typically spread among patients in clinical settings by contact with health-care workers and
contaminated surfaces and medical equipment.
VISA and VRSA strains differ from each other in the mechanism of resistance and the degree of resistance each
mechanism confers. VISA strains exhibit intermediate resistance, with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of
4–8 μg/mL, and the mechanism involves an increase in vancomycin targets. VISA strains decrease the crosslinking
of peptide chains in the cell wall, providing an increase in vancomycin targets that trap vancomycin in the outer cell
wall. In contrast, VRSA strains acquire vancomycin resistance through horizontal transfer of resistance genes from
VRE, an opportunity provided in individuals coinfected with both VRE and MRSA. VRSA exhibit a higher level of
resistance, with MICs of 16 μg/mL or higher.[24] In the case of all three types of vancomycin-resistant bacteria, rapid
clinical identification is necessary so proper procedures to limit spread can be implemented. The oxazolidinones like
linezolid are useful for the treatment of these vancomycin-resistant, opportunistic pathogens, as well as MRSA.

Extended-Spectrum β-Lactamase–Producing Gram-Negative Pathogens
Gram-negative pathogens that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) show resistance well beyond just
penicillins. The spectrum of β-lactams inactivated by ESBLs provides for resistance to all penicillins, cephalosporins,
monobactams, and the β-lactamase-inhibitor combinations, but not the carbapenems. An even greater concern is that
the genes encoding for ESBLs are usually found on mobile plasmids that also contain genes for resistance to other
drug classes (e.g., fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, tetracyclines), and may be readily spread to other bacteria
by horizontal gene transfer. These multidrug-resistant bacteria are members of the intestinal microbiota of some
23. F.D. Lowy. “Antimicrobial Resistance: The Example of Staphylococcus aureus.” Journal of Clinical Investigation 111 no. 9
(2003):1265–1273.
24. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Healthcare-Associated Infections (HIA): General Information about VISA/VRSA.”
http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/organisms/visa_vrsa/visa_vrsa.html. Accessed June 2, 2016.

640

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

individuals, but they are also important causes of opportunistic infections in hospitalized patients, from whom they
can be spread to other people.

Carbapenem-Resistant Gram-Negative Bacteria
The occurrence of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) and carbapenem resistance among other gramnegative bacteria (e.g., P. aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, Stenotrophomonas maltophila) is a growing healthcare concern. These pathogens develop resistance to carbapenems through a variety of mechanisms, including
production of carbapenemases (broad-spectrum β-lactamases that inactivate all β-lactams, including carbapenems),
active efflux of carbapenems out of the cell, and/or prevention of carbapenem entry through porin channels. Similar
to concerns with ESBLs, carbapenem-resistant, gram-negative pathogens are usually resistant to multiple classes of
antibacterials, and some have even developed pan-resistance (resistance to all available antibacterials). Infections
with carbapenem-resistant, gram-negative pathogens commonly occur in health-care settings through interaction with
contaminated individuals or medical devices, or as a result of surgery.

Multidrug-Resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis
The emergence of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MDR-TB) and extensively drug-resistant
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (XDR-TB) is also of significant global concern. MDR-TB strains are resistant to both
rifampin and isoniazid, the drug combination typically prescribed for treatment of tuberculosis. XDR-TB strains
are additionally resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one of three other drugs (amikacin, kanamycin, or
capreomycin) used as a second line of treatment, leaving these patients very few treatment options. Both types
of pathogens are particularly problematic in immunocompromised persons, including those suffering from HIV
infection. The development of resistance in these strains often results from the incorrect use of antimicrobials for
tuberculosis treatment, selecting for resistance.

• How does drug resistance lead to superbugs?

Link to Learning
To learn more about the top 18 drug-resistant threats (https://openstax.org/l/
22CDC18drugres) to the US, visit the CDC’s website.

Micro Connections
Factory Farming and Drug Resistance
Although animal husbandry has long been a major part of agriculture in America, the rise of concentrated
animal feeding operations (CAFOs) since the 1950s has brought about some new environmental issues,
including the contamination of water and air with biological waste, and ethical issues regarding animal rights
also are associated with growing animals in this way. Additionally, the increase in CAFOs involves the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

641

extensive use of antimicrobial drugs in raising livestock. Antimicrobials are used to prevent the development
of infectious disease in the close quarters of CAFOs; however, the majority of antimicrobials used in factory
farming are for the promotion of growth—in other words, to grow larger animals.
The mechanism underlying this enhanced growth remains unclear. These antibiotics may not necessarily be
the same as those used clinically for humans, but they are structurally related to drugs used for humans. As a
result, use of antimicrobial drugs in animals can select for antimicrobial resistance, with these resistant bacteria
becoming cross-resistant to drugs typically used in humans. For example, tylosin use in animals appears to
select for bacteria also cross-resistant to other macrolides, including erythromycin, commonly used in humans.
Concentrations of the drug-resistant bacterial strains generated by CAFOs become increased in water and
soil surrounding these farms. If not directly pathogenic in humans, these resistant bacteria may serve as a
reservoir of mobile genetic elements that can then pass resistance genes to human pathogens. Fortunately,
the cooking process typically inactivates any antimicrobials remaining in meat, so humans typically are not
directly ingesting these drugs. Nevertheless, many people are calling for more judicious use of these drugs,
perhaps charging farmers user fees to reduce indiscriminate use. In fact, in 2012, the FDA published guidelines
for farmers who voluntarily phase out the use of antimicrobial drugs except under veterinary supervision and
when necessary to ensure animal health. Although following the guidelines is voluntary at this time, the FDA
does recommend what it calls “judicious” use of antimicrobial drugs in food-producing animals in an effort to
decrease antimicrobial resistance.

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Unfortunately, Marisa’s urinary tract infection did not resolve with ciprofloxacin treatment. Laboratory testing
showed that her infection was caused by a strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae with significant antimicrobial
resistance. The resistance profile of this K. pneumoniae included resistance to the carbapenem class of
antibacterials, a group of β-lactams that is typically reserved for the treatment of highly resistant bacteria. K.
pneumoniae is an opportunistic, capsulated, gram-negative rod that may be a member of the normal microbiota
of the intestinal tract, but may also cause a number of diseases, including pneumonia and UTIs.
Specific laboratory tests looking for carbapenemase production were performed on Marisa’s samples and
came back positive. Based upon this result, in combination with her health history, production of a
carbapenemase known as the New Delhi Metallo-β-lactamase (NDM) was suspected. Although the origin of
the NDM carbapenemase is not completely known, many patients infected with NDM-containing strains have
travel histories involving hospitalizations in India or surrounding countries.

• How would doctors determine which types of antimicrobial drugs should be administered?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

14.6 Testing the Effectiveness of Antimicrobials
Learning Objectives
• Describe how the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test determines the susceptibility of a microbe to an antibacterial

drug.
• Explain the significance of the minimal inhibitory concentration and the minimal bactericidal concentration

relative to the effectiveness of an antimicrobial drug.

642

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Testing the effectiveness of antimicrobial drugs against specific organisms is important in identifying their spectrum
of activity and the therapeutic dosage. This type of test, generally described as antimicrobial susceptibility testing
(AST), is commonly performed in a clinical laboratory. In this section, we will discuss common methods of testing
the effectiveness of antimicrobials.

The Kirby-Bauer Disk Diffusion Test
The Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test has long been used as a starting point for determining the susceptibility of
specific microbes to various antimicrobial drugs. The Kirby-Bauer assay starts with a Mueller-Hinton agar plate on
which a confluent lawn is inoculated with a patient’s isolated bacterial pathogen. Filter paper disks impregnated with
known amounts of antibacterial drugs to be tested are then placed on the agar plate. As the bacterial inoculum grows,
antibiotic diffuses from the circular disk into the agar and interacts with the growing bacteria. Antibacterial activity
is observed as a clear circular zone of inhibition around the drug-impregnated disk, similar to the disk-diffusion
assay depicted in Figure 13.31. The diameter of the zone of inhibition, measured in millimeters and compared to a
standardized chart, determines the susceptibility or resistance of the bacterial pathogen to the drug.
There are multiple factors that determine the size of a zone of inhibition in this assay, including drug solubility, rate
of drug diffusion through agar, the thickness of the agar medium, and the drug concentration impregnated into the
disk. Due to a lack of standardization of these factors, interpretation of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion assay provides
only limited information on susceptibility and resistance to the drugs tested. The assay cannot distinguish between
bacteriostatic and bactericidal activities, and differences in zone sizes cannot be used to compare drug potencies or
efficacies. Comparison of zone sizes to a standardized chart will only provide information on the antibacterials to
which a bacterial pathogen is susceptible or resistant.

• How does one use the information from a Kirby-Bauer assay to predict the therapeutic effectiveness of an
antimicrobial drug in a patient?

Micro Connections
Antibiograms: Taking Some of the Guesswork Out of Prescriptions
Unfortunately, infectious diseases don’t take a time-out for lab work. As a result, physicians rarely have the
luxury of conducting susceptibility testing before they write a prescription. Instead, they rely primarily on the
empirical evidence (i.e., the signs and symptoms of disease) and their professional experience to make an
educated guess as to the diagnosis, causative agent(s), and drug most likely to be effective. This approach
allows treatment to begin sooner so the patient does not have to wait for lab test results. In many cases, the
prescription is effective; however, in an age of increased antimicrobial resistance, it is becoming increasingly
more difficult to select the most appropriate empiric therapy. Selecting an inappropriate empiric therapy not
only puts the patient at risk but may promote greater resistance to the drug prescribed.
Recently, studies have shown that antibiograms are useful tools in the decision-making process of selecting
appropriate empiric therapy. An antibiogram is a compilation of local antibiotic susceptibility data broken
down by bacterial pathogen. In a November 2014 study published in the journal Infection Control and Hospital
Epidemiology, researchers determined that 85% of the prescriptions ordered in skilled nursing facilities were
decided upon empirically, but only 35% of those prescriptions were deemed appropriate when compared with
the eventual pathogen identification and susceptibility profile obtained from the clinical laboratory. However,
in one nursing facility where use of antibiograms was implemented to direct selection of empiric therapy,
appropriateness of empiric therapy increased from 32% before antibiogram implementation to 45% after

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

643

implementation of antibiograms.[25] Although these data are preliminary, they do suggest that health-care
facilities can reduce the number of inappropriate prescriptions by using antibiograms to select empiric therapy,
thus benefiting patients and minimizing opportunities for antimicrobial resistance to develop.

Link to Learning
Visit this website to view an interactive antibiogram (https://openstax.org/l/
22StanUnintanti) provided by Stanford University.

Dilution Tests
As discussed, the limitations of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test do not allow for a direct comparison of
antibacterial potencies to guide selection of the best therapeutic choice. However, antibacterial dilution tests can be
used to determine a particular drug’s minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), the lowest concentration of drug that
inhibits visible bacterial growth, and minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC), the lowest drug concentration that
kills ≥99.9% of the starting inoculum. Determining these concentrations helps identify the correct drug for a particular
pathogen. For the macrobroth dilution assay, a dilution series of the drug in broth is made in test tubes and the same
number of cells of a test bacterial strain is added to each tube (Figure 14.19). The MIC is determined by examining
the tubes to find the lowest drug concentration that inhibits visible growth; this is observed as turbidity (cloudiness)
in the broth. Tubes with no visible growth are then inoculated onto agar media without antibiotic to determine the
MBC. Generally, serum levels of an antibacterial should be at least three to five times above the MIC for treatment of
an infection.
The MIC assay can also be performed using 96-well microdilution trays, which allow for the use of small volumes
and automated dispensing devices, as well as the testing of multiple antimicrobials and/or microorganisms in one tray
(Figure 14.20). MICs are interpreted as the lowest concentration that inhibits visible growth, the same as for the
macrobroth dilution in test tubes. Growth may also be interpreted visually or by using a spectrophotometer or similar
device to detect turbidity or a color change if an appropriate biochemical substrate that changes color in the presence
of bacterial growth is also included in each well.
The Etest is an alternative method used to determine MIC, and is a combination of the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion
test and dilution methods. Similar to the Kirby-Bauer assay, a confluent lawn of a bacterial isolate is inoculated onto
the surface of an agar plate. Rather than using circular disks impregnated with one concentration of drug, however,
commercially available plastic strips that contain a gradient of an antibacterial are placed on the surface of the
inoculated agar plate (Figure 14.21). As the bacterial inoculum grows, antibiotic diffuses from the plastic strips into
the agar and interacts with the bacterial cells. Because the rate of drug diffusion is directly related to concentration, an
elliptical zone of inhibition is observed with the Etest drug gradient, rather than a circular zone of inhibition observed
with the Kirby-Bauer assay. To interpret the results, the intersection of the elliptical zone with the gradient on the
drug-containing strip indicates the MIC. Because multiple strips containing different antimicrobials can be placed on
the same plate, the MIC of multiple antimicrobials can be determined concurrently and directly compared. However,
unlike the macrobroth and microbroth dilution methods, the MBC cannot be determined with the Etest.

25. J.P. Furuno et al. “Using Antibiograms to Improve Antibiotic Prescribing in Skilled Nursing Facilities.” Infection Control and Hospital
Epidemiology 35 no. Suppl S3 (2014):S56–61.

644

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.19 In a dilution test, the lowest dilution that inhibits turbidity (cloudiness) is the MIC. In this example, the
MIC is 8 μg/mL. Broth from samples without turbidity can be inoculated onto plates lacking the antimicrobial drug. The
lowest dilution that kills ≥99.9% of the starting inoculum is observed on the plates is the MBC. (credit: modification of
work by Suzanne Wakim)

Figure 14.20 A microdilution tray can also be used to determine MICs of multiple antimicrobial drugs in a single
assay. In this example, the drug concentrations increase from left to right and the rows with clindamycin, penicillin,
and erythromycin have been indicated to the left of the plate. For penicillin and erythromycin, the lowest
concentrations that inhibited visible growth are indicated by red circles and were 0.06 μg/mL for penicillin and 8 μg/
mL for erythromycin. For clindamycin, visible bacterial growth was observed at every concentration up to 32 μg/mL
and the MIC is interpreted as >32 μg/mL. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Figure 14.21 The Etest can be used to determine the MIC of an antibiotic. In this Etest, vancomycin is shown to
have a MIC of 1.5 μg/mL against Staphylococcus aureus.

• Compare and contrast MIC and MBC.

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Marisa’s UTI was likely caused by the catheterizations she had in Vietnam. Most bacteria that cause UTIs are
members of the normal gut microbiota, but they can cause infections when introduced to the urinary tract, as
might have occurred when the catheter was inserted. Alternatively, if the catheter itself was not sterile, bacteria
on its surface could have been introduced into Marisa’s body. The antimicrobial therapy Marisa received in
Cambodia may also have been a complicating factor because it may have selected for antimicrobial-resistant
strains already present in her body. These bacteria would have already contained genes for antimicrobial
resistance, either acquired by spontaneous mutation or through horizontal gene transfer, and, therefore, had
the best evolutionary advantage for adaptation and growth in the presence of the antimicrobial therapy. As a
result, one of these resistant strains may have been subsequently introduced into her urinary tract.
Laboratory testing at the CDC confirmed that the strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae from Marisa’s urine sample
was positive for the presence of NDM, a very active carbapenemase that is beginning to emerge as a new
problem in antimicrobial resistance. While NDM-positive strains are resistant to a wide range of antimicrobials,
they have shown susceptibility to tigecycline (structurally related to tetracycline) and the polymyxins B and E
(colistin).
To prevent her infection from spreading, Marisa was isolated from the other patients in a separate room. All
hospital staff interacting with her were advised to follow strict protocols to prevent surface and equipment
contamination. This would include especially stringent hand hygiene practices and careful disinfection of all
items coming into contact with her.
Marisa’s infection finally responded to tigecycline and eventually cleared. She was discharged a few weeks
after admission, and a follow-up stool sample showed her stool to be free of NDM-containing K. pneumoniae,
meaning that she was no longer harboring the highly resistant bacterium.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

645

646

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

14.7 Current Strategies for Antimicrobial Discovery
Learning Objectives
• Describe the methods and strategies used for discovery of new antimicrobial agents.

With the continued evolution and spread of antimicrobial resistance, and now the identification of pan-resistant
bacterial pathogens, the search for new antimicrobials is essential for preventing the postantibiotic era. Although
development of more effective semisynthetic derivatives is one strategy, resistance to them develops rapidly because
bacterial pathogens are already resistant to earlier-generation drugs in the family and can easily mutate and develop
resistance to the new semisynthetic drugs. Today, scientists continue to hunt for new antimicrobial compounds and
explore new avenues of antimicrobial discovery and synthesis. They check large numbers of soils and microbial
products for antimicrobial activity by using high-throughput screening methods, which use automation to test large
numbers of samples simultaneously. The recent development of the iChip[26] allows researchers to investigate the
antimicrobial-producing capabilities of soil microbes that are difficult to grow by standard cultivation techniques in
the laboratory. Rather than grow the microbes in the laboratory, they are grown in situ—right in the soil. Use of
the iChip has resulted in the discovery of teixobactin, a novel antimicrobial from Mount Ararat, Turkey. Teixobactin
targets two distinct steps in gram-positive cell wall synthesis and for which antimicrobial resistance appears not yet
to have evolved.
Although soils have been widely examined, other environmental niches have not been tested as fully. Since 70% of
the earth is covered with water, marine environments could be mined more fully for the presence of antimicrobialproducing microbes. In addition, researchers are using combinatorial chemistry, a method for making a very large
number of related compounds from simple precursors, and testing them for antimicrobial activity. An additional
strategy that needs to be explored further is the development of compounds that inhibit resistance mechanisms and
restore the activity of older drugs, such as the strategy described earlier for β-lactamase inhibitors like clavulanic acid.
Finally, developing inhibitors of virulence factor production and function could be a very important avenue. Although
this strategy would not be directly antibacterial, drugs that slow the progression of an infection could provide an
advantage for the immune system and could be used successfully in combination with antimicrobial drugs.

• What are new sources and strategies for developing drugs to fight infectious diseases?

Eye on Ethics

The (Free?) Market for New Antimicrobials
There used to be plenty of antimicrobial drugs on the market to treat infectious diseases. However, the
spread of antimicrobial resistance has created a need for new antibiotics to replace those that are no longer
as effective as they once were. Unfortunately, pharmaceutical companies are not particularly motivated to
fill this need. As of 2009, all but five pharmaceutical companies had moved away from antimicrobial drug
development.[27] As a result, the number of FDA approvals of new antimicrobials has fallen drastically in recent
decades (Figure 14.22).

26. L. Losee et al. “A New Antibiotic Kills Pathogens Without Detectable Resistance.” Nature 517 no. 7535 (2015):455–459.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Given that demand usually encourages supply, one might expect pharmaceutical companies to be rushing to
get back in the business of developing new antibiotics. But developing new drugs is a lengthy process and
requires large investments in research and development. Pharmaceutical companies can typically get a higher
return on their investment by developing products for chronic, nonmicrobial diseases like diabetes; such drugs
must be taken for life, and therefore generate more long-term revenue than an antibiotic that does its job in a
week or two. But what will happen when drugs like vancomycin, a superantimicrobial reserved for use as a last
resort, begin to lose their effectiveness against ever more drug-resistant superbugs? Will drug companies wait
until all antibiotics have become useless before beginning to look for new ones?
Recently, it has been suggested that large pharmaceutical companies should be given financial incentives to
pursue such research. In September 2014, the White House released an executive order entitled “Combating
Antibiotic Resistant Bacteria,” calling upon various government agencies and the private sector to work
together to “accelerate basic and applied research and development for new antimicrobials, other therapeutics,
and vaccines.”[28] As a result, as of March 2015, President Obama’s proposed fiscal year 2016 budget
doubled the amount of federal funding to $1.2 billion for “combating and preventing antibiotic resistance,” which
includes money for antimicrobial research and development.[29] Similar suggestions have also been made on
a global scale. In December 2014, a report chaired by former Goldman Sachs economist Jim O’Neill was
published in The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance.[30]
These developments reflect the growing belief that for-profit pharmaceutical companies must be subsidized
to encourage development of new antimicrobials. But some ask whether pharmaceutical development should
be motivated by profit at all. Given that millions of lives may hang in the balance, some might argue that drug
companies have an ethical obligation to devote their research and development efforts to high-utility drugs,
as opposed to highly profitable ones. Yet this obligation conflicts with the fundamental goals of a for-profit
company. Are government subsidies enough to ensure that drug companies make the public interest a priority,
or should government agencies assume responsibility for developing critical drugs that may have little or no
return on investment?

Figure 14.22 In recent decades, approvals of new antimicrobials by the FDA have steadily fallen. In the fiveyear period from 1983–1987, 16 new antimicrobial drugs were approved, compared to just two from
2008–2012.

27. H.W. Boucher et al. “Bad Bugs, No Drugs: No ESKAPE! An Update from the Infectious Diseases Society of America.” Clinical
Infectious Diseases 48 no. 1 (2009):1–12.

647

648

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Link to Learning
To further examine the scope of the problem, view this (https://openstax.org/l/
22PBSDecAntimic) video.
To learn more (https://openstax.org/l/22MSUAntResLeaH) about the history
of antimicrobial drug discovery, visit Michigan State University’s Antimicrobial
Resistance Learning Site.

Summary
14.1 History of Chemotherapy and Antimicrobial Discovery
• Antimicrobial drugs produced by purposeful fermentation and/or contained in plants have been used as
traditional medicines in many cultures for millennia.
• The purposeful and systematic search for a chemical “magic bullet” that specifically target infectious microbes
was initiated by Paul Ehrlich in the early 20th century.
• The discovery of the natural antibiotic, penicillin, by Alexander Fleming in 1928 started the modern age of
antimicrobial discovery and research.
• Sulfanilamide, the first synthetic antimicrobial, was discovered by Gerhard Domagk and colleagues and is a
breakdown product of the synthetic dye, prontosil.
14.2 Fundamentals of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
• Antimicrobial drugs can be bacteriostatic or bactericidal, and these characteristics are important
considerations when selecting the most appropriate drug.
• The use of narrow-spectrum antimicrobial drugs is preferred in many cases to avoid superinfection and the
development of antimicrobial resistance.
• Broad-spectrum antimicrobial use is warranted for serious systemic infections when there is no time to
determine the causative agent, when narrow-spectrum antimicrobials fail, or for the treatment or prevention
of infections with multiple types of microbes.
• The dosage and route of administration are important considerations when selecting an antimicrobial to treat
and infection. Other considerations include the patient’s age, mass, ability to take oral medications, liver and
kidney function, and possible interactions with other drugs the patient may be taking.
14.3 Mechanisms of Antibacterial Drugs
• Antibacterial compounds exhibit selective toxicity, largely due to differences between prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cell structure.
• Cell wall synthesis inhibitors, including the β-lactams, the glycopeptides, and bacitracin, interfere with
peptidoglycan synthesis, making bacterial cells more prone to osmotic lysis.
• There are a variety of broad-spectrum, bacterial protein synthesis inhibitors that selectively target the
prokaryotic 70S ribosome, including those that bind to the 30S subunit (aminoglycosides and tetracyclines)
and others that bind to the 50S subunit (macrolides, lincosamides, chloramphenicol, and oxazolidinones).
• Polymyxins are lipophilic polypeptide antibiotics that target the lipopolysaccharide component of gramnegative bacteria and ultimately disrupt the integrity of the outer and inner membranes of these bacteria.

28. The White House. National Action Plan for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria. Washington, DC: The White House, 2015.
29. White House Office of the Press Secretary. “Fact Sheet: Obama Administration Releases National Action Plan to Combat AntibioticResistant Bacteria.” March 27, 2015. https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/03/27/fact-sheet-obama-administration-releasesnational-action-plan-combat-ant
30. Review on Antimicrobial Resistance. http://amr-review.org. Accessed June 1, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

649

• The nucleic acid synthesis inhibitors rifamycins and fluoroquinolones target bacterial RNA transcription and
DNA replication, respectively.
• Some antibacterial drugs are antimetabolites, acting as competitive inhibitors for bacterial metabolic
enzymes. Sulfonamides and trimethoprim are antimetabolites that interfere with bacterial folic acid
synthesis. Isoniazid is an antimetabolite that interferes with mycolic acid synthesis in mycobacteria.
14.4 Mechanisms of Other Antimicrobial Drugs
• Because fungi, protozoans, and helminths are eukaryotic organisms like human cells, it is more challenging to
develop antimicrobial drugs that specifically target them. Similarly, it is hard to target viruses because human
viruses replicate inside of human cells.
• Antifungal drugs interfere with ergosterol synthesis, bind to ergosterol to disrupt fungal cell membrane
integrity, or target cell wall-specific components or other cellular proteins.
• Antiprotozoan drugs increase cellular levels of reactive oxygen species, interfere with protozoal DNA
replication (nuclear versus kDNA, respectively), and disrupt heme detoxification.
• Antihelminthic drugs disrupt helminthic and protozoan microtubule formation; block neuronal
transmissions; inhibit anaerobic ATP formation and/or oxidative phosphorylation; induce a calcium influx in
tapeworms, leading to spasms and paralysis; and interfere with RNA synthesis in schistosomes.
• Antiviral drugs inhibit viral entry, inhibit viral uncoating, inhibit nucleic acid biosynthesis, prevent viral
escape from endosomes in host cells, and prevent viral release from infected cells.
• Because it can easily mutate to become drug resistant, HIV is typically treated with a combination of several
antiretroviral drugs, which may include reverse transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, integrase
inhibitors, and drugs that interfere with viral binding and fusion to initiate infection.
14.5 Drug Resistance
• Antimicrobial resistance is on the rise and is the result of selection of drug-resistant strains in clinical
environments, the overuse and misuse of antibacterials, the use of subtherapeutic doses of antibacterial drugs,
and poor patient compliance with antibacterial drug therapies.
• Drug resistance genes are often carried on plasmids or in transposons that can undergo vertical transfer easily
and between microbes through horizontal gene transfer.
• Common modes of antimicrobial drug resistance include drug modification or inactivation, prevention of
cellular uptake or efflux, target modification, target overproduction or enzymatic bypass, and target mimicry.
• Problematic microbial strains showing extensive antimicrobial resistance are emerging; many of these strains
can reside as members of the normal microbiota in individuals but also can cause opportunistic infection. The
transmission of many of these highly resistant microbial strains often occurs in clinical settings, but can also
be community-acquired.
14.6 Testing the Effectiveness of Antimicrobials
• The Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test helps determine the susceptibility of a microorganism to various
antimicrobial drugs. However, the zones of inhibition measured must be correlated to known standards to
determine susceptibility and resistance, and do not provide information on bactericidal versus bacteriostatic
activity, or allow for direct comparison of drug potencies.
• Antibiograms are useful for monitoring local trends in antimicrobial resistance/susceptibility and for directing
appropriate selection of empiric antibacterial therapy.
• There are several laboratory methods available for determining the minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) of an antimicrobial drug against a specific microbe. The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC)
can also be determined, typically as a follow-up experiment to MIC determination using the tube dilution
method.
14.7 Current Strategies for Antimicrobial Discovery
• Current research into the development of antimicrobial drugs involves the use of high-throughput screening
and combinatorial chemistry technologies.

650

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

• New technologies are being developed to discover novel antibiotics from soil microorganisms that cannot be
cultured by standard laboratory methods.
• Additional strategies include searching for antibiotics from sources other than soil, identifying new
antibacterial targets, using combinatorial chemistry to develop novel drugs, developing drugs that inhibit
resistance mechanisms, and developing drugs that target virulence factors and hold infections in check.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. A scientist discovers that a soil bacterium he has
been studying produces an antimicrobial that kills gramnegative bacteria. She isolates and purifies the
antimicrobial compound, then chemically converts a
chemical side chain to a hydroxyl group. When she
tests the antimicrobial properties of this new version,
she finds that this antimicrobial drug can now also kill
gram-positive bacteria. The new antimicrobial drug with
broad-spectrum activity is considered to be which of the
following?
a. resistant
b. semisynthetic
c. synthetic
d. natural
2. Which of the following antimicrobial drugs is
synthetic?
a. sulfanilamide
b. penicillin
c. actinomycin
d. neomycin

5. Which clinical situation would be appropriate for
treatment with a narrow-spectrum antimicrobial drug?
a. treatment of a polymicrobic mixed infection in
the intestine
b. prophylaxis against infection after a surgical
procedure
c. treatment of strep throat caused by culture
identified Streptococcus pyogenes
d. empiric therapy of pneumonia while waiting for
culture results
6. Which of the following terms refers to the ability of
an antimicrobial drug to harm the target microbe without
harming the host?
a. mode of action
b. therapeutic level
c. spectrum of activity
d. selective toxicity

3. Which of the following combinations would most
likely contribute to the development of a superinfection?

7. Which of the following is not a type of β-lactam
antimicrobial?
a. penicillins
b. glycopeptides
c. cephalosporins
d. monobactams

a. long-term use of narrow-spectrum antimicrobials
b. long-term use of broad-spectrum antimicrobials
c. short-term
use
of
narrow-spectrum
antimicrobials
d. short-term use of broad-spectrum antimicrobials

8. Which of the following does not bind to the 50S
ribosomal subunit?
a. tetracyclines
b. lincosamides
c. macrolides
d. chloramphenicol

4. Which of the following routes of administration
would be appropriate and convenient for home
administration of an antimicrobial to treat a systemic
infection?
a. oral
b. intravenous
c. topical
d. parenteral

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

9. Which of the following antimicrobials inhibits the
activity of DNA gyrase?
a. polymyxin B
b. clindamycin
c. nalidixic acid
d. rifampin
10. Which of the following is not an appropriate target
for antifungal drugs?
a. ergosterol
b. chitin
c. cholesterol
d. β(1→3) glucan

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

11. Which of the following drug classes specifically
inhibits neuronal transmission in helminths?
a. quinolines
b. avermectins
c. amantadines
d. imidazoles
12. Which of the following is a nucleoside analog
commonly used as a reverse transcriptase inhibitor in the
treatment of HIV?
a. acyclovir
b. ribavirin
c. adenine-arabinoside
d. azidothymidine
13. Which of the following is an antimalarial drug that
is thought to increase ROS levels in target cells?
a. artemisinin
b. amphotericin b
c. praziquantel
d. pleconaril
14. Which of the following resistance mechanisms
describes the function of β-lactamase?
a. efflux pump
b. target mimicry
c. drug inactivation
d. target overproduction
15. Which of the following resistance mechanisms is
commonly effective against a wide range of
antimicrobials in multiple classes?
a. efflux pump
b. target mimicry
c. target modification
d. target overproduction

651

18. In the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test, the _______
of the zone of inhibition is measured and used for
interpretation.
a. diameter
b. microbial population
c. circumference
d. depth
19. Which of the following techniques cannot be used
to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration of
an antimicrobial drug against a particular microbe?
a. Etest
b. microbroth dilution test
c. Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test
d. macrobroth dilution test
20. The utility of an antibiogram is that it shows
antimicrobial susceptibility trends
a. over a large geographic area.
b. for an individual patient.
c. in research laboratory strains.
d. in a localized population.
21. Which of the following has yielded compounds
with the most antimicrobial activity?
a. water
b. air
c. volcanoes
d. soil

16. Which of the following resistance mechanisms is
the most nonspecific to a particular class of
antimicrobials?
a. drug modification
b. target mimicry
c. target modification
d. efflux pump
17. Which of the following types of drug-resistant
bacteria do not typically persist in individuals as a
member of their intestinal microbiota?
a. MRSA
b. VRE
c. CRE
d. ESBL-producing bacteria
True/False

22. Narrow-spectrum antimicrobials are commonly used for prophylaxis following surgery.

652

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

23. β-lactamases can degrade vancomycin.
24. Echinocandins, known as “penicillin for fungi,” target β(1→3) glucan in fungal cell walls.
25. If drug A produces a larger zone of inhibition than drug B on the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test, drug A should
always be prescribed.
26. The rate of discovery of antimicrobial drugs has decreased significantly in recent decades.
Fill in the Blank

27. The group of soil bacteria known for their ability to produce a wide variety of antimicrobials is called the
________.
28. The bacterium known for causing pseudomembranous colitis, a potentially deadly superinfection, is ________.
29. Selective toxicity antimicrobials are easier to develop against bacteria because they are ________ cells, whereas
human cells are eukaryotic.
30. Antiviral drugs, like Tamiflu and Relenza, that are effective against the influenza virus by preventing viral escape
from host cells are called ________.
31. Staphylococcus aureus, including MRSA strains, may commonly be carried as a normal member of the
________ microbiota in some people.
32. The method that can determine the MICs of multiple antimicrobial drugs against a microbial strain using a single
agar plate is called the ________.
Short Answer

33. Where do antimicrobials come from naturally? Why?
34. Why was Salvarsan considered to be a “magic bullet” for the treatment of syphilis?
35. When prescribing antibiotics, what aspects of the patient’s health history should the clinician ask about and
why?
36. When is using a broad-spectrum antimicrobial drug warranted?
37. If human cells and bacterial cells perform transcription, how are the rifamycins specific for bacterial infections?
38. What bacterial structural target would make an antibacterial drug selective for gram-negative bacteria? Provide
one example of an antimicrobial compound that targets this structure.
39. How does the biology of HIV necessitate the need to treat HIV infections with multiple drugs?
40. Niclosamide is insoluble and thus is not readily absorbed from the stomach into the bloodstream. How does the
insolubility of niclosamide aid its effectiveness as a treatment for tapeworm infection?
41. Why does the length of time of antimicrobial treatment for tuberculosis contribute to the rise of resistant strains?
42. What is the difference between multidrug resistance and cross-resistance?
43. How is the information from a Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test used for the recommendation of the clinical use
of an antimicrobial drug?
44. What is the difference between MIC and MBC?
Critical Thinking

45. In nature, why do antimicrobial-producing microbes commonly also have antimicrobial resistance genes?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

653

46. Why are yeast infections a common type of superinfection that results from long-term use of broad-spectrum
antimicrobials?
47. Too often patients will stop taking antimicrobial drugs before the prescription is finished. What are factors that
cause a patient to stop too soon, and what negative impacts could this have?
48. In considering the cell structure of prokaryotes compared with that of eukaryotes, propose one possible reason
for side effects in humans due to treatment of bacterial infections with protein synthesis inhibitors.
49. Which of the following molecules is an example of a nucleoside analog?

50. Why can’t drugs used to treat influenza, like amantadines and neuraminidase inhibitors, be used to treat a wider
variety of viral infections?
51. Can an Etest be used to find the MBC of a drug? Explain.
52. Who should be responsible for discovering and developing new antibiotics? Support your answer with
reasoning.

654

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 14 | Antimicrobial Drugs

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

697

Chapter 16

Disease and Epidemiology

Figure 16.1 Signs like this may seem self-explanatory today, but a few short centuries ago, people lacked a basic
understanding of how diseases spread. Microbiology has greatly contributed to the field of epidemiology, which
focuses on containing the spread of disease. (credit: modification of work by Tony Webster)

Chapter Outline
16.1 The Language of Epidemiologists
16.2 Tracking Infectious Diseases
16.3 Modes of Disease Transmission
16.4 Global Public Health

Introduction
In the United States and other developed nations, public health is a key function of government. A healthy citizenry
is more productive, content, and prosperous; high rates of death and disease, on the other hand, can severely hamper
economic productivity and foster social and political instability. The burden of disease makes it difficult for citizens to
work consistently, maintain employment, and accumulate wealth to better their lives and support a growing economy.
In this chapter, we will explore the intersections between microbiology and epidemiology, the science that underlies
public health. Epidemiology studies how disease originates and spreads throughout a population, with the goal
of preventing outbreaks and containing them when they do occur. Over the past two centuries, discoveries in
epidemiology have led to public health policies that have transformed life in developed nations, leading to the
eradication (or near eradication) of many diseases that were once causes of great human suffering and premature
death. However, the work of epidemiologists is far from finished. Numerous diseases continue to plague humanity,
and new diseases are always emerging. Moreover, in the developing world, lack of infrastructure continues to pose
many challenges to efforts to contain disease.

698

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

16.1 The Language of Epidemiologists
Learning Objectives
• Explain the difference between prevalence and incidence of disease
• Distinguish the characteristics of sporadic, endemic, epidemic, and pandemic diseases
• Explain the use of Koch’s postulates and their modifications to determine the etiology of disease
• Explain the relationship between epidemiology and public health

The field of epidemiology concerns the geographical distribution and timing of infectious disease occurrences
and how they are transmitted and maintained in nature, with the goal of recognizing and controlling outbreaks.
The science of epidemiology includes etiology (the study of the causes of disease) and investigation of disease
transmission (mechanisms by which a disease is spread).

Analyzing Disease in a Population
Epidemiological analyses are always carried out with reference to a population, which is the group of individuals that
are at risk for the disease or condition. The population can be defined geographically, but if only a portion of the
individuals in that area are susceptible, additional criteria may be required. Susceptible individuals may be defined by
particular behaviors, such as intravenous drug use, owning particular pets, or membership in an institution, such as a
college. Being able to define the population is important because most measures of interest in epidemiology are made
with reference to the size of the population.
The state of being diseased is called morbidity. Morbidity in a population can be expressed in a few different ways.
Morbidity or total morbidity is expressed in numbers of individuals without reference to the size of the population.
The morbidity rate can be expressed as the number of diseased individuals out of a standard number of individuals
in the population, such as 100,000, or as a percent of the population.
There are two aspects of morbidity that are relevant to an epidemiologist: a disease’s prevalence and its incidence.
Prevalence is the number, or proportion, of individuals with a particular illness in a given population at a point in
time. For example, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated that in 2012, there were about
1.2 million people 13 years and older with an active human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Expressed as a
proportion, or rate, this is a prevalence of 467 infected persons per 100,000 in the population.[1] On the other hand,
incidence is the number or proportion of new cases in a period of time. For the same year and population, the CDC
estimates that there were 43,165 newly diagnosed cases of HIV infection, which is an incidence of 13.7 new cases

Clinical Focus
Part 1
In late November and early December, a hospital in western Florida started to see a spike in the number
of cases of acute gastroenteritis-like symptoms. Patients began arriving at the emergency department
complaining of excessive bouts of emesis (vomiting) and diarrhea (with no blood in the stool). They also
complained of abdominal pain and cramping, and most were severely dehydrated. Alarmed by the number
of cases, hospital staff made some calls and learned that other regional hospitals were also seeing 10 to 20
similar cases per day.

• What are some possible causes of this outbreak?
• In what ways could these cases be linked, and how could any suspected links be confirmed?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

699

per 100,000 in the population.[2] The relationship between incidence and prevalence can be seen in Figure 16.2.
For a chronic disease like HIV infection, prevalence will generally be higher than incidence because it represents the
cumulative number of new cases over many years minus the number of cases that are no longer active (e.g., because
the patient died or was cured).
In addition to morbidity rates, the incidence and prevalence of mortality (death) may also be reported. A mortality
rate can be expressed as the percentage of the population that has died from a disease or as the number of deaths per
100,000 persons (or other suitable standard number).

Figure 16.2 This graph compares the incidence of HIV (the number of new cases reported each year) with the
prevalence (the total number of cases each year). Prevalence and incidence can also be expressed as a rate or
proportion for a given population.

• Explain the difference between incidence and prevalence.
• Describe how morbidity and mortality rates are expressed.

Patterns of Incidence
Diseases that are seen only occasionally, and usually without geographic concentration, are called sporadic diseases.
Examples of sporadic diseases include tetanus, rabies, and plague. In the United States, Clostridium tetani, the
bacterium that causes tetanus, is ubiquitous in the soil environment, but incidences of infection occur only rarely and
in scattered locations because most individuals are vaccinated, clean wounds appropriately, or are only rarely in a
situation that would cause infection.[3] Likewise in the United States there are a few scattered cases of plague each
year, usually contracted from rodents in rural areas in the western states.[4]

1. H. Irene Hall, Qian An, Tian Tang, Ruiguang Song, Mi Chen, Timothy Green, and Jian Kang. “Prevalence of Diagnosed and
Undiagnosed HIV Infection—United States, 2008–2012.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 64, no. 24 (2015): 657–662.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Diagnoses of HIV Infection in the United States and Dependent Areas, 2014.” HIV
Surveillance Report 26 (2015).
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Tetanus Surveillance—United States, 2001–2008.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
60, no. 12 (2011): 365.

700

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

Diseases that are constantly present (often at a low level) in a population within a particular geographic region are
called endemic diseases. For example, malaria is endemic to some regions of Brazil, but is not endemic to the United
States.
Diseases for which a larger than expected number of cases occurs in a short time within a geographic region are called
epidemic diseases. Influenza is a good example of a commonly epidemic disease. Incidence patterns of influenza
tend to rise each winter in the northern hemisphere. These seasonal increases are expected, so it would not be accurate
to say that influenza is epidemic every winter; however, some winters have an usually large number of seasonal
influenza cases in particular regions, and such situations would qualify as epidemics (Figure 16.3 and Figure 16.4).
An epidemic disease signals the breakdown of an equilibrium in disease frequency, often resulting from some change
in environmental conditions or in the population. In the case of influenza, the disruption can be due to antigenic shift
or drift (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens), which allows influenza virus strains to
circumvent the acquired immunity of their human hosts.
An epidemic that occurs on a worldwide scale is called a pandemic disease. For example, HIV/AIDS is a pandemic
disease and novel influenza virus strains often become pandemic.

Figure 16.3 The 2007–2008 influenza season in the United States saw much higher than normal numbers of visits
to emergency departments for influenza-like symptoms as compared to the previous and the following years. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Plague in the United States.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/plague/maps. Accessed June 1,
2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

Figure 16.4 The seasonal epidemic threshold (blue curve) is set by the CDC-based data from the previous five
years. When actual mortality rates exceed this threshold, a disease is considered to be epidemic. As this graph
shows, pneumonia- and influenza-related mortality saw pronounced epidemics during the winters of 2003–2004,
2005, and 2008. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Explain the difference between sporadic and endemic disease.
• Explain the difference between endemic and epidemic disease.

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Hospital physicians suspected that some type of food poisoning was to blame for the sudden postThanksgiving outbreak of gastroenteritis in western Florida. Over a two-week period, 254 cases were
observed, but by the end of the first week of December, the epidemic ceased just as quickly as it had started.
Suspecting a link between the cases based on the localized nature of the outbreak, hospitals handed over their
medical records to the regional public health office for study.
Laboratory testing of stool samples had indicated that the infections were caused by Salmonella bacteria.
Patients ranged from children as young as three to seniors in their late eighties. Cases were nearly evenly
split between males and females. Across the region, there had been three confirmed deaths in the outbreak,
all due to severe dehydration. In each of the fatal cases, the patients had not sought medical care until their
symptoms were severe; also, all of the deceased had preexisting medical conditions such as congestive heart
failure, diabetes, or high blood pressure.

701

702

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

After reviewing the medical records, epidemiologists with the public health office decided to conduct interviews
with a randomly selected sample of patients.

• What conclusions, if any, can be drawn from the medical records?
• What would epidemiologists hope to learn by interviewing patients? What kinds of questions might they
ask?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Etiology
When studying an epidemic, an epidemiologist’s first task is to determinate the cause of the disease, called the
etiologic agent or causative agent. Connecting a disease to a specific pathogen can be challenging because of the
extra effort typically required to demonstrate direct causation as opposed to a simple association. It is not enough to
observe an association between a disease and a suspected pathogen; controlled experiments are needed to eliminate
other possible causes. In addition, pathogens are typically difficult to detect when there is no immediate clue as to
what is causing the outbreak. Signs and symptoms of disease are also commonly nonspecific, meaning that many
different agents can give rise to the same set of signs and symptoms. This complicates diagnosis even when a
causative agent is familiar to scientists.
Robert Koch was the first scientist to specifically demonstrate the causative agent of a disease (anthrax) in the late
1800s. Koch developed four criteria, now known as Koch’s postulates, which had to be met in order to positively
link a disease with a pathogenic microbe. Without Koch’s postulates, the Golden Age of Microbiology would not
have occurred. Between 1876 and 1905, many common diseases were linked with their etiologic agents, including
cholera, diphtheria, gonorrhea, meningitis, plague, syphilis, tetanus, and tuberculosis. Today, we use the molecular
Koch’s postulates, a variation of Koch’s original postulates that can be used to establish a link between the disease
state and virulence traits unique to a pathogenic strain of a microbe. Koch’s original postulates and molecular Koch’s
postulates were described in more detail in How Pathogens Cause Disease.

• List some challenges to determining the causative agent of a disease outbreak.

The Role of Public Health Organizations
The main national public health agency in the United States is the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), an agency of the Department of Health and Human Services. The CDC is charged with protecting the public
from disease and injury. One way that the CDC carries out this mission is by overseeing the National Notifiable
Disease Surveillance System (NNDSS) in cooperation with regional, state, and territorial public health departments.
The NNDSS monitors diseases considered to be of public health importance on a national scale. Such diseases are
called notifiable diseases or reportable diseases because all cases must be reported to the CDC. A physician treating
a patient with a notifiable disease is legally required to submit a report on the case. Notifiable diseases include HIV
infection, measles, West Nile virus infections, and many others. Some states have their own lists of notifiable diseases
that include diseases beyond those on the CDC’s list.
Notifiable diseases are tracked by epidemiological studies and the data is used to inform health-care providers and
the public about possible risks. The CDC publishes the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), which
provides physicians and health-care workers with updates on public health issues and the latest data pertaining to
notifiable diseases. Table 16.1 is an example of the kind of data contained in the MMWR.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

703

Incidence of Four Notifiable Diseases in the United States, Week Ending January 2, 2016
Disease

Current Week
(Jan 2, 2016)

Median of
Previous 52
Weeks

Maximum of
Previous 52 Weeks

Cumulative
Cases 2015

Campylobacteriosis

406

869

1,385

46,618

Chlamydia
trachomatis
infection

11,024

28,562

31,089

1,425,303

Giardiasis

115

230

335

11,870

Gonorrhea

3,207

7,155

8,283

369,926

Table 16.1

Link to Learning
The current Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (https://openstax.org/l/
22mortweekrep) is available online.

• Describe how health agencies obtain data about the incidence of diseases of public health importance.

16.2 Tracking Infectious Diseases
Learning Objectives
• Explain the research approaches used by the pioneers of epidemiology
• Explain how descriptive, analytical, and experimental epidemiological studies go about determining the cause of

morbidity and mortality
Epidemiology has its roots in the work of physicians who looked for patterns in disease occurrence as a way to
understand how to prevent it. The idea that disease could be transmitted was an important precursor to making sense
of some of the patterns. In 1546, Girolamo Fracastoro first proposed the germ theory of disease in his essay De
Contagione et Contagiosis Morbis, but this theory remained in competition with other theories, such as the miasma
hypothesis, for many years (see What Our Ancestors Knew). Uncertainty about the cause of disease was not
an absolute barrier to obtaining useful knowledge from patterns of disease. Some important researchers, such as
Florence Nightingale, subscribed to the miasma hypothesis. The transition to acceptance of the germ theory during
the 19th century provided a solid mechanistic grounding to the study of disease patterns. The studies of 19th century
physicians and researchers such as John Snow, Florence Nightingale, Ignaz Semmelweis, Joseph Lister, Robert Koch,
Louis Pasteur, and others sowed the seeds of modern epidemiology.

704

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

Pioneers of Epidemiology
John Snow (Figure 16.5) was a British physician known as the father of epidemiology for determining the source
of the 1854 Broad Street cholera epidemic in London. Based on observations he had made during an earlier cholera
outbreak (1848–1849), Snow proposed that cholera was spread through a fecal-oral route of transmission and that
a microbe was the infectious agent. He investigated the 1854 cholera epidemic in two ways. First, suspecting that
contaminated water was the source of the epidemic, Snow identified the source of water for those infected. He found
a high frequency of cholera cases among individuals who obtained their water from the River Thames downstream
from London. This water contained the refuse and sewage from London and settlements upstream. He also noted
that brewery workers did not contract cholera and on investigation found the owners provided the workers with beer
to drink and stated that they likely did not drink water.[5] Second, he also painstakingly mapped the incidence of
cholera and found a high frequency among those individuals using a particular water pump located on Broad Street.
In response to Snow’s advice, local officials removed the pump’s handle,[6] resulting in the containment of the Broad
Street cholera epidemic.
Snow’s work represents an early epidemiological study and it resulted in the first known public health response to an
epidemic. Snow’s meticulous case-tracking methods are now common practice in studying disease outbreaks and in
associating new diseases with their causes. His work further shed light on unsanitary sewage practices and the effects
of waste dumping in the Thames. Additionally, his work supported the germ theory of disease, which argued disease
could be transmitted through contaminated items, including water contaminated with fecal matter.
Snow’s work illustrated what is referred to today as a common source spread of infectious disease, in which there is
a single source for all of the individuals infected. In this case, the single source was the contaminated well below the
Broad Street pump. Types of common source spread include point source spread, continuous common source spread,
and intermittent common source spread. In point source spread of infectious disease, the common source operates
for a short time period—less than the incubation period of the pathogen. An example of point source spread is a
single contaminated potato salad at a group picnic. In continuous common source spread, the infection occurs for an
extended period of time, longer than the incubation period. An example of continuous common source spread would
be the source of London water taken downstream of the city, which was continuously contaminated with sewage
from upstream. Finally, with intermittent common source spread, infections occur for a period, stop, and then begin
again. This might be seen in infections from a well that was contaminated only after large rainfalls and that cleared
itself of contamination after a short period.
In contrast to common source spread, propagated spread occurs through direct or indirect person-to-person contact.
With propagated spread, there is no single source for infection; each infected individual becomes a source for one or
more subsequent infections. With propagated spread, unless the spread is stopped immediately, infections occur for
longer than the incubation period. Although point sources often lead to large-scale but localized outbreaks of short
duration, propagated spread typically results in longer duration outbreaks that can vary from small to large, depending
on the population and the disease (Figure 16.6). In addition, because of person-to-person transmission, propagated
spread cannot be easily stopped at a single source like point source spread.

5. John Snow. On the Mode of Communication of Cholera. Second edition, Much Enlarged. John Churchill, 1855.
6. John Snow. “The Cholera near Golden-Wquare, and at Deptford.” Medical Times and Gazette 9 (1854): 321–322.
http://www.ph.ucla.edu/epi/snow/choleragoldensquare.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

705

Figure 16.5 (a) John Snow (1813–1858), British physician and father of epidemiology. (b) Snow’s detailed mapping
of cholera incidence led to the discovery of the contaminated water pump on Broad street (red square) responsible
for the 1854 cholera epidemic. (credit a: modification of work by “Rsabbatini”/Wikimedia Commons)

Figure 16.6 (a) Outbreaks that can be attributed to point source spread often have a short duration. (b) Outbreaks
attributed to propagated spread can have a more extended duration. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)

Florence Nightingale’s work is another example of an early epidemiological study. In 1854, Nightingale was part
of a contingent of nurses dispatched by the British military to care for wounded soldiers during the Crimean War.
Nightingale kept meticulous records regarding the causes of illness and death during the war. Her recordkeeping was a
fundamental task of what would later become the science of epidemiology. Her analysis of the data she collected was
published in 1858. In this book, she presented monthly frequency data on causes of death in a wedge chart histogram
(Figure 16.7). This graphical presentation of data, unusual at the time, powerfully illustrated that the vast majority of

706

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

casualties during the war occurred not due to wounds sustained in action but to what Nightingale deemed preventable
infectious diseases. Often these diseases occurred because of poor sanitation and lack of access to hospital facilities.
Nightingale’s findings led to many reforms in the British military’s system of medical care.
Joseph Lister provided early epidemiological evidence leading to good public health practices in clinics and hospitals.
These settings were notorious in the mid-1800s for fatal infections of surgical wounds at a time when the germ
theory of disease was not yet widely accepted (see Foundations of Modern Cell Theory). Most physicians did
not wash their hands between patient visits or clean and sterilize their surgical tools. Lister, however, discovered
the disinfecting properties of carbolic acid, also known as phenol (see Using Chemicals to Control
Microorganisms). He introduced several disinfection protocols that dramatically lowered post-surgical infection
rates.[7] He demanded that surgeons who worked for him use a 5% carbolic acid solution to clean their surgical
tools between patients, and even went so far as to spray the solution onto bandages and over the surgical site during
operations (Figure 16.8). He also took precautions not to introduce sources of infection from his skin or clothing by
removing his coat, rolling up his sleeves, and washing his hands in a dilute solution of carbolic acid before and during
the surgery.

Figure 16.7 (a) Florence Nightingale reported on the data she collected as a nurse in the Crimean War. (b)
Nightingale’s diagram shows the number of fatalities in soldiers by month of the conflict from various causes. The
total number dead in a particular month is equal to the area of the wedge for that month. The colored sections of the
wedge represent different causes of death: wounds (pink), preventable infectious diseases (gray), and all other
causes (brown).

7. O.M. Lidwell. “Joseph Lister and Infection from the Air.” Epidemiology and Infection 99 (1987): 569–578. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC2249236/pdf/epidinfect00006-0004.pdf.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

707

Figure 16.8 Joseph Lister initiated the use of a carbolic acid (phenol) during surgeries. This illustration of a surgery
shows a pressurized canister of carbolic acid being sprayed over the surgical site.

Link to Learning
Visit the website (https://openstax.org/l/22theghostmap) for The Ghost Map,
a book about Snow’s work related to the Broad Street pump cholera outbreak.
John Snow’s own account of his work (https://openstax.org/l/
22JohnSnowacco) has additional links and information.
This CDC resource (https://openstax.org/l/22CDCpointsourc) further breaks down
the pattern expected from a point-source outbreak.
Learn more about Nightingale’s wedge chart (https://openstax.org/l/
22nightwedgecha) here.

• Explain the difference between common source spread and propagated spread of disease.
• Describe how the observations of John Snow, Florence Nightingale, and Joseph Lister led to improvements
in public health.

Types of Epidemiological Studies
Today, epidemiologists make use of study designs, the manner in which data are gathered to test a hypothesis,
similar to those of researchers studying other phenomena that occur in populations. These approaches can be divided
into observational studies (in which subjects are not manipulated) and experimental studies (in which subjects
are manipulated). Collectively, these studies give modern-day epidemiologists multiple tools for exploring the
connections between infectious diseases and the populations of susceptible individuals they might infect.

Observational Studies
In an observational study, data are gathered from study participants through measurements (such as physiological
variables like white blood cell count), or answers to questions in interviews (such as recent travel or exercise

708

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

frequency). The subjects in an observational study are typically chosen at random from a population of affected or
unaffected individuals. However, the subjects in an observational study are in no way manipulated by the researcher.
Observational studies are typically easier to carry out than experimental studies, and in certain situations they may be
the only studies possible for ethical reasons.
Observational studies are only able to measure associations between disease occurrence and possible causative agents;
they do not necessarily prove a causal relationship. For example, suppose a study finds an association between heavy
coffee drinking and lower incidence of skin cancer. This might suggest that coffee prevents skin cancer, but there
may be another unmeasured factor involved, such as the amount of sun exposure the participants receive. If it turns
out that coffee drinkers work more in offices and spend less time outside in the sun than those who drink less coffee,
then it may be possible that the lower rate of skin cancer is due to less sun exposure, not to coffee consumption. The
observational study cannot distinguish between these two potential causes.
There are several useful approaches in observational studies. These include methods classified as descriptive
epidemiology and analytical epidemiology. Descriptive epidemiology gathers information about a disease outbreak,
the affected individuals, and how the disease has spread over time in an exploratory stage of study. This type of study
will involve interviews with patients, their contacts, and their family members; examination of samples and medical
records; and even histories of food and beverages consumed. Such a study might be conducted while the outbreak is
still occurring. Descriptive studies might form the basis for developing a hypothesis of causation that could be tested
by more rigorous observational and experimental studies.
Analytical epidemiology employs carefully selected groups of individuals in an attempt to more convincingly
evaluate hypotheses about potential causes for a disease outbreak. The selection of cases is generally made at random,
so the results are not biased because of some common characteristic of the study participants. Analytical studies
may gather their data by going back in time (retrospective studies), or as events unfold forward in time (prospective
studies).
Retrospective studies gather data from the past on present-day cases. Data can include things like the medical history,
age, gender, or occupational history of the affected individuals. This type of study examines associations between
factors chosen or available to the researcher and disease occurrence.
Prospective studies follow individuals and monitor their disease state during the course of the study. Data on the
characteristics of the study subjects and their environments are gathered at the beginning and during the study so that
subjects who become ill may be compared with those who do not. Again, the researchers can look for associations
between the disease state and variables that were measured during the study to shed light on possible causes.
Analytical studies incorporate groups into their designs to assist in teasing out associations with disease. Approaches
to group-based analytical studies include cohort studies, case-control studies, and cross-sectional studies. The cohort
method examines groups of individuals (called cohorts) who share a particular characteristic. For example, a cohort
might consist of individuals born in the same year and the same place; or it might consist of people who practice or
avoid a particular behavior, e.g., smokers or nonsmokers. In a cohort study, cohorts can be followed prospectively
or studied retrospectively. If only a single cohort is followed, then the affected individuals are compared with the
unaffected individuals in the same group. Disease outcomes are recorded and analyzed to try to identify correlations
between characteristics of individuals in the cohort and disease incidence. Cohort studies are a useful way to
determine the causes of a condition without violating the ethical prohibition of exposing subjects to a risk factor.
Cohorts are typically identified and defined based on suspected risk factors to which individuals have already been
exposed through their own choices or circumstances.
Case-control studies are typically retrospective and compare a group of individuals with a disease to a similar group
of individuals without the disease. Case-control studies are far more efficient than cohort studies because researchers
can deliberately select subjects who are already affected with the disease as opposed to waiting to see which subjects
from a random sample will develop a disease.
A cross-sectional study analyzes randomly selected individuals in a population and compares individuals affected
by a disease or condition to those unaffected at a single point in time. Subjects are compared to look for associations

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

709

between certain measurable variables and the disease or condition. Cross-sectional studies are also used to determine
the prevalence of a condition.

Experimental Studies
Experimental epidemiology uses laboratory or clinical studies in which the investigator manipulates the study
subjects to study the connections between diseases and potential causative agents or to assess treatments. Examples
of treatments might be the administration of a drug, the inclusion or exclusion of different dietary items, physical
exercise, or a particular surgical procedure. Animals or humans are used as test subjects. Because experimental
studies involve manipulation of subjects, they are typically more difficult and sometimes impossible for ethical
reasons.
Koch’s postulates require experimental interventions to determine the causative agent for a disease. Unlike
observational studies, experimental studies can provide strong evidence supporting cause because other factors are
typically held constant when the researcher manipulates the subject. The outcomes for one group receiving the
treatment are compared to outcomes for a group that does not receive the treatment but is treated the same in every
other way. For example, one group might receive a regimen of a drug administered as a pill, while the untreated group
receives a placebo (a pill that looks the same but has no active ingredient). Both groups are treated as similarly as
possible except for the administration of the drug. Because other variables are held constant in both the treated and
the untreated groups, the researcher is more certain that any change in the treated group is a result of the specific
manipulation.
Experimental studies provide the strongest evidence for the etiology of disease, but they must also be designed
carefully to eliminate subtle effects of bias. Typically, experimental studies with humans are conducted as doubleblind studies, meaning neither the subjects nor the researchers know who is a treatment case and who is not. This
design removes a well-known cause of bias in research called the placebo effect, in which knowledge of the treatment
by either the subject or the researcher can influence the outcomes.

• Describe the advantages and disadvantages of observational studies and experimental studies.
• Explain the ways that groups of subjects can be selected for analytical studies.

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Since laboratory tests had confirmed Salmonella, a common foodborne pathogen, as the etiologic agent,
epidemiologists suspected that the outbreak was caused by contamination at a food processing facility
serving the region. Interviews with patients focused on food consumption during and after the Thanksgiving
holiday, corresponding with the timing of the outbreak. During the interviews, patients were asked to list items
consumed at holiday gatherings and describe how widely each item was consumed among family members
and relatives. They were also asked about the sources of food items (e.g., brand, location of purchase, date
of purchase). By asking such questions, health officials hoped to identify patterns that would lead back to the
source of the outbreak.
Analysis of the interview responses eventually linked almost all of the cases to consumption of a holiday dish
known as the turducken—a chicken stuffed inside a duck stuffed inside a turkey. Turducken is a dish not
generally consumed year-round, which would explain the spike in cases just after the Thanksgiving holiday.
Additional analysis revealed that the turduckens consumed by the affected patients were purchased already

710

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

stuffed and ready to be cooked. Moreover, the pre-stuffed turduckens were all sold at the same regional
grocery chain under two different brand names. Upon further investigation, officials traced both brands to a
single processing plant that supplied stores throughout the Florida panhandle.

• Is this an example of common source spread or propagated spread?
• What next steps would the public health office likely take after identifying the source of the outbreak?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

16.3 Modes of Disease Transmission
Learning Objectives
• Describe the different types of disease reservoirs
• Compare contact, vector, and vehicle modes of transmission
• Identify important disease vectors
• Explain the prevalence of nosocomial infections

Understanding how infectious pathogens spread is critical to preventing infectious disease. Many pathogens require
a living host to survive, while others may be able to persist in a dormant state outside of a living host. But having
infected one host, all pathogens must also have a mechanism of transfer from one host to another or they will die
when their host dies. Pathogens often have elaborate adaptations to exploit host biology, behavior, and ecology to live
in and move between hosts. Hosts have evolved defenses against pathogens, but because their rates of evolution are
typically slower than their pathogens (because their generation times are longer), hosts are usually at an evolutionary
disadvantage. This section will explore where pathogens survive—both inside and outside hosts—and some of the
many ways they move from one host to another.

Reservoirs and Carriers
For pathogens to persist over long periods of time they require reservoirs where they normally reside. Reservoirs
can be living organisms or nonliving sites. Nonliving reservoirs can include soil and water in the environment. These
may naturally harbor the organism because it may grow in that environment. These environments may also become
contaminated with pathogens in human feces, pathogens shed by intermediate hosts, or pathogens contained in the
remains of intermediate hosts.
Pathogens may have mechanisms of dormancy or resilience that allow them to survive (but typically not to reproduce)
for varying periods of time in nonliving environments. For example, Clostridium tetani survives in the soil and in
the presence of oxygen as a resistant endospore. Although many viruses are soon destroyed once in contact with air,
water, or other non-physiological conditions, certain types are capable of persisting outside of a living cell for varying
amounts of time. For example, a study that looked at the ability of influenza viruses to infect a cell culture after
varying amounts of time on a banknote showed survival times from 48 hours to 17 days, depending on how they were
deposited on the banknote.[8] On the other hand, cold-causing rhinoviruses are somewhat fragile, typically surviving
less than a day outside of physiological fluids.
A human acting as a reservoir of a pathogen may or may not be capable of transmitting the pathogen, depending
on the stage of infection and the pathogen. To help prevent the spread of disease among school children, the CDC
has developed guidelines based on the risk of transmission during the course of the disease. For example, children
8. Yves Thomas, Guido Vogel, Werner Wunderli, Patricia Suter, Mark Witschi, Daniel Koch, Caroline Tapparel, and Laurent Kaiser.
“Survival of Influenza Virus on Banknotes.” Applied and Environmental Microbiology 74, no. 10 (2008): 3002–3007.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

711

with chickenpox are considered contagious for five days from the start of the rash, whereas children with most
gastrointestinal illnesses should be kept home for 24 hours after the symptoms disappear.
An individual capable of transmitting a pathogen without displaying symptoms is referred to as a carrier. A passive
carrier is contaminated with the pathogen and can mechanically transmit it to another host; however, a passive carrier
is not infected. For example, a health-care professional who fails to wash his hands after seeing a patient harboring an
infectious agent could become a passive carrier, transmitting the pathogen to another patient who becomes infected.
By contrast, an active carrier is an infected individual who can transmit the disease to others. An active carrier
may or may not exhibit signs or symptoms of infection. For example, active carriers may transmit the disease during
the incubation period (before they show signs and symptoms) or the period of convalescence (after symptoms have
subsided). Active carriers who do not present signs or symptoms of disease despite infection are called asymptomatic
carriers. Pathogens such as hepatitis B virus, herpes simplex virus, and HIV are frequently transmitted by
asymptomatic carriers. Mary Mallon, better known as Typhoid Mary, is a famous historical example of an
asymptomatic carrier. An Irish immigrant, Mallon worked as a cook for households in and around New York City
between 1900 and 1915. In each household, the residents developed typhoid fever (caused by Salmonella typhi) a
few weeks after Mallon started working. Later investigations determined that Mallon was responsible for at least 122
cases of typhoid fever, five of which were fatal.[9] See Eye on Ethics: Typhoid Mary for more about the Mallon
case.
A pathogen may have more than one living reservoir. In zoonotic diseases, animals act as reservoirs of human disease
and transmit the infectious agent to humans through direct or indirect contact. In some cases, the disease also affects
the animal, but in other cases the animal is asymptomatic.
In parasitic infections, the parasite’s preferred host is called the definitive host. In parasites with complex life cycles,
the definitive host is the host in which the parasite reaches sexual maturity. Some parasites may also infect one
or more intermediate hosts in which the parasite goes through several immature life cycle stages or reproduces
asexually.

Link to Learning
George Soper, the sanitary engineer who traced the typhoid outbreak to Mary
Mallon, gives an account (https://openstax.org/l/22geosopcurtyp) of his
investigation, an example of descriptive epidemiology, in “The Curious Career of
Typhoid Mary.”

• List some nonliving reservoirs for pathogens.
• Explain the difference between a passive carrier and an active carrier.

Transmission
Regardless of the reservoir, transmission must occur for an infection to spread. First, transmission from the reservoir
to the individual must occur. Then, the individual must transmit the infectious agent to other susceptible individuals,
either directly or indirectly. Pathogenic microorganisms employ diverse transmission mechanisms.
9. Filio Marineli, Gregory Tsoucalas, Marianna Karamanou, and George Androutsos. “Mary Mallon (1869–1938) and the History of
Typhoid Fever.” Annals of Gastroenterology 26 (2013): 132–134. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3959940/pdf/
AnnGastroenterol-26-132.pdf.

712

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

Contact Transmission
Contact transmission includes direct contact or indirect contact. Person-to-person transmission is a form of direct
contact transmission. Here the agent is transmitted by physical contact between two individuals (Figure 16.9)
through actions such as touching, kissing, sexual intercourse, or droplet sprays. Direct contact can be categorized
as vertical, horizontal, or droplet transmission. Vertical direct contact transmission occurs when pathogens are
transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy, birth, or breastfeeding. Other kinds of direct contact transmission
are called horizontal direct contact transmission. Often, contact between mucous membranes is required for entry
of the pathogen into the new host, although skin-to-skin contact can lead to mucous membrane contact if the new
host subsequently touches a mucous membrane. Contact transmission may also be site-specific; for example, some
diseases can be transmitted by sexual contact but not by other forms of contact.
When an individual coughs or sneezes, small droplets of mucus that may contain pathogens are ejected. This leads
to direct droplet transmission, which refers to droplet transmission of a pathogen to a new host over distances of
one meter or less. A wide variety of diseases are transmitted by droplets, including influenza and many forms of
pneumonia. Transmission over distances greater than one meter is called airborne transmission.
Indirect contact transmission involves inanimate objects called fomites that become contaminated by pathogens
from an infected individual or reservoir (Figure 16.10). For example, an individual with the common cold may
sneeze, causing droplets to land on a fomite such as a tablecloth or carpet, or the individual may wipe her nose and
then transfer mucus to a fomite such as a doorknob or towel. Transmission occurs indirectly when a new susceptible
host later touches the fomite and transfers the contaminated material to a susceptible portal of entry. Fomites can
also include objects used in clinical settings that are not properly sterilized, such as syringes, needles, catheters,
and surgical equipment. Pathogens transmitted indirectly via such fomites are a major cause of healthcare-associated
infections (see Controlling Microbial Growth).

Figure 16.9 Direct contact transmission of pathogens can occur through physical contact. Many pathogens require
contact with a mucous membrane to enter the body, but the host may transfer the pathogen from another point of
contact (e.g., hand) to a mucous membrane (e.g., mouth or eye). (credit left: modification of work by Lisa Doehnert)

Figure 16.10 Fomites are nonliving objects that facilitate the indirect transmission of pathogens. Contaminated
doorknobs, towels, and syringes are all common examples of fomites. (credit left: modification of work by Kate Ter
Haar; credit middle: modification of work by Vernon Swanepoel; credit right: modification of work by “Zaldylmg”/Flickr)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

713

Vehicle Transmission
The term vehicle transmission refers to the transmission of pathogens through vehicles such as water, food, and
air. Water contamination through poor sanitation methods leads to waterborne transmission of disease. Waterborne
disease remains a serious problem in many regions throughout the world. The World Health Organization (WHO)
estimates that contaminated drinking water is responsible for more than 500,000 deaths each year.[10] Similarly, food
contaminated through poor handling or storage can lead to foodborne transmission of disease (Figure 16.11).
Dust and fine particles known as aerosols, which can float in the air, can carry pathogens and facilitate the airborne
transmission of disease. For example, dust particles are the dominant mode of transmission of hantavirus to humans.
Hantavirus is found in mouse feces, urine, and saliva, but when these substances dry, they can disintegrate into fine
particles that can become airborne when disturbed; inhalation of these particles can lead to a serious and sometimes
fatal respiratory infection.
Although droplet transmission over short distances is considered contact transmission as discussed above, longer
distance transmission of droplets through the air is considered vehicle transmission. Unlike larger particles that drop
quickly out of the air column, fine mucus droplets produced by coughs or sneezes can remain suspended for long
periods of time, traveling considerable distances. In certain conditions, droplets desiccate quickly to produce a droplet
nucleus that is capable of transmitting pathogens; air temperature and humidity can have an impact on effectiveness
of airborne transmission.
Tuberculosis is often transmitted via airborne transmission when the causative agent, Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
is released in small particles with coughs. Because tuberculosis requires as few as 10 microbes to initiate a new
infection, patients with tuberculosis must be treated in rooms equipped with special ventilation, and anyone entering
the room should wear a mask.

Figure 16.11 Food is an important vehicle of transmission for pathogens, especially of the gastrointestinal and
upper respiratory systems. Notice the glass shield above the food trays, designed to prevent pathogens ejected in
coughs and sneezes from entering the food. (credit: Fort George G. Meade Public Affairs Office)

Clinical Focus
Resolution
After identifying the source of the contaminated turduckens, the Florida public health office notified the CDC,
which requested an expedited inspection of the facility by state inspectors. Inspectors found that a machine
used to process the chicken was contaminated with Salmonella as a result of substandard cleaning protocols.
Inspectors also found that the process of stuffing and packaging the turduckens prior to refrigeration allowed

10. World Health Organization. Fact sheet No. 391—Drinking Water. June 2005. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs391/en.

714

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

the meat to remain at temperatures conducive to bacterial growth for too long. The contamination and the
delayed refrigeration led to vehicle (food) transmission of the bacteria in turduckens.
Based on these findings, the plant was shut down for a full and thorough decontamination. All turduckens
produced in the plant were recalled and pulled from store shelves ahead of the December holiday season,
preventing further outbreaks.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus Box.

Vector Transmission
Diseases can also be transmitted by a mechanical or biological vector, an animal (typically an arthropod) that carries
the disease from one host to another. Mechanical transmission is facilitated by a mechanical vector, an animal that
carries a pathogen from one host to another without being infected itself. For example, a fly may land on fecal matter
and later transmit bacteria from the feces to food that it lands on; a human eating the food may then become infected
by the bacteria, resulting in a case of diarrhea or dysentery (Figure 16.12).
Biological transmission occurs when the pathogen reproduces within a biological vector that transmits the pathogen
from one host to another (Figure 16.12). Arthropods are the main vectors responsible for biological transmission
(Figure 16.13). Most arthropod vectors transmit the pathogen by biting the host, creating a wound that serves as
a portal of entry. The pathogen may go through part of its reproductive cycle in the gut or salivary glands of the
arthropod to facilitate its transmission through the bite. For example, hemipterans (called “kissing bugs” or “assassin
bugs”) transmit Chagas disease to humans by defecating when they bite, after which the human scratches or rubs the
infected feces into a mucous membrane or break in the skin.
Biological insect vectors include mosquitoes, which transmit malaria and other diseases, and lice, which transmit
typhus. Other arthropod vectors can include arachnids, primarily ticks, which transmit Lyme disease and other
diseases, and mites, which transmit scrub typhus and rickettsial pox. Biological transmission, because it involves
survival and reproduction within a parasitized vector, complicates the biology of the pathogen and its transmission.
There are also important non-arthropod vectors of disease, including mammals and birds. Various species of mammals
can transmit rabies to humans, usually by means of a bite that transmits the rabies virus. Chickens and other domestic
poultry can transmit avian influenza to humans through direct or indirect contact with avian influenza virus A shed in
the birds’ saliva, mucous, and feces.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

715

Figure 16.12 (a) A mechanical vector carries a pathogen on its body from one host to another, not as an infection.
(b) A biological vector carries a pathogen from one host to another after becoming infected itself.

716

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

Figure 16.13 (credit “Black fly”, “Tick”, “Tsetse fly”: modification of work by USDA; credit: “Flea”: modification of work
by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit: “Louse”, “Mosquito”, “Sand fly”: modification of work by James
Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “Kissing bug”: modification of work by Glenn Seplak;
credit “Mite”: modification of work by Michael Wunderli)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

• Describe how diseases can be transmitted through the air.
• Explain the difference between a mechanical vector and a biological vector.

Eye on Ethics

Using GMOs to Stop the Spread of Zika
In 2016, an epidemic of the Zika virus was linked to a high incidence of birth defects in South America and
Central America. As winter turned to spring in the northern hemisphere, health officials correctly predicted the
virus would spread to North America, coinciding with the breeding season of its major vector, the Aedes aegypti
mosquito.
The range of the A. aegypti mosquito extends well into the southern United States (Figure 16.14). Because
these same mosquitoes serve as vectors for other problematic diseases (dengue fever, yellow fever, and
others), various methods of mosquito control have been proposed as solutions. Chemical pesticides have
been used effectively in the past, and are likely to be used again; but because chemical pesticides can have
negative impacts on the environment, some scientists have proposed an alternative that involves genetically
engineering A. aegypti so that it cannot reproduce. This method, however, has been the subject of some
controversy.
One method that has worked in the past to control pests, with little apparent downside, has been sterile male
introductions. This method controlled the screw-worm fly pest in the southwest United States and fruit fly pests
of fruit crops. In this method, males of the target species are reared in the lab, sterilized with radiation, and
released into the environment where they mate with wild females, who subsequently bear no live offspring.
Repeated releases shrink the pest population.
A similar method, taking advantage of recombinant DNA technology,[11] introduces a dominant lethal allele
into male mosquitoes that is suppressed in the presence of tetracycline (an antibiotic) during laboratory
rearing. The males are released into the environment and mate with female mosquitoes. Unlike the sterile
male method, these matings produce offspring, but they die as larvae from the lethal gene in the absence of
tetracycline in the environment. As of 2016, this method has yet to be implemented in the United States, but
a UK company tested the method in Piracicaba, Brazil, and found an 82% reduction in wild A. aegypti larvae
and a 91% reduction in dengue cases in the treated area.[12] In August 2016, amid news of Zika infections
in several Florida communities, the FDA gave the UK company permission to test this same mosquito control
method in Key West, Florida, pending compliance with local and state regulations and a referendum in the
affected communities.
The use of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) to control a disease vector has its advocates as well
as its opponents. In theory, the system could be used to drive the A. aegypti mosquito extinct—a noble
goal according to some, given the damage they do to human populations.[13] But opponents of the idea are
concerned that the gene could escape the species boundary of A. aegypti and cause problems in other
species, leading to unforeseen ecological consequences. Opponents are also wary of the program because it
is being administered by a for-profit corporation, creating the potential for conflicts of interest that would have
to be tightly regulated; and it is not clear how any unintended consequences of the program could be reversed.
There are other epidemiological considerations as well. Aedes aegypti is apparently not the only vector for the
Zika virus. Aedes albopictus, the Asian tiger mosquito, is also a vector for the Zika virus.[14] A. albopictus is
now widespread around the planet including much of the United States (Figure 16.14). Many other mosquitoes

717

718

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

have been found to harbor Zika virus, though their capacity to act as vectors is unknown.[15] Genetically
modified strains of A. aegypti will not control the other species of vectors. Finally, the Zika virus can apparently
be transmitted sexually between human hosts, from mother to child, and possibly through blood transfusion.
All of these factors must be considered in any approach to controlling the spread of the virus.
Clearly there are risks and unknowns involved in conducting an open-environment experiment of an as-yet
poorly understood technology. But allowing the Zika virus to spread unchecked is also risky. Does the threat
of a Zika epidemic justify the ecological risk of genetically engineering mosquitos? Are current methods of
mosquito control sufficiently ineffective or harmful that we need to try untested alternatives? These are the
questions being put to public health officials now.

Figure 16.14 The Zika virus is an enveloped virus transmitted by mosquitoes, especially Aedes aegypti. The
range of this mosquito includes much of the United States, from the Southwest and Southeast to as far north
as the Mid-Atlantic. The range of A. albopictus, another vector, extends even farther north to New England
and parts of the Midwest. (credit micrograph: modification of work by Cynthia Goldsmith, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; credit photo: modification of work by James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; credit map: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

11. Blandine Massonnet-Bruneel, Nicole Corre-Catelin, Renaud Lacroix, Rosemary S. Lees, Kim Phuc Hoang, Derric Nimmo, Luke
Alphey, and Paul Reiter. “Fitness of Transgenic Mosquito Aedes aegypti Males Carrying a Dominant Lethal Genetic System.” PLOS ONE 8,
no. 5 (2013): e62711.
12. Richard Levine. “Cases of Dengue Drop 91 Percent Due to Genetically Modified Mosquitoes.” Entomology Today.
https://entomologytoday.org/2016/07/14/cases-of-dengue-drop-91-due-to-genetically-modified-mosquitoes.
13. Olivia Judson. “A Bug’s Death.” The New York Times, September 25, 2003. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/25/opinion/a-bug-sdeath.html.
14. Gilda Grard, Mélanie Caron, Illich Manfred Mombo, Dieudonné Nkoghe, Statiana Mboui Ondo, Davy Jiolle, Didier Fontenille,
Christophe Paupy, and Eric Maurice Leroy. “Zika Virus in Gabon (Central Africa)–2007: A New Threat from Aedes albopictus?” PLOS
Neglected Tropical Diseases 8, no. 2 (2014): e2681.
15. Constância F.J. Ayres. “Identification of Zika Virus Vectors and Implications for Control.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 16, no. 3
(2016): 278–279.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

719

Quarantining
Individuals suspected or known to have been exposed to certain contagious pathogens may be quarantined, or
isolated to prevent transmission of the disease to others. Hospitals and other health-care facilities generally set up
special wards to isolate patients with particularly hazardous diseases such as tuberculosis or Ebola (Figure 16.15).
Depending on the setting, these wards may be equipped with special air-handling methods, and personnel may
implement special protocols to limit the risk of transmission, such as personal protective equipment or the use of
chemical disinfectant sprays upon entry and exit of medical personnel.
The duration of the quarantine depends on factors such as the incubation period of the disease and the evidence
suggestive of an infection. The patient may be released if signs and symptoms fail to materialize when expected or if
preventive treatment can be administered in order to limit the risk of transmission. If the infection is confirmed, the
patient may be compelled to remain in isolation until the disease is no longer considered contagious.
In the United States, public health authorities may only quarantine patients for certain diseases, such as cholera,
diphtheria, infectious tuberculosis, and strains of influenza capable of causing a pandemic. Individuals entering the
United States or moving between states may be quarantined by the CDC if they are suspected of having been exposed
to one of these diseases. Although the CDC routinely monitors entry points to the United States for crew or passengers
displaying illness, quarantine is rarely implemented.

Figure 16.15 (a) The Aeromedical Biological Containment System (ABCS) is a module designed by the CDC and
Department of Defense specifically for transporting highly contagious patients by air. (b) An isolation ward for Ebola
patients in Lagos, Nigeria. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:
modification of work by CDC Global)

Healthcare-Associated (Nosocomial) Infections
Hospitals, retirement homes, and prisons attract the attention of epidemiologists because these settings are associated
with increased incidence of certain diseases. Higher rates of transmission may be caused by characteristics of the
environment itself, characteristics of the population, or both. Consequently, special efforts must be taken to limit the
risks of infection in these settings.
Infections acquired in health-care facilities, including hospitals, are called nosocomial infections or healthcareassociated infections (HAI). HAIs are often connected with surgery or other invasive procedures that provide the
pathogen with access to the portal of infection. For an infection to be classified as an HAI, the patient must have
been admitted to the health-care facility for a reason other than the infection. In these settings, patients suffering from
primary disease are often afflicted with compromised immunity and are more susceptible to secondary infection and
opportunistic pathogens.
In 2011, more than 720,000 HAIs occurred in hospitals in the United States, according to the CDC. About 22%
of these HAIs occurred at a surgical site, and cases of pneumonia accounted for another 22%; urinary tract

720

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

infections accounted for an additional 13%, and primary bloodstream infections 10%.[16] Such HAIs often occur when
pathogens are introduced to patients’ bodies through contaminated surgical or medical equipment, such as catheters
and respiratory ventilators. Health-care facilities seek to limit nosocomial infections through training and hygiene
protocols such as those described in Control of Microbial Growth.

• Give some reasons why HAIs occur.

16.4 Global Public Health
Learning Objectives
• Describe the entities involved in international public health and their activities
• Identify and differentiate between emerging and reemerging infectious diseases

A large number of international programs and agencies are involved in efforts to promote global public health. Among
their goals are developing infrastructure in health care, public sanitation, and public health capacity; monitoring
infectious disease occurrences around the world; coordinating communications between national public health
agencies in various countries; and coordinating international responses to major health crises. In large part, these
international efforts are necessary because disease-causing microorganisms know no national boundaries.

The World Health Organization (WHO)
International public health issues are coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO), an agency of the
United Nations. Of its roughly $4 billion budget for 2015–16[17], about $1 billion was funded by member states
and the remaining $3 billion by voluntary contributions. In addition to monitoring and reporting on infectious
disease, WHO also develops and implements strategies for their control and prevention. WHO has had a number of
successful international public health campaigns. For example, its vaccination program against smallpox, begun in
the mid-1960s, resulted in the global eradication of the disease by 1980. WHO continues to be involved in infectious
disease control, primarily in the developing world, with programs targeting malaria, HIV/AIDS, and tuberculosis,
among others. It also runs programs to reduce illness and mortality that occur as a result of violence, accidents,
lifestyle-associated illnesses such as diabetes, and poor health-care infrastructure.
WHO maintains a global alert and response system that coordinates information from member nations. In the event
of a public health emergency or epidemic, it provides logistical support and coordinates international response to
the emergency. The United States contributes to this effort through the CDC. The CDC carries out international
monitoring and public health efforts, mainly in the service of protecting US public health in an increasingly connected
world. Similarly, the European Union maintains a Health Security Committee that monitors disease outbreaks within
its member countries and internationally, coordinating with WHO.

• Name the organizations that participate in international public health monitoring.

16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “HAI Data and Statistics.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/hai/surveillance. Accessed Jan 2,
2016.
17. World Health Organization. “Programme Budget 2014–2015.” http://www.who.int/about/finances-accountability/budget/en.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

721

Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases
Both WHO and some national public health agencies such as the CDC monitor and prepare for emerging infectious
diseases. An emerging infectious disease is either new to the human population or has shown an increase in
prevalence in the previous twenty years. Whether the disease is new or conditions have changed to cause an increase
in frequency, its status as emerging implies the need to apply resources to understand and control its growing impact.
Emerging diseases may change their frequency gradually over time, or they may experience sudden epidemic growth.
The importance of vigilance was made clear during the Ebola hemorrhagic fever epidemic in western Africa through
2014–2015. Although health experts had been aware of the Ebola virus since the 1970s, an outbreak on such a large
scale had never happened before (Figure 16.16). Previous human epidemics had been small, isolated, and contained.
Indeed, the gorilla and chimpanzee populations of western Africa had suffered far worse from Ebola than the human
population. The pattern of small isolated human epidemics changed in 2014. Its high transmission rate, coupled with
cultural practices for treatment of the dead and perhaps its emergence in an urban setting, caused the disease to spread
rapidly, and thousands of people died. The international public health community responded with a large emergency
effort to treat patients and contain the epidemic.
Emerging diseases are found in all countries, both developed and developing (Table 16.2). Some nations are better
equipped to deal with them. National and international public health agencies watch for epidemics like the Ebola
outbreak in developing countries because those countries rarely have the health-care infrastructure and expertise to
deal with large outbreaks effectively. Even with the support of international agencies, the systems in western Africa
struggled to identify and care for the sick and control spread. In addition to the altruistic goal of saving lives and
assisting nations lacking in resources, the global nature of transportation means that an outbreak anywhere can spread
quickly to every corner of the planet. Managing an epidemic in one location—its source—is far easier than fighting
it on many fronts.
Ebola is not the only disease that needs to be monitored in the global environment. In 2015, WHO set priorities on
several emerging diseases that had a high probability of causing epidemics and that were poorly understood (and thus
urgently required research and development efforts).
A reemerging infectious disease is a disease that is increasing in frequency after a previous period of decline. Its
reemergence may be a result of changing conditions or old prevention regimes that are no longer working. Examples
of such diseases are drug-resistant forms of tuberculosis, bacterial pneumonia, and malaria. Drug-resistant strains
of the bacteria causing gonorrhea and syphilis are also becoming more widespread, raising concerns of untreatable
infections.

722

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

Figure 16.16 Even before the Ebola epidemic of 2014–15, Ebola was considered an emerging disease because of
several smaller outbreaks between the mid-1990s and 2000s.

Some Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases
Disease

Pathogen

Year
Discovered

Affected Regions

Transmission

AIDS

HIV

1981

Worldwide

Contact with infected
body fluids

Chikungunya
fever

Chikungunya
virus

1952

Africa, Asia, India; spreading to
Europe and the Americas

Mosquito-borne

Ebola virus
disease

Ebola virus

1976

Central and Western Africa

Contact with infected
body fluids

H1N1
Influenza
(swine flu)

H1N1 virus

2009

Worldwide

Droplet transmission

Lyme
disease

Borrelia
burgdorferi
bacterium

1981

Northern hemisphere

From mammal
reservoirs to humans
by tick vectors

West Nile
virus disease

West Nile
virus

1937

Africa, Australia, Canada to
Venezuela, Europe, Middle East,
Western Asia

Mosquito-borne

Table 16.2

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

723

• Explain why it is important to monitor emerging infectious diseases.
• Explain how a bacterial disease could reemerge, even if it had previously been successfully treated and
controlled.

Micro Connections
SARS Outbreak and Identification
On November 16, 2002, the first case of a SARS outbreak was reported in Guangdong Province, China. The
patient exhibited influenza-like symptoms such as fever, cough, myalgia, sore throat, and shortness of breath.
As the number of cases grew, the Chinese government was reluctant to openly communicate information
about the epidemic with the World Health Organization (WHO) and the international community. The slow
reaction of Chinese public health officials to this new disease contributed to the spread of the epidemic
within and later outside China. In April 2003, the Chinese government finally responded with a huge public
health effort involving quarantines, medical checkpoints, and massive cleaning projects. Over 18,000 people
were quarantined in Beijing alone. Large funding initiatives were created to improve health-care facilities,
and dedicated outbreak teams were created to coordinate the response. By August 16, 2003, the last SARS
patients were released from a hospital in Beijing nine months after the first case was reported in China.
In the meantime, SARS spread to other countries on its way to becoming a global pandemic. Though the
infectious agent had yet to be identified, it was thought to be an influenza virus. The disease was named
SARS, an acronym for severe acute respiratory syndrome, until the etiologic agent could be identified. Travel
restrictions to Southeast Asia were enforced by many countries. By the end of the outbreak, there were
8,098 cases and 774 deaths worldwide. China and Hong Kong were hit hardest by the epidemic, but Taiwan,
Singapore, and Toronto, Canada, also saw significant numbers of cases (Figure 16.17).
Fortunately, timely public health responses in many countries effectively suppressed the outbreak and led to
its eventual containment. For example, the disease was introduced to Canada in February 2003 by an infected
traveler from Hong Kong, who died shortly after being hospitalized. By the end of March, hospital isolation
and home quarantine procedures were in place in the Toronto area, stringent anti-infection protocols were
introduced in hospitals, and the media were actively reporting on the disease. Public health officials tracked
down contacts of infected individuals and quarantined them. A total of 25,000 individuals were quarantined in
the city. Thanks to the vigorous response of the Canadian public health community, SARS was brought under
control in Toronto by June, a mere four months after it was introduced.
In 2003, WHO established a collaborative effort to identify the causative agent of SARS, which has now been
identified as a coronavirus that was associated with horseshoe bats. The genome of the SARS virus was
sequenced and published by researchers at the CDC and in Canada in May 2003, and in the same month
researchers in the Netherlands confirmed the etiology of the disease by fulfilling Koch’s postulates for the
SARS coronavirus. The last known case of SARS worldwide was reported in 2004.

724

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

Figure 16.17 This map shows the spread of SARS as of March 28, 2003. (credit: modification of work by
Central Intelligence Agency)

Link to Learning
This database (https://openstax.org/l/22dataoutinfdis) of reports chronicles
outbreaks of infectious disease around the world. It was on this system that the
first information about the SARS outbreak in China emerged.
The CDC publishes Emerging Infectious Diseases (https://openstax.org/l/
22CDCEmerinfdis) , a monthly journal available online.

Summary
16.1 The Language of Epidemiologists
• Epidemiology is the science underlying public health.
• Morbidity means being in a state of illness, whereas mortality refers to death; both morbidity rates and
mortality rates are of interest to epidemiologists.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

725

• Incidence is the number of new cases (morbidity or mortality), usually expressed as a proportion, during a
specified time period; prevalence is the total number affected in the population, again usually expressed as a
proportion.
• Sporadic diseases only occur rarely and largely without a geographic focus. Endemic diseases occur at a
constant (and often low) level within a population. Epidemic diseases and pandemic diseases occur when an
outbreak occurs on a significantly larger than expected level, either locally or globally, respectively.
• Koch’s postulates specify the procedure for confirming a particular pathogen as the etiologic agent of a
particular disease. Koch’s postulates have limitations in application if the microbe cannot be isolated and
cultured or if there is no animal host for the microbe. In this case, molecular Koch’s postulates would be
utilized.
• In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention monitors notifiable diseases and
publishes weekly updates in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.
16.2 Tracking Infectious Diseases
• Early pioneers of epidemiology such as John Snow, Florence Nightingale, and Joseph Lister, studied disease
at the population level and used data to disrupt disease transmission.
• Descriptive epidemiology studies rely on case analysis and patient histories to gain information about
outbreaks, frequently while they are still occurring.
• Retrospective epidemiology studies use historical data to identify associations with the disease state of
present cases. Prospective epidemiology studies gather data and follow cases to find associations with future
disease states.
• Analytical epidemiology studies are observational studies that are carefully designed to compare groups and
uncover associations between environmental or genetic factors and disease.
• Experimental epidemiology studies generate strong evidence of causation in disease or treatment by
manipulating subjects and comparing them with control subjects.
16.3 Modes of Disease Transmission
• Reservoirs of human disease can include the human and animal populations, soil, water, and inanimate
objects or materials.
• Contact transmission can be direct or indirect through physical contact with either an infected host (direct)
or contact with a fomite that an infected host has made contact with previously (indirect).
• Vector transmission occurs when a living organism carries an infectious agent on its body (mechanical) or as
an infection host itself (biological), to a new host.
• Vehicle transmission occurs when a substance, such as soil, water, or air, carries an infectious agent to a new
host.
• Healthcare-associated infections (HAI), or nosocomial infections, are acquired in a clinical setting.
Transmission is facilitated by medical interventions and the high concentration of susceptible,
immunocompromised individuals in clinical settings.
16.4 Global Public Health
• The World Health Organization (WHO) is an agency of the United Nations that collects and analyzes data
on disease occurrence from member nations. WHO also coordinates public health programs and responses to
international health emergencies.
• Emerging diseases are those that are new to human populations or that have been increasing in the past
two decades. Reemerging diseases are those that are making a resurgence in susceptible populations after
previously having been controlled in some geographic areas.

Review Questions

726

Multiple Choice

1. Which is the most common type of biological vector
of human disease?
a. viruses
b. bacteria
c. mammals
d. arthropods
2. A mosquito bites a person who subsequently
develops a fever and abdominal rash. What type of
transmission would this be?
a. mechanical vector transmission
b. biological vector transmission
c. direct contact transmission
d. vehicle transmission
3. Cattle are allowed to pasture in a field that contains
the farmhouse well, and the farmer’s family becomes ill
with a gastrointestinal pathogen after drinking the water.
What type of transmission of infectious agents would
this be?
a. biological vector transmission
b. direct contact transmission
c. indirect contact transmission
d. vehicle transmission
4. A blanket from a child with chickenpox is likely to
be contaminated with the virus that causes chickenpox
(Varicella-zoster virus). What is the blanket called?
a. fomite
b. host
c. pathogen
d. vector
5. Which of the following would NOT be considered
an emerging disease?
a. Ebola hemorrhagic fever
b. West Nile virus fever/encephalitis
c. Zika virus disease
d. Tuberculosis
6. Which of the following would NOT be considered a
reemerging disease?
a. Drug-resistant tuberculosis
b. Drug-resistant gonorrhea
c. Malaria
d. West Nile virus fever/encephalitis

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

7. Which of the following factors can lead to
reemergence of a disease?
a. A mutation that allows it to infect humans
b. A period of decline in vaccination rates
c. A change in disease reporting procedures
d. Better education on the signs and symptoms of
the disease
8. Why are emerging diseases with very few cases the
focus of intense scrutiny?
a. They tend to be more deadly
b. They are increasing and therefore not controlled
c. They naturally have higher transmission rates
d. They occur more in developed countries

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

727

Matching

9. Match each term with its description.
___sporadic disease

A. the number of disease cases per 100,000 individuals

___endemic disease

B. a disease in higher than expected numbers around the world

___pandemic disease

C. the number of deaths from a disease for every 10,000 individuals

___morbidity rate

D. a disease found occasionally in a region with cases occurring mainly in isolation from
each other

___mortality rate

E. a disease found regularly in a region

10. Match each type of epidemiology study with its description.
___experimental

A. examination of past case histories and medical test results conducted on patients in an
outbreak

___analytical

B. examination of current case histories, interviews with patients and their contacts,
interpretation of medical test results; frequently conducted while outbreak is still in progress

___prospective

C. use of a set of test subjects (human or animal) and control subjects that are treated the
same as the test subjects except for the specific treatment being studied

___descriptive

D. observing groups of individuals to look for associations with disease

___retrospective

E. a comparison of a cohort of individuals through the course of the study

11. Match each pioneer of epidemiology with his or her contribution.
___Florence Nightingale

A. determined the source of a cholera outbreak in London

___Robert Koch

B. showed that surgical wound infection rates could be dramatically reduced by using
carbolic acid to disinfect surgical tools, bandages, and surgical sites

___Joseph Lister

C. compiled data on causes of mortality in soldiers, leading to innovations in military
medical care

___John Snow

D. developed a methodology for conclusively determining the etiology of disease

Fill in the Blank

12. The ________ collects data and conducts epidemiologic studies in the United States.
13. ________occurs when an infected individual passes the infection on to other individuals, who pass it on to still
others, increasing the penetration of the infection into the susceptible population.
14. A batch of food contaminated with botulism exotoxin, consumed at a family reunion by most of the members of
a family, would be an example of a ________ outbreak.
15. A patient in the hospital with a urinary catheter develops a bladder infection. This is an example of a(n)
________ infection.
16. A ________ is an animal that can transfer infectious pathogens from one host to another.
17. The ________ collects data and conducts epidemiologic studies at the global level.
Short Answer

18. During an epidemic, why might the prevalence of a disease at a particular time not be equal to the sum of the
incidences of the disease?

728

Chapter 16 | Disease and Epidemiology

19. In what publication would you find data on emerging/reemerging diseases in the United States?
20. What activity did John Snow conduct, other than mapping, that contemporary epidemiologists also use when
trying to understand how to control a disease?
21. Differentiate between droplet vehicle transmission and airborne transmission.
Critical Thinking

22. Why might an epidemiological population in a state not be the same size as the number of people in a state? Use
an example.
23. Many people find that they become ill with a cold after traveling by airplane. The air circulation systems of
commercial aircraft use HEPA filters that should remove any infectious agents that pass through them. What are the
possible reasons for increased incidence of colds after flights?
24. An Atlantic crossing by boat from England to New England took 60–80 days in the 18th century. In the late 19th
century the voyage took less than a week. How do you think these time differences for travel might have impacted
the spread of infectious diseases from Europe to the Americas, or vice versa?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

907

Chapter 21

Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.1 The skin is an important barrier to pathogens, but it can also develop infections. These raised lesions
(left) are typical of folliculitis, a condition that results from the inflammation of hair follicles. Acne lesions (right) also
result from inflammation of hair follicles. In this case, the inflammation results when hair follicles become clogged with
complex lipids, fatty acids, and dead skin cells, producing a favorable environment for bacteria.

Chapter Outline
21.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Skin and Eyes
21.2 Bacterial Infections of the Skin and Eyes
21.3 Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes
21.4 Mycoses of the Skin
21.5 Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Skin and Eyes

Introduction
The human body is covered in skin, and like most coverings, skin is designed to protect what is underneath. One of its
primary purposes is to prevent microbes in the surrounding environment from invading underlying tissues and organs.
But in spite of its role as a protective covering, skin is not itself immune from infection. Certain pathogens and toxins
can cause severe infections or reactions when they come in contact with the skin. Other pathogens are opportunistic,
breaching the skin’s natural defenses through cuts, wounds, or a disruption of normal microbiota resulting in an
infection in the surrounding skin and tissue. Still other pathogens enter the body via different routes—through the
respiratory or digestive systems, for example—but cause reactions that manifest as skin rashes or lesions.
Nearly all humans experience skin infections to some degree. Many of these conditions are, as the name suggests,
“skin deep,” with symptoms that are local and non-life-threatening. At some point, almost everyone must endure
conditions like acne, athlete’s foot, and minor infections of cuts and abrasions, all of which result from infections of
the skin. But not all skin infections are quite so innocuous. Some can become invasive, leading to systemic infection
or spreading over large areas of skin, potentially becoming life-threatening.

908

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

21.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Skin and
Eyes
Learning Objectives
• Describe the major anatomical features of the skin and eyes
• Compare and contrast the microbiomes of various body sites, such as the hands, back, feet, and eyes
• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of skin and eyes in order to cause infection
• Describe general signs and symptoms of disease associated with infections of the skin and eyes

Human skin is an important part of the innate immune system. In addition to serving a wide range of other functions,
the skin serves as an important barrier to microbial invasion. Not only is it a physical barrier to penetration of deeper
tissues by potential pathogens, but it also provides an inhospitable environment for the growth of many pathogens. In
this section, we will provide a brief overview of the anatomy and normal microbiota of the skin and eyes, along with
general symptoms associated with skin and eye infections.

Layers of the Skin
Human skin is made up of several layers and sublayers. The two main layers are the epidermis and the dermis. These
layers cover a third layer of tissue called the hypodermis, which consists of fibrous and adipose connective tissue
(Figure 21.2).
The epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin, and it is relatively thin. The exterior surface of the epidermis, called
the stratum corneum, primarily consists of dead skin cells. This layer of dead cells limits direct contact between the
outside world and live cells. The stratum corneum is rich in keratin, a tough, fibrous protein that is also found in hair
and nails. Keratin helps make the outer surface of the skin relatively tough and waterproof. It also helps to keep the
surface of the skin dry, which reduces microbial growth. However, some microbes are still able to live on the surface
of the skin, and some of these can be shed with dead skin cells in the process of desquamation, which is the shedding
and peeling of skin that occurs as a normal process but that may be accelerated when infection is present.
Beneath the epidermis lies a thicker skin layer called the dermis. The dermis contains connective tissue and embedded
structures such as blood vessels, nerves, and muscles. Structures called hair follicles (from which hair grows) are
located within the dermis, even though much of their structure consists of epidermal tissue. The dermis also contains
the two major types of glands found in human skin: sweat glands (tubular glands that produce sweat) and sebaceous
glands (which are associated with hair follicles and produce sebum, a lipid-rich substance containing proteins and
minerals).

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Sam, a college freshman with a bad habit of oversleeping, nicked himself shaving in a rush to get to class on
time. At the time, he didn’t think twice about it. But two days later, he noticed the cut was surrounded by a
reddish area of skin that was warm to the touch. When the wound started oozing pus, he decided he had better
stop by the university’s clinic. The doctor took a sample from the lesion and then cleaned the area.

• What type of microbe could be responsible for Sam’s infection?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

909

Perspiration (sweat) provides some moisture to the epidermis, which can increase the potential for microbial growth.
For this reason, more microbes are found on the regions of the skin that produce the most sweat, such as the skin
of the underarms and groin. However, in addition to water, sweat also contains substances that inhibit microbial
growth, such as salts, lysozyme, and antimicrobial peptides. Sebum also serves to protect the skin and reduce water
loss. Although some of the lipids and fatty acids in sebum inhibit microbial growth, sebum contains compounds that
provide nutrition for certain microbes.

Figure 21.2 (a) A micrograph of a section through human skin shows the epidermis and dermis. (b) The major
layers of human skin are the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis. (credit b: modification of work by National Cancer
Institute)

• How does desquamation help with preventing infections?

Normal Microbiota of the Skin
The skin is home to a wide variety of normal microbiota, consisting of commensal organisms that derive nutrition
from skin cells and secretions such as sweat and sebum. The normal microbiota of skin tends to inhibit transientmicrobe colonization by producing antimicrobial substances and outcompeting other microbes that land on the surface
of the skin. This helps to protect the skin from pathogenic infection.
The skin’s properties differ from one region of the body to another, as does the composition of the skin’s microbiota.
The availability of nutrients and moisture partly dictates which microorganisms will thrive in a particular region of the
skin. Relatively moist skin, such as that of the nares (nostrils) and underarms, has a much different microbiota than
the dryer skin on the arms, legs, hands, and top of the feet. Some areas of the skin have higher densities of sebaceous
glands. These sebum-rich areas, which include the back, the folds at the side of the nose, and the back of the neck,
harbor distinct microbial communities that are less diverse than those found on other parts of the body.

910

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Different types of bacteria dominate the dry, moist, and sebum-rich regions of the skin. The most abundant microbes
typically found in the dry and sebaceous regions are Betaproteobacteria and Propionibacteria, respectively. In the
moist regions, Corynebacterium and Staphylococcus are most commonly found (Figure 21.3). Viruses and fungi
are also found on the skin, with Malassezia being the most common type of fungus found as part of the normal
microbiota. The role and populations of viruses in the microbiota, known as viromes, are still not well understood,
and there are limitations to the techniques used to identify them. However, Circoviridae, Papillomaviridae, and
Polyomaviridae appear to be the most common residents in the healthy skin virome.[1][2][3]

Figure 21.3 The normal microbiota varies on different regions of the skin, especially in dry versus moist areas. The
figure shows the major organisms commonly found in different locations of a healthy individual’s skin and external
mucosa. Note that there is significant variation among individuals. (credit: modification of work by National Human
Genome Research Institute)

• What are the four most common bacteria that are part of the normal skin microbiota?

1. Belkaid, Y., and J.A. Segre. “Dialogue Between Skin Microbiota and Immunity,” Science 346 (2014) 6212:954–959.
2. Foulongne, Vincent, et al. “Human Skin Microbiota: High Diversity of DNA Viruses Identified on the Human Skin by High Throughput
Sequencing.” PLoS ONE (2012) 7(6): e38499. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038499.
3. Robinson, C.M., and J.K. Pfeiffer. “Viruses and the Microbiota.” Annual Review of Virology (2014) 1:55–59. doi: 10.1146/annurevvirology-031413-085550.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

911

Infections of the Skin
While the microbiota of the skin can play a protective role, it can also cause harm in certain cases. Often, an
opportunistic pathogen residing in the skin microbiota of one individual may be transmitted to another individual
more susceptible to an infection. For example, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) can often take up
residence in the nares of health care workers and hospital patients; though harmless on intact, healthy skin, MRSA
can cause infections if introduced into other parts of the body, as might occur during surgery or via a post-surgical
incision or wound. This is one reason why clean surgical sites are so important.
Injury or damage to the skin can allow microbes to enter deeper tissues, where nutrients are more abundant and the
environment is more conducive to bacterial growth. Wound infections are common after a puncture or laceration that
damages the physical barrier of the skin. Microbes may infect structures in the dermis, such as hair follicles and
glands, causing a localized infection, or they may reach the bloodstream, which can lead to a systemic infection.
In some cases, infectious microbes can cause a variety of rashes or lesions that differ in their physical characteristics.
These rashes can be the result of inflammation reactions or direct responses to toxins produced by the microbes.
Table 21.1 lists some of the medical terminology used to describe skin lesions and rashes based on their
characteristics; Figure 21.4 and Figure 21.5 illustrate some of the various types of skin lesions. It is important to
note that many different diseases can lead to skin conditions of very similar appearance; thus the terms used in the
table are generally not exclusive to a particular type of infection or disease.
Some Medical Terms Associated with Skin Lesions and Rashes
Term

Definition

abscess

localized collection of pus

bulla (pl.,
bullae)

fluid-filled blister no more than 5 mm in diameter

carbuncle

deep, pus-filled abscess generally formed from multiple furuncles

crust

dried fluids from a lesion on the surface of the skin

cyst

encapsulated sac filled with fluid, semi-solid matter, or gas, typically located just below the
upper layers of skin

folliculitis

a localized rash due to inflammation of hair follicles

furuncle (boil)

pus-filled abscess due to infection of a hair follicle

macules

smooth spots of discoloration on the skin

papules

small raised bumps on the skin

pseudocyst

lesion that resembles a cyst but with a less defined boundary

purulent

pus-producing; suppurative

pustules

fluid- or pus-filled bumps on the skin

pyoderma

any suppurative (pus-producing) infection of the skin

suppurative

producing pus; purulent

ulcer

break in the skin; open sore

vesicle

small, fluid-filled lesion

wheal

swollen, inflamed skin that itches or burns, such as from an insect bite

Table 21.1

912

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.4 (a) Acne is a bacterial infection of the skin that manifests as a rash of inflamed hair follicles (folliculitis).
The large whitehead near the center of the cheek is an infected hair follicle that has become purulent (or
suppurative), leading to the formation of a furuncle. (b) An abscess is a pus-filled lesion. (credit b: modification of
work by Bruce Blaus)

Figure 21.5 Numerous causes can lead to skin lesions of various types, some of which are very similar in
appearance. (credit: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)

• How can asymptomatic health care workers transmit bacteria such as MRSA to patients?

Anatomy and Microbiota of the Eye
Although the eye and skin have distinct anatomy, they are both in direct contact with the external environment. An
important component of the eye is the nasolacrimal drainage system, which serves as a conduit for the fluid of the
eye, called tears. Tears flow from the external eye to the nasal cavity by the lacrimal apparatus, which is composed of

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

913

the structures involved in tear production (Figure 21.6). The lacrimal gland, above the eye, secretes tears to keep
the eye moist. There are two small openings, one on the inside edge of the upper eyelid and one on the inside edge of
the lower eyelid, near the nose. Each of these openings is called a lacrimal punctum. Together, these lacrimal puncta
collect tears from the eye that are then conveyed through lacrimal ducts to a reservoir for tears called the lacrimal
sac, also known as the dacrocyst or tear sac.
From the sac, tear fluid flows via a nasolacrimal duct to the inner nose. Each nasolacrimal duct is located underneath
the skin and passes through the bones of the face into the nose. Chemicals in tears, such as defensins, lactoferrin,
and lysozyme, help to prevent colonization by pathogens. In addition, mucins facilitate removal of microbes from the
surface of the eye.

Figure 21.6 The lacrimal apparatus includes the structures of the eye associated with tear production and drainage.
(credit: modification of work by “Evidence Based Medical Educator Inc.”/YouTube)

The surfaces of the eyeball and inner eyelid are mucous membranes called conjunctiva. The normal conjunctival
microbiota has not been well characterized, but does exist. One small study (part of the Ocular Microbiome project)
found twelve genera that were consistently present in the conjunctiva.[4] These microbes are thought to help defend
the membranes against pathogens. However, it is still unclear which microbes may be transient and which may form
a stable microbiota.[5]
Use of contact lenses can cause changes in the normal microbiota of the conjunctiva by introducing another surface
into the natural anatomy of the eye. Research is currently underway to better understand how contact lenses may
impact the normal microbiota and contribute to eye disease.
The watery material inside of the eyeball is called the vitreous humor. Unlike the conjunctiva, it is protected from
contact with the environment and is almost always sterile, with no normal microbiota (Figure 21.7).

4. Abelson, M.B., Lane, K., and Slocum, C.. “The Secrets of Ocular Microbiomes.” Review of Ophthalmology June 8, 2015.
http://www.reviewofophthalmology.com/content/t/ocular_disease/c/55178. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
5. Shaikh-Lesko, R. “Visualizing the Ocular Microbiome.” The Scientist May 12, 2014. http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/
articleNo/39945/title/Visualizing-the-Ocular-Microbiome. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.

914

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.7 Some microbes live on the conjunctiva of the human eye, but the vitreous humor is sterile.

Infections of the Eye
The conjunctiva is a frequent site of infection of the eye; like other mucous membranes, it is also a common
portal of entry for pathogens. Inflammation of the conjunctiva is called conjunctivitis, although it is commonly
known as pinkeye because of the pink appearance in the eye. Infections of deeper structures, beneath the cornea, are
less common (Figure 21.8). Conjunctivitis occurs in multiple forms. It may be acute or chronic. Acute purulent
conjunctivitis is associated with pus formation, while acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is associated with bleeding
in the conjunctiva. The term blepharitis refers to an inflammation of the eyelids, while keratitis refers to an
inflammation of the cornea (Figure 21.8); keratoconjunctivitis is an inflammation of both the cornea and the
conjunctiva, and dacryocystitis is an inflammation of the lacrimal sac that can often occur when a nasolacrimal duct
is blocked.

Figure 21.8 (a) Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva. (b) Blepharitis is inflammation of the eyelids. (c)
Keratitis is inflammation of the cornea. (credit a: modification of work by Lopez-Prats MJ, Sanz Marco E, HidalgoMora JJ, Garcia-Delpech S, Diaz-Llopis M; credit b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Infections leading to conjunctivitis, blepharitis, keratoconjunctivitis, or dacryocystitis may be caused by bacteria or
viruses, but allergens, pollutants, or chemicals can also irritate the eye and cause inflammation of various structures.
Viral infection is a more likely cause of conjunctivitis in cases with symptoms such as fever and watery discharge that
occurs with upper respiratory infection and itchy eyes. Table 21.2 summarizes some common forms of conjunctivitis
and blepharitis.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

915

Types of Conjunctivities and Blepharitis
Condition

Description

Causative Agent(s)

Acute purulent
conjunctivitis

Conjunctivitis with purulent discharge

Bacterial (Haemophilus,
Staphylococcus)

Acute hemorrhagic
conjunctivitis

Involves subconjunctival hemorrhages

Viral (Picornaviradae)

Acute ulcerative
blepharitis

Infection involving eyelids; pustules and ulcers may
develop

Bacterial (Staphylococcal) or viral
(herpes simplex, varicella-zoster,
etc.)

Follicular
conjunctivitis

Inflammation of the conjunctiva with nodules
(dome-shaped structures that are red at the base
and pale on top)

Viral (adenovirus and others);
environmental irritants

Dacryocystitis

Inflammation of the lacrimal sac often associated
with a plugged nasolacrimal duct

Bacterial (Haemophilus,
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus)

Keratitis

Inflammation of cornea

Bacterial, viral, or protozoal;
environmental irritants

Keratoconjunctivitis

Inflammation of cornea and conjunctiva

Bacterial, viral (adenoviruses), or
other causes (including dryness of
the eye)

Nonulcerative
blepharitis

Inflammation, irritation, redness of the eyelids
without ulceration

Environmental irritants; allergens

Papillary
conjunctivitis

Inflammation of the conjunctiva; nodules and
papillae with red tops develop

Environmental irritants; allergens

Table 21.2

• How does the lacrimal apparatus help to prevent eye infections?

21.2 Bacterial Infections of the Skin and Eyes
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that cause infections of the skin and eyes
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the skin and eyes

Despite the skin’s protective functions, infections are common. Gram-positive Staphylococcus spp. and Streptococcus
spp. are responsible for many of the most common skin infections. However, many skin conditions are not strictly
associated with a single pathogen. Opportunistic pathogens of many types may infect skin wounds, and individual
cases with identical symptoms may result from different pathogens or combinations of pathogens.
In this section, we will examine some of the most important bacterial infections of the skin and eyes and discuss how
biofilms can contribute to and exacerbate such infections. Key features of bacterial skin and eye infections are also
summarized in the Disease Profile boxes throughout this section.

916

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Staphylococcal Infections of the Skin
Staphylococcus species are commonly found on the skin, with S. epidermidis and S. hominis being prevalent in the
normal microbiota. S. aureus is also commonly found in the nasal passages and on healthy skin, but pathogenic strains
are often the cause of a broad range of infections of the skin and other body systems.
S. aureus is quite contagious. It is spread easily through skin-to-skin contact, and because many people are chronic
nasal carriers (asymptomatic individuals who carry S. aureus in their nares), the bacteria can easily be transferred
from the nose to the hands and then to fomites or other individuals. Because it is so contagious, S. aureus is
prevalent in most community settings. This prevalence is particularly problematic in hospitals, where antibioticresistant strains of the bacteria may be present, and where immunocompromised patients may be more susceptible
to infection. Resistant strains include methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), which can be acquired through healthcare settings (hospital-acquired MRSA, or HA-MRSA) or in the community (community-acquired MRSA, or CAMRSA). Hospital patients often arrive at health-care facilities already colonized with antibiotic-resistant strains of S.
aureus that can be transferred to health-care providers and other patients. Some hospitals have attempted to detect
these individuals in order to institute prophylactic measures, but they have had mixed success (see Eye on Ethics:
Screening Patients for MRSA).
When a staphylococcal infection develops, choice of medication is important. As discussed above, many
staphylococci (such as MRSA) are resistant to some or many antibiotics. Thus, antibiotic sensitivity is measured to
identify the most suitable antibiotic. However, even before receiving the results of sensitivity analysis, suspected S.
aureus infections are often initially treated with drugs known to be effective against MRSA, such as trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMZ), clindamycin, a tetracycline (doxycycline or minocycline), or linezolid.
The pathogenicity of staphylococcal infections is often enhanced by characteristic chemicals secreted by some strains.
Staphylococcal virulence factors include hemolysins called staphylolysins, which are cytotoxic for many types of
cells, including skin cells and white blood cells. Virulent strains of S. aureus are also coagulase-positive, meaning
they produce coagulase, a plasma-clotting protein that is involved in abscess formation. They may also produce
leukocidins, which kill white blood cells and can contribute to the production of pus and Protein A, which inhibits
phagocytosis by binding to the constant region of antibodies. Some virulent strains of S. aureus also produce other
toxins, such as toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens).
To confirm the causative agent of a suspected staphylococcal skin infection, samples from the wound are cultured.
Under the microscope, gram-positive Staphylococcus species have cellular arrangements that form grapelike clusters;
when grown on blood agar, colonies have a unique pigmentation ranging from opaque white to cream. A catalase
test is used to distinguish Staphylococcus from Streptococcus, which is also a genus of gram-positive cocci and
a common cause of skin infections. Staphylococcus species are catalase-positive while Streptococcus species are
catalase-negative.
Other tests are performed on samples from the wound in order to distinguish coagulase-positive species of
Staphylococcus (CoPS) such as S. aureus from common coagulase-negative species (CoNS) such as S. epidermidis.
Although CoNS are less likely than CoPS to cause human disease, they can cause infections when they enter the
body, as can sometimes occur via catheters, indwelling medical devices, and wounds. Passive agglutination testing
can be used to distinguish CoPS from CoNS. If the sample is coagulase-positive, the sample is generally presumed to
contain S. aureus. Additional genetic testing would be necessary to identify the particular strain of S. aureus.
Another way to distinguish CoPS from CoNS is by culturing the sample on mannitol salt agar (MSA). Staphylococcus
species readily grow on this medium because they are tolerant of the high concentration of sodium chloride (7.5%
NaCl). However, CoPS such as S. aureus ferment mannitol (which will be evident on a MSA plate), whereas CoNS
such as S. epidermidis do not ferment mannitol but can be distinguished by the fermentation of other sugars such as
lactose, malonate, and raffinose (Figure 21.9).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

917

Figure 21.9 (a) A mannitol salt agar plate is used to distinguish different species of staphylococci. In this plate, S.
aureus is on the left and S. epidermidis is in the right. Because S. aureus is capable of fermenting mannitol, it
produces acids that cause the color to change to yellow. (b) This scanning electron micrograph shows the
characteristic grapelike clusters of S. aureus. (credit a: modification of work by “ScienceProfOnline”/YouTube; credit
b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Eye on Ethics

Screening Patients for MRSA
According to the CDC, 86% of invasive MRSA infections are associated in some way with healthcare, as
opposed to being community-acquired. In hospitals and clinics, asymptomatic patients who harbor MRSA may
spread the bacteria to individuals who are more susceptible to serious illness.
In an attempt to control the spread of MRSA, hospitals have tried screening patients for MRSA. If patients
test positive following a nasal swab test, they can undergo decolonization using chlorhexidine washes
or intranasal mupirocin. Some studies have reported substantial reductions in MRSA disease following
implementation of these protocols, while others have not. This is partly because there is no standard protocol
for these procedures. Several different MRSA identification tests may be used, some involving slower culturing
techniques and others rapid testing. Other factors, such as the effectiveness of general hand-washing
protocols, may also play a role in helping to prevent MRSA transmission. There are still other questions that
need to be addressed: How frequently should patients be screened? Which individuals should be tested? From
where on the body should samples be collected? Will increased resistance develop from the decolonization
procedures?
Even if identification and decolonization procedures are perfected, ethical questions will remain. Should
patients have the right to decline testing? Should a patient who tests positive for MRSA have the right to decline
the decolonization procedure, and if so, should hospitals have the right to refuse treatment to the patient? How
do we balance the individual’s right to receive care with the rights of other patients who could be exposed to
disease as a result?

918

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Superficial Staphylococcal Infections
S. aureus is often associated with pyoderma, skin infections that are purulent. Pus formation occurs because many
strains of S. aureus produce leukocidins, which kill white blood cells. These purulent skin infections may initially
manifest as folliculitis, but can lead to furuncles or deeper abscesses called carbuncles.
Folliculitis generally presents as bumps and pimples that may be itchy, red, and/or pus-filled. In some cases,
folliculitis is self-limiting, but if it continues for more than a few days, worsens, or returns repeatedly, it may require
medical treatment. Sweat, skin injuries, ingrown hairs, tight clothing, irritation from shaving, and skin conditions can
all contribute to folliculitis. Avoidance of tight clothing and skin irritation can help to prevent infection, but topical
antibiotics (and sometimes other treatments) may also help. Folliculitis can be identified by skin inspection; treatment
is generally started without first culturing and identifying the causative agent.
In contrast, furuncles (boils) are deeper infections (Figure 21.10). They are most common in those individuals
(especially young adults and teenagers) who play contact sports, share athletic equipment, have poor nutrition, live in
close quarters, or have weakened immune systems. Good hygiene and skin care can often help to prevent furuncles
from becoming more infective, and they generally resolve on their own. However, if furuncles spread, increase in
number or size, or lead to systemic symptoms such as fever and chills, then medical care is needed. They may
sometimes need to be drained (at which time the pathogens can be cultured) and treated with antibiotics.
When multiple boils develop into a deeper lesion, it is called a carbuncle (Figure 21.10). Because carbuncles
are deeper, they are more commonly associated with systemic symptoms and a general feeling of illness. Larger,
recurrent, or worsening carbuncles require medical treatment, as do those associated with signs of illness such as
fever. Carbuncles generally need to be drained and treated with antibiotics. While carbuncles are relatively easy to
identify visually, culturing and laboratory analysis of the wound may be recommended for some infections because
antibiotic resistance is relatively common.
Proper hygiene is important to prevent these types of skin infections or to prevent the progression of existing
infections.

Figure 21.10 Furuncles (boils) and carbuncles are infections of the skin often caused by Staphylococcus bacteria.
(a) A furuncle contains pus and exhibits swelling. (b) A carbuncle is a pus-filled lesion that is typically deeper than the
furuncle. It often forms from multiple furuncles. (credit a: modification of work by “Mahdouch”/Wikimedia Commons;
credit b: modification of work by “Drvgaikwad”/Wikimedia Commons)

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) is another superficial infection caused by S. aureus that is most
commonly seen in young children, especially infants. Bacterial exotoxins first produce erythema (redness of the skin)
and then severe peeling of the skin, as might occur after scalding (Figure 21.11). SSSS is diagnosed by examining
characteristics of the skin (which may rub off easily), using blood tests to check for elevated white blood cell counts,
culturing, and other methods. Intravenous antibiotics and fluid therapy are used as treatment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

919

Figure 21.11 A newborn with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS), which results in large regions of
peeling, dead skin. (credit: modification of work by D Jeyakumari, R Gopal, M Eswaran, and C MaheshKumar)

Impetigo
The skin infection impetigo causes the formation of vesicles, pustules, and possibly bullae, often around the nose
and mouth. Bullae are large, fluid-filled blisters that measure at least 5 mm in diameter. Impetigo can be diagnosed
as either nonbullous or bullous. In nonbullous impetigo, vesicles and pustules rupture and become encrusted sores.
Typically the crust is yellowish, often with exudate draining from the base of the lesion. In bullous impetigo, the
bullae fill and rupture, resulting in larger, draining, encrusted lesions (Figure 21.12).
Especially common in children, impetigo is particularly concerning because it is highly contagious. Impetigo can be
caused by S. aureus alone, by Streptococcus pyogenes alone, or by coinfection of S. aureus and S. pyogenes. Impetigo
is often diagnosed through observation of its characteristic appearance, although culture and susceptibility testing
may also be used.
Topical or oral antibiotic treatment is typically effective in treating most cases of impetigo. However, cases caused by
S. pyogenes can lead to serious sequelae (pathological conditions resulting from infection, disease, injury, therapy, or
other trauma) such as acute glomerulonephritis (AGN), which is severe inflammation in the kidneys.

Figure 21.12 Impetigo is characterized by vesicles, pustules, or bullae that rupture, producing encrusted sores.
(credit: modification of work by FDA)

Nosocomial S. epidermidis Infections
Though not as virulent as S. aureus, the staphylococcus S. epidermidis can cause serious opportunistic infections.
Such infections usually occur only in hospital settings. S. epidermidis is usually a harmless resident of the normal

920

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

skin microbiota. However, health-care workers can inadvertently transfer S. epidermidis to medical devices that are
inserted into the body, such as catheters, prostheses, and indwelling medical devices. Once it has bypassed the skin
barrier, S. epidermidis can cause infections inside the body that can be difficult to treat. Like S. aureus, S. epidermidis
is resistant to many antibiotics, and localized infections can become systemic if not treated quickly. To reduce the risk
of nosocomial (hospital-acquired) S. epidermidis, health-care workers must follow strict procedures for handling and
sterilizing medical devices before and during surgical procedures.

• Why are Staphylococcus aureus infections often purulent?

Streptococcal Infections of the Skin
Streptococcus are gram-positive cocci with a microscopic morphology that resembles chains of bacteria. Colonies
are typically small (1–2 mm in diameter), translucent, entire edge, with a slightly raised elevation that can be either
nonhemolytic, alpha-hemolytic, or beta-hemolytic when grown on blood agar (Figure 21.13). Additionally, they are
facultative anaerobes that are catalase-negative.

Figure 21.13 Streptococcus pyogenes forms chains of cocci. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

The genus Streptococcus includes important pathogens that are categorized in serological Lancefield groups based on
the distinguishing characteristics of their surface carbohydrates. The most clinically important streptococcal species
in humans is S. pyogenes, also known as group A streptococcus (GAS). S. pyogenes produces a variety of extracellular
enzymes, including streptolysins O and S, hyaluronidase, and streptokinase. These enzymes can aid in transmission
and contribute to the inflammatory response.[6] S. pyogenes also produces a capsule and M protein, a streptococcal
cell wall protein. These virulence factors help the bacteria to avoid phagocytosis while provoking a substantial
immune response that contributes to symptoms associated with streptococcal infections.
S. pyogenes causes a wide variety of diseases not only in the skin, but in other organ systems as well. Examples of
diseases elsewhere in the body include pharyngitis and scarlet fever, which will be covered in later chapters.

6. Starr, C.R. and Engelberg N.C. “Role of Hyaluronidase in Subcutaneous Spread and Growth of Group A Streptococcus.” Infection and
Immunity 2006(7:1): 40–48. doi: 10.1128/IAI.74.1.40-48.2006.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

921

Cellulitis, Erysipelas, and Erythema Nosodum
Common streptococcal conditions of the skin include cellulitis, erysipelas, and erythema nodosum. An infection that
develops in the dermis or hypodermis can cause cellulitis, which presents as a reddened area of the skin that is warm
to the touch and painful. The causative agent is often S. pyogenes, which may breach the epidermis through a cut or
abrasion, although cellulitis may also be caused by staphylococci. S. pyogenes can also cause erysipelas, a condition
that presents as a large, intensely inflamed patch of skin involving the dermis (often on the legs or face). These
infections can be suppurative, which results in a bullous form of erysipelas. Streptococcal and other pathogens may
also cause a condition called erythema nodosum, characterized by inflammation in the subcutaneous fat cells of the
hypodermis. It sometimes results from a streptococcal infection, though other pathogens can also cause the condition.
It is not suppurative, but leads to red nodules on the skin, most frequently on the shins (Figure 21.14).
In general, streptococcal infections are best treated through identification of the specific pathogen followed by
treatment based upon that particular pathogen’s susceptibility to different antibiotics. Many immunological tests,
including agglutination reactions and ELISAs, can be used to detect streptococci. Penicillin is commonly prescribed
for treatment of cellulitis and erysipelas because resistance is not widespread in streptococci at this time. In most
patients, erythema nodosum is self-limiting and is not treated with antimicrobial drugs. Recommended treatments
may include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), cool wet compresses, elevation, and bed rest.

Figure 21.14 S. pyogenes can cause a variety of skin conditions once it breaches the skin barrier through a cut or
wound. (a) Cellulitis presents as a painful, red rash. (b) Erysipelas presents as a raised rash, usually with clear
borders. (c) Erythema nodosum is characterized by red lumps or nodules, typically on the lower legs. (credit a:
modification of work by “Bassukas ID, Gaitanis G, Zioga A, Boboyianni C, Stergiopoulou C; credit b: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Dean C, Crow WT)

Necrotizing Fasciitis
Streptococcal infections that start in the skin can sometimes spread elsewhere, resulting in a rare but potentially
life-threatening condition called necrotizing fasciitis, sometimes referred to as flesh-eating bacterial syndrome. S.
pyogenes is one of several species that can cause this rare but potentially-fatal condition; others include Klebsiella,
Clostridium, Escherichia coli, S. aureus, and Aeromonas hydrophila.
Necrotizing fasciitis occurs when the fascia, a thin layer of connective tissue between the skin and muscle, becomes
infected. Severe invasive necrotizing fasciitis due to Streptococcus pyogenes occurs when virulence factors that are
responsible for adhesion and invasion overcome host defenses. S. pyogenes invasins allow bacterial cells to adhere
to tissues and establish infection. Bacterial proteases unique to S. pyogenes aggressively infiltrate and destroy host
tissues, inactivate complement, and prevent neutrophil migration to the site of infection. The infection and resulting
tissue death can spread very rapidly, as large areas of skin become detached and die. Treatment generally requires
debridement (surgical removal of dead or infected tissue) or amputation of infected limbs to stop the spread of the
infection; surgical treatment is supplemented with intravenous antibiotics and other therapies (Figure 21.15).
Necrotizing fasciitis does not always originate from a skin infection; in some cases there is no known portal of entry.
Some studies have suggested that experiencing a blunt force trauma can increase the risk of developing streptococcal
necrotizing fasciitis.[7]

922

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.15 (a) The left leg of this patient shows the clinical features of necrotizing fasciitis. (b) The same patient’s
leg is surgically debrided to remove the infection. (credit a, b: modification of work by Piotr Smuszkiewicz, Iwona
Trojanowska, and Hanna Tomczak)

• How do staphylococcal infections differ in general presentation from streptococcal infections?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Observing that Sam’s wound is purulent, the doctor tells him that he probably has a bacterial infection. She
takes a sample from the lesion to send for laboratory analysis, but because it is Friday, she does not expect
to receive the results until the following Monday. In the meantime, she prescribes an over-the-counter topical
antibiotic ointment. She tells Sam to keep the wound clean and apply a new bandage with the ointment at least
twice per day.

• How would the lab technician determine if the infection is staphylococcal or streptococcal? Suggest
several specific methods.

• What tests might the lab perform to determine the best course of antibiotic treatment?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Pseudomonas Infections of the Skin
Another important skin pathogen is Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a gram-negative, oxidase-positive, aerobic bacillus
that is commonly found in water and soil as well as on human skin. P. aeruginosa is a common cause of opportunistic
infections of wounds and burns. It can also cause hot tub rash, a condition characterized by folliculitis that frequently
afflicts users of pools and hot tubs (recall the Clinical Focus case in Microbial Biochemistry). P. aeruginosa is also
the cause of otitis externa (swimmer’s ear), an infection of the ear canal that causes itching, redness, and discomfort,
and can progress to fever, pain, and swelling (Figure 21.16).

7. Nuwayhid, Z.B., Aronoff, D.M., and Mulla, Z.D.. “Blunt Trauma as a Risk Factor for Group A Streptococcal Necrotizing Fasciitis.”
Annals of Epidemiology (2007) 17:878–881.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

923

Figure 21.16 (a) Hot tub folliculitis presents as an itchy red rash. It is typically caused by P. aeruginosa, a bacterium
that thrives in wet, warm environments such as hot tubs. (b) Otitis externa (swimmer’s ear) may also be caused by P.
aeruginosa or other bacteria commonly found in water. Inflammation of the outer ear and ear canal can lead to painful
swelling. (credit b: modification of work by Klaus D. Peter)

Wounds infected with P. aeruginosa have a distinctive odor resembling grape soda or fresh corn tortillas. This
odor is caused by the 2-aminoacetophenone that is used by P. aeruginosa in quorum sensing and contributes
to its pathogenicity. Wounds infected with certain strains of P. aeruginosa also produce a blue-green pus due
to the pigments pyocyanin and pyoverdin, which also contribute to its virulence. Pyocyanin and pyoverdin are
siderophores that help P. aeruginosa survive in low-iron environments by enhancing iron uptake. P. aeruginosa also
produces several other virulence factors, including phospholipase C (a hemolysin capable of breaking down red blood
cells), exoenzyme S (involved in adherence to epithelial cells), and exotoxin A (capable of causing tissue necrosis).
Other virulence factors include a slime that allows the bacterium to avoid being phagocytized, fimbriae for adherence,
and proteases that cause tissue damage. P. aeruginosa can be detected through the use of cetrimide agar, which is
selective for Pseudomonas species (Figure 21.17).

Figure 21.17 (a) These P. aeruginosa colonies are growing on xylose lysine sodium deoxycholate (XLD) agar. (b)
Pseudomonas spp. can produce a variety of blue-green pigments. (c) Pseudomonas spp. may produce fluorescein,
which fluoresces green under ultraviolet light under the right conditions. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)

Pseudomonas spp. tend to be resistant to most antibiotics. They often produce β-lactamases, may have mutations
affecting porins (small cell wall channels) that affect antibiotic uptake, and may pump some antibiotics out of the cell,
contributing to this resistance. Polymyxin B and gentamicin are effective, as are some fluoroquinolones. Otitis externa
is typically treated with ear drops containing acetic acid, antibacterials, and/or steroids to reduce inflammation;
ear drops may also include antifungals because fungi can sometimes cause or contribute to otitis externa. Wound

924

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

infections caused by Pseudomonas spp. may be treated with topical antibiofilm agents that disrupt the formation of
biofilms.

• Name at least two types of skin infections commonly caused by Pseudomonas spp.

Acne
One of the most ubiquitous skin conditions is acne. Acne afflicts nearly 80% of teenagers and young adults, but it can
be found in individuals of all ages. Higher incidence among adolescents is due to hormonal changes that can result in
overproduction of sebum.
Acne occurs when hair follicles become clogged by shed skin cells and sebum, causing non-inflammatory lesions
called comedones. Comedones (singular “comedo”) can take the form of whitehead and blackhead pimples.
Whiteheads are covered by skin, whereas blackhead pimples are not; the black color occurs when lipids in the clogged
follicle become exposed to the air and oxidize (Figure 21.18).

Figure 21.18 (a) Acne is characterized by whitehead and blackhead comedones that result from clogged hair
follicles. (b) Blackheads, visible as black spots on the skin, have a dark appearance due to the oxidation of lipids in
sebum via exposure to the air. (credit a: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)

Often comedones lead to infection by Propionibacterium acnes, a gram-positive, non-spore-forming, aerotolerant
anaerobic bacillus found on skin that consumes components of sebum. P. acnes secretes enzymes that damage the
hair follicle, causing inflammatory lesions that may include papules, pustules, nodules, or pseudocysts, depending on
their size and severity.
Treatment of acne depends on the severity of the case. There are multiple ways to grade acne severity, but three
levels are usually considered based on the number of comedones, the number of inflammatory lesions, and the types
of lesions. Mild acne is treated with topical agents that may include salicylic acid (which helps to remove old skin
cells) or retinoids (which have multiple mechanisms, including the reduction of inflammation). Moderate acne may
be treated with antibiotics (erythromycin, clindamycin), acne creams (e.g., benzoyl peroxide), and hormones. Severe
acne may require treatment using strong medications such as isotretinoin (a retinoid that reduces oil buildup, among
other effects, but that also has serious side effects such as photosensitivity). Other treatments, such as phototherapy
and laser therapy to kill bacteria and possibly reduce oil production, are also sometimes used.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

925

• What is the role of Propionibacterium acnes in causing acne?

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Sam uses the topical antibiotic over the weekend to treat his wound, but he does not see any improvement.
On Monday, the doctor calls to inform him that the results from his laboratory tests are in. The tests show
evidence of both Staphylococcus and Streptococcus in his wound. The bacterial species were confirmed using
several tests. A passive agglutination test confirmed the presence of S. aureus. In this type of test, latex beads
with antibodies cause agglutination when S. aureus is present. Streptococcus pyogenes was confirmed in
the wound based on bacitracin (0.04 units) susceptibility as well as latex agglutination tests specific for S.
pyogenes.
Because many strains of S. aureus are resistant to antibiotics, the doctor had also requested an antimicrobial
susceptibility test (AST) at the same time the specimen was submitted for identification. The results of the
AST indicated no drug resistance for the Streptococcus spp.; the Staphylococcus spp. showed resistance to
several common antibiotics, but were susceptible to cefoxitin and oxacillin. Once Sam began to use these new
antibiotics, the infection resolved within a week and the lesion healed.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Anthrax
The zoonotic disease anthrax is caused by Bacillus anthracis, a gram-positive, endospore-forming, facultative
anaerobe. Anthrax mainly affects animals such as sheep, goats, cattle, and deer, but can be found in humans as
well. Sometimes called wool sorter’s disease, it is often transmitted to humans through contact with infected animals
or animal products, such as wool or hides. However, exposure to B. anthracis can occur by other means, as the
endospores are widespread in soils and can survive for long periods of time, sometimes for hundreds of years.
The vast majority of anthrax cases (95–99%) occur when anthrax endospores enter the body through abrasions of the
skin.[8] This form of the disease is called cutaneous anthrax. It is characterized by the formation of a nodule on the
skin; the cells within the nodule die, forming a black eschar, a mass of dead skin tissue (Figure 21.19). The localized
infection can eventually lead to bacteremia and septicemia. If untreated, cutaneous anthrax can cause death in 20%
of patients.[9] Once in the skin tissues, B. anthracis endospores germinate and produce a capsule, which prevents the
bacteria from being phagocytized, and two binary exotoxins that cause edema and tissue damage. The first of the two
exotoxins consists of a combination of protective antigen (PA) and an enzymatic lethal factor (LF), forming lethal
toxin (LeTX). The second consists of protective antigen (PA) and an edema factor (EF), forming edema toxin (EdTX).

8. Shadomy, S.V., Traxler, R.M., and Marston, C.K. “Infectious Diseases Related to Travel: Anthrax” 2015. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/infectious-diseases-related-to-travel/anthrax. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
9. US FDA. “Anthrax.” 2015. http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ucm061751.htm. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.

926

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.19 (a) Cutaneous anthrax is an infection of the skin by B. anthracis, which produces tissue-damaging
exotoxins. Dead tissues accumulating in this nodule have produced a small black eschar. (b) Colonies of B. anthracis
grown on sheep’s blood agar. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Less commonly, anthrax infections can be initiated through other portals of entry such as the digestive tract
(gastrointestinal anthrax) or respiratory tract (pulmonary anthrax or inhalation anthrax). Typically, cases of
noncutaneous anthrax are more difficult to treat than the cutaneous form. The mortality rate for gastrointestinal
anthrax can be up to 40%, even with treatment. Inhalation anthrax, which occurs when anthrax spores are inhaled,
initially causes influenza-like symptoms, but mortality rates are approximately 45% in treated individuals and 85% in
those not treated. A relatively new form of the disease, injection anthrax, has been reported in Europe in intravenous
drug users; it occurs when drugs are contaminated with B. anthracis. Patients with injection anthrax show signs and
symptoms of severe soft tissue infection that differ clinically from cutaneous anthrax. This often delays diagnosis and
treatment, and leads to a high mortality rate.[10]
B. anthracis colonies on blood agar have a rough texture and serrated edges that eventually form an undulating band
(Figure 21.19). Broad spectrum antibiotics such as penicillin, erythromycin, and tetracycline are often effective
treatments.
Unfortunately, B. anthracis has been used as a biological weapon and remains on the United Nations’ list of potential
agents of bioterrorism.[11] Over a period of several months in 2001, a number of letters were mailed to members of
the news media and the United States Congress. As a result, 11 individuals developed cutaneous anthrax and another
11 developed inhalation anthrax. Those infected included recipients of the letters, postal workers, and two other
individuals. Five of those infected with pulmonary anthrax died. The anthrax spores had been carefully prepared to
aerosolize, showing that the perpetrator had a high level of expertise in microbiology.[12]
A vaccine is available to protect individuals from anthrax. However, unlike most routine vaccines, the current anthrax
vaccine is unique in both its formulation and the protocols dictating who receives it.[13] The vaccine is administered
through five intramuscular injections over a period of 18 months, followed by annual boosters. The US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) has only approved administration of the vaccine prior to exposure for at-risk adults, such
as individuals who work with anthrax in a laboratory, some individuals who handle animals or animal products (e.g.,
some veterinarians), and some members of the United States military. The vaccine protects against cutaneous and
10. Berger, T., Kassirer, M., and Aran, A.A.. “Injectional Anthrax—New Presentation of an Old Disease.” Euro Surveillance 19 (2014) 32.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25139073. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
11. United Nations Office at Geneva. “What Are Biological and Toxin Weapons?” http://www.unog.ch/
80256EE600585943/%28httpPages%29/29B727532FECBE96C12571860035A6DB?. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
12. Federal Bureau of Investigation. “Famous Cases and Criminals: Amerithrax or Anthrax Investigation.” https://www.fbi.gov/history/
famous-cases/amerithrax-or-anthrax-investigation. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Anthrax: Medical Care: Prevention: Antibiotics.” http://www.cdc.gov/anthrax/medicalcare/prevention.html. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

927

inhalation anthrax using cell-free filtrates of microaerophilic cultures of an avirulent, nonencapsulated strain of B.
anthracis.[14] The FDA has not approved the vaccine for routine use after exposure to anthrax, but if there were ever
an anthrax emergency in the United States, patients could be given anthrax vaccine after exposure to help prevent
disease.

• What is the characteristic feature of a cutaneous anthrax infection?

Disease Profile
Bacterial Infections of the Skin
Bacterial infections of the skin can cause a wide range of symptoms and syndromes, ranging from the
superficial and relatively harmless to the severe and even fatal. Most bacterial skin infections can be diagnosed
by culturing the bacteria and treated with antibiotics. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is also often necessary
because many strains of bacteria have developed antibiotic resistance. Figure 21.20 summarizes the
characteristics of some common bacterial skin infections.

14. Emergent Biosolutions. AVA (BioThrax) vaccine package insert (Draft). Nov 2015. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
biologicsbloodvaccines/bloodbloodproducts/approvedproducts/licensedproductsblas/ucm074923.pdf.

928

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.20

Bacterial Conjunctivitis
Like the skin, the surface of the eye comes in contact with the outside world and is somewhat prone to infection by
bacteria in the environment. Bacterial conjunctivitis (pinkeye) is a condition characterized by inflammation of the
conjunctiva, often accompanied by a discharge of sticky fluid (described as acute purulent conjunctivitis) (Figure
21.21). Conjunctivitis can affect one eye or both, and it usually does not affect vision permanently. Bacterial
conjunctivitis is most commonly caused by Haemophilus influenzae, but can also be caused by other species such as
Moraxella catarrhalis, S. pneumoniae, and S. aureus. The causative agent may be identified using bacterial cultures,
Gram stain, and diagnostic biochemical, antigenic, or nucleic acid profile tests of the isolated pathogen. Bacterial
conjunctivitis is very contagious, being transmitted via secretions from infected individuals, but it is also self-limiting.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

929

Bacterial conjunctivitis usually resolves in a few days, but topical antibiotics are sometimes prescribed. Because this
condition is so contagious, medical attention is recommended whenever it is suspected. Individuals who use contact
lenses should discontinue their use when conjunctivitis is suspected. Certain symptoms, such as blurred vision, eye
pain, and light sensitivity, can be associated with serious conditions and require medical attention.

Figure 21.21 Acute, purulent, bacterial conjunctivitis causes swelling and redness in the conjunctiva, the membrane
lining the whites of the eyes and the inner eyelids. It is often accompanied by a yellow, green, or white discharge,
which can dry and become encrusted on the eyelashes. (credit: “Tanalai”/Wikimedia Commons)

Neonatal Conjunctivitis
Newborns whose mothers have certain sexually transmitted infections are at risk of contracting ophthalmia
neonatorum or inclusion conjunctivitis, which are two forms of neonatal conjunctivitis contracted through exposure
to pathogens during passage through the birth canal. Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum is caused by Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, the bacterium that causes the STD gonorrhea (Figure 21.22). Inclusion (chlamydial) conjunctivitis is
caused by Chlamydia trachomatis, the anaerobic, obligate, intracellular parasite that causes the STD chlamydia.
To prevent gonoccocal ophthalmia neonatorum, silver nitrate ointments were once routinely applied to all infants’
eyes shortly after birth; however, it is now more common to apply antibacterial creams or drops, such as
erythromycin. Most hospitals are required by law to provide this preventative treatment to all infants, because
conjunctivitis caused by N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, or other bacteria acquired during a vaginal delivery can
have serious complications. If untreated, the infection can spread to the cornea, resulting in ulceration or perforation
that can cause vision loss or even permanent blindness. As such, neonatal conjunctivitis is treated aggressively with
oral or intravenous antibiotics to stop the spread of the infection. Causative agents of inclusion conjunctivitis may be
identified using bacterial cultures, Gram stain, and diagnostic biochemical, antigenic, or nucleic acid profile tests.

Figure 21.22 A newborn suffering from gonoccocal opthalmia neonatorum. Left untreated, purulent discharge can
scar the cornea, causing loss of vision or permanent blindness. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Compare and contrast bacterial conjunctivitis with neonatal conjunctivitis.

930

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Trachoma
Trachoma, or granular conjunctivitis, is a common cause of preventable blindness that is rare in the United States
but widespread in developing countries, especially in Africa and Asia. The condition is caused by the same species
that causes neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis in infants, Chlamydia trachomatis. C. trachomatis can be transmitted
easily through fomites such as contaminated towels, bed linens, and clothing and also by direct contact with infected
individuals. C. trachomatis can also be spread by flies that transfer infected mucous containing C. trachomatis from
one human to another.
Infection by C. trachomatis causes chronic conjunctivitis, which leads to the formation of necrotic follicles and
scarring in the upper eyelid. The scars turn the eyelashes inward (a condition known as trichiasis) and mechanical
abrasion of the cornea leads to blindness (Figure 21.23). Antibiotics such as azithromycin are effective in treating
trachoma, and outcomes are good when the disease is treated promptly. In areas where this disease is common, large
public health efforts are focused on reducing transmission by teaching people how to avoid the risks of the infection.

Figure 21.23 (a) If trachoma is not treated early with antibiotics, scarring on the eyelid can lead to trichiasis, a
condition in which the eyelashes turn inward. (b) Trichiasis leads to blindness if not corrected by surgery, as shown
here. (credit b: modification of work by Otis Historical Archives National Museum of Health & Medicine)

• Why is trachoma rare in the United States?

Micro Connections
SAFE Eradication of Trachoma
Though uncommon in the United States and other developed nations, trachoma is the leading cause of
preventable blindness worldwide, with more than 4 million people at immediate risk of blindness from trichiasis.
The vast majority of those affected by trachoma live in Africa and the Middle East in isolated rural or desert
communities with limited access to clean water and sanitation. These conditions provide an environment

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

931

conducive to the growth and spread of Chlamydia trachomatis, the bacterium that causes trachoma, via
wastewater and eye-seeking flies.
In response to this crisis, recent years have seen major public health efforts aimed at treating and preventing
trachoma. The Alliance for Global Elimination of Trachoma by 2020 (GET 2020), coordinated by the World
Health Organization (WHO), promotes an initiative dubbed “SAFE,” which stands for “Surgery, Antibiotics,
Facial cleanliness, and Environmental improvement.” The Carter Center, a charitable, nongovernment
organization led by former US President Jimmy Carter, has partnered with the WHO to promote the SAFE
initiative in six of the most critically impacted nations in Africa. Through its Trachoma Control Program, the
Carter Center trains and equips local surgeons to correct trichiasis and distributes antibiotics to treat trachoma.
The program also promotes better personal hygiene through health education and improves sanitation by
funding the construction of household latrines. This reduces the prevalence of open sewage, which provides
breeding grounds for the flies that spread trachoma.

Bacterial Keratitis
Keratitis can have many causes, but bacterial keratitis is most frequently caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and/
or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Contact lens users are particularly at risk for such an infection because S. epidermidis
and P. aeruginosa both adhere well to the surface of the lenses. Risk of infection can be greatly reduced by proper
care of contact lenses and avoiding wearing lenses overnight. Because the infection can quickly lead to blindness,
prompt and aggressive treatment with antibiotics is important. The causative agent may be identified using bacterial
cultures, Gram stain, and diagnostic biochemical, antigenic, or nucleic acid profile tests of the isolated pathogen.

• Why are contact lens wearers at greater risk for developing keratitis?

Biofilms and Infections of the Skin and Eyes
When treating bacterial infections of the skin and eyes, it is important to consider that few such infections can be
attributed to a single pathogen. While biofilms may develop in other parts of the body, they are especially relevant
to skin infections (such as those caused by S. aureus or P. aeruginosa) because of their prevalence in chronic
skin wounds. Biofilms develop when bacteria (and sometimes fungi) attach to a surface and produce extracellular
polymeric substances (EPS) in which cells of multiple organisms may be embedded. When a biofilm develops on a
wound, it may interfere with the natural healing process as well as diagnosis and treatment.
Because biofilms vary in composition and are difficult to replicate in the lab, they are still not thoroughly understood.
The extracellular matrix of a biofilm consists of polymers such as polysaccharides, extracellular DNA, proteins,
and lipids, but the exact makeup varies. The organisms living within the extracellular matrix may include familiar
pathogens as well as other bacteria that do not grow well in cultures (such as numerous obligate anaerobes). This
presents challenges when culturing samples from infections that involve a biofilm. Because only some species grow
in vitro, the culture may contain only a subset of the bacterial species involved in the infection.
Biofilms confer many advantages to the resident bacteria. For example, biofilms can facilitate attachment to surfaces
on or in the host organism (such as wounds), inhibit phagocytosis, prevent the invasion of neutrophils, and sequester
host antibodies. Additionally, biofilms can provide a level of antibiotic resistance not found in the isolated cells and
colonies that are typical of laboratory cultures. The extracellular matrix provides a physical barrier to antibiotics,
shielding the target cells from exposure. Moreover, cells within a biofilm may differentiate to create subpopulations
of dormant cells called persister cells. Nutrient limitations deep within a biofilm add another level of resistance, as
stress responses can slow metabolism and increase drug resistance.

932

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Disease Profile
Bacterial Infections of the Eyes
A number of bacteria are able to cause infection when introduced to the mucosa of the eye. In general,
bacterial eye infections can lead to inflammation, irritation, and discharge, but they vary in severity. Some are
typically short-lived, and others can become chronic and lead to permanent eye damage. Prevention requires
limiting exposure to contagious pathogens. When infections do occur, prompt treatment with antibiotics can
often limit or prevent permanent damage. Figure 21.24 summarizes the characteristics of some common
bacterial infections of the eyes.

Figure 21.24

21.3 Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common viruses associated with infections of the skin and eyes
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the skin and eyes

Until recently, it was thought that the normal microbiota of the body consisted primarily of bacteria and some fungi.
However, in addition to bacteria, the skin is colonized by viruses, and recent studies suggest that Papillomaviridae,
Polyomaviridae and Circoviridae also contribute to the normal skin microbiota. However, some viruses associated
with skin are pathogenic, and these viruses can cause diseases with a wide variety of presentations.
Numerous types of viral infections cause rashes or lesions on the skin; however, in many cases these skin conditions
result from infections that originate in other body systems. In this chapter, we will limit the discussion to viral skin

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

933

infections that use the skin as a portal of entry. Later chapters will discuss viral infections such as chickenpox,
measles, and rubella—diseases that cause skin rashes but invade the body through portals of entry other than the skin.

Papillomas
Papillomas (warts) are the expression of common skin infections by human papillomavirus (HPV) and are
transmitted by direct contact. There are many types of HPV, and they lead to a variety of different presentations, such
as common warts, plantar warts, flat warts, and filiform warts. HPV can also cause sexually-transmitted genital warts,
which will be discussed in Urogenital System Infections. Vaccination is available for some strains of HPV.
Common warts tend to develop on fingers, the backs of hands, and around nails in areas with broken skin. In contrast,
plantar warts (also called foot warts) develop on the sole of the foot and can grow inwards, causing pain and pressure
during walking. Flat warts can develop anywhere on the body, are often numerous, and are relatively smooth and
small compared with other wart types. Filiform warts are long, threadlike warts that grow quickly.
In some cases, the immune system may be strong enough to prevent warts from forming or to eradicate established
warts. However, treatment of established warts is typically required. There are many available treatments for warts,
and their effectiveness varies. Common warts can be frozen off with liquid nitrogen. Topical applications of salicylic
acid may also be effective. Other options are electrosurgery (burning), curettage (cutting), excision, painting with
cantharidin (which causes the wart to die so it can more easily be removed), laser treatments, treatment with
bleomycin, chemical peels, and immunotherapy (Figure 21.25).

Figure 21.25 Warts can vary in shape and in location. (a) Multiple plantar warts have grown on this toe. (b) A filiform
wart has grown on this eyelid.

Oral Herpes
Another common skin virus is herpes simplex virus (HSV). HSV has historically been divided into two types, HSV-1
and HSV-2. HSV-1 is typically transmitted by direct oral contact between individuals, and is usually associated with
oral herpes. HSV-2 is usually transmitted sexually and is typically associated with genital herpes. However, both
HSV-1 and HSV-2 are capable of infecting any mucous membrane, and the incidence of genital HSV-1 and oral
HSV-2 infections has been increasing in recent years. In this chapter, we will limit our discussion to infections caused
by HSV-1; HSV-2 and genital herpes will be discussed in Urogenital System Infections.
Infection by HSV-1 commonly manifests as cold sores or fever blisters, usually on or around the lips (Figure
21.26). HSV-1 is highly contagious, with some studies suggesting that up to 65% of the US population is infected;
however, many infected individuals are asymptomatic.[15] Moreover, the virus can be latent for long periods, residing
in the trigeminal nerve ganglia between recurring bouts of symptoms. Recurrence can be triggered by stress or

934

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

environmental conditions (systemic or affecting the skin). When lesions are present, they may blister, break open, and
crust. The virus can be spread through direct contact, even when a patient is asymptomatic.
While the lips, mouth, and face are the most common sites for HSV-1 infections, lesions can spread to other areas
of the body. Wrestlers and other athletes involved in contact sports may develop lesions on the neck, shoulders, and
trunk. This condition is often called herpes gladiatorum. Herpes lesions that develop on the fingers are often called
herpetic whitlow.
HSV-1 infections are commonly diagnosed from their appearance, although laboratory testing can confirm the
diagnosis. There is no cure, but antiviral medications such as acyclovir, penciclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovir
are used to reduce symptoms and risk of transmission. Topical medications, such as creams with n-docosanol and
penciclovir, can also be used to reduce symptoms such as itching, burning, and tingling.

Figure 21.26 This cold sore was caused by HSV-1. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What are the most common sites for the appearance of herpetic lesions?

Roseola and Fifth Disease
The viral diseases roseola and fifth disease are somewhat similar in terms of their presentation, but they are caused
by different viruses. Roseola, sometimes called roseola infantum or exanthem subitum (“sudden rash”), is a mild viral
infection usually caused by human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) and occasionally by HHV-7. It is spread via direct contact
with the saliva or respiratory secretions of an infected individual, often through droplet aerosols. Roseola is very
common in children, with symptoms including a runny nose, a sore throat, and a cough, along with (or followed by)
a high fever (39.4 ºC). About three to five days after the fever subsides, a rash may begin to appear on the chest and
abdomen. The rash, which does not cause discomfort, initially forms characteristic macules that are flat or papules that
are firm and slightly raised; some macules or papules may be surrounded by a white ring. The rash may eventually
spread to the neck and arms, and sometimes continues to spread to the face and legs. The diagnosis is generally made
based upon observation of the symptoms. However, it is possible to perform serological tests to confirm the diagnosis.
While treatment may be recommended to control the fever, the disease usually resolves without treatment within a
week after the fever develops. For individuals at particular risk, such as those who are immunocompromised, the
antiviral medication ganciclovir may be used.
Fifth disease (also known as erythema infectiosum) is another common, highly contagious illness that causes a
distinct rash that is critical to diagnosis. Fifth disease is caused by parvovirus B19, and is transmitted by contact
15. Wald, A., and Corey, L. “Persistence in the Population: Epidemiology, Transmission.” In: A. Arvin, G. Campadelli-Fiume, E. Mocarski
et al. Human Herpesviruses: Biology, Therapy, and Immunoprophylaxis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK47447/. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

935

with respiratory secretions from an infected individual. Infection is more common in children than adults. While
approximately 20% of individuals will be asymptomatic during infection,[16] others will exhibit cold-like symptoms
(headache, fever, and upset stomach) during the early stages when the illness is most infectious. Several days later, a
distinct red facial rash appears, often called “slapped cheek” rash (Figure 21.27). Within a few days, a second rash
may appear on the arms, legs, chest, back, or buttocks. The rash may come and go for several weeks, but usually
disappears within seven to twenty-one days, gradually becoming lacy in appearance as it recedes.
In children, the disease usually resolves on its own without medical treatment beyond symptom relief as needed.
Adults may experience different and possibly more serious symptoms. Many adults with fifth disease do not develop
any rash, but may experience joint pain and swelling that lasts several weeks or months. Immunocompromised
individuals can develop severe anemia and may need blood transfusions or immune globulin injections. While the
rash is the most important component of diagnosis (especially in children), the symptoms of fifth disease are not
always consistent. Serological testing can be conducted for confirmation.

Figure 21.27 (a) Roseola, a mild viral infection common in young children, generally begins with symptoms similar
to a cold, followed by a pink, patchy rash that starts on the trunk and spreads outward. (b) Fifth disease exhibits
similar symptoms in children, except for the distinctive “slapped cheek” rash that originates on the face.

• Identify at least one similarity and one difference between roseola and fifth disease.

Viral Conjunctivitis
Like bacterial conjunctivitis viral infections of the eye can cause inflammation of the conjunctiva and discharge from
the eye. However, viral conjunctivitis tends to produce a discharge that is more watery than the thick discharge
associated with bacterial conjunctivitis. The infection is contagious and can easily spread from one eye to the other or
to other individuals through contact with eye discharge.

16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fifth Disease.” http://www.cdc.gov/parvovirusb19/fifth-disease.html. Accessed Sept 14,
2016.

936

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Viral conjunctivitis is commonly associated with colds caused by adenoviruses; however, other viruses can also cause
conjunctivitis. If the causative agent is uncertain, eye discharge can be tested to aid in diagnosis. Antibiotic treatment
of viral conjunctivitis is ineffective, and symptoms usually resolve without treatment within a week or two.

Herpes Keratitis
Herpes infections caused by HSV-1 can sometimes spread to the eye from other areas of the body, which may result
in keratoconjunctivitis. This condition, generally called herpes keratitis or herpetic keratitis, affects the conjunctiva
and cornea, causing irritation, excess tears, and sensitivity to light. Deep lesions in the cornea may eventually form,
leading to blindness. Because keratitis can have numerous causes, laboratory testing is necessary to confirm the
diagnosis when HSV-1 is suspected; once confirmed, antiviral medications may be prescribed.

Disease Profile
Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes
A number of viruses can cause infections via direct contact with skin and eyes, causing signs and symptoms
ranging from rashes and lesions to warts and conjunctivitis. All of these viral diseases are contagious, and
while some are more common in children (fifth disease and roseola), others are prevalent in people of all ages
(oral herpes, viral conjunctivitis, papillomas). In general, the best means of prevention is avoiding contact with
infected individuals. Treatment may require antiviral medications; however, several of these conditions are mild
and typically resolve without treatment. Figure 21.28 summarizes the characteristics of some common viral
infections of the skin and eyes.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

937

Figure 21.28

21.4 Mycoses of the Skin
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common fungal pathogens associated with cutaneous and subcutaneous mycoses
• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases affecting the skin

Many fungal infections of the skin involve fungi that are found in the normal skin microbiota. Some of these
fungi can cause infection when they gain entry through a wound; others mainly cause opportunistic infections in
immunocompromised patients. Other fungal pathogens primarily cause infection in unusually moist environments
that promote fungal growth; for example, sweaty shoes, communal showers, and locker rooms provide excellent
breeding grounds that promote the growth and transmission of fungal pathogens.
Fungal infections, also called mycoses, can be divided into classes based on their invasiveness. Mycoses that cause
superficial infections of the epidermis, hair, and nails, are called cutaneous mycoses. Mycoses that penetrate the
epidermis and the dermis to infect deeper tissues are called subcutaneous mycoses. Mycoses that spread throughout
the body are called systemic mycoses.

938

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Tineas
A group of cutaneous mycoses called tineas are caused by dermatophytes, fungal molds that require keratin,
a protein found in skin, hair, and nails, for growth. There are three genera of dermatophytes, all of which can
cause cutaneous mycoses: Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, and Microsporum. Tineas on most areas of the body are
generally called ringworm, but tineas in specific locations may have distinctive names and symptoms (see Table
21.3 and Figure 21.29). Keep in mind that these names—even though they are Latinized—refer to locations on the
body, not causative organisms. Tineas can be caused by different dermatophytes in most areas of the body.
Some Common Tineas and Location on the Body
Tinea corporis (ringworm)

Body

Tinea capitis (ringworm)

Scalp

Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot)

Feet

Tinea barbae (barber’s itch)

Beard

Tinea cruris (jock itch)

Groin

Tinea unguium (onychomycosis)

Toenails, fingernails

Table 21.3

Figure 21.29 Tineas are superficial cutaneous mycoses and are common. (a) Tinea barbae (barber’s itch) occurs on
the lower face. (b) Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot) occurs on the feet, causing itching, burning, and dry, cracked skin
between the toes. (c) A close-up view of tinea corporis (ringworm) caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes. (credit a,
c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Al Hasan M,
Fitzgerald SM, Saoudian M, Krishnaswamy G)

Dermatophytes are commonly found in the environment and in soils and are frequently transferred to the skin via
contact with other humans and animals. Fungal spores can also spread on hair. Many dermatophytes grow well in
moist, dark environments. For example, tinea pedis (athlete’s foot) commonly spreads in public showers, and the
causative fungi grow well in the dark, moist confines of sweaty shoes and socks. Likewise, tinea cruris (jock itch)
often spreads in communal living environments and thrives in warm, moist undergarments.
Tineas on the body (tinea corporis) often produce lesions that grow radially and heal towards the center. This causes
the formation of a red ring, leading to the misleading name of ringworm recall the Clinical Focus case in The
Eukaryotes of Microbiology.
Several approaches may be used to diagnose tineas. A Wood’s lamp (also called a black lamp) with a wavelength
of 365 nm is often used. When directed on a tinea, the ultraviolet light emitted from the Wood’s lamp causes the
fungal elements (spores and hyphae) to fluoresce. Direct microscopic evaluation of specimens from skin scrapings,
hair, or nails can also be used to detect fungi. Generally, these specimens are prepared in a wet mount using a
potassium hydroxide solution (10%–20% aqueous KOH), which dissolves the keratin in hair, nails, and skin cells to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

939

allow for visualization of the hyphae and fungal spores. The specimens may be grown on Sabouraud dextrose CC
(chloramphenicol/cyclohexamide), a selective agar that supports dermatophyte growth while inhibiting the growth of
bacteria and saprophytic fungi (Figure 21.30). Macroscopic colony morphology is often used to initially identify the
genus of the dermatophyte; identification can be further confirmed by visualizing the microscopic morphology using
either a slide culture or a sticky tape prep stained with lactophenol cotton blue.
Various antifungal treatments can be effective against tineas. Allylamine ointments that include terbinafine are
commonly used; miconazole and clotrimazole are also available for topical treatment, and griseofulvin is used orally.

Figure 21.30 To diagnose tineas, the dermatophytes may be grown on a Sabouraud dextrose CC agar plate. This
culture contains a strain of Trichophyton rubrum, one of the most common causes of tineas on various parts of the
body. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Why are tineas, caused by fungal molds, often called ringworm?

Cutaneous Aspergillosis
Another cause of cutaneous mycoses is Aspergillus, a genus consisting of molds of many different species, some of
which cause a condition called aspergillosis. Primary cutaneous aspergillosis, in which the infection begins in the
skin, is rare but does occur. More common is secondary cutaneous aspergillosis, in which the infection begins in
the respiratory system and disseminates systemically. Both primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis result in
distinctive eschars that form at the site or sites of infection (Figure 21.31). Pulmonary aspergillosis will be discussed
more thoroughly in Respiratory Mycoses).

940

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.31 (a) Eschar on a patient with secondary cutaneous aspergillosis. (b) Micrograph showing a
conidiophore of Aspergillus. (credit a: modification of work by Santiago M, Martinez JH, Palermo C, Figueroa C,
Torres O, Trinidad R, Gonzalez E, Miranda Mde L, Garcia M, Villamarzo G; credit b: modification of work by U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services)

Primary cutaneous aspergillosis usually occurs at the site of an injury and is most often caused by Aspergillus
fumigatus or Aspergillus flavus. It is usually reported in patients who have had an injury while working in an
agricultural or outdoor environment. However, opportunistic infections can also occur in health-care settings, often
at the site of intravenous catheters, venipuncture wounds, or in association with burns, surgical wounds, or occlusive
dressing. After candidiasis, aspergillosis is the second most common hospital-acquired fungal infection and often
occurs in immunocompromised patients, who are more vulnerable to opportunistic infections.
Cutaneous aspergillosis is diagnosed using patient history, culturing, histopathology using a skin biopsy. Treatment
involves the use of antifungal medications such as voriconazole (preferred for invasive aspergillosis), itraconazole,
and amphotericin B if itraconazole is not effective. For immunosuppressed individuals or burn patients, medication
may be used and surgical or immunotherapy treatments may be needed.

• Identify the sources of infection for primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis.

Candidiasis of the Skin and Nails
Candida albicans and other yeasts in the genus Candida can cause skin infections referred to as cutaneous candidiasis.
Candida spp. are sometimes responsible for intertrigo, a general term for a rash that occurs in a skin fold, or other
localized rashes on the skin. Candida can also infect the nails, causing them to become yellow and harden (Figure
21.32).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

941

Figure 21.32 (a) This red, itchy rash is the result of cutaneous candidiasis, an opportunistic infection of the skin
caused by the yeast Candida albicans. (b) Fungal infections of the nail (tinea unguium) can be caused by
dermatophytes or Candida spp. The nail becomes yellow, brittle, and prone to breaking. This condition is relatively
common among adults. (c) C. albicans growing on Sabouraud dextrose agar. (credit a: modification of work by U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Candidiasis of the skin and nails is diagnosed through clinical observation and through culture, Gram stain, and
KOH wet mounts. Susceptibility testing for anti-fungal agents can also be done. Cutaneous candidiasis can be treated
with topical or systemic azole antifungal medications. Because candidiasis can become invasive, patients suffering
from HIV/AIDS, cancer, or other conditions that compromise the immune system may benefit from preventive
treatment. Azoles, such as clotrimazole, econazole, fluconazole, ketoconazole, and miconazole; nystatin; terbinafine;
and naftifine may be used for treatment. Long-term treatment with medications such as itraconazole or ketoconazole
may be used for chronic infections. Repeat infections often occur, but this risk can be reduced by carefully following
treatment recommendations, avoiding excessive moisture, maintaining good health, practicing good hygiene, and
having appropriate clothing (including footwear).
Candida also causes infections in other parts of the body besides the skin. These include vaginal yeast infections (see
Fungal Infections of the Reproductive System) and oral thrush (see Microbial Diseases of the Mouth
and Oral Cavity).

• What are the signs and symptoms of candidiasis of the skin and nails?

Sporotrichosis
Whereas cutaneous mycoses are superficial, subcutaneous mycoses can spread from the skin to deeper tissues. In
temperate regions, the most common subcutaneous mycosis is a condition called sporotrichosis, caused by the
fungus Sporothrix schenkii and commonly known as rose gardener’s disease or rose thorn disease (recall Case in
Point: Every Rose Has Its Thorn). Sporotrichosis is often contracted after working with soil, plants, or timber,
as the fungus can gain entry through a small wound such as a thorn-prick or splinter. Sporotrichosis can generally
be avoided by wearing gloves and protective clothing while gardening and promptly cleaning and disinfecting any
wounds sustained during outdoor activities.
Sporothrix infections initially present as small ulcers in the skin, but the fungus can spread to the lymphatic system
and sometimes beyond. When the infection spreads, nodules appear, become necrotic, and may ulcerate. As more
lymph nodes become affected, abscesses and ulceration may develop over a larger area (often on one arm or hand).
In severe cases, the infection may spread more widely throughout the body, although this is relatively uncommon.

942

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Sporothrix infection can be diagnosed based upon histologic examination of the affected tissue. Its macroscopic
morphology can be observed by culturing the mold on potato dextrose agar, and its microscopic morphology can
be observed by staining a slide culture with lactophenol cotton blue. Treatment with itraconazole is generally
recommended.

• Describe the progression of a Sporothrix schenkii infection.

Disease Profile
Mycoses of the Skin
Cutaneous mycoses are typically opportunistic, only able to cause infection when the skin barrier is breached
through a wound. Tineas are the exception, as the dermatophytes responsible for tineas are able to grow on
skin, hair, and nails, especially in moist conditions. Most mycoses of the skin can be avoided through good
hygiene and proper wound care. Treatment requires antifungal medications. Figure 21.33 summarizes the
characteristics of some common fungal infections of the skin.

Figure 21.33

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

943

21.5 Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Skin and
Eyes
Learning Objectives
• Identify two parasites that commonly cause infections of the skin and eyes
• Identify the major characteristics of specific parasitic diseases affecting the skin and eyes

Many parasitic protozoans and helminths use the skin or eyes as a portal of entry. Some may physically burrow into
the skin or the mucosa of the eye; others breach the skin barrier by means of an insect bite. Still others take advantage
of a wound to bypass the skin barrier and enter the body, much like other opportunistic pathogens. Although many
parasites enter the body through the skin, in this chapter we will limit our discussion to those for which the skin or
eyes are the primary site of infection. Parasites that enter through the skin but travel to a different site of infection will
be covered in other chapters. In addition, we will limit our discussion to microscopic parasitic infections of the skin
and eyes. Macroscopic parasites such as lice, scabies, mites, and ticks are beyond the scope of this text.

Acanthamoeba Infections
Acanthamoeba is a genus of free-living protozoan amoebae that are common in soils and unchlorinated bodies of
fresh water. (This is one reason why some swimming pools are treated with chlorine.) The genus contains a few
parasitic species, some of which can cause infections of the eyes, skin, and nervous system. Such infections can
sometimes travel and affect other body systems. Skin infections may manifest as abscesses, ulcers, and nodules. When
acanthamoebae infect the eye, causing inflammation of the cornea, the condition is called Acanthamoeba keratitis.
Figure 21.34 illustrates the Acanthamoeba life cycle and various modes of infection.
While Acanthamoeba keratitis is initially mild, it can lead to severe corneal damage, vision impairment, or even
blindness if left untreated. Similar to eye infections involving P. aeruginosa, Acanthamoeba poses a much greater
risk to wearers of contact lenses because the amoeba can thrive in the space between contact lenses and the cornea.
Prevention through proper contact lens care is important. Lenses should always be properly disinfected prior to use,
and should never be worn while swimming or using a hot tub.
Acanthamoeba can also enter the body through other pathways, including skin wounds and the respiratory tract.
It usually does not cause disease except in immunocompromised individuals; however, in rare cases, the infection
can spread to the nervous system, resulting in a usually fatal condition called granulomatous amoebic encephalitis
(GAE) (see Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System). Disseminated infections, lesions,
and Acanthamoeba keratitis can be diagnosed by observing symptoms and examining patient samples under the
microscope to view the parasite. Skin biopsies may be used.
Acanthamoeba keratitis is difficult to treat, and prompt treatment is necessary to prevent the condition from
progressing. The condition generally requires three to four weeks of intensive treatment to resolve. Common
treatments include topical antiseptics (e.g., polyhexamethylene biguanide, chlorhexidine, or both), sometimes with
painkillers or corticosteroids (although the latter are controversial because they suppress the immune system, which
can worsen the infection). Azoles are sometimes prescribed as well. Advanced cases of keratitis may require a corneal
transplant to prevent blindness.

944

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.34 Acanthamoeba spp. are waterborne parasites very common in unchlorinated aqueous environments.
As shown in this life cycle, Acanthamoeba cysts and trophozoites are both capable of entering the body through
various routes, causing infections of the eye, skin, and central nervous system. (credit: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Figure 21.35 (a) An Acanthamoeba cyst. (b) An Acanthamoeba trophozoite (c) The eye of a patient with
Acanthamoeba keratitis. The fluorescent color, which is due to sodium fluorescein application, highlights significant
damage to the cornea and vascularization of the surrounding conjunctiva. (credit a: modification of work by Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b, c: modification of work by Jacob Lorenzo-Morales, Naveed A Kahn and
Julia Walochnik)

• How are Acanthamoeba infections acquired?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

945

Loiasis
The helminth Loa loa, also known as the African eye worm, is a nematode that can cause loiasis, a disease endemic
to West and Central Africa (Figure 21.36). The disease does not occur outside that region except when carried by
travelers. There is evidence that individual genetic differences affect susceptibility to developing loiasis after infection
by the Loa loa worm. Even in areas in which Loa loa worms are common, the disease is generally found in less than
30% of the population.[17] It has been suggested that travelers who spend time in the region may be somewhat more
susceptible to developing symptoms than the native population, and the presentation of infection may differ.[18]
The parasite is spread by deerflies (genus Chrysops), which can ingest the larvae from an infected human via a blood
meal (Figure 21.36). When the deerfly bites other humans, it deposits the larvae into their bloodstreams. After about
five months in the human body, some larvae develop into adult worms, which can grow to several centimeters in
length and live for years in the subcutaneous tissue of the host.
The name “eye worm” alludes to the visible migration of worms across the conjunctiva of the eye. Adult worms live
in the subcutaneous tissues and can travel at about 1 cm per hour. They can often be observed when migrating through
the eye, and sometimes under the skin; in fact, this is generally how the disease is diagnosed. It is also possible to test
for antibodies, but the presence of antibodies does not necessarily indicate a current infection; it only means that the
individual was exposed at some time. Some patients are asymptomatic, but in others the migrating worms can cause
fever and areas of allergic inflammation known as Calabar swellings. Worms migrating through the conjunctiva can
cause temporary eye pain and itching, but generally there is no lasting damage to the eye. Some patients experience a
range of other symptoms, such as widespread itching, hives, and joint and muscle pain.
Worms can be surgically removed from the eye or the skin, but this treatment only relieves discomfort; it does not
cure the infection, which involves many worms. The preferred treatment is diethylcarbamazine, but this medication
produces severe side effects in some individuals, such as brain inflammation and possible death in patients with
heavy infections. Albendazole is also sometimes used if diethylcarbamazine is not appropriate or not successful. If
left untreated for many years, loiasis can damage the kidneys, heart, and lungs, though these symptoms are rare.

17. Garcia, A.. et al. “Genetic Epidemiology of Host Predisposition Microfilaraemia in Human Loiasis.” Tropical Medicine and
International Health 4 (1999) 8:565–74. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10499080. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
18. Spinello, A., et al. “Imported Loa loa Filariasis: Three Cases and a Review of Cases Reported in Non-Endemic Countries in the Past 25
Years.” International Journal of Infectious Disease 16 (2012) 9: e649–e662. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2012.05.1023.

946

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

Figure 21.36 This Loa loa worm, measuring about 55 mm long, was extracted from the conjunctiva of a patient with
loiasis. The Loa loa has a complex life cycle. Biting deerflies native to the rain forests of Central and West Africa
transmit the larvae between humans. (credit a: modification of work by Eballe AO, Epée E, Koki G, Owono D, Mvogo

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

947

CE, Bella AL; credit b: modification of work by NIAID; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention)

• Describe the most common way to diagnose loiasis.

Link to Learning
See a video (https://openstax.org/l/22microfilvid) of a live Loa loa microfilaria
under the microscope.

Disease Profile
Parasitic Skin and Eye Infections
The protozoan Acanthamoeba and the helminth Loa loa are two parasites capable of causing infections of the
skin and eyes. Figure 21.37 summarizes the characteristics of some common fungal infections of the skin.

Figure 21.37

Summary
21.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Skin and Eyes
• Human skin consists of two main layers, the epidermis and dermis, which are situated on top of the
hypodermis, a layer of connective tissue.
• The skin is an effective physical barrier against microbial invasion.

948

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

• The skin’s relatively dry environment and normal microbiota discourage colonization by transient microbes.
• The skin’s normal microbiota varies from one region of the body to another.
• The conjunctiva of the eye is a frequent site for microbial infection, but deeper eye infections are less
common; multiple types of conjunctivitis exist.
21.2 Bacterial Infections of the Skin and Eyes
• Staphylococcus and Streptococcus cause many different types of skin infections, many of which occur when
bacteria breach the skin barrier through a cut or wound.
• S. aureus are frequently associated with purulent skin infections that manifest as folliculitis, furuncles, or
carbuncles. S. aureus is also a leading cause of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS).
• S. aureus is generally drug resistant and current MRSA strains are resistant to a wide range of antibiotics.
• Community-acquired and hospital-acquired staphyloccocal infections are an ongoing problem because many
people are asymptomatic carriers.
• Group A streptococci (GAS), S. pyogenes, is often responsible for cases of cellulitis, erysipelas, and
erythema nosodum. GAS are also one of many possible causes of necrotizing fasciitis.
• P. aeruginosa is often responsible for infections of the skin and eyes, including wound and burn infections,
hot tub rash, otitis externa, and bacterial keratitis.
• Acne is a common skin condition that can become more inflammatory when Propionibacterium acnes infects
hair follicles and pores clogged with dead skin cells and sebum.
• Cutaneous anthrax occurs when Bacillus anthracis breaches the skin barrier. The infection results in a
localized black eschar on skin. Anthrax can be fatal if B. anthracis spreads to the bloodstream.
• Common bacterial conjunctivitis is often caused by Haemophilus influenzae and usually resolves on its own
in a few days. More serious forms of conjunctivitis include gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum, inclusion
conjunctivitis (chlamydial), and trachoma, all of which can lead to blindness if untreated.
• Keratitis is frequently caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis and/or Pseudomonas aeruginosa, especially
among contact lens users, and can lead to blindness.
• Biofilms complicate the treatment of wound and eye infections because pathogens living in biofilms can be
difficult to treat and eliminate.
21.3 Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes
• Papillomas (warts) are caused by human papillomaviruses.
• Herpes simplex virus (especially HSV-1) mainly causes oral herpes, but lesions can appear on other areas
of the skin and mucous membranes.
• Roseola and fifth disease are common viral illnesses that cause skin rashes; roseola is caused by HHV-6 and
HHV-7 while fifth disease is caused by parvovirus 19.
• Viral conjunctivitis is often caused by adenoviruses and may be associated with the common cold. Herpes
keratitis is caused by herpesviruses that spread to the eye.
21.4 Mycoses of the Skin
• Mycoses can be cutaneous, subcutaneous, or systemic.
• Common cutaneous mycoses include tineas caused by dermatophytes of the genera Trichophyton,
Epidermophyton, and Microsporum. Tinea corporis is called ringworm. Tineas on other parts of the body
have names associated with the affected body part.
• Aspergillosis is a fungal disease caused by molds of the genus Aspergillus. Primary cutaneous aspergillosis
enters through a break in the skin, such as the site of an injury or a surgical wound; it is a common hospitalacquired infection. In secondary cutaneous aspergillosis, the fungus enters via the respiratory system and
disseminates systemically, manifesting in lesions on the skin.
• The most common subcutaneous mycosis is sporotrichosis (rose gardener’s disease), caused by Sporothrix
schenkii.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

949

• Yeasts of the genus Candida can cause opportunistic infections of the skin called candidiasis, producing
intertrigo, localized rashes, or yellowing of the nails.
21.5 Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Skin and Eyes
• The protozoan Acanthamoeba and the helminth Loa loa are two parasites that can breach the skin barrier,
causing infections of the skin and eyes.
• Acanthamoeba keratitis is a parasitic infection of the eye that often results from improper disinfection of
contact lenses or swimming while wearing contact lenses.
• Loiasis, or eye worm, is a disease endemic to Africa that is caused by parasitic worms that infect the
subcutaneous tissue of the skin and eyes. It is transmitted by deerfly vectors.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. _____________ glands produce a lipid-rich
substance that contains proteins and minerals and
protects the skin.
a. Sweat
b. Mammary
c. Sebaceous
d. Endocrine
2. Which layer of skin contains living cells, is
vascularized, and lies directly above the hypodermis?
a. the stratum corneum
b. the dermis
c. the epidermis
d. the conjunctiva
3. Staphylococcus aureus is most often associated with
being
a. coagulase-positive.
b. coagulase-negative.
c. catalase-negative.
d. gram-negative
4. M protein is produced by
a. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
b. Staphylococcus aureus
c. Propionibacterium acnes
d. Streptococcus pyogenes
5. ___________ is a major cause of preventable
blindness that can be reduced through improved
sanitation.
a. Ophthalmia neonatorum
b. Keratitis
c. Trachoma
d. Cutaneous anthrax

6. Which species is frequently associated with
nosocomial infections transmitted via medical devices
inserted into the body?
a. Staphylococcus epidermidis
b. Streptococcus pyogenes
c. Proproniobacterium acnes
d. Bacillus anthracis
7. Warts are caused by
a. human papillomavirus.
b. herpes simplex virus.
c. adenoviruses.
d. parvovirus B19.
8. Which of these viruses can spread to the eye to cause
a form of keratitis?
a. human papillomavirus
b. herpes simplex virus 1
c. parvovirus 19
d. circoviruses
9. Cold sores are associated with:
a. human papillomavirus
b. roseola
c. herpes simplex viruses
d. human herpesvirus 6
10. Which disease is usually self-limiting but is most
commonly treated with ganciclovir if medical treatment
is needed?
a. roseola
b. oral herpes
c. papillomas
d. viral conjunctivitis
11. Adenoviruses can cause:
a. viral conjunctivitis
b. herpetic conjunctivitis
c. papillomas
d. oral herpes

950

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

12. ___________ is a superficial fungal infection found
on the head.
a. Tinea cruris
b. Tinea capitis
c. Tinea pedis
d. Tinea corporis

19. ________ is commonly treated with a combination
of chlorhexidine and polyhexamethylene biguanide.
a. Acanthamoeba keratitis
b. Sporotrichosis
c. Candidiasis
d. Loiasis

13. For what purpose would a health-care professional
use a Wood’s lamp for a suspected case of ringworm?
a. to prevent the rash from spreading
b. to kill the fungus
c. to visualize the fungus
d. to examine the fungus microscopically
14. Sabouraud dextrose agar CC is selective for:
a. all fungi
b. non-saprophytic fungi
c. bacteria
d. viruses
15.
The first-line
sporotrichosis is:
a. itraconazole
b. clindamycin
c. amphotericin
d. nystatin

recommended

treatment

for

16. Which of the following is most likely to cause an
Acanthamoeba infection?
a. swimming in a lake while wearing contact lenses
b. being bitten by deerflies in Central Africa
c. living environments in a college dormitory with
communal showers
d. participating in a contact sport such as wrestling
17. The parasitic Loa loa worm can cause great pain
when it:
a. moves through the bloodstream
b. exits through the skin of the foot
c. travels through the conjunctiva
d. enters the digestive tract
18. A patient tests positive for Loa loa antibodies.
What does this test indicate?
a. The individual was exposed to Loa loa at some
point.
b. The individual is currently suffering from loiasis.
c. The individual has never been exposed to Loa
loa.
d. The individual is immunosuppressed.
Fill in the Blank

20. The ________ is the outermost layer of the epidermis.
21. The mucous membrane that covers the surface of the eyeball and inner eyelid is called the ________.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

951

22. A purulent wound produces ________.
23. Human herpesvirus 6 is the causative agent of ________.
24. The most common subcutaneous mycosis in temperate regions is ________.
25. Eye worm is another name for ________.
26. The ________ is the part of the eye that is damaged due to Acanthamoeba keratitis.
Short Answer

27. What is the role of keratin in the skin?
28. What are two ways in which tears help to prevent microbial colonization?
29. Which label indicates a sweat gland?

Figure 21.38 (credit: modification of work by National Cancer Institute)

30. How are leukocidins associated with pus production?
31. What is a good first test to distinguish streptococcal infections from staphylococcal infections?
32. Compare and contrast bacterial and viral conjunctivitis.
33. What yeasts commonly cause opportunistic infections?
Critical Thinking

34. Explain why it is important to understand the normal microbiota of the skin.
35. Besides the presence or absence of ulceration, how do acute ulcerative and nonulcerative blepharitis differ?
36. What steps might you recommend to a patient for reducing the risk of developing a fungal infection of the
toenails?
37. Why might a traveler to a region with Loa loa worm have a greater risk of serious infection compared with
people who live in the region?

952

Chapter 21 | Skin and Eye Infections

38. What preventative actions might you recommend to a patient traveling to a region where loiasis is endemic?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

953

Chapter 22

Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.1 Aerosols produced by sneezing, coughing, or even just speaking are an important mechanism for
respiratory pathogen transmission. Simple actions, like covering your mouth when coughing or sneezing, can reduce
the spread of these microbes. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Chapter Outline
22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract
22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract
22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
22.4 Respiratory Mycoses

Introduction
The respiratory tract is one of the main portals of entry into the human body for microbial pathogens. On average,
a human takes about 20,000 breaths each day. This roughly corresponds to 10,000 liters, or 10 cubic meters, of air.
Suspended within this volume of air are millions of microbes of terrestrial, animal, and human origin—including
many potential pathogens. A few of these pathogens will cause relatively mild infections like sore throats and colds.
Others, however, are less benign. According to the World Health Organization, respiratory tract infections such as
tuberculosis, influenza, and pneumonia were responsible for more than 4 million deaths worldwide in 2012. [1]
At one time, it was thought that antimicrobial drugs and preventive vaccines might hold respiratory infections in
check in the developed world, but recent developments suggest otherwise. The rise of multiple-antibiotic resistance in
organisms like Mycobacterium tuberculosis has rendered many of our modern drugs ineffective. In addition, there has
been a recent resurgence in diseases like whooping cough and measles, once-common childhood illnesses made rare
by effective vaccines. Despite advances in medicine and public health programs, it is likely that respiratory pathogens
will remain formidable adversaries for the foreseeable future.

1. World Health Organization. “The Top Ten Causes of Death.” May 2014. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/

954

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory
Tract
Learning Objectives
• Describe the major anatomical features of the upper and lower respiratory tract
• Describe the normal microbiota of the upper and lower respiratory tracts
• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of upper and lower respiratory-tract membranes to cause

infection
• Explain how microbes and the respiratory system interact and modify each other in healthy individuals and

during an infection
The primary function of the respiratory tract is to exchange gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide) for metabolism.
However, inhalation and exhalation (particularly when forceful) can also serve as a vehicle of transmission for
pathogens between individuals.

Anatomy of the Upper Respiratory System
The respiratory system can be conceptually divided into upper and lower regions at the point of the epiglottis, the
structure that seals off the lower respiratory system from the pharynx during swallowing (Figure 22.2). The upper
respiratory system is in direct contact with the external environment. The nares (or nostrils) are the external openings
of the nose that lead back into the nasal cavity, a large air-filled space behind the nares. These anatomical sites
constitute the primary opening and first section of the respiratory tract, respectively. The nasal cavity is lined with
hairs that trap large particles, like dust and pollen, and prevent their access to deeper tissues. The nasal cavity is also
lined with a mucous membrane and Bowman’s glands that produce mucus to help trap particles and microorganisms
for removal. The nasal cavity is connected to several other air-filled spaces. The sinuses, a set of four, paired small
cavities in the skull, communicate with the nasal cavity through a series of small openings. The nasopharynx is
part of the upper throat extending from the posterior nasal cavity. The nasopharynx carries air inhaled through the
nose. The middle ear is connected to the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube. The middle ear is separated from
the outer ear by the tympanic membrane, or ear drum. And finally, the lacrimal glands drain to the nasal cavity
through the nasolacrimal ducts (tear ducts). The open connections between these sites allow microorganisms to

Clinical Focus
Part 1
John, a 65-year-old man with asthma and type 2 diabetes, works as a sales associate at a local home
improvement store. Recently, he began to feel quite ill and made an appointment with his family physician. At
the clinic, John reported experiencing headache, chest pain, coughing, and shortness of breath. Over the past
day, he had also experienced some nausea and diarrhea. A nurse took his temperature and found that he was
running a fever of 40 °C (104 °F).
John suggested that he must have a case of influenza (flu), and regretted that he had put off getting his flu
vaccine this year. After listening to John’s breathing through a stethoscope, the physician ordered a chest
radiography and collected blood, urine, and sputum samples.

• Based on this information, what factors may have contributed to John’s illness?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

955

move from the nasal cavity to the sinuses, middle ears (and back), and down into the lower respiratory tract from the
nasopharynx.
The oral cavity is a secondary opening for the respiratory tract. The oral and nasal cavities connect through the fauces
to the pharynx, or throat. The pharynx can be divided into three regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, and the
laryngopharynx. Air inhaled through the mouth does not pass through the nasopharynx; it proceeds first through the
oropharynx and then through the laryngopharynx. The palatine tonsils, which consist of lymphoid tissue, are located
within the oropharynx. The laryngopharynx, the last portion of the pharynx, connects to the larynx, which contains
the vocal fold (Figure 22.2).

Figure 22.2 (a) The ear is connected to the upper respiratory tract by the eustachian tube, which opens to the
nasopharynx. (b) The structures of the upper respiratory tract.

• Identify the sequence of anatomical structures through which microbes would pass on their way from the
nares to the larynx.

• What two anatomical points do the eustachian tubes connect?

Anatomy of the Lower Respiratory System
The lower respiratory system begins below the epiglottis in the larynx or voice box (Figure 22.3). The trachea, or
windpipe, is a cartilaginous tube extending from the larynx that provides an unobstructed path for air to reach the
lungs. The trachea bifurcates into the left and right bronchi as it reaches the lungs. These paths branch repeatedly to
form smaller and more extensive networks of tubes, the bronchioles. The terminal bronchioles formed in this treelike network end in cul-de-sacs called the alveoli. These structures are surrounded by capillary networks and are
the site of gas exchange in the respiratory system. Human lungs contain on the order of 400,000,000 alveoli. The
outer surface of the lungs is protected with a double-layered pleural membrane. This structure protects the lungs and
provides lubrication to permit the lungs to move easily during respiration.

956

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.3 The structures of the lower respiratory tract are identified in this illustration. (credit: modification of work
by National Cancer Institute)

Defenses of the Respiratory System
The inner lining of the respiratory system consists of mucous membranes (Figure 22.4) and is protected by multiple
immune defenses. The goblet cells within the respiratory epithelium secrete a layer of sticky mucus. The viscosity and
acidity of this secretion inhibits microbial attachment to the underlying cells. In addition, the respiratory tract contains
ciliated epithelial cells. The beating cilia dislodge and propel the mucus, and any trapped microbes, upward to the
epiglottis, where they will be swallowed. Elimination of microbes in this manner is referred to as the mucociliary
escalator effect and is an important mechanism that prevents inhaled microorganisms from migrating further into the
lower respiratory tract.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

957

Figure 22.4 This micrograph shows the structure of the mucous membrane of the respiratory tract. (credit:
modification of micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)

The upper respiratory system is under constant surveillance by mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), including
the adenoids and tonsils. Other mucosal defenses include secreted antibodies (IgA), lysozyme, surfactant, and
antimicrobial peptides called defensins. Meanwhile, the lower respiratory tract is protected by alveolar macrophages.
These phagocytes efficiently kill any microbes that manage to evade the other defenses. The combined action of these
factors renders the lower respiratory tract nearly devoid of colonized microbes.

• Identify the sequence of anatomical structures through which microbes would pass on their way from the
larynx to the alveoli.

• Name some defenses of the respiratory system that protect against microbial infection.

Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory System
The upper respiratory tract contains an abundant and diverse microbiota. The nasal passages and sinuses are primarily
colonized by members of the Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria. The most common bacteria identified
include Staphylococcus epidermidis, viridans group streptococci (VGS), Corynebacterium spp. (diphtheroids),
Propionibacterium spp., and Haemophilus spp. The oropharynx includes many of the same isolates as the nose and
sinuses, with the addition of variable numbers of bacteria like species of Prevotella, Fusobacterium, Moraxella,
and Eikenella, as well as some Candida fungal isolates. In addition, many healthy humans asymptomatically carry
potential pathogens in the upper respiratory tract. As much as 20% of the population carry Staphylococcus aureus
in their nostrils.[2] The pharynx, too, can be colonized with pathogenic strains of Streptococcus, Haemophilus, and
Neisseria.
2. J. Kluytmans et al. “Nasal Carriage of Staphylococcus aureus: Epidemiology, Underlying Mechanisms, and Associated Risks.” Clinical
Microbiology Reviews 10 no. 3 (1997):505–520.

958

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

The lower respiratory tract, by contrast, is scantily populated with microbes. Of the organisms identified in the lower
respiratory tract, species of Pseudomonas, Streptococcus, Prevotella, Fusobacterium, and Veillonella are the most
common. It is not clear at this time if these small populations of bacteria constitute a normal microbiota or if they are
transients.
Many members of the respiratory system’s normal microbiota are opportunistic pathogens. To proliferate and cause
host damage, they first must overcome the immune defenses of respiratory tissues. Many mucosal pathogens produce
virulence factors such as adhesins that mediate attachment to host epithelial cells, or polysaccharide capsules that
allow microbes to evade phagocytosis. The endotoxins of gram-negative bacteria can stimulate a strong inflammatory
response that damages respiratory cells. Other pathogens produce exotoxins, and still others have the ability to survive
within the host cells. Once an infection of the respiratory tract is established, it tends to impair the mucociliary
escalator, limiting the body’s ability to expel the invading microbes, thus making it easier for pathogens to multiply
and spread.
Vaccines have been developed for many of the most serious bacterial and viral pathogens. Several of the most
important respiratory pathogens and their vaccines, if available, are summarized in Table 22.1. Components of these
vaccines will be explained later in the chapter.
Some Important Respiratory Diseases and Vaccines
Disease

Available Vaccine(s)[3]

Pathogen

Chickenpox/shingles

Varicella-zoster virus

Varicella (chickenpox) vaccine, herpes zoster
(shingles) vaccine

Common cold

Rhinovirus

None

Diphtheria

Corynebacterium
diphtheriae

DtaP, Tdap, DT,Td, DTP

Epiglottitis, otitis media

Haemophilus influenzae

Hib

Influenza

Influenza viruses

Inactivated, FluMist

Measles

Measles virus

MMR

Pertussis

Bordetella pertussis

DTaP, Tdap

Pneumonia

Streptococcus
pneumoniae

Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13),
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23)

Rubella (German
measles)

Rubella virus

MMR

Severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS)

SARS-associated
coronavirus (SARSCoV)

None

Tuberculosis

Mycobacterium
tuberculosis

BCG

Table 22.1

3. Full names of vaccines listed in table: Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib); Diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis (DtaP);
tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis (Tdap); diphtheria and tetanus (DT); tetanus and diphtheria (Td); diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus
(DTP); Bacillus Calmette-Guérin; Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

959

• What are some pathogenic bacteria that are part of the normal microbiota of the respiratory tract?
• What virulence factors are used by pathogens to overcome the immune protection of the respiratory tract?

Signs and Symptoms of Respiratory Infection
Microbial diseases of the respiratory system typically result in an acute inflammatory response. These infections can
be grouped by the location affected and have names ending in “itis”, which literally means inflammation of. For
instance, rhinitis is an inflammation of the nasal cavities, often characteristic of the common cold. Rhinitis may also
be associated with hay fever allergies or other irritants. Inflammation of the sinuses is called sinusitis inflammation of
the ear is called otitis. Otitis media is an inflammation of the middle ear. A variety of microbes can cause pharyngitis,
commonly known as a sore throat. An inflammation of the larynx is called laryngitis. The resulting inflammation
may interfere with vocal cord function, causing voice loss. When tonsils are inflamed, it is called tonsillitis. Chronic
cases of tonsillitis may be treated surgically with tonsillectomy. More rarely, the epiglottis can be infected, a condition
called epiglottitis. In the lower respiratory system, the inflammation of the bronchial tubes results in bronchitis.
Most serious of all is pneumonia, in which the alveoli in the lungs are infected and become inflamed. Pus and edema
accumulate and fill the alveoli with fluids (called consolidations). This reduces the lungs’ ability to exchange gases
and often results in a productive cough expelling phlegm and mucus. Cases of pneumonia can range from mild to
life-threatening, and remain an important cause of mortality in the very young and very old.

• Describe the typical symptoms of rhinitis, sinusitis, pharyngitis, and laryngitis.

Case in Point
Smoking-Associated Pneumonia
Camila is a 22-year-old student who has been a chronic smoker for 5 years. Recently, she developed
a persistent cough that has not responded to over-the-counter treatments. Her doctor ordered a chest
radiograph to investigate. The radiological results were consistent with pneumonia. In addition, Streptococcus
pneumoniae was isolated from Camila’s sputum.
Smokers are at a greater risk of developing pneumonia than the general population. Several components
of tobacco smoke have been demonstrated to impair the lungs’ immune defenses. These effects include
disrupting the function of the ciliated epithelial cells, inhibiting phagocytosis, and blocking the action of
antimicrobial peptides. Together, these lead to a dysfunction of the mucociliary escalator effect. The organisms
trapped in the mucus are therefore able to colonize the lungs and cause infections rather than being expelled
or swallowed.

960

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases of the respiratory tract

The respiratory tract can be infected by a variety of bacteria, both gram positive and gram negative. Although the
diseases that they cause may range from mild to severe, in most cases, the microbes remain localized within the
respiratory system. Fortunately, most of these infections also respond well to antibiotic therapy.

Streptococcal Infections
A common upper respiratory infection, streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat) is caused by Streptococcus
pyogenes. This gram-positive bacterium appears as chains of cocci, as seen in Figure 22.5. Rebecca Lancefield
serologically classified streptococci in the 1930s using carbohydrate antigens from the bacterial cell walls. S.
pyogenes is the sole member of the Lancefield group A streptococci and is often referred to as GAS, or group A strep.

Figure 22.5 This scanning electron micrograph of Streptococcus pyogenes shows the characteristic cellular
phenotype resembling chains of cocci. (credit: modification of work by U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention - Medical Illustrator)

Similar to streptococcal infections of the skin, the mucosal membranes of the pharynx are damaged by the release
of a variety of exoenzymes and exotoxins by this extracellular pathogen. Many strains of S. pyogenes can degrade
connective tissues by using hyaluronidase, collagenase and streptokinase. Streptokinase activates plasmin, which
leads to degradation of fibrin and, in turn, dissolution of blood clots, which assists in the spread of the pathogen.
Released toxins include streptolysins that can destroy red and white blood cells. The classic signs of streptococcal
pharyngitis are a fever higher than 38 °C (100.4 °F); intense pharyngeal pain; erythema associated with pharyngeal
inflammation; and swollen, dark-red palatine tonsils, often dotted with patches of pus; and petechiae (microcapillary
hemorrhages) on the soft or hard palate (roof of the mouth) (Figure 22.6). The submandibular lymph nodes beneath
the angle of the jaw are also often swollen during strep throat.
Some strains of group A streptococci produce erythrogenic toxin. This exotoxin is encoded by a temperate
bacteriophage (bacterial virus) and is an example of phage conversion (see The Viral Life Cycle). The toxin attacks
the plasma membranes of capillary endothelial cells and leads to scarlet fever (or scarlatina), a disseminated fine
red rash on the skin, and strawberry tongue, a red rash on the tongue (Figure 22.6). Severe cases may even lead to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

961

streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS), which results from massive superantigen production that leads to septic
shock and death.
S. pyogenes can be easily spread by direct contact or droplet transmission through coughing and sneezing. The disease
can be diagnosed quickly using a rapid enzyme immunoassay for the group A antigen. However, due to a significant
rate of false-negative results (up to 30%[4]), culture identification is still the gold standard to confirm pharyngitis due
to S. pyogenes. S. pyogenes can be identified as a catalase-negative, beta hemolytic bacterium that is susceptible to
0.04 units of bacitracin. Antibiotic resistance is limited for this bacterium, so most β-lactams remain effective; oral
amoxicillin and intramuscular penicillin G are those most commonly prescribed.

Figure 22.6 Streptococcal infections of the respiratory tract may cause localized pharyngitis or systemic signs and
symptoms. (a) The characteristic appearance of strep throat: bright red arches of inflammation with the presence of
dark-red spots (petechiae). (b) Scarlet fever presents as a rash on the skin. (credit a: modification of work by Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Alicia Williams)

Sequelae of S. pyogenes Infections
One reason strep throat infections are aggressively treated with antibiotics is because they can lead to serious
sequelae, later clinical consequences of a primary infection. It is estimated that 1%–3% of untreated S. pyogenes
infections can be followed by nonsuppurative (without the production of pus) sequelae that develop 1–3 weeks after
the acute infection has resolved. Two such sequelae are acute rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis.
Acute rheumatic fever can follow pharyngitis caused by specific rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes (strains 1,
3, 5, 6, and 18). Although the exact mechanism responsible for this sequela remains unclear, molecular mimicry
between the M protein of rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes and heart tissue is thought to initiate the autoimmune
attack. The most serious and lethal clinical manifestation of rheumatic fever is damage to and inflammation of the
heart (carditis). Acute glomerulonephritis also results from an immune response to streptococcal antigens following
pharyngitis and cutaneous infections. Acute glomerulonephritis develops within 6–10 days after pharyngitis, but
can take up to 21 days after a cutaneous infection. Similar to acute rheumatic fever, there are strong associations
between specific nephritogenic strains of S. pyogenes and acute glomerulonephritis, and evidence suggests a role
for antigen mimicry and autoimmunity. However, the primary mechanism of acute glomerulonephritis appears to
be the formation of immune complexes between S. pyogenes antigens and antibodies, and their deposition between
endothelial cells of the glomeruli of kidney. Inflammatory response against the immune complexes leads to damage
and inflammation of the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis).

4. WL Lean et al. “Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Group A Streptococcal Pharyngitis: A Meta-Analysis.” Pediatrics 134, no. 4
(2014):771–781.

962

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

• What are the symptoms of strep throat?
• What is erythrogenic toxin and what effect does it have?
• What are the causes of rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis?

Acute Otitis Media
An infection of the middle ear is called acute otitis media (AOM), but often it is simply referred to as an earache.
The condition is most common between ages 3 months and 3 years. In the United States, AOM is the second-leading
cause of visits to pediatricians by children younger than age 5 years, and it is the leading indication for antibiotic
prescription.[5]
AOM is characterized by the formation and accumulation of pus in the middle ear. Unable to drain, the pus builds up,
resulting in moderate to severe bulging of the tympanic membrane and otalgia (ear pain). Inflammation resulting from
the infection leads to swelling of the eustachian tubes, and may also lead to fever, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea,
particularly in infants. Infants and toddlers who cannot yet speak may exhibit nonverbal signs suggesting AOM, such
as holding, tugging, or rubbing of the ear, as well as uncharacteristic crying or distress in response to the pain.
AOM can be caused by a variety of bacteria. Among neonates, S. pneumoniae is the most common cause of AOM,
but Escherichia coli, Enterococcus spp., and group B Streptococcus species can also be involved. In older infants and
children younger than 14 years old, the most common bacterial causes are S. pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae,
or Moraxella catarrhalis. Among S. pneumoniae infections, encapsulated strains are frequent causes of AOM. By
contrast, the strains of H. influenzae and M. cattarhalis that are responsible for AOM do not possess a capsule.
Rather than direct tissue damage by these pathogens, bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in gramnegative pathogens induce an inflammatory response that causes swelling, pus, and tissue damage within the middle
ear (Figure 22.7).
Any blockage of the eustachian tubes, with or without infection, can cause fluid to become trapped and accumulate
in the middle ear. This is referred to as otitis media with effusion (OME). The accumulated fluid offers an
excellent reservoir for microbial growth and, consequently, secondary bacterial infections often ensue. This can lead
to recurring and chronic earaches, which are especially common in young children. The higher incidence in children
can be attributed to many factors. Children have more upper respiratory infections, in general, and their eustachian
tubes are also shorter and drain at a shallower angle. Young children also tend to spend more time lying down than
adults, which facilitates drainage from the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube and into the middle ear. Bottle
feeding while lying down enhances this risk because the sucking action on the bottle causes negative pressure to build
up within the eustachian tube, promoting the movement of fluid and bacteria from the nasopharynx.
Diagnosis is typically made based on clinical signs and symptoms, without laboratory testing to determine the
specific causative agent. Antibiotics are frequently prescribed for the treatment of AOM. High-dose amoxicillin is
the first-line drug, but with increasing resistance concerns, macrolides and cephalosporins may also be used. The
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) contains serotypes that are important causes of AOM, and vaccination
has been shown to decrease the incidence of AOM. Vaccination against influenza has also been shown to decrease
the risk for AOM, likely because viral infections like influenza predispose patients to secondary infections with
S. pneumoniae. Although there is a conjugate vaccine available for the invasive serotype B of H. influenzae, this
vaccine does not impact the incidence of H. influenzae AOM. Because unencapsulated strains of H. influenzae and
M. catarrhalis are involved in AOM, vaccines against bacterial cellular factors other than capsules will need to be
developed.

5. G. Worrall. “Acute Otitis Media.” Canadian Family Physician 53 no. 12 (2007):2147–2148.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

963

Figure 22.7 (a) A healthy tympanic membrane; the middle ear bones can be seen behind the membrane. (b) An ear
with chronic inflammation that has resulted in a torn membrane, erosion of the inner ear bones, and mucus buildup.
(credit a: modification of work by “DrER.tv”/YouTube; credit b: modification of work by Li Mg, Hotez PJ, Vrabec JT,
Donovan DT)

Bacterial Rhinosinusitis
The microbial community of the nasopharynx is extremely diverse and harbors many opportunistic pathogens,
so it is perhaps not surprising that infections leading to rhinitis and sinusitis have many possible causes. These
conditions often occur as secondary infections after a viral infection, which effectively compromises the immune
defenses and allows the opportunistic bacteria to establish themselves. Bacterial sinusitis involves infection and
inflammation within the paranasal sinuses. Because bacterial sinusitis rarely occurs without rhinitis, the preferred
term is rhinosinusitis. The most common causes of bacterial rhinosinusitis are similar to those for AOM, including S.
pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis.

• What are the usual causative agents of acute otitis media?
• What factors facilitate acute otitis media with effusion in young children?
• What factor often triggers bacterial rhinosinusitis?

Diphtheria
The causative agent of diphtheria, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, is a club-shaped, gram-positive rod that belongs to
the phylum Actinobacteria. Diphtheroids are common members of the normal nasopharyngeal microbiota. However,
some strains of C. diphtheriae become pathogenic because of the presence of a temperate bacteriophage-encoded
protein—the diphtheria toxin. Diphtheria is typically a respiratory infection of the oropharynx but can also cause
impetigo-like lesions on the skin. Although the disease can affect people of all ages, it tends to be most severe in those
younger than 5 years or older than 40 years. Like strep throat, diphtheria is commonly transmitted in the droplets
and aerosols produced by coughing. After colonizing the throat, the bacterium remains in the oral cavity and begins

964

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

producing the diphtheria toxin. This protein is an A-B toxin that blocks host-cell protein synthesis by inactivating
elongation factor (EF)-2 (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens). The toxin’s action leads
to the death of the host cells and an inflammatory response. An accumulation of grayish exudate consisting of dead
host cells, pus, red blood cells, fibrin, and infectious bacteria results in the formation of a pseudomembrane. The
pseudomembrane can cover mucous membranes of the nasal cavity, tonsils, pharynx, and larynx (Figure 22.8). This
is a classic sign of diphtheria. As the disease progresses, the pseudomembrane can enlarge to obstruct the fauces of the
pharynx or trachea and can lead to suffocation and death. Sometimes, intubation, the placement of a breathing tube
in the trachea, is required in advanced infections. If the diphtheria toxin spreads throughout the body, it can damage
other tissues as well. This can include myocarditis (heart damage) and nerve damage that may impair breathing.

Figure 22.8 The pseudomembrane in a patient with diphtheria presents as a leathery gray patch consisting of dead
cells, pus, fibrin, red blood cells, and infectious microbes. (credit: modification of work by Putnong N, Agustin G,
Pasubillo M, Miyagi K, Dimaano EM)

The presumptive diagnosis of diphtheria is primarily based on the clinical symptoms (i.e., the pseudomembrane)
and vaccination history, and is typically confirmed by identifying bacterial cultures obtained from throat swabs.
The diphtheria toxin itself can be directly detected in vitro using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based, direct
detection systems for the diphtheria tox gene, and immunological techniques like radial immunodiffusion or Elek’s
immunodiffusion test.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics like penicillin and erythromycin tend to effectively control C. diphtheriae infections.
Regrettably, they have no effect against preformed toxins. If toxin production has already occurred in the patient,
antitoxins (preformed antibodies against the toxin) are administered. Although this is effective in neutralizing the
toxin, the antitoxins may lead to serum sickness because they are produced in horses (see Hypersensitivities).
Widespread vaccination efforts have reduced the occurrence of diphtheria worldwide. There are currently four
combination toxoid vaccines available that provide protection against diphtheria and other diseases: DTaP, Tdap, DT,
and Td. In all cases, the letters “d,” “t,” and “p” stand for diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis, respectively; the “a”
stands for acellular. If capitalized, the letters indicate a full-strength dose; lowercase letters indicate reduced dosages.
According to current recommendations, children should receive five doses of the DTaP vaccine in their youth and a
Td booster every 10 years. Children with adverse reactions to the pertussis vaccine may be given the DT vaccine in
place of the DTaP.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

965

• What effect does diphtheria toxin have?
• What is the pseudomembrane composed of?

Bacterial Pneumonia
Pneumonia is a general term for infections of the lungs that lead to inflammation and accumulation of fluids and
white blood cells in the alveoli. Pneumonia can be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other organisms, although
the vast majority of pneumonias are bacterial in origin. Bacterial pneumonia is a prevalent, potentially serious
infection; it caused more 50,000 deaths in the United States in 2014.[6] As the alveoli fill with fluids and white
blood cells (consolidation), air exchange becomes impaired and patients experience respiratory distress (Figure
22.9). In addition, pneumonia can lead to pleurisy, an infection of the pleural membrane surrounding the lungs,
which can make breathing very painful. Although many different bacteria can cause pneumonia under the right
circumstances, three bacterial species cause most clinical cases: Streptococcus pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae. In addition to these, we will also examine some of the less common causes of pneumonia.

Figure 22.9 A chest radiograph of a patient with pneumonia shows the consolidations (lesions) present as opaque
patches. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Pneumococcal Pneumonia
The most common cause of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumoniae. This grampositive, alpha hemolytic streptococcus is commonly found as part of the normal microbiota of the human respiratory
tract. The cells tend to be somewhat lancet-shaped and typically appear as pairs (Figure 22.10). The pneumococci
initially colonize the bronchioles of the lungs. Eventually, the infection spreads to the alveoli, where the microbe’s
polysaccharide capsule interferes with phagocytic clearance. Other virulence factors include autolysins like Lyt
A, which degrade the microbial cell wall, resulting in cell lysis and the release of cytoplasmic virulence factors.
One of these factors, pneumolysin O, is important in disease progression; this pore-forming protein damages host
cells, promotes bacterial adherence, and enhances pro-inflammatory cytokine production. The resulting inflammatory
response causes the alveoli to fill with exudate rich in neutrophils and red blood cells. As a consequence, infected
individuals develop a productive cough with bloody sputum.

6. KD Kochanek et al. “Deaths: Final Data for 2014.” National Vital Statistics Reports 65 no 4 (2016).

966

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.10 (a) This micrograph of Streptococcus pneumoniae grown from a blood culture shows the characteristic
lancet-shaped diplococcal morphology. (b) A colorized scanning electron micrograph of S. pneumoniae. (credit a:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Janice Carr,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Pneumococci can be presumptively identified by their distinctive gram-positive, lancet-shaped cell morphology
and diplococcal arrangement. In blood agar cultures, the organism demonstrates alpha hemolytic colonies that are
autolytic after 24 to 48 hours. In addition, S. pneumoniae is extremely sensitive to optochin and colonies are rapidly
destroyed by the addition of 10% solution of sodium deoxycholate. All clinical pneumococcal isolates are serotyped
using the quellung reaction with typing antisera produced by the CDC. Positive quellung reactions are considered
definitive identification of pneumococci.
Antibiotics remain the mainstay treatment for pneumococci. β-Lactams like penicillin are the first-line drugs, but
resistance to β-lactams is a growing problem. When β-lactam resistance is a concern, macrolides and fluoroquinolones
may be prescribed. However, S. pneumoniae resistance to macrolides and fluoroquinolones is increasing as well,
limiting the therapeutic options for some infections. There are currently two pneumococcal vaccines available:
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). These are generally
given to the most vulnerable populations of individuals: children younger than 2 years and adults older than 65 years.

Haemophilus Pneumonia
Encapsulated strains of Haemophilus influenzae are known for causing meningitis, but nonencapsulated strains are
important causes of pneumonia. This small, gram-negative coccobacillus is found in the pharynx of the majority
of healthy children; however, Haemophilus pneumonia is primarily seen in the elderly. Like other pathogens that
cause pneumonia, H. influenzae is spread by droplets and aerosols produced by coughing. A fastidious organism, H.
influenzae will only grow on media with available factor X (hemin) and factor V (NAD), like chocolate agar (Figure
22.11). Serotyping must be performed to confirm identity of H. influenzae isolates.
Infections of the alveoli by H. influenzae result in inflammation and accumulation of fluids. Increasing resistance to
β-lactams, macrolides, and tetracyclines presents challenges for the treatment of Haemophilus pneumonia. Resistance
to the fluoroquinolones is rare among isolates of H. influenzae but has been observed. As discussed for AOM, a
vaccine directed against nonencapsulated H. influenzae, if developed, would provide protection against pneumonia
caused by this pathogen.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

967

Figure 22.11 Culture of Haemophilus influenzae on a chocolate agar plate. (credit: modification of work by Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention)

Case in Point
Why Me?
Tracy is a 6-year old who developed a serious cough that would not seem to go away. After 2 weeks, her
parents became concerned and took her to the pediatrician, who suspected a case of bacterial pneumonia.
Tests confirmed that the cause was Haemophilus influenzae. Fortunately, Tracy responded well to antibiotic
treatment and eventually made a full recovery.
Because there had been several other cases of bacterial pneumonia at Tracy’s elementary school, local health
officials urged parents to have their children screened. Of the children who were screened, it was discovered
that greater than 50% carried H. influenzae in their nasal cavities, yet all but two of them were asymptomatic.
Why is it that some individuals become seriously ill from bacterial infections that seem to have little or no
effect on others? The pathogenicity of an organism—its ability to cause host damage—is not solely a property
of the microorganism. Rather, it is the product of a complex relationship between the microbe’s virulence
factors and the immune defenses of the individual. Preexisting conditions and environmental factors such
as exposure to secondhand smoke can make some individuals more susceptible to infection by producing
conditions favorable to microbial growth or compromising the immune system. In addition, individuals may
have genetically determined immune factors that protect them—or not—from particular strains of pathogens.
The interactions between these host factors and the pathogenicity factors produced by the microorganism
ultimately determine the outcome of the infection. A clearer understanding of these interactions may allow for
better identification of at-risk individuals and prophylactic interventions in the future.

Mycoplasma Pneumonia (Walking Pneumonia)
Primary atypical pneumonia is caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. This bacterium is not part of the respiratory
tract’s normal microbiota and can cause epidemic disease outbreaks. Also known as walking pneumonia, mycoplasma
pneumonia infections are common in crowded environments like college campuses and military bases. It is spread by
aerosols formed when coughing or sneezing. The disease is often mild, with a low fever and persistent cough. These
bacteria, which do not have cell walls, use a specialized attachment organelle to bind to ciliated cells. In the process,
epithelial cells are damaged and the proper function of the cilia is hindered (Figure 22.12).

968

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Mycoplasma grow very slowly when cultured. Therefore, penicillin and thallium acetate are added to agar to prevent
the overgrowth by faster-growing potential contaminants. Since M. pneumoniae does not have a cell wall, it is
resistant to these substances. Without a cell wall, the microbial cells appear pleomorphic. M. pneumoniae infections
tend to be self-limiting but may also respond well to macrolide antibiotic therapy. β-lactams, which target cell wall
synthesis, are not indicated for treatment of infections with this pathogen.

Figure 22.12 The micrograph shows Mycoplasma pneumoniae using their specialized receptors to attach to
epithelial cells in the trachea of an infected hamster. (credit: modification of work by American Society for
Microbiology)

Chlamydial Pneumonias and Psittacosis
Chlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three different species of bacteria: Chlamydophila pneumoniae (formerly
known as Chlamydia pneumoniae), Chlamydophila psittaci (formerly known as Chlamydia psittaci), and Chlamydia
trachomatis. All three are obligate intracellular pathogens and cause mild to severe pneumonia and bronchitis. Of
the three, Chlamydophila pneumoniae is the most common and is transmitted via respiratory droplets or aerosols. C.
psittaci causes psittacosis, a zoonotic disease that primarily affects domesticated birds such as parakeets, turkeys,
and ducks, but can be transmitted from birds to humans. Psittacosis is a relatively rare infection and is typically
found in people who work with birds. Chlamydia trachomatis, the causative agent of the sexually transmitted disease
chlamydia, can cause pneumonia in infants when the infection is passed from mother to baby during birth.
Diagnosis of chlamydia by culturing tends to be difficult and slow. Because they are intracellular pathogens, they
require multiple passages through tissue culture. Recently, a variety of PCR- and serologically based tests have been
developed to enable easier identification of these pathogens. Tetracycline and macrolide antibiotics are typically
prescribed for treatment.

Health Care-Associated Pneumonia
A variety of opportunistic bacteria that do not typically cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals are common
causes of health care-associated pneumonia. These include Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and
proteobacteria such as species of Escherichia, Proteus, and Serratia. Patients at risk include the elderly, those who
have other preexisting lung conditions, and those who are immunocompromised. In addition, patients receiving
supportive therapies such as intubation, antibiotics, and immunomodulatory drugs may also be at risk because these
interventions disrupt the mucociliary escalator and other pulmonary defenses. Invasive medical devices such as

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

969

catheters, medical implants, and ventilators can also introduce opportunistic pneumonia-causing pathogens into the
body.[7]
Pneumonia caused by K. pneumoniae is characterized by lung necrosis and “currant jelly sputum,” so named because
it consists of clumps of blood, mucus, and debris from the thick polysaccharide capsule produced by the bacterium. K.
pneumoniae is often multidrug resistant. Aminoglycoside and cephalosporin are often prescribed but are not always
effective. Klebsiella pneumonia is frequently fatal even when treated.

Pseudomonas Pneumonia
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is another opportunistic pathogen that can cause serious cases of bacterial pneumonia
in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and hospitalized patients assisted with artificial ventilators. This bacterium
is extremely antibiotic resistant and can produce a variety of exotoxins. Ventilator-associated pneumonia with P.
aeruginosa is caused by contaminated equipment that causes the pathogen to be aspirated into the lungs. In patients
with CF, a genetic defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor (CFTR) leads to the accumulation of excess
dried mucus in the lungs. This decreases the effectiveness of the defensins and inhibits the mucociliary escalator. P.
aeruginosa is known to infect more than half of all patients with CF. It adapts to the conditions in the patient’s lungs
and begins to produce alginate, a viscous exopolysaccharide that inhibits the mucociliary escalator. Lung damage
from the chronic inflammatory response that ensues is the leading cause of mortality in patients with CF.[8]

• What three pathogens are responsible for the most prevalent types of bacterial pneumonia?
• Which cause of pneumonia is most likely to affect young people?
• In what contexts does Pseudomonas aeruginosa cause pneumonia?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
John’s chest radiograph revealed an extensive consolidation in the right lung, and his sputum cultures revealed
the presence of a gram-negative rod. His physician prescribed a course of the antibiotic clarithromycin. He also
ordered the rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs) for type A and B influenza to rule out a possible underlying
viral infection. Despite antibiotic therapy, John’s condition continued to deteriorate, so he was admitted to the
hospital.

• What are some possible causes of pneumonia that would not have responded to the prescribed
antibiotic?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the deadliest infectious diseases in human history. Although tuberculosis infection rates
in the United States are extremely low, the CDC estimates that about one-third of the world’s population is infected
7. SM Koenig et al. “Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention.” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 19 no. 4
(2006):637–657.
8. R. Sordé et al. “Management of Refractory Pseudomonas aeruginosa Infection in Cystic Fibrosis.” Infection and Drug Resistance 4
(2011):31–41.

970

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causal organism of TB, with 9.6 million new TB cases and 1.5 million deaths
worldwide in 2014.[9]
M. tuberculosis is an acid-fast, high G + C, gram-positive, nonspore-forming rod. Its cell wall is rich in waxy
mycolic acids, which make the cells impervious to polar molecules. It also causes these organisms to grow slowly.
M. tuberculosis causes a chronic granulomatous disease that can infect any area of the body, although it is typically
associated with the lungs. M. tuberculosis is spread by inhalation of respiratory droplets or aerosols from an infected
person. The infectious dose of M. tuberculosis is only 10 cells.[10]
After inhalation, the bacteria enter the alveoli (Figure 22.13). The cells are phagocytized by macrophages but can
survive and multiply within these phagocytes because of the protection by the waxy mycolic acid in their cell walls.
If not eliminated by macrophages, the infection can progress, causing an inflammatory response and an accumulation
of neutrophils and macrophages in the area. Several weeks or months may pass before an immunological response is
mounted by T cells and B cells. Eventually, the lesions in the alveoli become walled off, forming small round lesions
called tubercles. Bacteria continue to be released into the center of the tubercles and the chronic immune response
results in tissue damage and induction of apoptosis (programmed host-cell death) in a process called liquefaction.
This creates a caseous center, or air pocket, where the aerobic M. tuberculosis can grow and multiply. Tubercles may
eventually rupture and bacterial cells can invade pulmonary capillaries; from there, bacteria can spread through the
bloodstream to other organs, a condition known as miliary tuberculosis. The rupture of tubercles also facilitates
transmission of the bacteria to other individuals via droplet aerosols that exit the body in coughs. Because these
droplets can be very small and stay aloft for a long time, special precautions are necessary when caring for patients
with TB, such as the use of face masks and negative-pressure ventilation and filtering systems.
Eventually, most lesions heal to form calcified Ghon complexes. These structures are visible on chest radiographs
and are a useful diagnostic feature. But even after the disease has apparently ended, viable bacteria remain sequestered
in these locations. Release of these organisms at a later time can produce reactivation tuberculosis (or secondary
TB). This is mainly observed in people with alcoholism, the elderly, or in otherwise immunocompromised individuals
(Figure 22.13).

9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Tuberculosis (TB). Data and Statistics.” http://www.cdc.gov/tb/statistics/default.htm
10. D. Saini et al. “Ultra-Low Dose of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Aerosol Creates Partial Infection in Mice.” Tuberculosis 92 no. 2
(2012):160–165.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

971

Figure 22.13 In the infectious cycle of tuberculosis, the immune response of most infected individuals
(approximately 90%) results in the formation of tubercles in which the infection is walled off.[11] The remainder will
suffer progressive primary tuberculosis. The sequestered bacteria may be reactivated to form secondary tuberculosis
in immunocompromised patients at a later time. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Because TB is a chronic disease, chemotherapeutic treatments often continue for months or years. Multidrug resistant
(MDR-TB) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR-TB) strains of M. tuberculosis are a growing clinical concern. These
strains can arise due to misuse or mismanagement of antibiotic therapies. Therefore, it is imperative that proper
11. G. Kaplan et al. “Mycobacterium tuberculosis Growth at the Cavity Surface: A Microenvironment with Failed Immunity.” Infection and
Immunity 71 no.12 (2003):7099–7108.

972

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

multidrug protocols are used to treat these infections. Common antibiotics included in these mixtures are isoniazid,
rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide.
A TB vaccine is available that is based on the so-called bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) strain of M. bovis commonly
found in cattle. In the United States, the BCG vaccine is only given to health-care workers and members of the
military who are at risk of exposure to active cases of TB. It is used more broadly worldwide. Many individuals born
in other countries have been vaccinated with BCG strain. BCG is used in many countries with a high prevalence of
TB, to prevent childhood tuberculous meningitis and miliary disease.
The Mantoux tuberculin skin test (Figure 22.14) is regularly used in the United States to screen for potential TB
exposure (see Hypersensitivities). However, prior vaccinations with the BCG vaccine can cause false-positive
results. Chest radiographs to detect Ghon complex formation are required, therefore, to confirm exposure.

Figure 22.14 (a) The Mantoux skin test for tuberculosis involves injecting the subject with tuberculin protein
derivative. The injection should initially produce a raised wheal. (b) The test should be read in 48–72 hours. A positive
result is indicated by redness, swelling, or hardness; the size of the responding region is measured to determine the
final result. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Link to Learning
These short animations (https://openstax.org/l/22mycotublegpnean) discuss
the infection strategies of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Legionella
pneumophila.

• What characteristic of Mycobacterium tuberculosis allows it to evade the immune response?
• What happens to cause miliary tuberculosis?
• Explain the limitations of the Mantoux tuberculin skin test.

Pertussis (Whooping Cough)
The causative agent of pertussis, commonly called whooping cough, is Bordetella pertussis, a gram-negative
coccobacillus. The disease is characterized by mucus accumulation in the lungs that leads to a long period of severe
coughing. Sometimes, following a bout of coughing, a sound resembling a “whoop” is produced as air is inhaled

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

973

through the inflamed and restricted airway—hence the name whooping cough. Although adults can be infected, the
symptoms of this disease are most pronounced in infants and children. Pertussis is highly communicable through
droplet transmission, so the uncontrollable coughing produced is an efficient means of transmitting the disease in a
susceptible population.
Following inhalation, B. pertussis specifically attaches to epithelial cells using an adhesin, filamentous
hemagglutinin. The bacteria then grow at the site of infection and cause disease symptoms through the production
of exotoxins. One of the main virulence factors of this organism is an A-B exotoxin called the pertussis toxin (PT).
When PT enters the host cells, it increases the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels and disrupts cellular
signaling. PT is known to enhance inflammatory responses involving histamine and serotonin. In addition to PT, B.
pertussis produces a tracheal cytotoxin that damages ciliated epithelial cells and results in accumulation of mucus in
the lungs. The mucus can support the colonization and growth of other microbes and, as a consequence, secondary
infections are common. Together, the effects of these factors produce the cough that characterizes this infection.
A pertussis infection can be divided into three distinct stages. The initial infection, termed the catarrhal stage, is
relatively mild and unremarkable. The signs and symptoms may include nasal congestion, a runny nose, sneezing,
and a low-grade fever. This, however, is the stage in which B. pertussis is most infectious. In the paroxysmal stage,
mucus accumulation leads to uncontrollable coughing spasms that can last for several minutes and frequently induce
vomiting. The paroxysmal stage can last for several weeks. A long convalescence stage follows the paroxysmal stage,
during which time patients experience a chronic cough that can last for up to several months. In fact, the disease is
sometimes called the 100-day cough.
In infants, coughing can be forceful enough to cause fractures to the ribs, and prolonged infections can lead to death.
The CDC reported 20 pertussis-related deaths in 2012,[12] but that number had declined to five by 2015.[13]
During the first 2 weeks of infection, laboratory diagnosis is best performed by culturing the organism directly from a
nasopharyngeal (NP) specimen collected from the posterior nasopharynx. The NP specimen is streaked onto BordetGengou medium. The specimens must be transported to the laboratory as quickly as possible, even if transport media
are used. Transport times of longer than 24 hours reduce the viability of B. pertussis significantly.
Within the first month of infection, B. pertussis can be diagnosed using PCR techniques. During the later stages
of infection, pertussis-specific antibodies can be immunologically detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA).
Pertussis is generally a self-limiting disease. Antibiotic therapy with erythromycin or tetracycline is only effective
at the very earliest stages of disease. Antibiotics given later in the infection, and prophylactically to uninfected
individuals, reduce the rate of transmission. Active vaccination is a better approach to control this disease. The DPT
vaccine was once in common use in the United States. In that vaccine, the P component consisted of killed whole-cell
B. pertussis preparations. Because of some adverse effects, that preparation has now been superseded by the DTaP
and Tdap vaccines. In both of these new vaccines, the “aP” component is a pertussis toxoid.
Widespread vaccination has greatly reduced the number of reported cases and prevented large epidemics of pertussis.
Recently, however, pertussis has begun to reemerge as a childhood disease in some states because of declining
vaccination rates and an increasing population of susceptible children.

12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2012 Final Pertussis Surveillance Report.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/downloads/
pertuss-surv-report-2012.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Provisional Pertussis Surveillance Report.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/
downloads/pertuss-surv-report-2015-provisional.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.

974

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Link to Learning
This web page (https://openstax.org/l/22pertussaudio) contains an audio clip
of the distinctive “whooping” sound associated with pertussis in infants.
This interactive map (https://openstax.org/l/22intmapprevacc) shows
outbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases, including pertussis, around the
world.

• What accounts for the mucus production in a pertussis infection?
• What are the signs and symptoms associated with the three stages of pertussis?
• Why is pertussis becoming more common in the United States?

Legionnaires Disease
An atypical pneumonia called Legionnaires disease (also known as legionellosis) is caused by an aerobic gramnegative bacillus, Legionella pneumophila. This bacterium infects free-living amoebae that inhabit moist
environments, and infections typically occur from human-made reservoirs such as air-conditioning cooling towers,
humidifiers, misting systems, and fountains. Aerosols from these reservoirs can lead to infections of susceptible
individuals, especially those suffering from chronic heart or lung disease or other conditions that weaken the immune
system.
When L. pneumophila bacteria enter the alveoli, they are phagocytized by resident macrophages. However, L.
pneumophila uses a secretion system to insert proteins in the endosomal membrane of the macrophage; these proteins
prevent lysosomal fusion, allowing L. pneumophila to continue to proliferate within the phagosome. The resulting
respiratory disease can range from mild to severe pneumonia, depending on the status of the host’s immune defenses.
Although this disease primarily affects the lungs, it can also cause fever, nausea, vomiting, confusion, and other
neurological effects.
Diagnosis of Legionnaires disease is somewhat complicated. L. pneumophila is a fastidious bacterium and is difficult
to culture. In addition, since the bacterial cells are not efficiently stained with the Gram stain, other staining
techniques, such as the Warthin-Starry silver-precipitate procedure, must be used to visualize this pathogen. A rapid
diagnostic test has been developed that detects the presence of Legionella antigen in a patient’s urine; results take less
than 1 hour, and the test has high selectivity and specificity (greater than 90%). Unfortunately, the test only works
for one serotype of L. pneumophila (type 1, the serotype responsible for most infections). Consequently, isolation and
identification of L. pneumophila from sputum remains the defining test for diagnosis.
Once diagnosed, Legionnaire disease can be effectively treated with fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotics.
However, the disease is sometimes fatal; about 10% of patients die of complications.[14] There is currently no vaccine
available.

14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Legionella (Legionnaires’ Disease and Pontiac Fever: Diagnosis, Treatment, and
Complications).” http://www.cdc.gov/legionella/about/diagnosis.html. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

975

• Why is Legionnaires disease associated with air-conditioning systems?
• How does Legionella pneumophila circumvent the immune system?

Q Fever
The zoonotic disease Q fever is caused by a rickettsia, Coxiella burnetii. The primary reservoirs for this bacterium
are domesticated livestock such as cattle, sheep, and goats. The bacterium may be transmitted by ticks or through
exposure to the urine, feces, milk, or amniotic fluid of an infected animal. In humans, the primary route of infection
is through inhalation of contaminated farmyard aerosols. It is, therefore, largely an occupational disease of farmers.
Humans are acutely sensitive to C. burnetii—the infective dose is estimated to be just a few cells.[15] In addition, the
organism is hardy and can survive in a dry environment for an extended time. Symptoms associated with acute Q
fever include high fever, headache, coughing, pneumonia, and general malaise. In a small number of patients (less
than 5%[16]), the condition may become chronic, often leading to endocarditis, which may be fatal.
Diagnosing rickettsial infection by cultivation in the laboratory is both difficult and hazardous because of the easy
aerosolization of the bacteria, so PCR and ELISA are commonly used. Doxycycline is the first-line drug to treat acute
Q fever. In chronic Q fever, doxycycline is often paired with hydroxychloroquine.

Disease Profile
Bacterial Diseases of the Respiratory Tract
Numerous pathogens can cause infections of the respiratory tract. Many of these infections produce similar
signs and symptoms, but appropriate treatment depends on accurate diagnosis through laboratory testing. The
tables in Figure 22.15 and Figure 22.16 summarize the most important bacterial respiratory infections, with
the latter focusing specifically on forms of bacterial pneumonia.

15. WD Tigertt et al. “Airborne Q Fever.” Bacteriological Reviews 25 no. 3 (1961):285–293.
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Q fever. Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment.” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/qfever/
symptoms/index.html. Accessed July 6, 2016.

976

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.15

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.16

977

978

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases of the respiratory tract

Viruses are the most frequent cause of respiratory tract infections. Unlike the bacterial pathogens, we have few
effective therapies to combat viral respiratory infections. Fortunately, many of these diseases are mild and selflimiting. A few respiratory infections manifest their primary symptoms at other locations in the body.

The Common Cold
The common cold is a generic term for a variety of mild viral infections of the nasal cavity. More than 200 different
viruses are known to cause the common cold. The most common groups of cold viruses include rhinoviruses,
coronaviruses, and adenoviruses. These infections are widely disseminated in the human population and are
transmitted through direct contact and droplet transmission. Coughing and sneezing efficiently produce infectious
aerosols, and rhinoviruses are known to persist on environmental surfaces for up to a week.[17]
Viral contact with the nasal mucosa or eyes can lead to infection. Rhinoviruses tend to replicate best between 33 °C
(91.4 °F) and 35 °C (95 °F), somewhat below normal body temperature (37 °C [98.6 °F]). As a consequence, they
tend to infect the cooler tissues of the nasal cavities. Colds are marked by an irritation of the mucosa that leads to
an inflammatory response. This produces common signs and symptoms such as nasal excess nasal secretions (runny
nose), congestion, sore throat, coughing, and sneezing. The absence of high fever is typically used to differentiate
common colds from other viral infections, like influenza. Some colds may progress to cause otitis media, pharyngitis,
or laryngitis, and patients may also experience headaches and body aches. The disease, however, is self-limiting and
typically resolves within 1–2 weeks.
There are no effective antiviral treatments for the common cold and antibacterial drugs should not be prescribed
unless secondary bacterial infections have been established. Many of the viruses that cause colds are related, so
immunity develops throughout life. Given the number of viruses that cause colds, however, individuals are never
likely to develop immunity to all causes of the common cold.

• How are colds transmitted?
• What is responsible for the symptoms of a cold?

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Since antibiotic treatment had proven ineffective, John’s doctor suspects that a viral or fungal pathogen may be
the culprit behind John’s case of pneumonia. Another possibility is that John could have an antibiotic-resistant
bacterial infection that will require a different antibiotic or combination of antibiotics to clear.
The RIDT tests both came back negative for type A and type B influenza. However, the diagnostic laboratory
identified the sputum isolate as Legionella pneumophila. The doctor ordered tests of John’s urine and, on the

17. AG L’Huillier et al. “Survival of Rhinoviruses on Human Fingers.” Clinical Microbiology and Infection 21, no. 4 (2015):381–385.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

979

second day after his admission, results of an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) were positive for the Legionella
antigen. John’s doctor added levofloxacin to his antibiotic therapy and continued to monitor him. The doctor
also began to ask John where he had been over the past 10 to 14 days.

• Do negative RIDT results absolutely rule out influenza virus as the etiologic agent? Why or why not?
• What is John’s prognosis?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Influenza
Commonly known as the flu, influenza is a common viral disease of the lower respiratory system caused by an
orthomyxovirus. Influenza is pervasive worldwide and causes 3,000–50,000 deaths each year in the United States.
The annual mortality rate can vary greatly depending on the virulence of the strain(s) responsible for seasonal
epidemics. [18]
Influenza infections are most typically characterized by fever, chills, and body aches. This is followed by symptoms
similar to the common cold that may last a week or more. Table 22.2 compares the signs and symptoms of influenza
and the common cold.
Comparing the Common Cold and Influenza
Sign/Symptom

Common Cold

Influenza

Fever

Low (37.2 °C [99 °F])

High (39 °C [102.2 °F])

Headache

Common

Common

Aches and pains

Mild

Severe

Fatigue

Slight

Severe

Nasal congestion

Common

Rare

Sneezing

Common

Rare

Table 22.2

In general, influenza is self-limiting. However, serious cases can lead to pneumonia and other complications that can
be fatal. Such cases are more common in the very young and the elderly; however, certain strains of influenza virus
(like the 1918–1919 variant discussed later in this chapter) are more lethal to young adults than to the very young or
old. Strains that affect young adults are believed to involve a cytokine storm—a positive feedback loop that forms
between cytokine production and leukocytes. This cytokine storm produces an acute inflammatory response that leads
to rapid fluid accumulation in the lungs, culminating in pulmonary failure. In such cases, the ability to mount a
vigorous immune response is actually detrimental to the patient. The very young and very old are less susceptible to
this effect because their immune systems are less robust.
A complication of influenza that occurs primarily in children and teenagers is Reye syndrome. This sequela causes
swelling in the liver and brain, and may progress to neurological damage, coma, or death. Reye syndrome may follow
other viral infections, like chickenpox, and has been associated with the use of aspirin. For this reason, the CDC and
other agencies recommend that aspirin and products containing aspirin never be used to treat viral illnesses in children
younger than age 19 years.[19]
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Estimating Seasonal Influenza-Associated Deaths in the United States: CDC Study
Confirms Variability of Flu.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/disease/us_flu-related_deaths.htm. Accessed July 6, 2016.

980

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

The influenza virus is primarily transmitted by direct contact and inhalation of aerosols. The RNA genome of this
virus exists as seven or eight segments, each coated with ribonucleoprotein and encoding one or two specific viral
proteins. The influenza virus is surrounded by a lipid membrane envelope, and two of the main antigens of the
influenza virus are the spike proteins hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N), as shown in Figure 22.17. These
spike proteins play important roles in the viral infectious cycle.

Figure 22.17 The illustration shows the structure of an influenza virus. The viral envelope is studded with copies of
the proteins neuraminidase and hemagglutinin, and surrounds the individual seven or eight RNA genome segments.
(credit: modification of work by Dan Higgins, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Following inhalation, the influenza virus uses the hemagglutinin protein to bind to sialic acid receptors on host
respiratory epithelial cells. This facilitates endocytosis of the viral particle. Once inside the host cell, the negative
strand viral RNA is replicated by the viral RNA polymerase to form mRNA, which is translated by the host to produce
viral proteins. Additional viral RNA molecules are transcribed to produce viral genomic RNA, which assemble with
viral proteins to form mature virions. Release of the virions from the host cell is facilitated by viral neuraminidase,
which cleaves sialic-acid receptors to allow progeny viruses to make a clean exit when budding from an infected cell.
There are three genetically related influenza viruses, called A, B, and C. The influenza A viruses have different
subtypes based on the structure of their hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins. There are currently 18 known
subtypes of hemagglutinin and 11 known subtypes of neuraminidase. Influenza viruses are serologically characterized
by the type of H and N proteins that they possess. Of the nearly 200 different combinations of H and N, only a few,
such as the H1N1 strain, are associated with human disease. The influenza viruses A, B, and C make up three of
the five major groups of orthomyxoviruses. The differences between the three types of influenza are summarized
in Table 22.3. The most virulent group is the influenza A viruses, which cause seasonal pandemics of influenza
each year. Influenza A virus can infect a variety of animals, including pigs, horses, pigs, and even whales and
dolphins. Influenza B virus is less virulent and is sometimes associated with epidemic outbreaks. Influenza C virus
generally produces the mildest disease symptoms and is rarely connected with epidemics. Neither influenza B virus
nor influenza C virus has significant animal reservoirs.
The Three Major Groups of Influenza Viruses

Severity

Influenza A virus

Influenza B virus

Influenza C virus

Severe

Moderate

Mild

Table 22.3

19. ED Belay et al. “Reye’s Syndrome in the United States From 1981 Through 1997.” New England Journal of Medicine 340 no. 18
(1999):1377–1382.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

981

The Three Major Groups of Influenza Viruses
Influenza A virus

Influenza B virus

Influenza C virus

Yes

No

No

Genome segments

8

8

7

Population spread

Epidemic and pandemic

Epidemic

Sporadic

Antigenic variation

Shift/drift

Drift

Drift

Animal reservoir

Table 22.3

Influenza virus infections elicit a strong immune response, particularly to the hemagglutinin protein, which would
protect the individual if they encountered the same virus. Unfortunately, the antigenic properties of the virus change
relatively rapidly, so new strains are evolving that immune systems previously challenged by influenza virus cannot
recognize. When an influenza virus gains a new hemagglutinin or neuraminidase type, it is able to evade the host’s
immune response and be successfully transmitted, often leading to an epidemic.
There are two mechanisms by which these evolutionary changes may occur. The mechanisms of antigen drift and
antigenic shift for influenza virus have been described in Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens.
Of these two genetic processes, it is viruses produced by antigenic shift that have the potential to be extremely virulent
because individuals previously infected by other strains are unlikely to produce any protective immune response
against these novel variants.
The most lethal influenza pandemic in recorded history occurred from 1918 through 1919. Near the end of World
War I, an antigenic shift involving the recombination of avian and human viruses is thought to have produced a new
H1N1 virus. This strain rapidly spread worldwide and is commonly claimed to have killed as many as 40 million
to 50 million people—more than double the number killed in the war. Although referred to as the Spanish flu, this
disease is thought to have originated in the United States. Regardless of its source, the conditions of World War I
greatly contributed to the spread of this disease. Crowding, poor sanitation, and rapid mobilization of large numbers
of personnel and animals facilitated the dissemination of the new virus once it appeared.
Several of the most important influenza pandemics of modern times have been associated with antigenic shifts. A few
of these are summarized in Table 22.4.
Historical Influenza Outbreaks[20][21][22]
Years

Common Name

Serotype

Estimated Number of Deaths

1918–1919

Spanish flu

H1N1

20,000,000–40,000,000

1957–1958

Asian flu

N2N2

1,000,000–2,000,000

1968–1969

Hong Kong flu

H3N2

1,000,000–3,000,000

2009–2010

Swine flu

H1N1/09

152,000–575,000

Table 22.4

Laboratory diagnosis of influenza is typically performed using a variety of RIDTs. These tests are inoculated by
point-of-care personnel and give results within 15–20 minutes. Unfortunately, these tests have variable sensitivity and
commonly yield false-negative results. Other tests include hemagglutination of erythrocytes (due to hemagglutinin
20. CE Mills et al. “Transmissibility of 1918 Pandemic Influenza.” Nature 432, no. 7019 (2004):904–906.
21. E. Tognotti. “Influenza Pandemics: A Historical Retrospect.” Journal of Infection in Developing Countries 3, no. 5 (2009):331–334.
22. FS Dawood et al. “Estimated Global Mortality Associated with the First 12 Months of 2009 Pandemic Influenza A H1N1 Virus
Circulation: A Modelling Study.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 12, no. 9 (2012):687–695.

982

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

action) or complement fixation. Patient serum antibodies against influenza viruses can also be detected in blood
samples. Because influenza is self-limiting disease, diagnosis through these more time-consuming and expensive
methods is not typically used.
Three drugs that inhibit influenza neuraminidase activity are available: inhaled zanamivir, oral oseltamivir, and
intravenous peramivir. If taken at the onset of symptoms, these drugs can shorten the course of the disease. These
drugs are thought to impair the ability of the virus to efficiently exit infected host cells. A more effective means
of controlling influenza outbreaks, though, is vaccination. Every year, new influenza vaccines are developed to be
effective against the strains expected to be predominant. This is determined in February by a review of the dominant
strains around the world from a network of reporting sites; their reports are used to generate a recommendation for the
vaccine combination for the following winter in the northern hemisphere. In September, a similar recommendation
is made for the winter in the southern hemisphere.[23] These recommendations are used by vaccine manufacturers to
formulate each year’s vaccine. In most cases, three or four viruses are selected—the two most prevalent influenza A
strains and one or two influenza B strains. The chosen strains are typically cultivated in eggs and used to produce
either an inactivated or a live attenuated vaccine (e.g., FluMist). For individuals 18 years or older with an allergy
to egg products, a recombinant egg-free trivalent vaccine is available. Most of the influenza vaccines over the past
decade have had an effectiveness of about 50%.[24]

Case in Point
Flu Pandemic
During the spring of 2013, a new strain of H7N9 influenza was reported in China. A total of 132 people were
infected. Of those infected, 44 (33%) died. A genetic analysis of the virus suggested that this strain arose
from the reassortment of three different influenza viruses: a domestic duck H7N3 virus, a wild bird H7N9
virus, and a domestic poultry H9N2 virus. The virus was detected in the Chinese domestic bird flocks and
contact with this reservoir is thought to have been the primary source of infection. This strain of influenza
was not able to spread from person to person. Therefore, the disease did not become a global problem. This
case does, though, illustrate the potential threat that influenza still represents. If a strain like the H7N9 virus
were to undergo another antigenic shift, it could become more communicable in the human population. With
a mortality rate of 33%, such a pandemic would be disastrous. For this reason, organizations like the World
Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention keep all known influenza outbreaks
under constant surveillance.

• Compare the severity of the three types of influenza viruses.
• Why must new influenza vaccines be developed each year?

Viral Pneumonia
Viruses cause fewer cases of pneumonia than bacteria; however, several viruses can lead to pneumonia in children and
the elderly. The most common sources of viral pneumonia are adenoviruses, influenza viruses, parainfluenza viruses,
and respiratory syncytial viruses. The signs and symptoms produced by these viruses can range from mild cold-like
23. World Health Organization. “WHO Report on Global Surveillance of Epidemic-Prone Infectious Diseases.” 2000. http://www.who.int/
csr/resources/publications/surveillance/Influenza.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.
24. Centers of Disease Control and Prevention. “Vaccine Effectiveness - How Well Does the Flu Vaccine Work?” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
flu/about/qa/vaccineeffect.htm. Accessed July 6, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

983

symptoms to severe cases of pneumonia, depending on the virulence of the virus strain and the strength of the host
defenses of the infected individual. Occasionally, infections can result in otitis media.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections are fairly common in infants; most people have been infected by the age
of 2 years. During infection, a viral surface protein causes host cells to fuse and form multinucleated giant cells called
syncytia. There are no specific antiviral therapies or vaccines available for viral pneumonia. In adults, these infections
are self-limiting, resemble the common cold, and tend to resolve uneventfully within 1 or 2 weeks. Infections in
infants, however, can be life-threatening. RSV is highly contagious and can be spread through respiratory droplets
from coughing and sneezing. RSV can also survive for a long time on environmental surfaces and, thus, be transmitted
indirectly via fomites.

• Who is most likely to contract viral pneumonia?
• What is the recommended treatment for viral pneumonia?

SARS and MERS
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) are two acute respiratory
infections caused by coronaviruses. In both cases, these are thought to be zoonotic infections. Bats and civet cats are
thought to have been the reservoirs for SARS; camels seem to be the reservoir for MERS.
SARS originated in southern China in the winter of 2002 and rapidly spread to 37 countries. Within about 1 year, more
than 8,000 people experienced influenza-like symptoms and nearly 800 people died. The rapid spread and severity of
these infections caused grave concern at the time. However, the outbreak was controlled in 2003 and no further cases
of SARS have been recorded since 2004.[25] Signs and symptoms of SARS include high fever, headache, body aches,
and cough, and most patients will develop pneumonia.
MERS was first reported in Saudi Arabia in 2013. Although some infected individuals will be asymptomatic or have
mild cold-like symptoms, most will develop a high fever, aches, cough and a severe respiratory infection that can
progress to pneumonia. As of 2015, over 1,300 people in 27 countries have been infected. About 500 people have
died. There are no specific treatments for either MERS or SARS. In addition, no vaccines are currently available.
Several recombinant vaccines, however, are being developed.

• What is the cause of SARS?
• What are the signs and symptoms of MERS?

Viral Respiratory Diseases Causing Skin Rashes
Measles, rubella (German measles), and chickenpox are three important viral diseases often associated with skin
rashes. However, their symptoms are systemic, and because their portal of entry is the respiratory tract, they can be
considered respiratory infections.

25. Y. Huang. “The SARS Epidemic and Its Aftermath in China: A Political Perspective.” In Learning from SARS: Preparing for the Next
Disease Outbreak. Edited by S. Knobler et al. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2004. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK92479/

984

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Measles (Rubeola)
The measles virus (MeV) causes the highly contagious disease measles, also known as rubeola, which is a major
cause of childhood mortality worldwide. Although vaccination efforts have greatly reduced the incidence of measles
in much of the world, epidemics are still common in unvaccinated populations in certain countries. [26]
The measles virus is a single-stranded, negative-strand RNA virus and, like the influenza virus, it possesses an
envelope with spikes of embedded hemagglutinin. The infection is spread by direct contact with infectious secretions
or inhalation of airborne droplets spread by breathing, coughing, or sneezing. Measles is initially characterized by a
high fever, conjunctivitis, and a sore throat. The virus then moves systemically through the bloodstream and causes
a characteristic rash. The measles rash initially forms on the face and later spreads to the extremities. The red, raised
macular rash will eventually become confluent and can last for several days. At the same time, extremely high fevers
(higher than 40.6 °C [105 °F]) can occur. Another diagnostic sign of measles infections is Koplik’s spots, white spots
that form on the inner lining of inflamed cheek tissues (Figure 22.18).

Figure 22.18 (a) Measles typically presents as a raised macular rash that begins on the face and spreads to the
extremities. (b) Koplik’s spots on the oral mucosa are also characteristic of measles. (c) A thin-section transmission
electron micrograph of a measles virion. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Although measles is usually self-limiting, it can lead to pneumonia, encephalitis, and death. In addition, the inhibition
of immune system cells by the measles virus predisposes patients to secondary infections. In severe infections with
highly virulent strains, measles fatality rates can be as high as 10% to 15%. There were more than 145,000 measles
deaths (mostly young children) worldwide in 2013.[27]
The preliminary diagnosis of measles is typically based on the appearance of the rash and Koplik’s spots.
Hemagglutination inhibition tests and serological tests may be used to confirm measles infections in low-prevalence
settings.
There are no effective treatments for measles. Vaccination is widespread in developed countries as part of the measles,
mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine. As a result, there are typically fewer than 200 cases of measles in the United
States annually.[28] When it is seen, it is often associated with children who have not been vaccinated.

26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Global Health - Measles, Rubella, and CRS, Eliminating Measles, Rubella & Congenital
Rubella Syndrome (CRS) Worldwide.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/measles/. Accessed July 7, 2016.
27. World Health Organization. “Measles Factsheet.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/. Accessed July 7, 2016.
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Measles Cases and Outbreaks.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/measles/cases-outbreaks.html.
Accessed July 7, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

985

Micro Connections
Preventable Measles Outbreaks
In December 2014, a measles epidemic began at Disneyland in southern California. Within just 4 months,
this outbreak affected 134 people in 24 states.[29] Characterization of the virus suggests that an unidentified
infected individual brought the disease to the United States from the Philippines, where a similar virus had
sickened more than 58,000 people and killed 110.[30] Measles is highly communicable, and its spread at
Disneyland may have been facilitated by the low vaccination rate in some communities in California.[31]
Several factors could conceivably lead to a strong comeback of measles in the U.S. Measles is still an
epidemic disease in many locations worldwide. Air travel enables infected individuals to rapidly translocate
these infections globally. Compounding this problem, low vaccination rates in some local areas in the United
States (such as in Amish communities) provide populations of susceptible hosts for the virus to establish
itself. Finally, measles has been a low-prevalence infection in the U.S. for some time. As a consequence,
physicians are not as likely to recognize the initial symptoms and make accurate diagnoses. Until vaccination
rates become high enough to ensure herd immunity, measles is likely to be an ongoing problem in the United
States.

Rubella (German Measles)
Rubella, or the German measles, is a relatively mild viral disease that produces a rash somewhat like that caused by
the measles, even though the two diseases are unrelated. The rubella virus is an enveloped RNA virus that can be
found in the respiratory tract. It is transmitted from person to person in aerosols produced by coughing or sneezing.
Nearly half of all infected people remain asymptomatic. However, the virus is shed and spread by asymptomatic
carriers. Like rubeola, rubella begins with a facial rash that spreads to the extremities (Figure 22.19). However, the
rash is less intense, shorter lived (2–3 days), not associated with Koplik’s spots, and the resulting fever is lower (101
°F [38.3 °C]).
Congenital rubella syndrome is the most severe clinical complication of the German measles. This occurs if a woman
is infected with rubella during pregnancy. The rubella virus is teratogenic, meaning it can cause developmental
defects if it crosses the placenta during pregnancy. There is a very high incidence of stillbirth, spontaneous abortion,
or congenital birth defects if the mother is infected before 11 weeks of pregnancy and 35% if she is infected between
weeks 13–16; after this time the incidence is low.[32] For this reason, prenatal screening for rubella is commonly
practiced in the United States. Postnatal infections are usually self-limiting and rarely cause severe complications.
Like measles, the preliminary diagnosis of rubella is based on the patient’s history, vaccination records, and the
appearance of the rash. The diagnosis can be confirmed by hemagglutinin inhibition assays and a variety of other
immunological techniques. There are no antiviral therapies for rubella, but an effective vaccine (MMR) is widely
available. Vaccination efforts have essentially eliminated rubella in the United States; fewer than a dozen cases are
reported in a typical year.

29. Ibid.
30. World Health Organization. “Measles-Rubella Bulletin.” Manila, Philippines; Expanded Programme on Immunization Regional Office
for the Western Pacific World Health Organization; 9 no. 1 (2015). http://www.wpro.who.int/immunization/documents/
mrbulletinvol9issue1.pdf
31. M. Bloch et al. “Vaccination Rates for Every Kindergartener in California.” The New York Times February 6, 2015.
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/02/06/us/california-measles-vaccines-map.html?_r=1. Accessed July 7, 2016.
32. E. Miller et al. “Consequences of Confirmed Maternal Rubella at Successive Stages of Pregnancy.” The Lancet 320, no. 8302
(1982):781–784.

986

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.19 (a) This photograph shows the appearance of the German measles (rubella) rash. Note that this is
less intense than the rash of measles and the lesions are not confluent. (b) This transmission electron micrograph
shows rubella virus virions just budding from a host cell. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

Chickenpox and Shingles
Chickenpox, also known as varicella, was once a common viral childhood disease. The causative agent of
chickenpox, the varicella-zoster virus, is a member of the herpesvirus family. In children, the disease is mild and selflimiting, and is easily transmitted by direct contact or inhalation of material from the skin lesions. In adults, however,
chickenpox infections can be much more severe and can lead to pneumonia and birth defects in the case of infected
pregnant women. Reye syndrome, mentioned earlier in this chapter, is also a serious complication associated with
chickenpox, generally in children.
Once infected, most individuals acquire a lifetime immunity to future chickenpox outbreaks. For this reason, parents
once held “chickenpox parties” for their children. At these events, uninfected children were intentionally exposed to
an infected individual so they would contract the disease earlier in life, when the incidence of complications is very
low, rather than risk a more severe infection later.
After the initial viral exposure, chickenpox has an incubation period of about 2 weeks. The initial infection of the
respiratory tract leads to viremia and eventually produces fever and chills. A pustular rash then develops on the face,
progresses to the trunk, and then the extremities, although most form on the trunk (Figure 22.20). Eventually, the
lesions burst and form a crusty scab. Individuals with chickenpox are infectious from about 2 days before the outbreak
of the rash until all the lesions have scabbed over.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

987

Figure 22.20 (a) The characteristic appearance of the pustular chickenpox rash is concentrated on the trunk region.
(b) This transmission electron micrograph shows a viroid of human herpesvirus 3, the virus that causes chickenpox in
children and shingles when it is reactivated in adults. (credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention)

Like other herpesviruses, the varicella-zoster virus can become dormant in nerve cells. While the pustular vesicles
are developing, the virus moves along sensory nerves to the dorsal ganglia in the spinal cord. Once there, the
varicella-zoster virus can remain latent for decades. These dormant viruses may be reactivated later in life by a
variety of stimuli, including stress, aging, and immunosuppression. Once reactivated, the virus moves along sensory
nerves to the skin of the face or trunk. This results in the production of the painful lesions in a condition known as
shingles (Figure 22.21). These symptoms generally last for 2–6 weeks, and may recur more than once. Postherpetic
neuralgia, pain signals sent from damaged nerves long after the other symptoms have subsided, is also possible. In
addition, the virus can spread to other organs in immunocompromised individuals. A person with shingles lesions
can transmit the virus to a nonimmune contact, and the newly infected individual would develop chickenpox as the
primary infection. Shingles cannot be transmitted from one person to another.
The primary diagnosis of chickenpox in children is mainly based on the presentation of a pustular rash of the trunk.
Serological and PCR-based tests are available to confirm the initial diagnosis. Treatment for chickenpox infections in
children is usually not required. In patients with shingles, acyclovir treatment can often reduce the severity and length
of symptoms, and diminish the risk of postherpetic neuralgia. An effective vaccine is now available for chickenpox.
A vaccine is also available for adults older than 60 years who were infected with chickenpox in their youth. This
vaccine reduces the likelihood of a shingles outbreak by boosting the immune defenses that are keeping the latent
infection in check and preventing reactivation.

988

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.21 (a) An individual suffering from shingles. (b) The rash is formed because of the reactivation of a
varicella-zoster infection that was initially contracted in childhood. (credit a: modification of work by National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID); credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

• Why does measles often lead to secondary infections?
• What signs or symptoms would distinguish rubella and measles?
• Why can chickenpox lead to shingles later in life?

Eye on Ethics

Smallpox Stockpiles
Smallpox has probably killed more humans than any other infectious disease, with the possible exception of
tuberculosis. This disease, caused by the variola major virus, is transmitted by inhalation of viral particles shed
from lesions in the throat. The smallpox virus spreads systemically in the bloodstream and produces a pustular
skin rash. Historical epidemics of smallpox had fatality rates of 50% or greater in susceptible populations.
Concerted worldwide vaccination efforts eradicated smallpox from the general population in 1977. This was
the first microbial disease in history to be eradicated, a feat made possible by the fact that the only reservoir
for the smallpox virus is infected humans.
Although the virus is no longer present in the wild, laboratory samples of the virus still exist in the United States
and Russia.[33] The question is, why do these samples still exist? Some claim that these stocks should be
maintained for research purposes. Should the smallpox virus ever reappear, they say, we would need access
to such stocks for development of vaccines and treatments. Concerns about a re-emergence of the virus are
not totally unfounded. Although there are no living reservoirs of the virus, there is always the possibility that
smallpox could re-emerge from mummified human bodies or human remains preserved in permafrost. It is
also possible that there are as-yet undiscovered samples of the virus in other locations around the world.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

An example of such "lost" samples was discovered in a drawer in a Food and Drug Administration lab in
Maryland.[34] If an outbreak from such a source were to occur, it could lead to uncontrolled epidemics, since
the population is largely unvaccinated now.
Critics of this argument, including many research scientists and the World Health Organization, claim that there
is no longer any rational argument for keeping the samples. They view the “re-emergence scenarios” as a
thinly veiled pretense for harboring biological weapons. These scenarios, they say, are less probable than an
intentional reintroduction of the virus from militarized stocks by humans. Furthermore, they point out that if we
needed to research smallpox in the future, we could rebuild the virus from its DNA sequence.
What do you think? Are there legitimate arguments for maintaining stockpiles of smallpox, or should all forms
of this deadly disease be eradicated?

Disease Profile
Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
Many viruses are capable of entering and causing disease in the respiratory system, and a number are able
to spread beyond the respiratory system to cause systemic infections. Most of these infections are highly
contagious and, with a few exceptions, antimicrobial drugs are not effective for treatment. Although some of
these infections are self-limiting, others can have serious or fatal complications. Effective vaccines have been
developed for several of these diseases, as summarized in Figure 22.22.

33. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “CDC Media Statement on Newly Discovered Smallpox Specimens.” July 8, 2014.
http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/s0708-nih.html. Accessed on July 7, 2016.
34. Ibid.

989

990

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.22

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

991

22.4 Respiratory Mycoses
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the respiratory tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases of the respiratory tract

Fungal pathogens are ubiquitous in the environment. Serological studies have demonstrated that most people have
been exposed to fungal respiratory pathogens during their lives. Yet symptomatic infections by these microbes are
rare in healthy individuals. This demonstrates the efficacy of the defenses of our respiratory system. In this section,
we will examine some of the fungi that can cause respiratory infections.

Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis is a fungal disease of the respiratory system and most commonly occurs in the Mississippi Valley
of the United States and in parts of Central and South America, Africa, Asia, and Australia. The causative agent,
Histoplasma capsulatum, is a dimorphic fungus. This microbe grows as a filamentous mold in the environment but
occurs as a budding yeast during human infections. The primary reservoir for this pathogen is soil, particularly in
locations rich in bat or bird feces.
Histoplasmosis is acquired by inhaling microconidial spores in the air; this disease is not transmitted from human
to human. The incidence of histoplasmosis exposure is high in endemic areas, with 60%–90% of the population
having anti-Histoplasma antibodies, depending on location;[35] however, relatively few individuals exposed to the
fungus actually experience symptoms. Those most likely to be affected are the very young, the elderly, and
immunocompromised people.
In many ways, the course of this disease is similar to that of tuberculosis. Following inhalation, the spores enter
the lungs and are phagocytized by alveolar macrophages. The fungal cells then survive and multiply within these
phagocytes (see Figure 5.26). Focal infections cause the formation of granulomatous lesions, which can lead to
calcifications that resemble the Ghon complexes of tuberculosis, even in asymptomatic cases. Also like tuberculosis,
histoplasmosis can become chronic and reactivation can occur, along with dissemination to other areas of the body
(e.g., the liver or spleen).
Signs and symptoms of pulmonary histoplasmosis include fever, headache, and weakness with some chest discomfort.
The initial diagnosis is often based on chest radiographs and cultures grown on fungal selective media like
Sabouraud's dextrose agar. Direct fluorescence antibody staining and Giemsa staining can also be used to detect this
pathogen. In addition, serological tests including a complement fixation assay and histoplasmin sensitivity can be
used to confirm the diagnosis. In most cases, these infections are self-limiting and antifungal therapy is not required.
However, in disseminated disease, the antifungal agents amphotericin B and ketoconazole are effective; itraconazole
may be effective in immunocompromised patients, in whom the disease can be more serious.

• In what environments is one more likely to be infected with histoplasmosis?
• Identify at least two similarities between histoplasmosis and tuberculosis.

Coccidioidomycosis
Infection by the dimorphic fungus Coccidioides immitis causes coccidioidomycosis. Because the microbe is endemic
to the San Joaquin Valley of California, the disease is sometimes referred to as Valley fever. A related species that
35. NE Manos et al. “Geographic Variation in the Prevalence of Histoplasmin Sensitivity.” Dis Chest 29, no. 6 (1956):649–668.

992

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

causes similar infections is found in semi-arid and arid regions of the southwestern United States, Mexico, and Central
and South America.[36]
Like histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis is acquired by inhaling fungal spores—in this case, arthrospores formed
by hyphal fragmentation. Once in the body, the fungus differentiates into spherules that are filled with endospores.
Most C. immitis infections are asymptomatic and self-limiting. However, the infection can be very serious for
immunocompromised patients. The endospores may be transported in the blood, disseminating the infection and
leading to the formation of granulomatous lesions on the face and nose (Figure 22.23). In severe cases, other major
organs can become infected, leading to serious complications such as fatal meningitis.
Coccidioidomycosis can be diagnosed by culturing clinical samples. C. immitis readily grows on laboratory fungal
media, such as Sabouraud's dextrose agar, at 35 °C (95 °F). Culturing the fungus, however, is rather dangerous. C.
immitis is one of the most infectious fungal pathogens known and is capable of causing laboratory-acquired infections.
Indeed, until 2012, this organism was considered a “select agent” of bioterrorism and classified as a BSL-3 microbe.
Serological tests for antibody production are more often used for diagnosis. Although mild cases generally do not
require intervention, disseminated infections can be treated with intravenous antifungal drugs like amphotericin B.

Figure 22.23 (a) This patient has extensive facial lesions due to a disseminated Coccidioides infection. (b) This
fluorescent micrograph depicts a spherule of C. immitis containing endospores. (credit a, b: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Clinical Focus
Resolution
John’s negative RIDT tests do not rule out influenza, since false-negative results are common, but the
Legionella infection still must be treated with antibiotic therapy and is the more serious condition. John's
prognosis is good, provided the physician can find an antibiotic therapy to which the infection responds.
While John was undergoing treatment, three of the employees from the home improvement store also reported
to the clinic with very similar symptoms. All three were older than 55 years and had Legionella antigen in their
urine; L. pneumophila was also isolated from their sputum. A team from the health department was sent to the
home improvement store to identify a probable source for these infections. Their investigation revealed that
about 3 weeks earlier, the store's air conditioning system, which was located where the employees ate lunch,

36. DR Hospenthal. “Coccioidomycosis.” Medscape. 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/215978-overview. Accessed July 7,
2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

993

had been undergoing maintenance. L. pneumophila was isolated from the cooling coils of the air conditioning
system and intracellular L. pneumophila was observed in amoebae in samples of condensed water from the
cooling coils as well (Figure 22.24). The amoebae provide protection for the Legionella bacteria and are known
to enhance their pathogenicity.[37]
In the wake of the infections, the store ordered a comprehensive cleaning of the air conditioning system and
implemented a regular maintenance program to prevent the growth of biofilms within the cooling tower. They
also reviewed practices at their other facilities.
After a month of rest at home, John recovered from his infection enough to return to work, as did the other
three employees of the store. However, John experienced lethargy and joint pain for more than a year after his
treatment.

Figure 22.24 Legionella pneumophila (red intracellular rods) infecting amoebae from a contaminated water
sample. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Blastomycosis
Blastomycosis is a rare disease caused by another dimorphic fungus, Blastomyces dermatitidis. Like Histoplasma
and Coccidioides, Blastomyces uses the soil as a reservoir, and fungal spores can be inhaled from disturbed soil.
The pulmonary form of blastomycosis generally causes mild flu-like symptoms and is self-limiting. It can, however,
become disseminated in immunocompromised people, leading to chronic cutaneous disease with subcutaneous
lesions on the face and hands (Figure 22.25). These skin lesions eventually become crusty and discolored and can
result in deforming scars. Systemic blastomycosis is rare, but if left untreated, it is always fatal.
Preliminary diagnosis of pulmonary blastomycosis can be made by observing the characteristic budding yeast forms
in sputum samples. Commercially available urine antigen tests are now also available. Additional confirmatory
tests include serological assays such as immunodiffusion tests or EIA. Most cases of blastomycosis respond well to
amphotericin B or ketoconazole treatments.

37. HY Lau and NJ Ashbolt. “The Role of Biofilms and Protozoa in Legionella Pathogenesis: Implications for Drinking Water.” Journal of
Applied Microbiology 107 no. 2 (2009):368–378.

994

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.25 (a) These skin lesions are the result of disseminated cutaneous blastomycosis. (b) A differential
interference contrast micrograph of B. dermatitidis yeast cultured on blood agar. (credit a: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Link to Learning
Watch this profile (https://openstax.org/l/22blastlunginf) of a blastomycosis
lung infection.

Mucormycosis
A variety of fungi in the order Mucorales cause mucormycosis, a rare fungal disease. These include bread molds,
like Rhizopus and Mucor; the most commonly associated species is Rhizopus arrhizus (oryzae) (see Figure 5.28).
These fungi can colonize many different tissues in immunocompromised patients, but often infect the skin, sinuses,
or the lungs.
Although most people are regularly exposed to the causative agents of mucormycosis, infections in healthy
individuals are rare. Exposure to spores from the environment typically occurs through inhalation, but the spores can
also infect the skin through a wound or the gastrointestinal tract if ingested. Respiratory mucormycosis primarily
affects immunocompromised individuals, such as patients with cancer or those who have had a transplant. [38]
After the spores are inhaled, the fungi grow by extending hyphae into the host’s tissues. Infections can occur in both
the upper and lower respiratory tracts. Rhinocerebral mucormycosis is an infection of the sinuses and brain; symptoms
include headache, fever, facial swelling, congestion, and tissue necrosis causing black lesions in the oral cavity.
Pulmonary mucormycosis is an infection of the lungs; symptoms include fever, cough, chest pain, and shortness of
38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fungal Diseases. Definition of Mucormycosis.” 2015 http://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/
mucormycosis/definition.html. Accessed July 7, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

995

breath. In severe cases, infections may become disseminated and involve the central nervous system, leading to coma
and death.[39]
Diagnosing mucormycosis can be challenging. Currently, there are no serological or PCR-based tests available to
identify these infections. Tissue biopsy specimens must be examined for the presence of the fungal pathogens. The
causative agents, however, are often difficult to distinguish from other filamentous fungi. Infections are typically
treated by the intravenous administration of amphotericin B, and superficial infections are removed by surgical
debridement. Since the patients are often immunocompromised, viral and bacterial secondary infections commonly
develop. Mortality rates vary depending on the site of the infection, the causative fungus, and other factors, but a
recent study found an overall mortality rate of 54%.[40]

• Compare the modes of transmission for coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, and mucormycosis.
• In general, which are more serious: the pulmonary or disseminated forms of these infections?

Aspergillosis
Aspergillus is a common filamentous fungus found in soils and organic debris. Nearly everyone has been exposed
to this mold, yet very few people become sick. In immunocompromised patients, however, Aspergillus may become
established and cause aspergillosis. Inhalation of spores can lead to asthma-like allergic reactions. The symptoms
commonly include shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing, runny nose, and headaches. Fungal balls, or
aspergilloma, can form when hyphal colonies collect in the lungs (Figure 22.26). The fungal hyphae can invade the
host tissues, leading to pulmonary hemorrhage and a bloody cough. In severe cases, the disease may progress to a
disseminated form that is often fatal. Death most often results from pneumonia or brain hemorrhages.
Laboratory diagnosis typically requires chest radiographs and a microscopic examination of tissue and respiratory
fluid samples. Serological tests are available to identify Aspergillus antigens. In addition, a skin test can be performed
to determine if the patient has been exposed to the fungus. This test is similar to the Mantoux tuberculin skin
test used for tuberculosis. Aspergillosis is treated with intravenous antifungal agents, including itraconazole and
voriconazole. Allergic symptoms can be managed with corticosteroids because these drugs suppress the immune
system and reduce inflammation. However, in disseminated infections, corticosteroids must be discontinued to allow
a protective immune response to occur.

39. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fungal Diseases. Symptoms of Mucormycosis.” 2015 http://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/
mucormycosis/symptoms.html. Accessed July 7, 2016.
40. MM Roden et al. “Epidemiology and Outcome of Zygomycosis: A Review of 929 Reported Cases.” Clinical Infectious Diseases 41 no.
5 (2005):634–653.

996

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Figure 22.26 A fungal ball can be observed in the upper lobe of the right lung in this chest radiograph of a patient
with aspergilloma. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Pneumocystis Pneumonia
A type of pneumonia called Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii. Once thought
to be a protozoan, this organism was formerly named P. carinii but it has been reclassified as a fungus and
renamed based on biochemical and genetic analyses. Pneumocystis is a leading cause of pneumonia in patients with
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and can be seen in other compromised patients and premature infants.
Respiratory infection leads to fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Diagnosis of these infections can be difficult.
The organism is typically identified by microscopic examination of tissue and fluid samples from the lungs (Figure
22.27). A PCR-based test is available to detect P. jirovecii in asymptomatic patients with AIDS. The best treatment
for these infections is the combination drug trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMZ). These sulfa drugs often
have adverse effects, but the benefits outweigh these risks. Left untreated, PCP infections are often fatal.

Figure 22.27 A light micrograph of a smear containing Pneumocystis jirovecii (dark purple cells) obtained from
human lung tissue and stained with toluidine blue. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

997

Cryptococcosis
Infection by the encapsulated yeast Cryptococcus neoformans causes cryptococcosis. This fungus is ubiquitous in the
soil and can be isolated from bird feces. Immunocompromised people are infected by inhaling basidiospores found
in aerosols. The thick polysaccharide capsule surrounding these microbes enables them to avoid clearance by the
alveolar macrophage. Initial symptoms of infection include fever, fatigue, and a dry cough. In immunocompromised
patients, pulmonary infections often disseminate to the brain. The resulting meningitis produces headaches, sensitivity
to light, and confusion. Left untreated, such infections are often fatal.
Cryptococcus infections are often diagnosed based on microscopic examination of lung tissues or cerebrospinal
fluids. India ink preparations (Figure 22.28) can be used to visualize the extensive capsules that surround the
yeast cells. Serological tests are also available to confirm the diagnosis. Amphotericin B, in combination with
flucytosine, is typically used for the initial treatment of pulmonary infections. Amphotericin B is a broad-spectrum
antifungal drug that targets fungal cell membranes. It can also adversely impact host cells and produce side effects.
For this reason, clinicians must carefully balance the risks and benefits of treatments in these patients. Because it
is difficult to eradicate cryptococcal infections, patients usually need to take fluconazole for up to 6 months after
treatment with amphotericin B and flucytosine to clear the fungus. Cryptococcal infections are more common in
immunocompromised people, such as those with AIDS. These patients typically require life-long suppressive therapy
to control this fungal infection.

Figure 22.28 (a) The micrograph shows stained budding Cryptococcus yeast cells from the lungs of a patient with
AIDS. (b) The large capsule of Cryptococcus neoformans is visible in this negative stain micrograph. (credit a, b:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What populations are most at risk for developing Pneumocystis pneumonia or cryptococcosis?
• Why are these infections fatal if left untreated?

998

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Disease Profile
Fungal Diseases of the Respiratory Tract
Most respiratory mycoses are caused by fungi that inhabit the environment. Such infections are generally
transmitted via inhalation of fungal spores and cannot be transmitted between humans. In addition, healthy
people are generally not susceptible to infection even when exposed; the fungi are only virulent enough to
establish infection in patients with HIV, AIDS, or another condition that compromises the immune defenses.
Figure 22.29 summarizes the features of important respiratory mycoses.

Figure 22.29

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

999

Summary
22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract
• The respiratory tract is divided into upper and lower regions at the epiglottis.
• Air enters the upper respiratory tract through the nasal cavity and mouth, which both lead to the pharynx.
The lower respiratory tract extends from the larynx into the trachea before branching into the bronchi, which
divide further to form the bronchioles, which terminate in alveoli, where gas exchange occurs.
• The upper respiratory tract is colonized by an extensive and diverse normal microbiota, many of which are
potential pathogens. Few microbial inhabitants have been found in the lower respiratory tract, and these may
be transients.
• Members of the normal microbiota may cause opportunistic infections, using a variety of strategies to
overcome the innate nonspecific defenses (including the mucociliary escalator) and adaptive specific defenses
of the respiratory system.
• Effective vaccines are available for many common respiratory pathogens, both bacterial and viral.
• Most respiratory infections result in inflammation of the infected tissues; these conditions are given names
ending in -itis, such as rhinitis, sinusitis, otitis, pharyngitis, and bronchitis.
22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract
• A wide variety of bacteria can cause respiratory diseases; most are treatable with antibiotics or preventable
with vaccines.
• Streptococcus pyogenes causes strep throat, an infection of the pharynx that also causes high fever and can
lead to scarlet fever, acute rheumatic fever, and acute glomerulonephritis.
• Acute otitis media is an infection of the middle ear that may be caused by several bacteria, including
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. The infection can block the
eustachian tubes, leading to otitis media with effusion.
• Diphtheria, caused by Corynebacterium diphtheriae, is now a rare disease because of widespread
vaccination. The bacteria produce exotoxins that kill cells in the pharynx, leading to the formation of a
pseudomembrane; and damage other parts of the body.
• Bacterial pneumonia results from infections that cause inflammation and fluid accumulation in the alveoli.
It is most commonly caused by S. pneumoniae or H. influenzae. The former is commonly multidrug resistant.
• Mycoplasma pneumonia results from infection by Mycoplasma pneumoniae; it can spread quickly, but the
disease is mild and self-limiting.
• Chlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three pathogens that are obligate intracellular parasites.
Chlamydophila pneumoniae is typically transmitted from an infected person, whereas C. psittaci is typically
transmitted from an infected bird. Chlamydia trachomatis, may cause pneumonia in infants.
• Several other bacteria can cause pneumonia in immunocompromised individuals and those with cystic
fibrosis.
• Tuberculosis is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infection leads to the production of protective
tubercles in the alveoli and calcified Ghon complexes that can harbor the bacteria for a long time. Antibioticresistant forms are common and treatment is typically long term.
• Pertussis is caused by Bordetella pertussis. Mucus accumulation in the lungs leads to prolonged severe
coughing episodes (whooping cough) that facilitate transmission. Despite an available vaccine, outbreaks are
still common.
• Legionnaires disease is caused by infection from environmental reservoirs of the Legionella pneumophila
bacterium. The bacterium is endocytic within macrophages and infection can lead to pneumonia, particularly
among immunocompromised individuals.
• Q fever is caused by Coxiella burnetii, whose primary hosts are domesticated mammals (zoonotic disease). It
causes pneumonia primarily in farm workers and can lead to serious complications, such as endocarditis.

1000

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
• Viruses cause respiratory tract infections more frequently than bacteria, and most viral infections lead to mild
symptoms.
• The common cold can be caused by more than 200 viruses, typically rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, and
adenoviruses, transmitted by direct contact, aerosols, or environmental surfaces.
• Due to its ability to rapidly mutate through antigenic drift and antigenic shift, influenza remains an
important threat to human health. Two new influenza vaccines are developed annually.
• Several viral infections, including respiratory syncytial virus infections, which frequently occur in the very
young, can begin with mild symptoms before progressing to viral pneumonia.
• SARS and MERS are acute respiratory infections caused by coronaviruses, and both appear to originate in
animals. SARS has not been seen in the human population since 2004 but had a high mortality rate during its
outbreak. MERS also has a high mortality rate and continues to appear in human populations.
• Measles, rubella, and chickenpox are highly contagious, systemic infections that gain entry through the
respiratory system and cause rashes and fevers. Vaccines are available for all three. Measles is the most severe
of the three and is responsible for significant mortality around the world. Chickenpox typically causes mild
infections in children but the virus can reactivate to cause painful cases of shingles later in life.
22.4 Respiratory Mycoses
• Fungal pathogens rarely cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals, but inhalation of fungal spores can
cause severe pneumonia and systemic infections in immunocompromised patients.
• Antifungal drugs like amphotericin B can control most fungal respiratory infections.
• Histoplasmosis is caused by a mold that grows in soil rich in bird or bat droppings. Few exposed individuals
become sick, but vulnerable individuals are susceptible. The yeast-like infectious cells grow inside
phagocytes.
• Coccidioidomycosis is also acquired from soil and, in some individuals, will cause lesions on the face.
Extreme cases may infect other organs, causing death.
• Blastomycosis, a rare disease caused by a soil fungus, typically produces a mild lung infection but can become
disseminated in the immunocompromised. Systemic cases are fatal if untreated.
• Mucormycosis is a rare disease, caused by fungi of the order Mucorales. It primarily affects
immunocompromised people. Infection involves growth of the hyphae into infected tissues and can lead to
death in some cases.
• Aspergillosis, caused by the common soil fungus Aspergillus, infects immunocompromised people. Hyphal
balls may impede lung function and hyphal growth into tissues can cause damage. Disseminated forms can
lead to death.
• Pneumocystis pneumonia is caused by the fungus P. jirovecii. The disease is found in patients with AIDS and
other immunocompromised individuals. Sulfa drug treatments have side effects, but untreated cases may be
fatal.
• Cryptococcosis is caused by Cryptococcus neoformans. Lung infections may move to the brain, causing
meningitis, which can be fatal.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. Which of the following is not directly connected to
the nasopharynx?
a. middle ear
b. oropharynx
c. lacrimal glands
d. nasal cavity

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

2. What type of cells produce the mucus for the mucous
membranes?
a. goblet cells
b. macrophages
c. phagocytes
d. ciliated epithelial cells

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

1001

3. Which of these correctly orders the structures
through which air passes during inhalation?
a. pharynx → trachea → larynx → bronchi
b. pharynx → larynx → trachea → bronchi
c. larynx → pharynx → bronchi → trachea
d. larynx → pharynx → trachea → bronchi

11. Which of the following viruses is not commonly
associated with the common cold?
a. coronavirus
b. adenovirus
c. rhinovirus
d. varicella-zoster virus

4. The ___________ separates the upper and lower
respiratory tract.
a. bronchi
b. larynx
c. epiglottis
d. palatine tonsil

12. Which of the following viral diseases has been
eliminated from the general population worldwide?
a. smallpox
b. measles
c. German measles
d. influenza

5. Which microbial virulence factor is most important
for attachment to host respiratory tissues?
a. adhesins
b. lipopolysaccharide
c. hyaluronidase
d. capsules

13. What term refers to multinucleated cells that form
when many host cells fuse together during infections?
a. Ghon elements
b. Reye syndrome
c. Koplik’s spots
d. syncytia

6. Which of the following does not involve a bacterial
exotoxin?
a. diphtheria
b. whooping cough
c. scarlet fever
d. Q fever

14. Which of the following diseases is not associated
with coronavirus infections?
a. Middle East respiratory syndrome
b. German measles
c. the common cold
d. severe acute respiratory syndrome

7. What disease is caused by Coxiella burnetii?
a. Q fever
b. tuberculosis
c. diphtheria
d. walking pneumonia

15. Which of these viruses is responsible for causing
shingles?
a. rubella virus
b. measles virus
c. varicella-zoster virus
d. variola major virus

8. In which stage of pertussis is the characteristic
whooping sound made?
a. convalescence
b. catarrhal
c. paroxysmal
d. prodromal
9. What is the causative agent of Q fever?
a. Coxiella burnetii
b. Chlamydophila psittaci
c. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
d. Streptococcus pyogenes
10. Which of these microbes causes “walking
pneumonia”?
a. Klebsiella pneumoniae
b. Streptococcus pneumoniae
c. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
d. Chlamydophila pneumoniae

16. Which of these infections is also referred to as
Valley fever?
a. histoplasmosis
b. coccidioidomycosis
c. blastomycosis
d. aspergillosis
17. Which of the following is not caused by a
dimorphic fungus?
a. histoplasmosis
b. coccidioidomycosis
c. blastomycosis
d. aspergillosis
18. Which of the following is caused by infections by
bread molds?
a. mucormycosis
b. coccidioidomycosis
c. cryptococcosis
d. Pneumocystis pneumonia

1002

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

19. In the United States, most histoplasmosis cases
occur
a. in the Pacific northwest.
b. in the desert southwest.
c. in the Mississippi river valley.
d. in Colorado river valley.
20. Which of the following infections can be diagnosed
using a skin test similar to the tuberculin test?
a. histoplasmosis
b. cryptococcosis
c. blastomycosis
d. aspergillosis
Fill in the Blank

21. Unattached microbes are moved from the lungs to the epiglottis by the _______ effect.
22. Many bacterial pathogens produce _______ to evade phagocytosis.
23. The main type of antibody in the mucous membrane defenses is _______.
24. _______ results from an inflammation of the “voice box.”
25. _______ phagocytize potential pathogens in the lower lung.
26. Calcified lesions called _______ form in the lungs of patients with TB.
27. An inflammation of the middle ear is called _______.
28. The _______ is used to serologically identify Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates.
29. _______ is a zoonotic infection that can be contracted by people who handle birds.
30. The main virulence factor involved in scarlet fever is the _______.
31. The _______ virus is responsible for causing German measles.
32. A(n) _______ is an uncontrolled positive feedback loop between cytokines and leucocytes.
33. In cases of shingles, the antiviral drug _______ may be prescribed.
34. The slow accumulation of genetic changes to an influenza virus over time is referred to as _______.
35. The _______ vaccine is effective in controlling both measles and rubella.
36. In coccidioidomycosis, _______ containing many endospores form in the lungs.
37. In cryptococcosis, the main fungal virulence factor is the _______, which helps the pathogen avoid
phagocytosis.
38. In some mycoses, fungal balls called _______ form in the lungs
39. Most US cases of coccidioidomycosis occur in _______.
40. Coccidioidomycosis may develop when Coccidioides immitis _______ are inhaled.
Short Answer

41. Explain why the lower respiratory tract is essentially sterile.
42. Explain why pneumonia is often a life-threatening disease.
43. Name three bacteria that commonly cause pneumonia. Which is the most common cause?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

1003

44. How does smoking make an individual more susceptible to infections?
45. How does the diphtheria pathogen form a pseudomembrane?
46. Since we all have experienced many colds in our lifetime, why are we not resistant to future infections?
47. Which pulmonary fungal infection is most likely to be confused with tuberculosis? How can we discriminate
between these two types of infection?
48. Compare and contrast aspergillosis and mucormycosis.
Critical Thinking

49. Name each of the structures of the respiratory tract shown, and state whether each has a relatively large or small
normal microbiota.

Figure 22.30 (credit: modification of work by National Cancer Institute)

50. Cystic fibrosis causes, among other things, excess mucus to be formed in the lungs. The mucus is very dry and
caked, unlike the moist, more-fluid mucus of normal lungs. What effect do you think that has on the lung’s defenses?
51. Why do you think smokers are more likely to suffer from respiratory tract infections?
52. Why might β-lactam antibiotics be ineffective against Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections?
53. Why is proper antibiotic therapy especially important for patients with tuberculosis?
54. What role does the common cold have in the rise of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria in the United States?
55. Why is it highly unlikely that influenza A virus will ever be eradicated, like the smallpox virus?
56. Why are fungal pulmonary infections rarely transmissible from person to person?

1004

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 22 | Respiratory System Infections

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1005

Chapter 23

Urogenital System Infections

Figure 23.1 Many pathogens that cause infections of the urogenital system can be detected in urine samples (left).
The top sample in the culture (right) was prepared from the urine of a patient with a urinary tract infection. (credit b:
modification of work by Nathan Reading)

Chapter Outline
23.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital Tract
23.2 Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System
23.3 Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive System
23.4 Viral Infections of the Reproductive System
23.5 Fungal Infections of the Reproductive System
23.6 Protozoan Infections of the Urogenital System

Introduction
The urogenital system is a combination of the urinary tract and reproductive system. Because both systems are open
to the external environment, they are prone to infections. Some infections are introduced from outside, whereas others
result from imbalances in the microbiota of the urogenital tract.
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are one the most common bacterial infections worldwide, affecting over 100 million
people each year. During 2007 in the United States, doctor office visits for UTIs exceeded 10 million, and an
additional 2–3 million emergency department visits were attributed to UTIs. Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
also primarily affect the urogenital system and are an important cause of patient morbidity. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that there are approximately 20 million new cases of reportable STIs
annually in the United States, half of which occur in people aged 15–24 years old. When STIs spread to the
reproductive organs, they can be associated with severe morbidity and loss of fertility.
Because males and females have different urogenital anatomy, urogenital infections may affect males and females
differently. In this chapter, we will discuss the various microbes that cause urogenital disease and the factors that
contribute to their pathogenicity.

1006

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

23.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital
Tract
Learning Objectives
• Compare the anatomy, function, and normal microbiota associated with the male and female urogenital systems
• Explain how microorganisms, in general, overcome the defenses of the urogenital system to cause infection
• Name, describe, and differentiate between general signs and symptoms associated with infections of the

urogenital tract
The urinary system filters blood, excretes wastes, and maintains an appropriate electrolyte and water balance. The
reproductive system is responsible for the production of gametes and participates in conception and, in females,
development of offspring. Due to their proximity and overlap, these systems are often studied together and referred
to as the urogenital system (or genitourinary system).

Anatomy of the Urinary Tract
The basic structures of the urinary tract are common in males and females. However, there are unique locations for
these structures in females and males, and there is a significant amount of overlap between the urinary and genital
structures in males. Figure 23.2 illustrates the urinary anatomy common to females and males.
The kidneys carry out the urinary system’s primary functions of filtering the blood and maintaining water and
electrolyte balance. The kidneys are composed of millions of filtration units called nephrons. Each nephron is in
intimate contact with blood through a specialized capillary bed called the glomerulus (plural glomeruli). Fluids,
electrolytes, and molecules from the blood pass from the glomerulus into the nephron, creating the filtrate that
becomes urine (Figure 23.3). Urine that collects in each kidney empties through a ureter and drains to the urinary
bladder, which stores urine. Urine is released from the bladder to the urethra, which transports it to be excreted from
the body through the urinary meatus, the opening of the urethra.

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Nadia is a newly married 26-year-old graduate student in economics. Recently she has been experiencing an
unusual vaginal discharge, as well as some itching and discomfort. Since she is due for her annual physical
exam, she makes an appointment with her doctor hoping that her symptoms can be quickly treated. However,
she worries that she may have some sort of sexually transmitted infection (STI). Although she is now in a
monogamous relationship, she is not fully certain of her spouse’s sexual history and she is reluctant to ask him
about it.
At her checkup, Nadia describes her symptoms to her primary care physician and, somewhat awkwardly,
explains why she thinks she might have an STI. Nadia’s doctor reassures her that she regularly sees patients
with similar concerns and encourages her to be fully transparent about her symptoms because some STIs
can have serious complications if left untreated. After some further questioning, the doctor takes samples of
Nadia’s blood, urine, and vaginal discharge to be sent to the lab for testing.

• What are some possible causes of Nadia’s symptoms?
• Why does the doctor take so many different samples?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1007

Figure 23.2 These structures of the human urinary system are present in both males and females.

Figure 23.3 The kidney contains several lobes, each of which contains millions of nephrons. The nephron is the
functional unit of the kidney, filtering the blood and removing water and dissolved compounds. The filtrate first enters
the glomerulus and then enters the proximal convoluted tubule. As it passes through the tubule, the filtrate is further
modified by osmosis and active transport until it reaches the larger ducts as urine.

Anatomy of the Reproductive System
The male reproductive system (Figure 23.4) is located in close proximity to the urinary system, and the urethra is
part of both systems. The testes are responsible for the production of sperm. The epididymis is a coiled tube that
collects sperm from the testes and passes it on to the vas deferens. The epididymis is also the site of sperm maturation
after they leave the testes. The seminal vesicles and prostate are accessory glands that produce fluid that supports
sperm. During ejaculation, the vas deferens releases this mixture of fluid and sperm, called semen, into the urethra,
which extends to the end of the penis.
The female reproductive system is located near the urinary system (Figure 23.4). The external genitalia (vulva)
in females open to the vagina, a muscular passageway that connects to the cervix. The cervix is the lower part of

1008

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

the uterus (the organ where a fertilized egg will implant and develop). The cervix is a common site of infection,
especially for viruses that may lead to cervical cancer. The uterus leads to the fallopian tubes and eventually to the
ovaries. Ovaries are the site of ova (egg) production, as well as the site of estrogen and progesterone production
that are involved in maturation and maintenance of reproductive organs, preparation of the uterus for pregnancy, and
regulation of the menstrual cycle.

Figure 23.4 The female reproductive system is located in close proximity to the urinary system. In males, the
urethra is shared by the reproductive and urinary systems.

• What are the major structures of the urinary system, starting where urine is formed?
• What structure in males is shared by the reproductive and the urinary systems?

Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital System
The normal microbiota of different body sites provides an important nonspecific defense against infectious diseases
(see Physical Defenses), and the urogenital tract is no exception. In both men and women, however, the kidneys
are sterile. Although urine does contain some antibacterial components, bacteria will grow in urine left out at room
temperature. Therefore, it is primarily the flushing action that keeps the ureters and bladder free of microbes.
Below the bladder, the normal microbiota of the male urogenital system is found primarily within the distal urethra
and includes bacterial species that are commonly associated with the skin microbiota. In women, the normal
microbiota is found within the distal one third of the urethra and the vagina. The normal microbiota of the vagina
becomes established shortly after birth and is a complex and dynamic population of bacteria that fluctuates in
response to environmental changes. Members of the vaginal microbiota play an important role in the nonspecific
defense against vaginal infections and sexually transmitted infections by occupying cellular binding sites and
competing for nutrients. In addition, the production of lactic acid by members of the microbiota provides an acidic
environment within the vagina that also serves as a defense against infections. For the majority of women, the
lactic-acid–producing bacteria in the vagina are dominated by a variety of species of Lactobacillus. For women
who lack sufficient lactobacilli in their vagina, lactic acid production comes primarily from other species of bacteria
such as Leptotrichia spp., Megasphaera spp., and Atopobium vaginae. Lactobacillus spp. use glycogen from vaginal
epithelial cells for metabolism and production of lactic acid. This process is tightly regulated by the hormone
estrogen. Increased levels of estrogen correlate with increased levels of vaginal glycogen, increased production of
lactic acid, and a lower vaginal pH. Therefore, decreases in estrogen during the menstrual cycle and with menopause

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1009

are associated with decreased levels of vaginal glycogen and lactic acid, and a higher pH. In addition to producing
lactic acid, Lactobacillus spp. also contribute to the defenses against infectious disease through their production of
hydrogen peroxide and bacteriocins (antibacterial peptides).

• What factors affect the microbiota of the female reproductive tract?

General Signs and Symptoms of Urogenital Infections
Infections of the urinary tract most commonly cause inflammation of the bladder (cystitis) or of the urethra
(urethritis). Urethritis can be associated with cystitis, but can also be caused by sexually transmitted infections.
Symptoms of urethritis in men include burning sensation while urinating, discharge from the penis, and blood in the
semen or the urine. In women, urethritis is associated with painful and frequent urination, vaginal discharge, fever,
chills, and abdominal pain. The symptoms of cystitis are similar to those of urethritis. When urethritis is caused by
a sexually transmitted pathogen, additional symptoms involving the genitalia can occur. These can include painful
vesicles (blisters), warts, and ulcers. Ureteritis, a rare infection of the ureter, can also occur with cystitis. These
infections can be acute or chronic.
Pyelonephritis and glomerulonephritis are infections of the kidney that are potentially serious. Pyelonephritis is an
infection of one or both of the kidneys and may develop from a lower urinary tract infection; the upper urinary tract,
including the ureters, is often affected. Signs and symptoms of pyelonephritis include fever, chills, nausea, vomiting,
lower back pain, and frequent painful urination. Pyelonephritis usually only becomes chronic in individuals who have
malformations in or damage to the kidneys.
Glomerulonephritis is an inflammation of the glomeruli of the nephrons. Symptoms include excessive protein
and blood in urine, increased blood pressure, and fluid retention leading to edema of face, hands, and feet.
Glomerulonephritis may be an acute infection or it can become chronic.
Infections occurring within the reproductive structures of males include epididymitis, orchitis, and prostatitis.
Bacterial infections may cause inflammation of the epididymis, called epididymitis. This inflammation causes pain in
the scrotum, testicles, and groin; swelling, redness, and warm skin in these areas may also be observed. Inflammation
of the testicle, called orchitis, is usually caused by a bacterial infection spreading from the epididymis, but it can
also be a complication of mumps, a viral disease. The symptoms are similar to those of epididymitis, and it is not
uncommon for them both to occur together, in which case the condition is called epididymo-orchitis. Inflammation
of the prostate gland, called prostatitis, can result from a bacterial infection. The signs and symptoms of prostatitis
include fever, chills, and pain in the bladder, testicles, and penis. Patients may also experience burning during
urination, difficulty emptying the bladder, and painful ejaculation.
Because of its proximity to the exterior, the vagina is a common site for infections in women. The general term for any
inflammation of the vagina is vaginitis. Vaginitis often develops as a result of an overgrowth of bacteria or fungi that
normally reside in the vaginal microbiota, although it can also result from infections by transient pathogens. Bacterial
infections of the vagina are called bacterial vaginosis, whereas fungal infections (typically involving Candida spp.)
are called yeast infections. Dynamic changes affecting the normal microbiota, acid production, and pH variations can
be involved in the initiation of the microbial overgrowth and the development of vaginitis. Although some individuals
may have no symptoms, vaginosis and vaginitis can be associated with discharge, odor, itching, and burning.
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection of the female reproductive organs including the uterus, cervix,
fallopian tubes, and ovaries. The two most common pathogens are the sexually transmitted bacterial pathogens
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis. Inflammation of the fallopian tubes, called salpingitis, is the
most serious form of PID. Symptoms of PID can vary between women and include pain in the lower abdomen, vaginal
discharge, fever, chills, nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, and painful urination.

1010

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

• What conditions can result from infections affecting the urinary system?
• What are some common causes of vaginitis in women?

General Causes and Modes of Transmission of Urogenital Infections
Hormonal changes, particularly shifts in estrogen in women due to pregnancy or menopause, can increase
susceptibility to urogenital infections. As discussed earlier, estrogen plays an important role in regulating the
availability of glycogen and subsequent production of lactic acid by Lactobacillus species. Low levels of estrogen are
associated with an increased vaginal pH and an increased risk of bacterial vaginosis and yeast infections. Estrogen
also plays a role in maintaining the elasticity, strength, and thickness of the vaginal wall, and keeps the vaginal wall
lubricated, reducing dryness. Low levels of estrogen are associated with thinning of the vaginal wall. This thinning
increases the risk of tears and abrasions, which compromise the protective barrier and increase susceptibility to
pathogens.
Another common cause of urogenital infections in females is fecal contamination that occurs because of the close
proximity of the anus and the urethra. Escherichia coli, an important member of the digestive tract microbiota, is the
most common cause of urinary tract infections (urethritis and cystitis) in women; it generally causes infection when it
is introduced to the urethra in fecal matter. Good hygiene can reduce the risk of urinary tract infections by this route.
In men, urinary tract infections are more commonly associated with other conditions, such as an enlarged prostate,
kidney stones, or placement of a urinary catheter. All of these conditions impair the normal emptying of the bladder,
which serves to flush out microbes capable of causing infection.
Infections that are transmitted between individuals through sexual contact are called sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). (The CDC prefers the term STD, but WHO prefers STI,[1] which
encompasses infections that result in disease as well as those that are subclinical or asymptomatic.) STIs often affect
the external genitalia and skin, where microbes are easily transferred through physical contact. Lymph nodes in
the genital region may also become swollen as a result of infection. However, many STIs have systemic effects
as well, causing symptoms that range from mild (e.g., general malaise) to severe (e.g., liver damage or serious
immunosuppression).

• What role does Lactobacillus play in the health of the female reproductive system?
• Why do urinary tract infections have different causes in males and females?

23.2 Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that can cause urinary tract infections
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the urinary tract

1. World Health Organization. “Guidelines for the Management of Sexually Transmitted Infections.” World Health Organization, 2003.
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/sti/en/STIGuidelines2003.pdf.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1011

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) include infections of the urethra, bladder, and kidneys, and are common causes of
urethritis, cystitis, pyelonephritis, and glomerulonephritis. Bacteria are the most common causes of UTIs, especially
in the urethra and bladder.

Cystitis
Cystitis is most often caused by a bacterial infection of the bladder, but it can also occur as a reaction to certain
treatments or irritants such as radiation treatment, hygiene sprays, or spermicides. Common symptoms of cystitis
include dysuria (urination accompanied by burning, discomfort, or pain), pyuria (pus in the urine), hematuria
(blood in the urine), and bladder pain.
In women, bladder infections are more common because the urethra is short and located in close proximity to the
anus, which can result in infections of the urinary tract by fecal bacteria. Bladder infections are also more common in
the elderly because the bladder may not empty fully, causing urine to pool; the elderly may also have weaker immune
systems that make them more vulnerable to infection. Conditions such as prostatitis in men or kidney stones in both
men and women can impact proper drainage of urine and increase risk of bladder infections. Catheterization can also
increase the risk of bladder infection (see Case in Point: Cystitis in the Elderly).
Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli (most commonly), Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
and Klebsiella pneumoniae cause most bladder infections. Gram-positive pathogens associated with cystitis include
the coagulase-negative Staphylococcus saprophyticus, Enterococcus faecalis, and Streptococcus agalactiae. Routine
manual urinalysis using a urine dipstick or test strip can be used for rapid screening of infection. These test strips
(Figure 23.5) are either held in a urine stream or dipped in a sample of urine to test for the presence of nitrites,
leukocyte esterase, protein, or blood that can indicate an active bacterial infection. The presence of nitrite may
indicate the presence of E. coli or K. pneumonia; these bacteria produce nitrate reductase, which converts nitrate to
nitrite. The leukocyte esterase (LE) test detects the presence of neutrophils as an indication of active infection.
Low specificity, sensitivity, or both, associated with these rapid screening tests require that care be taken in
interpretation of results and in their use in diagnosis of urinary tract infections. Therefore, positive LE or nitrite results
are followed by a urine culture to confirm a bladder infection. Urine culture is generally accomplished using blood
agar and MacConkey agar, and it is important to culture a clean catch of urine to minimize contamination with normal
microbiota of the penis and vagina. A clean catch of urine is accomplished by first washing the labia and urethral
opening of female patients or the penis of male patients. The patient then releases a small amount of urine into the
toilet bowl before stopping the flow of urine. Finally, the patient resumes urination, this time filling the container used
to collect the specimen.
Bacterial cystitis is commonly treated with fluoroquinolones, nitrofurantoin, cephalosporins, or a combination of
trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole. Pain medications may provide relief for patients with dysuria. Treatment is more
difficult in elderly patients, who experience a higher rate of complications such as sepsis and kidney infections.

1012

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Figure 23.5 A urine dipstick is compared against a color key to determine levels of various chemicals, proteins, or
cells in the urine. Abnormal levels may indicate an infection. (credit: modification of work by Suzanne Wakim)

Case in Point
Cystitis in the Elderly
Robert, an 81-year-old widower with early onset Alzheimer’s, was recently moved to a nursing home because
he was having difficulty living on his own. Within a few weeks of his arrival, he developed a fever and began
to experience pain associated with urination. He also began having episodes of confusion and delirium. The
doctor assigned to examine Robert read his file and noticed that Robert was treated for prostatitis several years
earlier. When he asked Robert how often he had been urinating, Robert explained that he had been trying not
to drink too much so that he didn’t have to walk to the restroom.
All of this evidence suggests that Robert likely has a urinary tract infection. Robert’s age means that his
immune system has probably begun to weaken, and his previous prostate condition may be making it difficult
for him to empty his bladder. In addition, Robert’s avoidance of fluids has led to dehydration and infrequent
urination, which may have allowed an infection to establish itself in his urinary tract. The fever and dysuria are
common signs of a UTI in patients of all ages, and UTIs in elderly patients are often accompanied by a notable
decline in mental function.
Physical challenges often discourage elderly individuals from urinating as frequently as they would otherwise.
In addition, neurological conditions that disproportionately affect the elderly (e.g., Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
disease) may also reduce their ability to empty their bladders. Robert’s doctor noted that he was having
difficulty navigating his new home and recommended that he be given more assistance and that his fluid intake
be monitored. The doctor also took a urine sample and ordered a laboratory culture to confirm the identity of
the causative agent.

• Why is it important to identify the causative agent in a UTI?
• Should the doctor prescribe a broad-spectrum or narrow-spectrum antibiotic to treat Robert’s UTI?
Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1013

Kidney Infections (Pyelonephritis and Glomerulonephritis)
Pyelonephritis, an inflammation of the kidney, can be caused by bacteria that have spread from other parts of the
urinary tract (such as the bladder). In addition, pyelonephritis can develop from bacteria that travel through the
bloodstream to the kidney. When the infection spreads from the lower urinary tract, the causative agents are typically
fecal bacteria such as E. coli. Common signs and symptoms include back pain (due to the location of the kidneys),
fever, and nausea or vomiting. Gross hematuria (visible blood in the urine) occurs in 30–40% of women but is rare
in men.[2] The infection can become serious, potentially leading to bacteremia and systemic effects that can become
life-threatening. Scarring of the kidney can occur and persist after the infection has cleared, which may lead to
dysfunction.
Diagnosis of pyelonephritis is made using microscopic examination of urine, culture of urine, testing for leukocyte
esterase and nitrite levels, and examination of the urine for blood or protein. It is also important to use blood cultures
to evaluate the spread of the pathogen into the bloodstream. Imaging of the kidneys may be performed in highrisk patients with diabetes or immunosuppression, the elderly, patients with previous renal damage, or to rule out
an obstruction in the kidney. Pyelonephritis can be treated with either oral or intravenous antibiotics, including
penicillins, cephalosporins, vancomycin, fluoroquinolones, carbapenems, and aminoglycosides.
Glomerulonephritis occurs when the glomeruli of the nephrons are damaged from inflammation. Whereas
pyelonephritis is usually acute, glomerulonephritis may be acute or chronic. The most well-characterized mechanism
of glomerulonephritis is the post-streptococcal sequelae associated with Streptococcus pyogenes throat and skin
infections. Although S. pyogenes does not directly infect the glomeruli of the kidney, immune complexes that
form in blood between S. pyogenes antigens and antibodies lodge in the capillary endothelial cell junctions of
the glomeruli and trigger a damaging inflammatory response. Glomerulonephritis can also occur in patients with
bacterial endocarditis (infection and inflammation of heart tissue); however, it is currently unknown whether
glomerulonephritis associated with endocarditis is also immune-mediated.

Leptospirosis
Leptospira are generally harmless spirochetes that are commonly found in the soil. However, some pathogenic species
can cause an infection called leptospirosis in the kidneys and other organs (Figure 23.6). Leptospirosis can produce
fever, headache, chills, vomiting, diarrhea, and rash with severe muscular pain. If the disease continues to progress,
infection of the kidney, meninges, or liver may occur and may lead to organ failure or meningitis. When the kidney
and liver become seriously infected, it is called Weil’s disease. Pulmonary hemorrhagic syndrome can also develop
in the lungs, and jaundice may occur.
Leptospira spp. are found widely in animals such as dogs, horses, cattle, pigs, and rodents, and are excreted in
their urine. Humans generally become infected by coming in contact with contaminated soil or water, often while
swimming or during flooding; infection can also occur through contact with body fluids containing the bacteria.
The bacteria may enter the body through mucous membranes, skin injuries, or by ingestion. The mechanism of
pathogenicity is not well understood.
Leptospirosis is extremely rare in the United States, although it is endemic in Hawaii; 50% of all cases in the
United States come from Hawaii.[3] It is more common in tropical than in temperate climates, and individuals
who work with animals or animal products are most at risk. The bacteria can also be cultivated in specialized
media, with growth observed in broth in a few days to four weeks; however, diagnosis of leptospirosis is generally
made using faster methods, such as detection of antibodies to Leptospira spp. in patient samples using serologic
testing. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), slide agglutination, and
indirect immunofluorescence tests may all be used for diagnosis. Treatment for leptospirosis involves broad-spectrum
antibiotics such as penicillin and doxycycline. For more serious cases of leptospirosis, antibiotics may be given
intravenously.

2. Tibor Fulop. “Acute Pyelonephritis” Medscape, 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/245559-overview.
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Leptospirosis.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/leptospirosis/health_care_workers.

1014

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Figure 23.6 (a) Dark field view of Leptospira sp. (b) A scanning electron micrograph of Leptospira interrogans, a
pathogenic species, shows the distinctive spirochete morphology of this genus. (credit b: modification of work by
Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What is the most common cause of a kidney infection?
• What are the most common symptoms of a kidney infection?

Nongonococcal Urethritis (NGU)
There are two main categories of bacterial urethritis: gonorrheal and nongonococcal. Gonorrheal urethritis is caused
by Neisseria gonorrhoeae and is associated with gonorrhea, a common STI. This cause of urethritis will be discussed
in Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive System. The term nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) refers to
inflammation of the urethra that is unrelated to N. gonorrhoeae. In women, NGU is often asymptomatic. In men,
NGU is typically a mild disease, but can lead to purulent discharge and dysuria. Because the symptoms are often
mild or nonexistent, most infected individuals do not know that they are infected, yet they are carriers of the disease.
Asymptomatic patients also have no reason to seek treatment, and although not common, untreated NGU can spread
to the reproductive organs, causing pelvic inflammatory disease and salpingitis in women and epididymitis and
prostatitis in men. Important bacterial pathogens that cause nongonococcal urethritis include Chlamydia trachomatis,
Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and Mycoplasma hominis.
C. trachomatis is a difficult-to-stain, gram-negative bacterium with an ovoid shape. An intracellular pathogen, C.
trachomatis causes the most frequently reported STI in the United States, chlamydia. Although most persons infected
with C. trachomatis are asymptomatic, some patients can present with NGU. C. trachomatis can also cause nonurogenital infections such as the ocular disease trachoma (see Bacterial Infections of the Skin and Eyes). The
life cycle of C. trachomatis is illustrated in Figure 4.5.
C. trachomatis has multiple possible virulence factors that are currently being studied to evaluate their roles in causing
disease. These include polymorphic outer-membrane autotransporter proteins, stress response proteins, and type III
secretion effectors. The type III secretion effectors have been identified in gram-negative pathogens, including C.
trachomatis. This virulence factor is an assembly of more than 20 proteins that form what is called an injectisome for
the transfer of other effector proteins that target the infected host cells. The outer-membrane autotransporter proteins

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1015

are also an effective mechanism of delivering virulence factors involved in colonization, disease progression, and
immune system evasion.
Other species associated with NGU include Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and Mycoplasma
hominis. These bacteria are commonly found in the normal microbiota of healthy individuals, who may acquire them
during birth or through sexual contact, but they can sometimes cause infections leading to urethritis (in males and
females) or vaginitis and cervicitis (in females).
M. genitalium is a more common cause of urethritis in most settings than N. gonorrhoeae, although it is less
common than C. trachomatis. It is responsible for approximately 30% of recurrent or persistent infections, 20–25% of
nonchlamydial NGU cases, and 15%–20% of NGU cases. M. genitalium attaches to epithelial cells and has substantial
antigenic variation that helps it evade host immune responses. It has lipid-associated membrane proteins that are
involved in causing inflammation.
Several possible virulence factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of U. urealyticum (Figure 23.7). These
include the ureaplasma proteins phospholipase A, phospholipase C, multiple banded antigen (MBA), urease, and
immunoglobulin α protease. The phospholipases are virulence factors that damage the cytoplasmic membrane of
target cells. The immunoglobulin α protease is an important defense against antibodies. It can generate hydrogen
peroxide, which may adversely affect host cell membranes through the production of reactive oxygen species.
Treatments differ for gonorrheal and nongonococcal urethritis. However, N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are
often simultaneously present, which is an important consideration for treatment. NGU is most commonly treated
using tetracyclines (such as doxycycline) and azithromycin; erythromycin is an alternative option. Tetracyclines and
fluoroquinolones are most commonly used to treat U. urealyticum, but resistance to tetracyclines is becoming an
increasing problem.[4] While tetracyclines have been the treatment of choice for M. hominis, increasing resistance
means that other options must be used. Clindamycin and fluoroquinolones are alternatives. M. genitalium is generally
susceptible to doxycycline, azithromycin, and moxifloxacin. Like other mycoplasma, M. genitalium does not have a
cell wall and therefore β-lactams (including penicillins and cephalosporins) are not effective treatments.

Figure 23.7 Ureaplasma urealyticum microcolonies (white arrows) on agar surface after anaerobic incubation,
visualized using phase contrast microscopy (800×). The black arrow indicates cellular debris. (credit: modification of
work by American Society for Microbiology)

• What are the three most common causes of urethritis?
• What three members of the normal microbiota can cause urethritis?

4. Ken B Waites. “Ureaplasma Infection Medication.” Medscape, 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/231470-medication.

1016

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Disease Profile
Bacterial Infections of the Urinary Tract
Urinary tract infections can cause inflammation of the urethra (urethritis), bladder (cystitis), and kidneys
(pyelonephritis), and can sometimes spread to other body systems through the bloodstream. Figure 23.8
captures the most important features of various types of UTIs.

Figure 23.8

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1017

23.3 Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive System
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common bacterial pathogens that can cause infections of the reproductive system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the reproductive system

In addition to infections of the urinary tract, bacteria commonly infect the reproductive tract. As with the urinary tract,
parts of the reproductive system closest to the external environment are the most likely sites of infection. Often, the
same microbes are capable of causing urinary tract and reproductive tract infections.

Bacterial Vaginitis and Vaginosis
Inflammation of the vagina is called vaginitis, often caused by a bacterial infection. It is also possible to have an
imbalance in the normal vaginal microbiota without inflammation called bacterial vaginosis (BV). Vaginosis may
be asymptomatic or may cause mild symptoms such as a thin, white-to-yellow, homogeneous vaginal discharge,
burning, odor, and itching. The major causative agent is Gardnerella vaginalis, a gram-variable to gram-negative
pleomorphic bacterium. Other causative agents include anaerobic species such as members of the genera Bacteroides
and Fusobacterium. Additionally, ureaplasma and mycoplasma may be involved. The disease is usually self-limiting,
although antibiotic treatment is recommended if symptoms develop.
G. vaginalis appears to be more virulent than other vaginal bacterial species potentially associated with BV. Like
Lactobacillus spp., G. vaginalis is part of the normal vaginal microbiota, but when the population of Lactobacillus
spp. decreases and the vaginal pH increases, G. vaginalis flourishes, causing vaginosis by attaching to vaginal
epithelial cells and forming a thick protective biofilm. G. vaginalis also produces a cytotoxin called vaginolysin that
lyses vaginal epithelial cells and red blood cells.
Since G. vaginalis can also be isolated from healthy women, the “gold standard” for the diagnosis of BV is direct
examination of vaginal secretions and not the culture of G. vaginalis. Diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis from vaginal
secretions can be accurately made in three ways. The first is to use a DNA probe. The second method is to assay
for sialidase activity (sialidase is an enzyme produced by G. vaginalis and other bacteria associated with vaginosis,
including Bacteroides spp., Prevotella spp., and Mobiluncus spp.). The third method is to assess gram-stained vaginal
smears for microscopic morphology and relative numbers and types of bacteria, squamous epithelial cells, and
leukocytes. By examining slides prepared from vaginal swabs, it is possible to distinguish lactobacilli (long, grampositive rods) from other gram-negative species responsible for BV. A shift in predominance from gram-positive
bacilli to gram-negative coccobacilli can indicate BV. Additionally, the slide may contain so-called clue cells, which
are epithelial cells that appear to have a granular or stippled appearance due to bacterial cells attached to their surface
(Figure 23.9). Presumptive diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis can involve an assessment of clinical symptoms and
evaluation of vaginal fluids using Amsel’s diagnostic criteria which include 3 out of 4 of the following characteristics:
1. white to yellow discharge;
2. a fishy odor, most noticeable when 10% KOH is added;
3. pH greater than 4.5;
4. the presence of clue cells.

Treatment is often unnecessary because the infection often clears on its own. However, in some cases, antibiotics such
as topical or oral clindamycin or metronidazole may be prescribed. Alternative treatments include oral tinidazole or
clindamycin ovules (vaginal suppositories).

1018

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Figure 23.9 In this vaginal smear, the cell at the lower left is a clue cell with a unique appearance caused by the
presence of bacteria on the cell. The cell on the right is a normal cell.

• Explain the difference between vaginosis and vaginitis.
• What organisms are responsible for vaginosis and what organisms typically hold it at bay?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
There is no catch-all test for STIs, so several tests, in addition to a physical exam, are necessary to diagnose
an infection. Nadia tries to relax in the exam room while she waits for the doctor to return, but she is nervous
about the results.
When the doctor finally returns, she has some unexpected news: Nadia is pregnant. Surprised and excited,
Nadia wants to know if the pregnancy explains her unusual symptoms. The doctor explains that the irritation
that Nadia is experiencing is vaginitis, which can be caused by several types of microorganisms. One
possibility is bacterial vaginosis, which develops when there is an imbalance in the bacteria in the vagina, as
often occurs during pregnancy. Vaginosis can increase the risk of preterm birth and low birth weight, and a
few studies have also shown that it can cause second-trimester miscarriage; however, the condition can be
treated. To check for it, the doctor has asked the lab to perform a Gram stain on Nadia’s sample.

• What result would you expect from the Gram stain if Nadia has bacterial vaginosis?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1019

• What is the relationship between pregnancy, estrogen levels, and development of bacterial vaginosis?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Gonorrhea
Also known as the clap, gonorrhea is a common sexually transmitted disease of the reproductive system that is
especially prevalent in individuals between the ages of 15 and 24. It is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae, often
called gonococcus or GC, which have fimbriae that allow the cells to attach to epithelial cells. It also has a type
of lipopolysaccharide endotoxin called lipooligosaccharide as part of the outer membrane structure that enhances
its pathogenicity. In addition to causing urethritis, N. gonorrhoeae can infect other body tissues such as the skin,
meninges, pharynx, and conjunctiva.
Many infected individuals (both men and women) are asymptomatic carriers of gonorrhea. When symptoms do occur,
they manifest differently in males and females. Males may develop pain and burning during urination and discharge
from the penis that may be yellow, green, or white (Figure 23.10). Less commonly, the testicles may become
swollen or tender. Over time, these symptoms can increase and spread. In some cases, chronic infection develops. The
disease can also develop in the rectum, causing symptoms such as discharge, soreness, bleeding, itching, and pain
(especially in association with bowel movements).

Figure 23.10 (a) Clinical photograph of gonococcal discharge from penis. The lesions on the skin could indicate coinfection with another STI. (b) Purulent discharge originating from the cervix and accumulating in the vagina of a
patient with gonorrhea. (c) A micrograph of urethral discharge shows gram-negative diplococci (paired cells) both
inside and outside the leukocytes (large cells with lobed nuclei). These results could be used to diagnose gonorrhea
in a male patient, but female vaginal samples may contain other Neisseria spp. even if the patient is not infected with
N. gonorrhoeae. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c:
modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

Women may develop pelvic pain, discharge from the vagina, intermenstrual bleeding (i.e., bleeding not associated
with normal menstruation), and pain or irritation associated with urination. As with men, the infection can become
chronic. In women, however, chronic infection can cause increases in menstrual flow. Rectal infection can also occur,
with the symptoms previously described for men. Infections that spread to the endometrium and fallopian tubes
can cause pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), characterized by pain in the lower abdominal region, dysuria, vaginal

1020

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

discharge, and fever. PID can also lead to infertility through scarring and blockage of the fallopian tubes (salpingitis);
it may also increase the risk of a life-threatening ectopic pregnancy, which occurs when a fertilized egg begins
developing somewhere other than the uterus (e.g., in the fallopian tube or ovary).
When a gonorrhea infection disseminates throughout the body, serious complications can develop. The infection
may spread through the blood (bacteremia) and affect organs throughout the body, including the heart (gonorrheal
endocarditis), joints (gonorrheal arthritis), and meninges encasing the brain (meningitis).
Urethritis caused by N. gonorrhoeae can be difficult to treat due to antibiotic resistance (see Micro Connections).
Some strains have developed resistance to the fluoroquinolones, so cephalosporins are often a first choice for
treatment. Because co-infection with C. trachomatis is common, the CDC recommends treating with a combination
regimen of ceftriaxone and azithromycin. Treatment of sexual partners is also recommended to avoid reinfection and
spread of infection to others.[5]

• What are some of the serious consequences of a gonorrhea infection?
• What organism commonly coinfects with N. gonorrhoeae?

Micro Connections
Antibiotic Resistance in Neisseria
Antibiotic resistance in many pathogens is steadily increasing, causing serious concern throughout the public
health community. Increased resistance has been especially notable in some species, such as Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. The CDC monitors the spread of antibiotic resistance in N. gonorrhoeae, which it classifies as
an urgent threat, and makes recommendations for treatment. So far, N. gonorrhoeae has shown resistance to
cefixime (a cephalosporin), ceftriaxone (another cephalosporin), azithromycin, and tetracycline. Resistance to
tetracycline is the most common, and was seen in 188,600 cases of gonorrhea in 2011 (out of a total 820,000
cases). In 2011, some 246,000 cases of gonorrhea involved strains of N. gonorrhoeae that were resistant
to at least one antibiotic.[6] These resistance genes are spread by plasmids, and a single bacterium may be
resistant to multiple antibiotics. The CDC currently recommends treatment with two medications, ceftriaxone
and azithromycin, to attempt to slow the spread of resistance. If resistance to cephalosporins increases, it will
be extremely difficult to control the spread of N. gonorrhoeae.

Chlamydia
Chlamydia trachomatis is the causative agent of the STI chlamydia (Figure 23.11). While many Chlamydia
infections are asymptomatic, chlamydia is a major cause of nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) and may also cause
epididymitis and orchitis in men. In women, chlamydia infections can cause urethritis, salpingitis, and PID. In
addition, chlamydial infections may be associated with an increased risk of cervical cancer.
Because chlamydia is widespread, often asymptomatic, and has the potential to cause substantial complications,
routine screening is recommended for sexually active women who are under age 25, at high risk (i.e., not in a
monogamous relationship), or beginning prenatal care.

5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines: Gonococcal Infections,” 2015.
http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/gonorrhea.htm.
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States, 2013,” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/
drugresistance/pdf/ar-threats-2013-508.pdf.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1021

Certain serovars of C. trachomatis can cause an infection of the lymphatic system in the groin known as
lymphogranuloma venereum. This condition is commonly found in tropical regions and can also co-occur in
conjunction with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. After the microbes invade the lymphatic system,
buboes (large lymph nodes, see Figure 23.11) form and can burst, releasing pus through the skin. The male genitals
can become greatly enlarged and in women the rectum may become narrow.
Urogenital infections caused by C. trachomatis can be treated using azithromycin or doxycycline (the recommended
regimen from the CDC). Erythromycin, levofloxacin, and ofloxacin are alternatives.

Figure 23.11 (a) Chlamydia trachomatis inclusion bodies within McCoy cell monolayers. Inclusion bodies are
distinguished by their brown color. (b) Lymphogranuloma venereum infection can cause swollen lymph nodes in the
groin called buboes. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b:
modification of work by Herbert L. Fred and Hendrik A. van Dijk)

• Compare the signs and symptoms of chlamydia infection in men and women.

Syphilis
Syphilis is spread through direct physical (generally sexual) contact, and is caused by the gram-negative spirochete
Treponema pallidum. T. pallidum has a relatively simple genome and lacks lipopolysaccharide endotoxin
characteristic of gram-negative bacteria. However, it does contain lipoproteins that trigger an immune response in the
host, causing tissue damage that may enhance the pathogen’s ability to disseminate while evading the host immune
system.
After entering the body, T. pallidum moves rapidly into the bloodstream and other tissues. If not treated effectively,
syphilis progresses through three distinct stages: primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary syphilis appears as a single
lesion on the cervix, penis, or anus within 10 to 90 days of transmission. Such lesions contain many T. pallidum cells
and are highly infectious. The lesion, called a hard chancre, is initially hard and painless, but it soon develops into
an ulcerated sore (Figure 23.12). Localized lymph node swelling may occur as well. In some cases, these symptoms
may be relatively mild, and the lesion may heal on its own within two to six weeks. Because the lesions are painless
and often occur in hidden locations (e.g., the cervix or anus), infected individuals sometimes do not notice them.
The secondary stage generally develops once the primary chancre has healed or begun to heal. Secondary syphilis is
characterized by a rash that affects the skin and mucous membranes of the mouth, vagina, or anus. The rash often
begins on the palms or the soles of the feet and spreads to the trunk and the limbs (Figure 23.12). The rash may
take many forms, such as macular or papular. On mucous membranes, it may manifest as mucus patches or white,
wartlike lesions called condylomata lata. The rash may be accompanied by malaise, fever, and swelling of lymph

1022

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

nodes. Individuals are highly contagious in the secondary stage, which lasts two to six weeks and is recurrent in about
25% of cases.
After the secondary phase, syphilis can enter a latent phase, in which there are no symptoms but microbial levels
remain high. Blood tests can still detect the disease during latency. The latent phase can persist for years.
Tertiary syphilis, which may occur 10 to 20 years after infection, produces the most severe symptoms and can be
fatal. Granulomatous lesions called gummas may develop in a variety of locations, including mucous membranes,
bones, and internal organs (Figure 23.12). Gummas can be large and destructive, potentially causing massive tissue
damage. The most deadly lesions are those of the cardiovascular system (cardiovascular syphilis) and the central
nervous system (neurosyphilis). Cardiovascular syphilis can result in a fatal aortic aneurysm (rupture of the aorta)
or coronary stenosis (a blockage of the coronary artery). Damage to the central nervous system can cause dementia,
personality changes, seizures, general paralysis, speech impairment, loss of vision and hearing, and loss of bowel and
bladder control.

Figure 23.12 (a) This ulcerated sore is a hard chancre caused by syphilis. (b) This individual has a secondary
syphilis rash on the hands. (c) Tertiary syphilis produces lesions called gummas, such as this one located on the
nose. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

The recommended methods for diagnosing early syphilis are darkfield or brightfield (silver stain) microscopy of
tissue or exudate from lesions to detect T. pallidum (Figure 23.13). If these methods are not available, two types
of serologic tests (treponemal and nontreponemal) can be used for a presumptive diagnosis once the spirochete has
spread in the body. Nontreponemal serologic tests include the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and
rapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests. These are similar screening tests that detect nonspecific antibodies (those for lipid
antigens produced during infection) rather than those produced against the spirochete. Treponemal serologic tests
measure antibodies directed against T. pallidum antigens using particle agglutination (T. pallidum passive particle
agglutination or TP-PA), immunofluorescence (the fluorescent T. pallidum antibody absorption or FTA-ABS), various
enzyme reactions (enzyme immunoassays or EIAs) and chemiluminescence immunoassays (CIA). Confirmatory
testing, rather than screening, must be done using treponemal rather than nontreponemal tests because only the former
tests for antibodies to spirochete antigens. Both treponemal and nontreponemal tests should be used (as opposed to
just one) since both tests have limitations than can result in false positives or false negatives.
Neurosyphilis cannot be diagnosed using a single test. With or without clinical signs, it is generally necessary to
assess a variety of factors, including reactive serologic test results, cerebrospinal fluid cell count abnormalities,
cerebrospinal fluid protein abnormalities, or reactive VDRL-CSF (the VDRL test of cerebrospinal fluid). The VDRLCSF is highly specific, but not sufficiently sensitive for conclusive diagnosis.
The recommended treatment for syphilis is parenteral penicillin G (especially long-acting benzathine penicillin,
although the exact choice depends on the stage of disease). Other options include tetracycline and doxycycline.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1023

Figure 23.13 (a) Darkfield micrograph of Treponema pallidum. (b) Silver stain micrograph of the same species.
(credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Congenital Syphilis
Congenital syphilis is passed by mother to fetus when untreated primary or secondary syphilis is present. In many
cases, infection may lead to miscarriage or stillbirth. Children born with congenital syphilis show symptoms of
secondary syphilis and may develop mucus patches that deform the nose. In infants, gummas can cause significant
tissue damage to organs and teeth. Many other complications may develop, such as osteochondritis, anemia,
blindness, bone deformations, neurosyphilis, and cardiovascular lesions. Because congenital syphilis poses such a
risk to the fetus, expectant mothers are screened for syphilis infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as part
of the TORCH panel of prenatal tests.

• What aspect of tertiary syphilis can lead to death?
• How do treponemal serologic tests detect an infection?

Chancroid
The sexually transmitted infection chancroid is caused by the gram-negative rod Haemophilus ducreyi. It is
characterized by soft chancres (Figure 23.14) on the genitals or other areas associated with sexual contact, such as
the mouth and anus. Unlike the hard chancres associated with syphilis, soft chancres develop into painful, open sores
that may bleed or produce fluid that is highly contagious. In addition to causing chancres, the bacteria can invade the
lymph nodes, potentially leading to pus discharge through the skin from lymph nodes in the groin. Like other genital
lesions, soft chancres are of particular concern because they compromise the protective barriers of the skin or mucous
membranes, making individuals more susceptible to HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Several virulence factors have been associated with H. ducreyi, including lipooligosaccharides, protective outer
membrane proteins, antiphagocytic proteins, secretory proteins, and collagen-specific adhesin NcaA. The collagenspecific adhesion NcaA plays an important role in initial cellular attachment and colonization. Outer membrane
proteins DsrA and DltA have been shown to provide protection from serum-mediated killing by antibodies and
complement.
H. ducreyi is difficult to culture; thus, diagnosis is generally based on clinical observation of genital ulcers and tests
that rule out other diseases with similar ulcers, such as syphilis and genital herpes. PCR tests for H. ducreyi have
been developed in some laboratories, but as of 2015 none had been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration

1024

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

(FDA).[7] Recommended treatments for chancroid include antibiotics such as azithromycin, ciprofloxacin,
erythromycin and ceftriaxone. Resistance to ciprofloxacin and erythromycin has been reported.[8]

Figure 23.14 (a) A soft chancre on the penis of a man with chancroid. (b) Chancroid is caused by the gram-negative
bacterium Haemophilus ducreyi, seen here in a gram-stained culture of rabbit blood. (credit a, b: modification of work
by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What is the key difference between chancroid lesions and those associated with syphilis?
• Why is it difficult to definitively diagnose chancroid?

Disease Profile
Bacterial Reproductive Tract Infections
Many bacterial infections affecting the reproductive system are transmitted through sexual contact, but some
can be transmitted by other means. In the United States, gonorrhea and chlamydia are common illnesses
with incidences of about 350,000 and 1.44 million, respectively, in 2014. Syphilis is a rarer disease with an
incidence of 20,000 in 2014. Chancroid is exceedingly rare in the United States with only six cases in 2014
and a median of 10 cases per year for the years 2010–2014.[9] Figure 23.15 summarizes bacterial infections
of the reproductive tract.

7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines: Chancroid,” 2015.
http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/chancroid.htm.
8. Ibid.
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2014 Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance,” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/std/stats14/
default.htm.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Figure 23.15

1025

1026

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

23.4 Viral Infections of the Reproductive System
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common viruses that cause infections of the reproductive system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the reproductive system

Several viruses can cause serious problems for the human reproductive system. Most of these viral infections are
incurable, increasing the risk of persistent sexual transmission. In addition, such viral infections are very common
in the United States. For example, human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common STI in the country, with an
estimated prevalence of 79.1 million infections in 2008; herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) is the next most prevalent
STI at 24.1 million infections.[10] In this section, we will examine these and other major viral infections of the
reproductive system.

Genital Herpes
Genital herpes is a common condition caused by the herpes simplex virus (Figure 23.16), an enveloped, doublestranded DNA virus that is classified into two distinct types. Herpes simplex virus has several virulence factors,
including infected cell protein (ICP) 34.5, which helps in replication and inhibits the maturation of dendritic cells as
a mechanism of avoiding elimination by the immune system. In addition, surface glycoproteins on the viral envelope
promote the coating of herpes simplex virus with antibodies and complement factors, allowing the virus to appear as
“self” and prevent immune system activation and elimination.
There are two herpes simplex virus types. While herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is generally associated with
oral lesions like cold sores or fever blisters (see Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes), herpes simplex virus
type 2 (HSV-2) is usually associated with genital herpes. However, both viruses can infect either location as well as
other parts of the body. Oral-genital contact can spread either virus from the mouth to the genital region or vice versa.

Figure 23.16 Virions of the herpes simplex virus are shown here in this transmission electron micrograph. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Many infected individuals do not develop symptoms, and thus do not realize that they carry the virus. However, in
some infected individuals, fever, chills, malaise, swollen lymph nodes, and pain precede the development of fluidfilled vesicles that may be irritating and uncomfortable. When these vesicles burst, they release infectious fluid and
allow transmission of HSV. In addition, open herpes lesions can increase the risk of spreading or acquiring HIV.
In men, the herpes lesions typically develop on the penis and may be accompanied by a watery discharge. In women,
the vesicles develop most commonly on the vulva, but may also develop on the vagina or cervix (Figure 23.17).
10. Catherine Lindsey Satterwhite, Elizabeth Torrone, Elissa Meites, Eileen F. Dunne, Reena Mahajan, M. Cheryl Bañez Ocfemia, John Su,
Fujie Xu, and Hillard Weinstock. “Sexually Transmitted Infections Among US Women and Men: Prevalence and Incidence Estimates, 2008.”
Sexually Transmitted Diseases 40, no. 3 (2013): 187–193.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1027

The symptoms are typically mild, although the lesions may be irritating or accompanied by urinary discomfort. Use
of condoms may not always be an effective means of preventing transmission of genital herpes since the lesions can
occur on areas other than the genitals.

Figure 23.17 Genital herpes is typically characterized by lesions on the genitals (left), but lesions can also appear
elsewhere on the skin or mucous membranes (right). The lesions can be large and painful or small and easily
overlooked. (credit b: modification of work by Schiffer JT, Swan D, Al Sallaq R, Magaret A, Johnston C, Mark KE,
Selke S, Ocbamichael N, Kuntz S, Zhu J, Robinson B, Huang ML, Jerome KR, Wald A, and Corey)

Herpes simplex viruses can cause recurrent infections because the virus can become latent and then be reactivated.
This occurs more commonly with HSV-2 than with HSV-1.[11] The virus moves down peripheral nerves, typically
sensory neurons, to ganglia in the spine (either the trigeminal ganglion or the lumbar-sacral ganglia) and becomes
latent. Reactivation can later occur, causing the formation of new vesicles. HSV-2 most effectively reactivates
from the lumbar-sacral ganglia. Not everyone infected with HSV-2 experiences reactivations, which are typically
associated with stressful conditions, and the frequency of reactivation varies throughout life and among individuals.
Between outbreaks or when there are no obvious vesicles, the virus can still be transmitted.
Virologic and serologic techniques are used for diagnosis. The virus may be cultured from lesions. The
immunostaining methods that are used to detect virus from cultures generally require less expertise than methods
based on cytopathic effect (CPE), as well as being a less expensive option. However, PCR or other DNA amplification
methods may be preferred because they provide the most rapid results without waiting for culture amplification. PCR
is also best for detecting systemic infections. Serologic techniques are also useful in some circumstances, such as
when symptoms persist but PCR testing is negative.
While there is no cure or vaccine for HSV-2 infections, antiviral medications are available that manage the infection
by keeping the virus in its dormant or latent phase, reducing signs and symptoms. If the medication is discontinued,
then the condition returns to its original severity. The recommended medications, which may be taken at the start of
an outbreak or daily as a method of prophylaxis, are acyclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovir.

Neonatal Herpes
Herpes infections in newborns, referred to as neonatal herpes, are generally transmitted from the mother to the
neonate during childbirth, when the child is exposed to pathogens in the birth canal. Infections can occur regardless
of whether lesions are present in the birth canal. In most cases, the infection of the newborn is limited to skin, mucous
membranes, and eyes, and outcomes are good. However, sometimes the virus becomes disseminated and spreads to
the central nervous system, resulting in motor function deficits or death.
In some cases, infections can occur before birth when the virus crosses the placenta. This can cause serious
complications in fetal development and may result in spontaneous abortion or severe disabilities if the fetus survives.
The condition is most serious when the mother is infected with HSV for the first time during pregnancy. Thus,
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Sexually Transmitted Disease Treatment Guidelines: Genital Herpes,” 2015.
http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/herpes.htm.

1028

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

expectant mothers are screened for HSV infection during the first trimester of pregnancy as part of the TORCH panel
of prenatal tests (see How Pathogens Cause Disease). Systemic acyclovir treatment is recommended to treat
newborns with neonatal herpes.

• Why are latent herpes virus infections still of clinical concern?
• How is neonatal herpes contracted?

Human Papillomas
Warts of all types are caused by a variety of strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) (see Viral Infections of the
Skin and Eyes). Condylomata acuminata, more commonly called genital warts or venereal warts (Figure 23.18),
are an extremely prevalent STI caused by certain strains of HPV. Condylomata are irregular, soft, pink growths that
are found on external genitalia or the anus.
HPV is a small, non-enveloped virus with a circular double-stranded DNA genome. Researchers have identified over
200 different strains (called types) of HPV, with approximately 40 causing STIs. While some types of HPV cause
genital warts, HPV infection is often asymptomatic and self-limiting. However, genital HPV infection often co-occurs
with other STIs like syphilis or gonorrhea. Additionally, some forms of HPV (not the same ones associated with
genital warts) are associated with cervical cancers. At least 14 oncogenic (cancer-causing) HPV types are known
to have a causal association with cervical cancers. Examples of oncogenic HPV are types 16 and 18, which are
associated with 70% of cervical cancers.[12] Oncogenic HPV types can also cause oropharyngeal cancer, anal cancer,
vaginal cancer, vulvar cancer, and penile cancer. Most of these cancers are caused by HPV type 16. HPV virulence
factors include proteins (E6 and E7) that are capable of inactivating tumor suppressor proteins, leading to uncontrolled
cell division and the development of cancer.
HPV cannot be cultured, so molecular tests are the primary method used to detect HPV. While routine HPV screening
is not recommended for men, it is included in guidelines for women. An initial screening for HPV at age 30,
conducted at the same time as a Pap test, is recommended. If the tests are negative, then further HPV testing is
recommended every five years. More frequent testing may be needed in some cases. The protocols used to collect,
transport, and store samples vary based on both the type of HPV testing and the purpose of the testing. This should
be determined in individual cases in consultation with the laboratory that will perform the testing.
Because HPV testing is often conducted concurrently with Pap testing, the most common approach uses a single
sample collection within one vial for both. This approach uses liquid-based cytology (LBC). The samples are then
used for Pap smear cytology as well as HPV testing and genotyping. HPV can be recognized in Pap smears by the
presence of cells called koilocytes (called koilocytosis or koilocytotic atypia). Koilocytes have a hyperchromatic
atypical nucleus that stains darkly and a high ratio of nuclear material to cytoplasm. There is a distinct clear
appearance around the nucleus called a perinuclear halo (Figure 23.19).

12. Lauren Thaxton and Alan G. Waxman. “Cervical Cancer Prevention: Immunization and Screening 2015.” Medical Clinics of North
America 99, no. 3 (2015): 469–477.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1029

Figure 23.18 Genital warts may occur around the anus (left) or genitalia (right). (credit left, right: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Figure 23.19 In this image, the cervical cells on the left are normal and those on the right show enlarged nuclei and
hyperchromasia (darkly stained nuclei) typical of HPV-infected koilocytes. (credit: modification of work by Ed Uthman)

Most HPV infections resolve spontaneously; however, various therapies are used to treat and remove warts. Topical
medications such as imiquimod (which stimulates the production of interferon), podofilox, or sinecatechins, may be
effective. Warts can also be removed using cryotherapy or surgery, but these approaches are less effective for genital
warts than for other types of warts. Electrocauterization and carbon dioxide laser therapy are also used for wart
removal.
Regular Pap testing can detect abnormal cells that might progress to cervical cancer, followed by biopsy and
appropriate treatment. Vaccines for some of the high risk HPV types are now available. Gardasil vaccine includes
types 6, 11, 16 and 18 (types 6 and 11 are associated with 90% of genital wart infections and types 16 and 18 are
associated with 70% of cervical cancers). Gardasil 9 vaccinates against the previous four types and an additional five
high-risk types (31, 33, 45, 52, and 58). Cervarix vaccine includes just HPV types 16 and 18. Vaccination is the most
effective way to prevent infection with oncogenic HPV, but it is important to note that not all oncogenic HPV types
are covered by the available vaccines. It is recommended for both boys and girls prior to sexual activity (usually
between the ages of nine and fifteen).

1030

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Link to Learning
Watch a video (https://openstax.org/l/22HPVpercep) of how perceptions of
HPV affect vaccination rates.

• What is diagnostic of an HPV infection in a Pap smear?
• What is the motivation for HPV vaccination?

Micro Connections
Secret STIs
Few people who have an STI (or think they may have one) are eager to share that information publicly. In fact,
many patients are even uncomfortable discussing the symptoms privately with their doctors. Unfortunately, the
social stigma associated with STIs makes it harder for infected individuals to seek the treatment they need and
creates the false perception that STIs are rare. In reality, STIs are quite common, but it is difficult to determine
exactly how common.
A recent study on the effects of HPV vaccination found a baseline HPV prevalence of 26.8% for women
between the ages of 14 and 59. Among women aged 20–24, the prevalence was 44.8%; in other words, almost
half of the women in this age bracket had a current infection.[13] According to the CDC, HSV-2 infection was
estimated to have a prevalence of 15.5% in younger individuals (14–49 years of age) in 2007–2010, down from
20.3% in the same age group in 1988–1994. However, the CDC estimates that 87.4% of infected individuals in
this age group have not been diagnosed by a physician.[14]
Another complicating factor is that many STIs can be asymptomatic or have long periods of latency. For
example, the CDC estimates that among women ages 14–49 in the United States, about 2.3 million (3.1%) are
infected with the sexually transmitted protozoan Trichomonas (see Protozoan Infections of the Urogenital
System); however, in a study of infected women, 85% of those diagnosed with the infection were
asymptomatic.[15]
Even when patients are treated for symptomatic STIs, it can be difficult to obtain accurate data on the
number of cases. Whereas STIs like chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis are notifiable diseases—meaning
each diagnosis must be reported by healthcare providers to the CDC—other STIs are not notifiable (e.g.,
genital herpes, genital warts, and trichomoniasis). Between the social taboos, the inconsistency of symptoms,
and the lack of mandatory reporting, it can be difficult to estimate the true prevalence of STIs—but it is safe to
say they are much more prevalent than most people think.

13. Eileen F. Dunne, Elizabeth R. Unger, Maya Sternberg, Geraldine McQuillan, David C. Swan, Sonya S. Patel, and Lauri E. Markowitz.
“Prevalence of HPV Infection Among Females in the United States.” Journal of the American Medical Association 297, no. 8 (2007):
813–819.
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Genital Herpes - CDC Fact Sheet,” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/std/herpes/stdfact-herpesdetailed.htm.
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Trichomoniasis Statistics,” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/std/trichomonas/stats.htm.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1031

Disease Profile
Viral Reproductive Tract Infections
Figure 23.20 summarizes the most important features of viral diseases affecting the human reproductive tract.

Figure 23.20

23.5 Fungal Infections of the Reproductive System
Learning Objectives
• Summarize the important characteristics of vaginal candidiasis

Only one major fungal pathogen affects the urogenital system. Candida is a genus of fungi capable of existing in
a yeast form or as a multicellular fungus. Candida spp. are commonly found in the normal, healthy microbiota
of the skin, gastrointestinal tract, respiratory system, and female urogenital tract (Figure 23.21). They can be
pathogenic due to their ability to adhere to and invade host cells, form biofilms, secrete hydrolases (e.g., proteases,
phospholipases, and lipases) that assist in their spread through tissues, and change their phenotypes to protect
themselves from the immune system. However, they typically only cause disease in the female reproductive tract
under conditions that compromise the host’s defenses. While there are at least 20 Candida species of clinical
importance, C. albicans is the species most commonly responsible for fungal vaginitis.

1032

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

As discussed earlier, lactobacilli in the vagina inhibit the growth of other organisms, including bacteria and Candida,
but disruptions can allow Candida to increase in numbers. Typical disruptions include antibiotic therapy, illness
(especially diabetes), pregnancy, and the presence of transient microbes. Immunosuppression can also play a role, and
the severe immunosuppression associated with HIV infection often allows Candida to thrive. This can cause genital
or vaginal candidiasis, a condition characterized by vaginitis and commonly known as a yeast infection. When a yeast
infection develops, inflammation occurs along with symptoms of pruritus (itching), a thick white or yellow discharge,
and odor.
Other forms of candidiasis include cutaneous candidiasis (see Mycoses of the Skin) and oral thrush (see
Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity). Although Candida spp. are found in the normal
microbiota, Candida spp. may also be transmitted between individuals. Sexual contact is a common mode of
transmission, although candidiasis is not considered an STI.
Diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis can be made using microscopic evaluation of vaginal secretions to determine
whether there is an excess of Candida. Culturing approaches are less useful because Candida is part of the normal
microbiota and will regularly appear. It is also easy to contaminate samples with Candida because it is so common,
so care must be taken to handle clinical material appropriately. Samples can be refrigerated if there is a delay in
handling. Candida is a dimorphic fungus, so it does not only exist in a yeast form; cultivation can be used to identify
chlamydospores and pseudohyphae, which develop from germ tubes (Figure 23.22). The presence of the germ
tube can be used in a diagnostic test in which cultured yeast cells are combined with rabbit serum and observed
after a few hours for the presence of germ tubes. Molecular tests are also available if needed. The Affirm VPII
Microbial Identification Test, for instance, tests simultaneously for the vaginal microbes C. albicans, G. vaginalis
(see Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System), and Trichomonas vaginalis (see Protozoan Infections of
the Urogenital System).
Topical antifungal medications for vaginal candidiasis include butoconazole, miconazole, clotrimazole, tioconazole,
and nystatin. Oral treatment with fluconazole can be used. There are often no clear precipitating factors for infection,
so prevention is difficult.

Figure 23.21 Candida blastospores (asexual spores that result from budding) and chlamydospores (resting spores
produced through asexual reproduction) are visible in this micrograph. (credit: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1033

Figure 23.22 Candida can produce germ tubes, like the one in this micrograph, that develop into hyphae. (credit:
modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

• What factors can lead to candidiasis?
• How is candidiasis typically diagnosed?

Clinical Focus
Part 3
The Gram stain of Nadia’s vaginal smear showed that the concentration of lactobacilli relative to other species
in Nadia’s vaginal sample was abnormally low. However, there were no clue cells visible, which suggests that
the infection is not bacterial vaginosis. But a wet-mount slide showed an overgrowth of yeast cells, suggesting
that the problem is candidiasis, or a yeast infection (Figure 23.23). This, Nadia’s doctor assures her, is good
news. Candidiasis is common during pregnancy and easily treatable.

• Knowing that the problem is candidiasis, what treatments might the doctor suggest?

1034

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Figure 23.23 (a) Lactobacilli are visible as gram-positive rods on and around this squamous epithelial cell.
(b) This wet mount prepared with KOH shows Candida albicans pseudohyphae and squamous epithelial cells
in a vaginal sample from a patient with candidiasis. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

23.6 Protozoan Infections of the Urogenital System
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common protozoan pathogen that causes infections of the reproductive system
• Summarize the important characteristics of trichomoniasis

Only one major protozoan species causes infections in the urogenital system. Trichomoniasis, or “trich,” is the most
common nonviral STI and is caused by a flagellated protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis. T. vaginalis has an undulating
membrane and, generally, an amoeboid shape when attached to cells in the vagina. In culture, it has an oval shape.
T. vaginalis is commonly found in the normal microbiota of the vagina. As with other vaginal pathogens, it can cause
vaginitis when there is disruption to the normal microbiota. It is found only as a trophozoite and does not form cysts.
T. vaginalis can adhere to cells using adhesins such as lipoglycans; it also has other cell-surface virulence factors,
including tetraspanins that are involved in cell adhesion, motility, and tissue invasion. In addition, T. vaginalis is
capable of phagocytosing other microbes of the normal microbiota, contributing to the development of an imbalance
that is favorable to infection.
Both men and women can develop trichomoniasis. Men are generally asymptomatic, and although women are more
likely to develop symptoms, they are often asymptomatic as well. When symptoms do occur, they are characteristic
of urethritis. Men experience itching, irritation, discharge from the penis, and burning after urination or ejaculation.
Women experience dysuria; itching, burning, redness, and soreness of the genitalia; and vaginal discharge. The
infection may also spread to the cervix. Infection increases the risk of transmitting or acquiring HIV and is associated
with pregnancy complications such as preterm birth.
Microscopic evaluation of wet mounts is an inexpensive and convenient method of diagnosis, but the sensitivity
of this method is low (Figure 23.24). Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) is preferred due to its high
sensitivity. Using wet mounts and then NAAT for those who initially test negative is one option to improve sensitivity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1035

Samples may be obtained for NAAT using urine, vaginal, or endocervical specimens for women and with urine and
urethral swabs for men. It is also possible to use other methods such as the OSOM Trichomonas Rapid Test (an
immunochromatographic test that detects antigen) and a DNA probe test for multiple species associated with vaginitis
(the Affirm VPII Microbial Identification Test discussed in section 23.5).[16] T. vaginalis is sometimes detected on a
Pap test, but this is not considered diagnostic due to high rates of false positives and negatives. The recommended
treatment for trichomoniasis is oral metronidazole or tinidazole. Sexual partners should be treated as well.

Figure 23.24 Trichomonas vaginalis is visible in this Gram stained specimen. (credit: modification of work by
American Society for Microbiology)

• What are the symptoms of trichomoniasis?

Eye on Ethics

STIs and Privacy
For many STIs, it is common to contact and treat sexual partners of the patient. This is especially important
when a new illness has appeared, as when HIV became more prevalent in the 1980s. But to contact sexual
partners, it is necessary to obtain their personal information from the patient. This raises difficult questions. In
some cases, providing the information may be embarrassing or difficult for the patient, even though withholding
such information could put their sexual partner(s) at risk.
Legal considerations further complicate such situations. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPPA), passed into law in 1996, sets the standards for the protection of patient information. It requires
businesses that use health information, such as insurance companies and healthcare providers, to maintain
strict confidentiality of patient records. Contacting a patient’s sexual partners may therefore violate the patient’s
privacy rights if the patient’s diagnosis is revealed as a result.

16. Association of Public Health Laboratories. “Advances in Laboratory Detection of Trichomonas vaginalis,” 2013. http://www.aphl.org/
AboutAPHL/publications/Documents/ID_2013August_Advances-in-Laboratory-Detection-of-Trichomonas-vaginalis.pdf.

1036

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

From an ethical standpoint, which is more important: the patient’s privacy rights or the sexual partner’s right
to know that they may be at risk of a sexually transmitted disease? Does the answer depend on the severity
of the disease or are the rules universal? Suppose the physician knows the identity of the sexual partner but
the patient does not want that individual to be contacted. Would it be a violation of HIPPA rules to contact the
individual without the patient’s consent?
Questions related to patient privacy become even more complicated when dealing with patients who are
minors. Adolescents may be reluctant to discuss their sexual behavior or health with a health professional,
especially if they believe that healthcare professionals will tell their parents. This leaves many teens at risk
of having an untreated infection or of lacking the information to protect themselves and their partners. On the
other hand, parents may feel that they have a right to know what is going on with their child. How should
physicians handle this? Should parents always be told even if the adolescent wants confidentiality? Does this
affect how the physician should handle notifying a sexual partner?

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Vaginal candidiasis is generally treated using topical antifungal medications such as butoconazole,
miconazole, clotrimazole, ticonozole, nystatin, or oral fluconazole. However, it is important to be careful
in selecting a treatment for use during pregnancy. Nadia’s doctor recommended treatment with topical
clotrimazole. This drug is classified as a category B drug by the FDA for use in pregnancy, and there appears
to be no evidence of harm, at least in the second or third trimesters of pregnancy. Based on Nadia’s particular
situation, her doctor thought that it was suitable for very short-term use even though she was still in the first
trimester. After a seven-day course of treatment, Nadia’s yeast infection cleared. She continued with a normal
pregnancy and delivered a healthy baby eight months later.
Higher levels of hormones during pregnancy can shift the typical microbiota composition and balance in the
vagina, leading to high rates of infections such as candidiasis or vaginosis. Topical treatment has an 80–90%
success rate, with only a small number of cases resulting in recurrent or persistent infections. Longer term or
intermittent treatment is usually effective in these cases.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Disease Profile
Fungal and Protozoan Reproductive Tract Infections
Figure 23.25 summarizes the most important features of candidiasis and trichomoniasis.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1037

Figure 23.25

Link to Learning
Take an online quiz (https://openstax.org/l/22quizstireview) for a review of
sexually transmitted infections.

Summary
23.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital Tract
• The urinary system is responsible for filtering the blood, excreting wastes, and helping to regulate electrolyte
and water balance.
• The urinary system includes the kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra; the bladder and urethra are
the most common sites of infection.
• Common sites of infection in the male reproductive system include the urethra, as well as the testes, prostate
and epididymis.

1038

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

• The most commons sites of infection in the female reproductive system are the vulva, vagina, cervix, and
fallopian tubes.
• Infections of the urogenital tract can occur through colonization from the external environment, alterations
in microbiota due to hormonal or other physiological and environmental changes, fecal contamination, and
sexual transmission (STIs).
23.2 Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System
• Bacterial cystitis is commonly caused by fecal bacteria such as E. coli.
• Pyelonephritis is a serious kidney infection that is often caused by bacteria that travel from infections
elsewhere in the urinary tract and may cause systemic complications.
• Leptospirosis is a bacterial infection of the kidney that can be transmitted by exposure to infected animal
urine, especially in contaminated water. It is more common in tropical than in temperate climates.
• Nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) is commonly caused by C. trachomatis, M. genitalium, Ureaplasma
urealyticum, and M. hominis.
• Diagnosis and treatment for bacterial urinary tract infections varies. Urinalysis (e.g., for leukocyte esterase
levels, nitrite levels, microscopic evaluation, and culture of urine) is an important component in most cases.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are typically used.
23.3 Bacterial Infections of the Reproductive System
• Bacterial vaginosis is caused by an imbalance in the vaginal microbiota, with a decrease in lactobacilli and
an increase in vaginal pH. G. vaginalis is the most common cause of bacterial vaginosis, which is associated
with vaginal discharge, odor, burning, and itching.
• Gonorrhea is caused by N. gonorrhoeae, which can cause infection of the reproductive and urinary tracts
and is associated with symptoms of urethritis. If left untreated, it can progress to epididymitis, salpingitis, and
pelvic inflammatory disease and enter the bloodstream to infect other sites in the body.
• Chlamydia is the most commonly reported STI and is caused by C. trachomatis. Most infections are
asymptomatic, and infections that are not treated can spread to involve the epididymis of men and cause
salpingitis and pelvic inflammatory disease in women.
• Syphilis is caused by T. pallidum and has three stages, primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary syphilis is
associated with a painless hard chancre lesion on genitalia. Secondary syphilis is associated with skin and
mucous membrane lesions. Tertiary syphilis is the most serious and life-threatening, and can involve serious
nervous system damage.
• Chancroid is an infection of the reproductive tract caused by H. ducreyi that results in the development of
characteristic soft chancres.
23.4 Viral Infections of the Reproductive System
• Genital herpes is usually caused by HSV-2 (although HSV-1 can also be responsible) and may cause the
development of infectious, potentially recurrent vesicles
• Neonatal herpes can occur in babies born to infected mothers and can cause symptoms that range from
relatively mild (more common) to severe.
• Human papillomaviruses are the most common sexually transmitted viruses and include strains that cause
genital warts as well as strains that cause cervical cancer.
23.5 Fungal Infections of the Reproductive System
• Candida spp. are typically present in the normal microbiota in the body, including the skin, respiratory tract,
gastrointestinal tract, and female urogenital system.
• Disruptions in the normal vaginal microbiota can lead to an overgrowth of Candida, causing vaginal
candidiasis.
• Vaginal candidiasis can be treated with topical or oral fungicides. Prevention is difficult.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1039

23.6 Protozoan Infections of the Urogenital System
• Trichomoniasis is a common STI caused by Trichomonas vaginalis.
• T. vaginalis is common at low levels in the normal microbiota.
• Trichomoniasis is often asymptomatic. When symptoms develop, trichomoniasis causes urinary discomfort,
irritation, itching, burning, discharge from the penis (in men), and vaginal discharge (in women).
• Trichomoniasis is treated with the antiflagellate drugs tinidazole and metronidazole.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. When it first leaves the kidney, urine flows through
a. the urinary bladder.
b. the urethra.
c. the ureter.
d. the glomeruli.
2. What part of the male urogenital tract is shared by
the urinary and reproductive systems?
a. the prostate gland
b. the seminal vesicles
c. the vas deferens
d. the urethra

7. The latent stage of syphilis, which may last for years,
can occur between
a. the secondary and tertiary stages.
b. the primary and secondary stages.
c. initial infection and the primary stage.
d. any of the three stages.
8. Based on its shape, which microbe is this?

3. Which species is not associated with NGU?
a. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
b. Mycoplasma hominis
c. Chlamydia trachomatis
d. Mycoplasma genitalium
4. A strain of bacteria associated with a bladder
infection shows gram-negative rods. What species is
most likely to be the causative agent?
a. Mycoplasma hominis
b. Escherichia coli
c. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
d. Chlamydia trachomatis
5. Treponemal and non-treponemal serological testing
can be used to test for
a. vaginosis.
b. chlamydia.
c. syphilis.
d. gonorrhea.
6. Lymphogranuloma venereum is caused by serovars
of
a. Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
b. Chlamydia trachomatis.
c. Treponema pallidum.
d. Haemophilis ducreyi.

Figure 23.26 (credit: modification of work by Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention)

a.
b.
c.
d.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Chlamydia trachomatis
Treponema pallidum
Haemophilis ducreyi

9. Genital herpes is most commonly caused by
a. herpes simplex virus 1.
b. varicella-zoster virus.
c. herpes simplex virus 2.
d. cytomegalovirus.
10. Koilocytes are characteristic of
a. cells infected with human papillomavirus
b. cells infected with herpes simplex virus 2
c. cells infected with all forms of herpesviruses
d. cervical cancer cells

1040

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

11. Which oral medication is recommended as an initial
topical treatment for genital yeast infections?
a. penicillin
b. acyclovir
c. fluconazole
d. miconazole
12. What is the only common infection of the
reproductive tract caused by a protozoan?
a. gonorrhea
b. chlamydia
c. trichomoniasis
d. candidiasis
13. Which test is preferred for detecting T. vaginalis
because of its high sensitivity?
a. NAAT
b. wet mounts
c. Pap tests
d. all of the above are equally good
Fill in the Blank

14. The genus of bacteria found in the vagina that is important in maintaining a healthy environment, including an
acidic pH, is _____.
15. Pyelonephritis is a potentially severe infection of the _____.
16. Soft chancres on the genitals are characteristic of the sexually transmitted disease known as _____.
17. Condylomata are _____.
18. The most common Candida species associated with yeast infections is _____.
19. Trichomoniasis is caused by _____.
Short Answer

20. When the microbial balance of the vagina is disrupted, leading to overgrowth of resident bacteria without
necessarily causing inflammation, the condition is called _____.
21. Explain the difference between a sexually transmitted infection and a sexually transmitted disease.
22. In the figure shown here, where would cystitis occur?

23. What is pyuria?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

1041

24. Compare gonococcal and nongonoccocal urethritis with respect to their symptoms and the pathogens that cause
each disease.
25. Is it true that human papillomaviruses can always be detected by the presence of genital warts?
26. How is neonatal herpes transmitted?
27. Name three organisms (a bacterium, a fungus, and a protozoan) that are associated with vaginitis.
Critical Thinking

28. Epidemiological data show that the use of antibiotics is often followed by cases of vaginosis or vaginitis in
women. Can you explain this finding?
29. What are some factors that would increase an individual’s risk of contracting leptospirosis?
30. Chlamydia is often asymptomatic. Why might it be important for an individual to know if he or she were
infected?
31. Why does the CDC recommend a two-drug treatment regimen to cover both C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
if testing to distinguish between the two is not available? Additionally, how does the two-drug treatment regimen
address antibiotic resistance?
32. Recently, studies have shown a reduction in the prevalence of some strains of HPV in younger women. What
might be the reason for this?

1042

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 23 | Urogenital System Infections

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1043

Chapter 24

Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.1 E. coli O157:H7 causes serious foodborne illness. Curli fibers (adhesive surface fibers that are part of
the extracellular matrix) help these bacteria adhere to surfaces and form biofilms. Pictured are two groups of cells,
curli non-producing cells (left) and curli producing cells (right). (credit left, right: modification of work by USDA)

Chapter Outline
24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System
24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity
24.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
24.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
24.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract

Introduction
Gastrointestinal (GI) diseases are so common that, unfortunately, most people have had first-hand experience with the
unpleasant symptoms, such as diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort. The causes of gastrointestinal illness
can vary widely, but such diseases can be grouped into two categories: those caused by infection (the growth of a
pathogen in the GI tract) or intoxication (the presence of a microbial toxin in the GI tract).
Foodborne pathogens like Escherichia coli O157:H7 are among the most common sources of gastrointestinal disease.
Contaminated food and water have always posed a health risk for humans, but in today’s global economy, outbreaks
can occur on a much larger scale. E. coli O157:H7 is a potentially deadly strain of E. coli with a history of
contaminating meat and produce that are not properly processed. The source of an E. coli O157:H7 outbreak can be
difficult to trace, especially if the contaminated food is processed in a foreign country. Once the source is identified,
authorities may issue recalls of the contaminated food products, but by then there are typically numerous cases of
food poisoning, some of them fatal.

1044

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive
System
Learning Objectives
• Describe the major anatomical features of the human digestive system
• Describe the normal microbiota of various regions in the human digestive system
• Explain how microorganisms overcome the defenses of the digestive tract to cause infection or intoxication
• Describe general signs and symptoms associated with infections of the digestive system

The human digestive system, or the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, begins with the mouth and ends with the anus. The
parts of the mouth include the teeth, the gums, the tongue, the oral vestibule (the space between the gums, lips, and
teeth), and the oral cavity proper (the space behind the teeth and gums). Other parts of the GI tract are the pharynx,
esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum, and anus (Figure 24.2). Accessory digestive organs
include the salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, spleen, and pancreas.
The digestive system contains normal microbiota, including archaea, bacteria, fungi, protists, and even viruses.
Because this microbiota is important for normal functioning of the digestive system, alterations to the microbiota by
antibiotics or diet can be harmful. Additionally, the introduction of pathogens to the GI tract can cause infections and
diseases. In this section, we will review the microbiota found in a healthy digestive tract and the general signs and
symptoms associated with oral and GI infections.

Clinical Focus
Part 1
After a morning of playing outside, four-year-old Carli ran inside for lunch. After taking a bite of her fried egg,
she pushed it away and whined, “It’s too slimy, Mommy. I don’t want any more.” But her mother, in no mood for
games, curtly replied that if she wanted to go back outside she had better finish her lunch. Reluctantly, Carli
complied, trying hard not to gag as she choked down the runny egg.
That night, Carli woke up feeling nauseated. She cried for her parents and then began to vomit. Her parents
tried to comfort her, but she continued to vomit all night and began to have diarrhea and run a fever. By the
morning, her parents were very worried. They rushed her to the emergency room.

• What could have caused Carli’s signs and symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1045

Figure 24.2 The digestive system, or the gastrointestinal tract, includes all of the organs associated with the
digestion of food.

Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Oral Cavity
Food enters the digestive tract through the mouth, where mechanical digestion (by chewing) and chemical digestion
(by enzymes in saliva) begin. Within the mouth are the tongue, teeth, and salivary glands, including the parotid,
sublingual, and submandibular glands (Figure 24.3). The salivary glands produce saliva, which lubricates food and
contains digestive enzymes.

1046

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.3 (a) When food enters the mouth, digestion begins. (b) Salivary glands are accessory digestive organs.
(credit: modification of work by National Cancer Institute)

The structure of a tooth (Figure 24.4) begins with the visible outer surface, called the crown, which has to be
extremely hard to withstand the force of biting and chewing. The crown is covered with enamel, which is the hardest
material in the body. Underneath the crown, a layer of relatively hard dentin extends into the root of the tooth around
the innermost pulp cavity, which includes the pulp chamber at the top of the tooth and pulp canal, or root canal,
located in the root. The pulp that fills the pulp cavity is rich in blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, connective tissue, and
nerves. The root of the tooth and some of the crown are covered with cementum, which works with the periodontal
ligament to anchor the tooth in place in the jaw bone. The soft tissues surrounding the teeth and bones are called
gums, or gingiva. The gingival space or gingival crevice is located between the gums and teeth.

Figure 24.4 The tooth has a visible crown with an outer layer of enamel, a layer of dentin, and an inner pulp. The
root, hidden by the gums, contains the pulp canal (root canal). (credit: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)

Microbes such as bacteria and archaea are abundant in the mouth and coat all of the surfaces of the oral cavity.
However, different structures, such as the teeth or cheeks, host unique communities of both aerobic and anaerobic

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1047

microbes. Some factors appear to work against making the mouth hospitable to certain microbes. For example,
chewing allows microbes to mix better with saliva so they can be swallowed or spit out more easily. Saliva also
contains enzymes, including lysozyme, which can damage microbial cells. Recall that lysozyme is part of the first
line of defense in the innate immune system and cleaves the β-(1,4) glycosidic linkages between N-acetylglucosamine
(NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) in bacterial peptidoglycan (see Chemical Defenses). Additionally,
fluids containing immunoglobulins and phagocytic cells are produced in the gingival spaces. Despite all of these
chemical and mechanical activities, the mouth supports a large microbial community.

• What factors make the mouth inhospitable for certain microbes?

Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the GI Tract
As food leaves the oral cavity, it travels through the pharynx, or the back of the throat, and moves into the esophagus,
which carries the food from the pharynx to the stomach without adding any additional digestive enzymes. The
stomach produces mucus to protect its lining, as well as digestive enzymes and acid to break down food. Partially
digested food then leaves the stomach through the pyloric sphincter, reaching the first part of the small intestine called
the duodenum. Pancreatic juice, which includes enzymes and bicarbonate ions, is released into the small intestine to
neutralize the acidic material from the stomach and to assist in digestion. Bile, produced by the liver but stored in the
gallbladder, is also released into the small intestine to emulsify fats so that they can travel in the watery environment
of the small intestine. Digestion continues in the small intestine, where the majority of nutrients contained in the food
are absorbed. Simple columnar epithelial cells called enterocytes line the lumen surface of the small intestinal folds
called villi. Each enterocyte has smaller microvilli (cytoplasmic membrane extensions) on the cellular apical surface
that increase the surface area to allow more absorption of nutrients to occur (Figure 24.5).

1048

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.5 (a) The structure of the wall of the small intestine allows for the majority of nutrient absorption in the
body. (b) Villi are folds in the surface of the small intestine. Microvilli are cytoplasmic extensions on individual cells
that increase the surface area for absorption. (c) A light micrograph shows the shape of the villi. (d) An electron
micrograph shows the shape of the microvilli. (credit b, c, d: Modification of micrographs provided by the Regents of
University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)

Digested food leaves the small intestine and moves into the large intestine, or colon, where there is a more diverse
microbiota. Near this junction, there is a small pouch in the large intestine called the cecum, which attaches to the
appendix. Further digestion occurs throughout the colon and water is reabsorbed, then waste is excreted through the
rectum, the last section of the colon, and out of the body through the anus (Figure 24.2).
The environment of most of the GI tract is harsh, which serves two purposes: digestion and immunity. The stomach is
an extremely acidic environment (pH 1.5–3.5) due to the gastric juices that break down food and kill many ingested
microbes; this helps prevent infection from pathogens. The environment in the small intestine is less harsh and is able
to support microbial communities. Microorganisms present in the small intestine can include lactobacilli, diptherioids
and the fungus Candida. On the other hand, the large intestine (colon) contains a diverse and abundant microbiota
that is important for normal function. These microbes include Bacteriodetes (especially the genera Bacteroides
and Prevotella) and Firmicutes (especially members of the genus Clostridium). Methanogenic archaea and some
fungi are also present, among many other species of bacteria. These microbes all aid in digestion and contribute
to the production of feces, the waste excreted from the digestive tract, and flatus, the gas produced from microbial
fermentation of undigested food. They can also produce valuable nutrients. For example, lactic acid bacteria such as

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1049

bifidobacteria can synthesize vitamins, such as vitamin B12, folate, and riboflavin, that humans cannot synthesize
themselves. E. coli found in the intestine can also break down food and help the body produce vitamin K, which is
important for blood coagulation.
The GI tract has several other methods of reducing the risk of infection by pathogens. Small aggregates of underlying
lymphoid tissue in the ileum, called Peyer’s patches (Figure 24.5), detect pathogens in the intestines via microfold
(M) cells, which transfer antigens from the lumen of the intestine to the lymphocytes on Peyer’s patches to induce
an immune response. The Peyer’s patches then secrete IgA and other pathogen-specific antibodies into the intestinal
lumen to help keep intestinal microbes at safe levels. Goblet cells, which are modified simple columnar epithelial
cells, also line the GI tract (Figure 24.6). Goblet cells secrete a gel-forming mucin, which is the major component
of mucus. The production of a protective layer of mucus helps reduce the risk of pathogens reaching deeper tissues.
The constant movement of materials through the gastrointestinal tract also helps to move transient pathogens out of
the body. In fact, feces are composed of approximately 25% microbes, 25% sloughed epithelial cells, 25% mucus,
and 25% digested or undigested food. Finally, the normal microbiota provides an additional barrier to infection via a
variety of mechanisms. For example, these organisms outcompete potential pathogens for space and nutrients within
the intestine. This is known as competitive exclusion. Members of the microbiota may also secrete protein toxins
known as bacteriocins that are able to bind to specific receptors on the surface of susceptible bacteria.

Figure 24.6 A magnified image of intestinal villi in the GI tract shows goblet cells. These cells are important in
producing a protective layer of mucus.

• Compare and contrast the microbiota of the small and large intestines.

General Signs and Symptoms of Oral and GI Disease
Despite numerous defense mechanisms that protect against infection, all parts of the digestive tract can become
sites of infection or intoxication. The term food poisoning is sometimes used as a catch-all for GI infections and
intoxications, but not all forms of GI disease originate with foodborne pathogens or toxins.

1050

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

In the mouth, fermentation by anaerobic microbes produces acids that damage the teeth and gums. This can lead to
tooth decay, cavities, and periodontal disease, a condition characterized by chronic inflammation and erosion of the
gums. Additionally, some pathogens can cause infections of the mucosa, glands, and other structures in the mouth,
resulting in inflammation, sores, cankers, and other lesions. An open sore in the mouth or GI tract is typically called
an ulcer.
Infections and intoxications of the lower GI tract often produce symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, aches,
and fever. In some cases, vomiting and diarrhea may cause severe dehydration and other complications that can
become serious or fatal. Various clinical terms are used to describe gastrointestinal symptoms. For example, gastritis
is an inflammation of the stomach lining that results in swelling and enteritis refers to inflammation of the intestinal
mucosa. When the inflammation involves both the stomach lining and the intestinal lining, the condition is called
gastroenteritis. Inflammation of the liver is called hepatitis. Inflammation of the colon, called colitis, commonly
occurs in cases of food intoxication. Because an inflamed colon does not reabsorb water as effectively as it normally
does, stools become watery, causing diarrhea. Damage to the epithelial cells of the colon can also cause bleeding and
excess mucus to appear in watery stools, a condition called dysentery.

• List possible causes and signs and symptoms of food poisoning.

24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity
Learning Objectives
• Explain the role of microbial activity in diseases of the mouth and oral cavity
• Compare the major characteristics of specific oral diseases and infections

Despite the presence of saliva and the mechanical forces of chewing and eating, some microbes thrive in the mouth.
These microbes can cause damage to the teeth and can cause infections that have the potential to spread beyond the
mouth and sometimes throughout the body.

Dental Caries
Cavities of the teeth, known clinically as dental caries, are microbial lesions that cause damage to the teeth. Over
time, the lesion can grow through the outer enamel layer to infect the underlying dentin or even the innermost pulp. If
dental caries are not treated, the infection can become an abscess that spreads to the deeper tissues of the teeth, near
the roots, or to the bloodstream.
Tooth decay results from the metabolic activity of microbes that live on the teeth. A layer of proteins and
carbohydrates forms when clean teeth come into contact with saliva. Microbes are attracted to this food source
and form a biofilm called plaque. The most important cariogenic species in these biofilms is Streptococcus mutans.
When sucrose, a disaccharide sugar from food, is broken down by bacteria in the mouth, glucose and fructose are
produced. The glucose is used to make dextran, which is part of the extracellular matrix of the biofilm. Fructose
is fermented, producing organic acids such as lactic acid. These acids dissolve the minerals of the tooth, including
enamel, even though it is the hardest material in the body. The acids work even more quickly on exposed dentin
(Figure 24.7). Over time, the plaque biofilm can become thick and eventually calcify. When a heavy plaque deposit
becomes hardened in this way, it is called tartar or dental calculus (Figure 24.8). These substantial plaque biofilms
can include a variety of bacterial species, including Streptococcus and Actinomyces species.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1051

Figure 24.7 Tooth decay occurs in stages. When bacterial biofilms (plaque) develop on teeth, the acids produced
gradually dissolve the enamel, followed by the dentin. Eventually, if left untreated, the lesion may reach the pulp and
cause an abscess. (credit: modification of work by “BruceBlaus”/Wikimedia Commons)

Figure 24.8 (a) Tartar (dental calculus) is visible at the bases of these teeth. The darker deposits higher on the
crowns are staining. (b) This tooth shows only a small amount of visible decay. (c) An X-ray of the same tooth shows
that there is a dark area representing more decay inside the tooth. (d) Removal of a portion of the crown reveals the
area of damage. (e) All of the cavity must be removed before filling. (credit: modification of work by
“DRosenbach”/Wikimedia Commons)

1052

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Some tooth decay is visible from the outside, but it is not always possible to see all decay or the extent of the decay.
X-ray imaging is used to produce radiographs that can be studied to look for deeper decay and damage to the root or
bone (Figure 24.8). If not detected, the decay can reach the pulp or even spread to the bloodstream. Painful abscesses
can develop.
To prevent tooth decay, prophylactic treatment and good hygiene are important. Regular tooth brushing and flossing
physically removes microbes and combats microbial growth and biofilm formation. Toothpaste contains fluoride,
which becomes incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth enamel, protecting it against acidity caused by
fermentation of mouth microbiota. Fluoride is also bacteriostatic, thus slowing enamel degradation. Antiseptic
mouthwashes commonly contain plant-derived phenolics like thymol and eucalyptol and/or heavy metals like zinc
chloride (see Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms). Phenolics tend to be stable and persistent on
surfaces, and they act through denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes.
Regular dental cleanings allow for the detection of decay at early stages and the removal of tartar. They may also help
to draw attention to other concerns, such as damage to the enamel from acidic drinks. Reducing sugar consumption
may help prevent damage that results from the microbial fermentation of sugars. Additionally, sugarless candies or
gum with sugar alcohols (such as xylitol) can reduce the production of acids because these are fermented to nonacidic
compounds (although excess consumption may lead to gastrointestinal distress). Fluoride treatment or ingesting
fluoridated water strengthens the minerals in teeth and reduces the incidence of dental caries.
If caries develop, prompt treatment prevents worsening. Smaller areas of decay can be drilled to remove affected
tissue and then filled. If the pulp is affected, then a root canal may be needed to completely remove the infected tissues
to avoid continued spread of the infection, which could lead to painful abscesses.

• Name some ways that microbes contribute to tooth decay.
• What is the most important cariogenic species of bacteria?

Periodontal Disease
In addition to damage to the teeth themselves, the surrounding structures can be affected by microbes. Periodontal
disease is the result of infections that lead to inflammation and tissue damage in the structures surrounding the
teeth. The progression from mild to severe periodontal disease is generally reversible and preventable with good oral
hygiene.
Inflammation of the gums that can lead to irritation and bleeding is called gingivitis. When plaque accumulates
on the teeth, bacteria colonize the gingival space. As this space becomes increasingly blocked, the environment
becomes anaerobic. This allows a wide variety of microbes to colonize, including Porphyromonas, Streptococcus,
and Actinomyces. The bacterial products, which include lipopolysaccharide (LPS), proteases, lipoteichoic acids, and
others, cause inflammation and gum damage (Figure 24.9). It is possible that methanogenic archaeans (including
Methanobrevibacter oralis and other Methanobrevibacter species) also contribute to disease progression as some
species have been identified in patients with periodontal disease, but this has proven difficult to study.[1][2][3] Gingivitis

1. Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads. “Methanogenic Archaea and Oral Infections—Ways to Unravel the Black Box.” Journal of Oral
Microbiology 3(2011). doi: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940.
2. Hiroshi Maeda, Kimito Hirai, Junji Mineshiba, Tadashi Yamamoto, Susumu Kokeguchi, and Shogo Takashiba. “Medical Microbiological
Approach to Archaea in Oral Infectious Diseases.” Japanese Dental Science Review 49: 2, p. 72–78.
3. Paul W. Lepp, Mary M. Brinig, Cleber C. Ouverney, Katherine Palm, Gary C. Armitage, and David A. Relman. “Methanogenic Archaea
and Human Periodontal Disease.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 (2003): 16, pp.
6176–6181. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0308766101.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1053

is diagnosed by visual inspection, including measuring pockets in the gums, and X-rays, and is usually treated using
good dental hygiene and professional dental cleaning, with antibiotics reserved for severe cases.

Figure 24.9 Redness and irritation of the gums are evidence of gingivitis.

Over time, chronic gingivitis can develop into the more serious condition of periodontitis (Figure 24.10). When
this happens, the gums recede and expose parts of the tooth below the crown. This newly exposed area is relatively
unprotected, so bacteria can grow on it and spread underneath the enamel of the crown and cause cavities. Bacteria
in the gingival space can also erode the cementum, which helps to hold the teeth in place. If not treated, erosion of
cementum can lead to the movement or loss of teeth. The bones of the jaw can even erode if the infection spreads. This
condition can be associated with bleeding and halitosis (bad breath). Cleaning and appropriate dental hygiene may
be sufficient to treat periodontitis. However, in cases of severe periodontitis, an antibiotic may be given. Antibiotics
may be given in pill form or applied directly to the gum (local treatment). Antibiotics given can include tetracycline,
doxycycline, macrolides or β-lactams. Because periodontitis can be caused by a mix of microbes, a combination of
antibiotics may be given.

Figure 24.10 (a) Healthy gums hold the teeth firmly and do not bleed. (b) Gingivitis is the first stage of periodontal
disease. Microbial infection causes gums to become inflamed and irritated, with occasional bleeding. (c) In
periodontitis, gums recede and expose parts of the tooth normally covered. (d) In advanced periodontitis, the infection
spreads to ligaments and bone tissue supporting the teeth. Tooth loss may occur, or teeth may need to be surgically
removed. (credit: modification of work by “BruceBlaus”/Wikimedia Commons)

Trench Mouth
When certain bacteria, such as Prevotella intermedia, Fusobacterium species, and Treponema vicentii, are involved
and periodontal disease progresses, acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis or trench mouth, also called Vincent's
disease, can develop. This is severe periodontitis characterized by erosion of the gums, ulcers, substantial pain with
chewing, and halitosis (Figure 24.11) that can be diagnosed by visual examination and X-rays. In countries with

1054

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

good medical and dental care, it is most common in individuals with weakened immune systems, such as patients
with AIDS. In addition to cleaning and pain medication, patients may be prescribed antibiotics such as amoxicillin,
amoxicillin clavulanate, clindamycin, or doxycycline.

Figure 24.11 These inflamed, eroded gums are an example of a mild case of acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis,
also known as trench mouth. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• How does gingivitis progress to periodontitis?

Micro Connections
Healthy Mouth, Healthy Body
Good oral health promotes good overall health, and the reverse is also true. Poor oral health can lead to
difficulty eating, which can cause malnutrition. Painful or loose teeth can also cause a person to avoid certain
foods or eat less. Malnutrition due to dental problems is of greatest concern for the elderly, for whom it can
worsen other health conditions and contribute to mortality. Individuals who have serious illnesses, especially
AIDS, are also at increased risk of malnutrition from dental problems.
Additionally, poor oral health can contribute to the development of disease. Increased bacterial growth in the
mouth can cause inflammation and infection in other parts of the body. For example, Streptococcus in the
mouth, the main contributor to biofilms on teeth, tartar, and dental caries, can spread throughout the body when
there is damage to the tissues inside the mouth, as can happen during dental work. S. mutans produces a
surface adhesin known as P1, which binds to salivary agglutinin on the surface of the tooth. P1 can also bind to
extracellular matrix proteins including fibronectin and collagen. When Streptococcus enters the bloodstream as
a result of tooth brushing or dental cleaning, it causes inflammation that can lead to the accumulation of plaque
in the arteries and contribute to the development of atherosclerosis, a condition associated with cardiovascular

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1055

disease, heart attack, and stroke. In some cases, bacteria that spread through the blood vessels can lodge in
the heart and cause endocarditis (an example of a focal infection).

Oral Infections
As noted earlier, normal oral microbiota can cause dental and periodontal infections. However, there are number of
other infections that can manifest in the oral cavity when other microbes are present.

Herpetic Gingivostomatitis
As described in Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes, infections by herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)
frequently manifest as oral herpes, also called acute herpes labialis and characterized by cold sores on the lips,
mouth, or gums. HSV-1 can also cause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis, a condition that results in ulcers of the
mucous membranes inside the mouth (Figure 24.12). Herpetic gingivostomatitis is normally self-limiting except in
immunocompromised patients. Like oral herpes, the infection is generally diagnosed through clinical examination,
but cultures or biopsies may be obtained if other signs or symptoms suggest the possibility of a different causative
agent. If treatment is needed, mouthwashes or antiviral medications such as acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir
may be used.

Figure 24.12 (a) This cold sore is caused by infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). (b) HSV-1 can also
cause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis. (credit b: modification of work by Klaus D. Peter)

Oral Thrush
The yeast Candida is part of the normal human microbiota, but overgrowths, especially of Candida albicans, can
lead to infections in several parts of the body. When Candida infection develops in the oral cavity, it is called oral
thrush. Oral thrush is most common in infants because they do not yet have well developed immune systems and
have not acquired the robust normal microbiota that keeps Candida in check in adults. Oral thrush is also common in
immunodeficient patients and is a common infection in patients with AIDS.
Oral thrush is characterized by the appearance of white patches and pseudomembranes in the mouth (Figure 24.13)
and can be associated with bleeding. The infection may be treated topically with nystatin or clotrimazole oral
suspensions, although systemic treatment is sometimes needed. In serious cases, systemic azoles such as fluconazole

1056

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

or itraconazole (for strains resistant to fluconazole), may be used. Amphotericin B can also be used if the infection is
severe or if the Candida species is azole-resistant.

Figure 24.13 Overgrowth of Candida in the mouth is called thrush. It often appears as white patches. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Mumps
The viral disease mumps is an infection of the parotid glands, the largest of the three pairs of salivary glands (Figure
24.3). The causative agent is mumps virus (MuV), a paramyxovirus with an envelope that has hemagglutinin and
neuraminidase spikes. A fusion protein located on the surface of the envelope helps to fuse the viral envelope to the
host cell plasma membrane.
Mumps virus is transmitted through respiratory droplets or through contact with contaminated saliva, making it quite
contagious so that it can lead easily to epidemics. It causes fever, muscle pain, headache, pain with chewing, loss
of appetite, fatigue, and weakness. There is swelling of the salivary glands and associated pain (Figure 24.14).
The virus can enter the bloodstream (viremia), allowing it to spread to the organs and the central nervous system.
The infection ranges from subclinical cases to cases with serious complications, such as encephalitis, meningitis, and
deafness. Inflammation of the pancreas, testes, ovaries, and breasts may also occur and cause permanent damage to
those organs; despite these complications, a mumps infection rarely cause sterility.
Mumps can be recognized based on clinical signs and symptoms, and a diagnosis can be confirmed with laboratory
testing. The virus can be identified using culture or molecular techniques such as RT-PCR. Serologic tests are also
available, especially enzyme immunoassays that detect antibodies. There is no specific treatment for mumps, so
supportive therapies are used. The most effective way to avoid infection is through vaccination. Although mumps
used to be a common childhood disease, it is now rare in the United States due to vaccination with the measles,
mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.14 This child shows the characteristic parotid swelling associated with mumps. (credit: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Compare and contrast the signs and symptoms of herpetic gingivostomatitis, oral thrush, and mumps.

Disease Profile
Oral Infections
Infections of the mouth and oral cavity can be caused by a variety of pathogens, including bacteria, viruses,
and fungi. Many of these infections only affect the mouth, but some can spread and become systemic
infections. Figure 24.15 summarizes the main characteristics of common oral infections.

1057

1058

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.15

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1059

24.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the GI tract

A wide range of gastrointestinal diseases are caused by bacterial contamination of food. Recall that foodborne
disease can arise from either infection or intoxication. In both cases, bacterial toxins are typically responsible for
producing disease signs and symptoms. The distinction lies in where the toxins are produced. In an infection, the
microbial agent is ingested, colonizes the gut, and then produces toxins that damage host cells. In an intoxication,
bacteria produce toxins in the food before it is ingested. In either case, the toxins cause damage to the cells lining the
gastrointestinal tract, typically the colon. This leads to the common signs and symptoms of diarrhea or watery stool
and abdominal cramps, or the more severe dysentery. Symptoms of foodborne diseases also often include nausea and
vomiting, which are mechanisms the body uses to expel the toxic materials.
Most bacterial gastrointestinal illness is short-lived and self-limiting; however, loss of fluids due to severe diarrheal
illness can lead to dehydration that can, in some cases, be fatal without proper treatment. Oral rehydration therapy
with electrolyte solutions is an essential aspect of treatment for most patients with GI disease, especially in children
and infants.

Staphylococcal Food Poisoning
Staphylococcal food poisoning is one form of food intoxication. When Staphylococcus aureus grows in food, it
may produce enterotoxins that, when ingested, can cause symptoms such as nausea, diarrhea, cramping, and vomiting
within one to six hours. In some severe cases, it may cause headache, dehydration, and changes in blood pressure
and heart rate. Signs and symptoms resolve within 24 to 48 hours. S. aureus is often associated with a variety of raw
or undercooked and cooked foods including meat (e.g., canned meat, ham, and sausages) and dairy products (e.g.,
cheeses, milk, and butter). It is also commonly found on hands and can be transmitted to prepared foods through poor
hygiene, including poor handwashing and the use of contaminated food preparation surfaces, such as cutting boards.
The greatest risk is for food left at a temperature below 60 °C (140 °F), which allows the bacteria to grow. Cooked
foods should generally be reheated to at least 60 °C (140 °F) for safety and most raw meats should be cooked to even
higher internal temperatures (Figure 24.16).

1060

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.16 This figure indicates safe internal temperatures associated with the refrigeration, cooking, and
reheating of different foods. Temperatures above refrigeration and below the minimum cooking temperature may
allow for microbial growth, increasing the likelihood of foodborne disease. (credit: modification of work by USDA)

There are at least 21 Staphylococcal enterotoxins and Staphylococcal enterotoxin-like toxins that can cause food
intoxication. The enterotoxins are proteins that are resistant to low pH, allowing them to pass through the stomach.
They are heat stable and are not destroyed by boiling at 100 °C. Even though the bacterium itself may be killed, the
enterotoxins alone can cause vomiting and diarrhea, although the mechanisms are not fully understood. At least some
of the symptoms may be caused by the enterotoxin functioning as a superantigen and provoking a strong immune
response by activating T cell proliferation.
The rapid onset of signs and symptoms helps to diagnose this foodborne illness. Because the bacterium does not need
to be present for the toxin to cause symptoms, diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the toxin in a food sample or in
biological specimens (feces or vomitus) from the patient. Serological techniques, including ELISA, can also be used
to identify the toxin in food samples.
The condition generally resolves relatively quickly, within 24 hours, without treatment. In some cases, supportive
treatment in a hospital may be needed.

• How can S. aureus cause food intoxication?

Shigellosis (Bacillary Dysentery)
When gastrointestinal illness is associated with the rod-shaped, gram-negative bacterium Shigella, it is called
bacillary dysentery, or shigellosis. Infections can be caused by S. dysenteriae, S. flexneri, S. boydii, and/or S. sonnei
that colonize the GI tract. Shigellosis can be spread from hand to mouth or through contaminated food and water.
Most commonly, it is transmitted through the fecal-oral route.
Shigella bacteria invade intestinal epithelial cells. When taken into a phagosome, they can escape and then live within
the cytoplasm of the cell or move to adjacent cells. As the organisms multiply, the epithelium and structures with M
cells of the Peyer’s patches in the intestine may become ulcerated and cause loss of fluid. Stomach cramps, fever,
and watery diarrhea that may also contain pus, mucus, and/or blood often develop. More severe cases may result in
ulceration of the mucosa, dehydration, and rectal bleeding. Additionally, patients may later develop hemolytic uremic

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1061

syndrome (HUS), a serious condition in which damaged blood cells build up in the kidneys and may cause kidney
failure, or reactive arthritis, a condition in which arthritis develops in multiple joints following infection. Patients may
also develop chronic post-infection irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
S. dysenteriae type 1 is able to produce Shiga toxin, which targets the endothelial cells of small blood vessels in the
small and large intestine by binding to a glycosphingolipid. Once inside the endothelial cells, the toxin targets the
large ribosomal subunit, thus affecting protein synthesis of these cells. Hemorrhaging and lesions in the colon can
result. The toxin can target the kidney’s glomerulus, the blood vessels where filtration of blood in the kidney begins,
thus resulting in HUS.
Stool samples, which should be processed promptly, are analyzed using serological or molecular techniques. One
common method is to perform immunoassays for S. dysenteriae. (Other methods that can be used to identify Shigella
include API test strips, Enterotube systems, or PCR testing. The presence of white blood cells and blood in fecal
samples occurs in about 70% of patients[4] (Figure 24.17). Severe cases may require antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin
and azithromycin, but these must be carefully prescribed because resistance is increasingly common.

Figure 24.17 Red and white blood cells can be seen in this micrograph of a stool sample from a patient with
shigellosis.

• Compare and contrast Shigella infections and intoxications.

Salmonellosis
Salmonella gastroenteritis, also called salmonellosis, is caused by the rod-shaped, gram-negative bacterium
Salmonella. Two species, S. enterica and S. bongori, cause disease in humans, but S. enterica is the most common.
The most common serotypes of S. enterica are Enteritidis and Typhi. We will discuss typhoid fever caused by
serotypes Typhi and Paratyphi A separately. Here, we will focus on salmonellosis caused by other serotypes.
Salmonella is a part of the normal intestinal microbiota of many individuals. However, salmonellosis is caused by
exogenous agents, and infection can occur depending on the serotype, size of the inoculum, and overall health of the
4. Jaya Sureshbabu. “Shigella Infection Workup.” Medscape. Updated Jun 28, 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/
968773-workup.

1062

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

host. Infection is caused by ingestion of contaminated food, handling of eggshells, or exposure to certain animals.
Salmonella is part of poultry’s microbiota, so exposure to raw eggs and raw poultry can increase the risk of infection.
Handwashing and cooking foods thoroughly greatly reduce the risk of transmission. Salmonella bacteria can survive
freezing for extended periods but cannot survive high temperatures.
Once the bacteria are ingested, they multiply within the intestines and penetrate the epithelial mucosal cells via M
cells where they continue to grow (Figure 24.18). They trigger inflammatory processes and the hypersecretion
of fluids. Once inside the body, they can persist inside the phagosomes of macrophages. Salmonella can cross the
epithelial cell membrane and enter the bloodstream and lymphatic system. Some strains of Salmonella also produce
an enterotoxin that can cause an intoxication.
Infected individuals develop fever, nausea, abdominal cramps, vomiting, headache, and diarrhea. These signs and
symptoms generally last a few days to a week. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
there are 1,000,000 cases annually, with 380 deaths each year.[5] However, because the disease is usually self-limiting,
many cases are not reported to doctors and the overall incidence may be underreported. Diagnosis involves culture
followed by serotyping and DNA fingerprinting if needed. Positive results are reported to the CDC. When an unusual
serotype is detected, samples are sent to the CDC for further analysis. Serotyping is important for determining
treatment. Oral rehydration therapy is commonly used. Antibiotics are only recommended for serious cases. When
antibiotics are needed, as in immunocompromised patients, fluoroquinolones, third-generation cephalosporins, and
ampicillin are recommended. Antibiotic resistance is a serious concern.

Figure 24.18 Salmonella entering an intestinal epithelial cell by reorganizing the host cell’s cytoskeleton via the
trigger mechanism. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes for Health)

Typhoid Fever
Certain serotypes of S. enterica, primarily serotype Typhi (S. typhi) but also Paratyphi, cause a more severe type of
salmonellosis called typhoid fever. This serious illness, which has an untreated mortality rate of 10%, causes high
fever, body aches, headache, nausea, lethargy, and a possible rash.
Some individuals carry S. typhi without presenting signs or symptoms (known as asymptomatic carriers) and
continually shed them through their feces. These carriers often have the bacteria in the gallbladder or intestinal
epithelium. Individuals consuming food or water contaminated with these feces can become infected.

5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Salmonella. Updated August 25, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/salmonella.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1063

S. typhi penetrate the intestinal mucosa, grow within the macrophages, and are transported through the body, most
notably to the liver and gallbladder. Eventually, the macrophages lyse, releasing S. typhi into the bloodstream
and lymphatic system. Mortality can result from ulceration and perforation of the intestine. A wide range of
complications, such as pneumonia and jaundice, can occur with disseminated disease.
S. typhi have Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPIs) that contain the genes for many of their virulence factors. Two
examples of important typhoid toxins are the Vi antigen, which encodes for capsule production, and chimeric A2B5
toxin, which causes many of the signs and symptoms of the acute phase of typhoid fever.
Clinical examination and culture are used to make the diagnosis. The bacteria can be cultured from feces, urine, blood,
or bone marrow. Serology, including ELISA, is used to identify the most pathogenic strains, but confirmation with
DNA testing or culture is needed. A PCR test can also be used, but is not widely available.
The recommended antibiotic treatment involves fluoroquinolones, ceftriaxone, and azithromycin. Individuals must be
extremely careful to avoid infecting others during treatment. Typhoid fever can be prevented through vaccination for
individuals traveling to parts of the world where it is common.

• Why is serotyping particularly important in Salmonella infections and typhoid fever?

Eye on Ethics

Typhoid Mary
Mary Mallon was an Irish immigrant who worked as a cook in New York in the early 20th century. Over seven
years, from 1900 to 1907, Mallon worked for a number of different households, unknowingly spreading illness
to the people who lived in each one. In 1906, one family hired George Soper, an expert in typhoid fever
epidemics, to determine the cause of the illnesses in their household. Eventually, Soper tracked Mallon down
and directly linked 22 cases of typhoid fever to her. He discovered that Mallon was a carrier for typhoid but
was immune to it herself. Although active carriers had been recognized before, this was the first time that an
asymptomatic carrier of infection had been identified.
Because she herself had never been ill, Mallon found it difficult to believe she could be the source of the illness.
She fled from Soper and the authorities because she did not want to be quarantined or forced to give up her
profession, which was relatively well paid for someone with her background. However, Mallon was eventually
caught and kept in an isolation facility in the Bronx, where she remained until 1910, when the New York health
department released her under the condition that she never again work with food. Unfortunately, Mallon did
not comply, and she soon began working as a cook again. After new cases began to appear that resulted in
the death of two individuals, the authorities tracked her down again and returned her to isolation, where she
remained for 23 more years until her death in 1938. Epidemiologists were able to trace 51 cases of typhoid
fever and three deaths directly to Mallon, who is unflatteringly remembered as “Typhoid Mary.”
The Typhoid Mary case has direct correlations in the health-care industry. Consider Kaci Hickox, an American
nurse who treated Ebola patients in West Africa during the 2014 epidemic. After returning to the United States,
Hickox was quarantined against her will for three days and later found not to have Ebola. Hickox vehemently
opposed the quarantine. In an editorial published in the British newspaper The Guardian,[6] Hickox argued
that quarantining asymptomatic health-care workers who had not tested positive for a disease would not only

1064

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

prevent such individuals from practicing their profession, but discourage others from volunteering to work in
disease-ridden areas where health-care workers are desperately needed.
What is the responsibility of an individual like Mary Mallon to change her behavior to protect others? What
happens when an individual believes that she is not a risk, but others believe that she is? How would you
react if you were in Mallon’s shoes and were placed in a quarantine you did not believe was necessary, at the
expense of your own freedom and possibly your career? Would it matter if you were definitely infected or not?

E. coli Infections
The gram-negative rod Escherichia coli is a common member of the normal microbiota of the colon. Although the
vast majority of E. coli strains are helpful commensal bacteria, some can be pathogenic and may cause dangerous
diarrheal disease. The pathogenic strains have additional virulence factors such as type 1 fimbriae that promote
colonization of the colon or may produce toxins (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens).
These virulence factors are acquired through horizontal gene transfer.
Extraintestinal disease can result if the bacteria spread from the gastrointestinal tract. Although these bacteria can be
spread from person to person, they are often acquired through contaminated food or water. There are six recognized
pathogenic groups of E. coli, but we will focus here on the four that are most commonly transmitted through food and
water.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), also known as traveler’s diarrhea, causes diarrheal illness and is common
in less developed countries. In Mexico, ETEC infection is called Montezuma’s Revenge. Following ingestion of
contaminated food or water, infected individuals develop a watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, malaise (a feeling
of being unwell), and a low fever. ETEC produces a heat-stable enterotoxin similar to cholera toxin, and adhesins
called colonization factors that help the bacteria to attach to the intestinal wall. Some strains of ETEC also produce
heat-labile toxins. The disease is usually relatively mild and self-limiting. Diagnosis involves culturing and PCR.
If needed, antibiotic treatment with fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, rifaximin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP/SMZ) may shorten infection duration. However, antibiotic resistance is a problem.
Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) is very similar to shigellosis, including its pathogenesis of intracellular invasion into
intestinal epithelial tissue. This bacterium carries a large plasmid that is involved in epithelial cell penetration. The
illness is usually self-limiting, with symptoms including watery diarrhea, chills, cramps, malaise, fever, and dysentery.
Culturing and PCR testing can be used for diagnosis. Antibiotic treatment is not recommended, so supportive therapy
is used if needed.
Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) can cause a potentially fatal diarrhea, especially in infants and those in less
developed countries. Fever, vomiting, and diarrhea can lead to severe dehydration. These E. coli inject a protein (Tir)
that attaches to the surface of the intestinal epithelial cells and triggers rearrangement of host cell actin from microvilli
to pedestals. Tir also happens to be the receptor for Intimin, a surface protein produced by EPEC, thereby allowing E.
coli to “sit” on the pedestal. The genes necessary for this pedestal formation are encoded on the locus for enterocyte
effacement (LEE) pathogenicity island. As with ETEC, diagnosis involves culturing and PCR. Treatment is similar to
that for ETEC.
The most dangerous strains are enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), which are the strains capable of causing
epidemics. In particular, the strain O157:H7 has been responsible for several recent outbreaks. Recall that the O
and H refer to surface antigens that contribute to pathogenicity and trigger a host immune response (“O” refers to
the O-side chain of the lipopolysaccharide and the “H” refers to the flagella). Similar to EPEC, EHEC also forms
pedestals. EHEC also produces a Shiga-like toxin. Because the genome of this bacterium has been sequenced, it is
known that the Shiga toxin genes were most likely acquired through transduction (horizontal gene transfer). The Shiga
6. Kaci Hickox. “Stop Calling Me the ‘Ebola Nurse.’” The Guardian. November 17, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/
2014/nov/17/stop-calling-me-ebola-nurse-kaci-hickox.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1065

toxin genes originated from Shigella dysenteriae. Prophage from a bacteriophage that previously infected Shigella
integrated into the chromosome of E. coli. The Shiga-like toxin is often called verotoxin.
EHEC can cause disease ranging from relatively mild to life-threatening. Symptoms include bloody diarrhea with
severe cramping, but no fever. Although it is often self-limiting, it can lead to hemorrhagic colitis and profuse
bleeding. One possible complication is HUS. Diagnosis involves culture, often using MacConkey with sorbitol agar
to differentiate between E. coli O157:H7, which does not ferment sorbitol, and other less virulent strains of E. coli
that can ferment sorbitol.
Serological typing or PCR testing also can be used, as well as genetic testing for Shiga toxin. To distinguish EPEC
from EHEC, because they both form pedestals on intestinal epithelial cells, it is necessary to test for genes encoding
for both the Shiga-like toxin and for the LEE. Both EPEC and EHEC have LEE, but EPEC lacks the gene for Shiga
toxin. Antibiotic therapy is not recommended and may worsen HUS because of the toxins released when the bacteria
are killed, so supportive therapies must be used. Table 24.1 summarizes the characteristics of the four most common
pathogenic groups.
Some Pathogenic Groups of E. coli
Group

Virulence
Factors and
Genes

Enterotoxigenic E.
coli (ETEC)

Heat stable
enterotoxin
similar to
cholera toxin

Relatively
mild, watery
diarrhea

Culturing, PCR

Self-limiting; if
needed,
fluoroquinolones,
doxycycline,
rifaximin, TMP/SMZ;
antibiotic resistance
is a problem

Enteroinvasive E.
coli (EIEC)

Inv (invasive
plasmid)
genes

Relatively
mild, watery
diarrhea;
dysentery or
inflammatory
colitis may
occur

Culturing, PCR; testing for
inv gene; additional assays
to distinguish from Shigella

Supportive therapy
only; antibiotics not
recommended

Enteropathogenic
E. coli (EPEC)

Locus of
enterocyte
effacement
(LEE)
pathogenicity
island

Severe fever,
vomiting,
nonbloody
diarrhea,
dehydration;
potentially
fatal

Culturing, PCR; detection of
LEE lacking Shiga-like toxin
genes

Self-limiting; if
needed,
fluoroquinolones,
doxycycline, rifaximin
(TMP/SMZ);
antibiotic resistance
is a problem

Enterohemorrhagic
E. coli (EHEC)

Verotoxin

May be mild
or very
severe;
bloody
diarrhea; may
result in HUS

Culturing; plate on
MacConkey agar with
sorbitol agar as it does not
ferment sorbitol; PCR
detection of LEE containing
Shiga-like toxin genes

Antibiotics are not
recommended due to
the risk of HUS

Table 24.1

Signs and
Symptoms

Diagnostic Tests

Treatment

1066

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

• Compare and contrast the virulence factors and signs and symptoms of infections with the four main E. coli
groups.

Cholera and Other Vibrios
The gastrointestinal disease cholera is a serious infection often associated with poor sanitation, especially following
natural disasters, because it is spread through contaminated water and food that has not been heated to temperatures
high enough to kill the bacteria. It is caused by Vibrio cholerae serotype O1, a gram-negative, flagellated bacterium
in the shape of a curved rod (vibrio). According to the CDC, cholera causes an estimated 3 to 5 million cases and
100,000 deaths each year.[7]
Because V. cholerae is killed by stomach acid, relatively large doses are needed for a few microbial cells to survive to
reach the intestines and cause infection. The motile cells travel through the mucous layer of the intestines, where they
attach to epithelial cells and release cholera enterotoxin. The toxin is an A-B toxin with activity through adenylate
cyclase (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens). Within the intestinal cell, cyclic AMP
(cAMP) levels increase, which activates a chloride channel and results in the release of ions into the intestinal lumen.
This increase in osmotic pressure in the lumen leads to water also entering the lumen. As the water and electrolytes
leave the body, it causes rapid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. Diarrhea is so profuse that it is often called
“rice water stool,” and patients are placed on cots with a hole in them to monitor the fluid loss (Figure 24.19).
Cholera is diagnosed by taking a stool sample and culturing for Vibrio. The bacteria are oxidase positive and show
non-lactose fermentation on MacConkey agar. Gram-negative lactose fermenters will produce red colonies while
non-fermenters will produce white/colorless colonies. Gram-positive bacteria will not grow on MacConkey. Lactose
fermentation is commonly used for pathogen identification because the normal microbiota generally ferments lactose
while pathogens do not. V. cholerae may also be cultured on thiosulfate citrate bile salts sucrose (TCBS) agar, a
selective and differential media for Vibrio spp., which produce a distinct yellow colony.
Cholera may be self-limiting and treatment involves rehydration and electrolyte replenishment. Although antibiotics
are not typically needed, they can be used for severe or disseminated disease. Tetracyclines are recommended, but
doxycycline, erythromycin, orfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and TMP/SMZ may be used. Recent evidence suggests that
azithromycin is also a good first-line antibiotic. Good sanitation—including appropriate sewage treatment, clean
supplies for cooking, and purified drinking water—is important to prevent infection (Figure 24.19)

7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cholera—Vibrio cholerae Infection. Updated November 6, 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/
cholera/general. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1067

Figure 24.19 (a) Outbreaks of cholera often occur in areas with poor sanitation or after natural disasters that
compromise sanitation infrastructure. (b) At a cholera treatment center in Haiti, patients are receiving intravenous
fluids to combat the dehydrating effects of this disease. They often lie on a cot with a hole in it and a bucket
underneath to allow for monitoring of fluid loss. (c) This scanning electron micrograph shows Vibrio cholera. (credit a,
b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Janice Carr,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

V. cholera is not the only Vibrio species that can cause disease. V. parahemolyticus is associated with consumption of
contaminated seafood and causes gastrointestinal illness with signs and symptoms such as watery diarrhea, nausea,
fever, chills, and abdominal cramps. The bacteria produce a heat-stable hemolysin, leading to dysentery and possible
disseminated disease. It also sometimes causes wound infections. V. parahemolyticus is diagnosed using cultures from
blood, stool, or a wound. As with V. cholera, selective medium (especially TCBS agar) works well. Tetracycline and
ciprofloxacin can be used to treat severe cases, but antibiotics generally are not needed.
Vibrio vulnificus is found in warm seawater and, unlike V. cholerae, is not associated with poor sanitary conditions.
The bacteria can be found in raw seafood, and ingestion causes gastrointestinal illness. It can also be acquired by
individuals with open skin wounds who are exposed to water with high concentrations of the pathogen. In some
cases, the infection spreads to the bloodstream and causes septicemia. Skin infection can lead to edema, ecchymosis
(discoloration of skin due to bleeding), and abscesses. Patients with underlying disease have a high fatality rate of
about 50%. It is of particular concern for individuals with chronic liver disease or who are otherwise immunodeficient
because a healthy immune system can often prevent infection from developing. V. vulnificus is diagnosed by culturing
for the pathogen from stool samples, blood samples, or skin abscesses. Adult patients are treated with doxycycline
combined with a third generation cephalosporin or with fluoroquinolones, and children are treated with TMP/SMZ.
Two other vibrios, Aeromonas hydrophila and Plesiomonas shigelloides, are also associated with marine
environments and raw seafood; they can also cause gastroenteritis. Like V. vulnificus, A. hydrophila is more often
associated with infections in wounds, generally those acquired in water. In some cases, it can also cause septicemia.
Other species of Aeromonas can cause illness. P. shigelloides is sometimes associated with more serious systemic
infections if ingested in contaminated food or water. Culture can be used to diagnose A. hydrophila and P. shigelloides
infections, for which antibiotic therapy is generally not needed. When necessary, tetracycline and ciprofloxacin,
among other antibiotics, may be used for treatment of A. hydrophila, and fluoroquinolones and trimethoprim are the
effective treatments for P. shigelloides.

• How does V. cholera infection cause rapid dehydration?

1068

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Campylobacter jejuni Gastroenteritis
Campylobacter is a genus of gram-negative, spiral or curved bacteria. They may have one or two flagella.
Campylobacter jejuni gastroenteritis, a form of campylobacteriosis, is a widespread illness that is caused by
Campylobacter jejuni. The primary route of transmission is through poultry that becomes contaminated during
slaughter. Handling of the raw chicken in turn contaminates cooking surfaces, utensils, and other foods.
Unpasteurized milk or contaminated water are also potential vehicles of transmission. In most cases, the illness
is self-limiting and includes fever, diarrhea, cramps, vomiting, and sometimes dysentery. More serious signs and
symptoms, such as bacteremia, meningitis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and hepatitis, sometimes occur. It has also been
associated with autoimmune conditions such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, a neurological disease that occurs after
some infections and results in temporary paralysis. HUS following infection can also occur. The virulence in many
strains is the result of hemolysin production and the presence of Campylobacter cytolethal distending toxin (CDT), a
powerful deoxyribonuclease (DNase) that irreversibly damages host cell DNA.
Diagnosis involves culture under special conditions, such as elevated temperature, low oxygen tension, and often
medium supplemented with antimicrobial agents. These bacteria should be cultured on selective medium (such
as Campy CV, charcoal selective medium, or cefaperazone charcoal deoxycholate agar) and incubated under
microaerophilic conditions for at least 72 hours at 42 °C. Antibiotic treatment is not usually needed, but erythromycin
or ciprofloxacin may be used.

Peptic Ulcers
The gram-negative bacterium Helicobacter pylori is able to tolerate the acidic environment of the human stomach and
has been shown to be a major cause of peptic ulcers, which are ulcers of the stomach or duodenum. The bacterium
is also associated with increased risk of stomach cancer (Figure 24.20). According to the CDC, approximately twothirds of the population is infected with H. pylori, but less than 20% have a risk of developing ulcers or stomach
cancer. H. pylori is found in approximately 80% of stomach ulcers and in over 90% of duodenal ulcers.[8]
H. pylori colonizes epithelial cells in the stomach using pili for adhesion. These bacteria produce urease, which
stimulates an immune response and creates ammonia that neutralizes stomach acids to provide a more hospitable
microenvironment. The infection damages the cells of the stomach lining, including those that normally produce the
protective mucus that serves as a barrier between the tissue and stomach acid. As a result, inflammation (gastritis)
occurs and ulcers may slowly develop. Ulcer formation can also be caused by toxin activity. It has been reported that
50% of clinical isolates of H. pylori have detectable levels of exotoxin activity in vitro.[9] This toxin, VacA, induces
vacuole formation in host cells. VacA has no primary sequence homology with other bacterial toxins, and in a mouse
model, there is a correlation between the presence of the toxin gene, the activity of the toxin, and gastric epithelial
tissue damage.
Signs and symptoms include nausea, lack of appetite, bloating, burping, and weight loss. Bleeding ulcers may produce
dark stools. If no treatment is provided, the ulcers can become deeper, more tissues can be involved, and stomach
perforation can occur. Because perforation allows digestive enzymes and acid to leak into the body, it is a very serious
condition.

8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Helicobacter pylori: Fact Sheet for Health Care Providers.” Updated July 1998.
http://www.cdc.gov/ulcer/files/hpfacts.pdf.
9. T. L. Cover. “The Vacuolating Cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori.” Molecular Microbiology 20 (1996) 2: pp. 241–246.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8733223.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1069

Figure 24.20 Helicobacter infection decreases mucus production and causes peptic ulcers. (credit top left photo:
modification of work by "Santhosh Thomas"/YouTube; credit top right photo: modification of work by Moriya M,
Uehara A, Okumura T, Miyamoto M, and Kohgo Y)

To diagnose H. pylori infection, multiple methods are available. In a breath test, the patient swallows radiolabeled
urea. If H. pylori is present, the bacteria will produce urease to break down the urea. This reaction produces
radiolabeled carbon dioxide that can be detected in the patient’s breath. Blood testing can also be used to detect
antibodies to H. pylori. The bacteria themselves can be detected using either a stool test or a stomach wall biopsy.
Antibiotics can be used to treat the infection. However, unique to H. pylori, the recommendation from the US
Food and Drug Administration is to use a triple therapy. The current protocols are 10 days of treatment with
omeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (OAC); 14 days of treatment with bismuth subsalicylate, metronidazole,
and tetracycline (BMT); or 10 or 14 days of treatment with lansoprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (LAC).
Omeprazole, bismuth subsalicylate, and lansoprazole are not antibiotics but are instead used to decrease acid levels
because H. pylori prefers acidic environments.

1070

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Although treatment is often valuable, there are also risks to H. pylori eradication. Infection with H. pylori may
actually protect against some cancers, such as esophageal adenocarcinoma and gastroesophageal reflux disease.[10][11]

• How does H. pylori cause peptic ulcers?

Clostridium perfringens Gastroenteritis
Clostridium perfringens gastroenteritis is a generally mild foodborne disease that is associated with undercooked
meats and other foods. C. perfringens is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, endospore-forming anaerobic bacterium that
is tolerant of high and low temperatures. At high temperatures, the bacteria can form endospores that will germinate
rapidly in foods or within the intestine. Food poisoning by type A strains is common. This strain always produces
an enterotoxin, sometimes also present in other strains, that causes the clinical symptoms of cramps and diarrhea.
A more severe form of the illness, called pig-bel or enteritis necroticans, causes hemorrhaging, pain, vomiting, and
bloating. Gangrene of the intestines may result. This form has a high mortality rate but is rare in the United States.
Diagnosis involves detecting the C. perfringens toxin in stool samples using either molecular biology techniques
(PCR detection of the toxin gene) or immunology techniques (ELISA). The bacteria itself may also be detected in
foods or in fecal samples. Treatment includes rehydration therapy, electrolyte replacement, and intravenous fluids.
Antibiotics are not recommended because they can damage the balance of the microbiota in the gut, and there are
concerns about antibiotic resistance. The illness can be prevented through proper handling and cooking of foods,
including prompt refrigeration at sufficiently low temperatures and cooking food to a sufficiently high temperature.

Clostridium difficile
Clostridium difficile is a gram-positive rod that can be a commensal bacterium as part of the normal microbiota of
healthy individuals. When the normal microbiota is disrupted by long-term antibiotic use, it can allow the overgrowth
of this bacterium, resulting in antibiotic-associated diarrhea caused by C. difficile. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea
can also be considered a nosocomial disease. Patients at the greatest risk of C. difficile infection are those who
are immunocompromised, have been in health-care settings for extended periods, are older, have recently taken
antibiotics, have had gastrointestinal procedures done, or use proton pump inhibitors, which reduce stomach acidity
and allow proliferation of C. difficile. Because this species can form endospores, it can survive for extended periods
of time in the environment under harsh conditions and is a considerable concern in health-care settings.
This bacterium produces two toxins, Clostridium difficile toxin A (TcdA) and Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB).
These toxins inactivate small GTP-binding proteins, resulting in actin condensation and cell rounding, followed
by cell death. Infections begin with focal necrosis, then ulceration with exudate, and can progress to
pseudomembranous colitis, which involves inflammation of the colon and the development of a pseudomembrane
of fibrin containing dead epithelial cells and leukocytes (Figure 24.21). Watery diarrhea, dehydration, fever, loss of
appetite, and abdominal pain can result. Perforation of the colon can occur, leading to septicemia, shock, and death. C.
difficile is also associated with necrotizing enterocolitis in premature babies and neutropenic enterocolitis associated
with cancer therapies.

10. Martin J. Blaser. “Disappearing Microbiota: Helicobacter pylori Protection against Esophageal Adenocarcinoma.” Cancer Prevention
Research 1 (2008) 5: pp. 308–311. http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/1/5/308.full.pdf+html.
11. Ivan F. N. Hung and Benjamin C. Y. Wong. “Assessing the Risks and Benefits of Treating Helicobacter pylori Infection.” Therapeutic
Advances in Gastroenterology 2 (2009) 3: pp, 141–147. doi: 10.1177/1756283X08100279.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1071

Figure 24.21 Clostridium difficile is able to colonize the mucous membrane of the colon when the normal microbiota
is disrupted. The toxins TcdA and TcdB trigger an immune response, with neutrophils and monocytes migrating from
the bloodstream to the site of infection. Over time, inflammation and dead cells contribute to the development of a
pseudomembrane. (credit micrograph: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Diagnosis is made by considering the patient history (such as exposure to antibiotics), clinical presentation, imaging,
endoscopy, lab tests, and other available data. Detecting the toxin in stool samples is used to confirm diagnosis.
Although culture is preferred, it is rarely practical in clinical practice because the bacterium is an obligate anaerobe.
Nucleic acid amplification tests, including PCR, are considered preferable to ELISA testing for molecular analysis.
The first step of conventional treatment is to stop antibiotic use, and then to provide supportive therapy with
electrolyte replacement and fluids. Metronidazole is the preferred treatment if the C. difficile diagnosis has been
confirmed. Vancomycin can also be used, but it should be reserved for patients for whom metronidazole was
ineffective or who meet other criteria (e.g., under 10 years of age, pregnant, or allergic to metronidazole).

1072

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

A newer approach to treatment, known as a fecal transplant, focuses on restoring the microbiota of the gut in order
to combat the infection. In this procedure, a healthy individual donates a stool sample, which is mixed with saline
and transplanted to the recipient via colonoscopy, endoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, or enema. It has been reported that this
procedure has greater than 90% success in resolving C. difficile infections.[12]

• How does antibiotic use lead to C. difficile infections?

Foodborne Illness Due to Bacillus cereus
Bacillus cereus, commonly found in soil, is a gram-positive endospore-forming bacterium that can sometimes cause
foodborne illness. B. cereus endospores can survive cooking and produce enterotoxins in food after it has been heated;
illnesses often occur after eating rice and other prepared foods left at room temperature for too long. The signs and
symptoms appear within a few hours of ingestion and include nausea, pain, and abdominal cramps. B. cereus produces
two toxins: one causing diarrhea, and the other causing vomiting. More severe signs and symptoms can sometimes
develop.
Diagnosis can be accomplished by isolating bacteria from stool samples or vomitus and uneaten infected food.
Treatment involves rehydration and supportive therapy. Antibiotics are not typically needed, as the illness is usually
relatively mild and is due to toxin activity.

Foodborne Illness Due to Yersinia
The genus Yersinia is best known for Yersinia pestis, a gram-negative rod that causes the plague. However, Y.
enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis can cause gastroenteritis. The infection is generally transmitted through the
fecal-oral route, with ingestion of food or water that has been contaminated by feces. Intoxication can also result
because of the activity of its endotoxin and exotoxins (enterotoxin and cytotoxin necrotizing factor). The illness
is normally relatively mild and self-limiting. However, severe diarrhea and dysentery can develop in infants. In
adults, the infection can spread and cause complications such as reactive arthritis, thyroid disorders, endocarditis,
glomerulonephritis, eye inflammation, and/or erythema nodosum. Bacteremia may develop in rare cases.
Diagnosis is generally made by detecting the bacteria in stool samples. Samples may also be obtained from other
tissues or body fluids. Treatment is usually supportive, including rehydration, without antibiotics. If bacteremia
or other systemic disease is present, then antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, doxycycline, and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may be used. Recovery can take up to two weeks.

• Compare and contrast foodborne illnesses due to B. cereus and Yersinia.

12. Faith Rohlke and Neil Stollman. “Fecal Microbiota Transplantation in Relapsing Clostridium difficile Infection,” Therapeutic Advances
in Gastroenterology 5 (2012) 6: 403–420. doi: 10.1177/1756283X12453637.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Disease Profile
Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract generally occur when bacteria or bacterial toxins are ingested
in contaminated food or water. Toxins and other virulence factors can produce gastrointestinal inflammation
and general symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting. Bacterial GI infections can vary widely in terms of
severity and treatment. Some can be treated with antibiotics, but in other cases antibiotics may be ineffective
in combating toxins or even counterproductive if they compromise the GI microbiota. Figure 24.22 and Figure
24.23 the key features of common bacterial GI infections.

1073

1074

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.22

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.23

1075

1076

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Clinical Focus
Part 2
At the hospital, Carli’s doctor began to think about possible causes of her severe gastrointestinal distress. One
possibility was food poisoning, but no one else in her family was sick. The doctor asked about what Carli had
eaten the previous day; her mother mentioned that she’d had eggs for lunch, and that they may have been
a little undercooked. The doctor took a sample of Carli’s stool and sent it for laboratory testing as part of her
workup. She suspected that Carli could have a case of bacterial or viral gastroenteritis, but she needed to
know the cause in order to prescribe an appropriate treatment.
In the laboratory, technicians microscopically identified gram-negative bacilli in Carli’s stool sample. They also
established a pure culture of the bacteria and analyzed it for antigens. This testing showed that the causative
agent was Salmonella.

• What should the doctor do now to treat Carli?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the GI tract and liver

In the developing world, acute viral gastroenteritis is devastating and a leading cause of death for children.[13]
Worldwide, diarrhea is the second leading cause of mortality for children under age five, and 70% of childhood
gastroenteritis is viral.[14] As discussed, there are a number of bacteria responsible for diarrhea, but viruses can also
cause diarrhea. E. coli and rotavirus are the most common causative agents in the developing world. In this section,
we will discuss rotaviruses and other, less common viruses that can also cause gastrointestinal illnesses.

Gastroenteritis Caused by Rotaviruses
Rotaviruses are double-stranded RNA viruses in the family Reoviridae. They are responsible for common diarrheal
illness, although prevention through vaccination is becoming more common. The virus is primarily spread by the
fecal-oral route (Figure 24.24).

13. Caleb K. King, Roger Glass, Joseph S. Bresee, Christopher Duggan. “Managing Acute Gastroenteritis Among Children: Oral
Rehydration, Maintenance, and Nutritional Therapy.” MMWR 52 (2003) RR16: pp. 1–16. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
rr5216a1.htm.
14. Elizabeth Jane Elliott. “Acute Gastroenteritis in Children.” British Medical Journal 334 (2007) 7583: 35–40, doi: 10.1136/
bmj.39036.406169.80; S. Ramani and G. Kang. “Viruses Causing Diarrhoea in the Developing World.” Current Opinions in Infectious
Diseases 22 (2009) 5: pp. 477–482. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328330662f; Michael Vincent F Tablang. “Viral Gastroenteritis.” Medscape.
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/176515-overview.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1077

Figure 24.24 Rotaviruses in a fecal sample are visualized using electron microscopy. (credit: Dr. Graham Beards)

These viruses are widespread in children, especially in day-care centers. The CDC estimates that 95% of children in
the United States have had at least one rotavirus infection by the time they reach age five.[15] Due to the memory of
the body’s immune system, adults who come into contact with rotavirus will not contract the infection or, if they do,
are asymptomatic. The elderly, however, are vulnerable to rotavirus infection due to weakening of the immune system
with age, so infections can spread through nursing homes and similar facilities. In these cases, the infection may be
transmitted from a family member who may have subclinical or clinical disease. The virus can also be transmitted
from contaminated surfaces, on which it can survive for some time.
Infected individuals exhibit fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. The virus can survive in the stomach following a meal,
but is normally found in the small intestines, particularly the epithelial cells on the villi. Infection can cause food
intolerance, especially with respect to lactose. The illness generally appears after an incubation period of about two
days and lasts for approximately one week (three to eight days). Without supportive treatment, the illness can cause
severe fluid loss, dehydration, and even death. Even with milder illness, repeated infections can potentially lead to
malnutrition, especially in developing countries, where rotavirus infection is common due to poor sanitation and lack
of access to clean drinking water. Patients (especially children) who are malnourished after an episode of diarrhea are
more susceptible to future diarrheal illness, increasing their risk of death from rotavirus infection.
The most common clinical tool for diagnosis is enzyme immunoassay, which detects the virus from fecal samples.
Latex agglutination assays are also used. Additionally, the virus can be detected using electron microscopy and RTPCR.
Treatment is supportive with oral rehydration therapy. Preventive vaccination is also available. In the United States,
rotavirus vaccines are part of the standard vaccine schedule and administration follows the guidelines of the World
Health Organization (WHO). The WHO recommends that all infants worldwide receive the rotavirus vaccine, the first
dose between six and 15 weeks of age and the second before 32 weeks.[16]

Gastroenteritis Caused by Noroviruses
Noroviruses, commonly identified as Norwalk viruses, are caliciviruses. Several strains can cause gastroenteritis.
There are millions of cases a year, predominately in infants, young children, and the elderly. These viruses are
easily transmitted and highly contagious. They are known for causing widespread infections in groups of people in
confined spaces, such as on cruise ships. The viruses can be transmitted through direct contact, through touching
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Rotavirus,” The Pink Book. Updated September 8, 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
pubs/pinkbook/rota.html.
16. World Health Organization. “Rotavirus.” Immunization, Vaccines, and Biologicals. Updated April 21, 2010. http://www.who.int/
immunization/topics/rotavirus/en/.

1078

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

contaminated surfaces, and through contaminated food. Because the virus is not killed by disinfectants used at
standard concentrations for killing bacteria, the risk of transmission remains high, even after cleaning.
The signs and symptoms of norovirus infection are similar to those for rotavirus, with watery diarrhea, mild cramps,
and fever. Additionally, these viruses sometimes cause projectile vomiting. The illness is usually relatively mild,
develops 12 to 48 hours after exposure, and clears within a couple of days without treatment. However, dehydration
may occur.
Norovirus can be detected using PCR or enzyme immunoassay (EIA) testing. RT-qPCR is the preferred approach
as EIA is insufficiently sensitive. If EIA is used for rapid testing, diagnosis should be confirmed using PCR. No
medications are available, but the illness is usually self-limiting. Rehydration therapy and electrolyte replacement
may be used. Good hygiene, hand washing, and careful food preparation reduce the risk of infection.

Gastroenteritis Caused by Astroviruses
Astroviruses are single-stranded RNA viruses (family Astroviridae) that can cause severe gastroenteritis, especially
in infants and children. Signs and symptoms include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fever, abdominal pain, headache,
and malaise. The viruses are transmitted through the fecal-oral route (contaminated food or water). For diagnosis,
stool samples are analyzed. Testing may involve enzyme immunoassays and immune electron microscopy. Treatment
involves supportive rehydration and electrolyte replacement if needed.

• Why are rotaviruses, noroviruses, and astroviruses more common in children?

Disease Profile
Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
A number of viruses can cause gastroenteritis, characterized by inflammation of the GI tract and other signs
and symptoms with a range of severities. As with bacterial GI infections, some cases can be relatively
mild and self-limiting, while others can become serious and require intensive treatment. Antimicrobial drugs
are generally not used to treat viral gastroenteritis; generally, these illnesses can be treated effectively with
rehydration therapy to replace fluids lost in bouts of diarrhea and vomiting. Because most viral causes of
gastroenteritis are quite contagious, the best preventive measures involve avoiding and/or isolating infected
individuals and limiting transmission through good hygiene and sanitation.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1079

Figure 24.25

Hepatitis
Hepatitis is a general term meaning inflammation of the liver, which can have a variety of causes. In some cases, the
cause is viral infection. There are five main hepatitis viruses that are clinically significant: hepatitisviruses A (HAV),
B (HBV), C (HCV), D, (HDV) and E (HEV) (Figure 24.26). Note that other viruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV), yellow fever, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) can also cause hepatitis and are discussed in Viral Infections of
the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems.

Figure 24.26 Five main types of viruses cause hepatitis. HAV is a non-enveloped ssRNA(+) virus and is a member
of the picornavirus family (Baltimore Group IV). HBV is a dsDNA enveloped virus, replicates using reverse
transcriptase, and is a member of the hepadnavirus family (Baltimore Group VII). HCV is an enveloped ssRNA(+)
virus and is a member of the flavivirus family (Baltimore Group IV). HDV is an enveloped ssRNA(–) that is circular
(Baltimore Group V). This virus can only propagate in the presence of HBV. HEV is a non-enveloped ssRNA(+) virus
and a member of the hepeviridae family (Baltimore Group IV).

Although the five hepatitis viruses differ, they can cause some similar signs and symptoms because they all have an
affinity for hepatocytes (liver cells). HAV and HEV can be contracted through ingestion while HBV, HCV, and HDV
are transmitted by parenteral contact. It is possible for individuals to become long term or chronic carriers of hepatitis
viruses.

1080

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

The virus enters the blood (viremia), spreading to the spleen, the kidneys, and the liver. During viral replication, the
virus infects hepatocytes. The inflammation is caused by the hepatocytes replicating and releasing more hepatitis
virus. Signs and symptoms include malaise, anorexia, loss of appetite, dark urine, pain in the upper right quadrant
of the abdomen, vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, joint pain, and gray stool. Additionally, when the liver is diseased or
injured, it is unable to break down hemoglobin effectively, and bilirubin can build up in the body, giving the skin and
mucous membranes a yellowish color, a condition called jaundice (Figure 24.27). In severe cases, death from liver
necrosis may occur.

Figure 24.27 (a) Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver resulting from a variety of root causes. It can cause jaundice.
(b) Jaundice is characterized by yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and sclera of the eyes. (credit b left:
modification of work by James Heilman, MD; credit b right: modification of work by “Sab3el3eish”/Wikimedia
Commons)

Despite having many similarities, each of the hepatitis viruses has its own unique characteristics. HAV is generally
transmitted through the fecal-oral route, close personal contact, or exposure to contaminated water or food. Hepatitis
A can develop after an incubation period of 15 to 50 days (the mean is 30). It is normally mild or even asymptomatic
and is usually self-limiting within weeks to months. A more severe form, fulminant hepatitis, rarely occurs but has a
high fatality rate of 70–80%. Vaccination is available and is recommended especially for children (between ages one
and two), those traveling to countries with higher risk, those with liver disease and certain other conditions, and drug
users.
Although HBV is associated with similar signs and symptoms, transmission and outcomes differ. This virus has a
mean incubation period of 120 days and is generally associated with exposure to infectious blood or body fluids
such as semen or saliva. Exposure can occur through skin puncture, across the placenta, or through mucosal contact,
but it is not spread through casual contact such as hugging, hand holding, sneezing, or coughing, or even through
breastfeeding or kissing. Risk of infection is greatest for those who use intravenous drugs or who have sexual contact
with an infected individual. Health-care workers are also at risk from needle sticks and other injuries when treating
infected patients. The infection can become chronic and may progress to cirrhosis or liver failure. It is also associated
with liver cancer. Chronic infections are associated with the highest mortality rates and are more common in infants.
Approximately 90% of infected infants become chronic carriers, compared with only 6–10% of infected adults.[17]
Vaccination is available and is recommended for children as part of the standard vaccination schedule (one dose at
birth and the second by 18 months of age) and for adults at greater risk (e.g., those with certain diseases, intravenous
drug users, and those who have sex with multiple partners). Health-care agencies are required to offer the HBV
vaccine to all workers who have occupational exposure to blood and/or other infectious materials.

17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “The ABCs of Hepatitis.” Updated 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/resources/
professionals/pdfs/abctable.pdf.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1081

HCV is often undiagnosed and therefore may be more widespread than is documented. It has a mean incubation
period of 45 days and is transmitted through contact with infected blood. Although some cases are asymptomatic
and/or resolve spontaneously, 75%–85% of infected individuals become chronic carriers. Nearly all cases result from
parenteral transmission often associated with IV drug use or transfusions. The risk is greatest for individuals with past
or current history of intravenous drug use or who have had sexual contact with infected individuals. It has also been
spread through contaminated blood products and can even be transmitted through contaminated personal products
such as toothbrushes and razors. New medications have recently been developed that show great effectiveness in
treating HCV and that are tailored to the specific genotype causing the infection.
HDV is uncommon in the United States and only occurs in individuals who are already infected with HBV, which
it requires for replication. Therefore, vaccination against HBV is also protective against HDV infection. HDV is
transmitted through contact with infected blood.
HEV infections are also rare in the United States but many individuals have a positive antibody titer for HEV.
The virus is most commonly spread by the fecal-oral route through food and/or water contamination, or personto-person contact, depending on the genotype of the virus, which varies by location. There are four genotypes that
differ somewhat in their mode of transmission, distribution, and other factors (for example, two are zoonotic and
two are not, and only one causes chronic infection). Genotypes three and four are only transmitted through food,
while genotypes one and two are also transmitted through water and fecal-oral routes. Genotype one is the only type
transmitted person-to-person and is the most common cause of HEV outbreaks. Consumption of undercooked meat,
especially deer or pork, and shellfish can lead to infection. Genotypes three and four are zoonoses, so they can be
transmitted from infected animals that are consumed. Pregnant women are at particular risk. This disease is usually
self-limiting within two weeks and does not appear to cause chronic infection.
General laboratory testing for hepatitis begins with blood testing to examine liver function (Figure 24.28). When
the liver is not functioning normally, the blood will contain elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase, alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), direct bilirubin, total bilirubin, serum albumin, serum
total protein, and calculated globulin, albumin/globulin (A/G) ratio. Some of these are included in a complete
metabolic panel (CMP), which may first suggest a possible liver problem and indicate the need for more
comprehensive testing. A hepatitis virus serological test panel can be used to detect antibodies for hepatitis viruses A,
B, C, and sometimes D. Additionally, other immunological and genomic tests are available.
Specific treatments other than supportive therapy, rest, and fluids are often not available for hepatitis virus infection,
except for HCV, which is often self-limited. Immunoglobulins can be used prophylactically following possible
exposure. Medications are also used, including interferon alpha 2b and antivirals (e.g., lamivudine, entecavir,
adefovir, and telbivudine) for chronic infections. Hepatitis C can be treated with interferon (as monotherapy or
combined with other treatments), protease inhibitors, and other antivirals (e.g., the polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir).
Combination treatments are commonly used. Antiviral and immunosuppressive medications may be used for chronic
cases of HEV. In severe cases, liver transplants may be necessary. Additionally, vaccines are available to prevent
infection with HAV and HBV. The HAV vaccine is also protective against HEV. The HBV vaccine is also protective
against HDV. There is no vaccine against HCV.

Link to Learning
Learn more information about heptatitisvirus (https://openstax.org/
22Hepvirus) infections.

1082

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

• Why do the five different hepatitis viruses all cause similar signs and symptoms?

Micro Connections
Preventing HBV Transmission in Health-Care Settings
Hepatitis B was once a leading on-the-job hazard for health-care workers. Many health-care workers over the
years have become infected, some developing cirrhosis and liver cancer. In 1982, the CDC recommended that
health-care workers be vaccinated against HBV, and rates of infection have declined since then. Even though
vaccination is now common, it is not always effective and not all individuals are vaccinated. Therefore, there
is still a small risk for infection, especially for health-care workers working with individuals who have chronic
infections, such as drug addicts, and for those with higher risk of needle sticks, such as phlebotomists. Dentists
are also at risk.
Health-care workers need to take appropriate precautions to prevent infection by HBV and other illnesses.
Blood is the greatest risk, but other body fluids can also transmit infection. Damaged skin, as occurs with
eczema or psoriasis, can also allow transmission. Avoiding contact with body fluids, especially blood, by
wearing gloves and face protection and using disposable syringes and needles reduce the risk of infection.
Washing exposed skin with soap and water is recommended. Antiseptics may also be used, but may not help.
Post-exposure treatment, including treatment with hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) and vaccination, may
be used in the event of exposure to the virus from an infected patient. Detailed protocols are available for
managing these situations. The virus can remain infective for up to seven days when on surfaces, even if no
blood or other fluids are visible, so it is important to consider the best choices for disinfecting and sterilizing
equipment that could potentially transmit the virus. The CDC recommends a solution of 10% bleach to disinfect
surfaces.[18] Finally, testing blood products is important to reduce the risk of transmission during transfusions
and similar procedures.

Disease Profile
Viral Hepatitis
Hepatitis involves inflammation of the liver that typically manifests with signs and symptoms such as jaundice,
nausea, vomiting, joint pain, gray stool, and loss of appetite. However, the severity and duration of the
disease can vary greatly depending on the causative agent. Some infections may be completely asymptomatic,
whereas others may be life threatening. The five different viruses capable of causing hepatitis are compared
in Figure 24.28. For the sake of comparison, this table presents only the unique aspects of each form of viral
hepatitis, not the commonalities.

18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Hepatitis B FAQs for Health Professionals.” Updated August 4, 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/HBV/HBVfaq.htm.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.28

1083

1084

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

24.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common protozoans that can cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific protozoan diseases affecting the GI tract

Like other microbes, protozoa are abundant in natural microbiota but can also be associated with significant illness.
Gastrointestinal diseases caused by protozoa are generally associated with exposure to contaminated food and water,
meaning that those without access to good sanitation are at greatest risk. Even in developed countries, infections can
occur and these microbes have sometimes caused significant outbreaks from contamination of public water supplies.

Giardiasis
Also called backpacker’s diarrhea or beaver fever, giardiasis is a common disease in the United States caused by
the flagellated protist Giardia lamblia, also known as Giardia intestinalis or Giardia duodenalis (Figure 1.16). To
establish infection, G. lamblia uses a large adhesive disk to attach to the intestinal mucosa. The disk is comprised of
microtubules. During adhesion, the flagella of G. lamblia move in a manner that draws fluid out from under the disk,
resulting in an area of lower pressure that promotes its adhesion to the intestinal epithelial cells. Due to its attachment,
Giardia also blocks absorption of nutrients, including fats.
Transmission occurs through contaminated food or water or directly from person to person. Children in day-care
centers are at risk due to their tendency to put items into their mouths that may be contaminated. Large outbreaks may
occur if a public water supply becomes contaminated. Giardia have a resistant cyst stage in their life cycle that is able
to survive cold temperatures and the chlorination treatment typically used for drinking water in municipal reservoirs.
As a result, municipal water must be filtered to trap and remove these cysts. Once consumed by the host, Giardia
develops into the active tropozoite.
Infected individuals may be asymptomatic or have gastrointestinal signs and symptoms, sometimes accompanied by
weight loss. Common symptoms, which appear one to three weeks after exposure, include diarrhea, nausea, stomach
cramps, gas, greasy stool (because fat absorption is being blocked), and possible dehydration. The parasite remains
in the colon and does not cause systemic infection. Signs and symptoms generally clear within two to six weeks.
Chronic infections may develop and are often resistant to treatment. These are associated with weight loss, episodic
diarrhea, and malabsorption syndrome due to the blocked nutrient absorption.
Diagnosis may be made using observation under the microscope. A stool ova and parasite (O&P) exam involves
direct examination of a stool sample for the presence of cysts and trophozoites; it can be used to distinguish common
parasitic intestinal infections. ELISA and other immunoassay tests, including commercial direct fluorescence
antibody kits, are also used. The most common treatments use metronidazole as the first-line choice, followed by
tinidazole. If the infection becomes chronic, the parasites may become resistant to medications.

Cryptosporidiosis
Another protozoan intestinal illness is cryptosporidiosis, which is usually caused by Cryptosporidium parvum or
C. hominis. (Figure 24.29) These pathogens are commonly found in animals and can be spread in feces from
mice, birds, and farm animals. Contaminated water and food are most commonly responsible for transmission. The
protozoan can also be transmitted through human contact with infected animals or their feces.
In the United States, outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis generally occur through contamination of the public water supply
or contaminated water at water parks, swimming pools, and day-care centers. The risk is greatest in areas with poor
sanitation, making the disease more common in developing countries.
Signs and symptoms include watery diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, cramps, fever, dehydration, and weight loss. The
illness is generally self-limiting within a month. However, immunocompromised patients, such as those with HIV/
AIDS, are at particular risk of severe illness or death.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1085

Diagnosis involves direct examination of stool samples, often over multiple days. As with giardiasis, a stool O&P
exam may be helpful. Acid fast staining is often used. Enzyme immunoassays and molecular analysis (PCR) are
available.
The first line of treatment is typically oral rehydration therapy. Medications are sometimes used to treat the diarrhea.
The broad-range anti-parasitic drug nitazoxanide can be used to treat cryptosporidiosis. Other anti-parasitic drugs that
can be used include azithromycin and paromomycin.

Figure 24.29 Immunofluorescent staining allows for visualization of Cryptosporidium spp. (credit: modification of
work by EPA/H.D.A. Lindquist)

Amoebiasis (Amebiasis)
The protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica causes amoebiasis, which is known as amoebic dysentery in severe
cases. E. histolytica is generally transmitted through water or food that has fecal contamination. The disease is most
widespread in the developing world and is one of the leading causes of mortality from parasitic disease worldwide.
Disease can be caused by as few as 10 cysts being transmitted.
Signs and symptoms range from nonexistent to mild diarrhea to severe amoebic dysentery. Severe infection causes the
abdomen to become distended and may be associated with fever. The parasite may live in the colon without causing
signs or symptoms or may invade the mucosa to cause colitis. In some cases, the disease spreads to the spleen, brain,
genitourinary tract, or lungs. In particular, it may spread to the liver and cause an abscess. When a liver abscess
develops, fever, nausea, liver tenderness, weight loss, and pain in the right abdominal quadrant may occur. Chronic
infection may occur and is associated with intermittent diarrhea, mucus, pain, flatulence, and weight loss.
Direct examination of fecal specimens may be used for diagnosis. As with cryptosporidiosis, samples are often
examined on multiple days. A stool O&P exam of fecal or biopsy specimens may be helpful. Immunoassay, serology,
biopsy, molecular, and antibody detection tests are available. Enzyme immunoassay may not distinguish current from
past illness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used to detect any liver abscesses. The first line of treatment
is metronidazole or tinidazole, followed by diloxanide furoate, iodoquinol, or paromomycin to eliminate the cysts that
remain.

Cyclosporiasis
The intestinal disease cyclosporiasis is caused by the protozoan Cyclospora cayetanensis. It is endemic to tropical
and subtropical regions and therefore uncommon in the United States, although there have been outbreaks associated
with contaminated produce imported from regions where the protozoan is more common.

1086

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

This protist is transmitted through contaminated food and water and reaches the lining of the small intestine, where it
causes infection. Signs and symptoms begin within seven to ten days after ingestion. Based on limited data, it appears
to be seasonal in ways that differ regionally and that are poorly understood.[19]
Some individuals do not develop signs or symptoms. Those who do may exhibit explosive and watery diarrhea,
fever, nausea, vomiting, cramps, loss of appetite, fatigue, and bloating. These symptoms may last for months without
treatment. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the recommended treatment.
Microscopic examination is used for diagnosis. A stool O&P examination may be helpful. The oocysts have a
distinctive blue halo when viewed using ultraviolet fluorescence microscopy (Figure 24.30).

Figure 24.30 Cyclospora cayetanensis are autofluorescent under ultraviolet light. (credit: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Which protozoan GI infections are common in the United States?

Disease Profile
Protozoan Gastrointestinal Infections
Protozoan GI infections are generally transmitted through contaminated food or water, triggering diarrhea and
vomiting that can lead to dehydration. Rehydration therapy is an important aspect of treatment, but most
protozoan GI infections can also be treated with drugs that target protozoans.

19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Cyclosporiasis FAQs for Health Professionals.” Updated June 13, 2014.
http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/cyclosporiasis/health_professionals/hp-faqs.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1087

Figure 24.31

24.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common helminths that cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific helminthic diseases affecting GI tract

Helminths are widespread intestinal parasites. These parasites can be divided into three common groups: roundbodied worms also described as nematodes, flat-bodied worms that are segmented (also described as cestodes),
and flat-bodied worms that are non-segmented (also described as trematodes). The nematodes include roundworms,
pinworms, hookworms, and whipworms. Cestodes include beef, pork, and fish tapeworms. Trematodes are
collectively called flukes and more uniquely identified with the body site where the adult flukes are located. Although
infection can have serious consequences, many of these parasites are so well adapted to the human host that there is
little obvious disease.

1088

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Ascariasis
Infections caused by the large nematode roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides, a soil-transmitted helminth, are called
ascariasis. Over 800 million to 1 billion people are estimated to be infected worldwide.[20] Infections are most
common in warmer climates and at warmer times of year. At present, infections are uncommon in the United States.
The eggs of the worms are transmitted through contaminated food and water. This may happen if food is grown in
contaminated soil, including when manure is used as fertilizer.
When an individual consumes embryonated eggs (those with a developing embryo), the eggs travel to the intestine
and the larvae are able to hatch. Ascaris is able to produce proteases that allow for penetration and degradation of host
tissue. The juvenile worms can then enter the circulatory system and migrate to the lungs where they enter the alveoli
(air sacs). From here they crawl to the pharynx and then follow the gut lumen to return to the small intestine, where
they mature into adult roundworms. Females in the host will produce and release eggs that leave the host via feces. In
some cases, the worms can block ducts such as those of the pancreas or gallbladder.
The infection is commonly asymptomatic. When signs and symptoms are present, they include shortness of breath,
cough, nausea, diarrhea, blood in the stool, abdominal pain, weight loss, and fatigue. The roundworms may be visible
in the stool. In severe cases, children with substantial infections may experience intestinal blockage.
The eggs can be identified by microscopic examination of the stool (Figure 24.32). In some cases, the worms
themselves may be identified if coughed up or excreted in stool. They can also sometimes be identified by X-rays,
ultrasounds, or MRIs.
Ascariasis is self-limiting, but can last one to two years because the worms can inhibit the body’s inflammatory
response through glycan gimmickry (see Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic Pathogens). The first line of
treatment is mebendazole or albendazole. In some severe cases, surgery may be required.

Figure 24.32 (a) Adult Ascaris lumbricoides roundworms can cause intestinal blockage. (b) This mass of A.
lumbricoides worms was excreted by a child. (c) A micrograph of a fertilized egg of A. lumbricoides. Fertilized eggs
can be distinguished from unfertilized eggs because they are round rather than elongated and have a thicker cell
wall. (credit a: modification of work by South African Medical Research Council; credit b: modification of work by
James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

• Describe the route by which A. lumbricoides reaches the host’s intestines as an adult worm.

20. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites–Ascariasis.” Updated May 24, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/ascariasis/
index.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1089

Hookworm
Two species of nematode worms are associated with hookworm infection. Both species are found in the Americas,
Africa, and Asia. Necator americanus is found predominantly in the United States and Australia. Another species,
Ancylostoma doudenale, is found in southern Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Asia.
The eggs of these species develop into larvae in soil contaminated by dog or cat feces. These larvae can penetrate
the skin. After traveling through the venous circulation, they reach the lungs. When they are coughed up, they are
then swallowed and can enter the intestine and develop into mature adults. At this stage, they attach to the wall of the
intestine, where they feed on blood and can potentially cause anemia. Signs and symptoms include cough, an itchy
rash, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. In children, hookworms can affect physical and cognitive growth.
Some hookworm species, such as Ancylostoma braziliense that is commonly found in animals such as cats and dogs,
can penetrate human skin and migrate, causing cutaneous larva migrans, a skin disease caused by the larvae of
hookworms. As they move across the skin, in the subcutaneous tissue, pruritic tracks appear (Figure 24.33).
The infection is diagnosed using microscopic examination of the stool, allowing for observation of eggs in the feces.
Medications such as albendazole, mebendazole, and pyrantel pamoate are used as needed to treat systemic infection.
In addition to systemic medication for symptoms associated with cutaneous larva migrans, topical thiabendazole is
applied to the affected areas.

Figure 24.33 (a) This animal hookworm, Ancylostoma caninum, is attached to the intestinal wall. (b) The tracks of
hookworms are visible in this individual with cutaneous larva migrans. (c) This micrograph shows the microscopic egg
of a hookworm. (credit a, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Strongyloidiasis
Strongyloidiasis is generally caused by Strongyloides stercoralis, a soil-transmitted helminth with both free-living
and parasitic forms. In the parasitic form, the larvae of these nematodes generally penetrate the body through the
skin, especially through bare feet, although transmission through organ transplantation or at facilities like day-care
centers can also occur. When excreted in the stool, larvae can become free-living adults rather than developing into
the parasitic form. These free-living worms reproduce, laying eggs that hatch into larvae that can develop into the
parasitic form. In the parasitic life cycle, infective larvae enter the skin, generally through the feet. The larvae reach
the circulatory system, which allows them to travel to the alveolar spaces of the lungs. They are transported to the
pharynx where, like many other helminths, the infected patient coughs them up and swallows them again so that they
return to the intestine. Once they reach the intestine, females live in the epithelium and produce eggs that develop
asexually, unlike the free-living forms, which use sexual reproduction. The larvae may be excreted in the stool or can
reinfect the host by entering the tissue of the intestines and skin around the anus, which can lead to chronic infections.
The condition is generally asymptomatic, although severe symptoms can develop after treatment with corticosteroids
for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or following other forms of immunosuppression. When the

1090

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

immune system is suppressed, the rate of autoinfection increases, and huge amounts of larvae migrate to organs
throughout the body.
Signs and symptoms are generally nonspecific. The condition can cause a rash at the site of skin entry, cough (dry
or with blood), fever, nausea, difficulty breathing, bloating, pain, heartburn, and, rarely, arthritis, or cardiac or kidney
complications. Disseminated strongyloidiasis or hyperinfection is a life-threatening form of the disease that can occur,
usually following immunosuppression such as that caused by glucocorticoid treatment (most commonly), with other
immunosuppressive medications, with HIV infection, or with malnutrition.
As with other helminths, direct examination of the stool is important in diagnosis. Ideally, this should be continued
over seven days. Serological testing, including antigen testing, is also available. These can be limited by crossreactions with other similar parasites and by the inability to distinguish current from resolved infection. Ivermectin is
the preferred treatment, with albendazole as a secondary option.

• How does an acute infection of S. stercoralis become chronic?

Pinworms (Enterobiasis)
Enterobius vermicularis, commonly called pinworms, are tiny (2–13 mm) nematodes that cause enterobiasis. Of
all helminthic infections, enterobiasis is the most common in the United States, affecting as many as one-third of
American children.[21] Although the signs and symptoms are generally mild, patients may experience abdominal pain
and insomnia from itching of the perianal region, which frequently occurs at night when worms leave the anus to
lay eggs. The itching contributes to transmission, as the disease is transmitted through the fecal-oral route. When
an infected individual scratches the anal area, eggs may get under the fingernails and later be deposited near the
individual’s mouth, causing reinfection, or on fomites, where they can be transferred to new hosts. After being
ingested, the larvae hatch within the small intestine and then take up residence in the colon and develop into adults.
From the colon, the female adult exits the body at night to lay eggs (Figure 24.34).
Infection is diagnosed in any of three ways. First, because the worms emerge at night to lay eggs, it is possible to
inspect the perianal region for worms while an individual is asleep. An alternative is to use transparent tape to remove
eggs from the area around the anus first thing in the morning for three days to yield eggs for microscopic examination.
Finally, it may be possible to detect eggs through examination of samples from under the fingernails, where eggs
may lodge due to scratching. Once diagnosis has been made, mebendazole, albendazole, and pyrantel pamoate are
effective for treatment.

21. “Roundworms.” University of Maryland Medical Center Medical Reference Guide. Last reviewed December 9, 2014. https://umm.edu/
health/medical/altmed/condition/roundworms.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1091

Figure 24.34 (a) E. vermicularis are tiny nematodes commonly called pinworms. (b) This micrograph shows
pinworm eggs.

Trichuriasis
The nematode whipworm Trichuris trichiura is a parasite that is transmitted by ingestion from soil-contaminated
hands or food and causes trichuriasis. Infection is most common in warm environments, especially when there is
poor sanitation and greater risk of fecal contamination of soil, or when food is grown in soil using manure as a
fertilizer. The signs and symptoms may be minimal or nonexistent. When a substantial infection develops, signs and
symptoms include painful, frequent diarrhea that may contain mucus and blood. It is possible for the infection to
cause rectal prolapse, a condition in which a portion of the rectum becomes detached from the inside of the body
and protrudes from the anus (Figure 24.35). Severely infected children may experience reduced growth and their
cognitive development may be affected.
When fertilized eggs are ingested, they travel to the intestine and the larvae emerge, taking up residence in the walls
of the colon and cecum. They attach themselves with part of their bodies embedded in the mucosa. The larvae mature
and live in the cecum and ascending colon. After 60 to 70 days, females begin to lay 3000 to 20,000 eggs per day.
Diagnosis involves examination of the feces for the presence of eggs. It may be necessary to use concentration
techniques and to collect specimens on multiple days. Following diagnosis, the infection may be treated with
mebendazole, albendazole, or ivermectin.

Figure 24.35 (a) This adult female Trichuris whipworm is a soil-transmitted parasite. (b) Trichuris trichiura eggs are
ingested and travel to the intestines where the larvae emerge and take up residence. (c) Rectal prolapse is a
condition that can result from whipworm infections. It occurs when the rectum loses its attachment to the internal
body structure and protrudes from the anus. (credit a, b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

1092

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Trichinosis
Trichinosis (trichenellosis) develops following consumption of food that contains Trichinella spiralis (most
commonly) or other Trichinella species. These microscopic nematode worms are most commonly transmitted in meat,
especially pork, that has not been cooked thoroughly. T. spiralis larvae in meat emerge from cysts when exposed to
acid and pepsin in the stomach. They develop into mature adults within the large intestine. The larvae produced in the
large intestine are able to migrate into the muscles mechanically via the stylet of the parasite, forming cysts. Muscle
proteins are reduced in abundance or undetectable in cells that contain Trichinella (nurse cells). Animals that ingest
the cysts from other animals can later develop infection (Figure 24.36).
Although infection may be asymptomatic, symptomatic infections begin within a day or two of consuming the
nematodes. Abdominal symptoms arise first and can include diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal pain. Other
possible symptoms include headache, light sensitivity, muscle pain, fever, cough, chills, and conjunctivitis. More
severe symptoms affecting motor coordination, breathing, and the heart sometimes occur. It may take months for the
symptoms to resolve, and the condition is occasionally fatal. Mild cases may be mistaken for influenza or similar
conditions.
Infection is diagnosed using clinical history, muscle biopsy to look for larvae, and serological testing, including
immunoassays. Enzyme immunoassay is the most common test. It is difficult to effectively treat larvae that have
formed cysts in the muscle, although medications may help. It is best to begin treatment as soon as possible because
medications such as mebendazole and albendazole are effective in killing only the adult worms in the intestine.
Steroids may be used to reduce inflammation if larvae are in the muscles.

Figure 24.36 (a) This image shows larvae of T. spiralis within muscle. (b) In meat, the larvae have a characteristic
coiled appearance, as seen in this partially digested larva in bear meat. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Compare and contrast the transmissions of pinworms and whipworms.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1093

Tapeworms (Taeniasis)
Taeniasis is a tapeworm infection, generally caused by pork (Taenia solium), beef (Taenia saginata), and Asian
(Taenia asiatica) tapeworms found in undercooked meat. Consumption of raw or undercooked fish, including
contaminated sushi, can also result in infection from the fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum). Tapeworms are
flatworms (cestodes) with multiple body segments and a head called a scolex that attaches to the intestinal wall.
Tapeworms can become quite large, reaching 4 to 8 meters long (Figure 24.37). Figure 5.23 illustrates the life
cycle of a tapeworm.

Figure 24.37 (a) An adult tapeworm uses the scolex to attach to the intestinal wall. (b) The egg of a pork tapeworm
(Taenia solium) is visible in this micrograph. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Tapeworms attached to the intestinal wall produce eggs that are excreted in feces. After ingestion by animals, the eggs
hatch and the larvae emerge. They may take up residence in the intestine, but can sometimes move to other tissues,
especially muscle or brain tissue. When T. solium larvae form cysts in tissue, the condition is called cysticercosis.
This occurs through ingestion of eggs via the fecal-oral route, not through consumption of undercooked meat. It can
develop in the muscles, eye (ophthalmic cysticercosis), or brain (neurocysticercosis).
Infections may be asymptomatic or they may cause mild gastrointestinal symptoms such as epigastric discomfort,
nausea, diarrhea, flatulence, or hunger pains. It is also common to find visible tapeworm segments passed in the stool.
In cases of cysticercosis, symptoms differ depending upon where the cysts become established. Neurocysticercosis
can have severe, life-threatening consequences and is associated with headaches and seizures because of the presence
of the tapeworm larvae encysted in the brain. Cysts in muscles may be asymptomatic, or they may be painful.
To diagnose these conditions, microscopic analysis of stool samples from three separate days is generally
recommended. Eggs or body segments, called proglottids, may be visible in these samples. Molecular methods
have been developed but are not yet widely available. Imaging, such as CT and MRI, may be used to detect cysts.
Praziquantel or niclosamide are used for treatment.

Micro Connections
What’s in Your Sushi Roll?
As foods that contain raw fish, such as sushi and sashimi, continue to increase in popularity throughout the
world, so does the risk of parasitic infections carried by raw or undercooked fish. Diphyllobothrium species,
known as fish tapeworms, is one of the main culprits. Evidence suggests that undercooked salmon caused an
increase in Diphyllobothrium infections in British Columbia in the 1970s and early 1980s. In the years since,

1094

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

the number of reported cases in the United States and Canada has been low, but it is likely that cases are
underreported because the causative agent is not easily recognized.[22]
Another illness transmitted in undercooked fish is herring worm disease, or anisakiasis, in which nematodes
attach to the epithelium of the esophagus, stomach, or small intestine. Cases have increased around the world
as raw fish consumption has increased.[23]
Although the message may be unpopular with sushi lovers, fish should be frozen or cooked before eating. The
extremely low and high temperatures associated with freezing and cooking kill worms and larvae contained in
the meat, thereby preventing infection. Ingesting fresh, raw sushi may make for a delightful meal, but it also
entails some risk.

Hydatid Disease
Another cestode, Echinococcus granulosus, causes a serious infection known as hydatid disease (cystic
echinococcosis). E. granulosus is found in dogs (the definitive host), as well as several intermediate hosts (sheep,
pigs, goats, cattle). The cestodes are transmitted through eggs in the feces from infected animals, which can be an
occupational hazard for individuals who work in agriculture.
Once ingested, E. granulosus eggs hatch in the small intestine and release the larvae. The larvae invade the intestinal
wall to gain access to the circulatory system. They form hydatid cysts in internal organs, especially in the lungs and
liver, that grow slowly and are often undetected until they become large. If the cysts burst, a severe allergic reaction
(anaphylaxis) may occur.
Cysts present in the liver can cause enlargement of the liver, nausea, vomiting, right epigastric pain, pain in the right
upper quadrant, and possible allergic signs and symptoms. Cysts in the lungs can lead to alveolar disease. Abdominal
pain, weight loss, pain, and malaise may occur, and inflammatory processes develop.
E. granulosus can be detected through imaging (ultrasonography, CT, MRI) that shows the cysts. Serologic tests,
including ELISA and indirect hemagglutinin tests, are used. Cystic disease is most effectively treated with surgery
to remove cysts, but other treatments are also available, including chemotherapy with anti-helminthic drugs
(albendazole or mebendazole).

• Describe the risks of the cysts associated with taeniasis and hydatid disease.

Flukes
Flukes are flatworms that have a leaflike appearance. They are a type of trematode worm, and multiple species are
associated with disease in humans. The most common are liver flukes and intestinal flukes (Figure 24.38).

22. Nancy Craig. “Fish Tapeworm and Sushi.” Canadian Family Physician 58 (2012) 6: pp. 654–658. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC3374688/.
23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Anisakiasis FAQs.” Updated November 12, 2012. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/
anisakiasis/faqs.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1095

Figure 24.38 (a) A liver fluke infects the bile ducts. (b) An intestinal fluke infects the intestines. (credit a: modification
of work by Shafiei R, Sarkari B, Sadjjadi SM, Mowlavi GR, and Moshfe A; credit b: modification of work by Georgia
Division of Public Health)

Liver Flukes
The liver flukes are several species of trematodes that cause disease by interfering with the bile duct. Fascioliasis
is caused by Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica in contaminated raw or undercooked aquatic plants (e.g.,
watercress). In Fasciola infection, adult flukes develop in the bile duct and release eggs into the feces. Clonochiasis
is caused by Clonorchis sinensis in contaminated freshwater fish. Other flukes, such as Opisthorchis viverrini (found
in fish) and Opisthorchis felineus (found in freshwater snails), also cause infections. Liver flukes spend part of their
life cycle in freshwater snails, which serve as an intermediate host. Humans are typically infected after eating aquatic
plants contaminated by the infective larvae after they have left the snail. Once they reach the human intestine, they
migrate back to the bile duct, where they mature. The life cycle is similar for the other infectious liver flukes, (see
Figure 5.22).
When Fasciola flukes cause acute infection, signs and symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, rash,
fever, malaise, and breathing difficulties. If the infection becomes chronic, with adult flukes living in the bile
duct, then cholangitis, cirrhosis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and gallstones may develop. Symptoms are similar for
infections by other liver flukes. Cholangiocarcinoma can occur from C. sinensis infection. The Opisthorchis species
can also be associated with cancer development.
Diagnosis is accomplished using patient history and examination of samples from feces or other samples (such as
vomitus). Because the eggs may appear similar, immunoassay techniques are available that can help distinguish
species. The preferred treatment for fascioliasis is triclabendazole. C. sinensis and Opisthorchis spp. infections are
treated with praziquantel or albendazole.

Intestinal Flukes
The intestinal flukes are trematodes that develop in the intestines. Many, such as Fasciolopsis buski, which causes
fasciolopsiasis, are closely related to liver flukes. Intestinal flukes are ingested from contaminated aquatic plants that
have not been properly cooked. When the cysts are consumed, the larvae emerge in the duodenum and develop into
adults while attached to the intestinal epithelium. The eggs are released in stool.
Intestinal fluke infection is often asymptomatic, but some cases may involve mild diarrhea and abdominal pain. More
severe symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, allergic reactions, and anemia can sometimes occur, and high parasite
loads may sometimes lead to intestinal obstructions.
Diagnosis is the same as with liver flukes: examination of feces or other samples and immunoassay. Praziquantel is
used to treat infections caused by intestinal flukes.

1096

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

• How are flukes transmitted?

Disease Profile
Helminthic Gastrointestinal Infections
Numerous helminths are capable of colonizing the GI tract. Many such infections are asymptomatic, but others
may cause signs and symptoms ranging from mild GI stress to severe systemic infection. Helminths have
complex and unique life cycles that dictate their specific modes of transmission. Most helminthic infections can
be treated with medications.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.39

1097

1098

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Figure 24.40

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Carli’s doctor explained that she had bacterial gastroenteritis caused by Salmonella bacteria. The source of
these bacteria was likely the undercooked egg. Had the egg been fully cooked, the high temperature would
have been sufficient to kill any Salmonella in or on the egg. In this case, enough bacteria survived to cause an
infection once the egg was eaten.
Carli’s signs and symptoms continued to worsen. Her fever became higher, her vomiting and diarrhea
continued, and she began to become dehydrated. She felt thirsty all the time and had continual abdominal
cramps. Carli’s doctor treated her with intravenous fluids to help with her dehydration, but did not prescribe
antibiotics. Carli’s parents were confused because they thought a bacterial infection should always be treated
with antibiotics.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1099

The doctor explained that the worst medical problem for Carli was dehydration. Except in the most vulnerable
and sick patients, such as those with HIV/AIDS, antibiotics do not reduce recovery time or improve outcomes
in Salmonella infections. In fact, antibiotics can actually delay the natural excretion of bacteria from the body.
Rehydration therapy replenishes lost fluids, diminishing the effects of dehydration and improving the patient’s
condition while the infection resolves.
After two days of rehydration therapy, Carli’s signs and symptoms began to fade. She was still somewhat
thirsty, but the amount of urine she passed became larger and the color lighter. She stopped vomiting. Her
fever was gone, and so was the diarrhea. At that point, stool analysis found very few Salmonella bacteria. In
one week, Carli was discharged as fully recovered.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Summary
24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System
• The digestive tract, consisting of the oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and large
intestine, has a normal microbiota that is important for health.
• The constant movement of materials through the gastrointestinal canal, the protective layer of mucus, the
normal microbiota, and the harsh chemical environment in the stomach and small intestine help to prevent
colonization by pathogens.
• Infections or microbial toxins in the oral cavity can cause tooth decay, periodontal disease, and various types
of ulcers.
• Infections and intoxications of the gastrointestinal tract can cause general symptoms such as nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and fever. Localized inflammation of the GI tract can result in gastritis, enteritis, gastroenteritis,
hepatitis, or colitis, and damage to epithelial cells of the colon can lead to dysentery.
• Foodborne illness refers to infections or intoxications that originate with pathogens or toxins ingested in
contaminated food or water.
24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity
• Dental caries, tartar, and gingivitis are caused by overgrowth of oral bacteria, usually Streptococcus and
Actinomyces species, as a result of insufficient dental hygiene.
• Gingivitis can worsen, allowing Porphyromonas, Streptococcus, and Actinomyces species to spread and cause
periodontitis. When Prevotella intermedia, Fusobacterium species, and Treponema vicentii are involved, it
can lead to acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.
• The herpes simplex virus type 1 can cause lesions of the mouth and throat called herpetic gingivostomatitis.
• Other infections of the mouth include oral thrush, a fungal infection caused by overgrowth of Candida yeast,
and mumps, a viral infection of the salivary glands caused by the mumps virus, a paramyxovirus.
24.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
• Major causes of gastrointestinal illness include Salmonella spp., Staphylococcus spp., Helicobacter pylori,
Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium difficile, Bacillus cereus, and Yersinia bacteria.
• C. difficile is an important cause of hospital acquired infection.
• Vibrio cholerae causes cholera, which can be a severe diarrheal illness.
• Different strains of E. coli, including ETEC, EPEC, EIEC, and EHEC, cause different illnesses with varying
degrees of severity.
• H. pylori is associated with peptic ulcers.
• Salmonella enterica serotypes can cause typhoid fever, a more severe illness than salmonellosis.

1100

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

• Rehydration and other supportive therapies are often used as general treatments.
• Careful antibiotic use is required to reduce the risk of causing C. difficile infections and when treating
antibiotic-resistant infections.
24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
• Common viral causes of gastroenteritis include rotaviruses, noroviruses, and astroviruses.
• Hepatitis may be caused by several unrelated viruses: hepatitis viruses A, B, C, D, and E.
• The hepatitis viruses differ in their modes of transmission, treatment, and potential for chronic infection.
24.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
• Giardiasis, cryptosporidiosis, amoebiasis, and cyclosporiasis are intestinal infections caused by protozoans.
• Protozoan intestinal infections are commonly transmitted through contaminated food and water.
• Treatment varies depending on the causative agent, so proper diagnosis is important.
• Microscopic examination of stool or biopsy specimens is often used in diagnosis, in combination with other
approaches.
24.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
• Helminths often cause intestinal infections after transmission to humans through exposure to contaminated
soil, water, or food. Signs and symptoms are often mild, but severe complications may develop in some cases.
• Ascaris lumbricoides eggs are transmitted through contaminated food or water and hatch in the intestine.
Juvenile larvae travel to the lungs and then to the pharynx, where they are swallowed and returned to the
intestines to mature. These nematode roundworms cause ascariasis.
• Necator americanus and Ancylostoma doudenale cause hookworm infection when larvae penetrate the skin
from soil contaminated by dog or cat feces. They travel to the lungs and are then swallowed to mature in the
intestines.
• Strongyloides stercoralis are transmitted from soil through the skin to the lungs and then to the intestine where
they cause strongyloidiasis.
• Enterobius vermicularis are nematode pinworms transmitted by the fecal-oral route. After ingestion, they
travel to the colon where they cause enterobiasis.
• Trichuris trichiura can be transmitted through soil or fecal contamination and cause trichuriasis. After
ingestion, the eggs travel to the intestine where the larvae emerge and mature, attaching to the walls of the
colon and cecum.
• Trichinella spp. is transmitted through undercooked meat. Larvae in the meat emerge from cysts and mature
in the large intestine. They can migrate to the muscles and form new cysts, causing trichinosis.
• Taenia spp. and Diphyllobothrium latum are tapeworms transmitted through undercooked food or the fecaloral route. Taenia infections cause taeniasis. Tapeworms use their scolex to attach to the intestinal wall.
Larvae may also move to muscle or brain tissue.
• Echinococcus granulosus is a cestode transmitted through eggs in the feces of infected animals, especially
dogs. After ingestion, eggs hatch in the small intestine, and the larvae invade the intestinal wall and travel
through the circulatory system to form dangerous cysts in internal organs, causing hydatid disease.
• Flukes are transmitted through aquatic plants or fish. Liver flukes cause disease by interfering with the bile
duct. Intestinal flukes develop in the intestines, where they attach to the intestinal epithelium.

Review Questions

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Multiple Choice

1. Which of the following is NOT a way the normal
microbiota of the intestine helps to prevent infection?
a. It produces acids that lower the pH of the
stomach.
b. It speeds up the process by which microbes are
flushed from the digestive tract.
c. It consumes food and occupies space,
outcompeting potential pathogens.
d. It generates large quantities of oxygen that kill
anaerobic pathogens.
2. What types of microbes live in the intestines?
a. Diverse species of bacteria, archaea, and fungi,
especially Bacteroides and Firmicutes bacteria
b. A narrow range of bacteria, especially
Firmicutes
c. A narrow range of bacteria and fungi, especially
Bacteroides
d. Archaea and fungi only
3. What pathogen is the most important contributor to
biofilms in plaque?
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Streptococcus mutans
c. Escherichia coli
d. Clostridium difficile
4. What type of organism causes thrush?
a. a bacterium
b. a virus
c. a fungus
d. a protozoan
5. In mumps, what glands swell to produce the
disease’s characteristic appearance?
a. the sublingual glands
b. the gastric glands
c. the parotid glands
d. the submandibular glands
6. Which of the following is true of HSV-1?
a. It causes oral thrush in immunocompromised
patients.
b. Infection is generally self-limiting.
c. It is a bacterium.
d. It is usually treated with amoxicillin.

1101

7. Which type of E. coli infection can be severe with
life-threatening consequences such as hemolytic uremic
syndrome?
a. ETEC
b. EPEC
c. EHEC
d. EIEC
8. Which species of Shigella has a type that produces
Shiga toxin?
a. S. boydii
b. S. flexneri
c. S. dysenteriae
d. S. sonnei
9. Which type of bacterium produces an A-B toxin?
a. Salmonella
b. Vibrio cholera
c. ETEC
d. Shigella dysenteriae
10. Which form of hepatitisvirus can only infect an
individual who is already infected with another
hepatitisvirus?
a. HDV
b. HAV
c. HBV
d. HEV
11. Which cause of viral gastroenteritis commonly
causes projectile vomiting?
a. hepatitisvirus
b. Astroviruses
c. Rotavirus
d. Noroviruses
12. Which protozoan is associated with the ability to
cause severe dysentery?
a. Giardia lamblia
b. Cryptosporidium hominis
c. Cyclospora cayetanesis
d. Entamoeba histolytica
13. Which protozoan has a unique appearance, with a
blue halo, when viewed using ultraviolet fluorescence
microscopy?
a. Giardia lamblia
b. Cryptosporidium hominis
c. Cyclospora cayetanesis
d. Entamoeba histolytica

1102

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

14. The micrograph shows protozoans attached to the
intestinal wall of a gerbil. Based on what you know
about protozoan intestinal parasites, what is it?

Figure 24.41 (credit: Dr. Stan Erlandsen, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)

a.
b.
c.
d.

Giardia lamblia
Cryptosporidium hominis
Cyclospora cayetanesis
Entamoeba histolytica

15. What is another name for Trichuris trichiura?
a. pinworm
b. whipworm
c. hookworm
d. ascariasis
16. Which type of helminth infection can be diagnosed
using tape?
a. pinworm
b. whipworm
c. hookworm
d. tapeworm
Fill in the Blank

17. The part of the gastrointestinal tract with the largest natural microbiota is the _________.
18. When plaque becomes heavy and hardened, it is called dental calculus or _________.
19. Antibiotic associated pseudomembranous colitis is caused by _________.
20. Jaundice results from a buildup of _________.
21. Chronic _________ infections cause the unique sign of disease of greasy stool and are often resistant to
treatment.
22. Liver flukes are often found in the _________ duct.
Short Answer

23. How does the diarrhea caused by dysentery differ from other types of diarrhea?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

1103

24. Why do sugary foods promote dental caries?
25. Which forms of viral hepatitis are transmitted through the fecal-oral route?
26. What is an O&P exam?
27. Why does the coughing up of worms play an important part in the life cycle of some helminths, such as the
roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides?
Critical Thinking

28. Why does use of antibiotics and/or proton pump inhibitors contribute to the development of C. difficile
infections?
29. Why did scientists initially think it was unlikely that a bacterium caused peptic ulcers?
30. Does it makes a difference in treatment to know if a particular illness is caused by a bacterium (an infection) or
a toxin (an intoxication)?
31. Based on what you know about HBV, what are some ways that its transmission could be reduced in a health-care
setting?
32. Cases of strongyloidiasis are often more severe in patients who are using corticosteroids to treat another disorder.
Explain why this might occur.

1104

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 24 | Digestive System Infections

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1105

Chapter 25

Circulatory and Lymphatic System
Infections

Figure 25.1 Yellow fever is a viral hemorrhagic disease that can cause liver damage, resulting in jaundice (left) as
well as serious and sometimes fatal complications. The virus that causes yellow fever is transmitted through the bite
of a biological vector, the Aedes aegypti mosquito (right). (credit left: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; credit right: modification of work by James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Chapter Outline
25.1 Anatomy of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
25.2 Bacterial Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
25.3 Viral Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
25.4 Parasitic Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems

Introduction
Yellow fever was once common in the southeastern US, with annual outbreaks of more than 25,000 infections
in New Orleans in the mid-1800s.[1] In the early 20th century, efforts to eradicate the virus that causes yellow
fever were successful thanks to vaccination programs and effective control (mainly through the insecticide
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane [DDT]) of Aedes aegypti, the mosquito that serves as a vector. Today, the virus has
been largely eradicated in North America.
Elsewhere, efforts to contain yellow fever have been less successful. Despite mass vaccination campaigns in some
regions, the risk for yellow fever epidemics is rising in dense urban cities in Africa and South America.[2] In an
increasingly globalized society, yellow fever could easily make a comeback in North America, where A. aegypti is
still present. If these mosquitoes were exposed to infected individuals, new outbreaks would be possible.
Like yellow fever, many of the circulatory and lymphatic diseases discussed in this chapter are emerging or reemerging worldwide. Despite medical advances, diseases like malaria, Ebola, and others could become endemic in
the US given the right circumstances.
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “The History of Yellow Fever.” http://www.cdc.gov/travel-training/local/
HistoryEpidemiologyandVaccination/page27568.html
2. C.L. Gardner, K.D. Ryman. “Yellow Fever: A Reemerging Threat.” Clinical Laboratory Medicine 30 no. 1 (2010):237–260.

1106

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

25.1 Anatomy of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
Learning Objectives
• Describe the major anatomical features of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
• Explain why the circulatory and lymphatic systems lack normal microbiota
• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of the circulatory and lymphatic systems to cause infection
• Describe general signs and symptoms of disease associated with infections of the circulatory and lymphatic

systems
The circulatory and lymphatic systems are networks of vessels and a pump that transport blood and lymph,
respectively, throughout the body. When these systems are infected with a microorganism, the network of vessels can
facilitate the rapid dissemination of the microorganism to other regions of the body, sometimes with serious results.
In this section, we will examine some of the key anatomical features of the circulatory and lymphatic systems, as well
as general signs and symptoms of infection.

The Circulatory System
The circulatory (or cardiovascular) system is a closed network of organs and vessels that moves blood around the
body (Figure 25.2). The primary purposes of the circulatory system are to deliver nutrients, immune factors, and
oxygen to tissues and to carry away waste products for elimination. The heart is a four-chambered pump that propels
the blood throughout the body. Deoxygenated blood enters the right atrium through the superior vena cava and the
inferior vena cava after returning from the body. The blood next passes through the tricuspid valve to enter the right
ventricle. When the heart contracts, the blood from the right ventricle is pumped through the pulmonary arteries to
the lungs. There, the blood is oxygenated at the alveoli and returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins. The
oxygenated blood is received at the left atrium and proceeds through the mitral valve to the left ventricle. When
the heart contracts, the oxygenated blood is pumped throughout the body via a series of thick-walled vessels called
arteries. The first and largest artery is called the aorta. The arteries sequentially branch and decrease in size (and are
called arterioles) until they end in a network of smaller vessels called capillaries. The capillary beds are located in
the interstitial spaces within tissues and release nutrients, immune factors, and oxygen to those tissues. The capillaries
connect to a series of vessels called venules, which increase in size to form the veins. The veins join together into

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Barbara is a 43-year-old patient who has been diagnosed with metastatic inflammatory breast cancer. To
facilitate her ongoing chemotherapy, her physician implanted a port attached to a central venous catheter.
At a recent checkup, she reported feeling restless and complained that the site of the catheter had become
uncomfortable. After removing the dressing, the physician observed that the surgical site appeared red and
was warm to the touch, suggesting a localized infection. Barbara’s was also running a fever of 38.2 °C (100.8
°F). Her physician treated the affected area with a topical antiseptic and applied a fresh dressing. She also
prescribed a course of the antibiotic oxacillin.

• Based on this information, what factors likely contributed to Barbara’s condition?
• What is the most likely source of the microbes involved?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1107

larger vessels as they transfer blood back to the heart. The largest veins, the superior and inferior vena cava, return
the blood to the right atrium.

Figure 25.2 The major components of the human circulatory system include the heart, arteries, veins, and
capillaries. This network delivers blood to the body’s organs and tissues. (credit top left: modification of work by
Mariana Ruiz Villareal; credit bottom right: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)

Other organs play important roles in the circulatory system as well. The kidneys filter the blood, removing waste
products and eliminating them in the urine. The liver also filters the blood and removes damaged or defective red
blood cells. The spleen filters and stores blood, removes damaged red blood cells, and is a reservoir for immune
factors. All of these filtering structures serve as sites for entrapment of microorganisms and help maintain an
environment free of microorganisms in the blood.

The Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system is also a network of vessels that run throughout the body (Figure 25.3). However, these
vessels do not form a full circulating system and are not pressurized by the heart. Rather, the lymphatic system is

1108

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

an open system with the fluid moving in one direction from the extremities toward two drainage points into veins
just above the heart. Lymphatic fluids move more slowly than blood because they are not pressurized. Small lymph
capillaries interact with blood capillaries in the interstitial spaces in tissues. Fluids from the tissues enter the lymph
capillaries and are drained away (Figure 25.4). These fluids, termed lymph, also contain large numbers of white
blood cells.

Figure 25.3 The essential components of the human lymphatic system drain fluid away from tissues.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1109

Figure 25.4 Blood enters the capillaries from an arteriole (red) and leaves through venules (blue). Interstitial fluids
may drain into the lymph capillaries (green) and proceed to lymph nodes. (credit: modification of work by National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health)

The lymphatic system contains two types of lymphoid tissues. The primary lymphoid tissue includes bone marrow
and the thymus. Bone marrow contains the hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) that differentiate and mature into the
various types of blood cells and lymphocytes (see Figure 17.12). The secondary lymphoid tissues include the
spleen, lymph nodes, and several areas of diffuse lymphoid tissues underlying epithelial membranes. The spleen, an
encapsulated structure, filters blood and captures pathogens and antigens that pass into it (Figure 25.5). The spleen
contains specialized macrophages and dendritic cells that are crucial for antigen presentation, a mechanism critical
for activation of T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes (see Major Histocompatibility Complexes and AntigenPresenting Cells). Lymph nodes are bean-shaped organs situated throughout the body. These structures contain
areas called germinal centers that are rich in B and T lymphocytes. The lymph nodes also contain macrophages and
dendritic cells for antigen presentation. Lymph from nearby tissues enters the lymph node through afferent lymphatic
vessels and encounters these lymphocytes as it passes through; the lymph exits the lymph node through the efferent
lymphatic vessels (Figure 25.5).

1110

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.5 (a) The spleen is a lymphatic organ located in the upper left quadrant of the abdomen near the stomach
and left kidney. It contains numerous phagocytes and lymphocytes that combat and prevent circulatory infections by
killing and removing pathogens from the blood. (b) Lymph nodes are masses of lymphatic tissue located along the
larger lymph vessels. They contain numerous lymphocytes that kill and remove pathogens from lymphatic fluid that
drains from surrounding tissues.

Link to Learning
The lymphatic system filters fluids that have accumulated in tissues before they
are returned to the blood. A brief overview of this process is provided at this
(https://openstax.org/l/22lymphatic) website.

• What is the main function of the lymphatic system?

Infections of the Circulatory System
Under normal circumstances, the circulatory system and the blood should be sterile; the circulatory system has no
normal microbiota. Because the system is closed, there are no easy portals of entry into the circulatory system for
microbes. Those that are able to breach the body’s physical barriers and enter the bloodstream encounter a host of
circulating immune defenses, such as antibodies, complement proteins, phagocytes, and other immune cells. Microbes
often gain access to the circulatory system through a break in the skin (e.g., wounds, needles, intravenous catheters,
insect bites) or spread to the circulatory system from infections in other body sites. For example, microorganisms
causing pneumonia or renal infection may enter the local circulation of the lung or kidney and spread from there
throughout the circulatory network.
If microbes in the bloodstream are not quickly eliminated, they can spread rapidly throughout the body, leading to
serious, even life-threatening infections. Various terms are used to describe conditions involving microbes in the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1111

circulatory system. The term bacteremia refers to bacteria in the blood. If bacteria are reproducing in the blood as
they spread, this condition is called septicemia. The presence of viruses in the blood is called viremia. Microbial
toxins can also be spread through the circulatory system, causing a condition termed toxemia.
Microbes and microbial toxins in the blood can trigger an inflammatory response so severe that the inflammation
damages host tissues and organs more than the infection itself. This counterproductive immune response is called
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), and it can lead to the life-threatening condition known as
sepsis. Sepsis is characterized by the production of excess cytokines that leads to classic signs of inflammation such as
fever, vasodilation, and edema (see Inflammation and Fever). In a patient with sepsis, the inflammatory response
becomes dysregulated and disproportionate to the threat of infection. Critical organs such as the heart, lungs, liver,
and kidneys become dysfunctional, resulting in increased heart and respiratory rates, and disorientation. If not treated
promptly and effectively, patients with sepsis can go into shock and die.
Certain infections can cause inflammation in the heart and blood vessels. Inflammation of the endocardium, the inner
lining of the heart, is called endocarditis and can result in damage to the heart valves severe enough to require
surgical replacement. Inflammation of the pericardium, the sac surrounding the heart, is called pericarditis. The term
myocarditis refers to the inflammation of the heart’s muscle tissue. Pericarditis and myocarditis can cause fluid to
accumulate around the heart, resulting in congestive heart failure. Inflammation of blood vessels is called vasculitis.
Although somewhat rare, vasculitis can cause blood vessels to become damaged and rupture; as blood is released,
small red or purple spots called petechiae appear on the skin. If the damage of tissues or blood vessels is severe, it can
result in reduced blood flow to the surrounding tissues. This condition is called ischemia, and it can be very serious.
In severe cases, the affected tissues can die and become necrotic; these situations may require surgical debridement
or amputation.

• Why does the circulatory system have no normal microbiota?
• Explain why the presence of microbes in the circulatory system can lead to serious consequences.

Infections of the Lymphatic System
Like the circulatory system, the lymphatic system does not have a normal microbiota, and the large numbers of
immune cells typically eliminate transient microbes before they can establish an infection. Only microbes with an
array of virulence factors are able to overcome these defenses and establish infection in the lymphatic system.
However, when a localized infection begins to spread, the lymphatic system is often the first place the invading
microbes can be detected.
Infections in the lymphatic system also trigger an inflammatory response. Inflammation of lymphatic vessels, called
lymphangitis, can produce visible red streaks under the skin. Inflammation in the lymph nodes can cause them to
swell. A swollen lymph node is referred to as a bubo, and the condition is referred to as lymphadenitis.

25.2 Bacterial Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic
Systems
Learning Objectives
• Identify and compare bacteria that most commonly cause infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the circulatory and lymphatic systems

1112

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Bacteria can enter the circulatory and lymphatic systems through acute infections or breaches of the skin barrier or
mucosa. Breaches may occur through fairly common occurrences, such as insect bites or small wounds. Even the act
of tooth brushing, which can cause small ruptures in the gums, may introduce bacteria into the circulatory system. In
most cases, the bacteremia that results from such common exposures is transient and remains below the threshold of
detection. In severe cases, bacteremia can lead to septicemia with dangerous complications such as toxemia, sepsis,
and septic shock. In these situations, it is often the immune response to the infection that results in the clinical signs
and symptoms rather than the microbes themselves.

Bacterial Sepsis, Septic and Toxic Shock
At low concentrations, pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
play important roles in the host’s immune defenses. When they circulate systemically in larger amounts, however, the
resulting immune response can be life threatening. IL-1 induces vasodilation (widening of blood vessels) and reduces
the tight junctions between vascular endothelial cells, leading to widespread edema. As fluids move out of circulation
into tissues, blood pressure begins to drop. If left unchecked, the blood pressure can fall below the level necessary
to maintain proper kidney and respiratory functions, a condition known as septic shock. In addition, the excessive
release of cytokines during the inflammatory response can lead to the formation of blood clots. The loss of blood
pressure and occurrence of blood clots can result in multiple organ failure and death.
Bacteria are the most common pathogens associated with the development of sepsis, and septic shock.[3] The most
common infection associated with sepsis is bacterial pneumonia (see Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory
Tract), accounting for about half of all cases, followed by intra-abdominal infections (Bacterial Infections of
the Gastrointestinal Tract) and urinary tract infections (Bacterial Infections of the Urinary System).[4]
Infections associated with superficial wounds, animal bites, and indwelling catheters may also lead to sepsis and
septic shock.
These initially minor, localized infections can be caused by a wide range of different bacteria, including
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Pseudomonas, Pasteurella, Acinetobacter, and members of the Enterobacteriaceae.
However, if left untreated, infections by these gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens can potentially progress to
sepsis, shock, and death.

Toxic Shock Syndrome and Streptococcal Toxic Shock-Like Syndrome
Toxemia associated with infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus can cause staphylococcal toxic shock
syndrome (TSS). Some strains of S. aureus produce a superantigen called toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1).
TSS may occur as a complication of other localized or systemic infections such as pneumonia, osteomyelitis, sinusitis,
and skin wounds (surgical, traumatic, or burns). Those at highest risk for staphylococcal TSS are women with
preexisting S. aureus colonization of the vagina who leave tampons, contraceptive sponges, diaphragms, or other
devices in the vagina for longer than the recommended time.
Staphylococcal TSS is characterized by sudden onset of vomiting, diarrhea, myalgia, body temperature higher than
38.9 °C (102.0 °F), and rapid-onset hypotension with a systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg for adults; a
diffuse erythematous rash that leads to peeling and shedding skin 1 to 2 weeks after onset; and additional involvement
of three or more organ systems.[5] The mortality rate associated with staphylococcal TSS is less than 3% of cases.
Diagnosis of staphylococcal TSS is based on clinical signs, symptoms, serologic tests to confirm bacterial species,
and the detection of toxin production from staphylococcal isolates. Cultures of skin and blood are often negative; less
than 5% are positive in cases of staphylococcal TSS. Treatment for staphylococcal TSS includes decontamination,
debridement, vasopressors to elevate blood pressure, and antibiotic therapy with clindamycin plus vancomycin or
daptomycin pending susceptibility results.
3. S.P. LaRosa. “Sepsis.” 2010. http://www.clevelandclinicmeded.com/medicalpubs/diseasemanagement/infectious-disease/sepsis/.
4. D.C. Angus, T. Van der Poll. “Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock.” New England Journal of Medicine 369, no. 9 (2013):840–851.
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Toxic Shock Syndrome (Other Than Streptococcal) (TSS) 2011 Case Definition.”
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/toxic-shock-syndrome-other-than-streptococcal/case-definition/2011/. Accessed July 25, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1113

A syndrome with signs and symptoms similar to staphylococcal TSS can be caused by Streptococcus pyogenes. This
condition, called streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome (STSS), is characterized by more severe pathophysiology
than staphylococcal TSS,[6] with about 50% of patients developing S. pyogenes bacteremia and necrotizing fasciitis.
In contrast to staphylococcal TSS, STSS is more likely to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a rapidly
progressive disease characterized by fluid accumulation in the lungs that inhibits breathing and causes hypoxemia
(low oxygen levels in the blood). STSS is associated with a higher mortality rate (20%–60%), even with aggressive
therapy. STSS usually develops in patients with a streptococcal soft-tissue infection such as bacterial cellulitis,
necrotizing fasciitis, pyomyositis (pus formation in muscle caused by infection), a recent influenza A infection, or
chickenpox.

• How can large amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines lead to septic shock?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Despite oxacillin therapy, Barbara’s condition continued to worsen over the next several days. Her fever
increased to 40.1 °C (104.2 °F) and she began to experience chills, rapid breathing, and confusion. Her
doctor suspected bacteremia by a drug-resistant bacterium and admitted Barbara to the hospital. Cultures
of the surgical site and blood revealed Staphylococcus aureus. Antibiotic susceptibility testing confirmed that
the isolate was methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). In response, Barbara’s doctor changed her antibiotic
therapy to vancomycin and arranged to have the port and venous catheter removed.

• Why did Barbara’s infection not respond to oxacillin therapy?
• Why did the physician have the port and catheter removed?
• Based on the signs and symptoms described, what are some possible diagnoses for Barbara’s
condition?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus feature box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus feature box.

Puerperal Sepsis
A type of sepsis called puerperal sepsis, also known as puerperal infection, puerperal fever, or childbed fever,
is a nosocomial infection associated with the period of puerperium—the time following childbirth during which
the mother’s reproductive system returns to a nonpregnant state. Such infections may originate in the genital tract,
breast, urinary tract, or a surgical wound. Initially the infection may be limited to the uterus or other local site of
infection, but it can quickly spread, resulting in peritonitis, septicemia, and death. Before the 19th century work of
Ignaz Semmelweis and the widespread acceptance of germ theory (see Modern Foundations of Cell Theory),
puerperal sepsis was a major cause of mortality among new mothers in the first few days following childbirth.
Puerperal sepsis is often associated with Streptococcus pyogenes, but numerous other bacteria can also be responsible.
Examples include gram-positive bacterial (e.g. Streptococcus spp., Staphylococcus spp., and Enterococcus spp.),
gram-negative bacteria (e.g. Chlamydia spp., Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., and Proteus spp.), as well as anaerobes
such as Peptostreptococcus spp., Bacteroides spp., and Clostridium spp. In cases caused by S. pyogenes, the bacteria
attach to host tissues using M protein and produce a carbohydrate capsule to avoid phagocytosis. S. pyogenes also
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Streptococcal Toxic Shock Syndrome (STSS) (Streptococcus pyogenes) 2010 Case
Definition.” https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/streptococcal-toxic-shock-syndrome/case-definition/2010/. Accessed July 25, 2016.

1114

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

produces a variety of exotoxins, like streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxins A and B, that are associated with virulence
and may function as superantigens.
Diagnosis of puerperal fever is based on the timing and extent of fever and isolation, and identification of the etiologic
agent in blood, wound, or urine specimens. Because there are numerous possible causes, antimicrobial susceptibility
testing must be used to determine the best antibiotic for treatment. Nosocomial incidence of puerperal fever can
be greatly reduced through the use of antiseptics during delivery and strict adherence to handwashing protocols by
doctors, midwives, and nurses.

Infectious Arthritis
Also called septic arthritis, infectious arthritis can be either an acute or a chronic condition. Infectious arthritis is
characterized by inflammation of joint tissues and is most often caused by bacterial pathogens. Most cases of acute
infectious arthritis are secondary to bacteremia, with a rapid onset of moderate to severe joint pain and swelling that
limits the motion of the affected joint. In adults and young children, the infective pathogen is most often introduced
directly through injury, such as a wound or a surgical site, and brought to the joint through the circulatory system.
Acute infections may also occur after joint replacement surgery. Acute infectious arthritis often occurs in patients
with an immune system impaired by other viral and bacterial infections. S. aureus is the most common cause of acute
septic arthritis in the general population of adults and young children. Neisseria gonorrhoeae is an important cause of
acute infectious arthritis in sexually active individuals.
Chronic infectious arthritis is responsible for 5% of all infectious arthritis cases and is more likely to occur in patients
with other illnesses or conditions. Patients at risk include those who have an HIV infection, a bacterial or fungal
infection, prosthetic joints, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), or who are undergoing immunosuppressive chemotherapy.
Onset is often in a single joint; there may be little or no pain, aching pain that may be mild, gradual swelling, mild
warmth, and minimal or no redness of the joint area.
Diagnosis of infectious arthritis requires the aspiration of a small quantity of synovial fluid from the afflicted joint.
Direct microscopic evaluation, culture, antimicrobial susceptibility testing, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
analyses of the synovial fluid are used to identify the potential pathogen. Typical treatment includes administration
of appropriate antimicrobial drugs based on antimicrobial susceptibility testing. For nondrug-resistant bacterial
strains, β-lactams such as oxacillin and cefazolin are often prescribed for staphylococcal infections. Third-generation
cephalosporins (e.g., ceftriaxone) are used for increasingly prevalent β-lactam-resistant Neisseria infections.
Infections by Mycobacterium spp. or fungi are treated with appropriate long-term antimicrobial therapy. Even with
treatment, the prognosis is often poor for those infected. About 40% of patients with nongonnococcal infectious
arthritis will suffer permanent joint damage and mortality rates range from 5% to 20%.[7] Mortality rates are higher
among the elderly.[8]

Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis is an inflammation of bone tissues most commonly caused by infection. These infections can either be
acute or chronic and can involve a variety of different bacteria. The most common causative agent of osteomyelitis is
S. aureus. However, M. tuberculosis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus pyogenes, S. agalactiae, species in the
Enterobacteriaceae, and other microorganisms can also cause osteomyelitis, depending on which bones are involved.
In adults, bacteria usually gain direct access to the bone tissues through trauma or a surgical procedure involving
prosthetic joints. In children, the bacteria are often introduced from the bloodstream, possibly spreading from focal
infections. The long bones, such as the femur, are more commonly affected in children because of the more extensive
vascularization of bones in the young.[9]

7. M.E. Shirtliff, Mader JT. “Acute Septic Arthritis.” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 15 no. 4 (2002):527–544.
8. J.R. Maneiro et al. “Predictors of Treatment Failure and Mortality in Native Septic Arthritis.” Clinical Rheumatology 34, no. 11
(2015):1961–1967.
9. M. Vazquez. “Osteomyelitis in Children.” Current Opinion in Pediatrics 14, no. 1 (2002):112–115.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1115

The signs and symptoms of osteomyelitis include fever, localized pain, swelling due to edema, and ulcers in soft
tissues near the site of infection. The resulting inflammation can lead to tissue damage and bone loss. In addition, the
infection may spread to joints, resulting in infectious arthritis, or disseminate into the blood, resulting in sepsis and
thrombosis (formation of blood clots). Like septic arthritis, osteomyelitis is usually diagnosed using a combination
of radiography, imaging, and identification of bacteria from blood cultures, or from bone cultures if blood cultures
are negative. Parenteral antibiotic therapy is typically used to treat osteomyelitis. Because of the number of different
possible etiologic agents, however, a variety of drugs might be used. Broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs such as
nafcillin, oxacillin, or cephalosporin are typically prescribed for acute osteomyelitis, and ampicillin and piperacillin/
tazobactam for chronic osteomyelitis. In cases of antibiotic resistance, vancomycin treatment is sometimes required
to control the infection. In serious cases, surgery to remove the site of infection may be required. Other forms of
treatment include hyperbaric oxygen therapy (see Using Physical Methods to Control Microorganisms) and
implantation of antibiotic beads or pumps.

• What bacterium the most common cause of both septic arthritis and osteomyelitis?

Rheumatic Fever
Infections with S. pyogenes have a variety of manifestations and complications generally called sequelae. As
mentioned, the bacterium can cause suppurative infections like puerperal fever. However, this microbe can also cause
nonsuppurative sequelae in the form of acute rheumatic fever (ARF), which can lead to rheumatic heart disease,
thus impacting the circulatory system. Rheumatic fever occurs primarily in children a minimum of 2–3 weeks after
an episode of untreated or inadequately treated pharyngitis (see Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract).
At one time, rheumatic fever was a major killer of children in the US; today, however, it is rare in the US because
of early diagnosis and treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis with antibiotics. In parts of the world where diagnosis
and treatment are not readily available, acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease are still major causes of
mortality in children.[10]
Rheumatic fever is characterized by a variety of diagnostic signs and symptoms caused by nonsuppurative, immunemediated damage resulting from a cross-reaction between patient antibodies to bacterial surface proteins and similar
proteins found on cardiac, neuronal, and synovial tissues. Damage to the nervous tissue or joints, which leads to joint
pain and swelling, is reversible. However, damage to heart valves can be irreversible and is worsened by repeated
episodes of acute rheumatic fever, particularly during the first 3–5 years after the first rheumatic fever attack. The
inflammation of the heart valves caused by cross-reacting antibodies leads to scarring and stiffness of the valve
leaflets. This, in turn, produces a characteristic heart murmur. Patients who have previously developed rheumatic
fever and who subsequently develop recurrent pharyngitis due to S. pyogenes are at high risk for a recurrent attacks
of rheumatic fever.
The American Heart Association recommends[11] a treatment regimen consisting of benzathine benzylpenicillin every
3 or 4 weeks, depending on the patient’s risk for reinfection. Additional prophylactic antibiotic treatment may be
recommended depending on the age of the patient and risk for reinfection.

10. A. Beaudoin et al. “Acute Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease Among Children—American Samoa, 2011–2012.” Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report 64 no. 20 (2015):555–558.
11. M.A. Gerber et al. “Prevention of Rheumatic Fever and Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Streptococcal Pharyngitis: A Scientific
Statement From the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, the Interdisciplinary Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology, and the
Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research: Endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics.” Circulation 119,
no. 11 (2009):1541–1551.

1116

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Bacterial Endocarditis and Pericarditis
The endocardium is a tissue layer that lines the muscles and valves of the heart. This tissue can become infected
by a variety of bacteria, including gram-positive cocci such as Staphylococcus aureus, viridans streptococci, and
Enterococcus faecalis, and the gram-negative so-called HACEK bacilli: Haemophilus spp., Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae. The resulting
inflammation is called endocarditis, which can be described as either acute or subacute. Causative agents typically
enter the bloodstream during accidental or intentional breaches in the normal barrier defenses (e.g., dental procedures,
body piercings, catheterization, wounds). Individuals with preexisting heart damage, prosthetic valves and other
cardiac devices, and those with a history of rheumatic fever have a higher risk for endocarditis. This disease can
rapidly destroy the heart valves and, if untreated, lead to death in just a few days.
In subacute bacterial endocarditis, heart valve damage occurs slowly over a period of months. During this time,
blood clots form in the heart, and these protect the bacteria from phagocytes. These patches of tissue-associated
bacteria are called vegetations. The resulting damage to the heart, in part resulting from the immune response
causing fibrosis of heart valves, can necessitate heart valve replacement (Figure 25.6). Outward signs of subacute
endocarditis may include a fever.
Diagnosis of infective endocarditis is determined using the combination of blood cultures, echocardiogram, and
clinical symptoms. In both acute and subacute endocarditis, treatment typically involves relatively high doses of
intravenous antibiotics as determined by antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Acute endocarditis is often treated
with a combination of ampicillin, nafcillin, and gentamicin for synergistic coverage of Staphylococcus spp. and
Streptococcus spp. Prosthetic-valve endocarditis is often treated with a combination of vancomycin, rifampin, and
gentamicin. Rifampin is necessary to treat individuals with infection of prosthetic valves or other foreign bodies
because rifampin can penetrate the biofilm of most of the pathogens that infect these devices.
Staphylcoccus spp. and Streptococcus spp. can also infect and cause inflammation in the tissues surrounding the
heart, a condition called acute pericarditis. Pericarditis is marked by chest pain, difficulty breathing, and a dry cough.
In most cases, pericarditis is self-limiting and clinical intervention is not necessary. Diagnosis is made with the aid
of a chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, aspirate of pericardial fluid, or biopsy of pericardium.
Antibacterial medications may be prescribed for infections associated with pericarditis; however, pericarditis can
also be caused other pathogens, including viruses (e.g., echovirus, influenza virus), fungi (e.g., Histoplasma spp.,
Coccidioides spp.), and eukaryotic parasites (e.g., Toxoplasma spp.).

Figure 25.6 The heart of an individual who had subacute bacterial endocarditis of the mitral valve. Bacterial
vegetations are visible on the valve tissues. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1117

• Compare acute and subacute bacterial endocarditis.

Gas Gangrene
Traumatic injuries or certain medical conditions, such as diabetes, can cause damage to blood vessels that interrupts
blood flow to a region of the body. When blood flow is interrupted, tissues begin to die, creating an anaerobic
environment in which anaerobic bacteria can thrive. This condition is called ischemia. Endospores of the anaerobic
bacterium Clostridium perfringens (along with a number of other Clostridium spp. from the gut) can readily germinate
in ischemic tissues and colonize the anaerobic tissues.
The resulting infection, called gas gangrene, is characterized by rapidly spreading myonecrosis (death of muscle
tissue). The patient experiences a sudden onset of excruciating pain at the infection site and the rapid development of
a foul-smelling wound containing gas bubbles and a thin, yellowish discharge tinged with a small amount of blood.
As the infection progresses, edema and cutaneous blisters containing bluish-purple fluid form. The infected tissue
becomes liquefied and begins sloughing off. The margin between necrotic and healthy tissue often advances several
inches per hour even with antibiotic therapy. Septic shock and organ failure frequently accompany gas gangrene;
when patients develop sepsis, the mortality rate is greater than 50%.
α-Toxin and theta (θ) toxin are the major virulence factors of C. perfringens implicated in gas gangrene. α-Toxin
is a lipase responsible for breaking down cell membranes; it also causes the formation of thrombi (blood clots) in
blood vessels, contributing to the spread of ischemia. θ-Toxin forms pores in the patient’s cell membranes, causing
cell lysis. The gas associated with gas gangrene is produced by Clostridium’s fermentation of butyric acid, which
produces hydrogen and carbon dioxide that are released as the bacteria multiply, forming pockets of gas in tissues
(Figure 25.7).
Gas gangrene is initially diagnosed based on the presence of the clinical signs and symptoms described earlier in
this section. Diagnosis can be confirmed through Gram stain and anaerobic cultivation of wound exudate (drainage)
and tissue samples on blood agar. Treatment typically involves surgical debridement of any necrotic tissue; advanced
cases may require amputation. Surgeons may also use vacuum-assisted closure (VAC), a surgical technique in which
vacuum-assisted drainage is used to remove blood or serous fluid from a wound or surgical site to speed recovery. The
most common antibiotic treatments include penicillin G and clindamycin. Some cases are also treated with hyperbaric
oxygen therapy because Clostridium spp. are incapable of surviving in oxygen-rich environments.

Figure 25.7 (a) In this image of a patient with gas gangrene, note the bluish-purple discoloration around the bicep
and the irregular margin of the discolored tissue indicating the spread of infection. (b) A radiograph of the arm shows
a darkening in the tissue, which indicates the presence of gas. (credit a, b: modification of work by Aggelidakis J,
Lasithiotakis K, Topalidou A, Koutroumpas J, Kouvidis G, and Katonis P)

1118

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Tularemia
Infection with the gram-negative bacterium Francisella tularensis causes tularemia (or rabbit fever), a zoonotic
infection in humans. F. tularensis is a facultative intracellular parasite that primarily causes illness in rabbits, although
a wide variety of domesticated animals are also susceptible to infection. Humans can be infected through ingestion
of contaminated meat or, more typically, handling of infected animal tissues (e.g., skinning an infected rabbit).
Tularemia can also be transmitted by the bites of infected arthropods, including the dog tick (Dermacentor variabilis),
the lone star tick (Amblyomma americanum), the wood tick (Dermacentor andersoni), and deer flies (Chrysops spp.).
Although the disease is not directly communicable between humans, exposure to aerosols of F. tularensis can result
in life-threatening infections. F. tularensis is highly contagious, with an infectious dose of as few as 10 bacterial cells.
In addition, pulmonary infections have a 30%–60% fatality rate if untreated.[12] For these reasons, F. tularensis is
currently classified and must be handled as a biosafety level-3 (BSL-3) organism and as a potential biological warfare
agent.
Following introduction through a break in the skin, the bacteria initially move to the lymph nodes, where they are
ingested by phagocytes. After escaping from the phagosome, the bacteria grow and multiply intracellularly in the
cytoplasm of phagocytes. They can later become disseminated through the blood to other organs such as the liver,
lungs, and spleen, where they produce masses of tissue called granulomas (Figure 25.8). After an incubation period
of about 3 days, skin lesions develop at the site of infection. Other signs and symptoms include fever, chills, headache,
and swollen and painful lymph nodes.

Figure 25.8 (a) A skin lesion appears at the site of infection on the hand of an individual infected with Francisella
tularensis. (b) A scanning electron micrograph shows the coccobacilli cells (blue) of F. tularensis. (credit a:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by NIAID)

A direct diagnosis of tularemia is challenging because it is so contagious. Once a presumptive diagnosis of tularemia
is made, special handling is required to collect and process patients’ specimens to prevent the infection of healthcare workers. Specimens suspected of containing F. tularensis can only be handled by BSL-2 or BSL-3 laboratories
registered with the Federal Select Agent Program, and individuals handling the specimen must wear protective
equipment and use a class II biological safety cabinet.
Tularemia is relatively rare in the US, and its signs and symptoms are similar to a variety of other infections that may
need to be ruled out before a diagnosis can be made. Direct fluorescent-antibody (DFA) microscopic examination
using antibodies specific for F. tularensis can rapidly confirm the presence of this pathogen. Culturing this microbe
is difficult because of its requirement for the amino acid cysteine, which must be supplied as an extra nutrient in
culturing media. Serological tests are available to detect an immune response against the bacterial pathogen. In
patients with suspected infection, acute- and convalescent-phase serum samples are required to confirm an active
12. World Health Organization. “WHO Guidelines on Tularaemia.” 2007. http://www.cdc.gov/tularemia/resources/
whotularemiamanual.pdf. Accessed July 26, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1119

infection. PCR-based tests can also be used for clinical identification of direct specimens from body fluids or tissues
as well as cultured specimens. In most cases, diagnosis is based on clinical findings and likely incidents of exposure
to the bacterium. The antibiotics streptomycin, gentamycin, doxycycline, and ciprofloxacin are effective in treating
tularemia.

Brucellosis
Species in the genus Brucella are gram-negative facultative intracellular pathogens that appear as coccobacilli.
Several species cause zoonotic infections in animals and humans, four of which have significant human
pathogenicity: B. abortus from cattle and buffalo, B. canis from dogs, B. suis from swine, and B. melitensis from
goats, sheep, and camels. Infections by these pathogens are called brucellosis, also known as undulant fever,
“Mediterranean fever,” or “Malta fever.” Vaccination of animals has made brucellosis a rare disease in the US, but it
is still common in the Mediterranean, south and central Asia, Central and South America, and the Caribbean. Human
infections are primarily associated with the ingestion of meat or unpasteurized dairy products from infected animals.
Infection can also occur through inhalation of bacteria in aerosols when handling animal products, or through direct
contact with skin wounds. In the US, most cases of brucellosis are found in individuals with extensive exposure to
potentially infected animals (e.g., slaughterhouse workers, veterinarians).
Two important virulence factors produced by Brucella spp. are urease, which allows ingested bacteria to avoid
destruction by stomach acid, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which allows the bacteria to survive within phagocytes.
After gaining entry to tissues, the bacteria are phagocytized by host neutrophils and macrophages. The bacteria then
escape from the phagosome and grow within the cytoplasm of the cell. Bacteria phagocytized by macrophages are
disseminated throughout the body. This results in the formation of granulomas within many body sites, including
bone, liver, spleen, lung, genitourinary tract, brain, heart, eye, and skin. Acute infections can result in undulant
(relapsing) fever, but untreated infections develop into chronic disease that usually manifests as acute febrile illness
(fever of 40–41 °C [104–105.8 °F]) with recurring flu-like signs and symptoms.
Brucella is only reliably found in the blood during the acute fever stage; it is difficult to diagnose by cultivation.
In addition, Brucella is considered a BSL-3 pathogen and is hazardous to handle in the clinical laboratory without
protective clothing and at least a class II biological safety cabinet. Agglutination tests are most often used for
serodiagnosis. In addition, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) are available to determine exposure to
the organism. The antibiotics doxycycline or ciprofloxacin are typically prescribed in combination with rifampin;
gentamicin, streptomycin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) are also effective against Brucella
infections and can be used if needed.

• Compare the pathogenesis of tularemia and brucellosis.

Cat-Scratch Disease
The zoonosis cat-scratch disease (CSD) (or cat-scratch fever) is a bacterial infection that can be introduced to the
lymph nodes when a human is bitten or scratched by a cat. It is caused by the facultative intracellular gram-negative
bacterium Bartonella henselae. Cats can become infected from flea feces containing B. henselae that they ingest while
grooming. Humans become infected when flea feces or cat saliva (from claws or licking) containing B. henselae are
introduced at the site of a bite or scratch. Once introduced into a wound, B. henselae infects red blood cells.
B. henselae invasion of red blood cells is facilitated by adhesins associated with outer membrane proteins and a
secretion system that mediates transport of virulence factors into the host cell. Evidence of infection is indicated if
a small nodule with pus forms in the location of the scratch 1 to 3 weeks after the initial injury. The bacteria then
migrate to the nearest lymph nodes, where they cause swelling and pain. Signs and symptoms may also include fever,
chills, and fatigue. Most infections are mild and tend to be self-limiting. However, immunocompromised patients may

1120

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

develop bacillary angiomatosis (BA), characterized by the proliferation of blood vessels, resulting in the formation
of tumor-like masses in the skin and internal organs; or bacillary peliosis (BP), characterized by multiple cyst-like,
blood-filled cavities in the liver and spleen. Most cases of CSD can be prevented by keeping cats free of fleas and
promptly cleaning a cat scratch with soap and warm water.
The diagnosis of CSD is difficult because the bacterium does not grow readily in the laboratory. When necessary,
immunofluorescence, serological tests, PCR, and gene sequencing can be performed to identify the bacterial species.
Given the limited nature of these infections, antibiotics are not normally prescribed. For immunocompromised
patients, rifampin, azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin (intramuscularly), or TMP-SMZ are generally the most
effective options.

Rat-Bite Fever
The zoonotic infection rat-bite fever can be caused by two different gram-negative bacteria: Streptobacillus
moniliformis, which is more common in North America, and Spirillum minor, which is more common in Asia.
Because of modern sanitation efforts, rat bites are rare in the US. However, contact with fomites, food, or water
contaminated by rat feces or body fluids can also cause infections. Signs and symptoms of rat-bite fever include fever,
vomiting, myalgia (muscle pain), arthralgia (joint pain), and a maculopapular rash on the hands and feet. An ulcer
may also form at the site of a bite, along with some swelling of nearby lymph nodes. In most cases, the infection is
self-limiting. Little is known about the virulence factors that contribute to these signs and symptoms of disease.
Cell culture, MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, PCR, or ELISA can be used in the identification of Streptobacillus
moniliformis. The diagnosis Spirillum minor may be confirmed by direct microscopic observation of the pathogens in
blood using Giemsa or Wright stains, or darkfield microscopy. Serological tests can be used to detect a host immune
response to the pathogens after about 10 days. The most commonly used antibiotics to treat these infections are
penicillin or doxycycline.

Plague
The gram-negative bacillus Yersinia pestis causes the zoonotic infection plague. This bacterium causes acute febrile
disease in animals, usually rodents or other small mammals, and humans. The disease is associated with a high
mortality rate if left untreated. Historically, Y. pestis has been responsible for several devastating pandemics, resulting
in millions of deaths (see Micro Connections: The History of the Plague). There are three forms of plague:
bubonic plague (the most common form, accounting for about 80% of cases), pneumonic plague, and septicemic
plague. These forms are differentiated by the mode of transmission and the initial site of infection. Figure 25.9
illustrates these various modes of transmission and infection between animals and humans.
In bubonic plague, Y. pestis is transferred by the bite of infected fleas. Since most flea bites occur on the legs and
ankles, Y. pestis is often introduced into the tissues and blood circulation in the lower extremities. After a 2- to 6-day
incubation period, patients experience an abrupt onset fever (39.5–41 °C [103.1–105.8 °F]), headache, hypotension,
and chills. The pathogen localizes in lymph nodes, where it causes inflammation, swelling, and hemorrhaging that
results in purple buboes (Figure 25.10). Buboes often form in lymph nodes of the groin first because these are
the nodes associated with the lower limbs; eventually, through circulation in the blood and lymph, lymph nodes
throughout the body become infected and form buboes. The average mortality rate for bubonic plague is about 55%
if untreated and about 10% with antibiotic treatment.
Septicemic plague occurs when Y. pestis is directly introduced into the bloodstream through a cut or wound and
circulates through the body. The incubation period for septicemic plague is 1 to 3 days, after which patients develop
fever, chills, extreme weakness, abdominal pain, and shock. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) can also
occur, resulting in the formation of thrombi that obstruct blood vessels and promote ischemia and necrosis in
surrounding tissues (Figure 25.10). Necrosis occurs most commonly in extremities such as fingers and toes, which
become blackened. Septicemic plague can quickly lead to death, with a mortality rate near 100% when it is untreated.
Even with antibiotic treatment, the mortality rate is about 50%.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1121

Pneumonic plague occurs when Y. pestis causes an infection of the lungs. This can occur through inhalation of
aerosolized droplets from an infected individual or when the infection spreads to the lungs from elsewhere in the body
in patients with bubonic or septicemic plague. After an incubation period of 1 to 3 days, signs and symptoms include
fever, headache, weakness, and a rapidly developing pneumonia with shortness of breath, chest pain, and cough
producing bloody or watery mucus. The pneumonia may result in rapid respiratory failure and shock. Pneumonic
plague is the only form of plague that can be spread from person to person by infectious aerosol droplet. If untreated,
the mortality rate is near 100%; with antibiotic treatment, the mortality rate is about 50%.

Figure 25.9 Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of plague, has numerous modes of transmission. The modes are
divided into two ecological classes: urban and sylvatic (i.e., forest or rural). The urban cycle primarily involves
transmission from infected urban mammals (rats) to humans by flea vectors (brown arrows). The disease may travel
between urban centers (purple arrow) if infected rats find their way onto ships or trains. The sylvatic cycle involves
mammals more common in nonurban environments. Sylvatic birds and mammals (including humans) may become
infected after eating infected mammals (pink arrows) or by flea vectors. Pneumonic transmission occurs between
humans or between humans and infected animals through the inhalation of Y. pestis in aerosols. (credit “diagram”:
modification of work by Stenseth NC, Atshabar BB, Begon M, Belmain SR, Bertherat E, Carniel E, Gage KL, Leirs H,
and Rahalison L; credit “cat”: modification of work by “KaCey97078”/Flickr)

1122

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.10 (a) Yersinia pestis infection can cause inflamed and swollen lymph nodes (buboes), like these in the
groin of an infected patient. (b) Septicemic plague caused necrotic toes in this patient. Vascular damage at the
extremities causes ischemia and tissue death. (credit a: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology;
credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

The high mortality rate for the plague is, in part, a consequence of it being unusually well equipped with virulence
factors. To date, there are at least 15 different major virulence factors that have been identified from Y. pestis and,
of these, eight are involved with adherence to host cells. In addition, the F1 component of the Y. pestis capsule
is a virulence factor that allows the bacterium to avoid phagocytosis. F1 is produced in large quantities during
mammalian infection and is the most immunogenic component.[13] Successful use of virulence factors allows the
bacilli to disseminate from the area of the bite to regional lymph nodes and eventually the entire blood and lymphatic
systems.
Culturing and direct microscopic examination of a sample of fluid from a bubo, blood, or sputum is the best way
to identify Y. pestis and confirm a presumptive diagnosis of plague. Specimens may be stained using either a Gram,
Giemsa, Wright, or Wayson's staining technique (Figure 25.11). The bacteria show a characteristic bipolar staining
pattern, resembling safety pins, that facilitates presumptive identification. Direct fluorescent antibody tests (rapid test
of outer-membrane antigens) and serological tests like ELISA can be used to confirm the diagnosis. The confirmatory
method for identifying Y. pestis isolates in the US is bacteriophage lysis.
Prompt antibiotic therapy can resolve most cases of bubonic plague, but septicemic and pneumonic plague are more
difficult to treat because of their shorter incubation stages. Survival often depends on an early and accurate diagnosis
and an appropriate choice of antibiotic therapy. In the US, the most common antibiotics used to treat patients with
plague are gentamicin, fluoroquinolones, streptomycin, levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and doxycycline.

13. MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens. “Virulence Factors of Pathogenic Bacteria, Yersinia.” http://www.mgc.ac.cn/
cgi-bin/VFs/genus.cgi?Genus=Yersinia. Accessed September 9, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1123

Figure 25.11 This Wright’s stain of a blood sample from a patient with plague shows the characteristic “safety pin”
appearance of Yersinia pestis. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• Compare bubonic plague, septicemic plague, and pneumonic plague.

Micro Connections
The History of the Plague
The first recorded pandemic of plague, the Justinian plague, occurred in the sixth century CE. It is thought to
have originated in central Africa and spread to the Mediterranean through trade routes. At its peak, more than
5,000 people died per day in Constantinople alone. Ultimately, one-third of that city’s population succumbed to
plague.[14] The impact of this outbreak probably contributed to the later fall of Emperor Justinian.
The second major pandemic, dubbed the Black Death, occurred during the 14th century. This time, the
infections are thought to have originated somewhere in Asia before being transported to Europe by trade,
soldiers, and war refugees. This outbreak killed an estimated one-quarter of the population of Europe (25
million, primarily in major cities). In addition, at least another 25 million are thought to have been killed in
Asia and Africa.[15] This second pandemic, associated with strain Yersinia pestis biovar Medievalis, cycled for
another 300 years in Europe and Great Britain, and was called the Great Plague in the 1660s.
The most recent pandemic occurred in the 1890s with Yersinia pestis biovar Orientalis. This outbreak
originated in the Yunnan province of China and spread worldwide through trade. It is at this time that plague
made its way to the US. The etiologic agent of plague was discovered by Alexandre Yersin (1863–1943) during
this outbreak as well. The overall number of deaths was lower than in prior outbreaks, perhaps because of
improved sanitation and medical support.[16] Most of the deaths attributed to this final pandemic occurred in
India.

14. Rosen, William. Justinian’s Flea: Plague, Empire, and the Birth of Europe. Viking Adult; pg 3; ISBN 978-0-670-03855-8.
15. Benedictow, Ole J. 2004. The Black Death 1346-1353: The Complete History. Woodbridge: Boydell Press.
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Plague: History.” http://www.cdc.gov/plague/history/. Accessed September 15, 2016.

1124

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Link to Learning
Visit this link (https://openstax.org/l/22blackdeath) to see a video describing
how similar the genome of the Black Death bacterium is to today’s strains of
bubonic plague.

Zoonotic Febrile Diseases
A wide variety of zoonotic febrile diseases (diseases that cause fever) are caused by pathogenic bacteria that require
arthropod vectors. These pathogens are either obligate intracellular species of Anaplasma, Bartonella, Ehrlichia,
Orientia, and Rickettsia, or spirochetes in the genus Borrelia. Isolation and identification of pathogens in this group
are best performed in BSL-3 laboratories because of the low infective dose associated with the diseases.

Anaplasmosis
The zoonotic tickborne disease human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA) is caused by the obligate intracellular
pathogen Anaplasma phagocytophilum. HGA is endemic primarily in the central and northeastern US and in countries
in Europe and Asia.
HGA is usually a mild febrile disease that causes flu-like symptoms in immunocompetent patients; however,
symptoms are severe enough to require hospitalization in at least 50% of infections and, of those patients, less than
1% will die of HGA.[17] Small mammals such as white-footed mice, chipmunks, and voles have been identified as
reservoirs of A. phagocytophilum, which is transmitted by the bite of an Ixodes tick. Five major virulence factors[18]
have been reported in Anaplasma; three are adherence factors and two are factors that allow the pathogen to avoid the
human immune response. Diagnostic approaches include locating intracellular microcolonies of Anaplasma through
microscopic examination of neutrophils or eosinophils stained with Giemsa or Wright stain, PCR for detection of A.
phagocytophilum, and serological tests to detect antibody titers against the pathogens. The primary antibiotic used for
treatment is doxycycline.

Ehrlichiosis
Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis (HME) is a zoonotic tickborne disease caused by the BSL-2, obligate
intracellular pathogen Ehrlichia chaffeensis. Currently, the geographic distribution of HME is primarily the eastern
half of the US, with a few cases reported in the West, which corresponds with the known geographic distribution
of the primary vector, the lone star tick (Amblyomma americanum). Symptoms of HME are similar to the flu-like
symptoms observed in anaplasmosis, but a rash is more common, with 60% of children and less than 30% of adults
developing petechial, macula, and maculopapular rashes.[19] Virulence factors allow E. chaffeensis to adhere to and
infect monocytes, forming intracellular microcolonies in monocytes that are diagnostic for the HME. Diagnosis of
HME can be confirmed with PCR and serologic tests. The first-line treatment for adults and children of all ages with
HME is doxycycline.

17. J.S. Bakken et al. “Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, Ehrlichioses, and
Anaplasmosis–United States. A Practical Guide for Physicians and Other Health Care and Public Health Professionals.” MMWR
Recommendations and Reports 55 no. RR04 (2006):1–27.
18. MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, “Virulence Factors of Pathogenic Bacteria, Anaplasma” 2016.
http://www.mgc.ac.cn/cgi-bin/VFs/jsif/main.cgi. Accessed July, 26, 2016.
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Ehrlichiosis, Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment.” 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/
ehrlichiosis/symptoms/index.html. Accessed July 29, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1125

Epidemic Typhus
The disease epidemic typhus is caused by Rickettsia prowazekii and is transmitted by body lice, Pediculus humanus.
Flying squirrels are animal reservoirs of R. prowazekii in North America and can also be sources of lice capable
of transmitting the pathogen. Epidemic typhus is characterized by a high fever and body aches that last for about 2
weeks. A rash develops on the abdomen and chest and radiates to the extremities. Severe cases can result in death
from shock or damage to heart and brain tissues. Infected humans are an important reservoir for this bacterium
because R. prowazekii is the only Rickettsia that can establish a chronic carrier state in humans.
Epidemic typhus has played an important role in human history, causing large outbreaks with high mortality rates
during times of war or adversity. During World War I, epidemic typhus killed more than 3 million people on the
Eastern front.[20] With the advent of effective insecticides and improved personal hygiene, epidemic typhus is now
quite rare in the US. In the developing world, however, epidemics can lead to mortality rates of up to 40% in the
absence of treatment.[21] In recent years, most outbreaks have taken place in Burundi, Ethiopia, and Rwanda. For
example, an outbreak in Burundi refugee camps in 1997 resulted in 45,000 illnesses in a population of about 760,000
people.[22]
A rapid diagnosis is difficult because of the similarity of the primary symptoms with those of many other diseases.
Molecular and immunohistochemical diagnostic tests are the most useful methods for establishing a diagnosis during
the acute stage of illness when therapeutic decisions are critical. PCR to detect distinctive genes from R. prowazekii
can be used to confirm the diagnosis of epidemic typhus, along with immunofluorescent staining of tissue biopsy
specimens. Serology is usually used to identify rickettsial infections. However, adequate antibody titers take up to 10
days to develop. Antibiotic therapy is typically begun before the diagnosis is complete. The most common drugs used
to treat patients with epidemic typhus are doxycycline or chloramphenicol.

Murine (Endemic) Typhus
Murine typhus (also known as endemic typhus) is caused by Rickettsia typhi and is transmitted by the bite of the rat
flea, Xenopsylla cheopis, with infected rats as the main reservoir. Clinical signs and symptoms of murine typhus
include a rash and chills accompanied by headache and fever that last about 12 days. Some patients also exhibit a
cough and pneumonia-like symptoms. Severe illness can develop in immunocompromised patients, with seizures,
coma, and renal and respiratory failure.
Clinical diagnosis of murine typhus can be confirmed from a biopsy specimen from the rash. Diagnostic tests include
indirect immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) staining, PCR for R. typhi, and acute and convalescent serologic testing.
Primary treatment is doxycycline, with chloramphenicol as the second choice.

Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
The disease Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is caused by Rickettsia rickettsii and is transmitted by the
bite of a hard-bodied tick such as the American dog tick (Dermacentor variabilis), Rocky Mountain wood tick (D.
andersoni), or brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus).
This disease is endemic in North and South America and its incidence is coincident with the arthropod vector range.
Despite its name, most cases in the US do not occur in the Rocky Mountain region but in the Southeast; North
Carolina, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Tennessee, and Missouri account for greater than 60% of all cases.[23] The map in
Figure 25.12 shows the distribution of prevalence in the US in 2010.

20. Drali, R., Brouqui, P. and Raoult, D. “Typhus in World War I.” Microbiology Today 41 (2014) 2:58–61.
21. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Health Information for International Travel 2014: The Yellow Book. Oxford
University Press, 2013. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/infectious-diseases-related-to-travel/rickettsial-spotted-typhus-feversrelated-infections-anaplasmosis-ehrlichiosis. Accessed July 26, 2016.
22. World Health Organization. “Typhus.” 1997. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs162/en/. Accessed July 26, 2016.
23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF): Statistics and Epidemiology.”
http://www.cdc.gov/rmsf/stats/index.html. Accessed Sept 16, 2016.

1126

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.12 In the US, Rocky Mountain spotted fever is most prevalent in the southeastern states. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Signs and symptoms of RMSF include a high fever, headache, body aches, nausea, and vomiting. A petechial rash
(similar in appearance to measles) begins on the hands and wrists, and spreads to the trunk, face, and extremities
(Figure 25.13). If untreated, RMSF is a serious illness that can be fatal in the first 8 days even in otherwise healthy
patients. Ideally, treatment should begin before petechiae develop, because this is a sign of progression to severe
disease; however, the rash usually does not appear until day 6 or later after onset of symptoms and only occurs in
35%–60% of patients with the infection. Increased vascular permeability associated with petechiae formation can
result in fatality rates of 3% or greater, even in the presence of clinical support. Most deaths are due to hypotension
and cardiac arrest or from ischemia following blood coagulation.
Diagnosis can be challenging because the disease mimics several other diseases that are more prevalent. The
diagnosis of RMSF is made based on symptoms, fluorescent antibody staining of a biopsy specimen from the rash,
PCR for Rickettsia rickettsii, and acute and convalescent serologic testing. Primary treatment is doxycycline, with
chloramphenicol as the second choice.

Figure 25.13 Rocky Mountain spotted fever causes a petechial rash. Unlike epidemic or murine typhus, the rash
begins at the hands and wrists and then spreads to the trunk. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1127

Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi that is transmitted by the bite of a hard-bodied, blacklegged Ixodes tick. I. scapularis is the biological vector transmitting B. burgdorferi in the eastern and north-central
US and I. pacificus transmits B. burgdorferi in the western US (Figure 25.15). Different species of Ixodes ticks
are responsible for B. burgdorferi transmission in Asia and Europe. In the US, Lyme disease is the most commonly
reported vectorborne illness. In 2014, it was the fifth most common Nationally Notifiable disease. [24]
Ixodes ticks have complex life cycles and deer, mice, and even birds can act as reservoirs. Over 2 years, the ticks pass
through four developmental stages and require a blood meal from a host at each stage. In the spring, tick eggs hatch
into six-legged larvae. These larvae do not carry B. burgdorferi initially. They may acquire the spirochete when they
take their first blood meal (typically from a mouse). The larvae then overwinter and molt into eight-legged nymphs
in the following spring. Nymphs take blood meals primarily from small rodents, but may also feed on humans,
burrowing into the skin. The feeding period can last several days to a week, and it typically takes 24 hours for an
infected nymph to transmit enough B. burgdorferi to cause infection in a human host. Nymphs ultimately mature into
male and female adult ticks, which tend to feed on larger animals like deer or, occasionally, humans. The adults then
mate and produce eggs to continue the cycle (Figure 25.14).

24. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Lyme Disease. Data and Statistics.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/index.html.
Accessed July 26, 2016.

1128

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.14 This image shows the 2-year life cycle of the black-legged tick, the biological vector of Lyme disease.
(credit “mouse”: modification of work by George Shuklin)

The symptoms of Lyme disease follow three stages: early localized, early disseminated, and late stage. During the
early-localized stage, approximately 70%–80%[25] of cases may be characterized by a bull's-eye rash, called erythema
migrans, at the site of the initial tick bite. The rash forms 3 to 30 days after the tick bite (7 days is the average) and
may also be warm to the touch (Figure 25.15).[26] This diagnostic sign is often overlooked if the tick bite occurs on
the scalp or another less visible location. Other early symptoms include flu-like symptoms such as malaise, headache,
fever, and muscle stiffness. If the patient goes untreated, the second early-disseminated stage of the disease occurs
days to weeks later. The symptoms at this stage may include severe headache, neck stiffness, facial paralysis, arthritis,
and carditis. The late-stage manifestations of the disease may occur years after exposure. Chronic inflammation
causes damage that can eventually cause severe arthritis, meningitis, encephalitis, and altered mental states. The
disease may be fatal if untreated.
A presumptive diagnosis of Lyme disease can be made based solely on the presence of a bull’s-eye rash at the
site of infection, if it is present, in addition to other associated symptoms (Figure 25.15). In addition, indirect
25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Signs and Symptoms of Untreated Lyme Disease.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/
signs_symptoms/index.html. Accessed July 27, 2016.
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Ticks. Symptoms of Tickborne Illness.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/ticks/symptoms.html.
Accessed July 27, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1129

immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) labeling can be used to visualize bacteria from blood or skin biopsy specimens.
Serological tests like ELISA can also be used to detect serum antibodies produced in response to infection. During
the early stage of infection (about 30 days), antibacterial drugs such as amoxicillin and doxycycline are effective. In
the later stages, penicillin G, chloramphenicol, or ceftriaxone can be given intravenously.

Figure 25.15 (a) A characteristic bull’s eye rash of Lyme disease forms at the site of a tick bite. (b) A darkfield
micrograph shows Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative agent of Lyme disease. (credit a: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)

Relapsing Fever
Borrelia spp. also can cause relapsing fever. Two of the most common species are B. recurrentis, which causes
epidemics of louseborne relapsing fever, and B. hermsii, which causes tickborne relapsing fevers. These Borrelia
species are transmitted by the body louse Pediculus humanus and the soft-bodied tick Ornithodoros hermsi,
respectively. Lice acquire the spirochetes from human reservoirs, whereas ticks acquire them from rodent reservoirs.
Spirochetes infect humans when Borrelia in the vector’s saliva or excreta enter the skin rapidly as the vector bites.
In both louse- and tickborne relapsing fevers, bacteremia usually occurs after the initial exposure, leading to a sudden
high fever (39–43 °C [102.2–109.4 °F) typically accompanied by headache and muscle aches. After about 3 days,
these symptoms typically subside, only to return again after about a week. After another 3 days, the symptoms subside
again but return a week later, and this cycle may repeat several times unless it is disrupted by antibiotic treatment.
Immune evasion through bacterial antigenic variation is responsible for the cyclical nature of the symptoms in these
diseases.
The diagnosis of relapsing fever can be made by observation of spirochetes in blood, using darkfield microscopy
(Figure 25.16). For louseborne relapsing fever, doxycycline or erythromycin are the first-line antibiotics. For
tickborne relapsing fever, tetracycline or erythromycin are the first-line antibiotics.

1130

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.16 A peripheral blood smear from a patient with tickborne relapsing fever. Borrelia appears as thin
spirochetes among the larger red blood cells. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Trench Fever
The louseborne disease trench fever was first characterized as a specific disease during World War I, when
approximately 1 million soldiers were infected. Today, it is primarily limited to areas of the developing world where
poor sanitation and hygiene lead to infestations of lice (e.g., overpopulated urban areas and refugee camps). Trench
fever is caused by the gram-negative bacterium Bartonella quintana, which is transmitted when feces from infected
body lice, Pediculus humanus var corporis, are rubbed into the louse bite, abraded skin, or the conjunctiva. The
symptoms typically follow a 5-day course marked by a high fever, body aches, conjunctivitis, ocular pain, severe
headaches, and severe bone pain in the shins, neck, and back. Diagnosis can be made using blood cultures; serological
tests like ELISA can be used to detect antibody titers to the pathogen and PCR can also be used. The first-line
antibiotics are doxycycline, macrolide antibiotics, and ceftriaxone.

• What is the vector associated with epidemic typhus?
• Describe the life cycle of the deer tick and how it spreads Lyme disease.

Micro Connections
Tick Tips
Many of the diseases covered in this chapter involve arthropod vectors. Of these, ticks are probably the most
commonly encountered in the US. Adult ticks have eight legs and two body segments, the cephalothorax and
the head (Figure 25.17). They typically range from 2 mm to 4 mm in length, and feed on the blood of the host
by attaching themselves to the skin.
Unattached ticks should be removed and eliminated as soon as they are discovered. When removing a tick
that has already attached itself, keep the following guidelines in mind to reduce the chances of exposure to
pathogens:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

• Use blunt tweezers to gently pull near the site of attachment until the tick releases its hold on the skin.
• Avoid crushing the tick's body and do not handle the tick with bare fingers. This could release bacterial
pathogens and actually increase your exposure. The tick can be killed by drowning in water or alcohol,
or frozen if it may be needed later for identification and analysis.

• Disinfect the area thoroughly by swabbing with an antiseptic such as isopropanol.
• Monitor the site of the bite for rashes or other signs of infection.
Many ill-advised home remedies for tick removal have become popular in recent years, propagated by social
media and pseudojournalism. Health professionals should discourage patients from resorting to any of the
following methods, which are NOT recommended:

• using chemicals (e.g., petroleum jelly or fingernail polish) to dislodge an attached tick, because it can
cause the tick to release fluid, which can increase the chance of infection

• using hot objects (matches or cigarette butts) to dislodge an attached tick
• squeezing the tick's body with fingers or tweezers

Figure 25.17 (a) This black-legged tick, also known as the deer tick, has not yet attached to the skin. (b) A
notched tick extractor can be used for removal. (c) To remove an attached tick with fine-tipped tweezers, pull
gently on the mouth parts until the tick releases its hold on the skin. Avoid squeezing the tick’s body, because
this could release pathogens and thus increase the risk of contracting Lyme disease. (credit a: modification of
work by Jerry Kirkhart; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Disease Profile
Bacterial Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
Although the circulatory system is a closed system, bacteria can enter the bloodstream through several
routes. Wounds, animal bites, or other breaks in the skin and mucous membranes can result in the rapid
dissemination of bacterial pathogens throughout the body. Localized infections may also spread to the
bloodstream, causing serious and often fatal systemic infections. Figure 25.18 and Figure 25.19 summarize
the major characteristics of bacterial infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems.

1131

1132

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.18

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.19

1133

1134

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

25.3 Viral Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic
Systems
Learning Objectives
• Identify common viral pathogens that cause infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the circulatory and lymphatic systems

Viral pathogens of the circulatory system vary tremendously both in their virulence and distribution worldwide. Some
of these pathogens are practically global in their distribution. Fortunately, the most ubiquitous viruses tend to produce
the mildest forms of disease. In the majority of cases, those infected remain asymptomatic. On the other hand, other
viruses are associated with life-threatening diseases that have impacted human history.

Infectious Mononucleosis and Burkitt Lymphoma
Human herpesvirus 4, also known as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), has been associated with a variety of human diseases,
such as mononucleosis and Burkitt lymphoma. Exposure to the human herpesvirus 4 (HHV-4) is widespread and
nearly all people have been exposed at some time in their childhood, as evidenced by serological tests on populations.
The virus primarily resides within B lymphocytes and, like all herpes viruses, can remain dormant in a latent state for
a long time.
When uninfected young adults are exposed to EBV, they may experience infectious mononucleosis. The virus
is mainly spread through contact with body fluids (e.g., saliva, blood, and semen). The main symptoms include
pharyngitis, fever, fatigue, and lymph node swelling. Abdominal pain may also occur as a result of spleen and liver
enlargement in the second or third week of infection. The disease typically is self-limiting after about a month.
The main symptom, extreme fatigue, can continue for several months, however. Complications in immunocompetent
patients are rare but can include jaundice, anemia, and possible rupture of the spleen caused by enlargement.
In patients with malaria or HIV, Epstein-Barr virus can lead to a fast-growing malignant cancer known as Burkitt
lymphoma (Figure 25.20). This condition is a form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma that produces solid tumors chiefly
consisting of aberrant B cells. Burkitt lymphoma is more common in Africa, where prevalence of HIV and malaria
is high, and it more frequently afflicts children. Repeated episodes of viremia caused by reactivation of the virus
are common in immunocompromised individuals. In some patients with AIDS, EBV may induce the formation of
malignant B-cell lymphomas or oral hairy leukoplakia. Immunodeficiency-associated Burkitt lymphoma primarily
occurs in patients with HIV. HIV infection, similar to malaria, leads to polyclonal B-cell activation and permits poorly
controlled proliferation of EBV+ B cells, leading to the formation of lymphomas.
Infectious mononucleosis is typically diagnosed based on the initial clinical symptoms and a test for antibodies to
EBV-associated antigens. Because the disease is self-limiting, antiviral treatments are rare for mononucleosis. Cases
of Burkitt lymphoma are diagnosed from a biopsy specimen from a lymph node or tissue from a suspected tumor.
Staging of the cancer includes computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen, pelvis, and cytologic and
histologic evaluation of biopsy specimens. Because the tumors grow so rapidly, staging studies must be expedited
and treatment must be initiated promptly. An intensive alternating regimen of cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
doxorubicin, methotrexate, ifosfamide, etoposide, and cytarabine (CODOX-M/IVAC) plus rituximab results in a cure
rate greater than 90% for children and adults.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1135

Figure 25.20 (a) Burkitt lymphoma can cause large tumors. (b) Characteristic irregularly shaped abnormal
lymphocytes (large purple cells) with vacuoles (white spots) from a fine-needle aspirate of a tumor from a patient with
Burkitt lymphoma. (credit a: modification of work by Bi CF, Tang Y, Zhang WY, Zhao S, Wang XQ, Yang QP, Li GD,
and Liu WP; credit b: modification of work by Ed Uthman)

Cytomegalovirus Infections
Also known as cytomegalovirus (CMV), human herpesvirus 5 (HHV-5) is a virus with high infection rates in the
human population. It is currently estimated that 50% of people in the US have been infected by the time they
reach adulthood.[27] CMV is the major cause of non-Epstein-Barr infectious mononucleosis in the general human
population. It is also an important pathogen in immunocompromised hosts, including patients with AIDS, neonates,
and transplant recipients. However, the vast majority of CMV infections are asymptomatic. In adults, if symptoms do
occur, they typically include fever, fatigue, swollen glands, and pharyngitis.
CMV can be transmitted between individuals through contact with body fluids such as saliva or urine. Common
modes of transmission include sexual contact, nursing, blood transfusions, and organ transplants. In addition,
pregnant women with active infections frequently pass this virus to their fetus, resulting in congenital CMV
infections, which occur in approximately one in every 150 infants in US.[28] Infants can also be infected during
passage through the birth canal or through breast milk and saliva from the mother.
Perinatal infections tend to be milder but can occasionally cause lung, spleen, or liver damage. Serious symptoms
in newborns include growth retardation, jaundice, deafness, blindness, and mental retardation if the virus crosses
the placenta during the embryonic state when the body systems are developing in utero. However, a majority
(approximately 80%) of infected infants will never have symptoms or experience long-term problems.[29] Diagnosis
of CMV infection during pregnancy is usually achieved by serology; CMV is the “C” in prenatal TORCH screening.
Many patients receiving blood transfusions and nearly all those receiving kidney transplants ultimately become
infected with CMV. Approximately 60% of transplant recipients will have CMV infection and more than 20% will
develop symptomatic disease.[30] These infections may result from CMV-contaminated tissues but also may be a
consequence of immunosuppression required for transplantation causing reactivation of prior CMV infections. The
resulting viremia can lead to fever and leukopenia, a decrease in the number of white blood cells in the bloodstream.
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Congenital CMV Infection: About CMV.” 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/cmv/transmission.html. Accessed July 28, 2016.
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Congenital CMV Infection: Babies Born with CMV
(Congenital CMV Infection).” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/cmv/congenital-infection.html. Accessed July 28, 2016.
29. ibid.
30. E. Cordero et al. “Cytomegalovirus Disease in Kidney Transplant Recipients: Incidence, Clinical Profile, and Risk Factors.”
Transplantation Proceedings 44 no. 3 (2012):694–700.

1136

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Serious consequences may include liver damage, transplant rejection, and death. For similar reasons, many patients
with AIDS develop active CMV infections that can manifest as encephalitis or progressive retinitis leading to
blindness.[31]
Diagnosis of a localized CMV infection can be achieved through direct microscopic evaluation of tissue specimens
stained with routine stains (e.g., Wright-Giemsa, hematoxylin and eosin, Papanicolaou) and immunohistochemical
stains. Cells infected by CMV produce characteristic inclusions with an "owl's eye" appearance; this sign is less
sensitive than molecular methods like PCR but more predictive of localized disease (Figure 25.21). For more severe
CMV infection, tests such as enzyme immunoassay (EIA), indirect immunofluorescence antibody (IFA) tests, and
PCR, which are based on detection of CMV antigen or DNA, have a higher sensitivity and can determine viral load.
Cultivation of the virus from saliva or urine is still the method for detecting CMV in newborn babies up to 3 weeks
old. Ganciclovir, valganciclovir, foscarnet, and cidofovir are the first-line antiviral drugs for serious CMV infections.

Figure 25.21 Cells infected with CMV become enlarged and have a characteristic “owl’s eye” nucleus. This
micrograph shows kidney cells from a patient with CMV. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention)

• Compare the diseases caused by HHV-4 and HHV-5.

Arthropod-Borne Viral Diseases
There are a number of arthropod-borne viruses, or arboviruses, that can cause human disease. Among these are
several important hemorrhagic fevers transmitted by mosquitoes. We will discuss three that pose serious threats:
yellow fever, chikungunya fever, and dengue fever.

Yellow Fever
Yellow fever was once common in the US and caused several serious outbreaks between 1700 and 1900.[32] Through
vector control efforts, however, this disease has been eliminated in the US. Currently, yellow fever occurs primarily
31. L.M. Mofenson et al. “Guidelines for the Prevention and Treatment of Opportunistic Infections Among HIV-Exposed and HIV-Infected
Children: Recommendations From CDC, the National Institutes of Health, the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America, the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society, and the American Academy of Pediatrics.” MMWR Recommendations and Reports 58
no. RR-11 (2009):1–166.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1137

in tropical and subtropical areas in South America and Africa. It is caused by the yellow fever virus of the genus
Flavivirus (named for the Latin word flavus meaning yellow), which is transmitted to humans by mosquito vectors.
Sylvatic yellow fever occurs in tropical jungle regions of Africa and Central and South America, where the virus can
be transmitted from infected monkeys to humans by the mosquitoes Aedes africanus or Haemagogus spp. In urban
areas, the Aedes aegypti mosquito is mostly responsible for transmitting the virus between humans.
Most individuals infected with yellow fever virus have no illness or only mild disease. Onset of milder symptoms is
sudden, with dizziness, fever of 39–40 °C (102–104 °F), chills, headache, and myalgias. As symptoms worsen, the
face becomes flushed, and nausea, vomiting, constipation, severe fatigue, restlessness, and irritability are common.
Mild disease may resolve after 1 to 3 days. However, approximately 15% of cases progress to develop moderate to
severe yellow fever disease.[33]
In moderate or severe disease, the fever falls suddenly 2 to 5 days after onset, but recurs several hours or days later.
Symptoms of jaundice, petechial rash, mucosal hemorrhages, oliguria (scant urine), epigastric tenderness with bloody
vomit, confusion, and apathy also often occur for approximately 7 days of moderate to severe disease. After more
than a week, patients may have a rapid recovery and no sequelae.
In its most severe form, called malignant yellow fever, symptoms include delirium, bleeding, seizures, shock,
coma, and multiple organ failure; in some cases, death occurs. Patients with malignant yellow fever also become
severely immunocompromised, and even those in recovery may become susceptible to bacterial superinfections and
pneumonia. Of the 15% of patients who develop moderate or severe disease, up to half may die.
Diagnosis of yellow fever is often based on clinical signs and symptoms and, if applicable, the patient’s travel history,
but infection can be confirmed by culture, serologic tests, and PCR. There are no effective treatments for patients
with yellow fever. Whenever possible, patients with yellow fever should be hospitalized for close observation and
given supportive care. Prevention is the best method of controlling yellow fever. Use of mosquito netting, window
screens, insect repellents, and insecticides are all effective methods of reducing exposure to mosquito vectors. An
effective vaccine is also available, but in the US, it is only administered to those traveling to areas with endemic
yellow fever. In West Africa, the World Health Organization (WHO) launched a Yellow Fever Initiative in 2006 and,
since that time, significant progress has been made in combating yellow fever. More than 105 million people have
been vaccinated, and no outbreaks of yellow fever were reported in West Africa in 2015.

Micro Connections
Yellow Fever: Altering the Course of History
Yellow fever originated in Africa and is still most prevalent there today. This disease is thought to have been
translocated to the Americas by the slave trade in the 16th century.[34] Since that time, yellow fever has been
associated with many severe outbreaks, some of which had important impacts upon historic events.
Yellow fever virus was once an important cause of disease in the US. In the summer of 1793, there was a
serious outbreak in Philadelphia (then the US capitol). It is estimated that 5,000 people (10% of the city’s
population) died. All of the government officials, including George Washington, fled the city in the face of this
epidemic. The disease only abated when autumn frosts killed the mosquito vector population.
In 1802, Napoleon Bonaparte sent an army of 40,000 to Hispaniola to suppress a slave revolution. This was
seen by many as a part of a plan to use the Louisiana Territory as a granary as he reestablished France as
a global power. Yellow fever, however, decimated his army and they were forced to withdraw. Abandoning his
aspirations in the New World, Napoleon sold the Louisiana Territory to the US for $15 million in 1803.

32. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “History Timeline Transcript.” http://www.cdc.gov/travel-training/local/
HistoryEpidemiologyandVaccination/HistoryTimelineTranscript.pdf. Accessed July 28, 2016.
33. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Yellow Fever, Symptoms and Treatment.” 2015 http://www.cdc.gov/yellowfever/
symptoms/index.html. Accessed July 28, 2016.

1138

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

The most famous historic event associated with yellow fever is probably the construction of the Panama Canal.
The French began work on the canal in the early 1880s. However, engineering problems, malaria, and yellow
fever forced them to abandon the project. The US took over the task in 1904 and opened the canal a decade
later. During those 10 years, yellow fever was a constant adversary. In the first few years of work, greater
than 80% of the American workers in Panama were hospitalized with yellow fever. It was the work of Carlos
Finlay and Walter Reed that turned the tide. Taken together, their work demonstrated that the disease was
transmitted by mosquitoes. Vector control measures succeeded in reducing both yellow fever and malaria rates
and contributed to the ultimate success of the project.

Dengue Fever
The disease dengue fever, also known as breakbone fever, is caused by four serotypes of dengue virus called dengue
1–4. These are Flavivirus species that are transmitted to humans by A. aegypti or A. albopictus mosquitoes. The
disease is distributed worldwide but is predominantly located in tropical regions. The WHO estimates that 50 million
to 100 million infections occur yearly, including 500,000 dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) cases and 22,000 deaths,
most among children.[35] Dengue fever is primarily a self-limiting disease characterized by abrupt onset of high fever
up to 40 °C (104 °F), intense headaches, rash, slight nose or gum bleeding, and extreme muscle, joint, and bone
pain, causing patients to feel as if their bones are breaking, which is the reason this disease is also referred to as
breakbone fever. As the body temperature returns to normal, in some patients, signs of dengue hemorrhagic fever may
develop that include drowsiness, irritability, severe abdominal pain, severe nose or gum bleeding, persistent vomiting,
vomiting blood, and black tarry stools, as the disease progresses to DHF or dengue shock syndrome (DSS). Patients
who develop DHF experience circulatory system failure caused by increased blood vessel permeability. Patients with
dengue fever can also develop DSS from vascular collapse because of the severe drop in blood pressure. Patients who
develop DHF or DSS are at greater risk for death without prompt appropriate supportive treatment. About 30% of
patients with severe hemorrhagic disease with poor supportive treatment die, but mortality can be less than 1% with
experienced support.[36]
Diagnostic tests for dengue fever include serologic testing, ELISA, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) of blood. There are no specific treatments for dengue fever, nor is there a vaccine. Instead,
supportive clinical care is provided to treat the symptoms of the disease. The best way to limit the impact of this viral
pathogen is vector control.

Chikungunya Fever
The arboviral disease chikungunya fever is caused by chikungunya virus (CHIKV), which is transmitted to humans
by A. aegypti and A. albopictus mosquitoes. Until 2013, the disease had not been reported outside of Africa, Asia, and
a few European countries; however, CHIKV has now spread to mosquito populations in North and South America.
Chikungunya fever is characterized by high fever, joint pain, rash, and blisters, with joint pain persisting for several
months. These infections are typically self-limiting and rarely fatal.
The diagnostic approach for chikungunya fever is similar to that for dengue fever. Viruses can be cultured directly
from patient serum during early infections. IFA, EIA, ELISA, PCR, and RT-PCR are available to detect CHIKV
antigens and patient antibody response to the infection. There are no specific treatments for this disease except to
manage symptoms with fluids, analgesics, and bed rest. As with most arboviruses, the best strategy for combating the
disease is vector control.
34. J.T. Cathey, J.S. Marr. “Yellow fever, Asia and the East African Slave Trade.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene 108, no. 5 (2014):252–257.
35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Dengue, Epidemiology.” 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/dengue/epidemiology/index.html.
Accessed July 28, 2016.
36. C.R. Pringle “Dengue.” MSD Manual: Consumer Version. https://www.msdmanuals.com/home/infections/viral-infections/dengue.
2016. Accessed Sept 15, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1139

Link to Learning
Use this interactive map (https://openstax.org/l/22denguemap) to explore
the global distribution of dengue.

• Name three arboviral diseases and explain why they are so named.
• What is the best method for controlling outbreaks of arboviral diseases?

Ebola Virus Disease
The Ebola virus disease (EVD) is a highly contagious disease caused by species of Ebolavirus, a BSL-4 filovirus
(Figure 25.22). Transmission to humans occurs through direct contact with body fluids (e.g., blood, saliva, sweat,
urine, feces, or vomit), and indirect contact by contaminated fomites. Infected patients can easily transmit Ebola virus
to others if appropriate containment and use of personal protective equipment is not available or used. Handling
and working with patients with EVD is extremely hazardous to the general population and health-care workers. In
almost every EVD outbreak there have been Ebola infections among health-care workers. This ease of Ebola virus
transmission was recently demonstrated in the Ebola epidemic in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone in 2014, in which
more than 28,000 people in 10 countries were infected and more than 11,000 died.[37]
After infection, the initial symptoms of Ebola are unremarkable: fever, severe headache, myalgia, cough, chest
pain, and pharyngitis. As the disease progresses, patients experience abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting.
Hemorrhaging begins after about 3 days, with bleeding occurring in the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and many other
sites. This often leads to delirium, stupor, and coma, accompanied by shock, multiple organ failure, and death. The
mortality rates of EVD often range from 50% to 90%.
The initial diagnosis of Ebola is difficult because the early symptoms are so similar to those of many other illnesses.
It is possible to directly detect the virus from patient samples within a few days after symptoms begin, using
antigen-capture ELISA, immunoglobulin M (IgM) ELISA, PCR, and virus isolation. There are currently no effective,
approved treatments for Ebola other than supportive care and proper isolation techniques to contain its spread.

37. HealthMap. “2014 Ebola Outbreaks.” http://www.healthmap.org/ebola/#timeline. Accessed July 28, 2016.

1140

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.22 An Ebola virus particle viewed with electron microscopy. These filamentous viruses often exhibit
looped or hooked ends. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• How is Ebola transmitted?

Hantavirus
The genus Hantavirus consists of at least four serogroups with nine viruses causing two major clinical (sometimes
overlapping) syndromes: hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) in North America and hemorrhagic fever with
renal syndrome (HFRS) in other continents. Hantaviruses are found throughout the world in wild rodents that shed
the virus in their urine and feces. Transmission occurs between rodents and to humans through inhalation of aerosols
of the rodent urine and feces. Hantaviruses associated with outbreaks in the US and Canada are transmitted by the
deer mouse, white-footed mouse, or cotton rat.
HPS begins as a nonspecific flu-like illness with headache, fever, myalgia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal
pain. Patients rapidly develop pulmonary edema and hypotension resulting in pneumonia, shock, and death, with a
mortality rate of up to 50%.[38] This virus can also cause HFRS, which has not been reported in the US. The initial
symptoms of this condition include high fever, headache, chills, nausea, inflammation or redness of the eyes, or a
rash. Later symptoms are hemorrhaging, hypotension, kidney failure, shock, and death. The mortality rate of HFRS
can be as high as 15%.[39]
ELISA, Western blot, rapid immunoblot strip assay (RIBA), and RT-PCR detect host antibodies or viral proteins
produced during infection. Immunohistological staining may also be used to detect the presence of viral antigens.
There are no clinical treatments other than general supportive care available for HPS infections. Patients with HFRS
can be treated with ribavirin.[40]

• Compare the two Hantavirus diseases discussed in this section.

38. World Health Organization. “Hantavirus Diseases.” 2016. http://www.who.int/ith/diseases/hantavirus/en/. Accessed July 28, 2016.
39. ibid.
40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Hantavirus: Treatment.” 2012. http://www.cdc.gov/hantavirus/technical/hps/
treatment.html. Accessed July 28, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1141

Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Human T-lymphotropic viruses (HTLV), also called human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) are retroviruses that
are the causative agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). There are two main variants of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV-1 (Figure 25.23) occurs in human populations worldwide, whereas HIV-2 is
concentrated in West Africa. Currently, the most affected region in the world is sub-Saharan Africa, with an estimated
25.6 million people living with HIV in 2015.[41] Sub-Saharan Africa also accounts for two-thirds of the global total of
new HIV infections (Figure 25.24).[42]

Figure 25.23 This micrograph shows HIV particles (green) budding from a lymphocyte (top right). (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

41. World Health Organization. “HIV/AIDS: Fact Sheet.” 2016.http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs360/en/. Accessed July 28,
2016.
42. ibid.

1142

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.24 This map shows the prevalence of HIV worldwide in 2015 among adults ages 15–49 years.

HIV is spread through direct contact with body fluids. Casual contact and insect vectors are not sufficient for disease
transmission; common modes of transmission include sexual contact and sharing of needles by intravenous (IV)
drug users. It generally takes many years before the effects of an HIV infection are detected. HIV infections are not
dormant during this period: virions are continually produced, and the immune system continually attempts to clear
the viral infection, while the virus persistently infects additional CD4 T cells. Over time, the CD4 T-cell population is
devastated, ultimately leading to AIDS.
When people are infected with HIV, their disease progresses through three stages based on CD4 T-cell counts and the
presence of clinical symptoms (Figure 25.25).
• Stage 1: Acute HIV infection. Two to 4 weeks after infection with HIV, patients may experience a flu-

like illness, which can last for a few weeks. Patients with acute HIV infection have more than 500 cells/μL
CD4 T cells and a large amount of virus in their blood. Patients are very contagious during this stage. To
confirm acute infection, either a fourth-generation antibody-antigen test or a nucleic acid test (NAT) must be
performed.
• Stage 2: Clinical latency. During this period, HIV enters a period of dormancy. Patients have between 200

and 499 cells/μL CD4 T cells; HIV is still active but reproduces at low levels, and patients may not experience
any symptoms of illness. For patients who are not taking medicine to treat HIV, this period can last a decade or
longer. For patients receiving antiretroviral therapy, the stage may last for several decades, and those with low
levels of the virus in their blood are much less likely to transmit HIV than those who are not virally suppressed.
Near the end of the latent stage, the patient’s viral load starts to increase and the CD4 T-cell count begins to
decrease, leading to the development of symptoms and increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections.
• Stage 3: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Patients are diagnosed with AIDS when their

CD4 T-cell count drops below 200 cells/μL or when they develop certain opportunistic illnesses. During this
stage, the immune system becomes severely damaged by HIV. Common symptoms of AIDS include chills,
fever, sweats, swollen lymph glands, weakness, and weight loss; in addition, patients often develop rare
cancers such as Kaposi’s sarcoma and opportunistic infections such as Pneumocystis pneumonia, tuberculosis,
cryptosporidiosis, and toxoplasmosis. This is a fatal progression that, in the terminal stages, includes wasting

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1143

syndrome and dementia complex. Patients with AIDS have a high viral load and are highly infectious; they
typically survive about 3 years without treatment.

Figure 25.25 This graph shows the clinical progression of CD4 T cells (blue line), clinical symptoms, and viral RNA
(red line) during an HIV infection. (credit: modification of work by Kogan M, and Rappaport J)

The initial diagnosis of HIV is performed using a serological test for antibody production against the pathogen.
Positive test results are confirmed by Western blot or PCR tests. It can take weeks or months for the body to produce
antibodies in response to an infection. There are fourth-generation tests that detect HIV antibodies and HIV antigens
that are present even before the body begins producing antibodies. Nucleic acid tests (NATs) are a third type of test
that is relatively expensive and uncommon; NAT can detect HIV in blood and determine the viral load.
As a consequence of provirus formation, it is currently not possible to eliminate HIV from an infected patient’s body.
Elimination by specific antibodies is ineffective because the virus mutates rapidly—a result of the error-prone reverse
transcriptase and the inability to correct errors. Antiviral treatments, however, can greatly extend life expectancy.
To combat the problem of drug resistance, combinations of antiretroviral drugs called antiretroviral therapy (ART),
sometimes called highly active ART or combined ART, are used. There are several different targets for antiviral drug
action (and a growing list of drugs for each of these targets). One class of drugs inhibits HIV entry; other classes
inhibit reverse transcriptase by blocking viral RNA-dependent and DNA-dependent DNA polymerase activity; and
still others inhibit one of the three HIV enzymes needed to replicate inside human cells.

• Why is it not yet possible to cure HIV infections?

1144

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Eye on Ethics

HIV, AIDS, and Education
When the first outbreaks of AIDS in the US occurred in the early 1980s, very little was known about the
disease or its origins. Erroneously, the disease quickly became stigmatized as one associated with what
became identified as at-risk behaviors such as sexual promiscuity, homosexuality, and IV drug use, even
though mounting evidence indicated the disease was also contracted through transfusion of blood and blood
products or by fetuses of infected mothers. In the mid-1980s, scientists elucidated the identity of the virus, its
mode of transmission, and mechanisms of pathogenesis. Campaigns were undertaken to educate the public
about how HIV spreads to stem infection rates and encourage behavioral changes that reduced the risk for
infection. Approaches to this campaign, however, emphasized very different strategies. Some groups favored
educational programs that emphasized sexual abstinence, monogamy, heterosexuality, and “just say no to
drugs.” Other groups placed an emphasis on “safe sex” in sex education programs and advocated social
services programs that passed out free condoms to anyone, including sexually active minors, and provided
needle exchange programs for IV drug users.
These are clear examples of the intersection between disease and cultural values. As a future health
professional, what is your responsibility in terms of educating patients about behaviors that put them at risk for
HIV or other diseases while possibly setting your own personal opinions aside? You will no doubt encounter
patients whose cultural and moral values differ from your own. Is it ethical for you to promote your own moral
agenda to your patients? How can you advocate for practical disease prevention while still respecting the
personal views of your patients?

Disease Profile
Viral Diseases of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
Many viruses are able to cause systemic, difficult-to-treat infections because of their ability to replicate within
the host. Some of the more common viruses that affect the circulatory system are summarized in Figure 25.26.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.26

1145

1146

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

25.4 Parasitic Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic
Systems
Learning Objectives
• Identify common parasites that cause infections of the circulatory and lymphatic systems
• Compare the major characteristics of specific parasitic diseases affecting the circulatory and lymphatic systems

Some protozoa and parasitic flukes are also capable of causing infections of the human circulatory system. Although
these infections are rare in the US, they continue to cause widespread suffering in the developing world today. Fungal
infections of the circulatory system are very rare. Therefore, they are not discussed in this chapter.

Malaria
Despite more than a century of intense research and clinical advancements, malaria remains one of the most
important infectious diseases in the world today. Its widespread distribution places more than half of the world’s
population in jeopardy. In 2015, the WHO estimated there were about 214 million cases of malaria worldwide,
resulting in about 438,000 deaths; about 88% of cases and 91% of deaths occurred in Africa.[43] Although malaria
is not currently a major threat in the US, the possibility of its reintroduction is a concern. Malaria is caused by
several protozoan parasites in the genus Plasmodium: P. falciparum, P. knowlesi, P. malariae, P. ovale, and P. vivax.
Plasmodium primarily infect red blood cells and are transmitted through the bite of Anopheles mosquitoes.
Currently, P. falciparum is the most common and most lethal cause of malaria, often called falciparum malaria.
Falciparum malaria is widespread in highly populated regions of Africa and Asia, putting many people at risk for the
most severe form of the disease.
The classic signs and symptoms of malaria are cycles of extreme fever and chills. The sudden, violent symptoms
of malaria start with malaise, abrupt chills, and fever (39–41° C [102.2–105.8 °F]), rapid and faint pulse, polyuria,
headache, myalgia, nausea, and vomiting. After 2 to 6 hours of these symptoms, the fever falls, and profuse sweating
occurs for 2 to 3 hours, followed by extreme fatigue. These symptoms are a result of Plasmodium emerging from red
blood cells synchronously, leading to simultaneous rupture of a large number of red blood cells, resulting in damage
to the spleen, liver, lymph nodes, and bone marrow. The organ damage resulting from hemolysis causes patients to
develop sludge blood (i.e., blood in which the red blood cells agglutinate into clumps) that can lead to lack of oxygen,
necrosis of blood vessels, organ failure, and death.
In established infections, malarial cycles of fever and chills typically occur every 2 days in the disease described as
tertian malaria, which is caused by P. vivax and P. ovale. The cycles occur every 3 days in the disease described as
quartan malaria, which is caused by P. malariae. These intervals may vary among cases.
Plasmodium has a complex life cycle that includes several developmental stages alternately produced in mosquitoes
and humans (Figure 25.27). When an infected mosquito takes a blood meal, sporozoites in the mosquito salivary
gland are injected into the host’s blood. These parasites circulate to the liver, where they develop into schizonts. The
schizonts then undergo schizogony, resulting in the release of many merozoites at once. The merozoites move to the
bloodstream and infect red blood cells. Inside red blood cells, merozoites develop into trophozoites that produce more
merozoites. The synchronous release of merozoites from red blood cells in the evening leads to the symptoms of
malaria.
In addition, some trophozoites alternatively develop into male and female gametocytes. The gametocytes are taken
up when the mosquito takes a blood meal from an infected individual. Sexual sporogony occurs in the gut of the
mosquito. The gametocytes fuse to form zygotes in the insect gut. The zygotes become motile and elongate into

43. World Health Organization. “World Malaria Report 2015: Summary.” 2015. http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/world-malariareport-2015/report/en/. Accessed July 28, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1147

an ookinete. This form penetrates the midgut wall and develops into an oocyst. Finally, the oocyst releases new
sporozoites that migrate to the mosquito salivary glands to complete the life cycle.
Diagnosis of malaria is by microscopic observation of developmental forms of Plasmodium in blood smears and rapid
EIA assays that detect Plasmodium antigens or enzymes (Figure 25.28). Drugs such as chloroquine, atovaquone ,
artemether, and lumefantrine may be prescribed for both acute and prophylactic therapy, although some Plasmodium
spp. have shown resistance to antimalarial drugs. Use of insecticides and insecticide-treated bed nets can limit the
spread of malaria. Despite efforts to develop a vaccine for malaria, none is currently available.

Figure 25.27 The life cycle of Plasmodium. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

1148

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.28 A blood smear (human blood stage) shows an early trophozoite in a delicate ring form (upper left) and
an early stage schizont form (center) of Plasmodium falciparum from a patient with malaria. (credit: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Link to Learning
Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/22plasmodium) to learn how the parasite
Plasmodium infects red blood cells.
The Nothing But Nets campaign, an initiative of the United Nations Foundation,
has partnered with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to make mosquito bed
nets available in developing countries in Africa. Visit their website
(https://openstax.org/l/22mosquitonet) to learn more about their efforts to prevent
malaria.

• Why is malaria one of the most important infectious diseases?

Toxoplasmosis
The disease toxoplasmosis is caused by the protozoan Toxoplasma gondii. T. gondii is found in a wide variety of
birds and mammals,[44] and human infections are common. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
estimates that 22.5% of the population 12 years and older has been infected with T. gondii; but immunocompetent
individuals are typically asymptomatic, however.[45] Domestic cats are the only known definitive hosts for the sexual
stages of T. gondii and, thus, are the main reservoirs of infection. Infected cats shed T. gondii oocysts in their feces,
44. A.M. Tenter et al.. “Toxoplasma gondii: From Animals to Humans.” International Journal for Parasitology 30 no. 12-13
(2000):1217–1258.
45. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites - Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma Infection). Epidemiology & Risk Factors.” 2015
http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/toxoplasmosis/epi.html. Accessed July 28, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1149

and these oocysts typically spread to humans through contact with fecal matter on cats’ bodies, in litter boxes, or in
garden beds where outdoor cats defecate.
T. gondii has a complex life cycle that involves multiple hosts. The T. gondii life cycle begins when unsporulated
oocysts are shed in the cat’s feces. These oocysts take 1–5 days to sporulate in the environment and become infective.
Intermediate hosts in nature include birds and rodents, which become infected after ingesting soil, water, or plant
material contaminated with the infective oocysts. Once ingested, the oocysts transform into tachyzoites that localize
in the bird or rodent neural and muscle tissue, where they develop into tissue cysts. Cats may become infected after
consuming birds and rodents harboring tissue cysts. Cats and other animals may also become infected directly by
ingestion of sporulated oocysts in the environment. Interestingly, Toxoplasma infection appears to be able to modify
the host’s behavior. Mice infected by Toxoplasma lose their fear of cat pheromones. As a result, they become easier
prey for cats, facilitating the transmission of the parasite to the cat definitive host [46] (Figure 25.29).
Toxoplasma infections in humans are extremely common, but most infected people are asymptomatic or have
subclinical symptoms. Some studies suggest that the parasite may be able to influence the personality and
psychomotor performance of infected humans, similar to the way it modifies behavior in other mammals.[47] When
symptoms do occur, they tend to be mild and similar to those of mononucleosis. However, asymptomatic
toxoplasmosis can become problematic in certain situations. Cysts can lodge in a variety of human tissues and lie
dormant for years. Reactivation of these quiescent infections can occur in immunocompromised patients following
transplantation, cancer therapy, or the development of an immune disorder such as AIDS. In patients with AIDS who
have toxoplasmosis, the immune system cannot combat the growth of T. gondii in body tissues; as a result, these cysts
can cause encephalitis, retinitis, pneumonitis, cognitive disorders, and seizures that can eventually be fatal.
Toxoplasmosis can also pose a risk during pregnancy because tachyzoites can cross the placenta and cause serious
infections in the developing fetus. The extent of fetal damage resulting from toxoplasmosis depends on the severity
of maternal disease, the damage to the placenta, the gestational age of the fetus when infected, and the virulence
of the organism. Congenital toxoplasmosis often leads to fetal loss or premature birth and can result in damage to
the central nervous system, manifesting as mental retardation, deafness, or blindness. Consequently, pregnant women
are advised by the CDC to take particular care in preparing meat, gardening, and caring for pet cats.[48] Diagnosis
of toxoplasmosis infection during pregnancy is usually achieved by serology including TORCH testing (the “T” in
TORCH stands for toxoplasmosis). Diagnosis of congenital infections can also be achieved by detecting T. gondii
DNA in amniotic fluid, using molecular methods such as PCR.
In adults, diagnosis of toxoplasmosis can include observation of tissue cysts in tissue specimens. Tissue cysts may be
observed in Giemsa- or Wright-stained biopsy specimens, and CT, magnetic resonance imaging, and lumbar puncture
can also be used to confirm infection (Figure 25.30).
Preventing infection is the best first-line defense against toxoplasmosis. Preventive measures include washing hands
thoroughly after handling raw meat, soil, or cat litter, and avoiding consumption of vegetables possibly contaminated
with cat feces. All meat should be cooked to an internal temperature of 73.9–76.7 °C (165–170 °F).
Most immunocompetent patients do not require clinical intervention for Toxoplasma infections. However, neonates,
pregnant women, and immunocompromised patients can be treated with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine—except
during the first trimester of pregnancy, because these drugs can cause birth defects. Spiramycin has been used safely
to reduce transmission in pregnant women with primary infection during the first trimester because it does not cross
the placenta.

46. J. Flegr. “Effects of Toxoplasma on Human Behavior.” Schizophrenia Bulletin 33, no. 3 (2007):757–760.
47. Ibid
48. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites - Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma infection). Toxoplasmosis Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQs).” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/toxoplasmosis/gen_info/faqs.html. Accessed July 28, 2016.

1150

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.29 The infectious cycle of Toxoplasma gondii. (credit: “diagram”: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; credit “cat”: modification of work by “KaCey97078”/Flickr)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1151

Figure 25.30 (a) Giemsa-stained Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites from a smear of peritoneal fluid obtained from a
mouse inoculated with T. gondii. Tachyzoites are typically crescent shaped with a prominent, centrally placed nucleus.
(b) Microscopic cyst containing T. gondii from mouse brain tissue. Thousands of resting parasites (stained red) are
contained in a thin parasite cyst wall. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
credit b: modification of work by USDA)

• How does T. gondii infect humans?

Babesiosis
Babesiosis is a rare zoonotic infectious disease caused by Babesia spp. These parasitic protozoans infect various wild
and domestic animals and can be transmitted to humans by black-legged Ixodes ticks. In humans, Babesia infect
red blood cells and replicate inside the cell until it ruptures. The Babesia released from the ruptured red blood cell
continue the growth cycle by invading other red blood cells. Patients may be asymptomatic, but those who do have
symptoms often initially experience malaise, fatigue, chills, fever, headache, myalgia, and arthralgia. In rare cases,
particularly in asplenic (absence of the spleen) patients, the elderly, and patients with AIDS, babesiosis may resemble
falciparum malaria, with high fever, hemolytic anemia, hemoglobinuria (hemoglobin or blood in urine), jaundice,
and renal failure, and the infection can be fatal. Previously acquired asymptomatic Babesia infection may become
symptomatic if a splenectomy is performed.
Diagnosis is based mainly on the microscopic observation of parasites in blood smears (Figure 25.31). Serologic
and antibody detection by IFA can also be performed and PCR-based tests are available. Many people do not
require clinical intervention for Babesia infections, however, serious infections can be cleared with a combination of
atovaquone and azithromycin or a combination of clindamycin and quinine.

1152

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.31 In this blood smear from a patient with babesiosis, Babesia parasites can be observed in the red blood
cells. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Chagas Disease
Also called American trypanosomiasis, Chagas disease is a zoonosis classified as a neglected tropical disease (NTD).
It is caused by the flagellated protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi and is most commonly transmitted to animals and people
through the feces of triatomine bugs. The triatomine bug is nicknamed the kissing bug because it frequently bites
humans on the face or around the eyes; the insect often defecates near the bite and the infected fecal matter may be
rubbed into the bite wound by the bitten individual (Figure 25.32). The bite itself is painless and, initially, many
people show no signs of the disease. Alternative modes of transmission include contaminated blood transfusions,
organ transplants from infected donors, and congenital transmission from mother to fetus.
Chagas disease is endemic throughout much of Mexico, Central America, and South America, where, according to
WHO, an estimated 6 million to 7 million people are infected.[49] Currently, Chagas disease is not endemic in the US,
even though triatomine bugs are found in the southern half of the country.
Triatomine bugs typically are active at night, when they take blood meals by biting the faces and lips of people or
animals as they sleep and often defecate near the site of the bite. Infection occurs when the host rubs the feces into
their eyes, mouth, the bite wound, or another break in the skin. The protozoan then enters the blood and invades
tissues of the heart and central nervous system, as well as macrophages and monocytes. Nonhuman reservoirs of T.
cruzi parasites include wild animals and domesticated animals such as dogs and cats, which also act as reservoirs of
the pathogen.[50]
There are three phases of Chagas disease: acute, intermediate, and chronic. These phases can be either asymptomatic
or life-threatening depending on the immunocompetence status of the patient.
In acute phase disease, symptoms include fever, headache, myalgia, rash, vomiting, diarrhea, and enlarged spleen,
liver, and lymph nodes. In addition, a localized nodule called a chagoma may form at the portal of entry, and swelling
of the eyelids or the side of the face, called Romaña's sign, may occur near the bite wound. Symptoms of the acute
phase may resolve spontaneously, but if untreated, the infection can persist in tissues, causing irreversible damage to

49. World Health Organization. “Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis). Fact Sheet.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs340/en/. Accessed July 29, 2016.
50. C.E. Reisenman et al. “Infection of Kissing Bugs With Trypanosoma cruzi, Tucson, Arizona, USA.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 16
no. 3 (2010):400–405.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1153

the heart or brain. In rare cases, young children may die of myocarditis or meningoencephalitis during the acute phase
of Chagas disease.
Following the acute phase is a prolonged intermediate phase during which few or no parasites are found in the
blood and most people are asymptomatic. Many patients will remain asymptomatic for life; however, decades after
exposure, an estimated 20%–30% of infected people will develop chronic disease that can be debilitating and
sometimes life threatening. In the chronic phase, patients may develop painful swelling of the colon, leading to
severe twisting, constipation, and bowel obstruction; painful swelling of the esophagus, leading to dysphagia and
malnutrition; and flaccid cardiomegaly (enlargement of the heart), which can lead to heart failure and sudden death.
Diagnosis can be confirmed through several different tests, including direct microscopic observation of trypanosomes
in the blood, IFA, EIAs, PCR, and culturing in artificial media. In endemic regions, xenodiagnoses may be used;
this method involves allowing uninfected kissing bugs to feed on the patient and then examining their feces for the
presence of T. cruzi.
The medications nifurtimox and benznidazole are effective treatments during the acute phase of Chagas disease. The
efficacy of these drugs is much lower when the disease is in the chronic phase. Avoiding exposure to the pathogen
through vector control is the most effective method of limiting this disease.

Figure 25.32 (a) Trypanosoma cruzi protozoan in a blood smear from a patient with Chagas disease. (b) The
triatomine bug (also known as the kissing bug or assassin bug) is the vector of Chagas disease. (credit a:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Erwin Huebner)

• How do kissing bugs infect humans with Trypanosoma cruzi?

Leishmaniasis
Although it is classified as an NTD, leishmaniasis is relatively widespread in tropical and subtropical regions,
affecting people in more than 90 countries. It is caused by approximately 20 different species of Leishmania,
protozoan parasites that are transmitted by sand fly vectors such as Phlebotomus spp. and Lutzomyia spp. Dogs, cats,
sheep, horses, cattle rodents, and humans can all serve as reservoirs.
The Leishmania protozoan is phagocytosed by macrophages but uses virulence factors to avoid destruction within
the phagolysosome. The virulence factors inhibit the phagolysosome enzymes that would otherwise destroy the

1154

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

parasite. The parasite reproduces within the macrophage, lyses it, and the progeny infect new macrophages (see
Micro Connections: When Phagocytosis Fails).
The three major clinical forms of leishmaniasis are cutaneous (oriental sore, Delhi boil, Aleppo boil), visceral (kalaazar, Dumdum fever), and mucosal (espundia). The most common form of disease is cutaneous leishmaniasis, which
is characterized by the formation of sores at the site of the insect bite that may start out as papules or nodules before
becoming large ulcers (Figure 25.33).
It may take visceral leishmaniasis months and sometimes years to develop, leading to enlargement of the lymph
nodes, liver, spleen, and bone marrow. The damage to these body sites triggers fever, weight loss, and swelling of the
spleen and liver. It also causes a decrease in the number of red blood cells (anemia), white blood cells (leukopenia),
and platelets (thrombocytopenia), causing the patient to become immunocompromised and more susceptible to fatal
infections of the lungs and gastrointestinal tract.
The mucosal form of leishmaniasis is one of the less common forms of the disease. It causes a lesion similar to the
cutaneous form but mucosal leishmaniasis is associated with mucous membranes of the mouth, nares, or pharynx, and
can be destructive and disfiguring. Mucosal leishmaniasis occurs less frequently when the original cutaneous (skin)
infection is promptly treated.
Definitive diagnosis of leishmaniasis is made by visualizing organisms in Giemsa-stained smears, by isolating
Leishmania protozoans in cultures, or by PCR-based assays of aspirates from infected tissues. Specific DNA probes
or analysis of cultured parasites can help to distinguish Leishmania species that are causing simple cutaneous
leishmaniasis from those capable of causing mucosal leishmaniasis.
Cutaneous leishmaniasis is usually not treated. The lesions will resolve after weeks (or several months), but may
result in scarring. Recurrence rates are low for this disease. More serious infections can be treated with stibogluconate
(antimony gluconate), amphotericin B, and miltefosine.

Figure 25.33 (a) A micrograph of a tissue sample from a patient with localized cutaneous leishmaniasis. Parasitic
Leishmania mexicana (black arrow) are visible in and around the host cells. (b) Large skin ulcers are associated with
cutaneous leishmaniasis. (credit a: modification of work by Fernández-Figueroa EA, Rangel-Escareño C, EspinosaMateos V, Carrillo-Sánchez K, Salaiza-Suazo N, Carrada-Figueroa G, March-Mifsut S, and Becker I; credit b:
modification of work by Jean Fortunet)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1155

• Compare the mucosal and cutaneous forms of leishmaniasis.

Schistosomiasis
Schistosomiasis (bilharzia) is an NTD caused by blood flukes in the genus Schistosoma that are native to the
Caribbean, South America, Middle East, Asia, and Africa. Most human schistosomiasis cases are caused by
Schistosoma mansoni, S. haematobium, or S. japonicum. Schistosoma are the only trematodes that invade through the
skin; all other trematodes infect by ingestion. WHO estimates that at least 258 million people required preventive
treatment for schistosomiasis in 2014.[51]
Infected human hosts shed Schistosoma eggs in urine and feces, which can contaminate freshwater habitats of snails
that serve as intermediate hosts. The eggs hatch in the water, releasing miracidia, an intermediate growth stage of the
Schistosoma that infect the snails. The miracidia mature and multiply inside the snails, transforming into cercariae
that leave the snail and enter the water, where they can penetrate the skin of swimmers and bathers. The cercariae
migrate through human tissue and enter the bloodstream, where they mature into adult male and female worms that
mate and release fertilized eggs. The eggs travel through the bloodstream and penetrate various body sites, including
the bladder or intestine, from which they are excreted in urine or stool to start the life cycle over again (Figure 5.22).
A few days after infection, patients may develop a rash or itchy skin associated with the site of cercariae penetration.
Within 1–2 months of infection, symptoms may develop, including fever, chills, cough, and myalgia, as eggs that
are not excreted circulate through the body. After years of infection, the eggs become lodged in tissues and trigger
inflammation and scarring that can damage the liver, central nervous system, intestine, spleen, lungs, and bladder.
This may cause abdominal pain, enlargement of the liver, blood in the urine or stool, and problems passing urine.
Increased risk for bladder cancer is also associated with chronic Schistosoma infection. In addition, children who are
repeatedly infected can develop malnutrition, anemia, and learning difficulties.
Diagnosis of schistosomiasis is made by the microscopic observation of eggs in feces or urine, intestine or bladder
tissue specimens, or serologic tests. The drug praziquantel is effective for the treatment of all schistosome infections.
Improving wastewater management and educating at-risk populations to limit exposure to contaminated water can
help control the spread of the disease.

Cercarial Dermatitis
The cercaria of some species of Schistosoma can only transform into adult worms and complete their life cycle in
animal hosts such as migratory birds and mammals. The cercaria of these worms are still capable of penetrating
human skin, but they are unable to establish a productive infection in human tissue. Still, the presence of the cercaria
in small blood vessels triggers an immune response, resulting in itchy raised bumps called cercarial dermatitis
(also known as swimmer’s itch or clam digger's itch). Although it is uncomfortable, cercarial dermatitis is typically
self-limiting and rarely serious. Antihistamines and antipruritics can be used to limit inflammation and itching,
respectively.

• How do schistosome infections in humans occur?

51. World Health Organization. “Schistosomiasis. Fact Sheet.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs115/en/. Accessed July
29, 2016.

1156

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Disease Profile
Common Eukaryotic Pathogens of the Human Circulatory System
Protozoan and helminthic infections are prevalent in the developing world. A few of the more important
parasitic infections are summarized in Figure 25.34.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Figure 25.34

1157

1158

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Despite continued antibiotic treatment and the removal of the venous catheter, Barbara’s condition further
declined. She began to show signs of shock and her blood pressure dropped to 77/50 mmHg. Antiinflammatory drugs and drotrecogin-α were administered to combat sepsis. However, by the seventh day of
hospitalization, Barbara experienced hepatic and renal failure and died.
Staphylococcus aureus most likely formed a biofilm on the surface of Barbara’s catheter. From there, the
bacteria were chronically shed into her circulation and produced the initial clinical symptoms. The
chemotherapeutic therapies failed in large part because of the drug-resistant MRSA isolate. Virulence factors
like leukocidin and hemolysins also interfered with her immune response. Barbara’s ultimate decline may have
been a consequence of the production of enterotoxins and toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST), which can
initiate toxic shock.
Venous catheters are common life-saving interventions for many patients requiring long-term administration
of medication or fluids. However, they are also common sites of bloodstream infections. The World Health
Organization estimates that there are up to 80,000 catheter-related bloodstream infections each year in the
US, resulting in about 20,000 deaths.[52]
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Summary
25.1 Anatomy of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
• The circulatory system moves blood throughout the body and has no normal microbiota.
• The lymphatic system moves fluids from the interstitial spaces of tissues toward the circulatory system and
filters the lymph. It also has no normal microbiota.
• The circulatory and lymphatic systems are home to many components of the host immune defenses.
• Infections of the circulatory system may occur after a break in the skin barrier or they may enter the
bloodstream at the site of a localized infection. Pathogens or toxins in the bloodstream can spread rapidly
throughout the body and can provoke systemic and sometimes fatal inflammatory responses such as SIRS,
sepsis, and endocarditis.
• Infections of the lymphatic system can cause lymphangitis and lymphadenitis.
25.2 Bacterial Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
• Bacterial infections of the circulatory system are almost universally serious. Left untreated, most have high
mortality rates.
• Bacterial pathogens usually require a breach in the immune defenses to colonize the circulatory system. Most
often, this involves a wound or the bite of an arthropod vector, but it can also occur in hospital settings and
result in nosocomial infections.
• Sepsis from both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, puerperal fever, rheumatic fever, endocarditis,
gas gangrene, osteomyelitis, and toxic shock syndrome are typically a result of injury or introduction of
bacteria by medical or surgical intervention.
• Tularemia, brucellosis, cat-scratch fever, rat-bite fever, and bubonic plague are zoonotic diseases
transmitted by biological vectors
• Ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, endemic and murine typhus, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Lyme disease,
relapsing fever, and trench fever are transmitted by arthropod vectors.
52. World Health Organization. “Patient Safety, Preventing Bloodstream Infections From Central Line Venous Catheters.” 2016.
http://www.who.int/patientsafety/implementation/bsi/en/. Accessed July 29, 2016.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1159

• Because their symptoms are so similar to those of other diseases, many bacterial infections of the circulatory
system are difficult to diagnose.
• Standard antibiotic therapies are effective for the treatment of most bacterial infections of the circulatory
system, unless the bacterium is resistant, in which case synergistic treatment may be required.
• The systemic immune response to a bacteremia, which involves the release of excessive amounts of cytokines,
can sometimes be more damaging to the host than the infection itself.
25.3 Viral Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
• Human herpesviruses such Epstein-Barr virus (HHV-4) and cytomegalovirus (HHV-5) are widely
distributed. The former is associated with infectious mononucleosis and Burkitt lymphoma, and the latter can
cause serious congenital infections as well as serious disease in immunocompromised adults.
• Arboviral diseases such as yellow fever, dengue fever, and chikungunya fever are characterized by high
fevers and vascular damage that can often be fatal. Ebola virus disease is a highly contagious and often fatal
infection spread through contact with bodily fluids.
• Although there is a vaccine available for yellow fever, treatments for patients with yellow fever, dengue,
chikungunya fever, and Ebola virus disease are limited to supportive therapies.
• Patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) progress through three stages of disease,
culminating in AIDS. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) uses various combinations of drugs to suppress viral
loads, extending the period of latency and reducing the likelihood of transmission.
• Vector control and animal reservoir control remain the best defenses against most viruses that cause diseases
of the circulatory system.
25.4 Parasitic Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems
• Malaria is a protozoan parasite that remains an important cause of death primarily in the tropics. Several
species in the genus Plasmodium are responsible for malaria and all are transmitted by Anopheles mosquitoes.
Plasmodium infects and destroys human red blood cells, leading to organ damage, anemia, blood vessel
necrosis, and death. Malaria can be treated with various antimalarial drugs and prevented through vector
control.
• Toxoplasmosis is a widespread protozoal infection that can cause serious infections in the
immunocompromised and in developing fetuses. Domestic cats are the definitive host.
• Babesiosis is a generally asymptomatic infection of red blood cells that can causes malaria-like symptoms in
elderly, immunocompromised, or asplenic patients.
• Chagas disease is a tropical disease transmitted by triatomine bugs. The trypanosome infects heart, neural
tissues, monocytes, and phagocytes, often remaining latent for many years before causing serious and
sometimes fatal damage to the digestive system and heart.
• Leishmaniasis is caused by the protozoan Leishmania and is transmitted by sand flies. Symptoms are
generally mild, but serious cases may cause organ damage, anemia, and loss of immune competence.
• Schistosomiasis is caused by a fluke transmitted by snails. The fluke moves throughout the body in the blood
stream and chronically infects various tissues, leading to organ damage.

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. Which term refers to an inflammation of the blood
vessels?
a. lymphangitis
b. endocarditis
c. pericarditis
d. vasculitis

2. Which of the following is located in the interstitial
spaces within tissues and releases nutrients, immune
factors, and oxygen to those tissues?
a. lymphatics
b. arterioles
c. capillaries
d. veins

1160

3. Which of these conditions results in the formation of
a bubo?
a. lymphangitis
b. lymphadenitis
c. ischemia
d. vasculitis
4. Which of the following is where are most microbes
filtered out of the fluids that accumulate in the body
tissues?
a. spleen
b. lymph nodes
c. pericardium
d. blood capillaries

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

11. A patient at a clinic has tested positive for HIV.
Her blood contained 700/µL CD4 T cells and she does
not have any apparent illness. Her infection is in which
stage?
a. 1
b. 2
c. 3
12. Which of the following diseases is caused by a
helminth?
a. leishmaniasis
b. malaria
c. Chagas disease
d. schistosomiasis

5. Which of the following diseases is caused by a
spirochete?
a. tularemia
b. relapsing fever
c. rheumatic fever
d. Rocky Mountain spotted fever

13. Which of these is the most common form of
leishmaniasis?
a. cutaneous
b. mucosal
c. visceral
d. intestinal

6. Which of the following diseases is transmitted by
body lice?
a. tularemia
b. bubonic plague
c. murine typhus
d. epidemic typhus

14. Which of the following is a causative agent of
malaria?
a. Trypanosoma cruzi
b. Toxoplasma gondii
c. Plasmodium falciparum
d. Schistosoma mansoni

7. What disease is most associated with Clostridium
perfringens?
a. endocarditis
b. osteomyelitis
c. gas gangrene
d. rat bite fever

15. Which of the following diseases does not involve
an arthropod vector?
a. schistosomiasis
b. malaria
c. Chagas disease
d. babesiosis

8. Which bacterial pathogen causes plague?
a. Yersinia pestis
b. Bacillus moniliformis
c. Bartonella quintana
d. Rickettsia rickettsii
9. Which of the following viruses is most widespread
in the human population?
a. human immunodeficiency virus
b. Ebola virus
c. Epstein-Barr virus
d. hantavirus
10. Which of these viruses is spread through mouse
urine or feces?
a. Epstein-Barr
b. hantavirus
c. human immunodeficiency virus
d. cytomegalovirus

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

1161

Fill in the Blank

16. Vasculitis can cause blood to leak from damaged vessels, forming purple spots called ________.
17. The lymph reenters the vascular circulation at ________.
18. Lyme disease is characterized by a(n) ________ that forms at the site of infection.
19. ________ refers to a loss of blood pressure resulting from a system-wide infection.
20. ________ is a cancer that forms in patients with HHV-4 and malaria coinfections.
21. ________ are transmitted by vectors such as ticks or mosquitoes.
22. Infectious mononucleosis is caused by ________ infections.
23. The ________ mosquito is the biological vector for malaria.
24. The kissing bug is the biological vector for ________.
25. Cercarial dermatitis is also known as ________.
Short Answer

26. How do lymph nodes help to maintain a microbial-free circulatory and lymphatic system?
27. What are the three forms of plague and how are they contracted?
28. Compare epidemic and murine typhus.
29. Describe the progression of an HIV infection over time with regard to the number of circulating viruses, host
antibodies, and CD4 T cells.
30. Describe the general types of diagnostic tests used to diagnose patients infected with HIV.
31. Identify the general categories of drugs used in ART used to treat patients infected with HIV.
32. Describe main cause of Plasmodium falciparum infection symptoms.
33. Why should pregnant women avoid cleaning their cat’s litter box or do so with protective gloves?
Critical Thinking

34. What term refers to the red streaks seen on this patient’s skin? What is likely causing this condition?

Figure 25.35 (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

35. Why would septicemia be considered a more serious condition than bacteremia?

1162

Chapter 25 | Circulatory and Lymphatic System Infections

36. Why are most vascular pathogens poorly communicable from person to person?
37. How have human behaviors contributed to the spread or control of arthropod-borne vascular diseases?
38. Which is a bigger threat to the US population, Ebola or yellow fever? Why?
39. What measures can be taken to reduce the likelihood of malaria reemerging in the US?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1163

Chapter 26

Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.1 This dog is exhibiting the restlessness and aggression associated with rabies, a neurological disease
that frequently affects mammals and can be transmitted to humans. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)

Chapter Outline
26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System
26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System
26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System
26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System

Introduction
Few diseases inspire the kind of fear that rabies does. The name is derived from the Latin word for “madness” or
“fury,” most likely because animals infected with rabies may behave with uncharacteristic rage and aggression. And
while the thought of being attacked by a rabid animal is terrifying enough, the disease itself is even more frightful.
Once symptoms appear, the disease is almost always fatal, even when treated.
Rabies is an example of a neurological disease caused by an acellular pathogen. The rabies virus enters nervous tissue
shortly after transmission and makes its way to the central nervous system, where its presence leads to changes in
behavior and motor function. Well-known symptoms associated with rabid animals include foaming at the mouth,
hydrophobia (fear of water), and unusually aggressive behavior. Rabies claims tens of thousands of human lives
worldwide, mainly in Africa and Asia. Most human cases result from dog bites, although many mammal species
can become infected and transmit the disease. Human infection rates are low in the United States and many other
countries as a result of control measures in animal populations. However, rabies is not the only disease with serious
or fatal neurological effects. In this chapter, we examine the important microbial diseases of the nervous system.

1164

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System
Learning Objectives
• Describe the major anatomical features of the nervous system
• Explain why there is no normal microbiota of the nervous system
• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of the nervous system to cause infection
• Identify and describe general symptoms associated with various infections of the nervous system

The human nervous system can be divided into two interacting subsystems: the peripheral nervous system (PNS)
and the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord. The peripheral nervous system
is an extensive network of nerves connecting the CNS to the muscles and sensory structures. The relationship of these
systems is illustrated in Figure 26.2.

The Central Nervous System
The brain is the most complex and sensitive organ in the body. It is responsible for all functions of the body, including
serving as the coordinating center for all sensations, mobility, emotions, and intellect. Protection for the brain is
provided by the bones of the skull, which in turn are covered by the scalp, as shown in Figure 26.3. The scalp
is composed of an outer layer of skin, which is loosely attached to the aponeurosis, a flat, broad tendon layer that
anchors the superficial layers of the skin. The periosteum, below the aponeurosis, firmly encases the bones of the
skull and provides protection, nutrition to the bone, and the capacity for bone repair. Below the boney layer of the
skull are three layers of membranes called meninges that surround the brain. The relative positions of these meninges
are shown in Figure 26.3. The meningeal layer closest to the bones of the skull is called the dura mater (literally
meaning tough mother). Below the dura mater lies the arachnoid mater (literally spider-like mother). The innermost
meningeal layer is a delicate membrane called the pia mater (literally tender mother). Unlike the other meningeal
layers, the pia mater firmly adheres to the convoluted surface of the brain. Between the arachnoid mater and pia mater
is the subarachnoid space. The subarachnoid space within this region is filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This
watery fluid is produced by cells of the choroid plexus—areas in each ventricle of the brain that consist of cuboidal
epithelial cells surrounding dense capillary beds. The CSF serves to deliver nutrients and remove waste from neural
tissues.

Clinical Focus
Part 1
David is a 35-year-old carpenter from New Jersey. A year ago, he was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease, a
chronic inflammatory bowel disease that has no known cause. He has been taking a prescription corticosteroid
to manage the condition, and the drug has been highly effective in keeping his symptoms at bay. However,
David recently fell ill and decided to visit his primary care physician. His symptoms included a fever, a
persistent cough, and shortness of breath. His physician ordered a chest X-ray, which revealed consolidation
of the right lung. The doctor prescribed a course of levofloxacin and told David to come back in a week if he
did not feel better.

• What type of drug is levofloxacin?
• What type of microbes would this drug be effective against?
• What type of infection is consistent with David’s symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1165

Figure 26.2 The essential components of the human nervous system are shown in this illustration. The central
nervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and spinal cord. It connects to the peripheral nervous system (PNS), a
network of nerves that extends throughout the body.

Figure 26.3 The layers of tissue surrounding the human brain include three meningeal membranes: the dura mater,
arachnoid mater, and pia mater. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)

1166

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

The Blood-Brain Barrier
The tissues of the CNS have extra protection in that they are not exposed to blood or the immune system in the
same way as other tissues. The blood vessels that supply the brain with nutrients and other chemical substances lie
on top of the pia mater. The capillaries associated with these blood vessels in the brain are less permeable than those
in other locations in the body. The capillary endothelial cells form tight junctions that control the transfer of blood
components to the brain. In addition, cranial capillaries have far fewer fenestra (pore-like structures that are sealed
by a membrane) and pinocytotic vesicles than other capillaries. As a result, materials in the circulatory system have a
very limited ability to interact with the CNS directly. This phenomenon is referred to as the blood-brain barrier.
The blood-brain barrier protects the cerebrospinal fluid from contamination, and can be quite effective at excluding
potential microbial pathogens. As a consequence of these defenses, there is no normal microbiota in the cerebrospinal
fluid. The blood-brain barrier also inhibits the movement of many drugs into the brain, particularly compounds that
are not lipid soluble. This has profound ramifications for treatments involving infections of the CNS, because it is
difficult for drugs to cross the blood-brain barrier to interact with pathogens that cause infections.
The spinal cord also has protective structures similar to those surrounding the brain. Within the bones of the vertebrae
are meninges of dura mater (sometimes called the dural sheath), arachnoid mater, pia mater, and a blood-spinal cord
barrier that controls the transfer of blood components from blood vessels associated with the spinal cord.
To cause an infection in the CNS, pathogens must successfully breach the blood-brain barrier or blood-spinal
cord barrier. Various pathogens employ different virulence factors and mechanisms to achieve this, but they can
generally be grouped into four categories: intercellular (also called paracellular), transcellular, leukocyte facilitated,
and nonhematogenous. Intercellular entry involves the use of microbial virulence factors, toxins, or inflammationmediated processes to pass between the cells of the blood-brain barrier. In transcellular entry, the pathogen passes
through the cells of the blood-brain barrier using virulence factors that allow it to adhere to and trigger uptake
by vacuole- or receptor-mediated mechanisms. Leukocyte-facilitated entry is a Trojan-horse mechanism that occurs
when a pathogen infects peripheral blood leukocytes to directly enter the CNS. Nonhematogenous entry allows
pathogens to enter the brain without encountering the blood-brain barrier; it occurs when pathogens travel along either
the olfactory or trigeminal cranial nerves that lead directly into the CNS.

Link to Learning
View this video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22bldbrbarr) about the bloodbrain barrier

• What is the primary function of the blood-brain barrier?

The Peripheral Nervous System
The PNS is formed of the nerves that connect organs, limbs, and other anatomic structures of the body to the brain
and spinal cord. Unlike the brain and spinal cord, the PNS is not protected by bone, meninges, or a blood barrier,
and, as a consequence, the nerves of the PNS are much more susceptible to injury and infection. Microbial damage to
peripheral nerves can lead to tingling or numbness known as neuropathy. These symptoms can also be produced by
trauma and noninfectious causes such as drugs or chronic diseases like diabetes.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1167

The Cells of the Nervous System
Tissues of the PNS and CNS are formed of cells called glial cells (neuroglial cells) and neurons (nerve cells).
Glial cells assist in the organization of neurons, provide a scaffold for some aspects of neuronal function, and aid in
recovery from neural injury.
Neurons are specialized cells found throughout the nervous system that transmit signals through the nervous system
using electrochemical processes. The basic structure of a neuron is shown in Figure 26.4. The cell body (or
soma) is the metabolic center of the neuron and contains the nucleus and most of the cell’s organelles. The many
finely branched extensions from the soma are called dendrites. The soma also produces an elongated extension,
called the axon, which is responsible for the transmission of electrochemical signals through elaborate ion transport
processes. Axons of some types of neurons can extend up to one meter in length in the human body. To facilitate
electrochemical signal transmission, some neurons have a myelin sheath surrounding the axon. Myelin, formed from
the cell membranes of glial cells like the Schwann cells in the PNS and oligodendrocytes in the CNS, surrounds and
insulates the axon, significantly increasing the speed of electrochemical signal transmission along the axon. The end
of an axon forms numerous branches that end in bulbs called synaptic terminals. Neurons form junctions with other
cells, such as another neuron, with which they exchange signals. The junctions, which are actually gaps between
neurons, are referred to as synapses. At each synapse, there is a presynaptic neuron and a postsynaptic neuron (or
other cell). The synaptic terminals of the axon of the presynaptic terminal form the synapse with the dendrites, soma,
or sometimes the axon of the postsynaptic neuron, or a part of another type of cell such as a muscle cell. The synaptic
terminals contain vesicles filled with chemicals called neurotransmitters. When the electrochemical signal moving
down the axon reaches the synapse, the vesicles fuse with the membrane, and neurotransmitters are released, which
diffuse across the synapse and bind to receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, potentially initiating a
response in that cell. That response in the postsynaptic cell might include further propagation of an electrochemical
signal to transmit information or contraction of a muscle fiber.

Figure 26.4 (a) A myelinated neuron is associated with oligodendrocytes. Oligodendrocytes are a type of glial cell
that forms the myelin sheath in the CNS that insulates the axon so that electrochemical nerve impulses are
transferred more efficiently. (b) A synapse consists of the axonal end of the presynaptic neuron (top) that releases
neurotransmitters that cross the synaptic space (or cleft) and bind to receptors on dendrites of the postsynaptic
neuron (bottom).

1168

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

• What cells are associated with neurons, and what is their function?
• What is the structure and function of a synapse?

Meningitis and Encephalitis
Although the skull provides the brain with an excellent defense, it can also become problematic during infections.
Any swelling of the brain or meninges that results from inflammation can cause intracranial pressure, leading to
severe damage of the brain tissues, which have limited space to expand within the inflexible bones of the skull. The
term meningitis is used to describe an inflammation of the meninges. Typical symptoms can include severe headache,
fever, photophobia (increased sensitivity to light), stiff neck, convulsions, and confusion. An inflammation of brain
tissue is called encephalitis, and patients exhibit signs and symptoms similar to those of meningitis in addition to
lethargy, seizures, and personality changes. When inflammation affects both the meninges and the brain tissue, the
condition is called meningoencephalitis. All three forms of inflammation are serious and can lead to blindness,
deafness, coma, and death.
Meningitis and encephalitis can be caused by many different types of microbial pathogens. However, these conditions
can also arise from noninfectious causes such as head trauma, some cancers, and certain drugs that trigger
inflammation. To determine whether the inflammation is caused by a pathogen, a lumbar puncture is performed to
obtain a sample of CSF. If the CSF contains increased levels of white blood cells and abnormal glucose and protein
levels, this indicates that the inflammation is a response to an infectioninflinin.

• What are the two types of inflammation that can impact the CNS?
• Why do both forms of inflammation have such serious consequences?

Micro Connections
Guillain-Barré Syndrome
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a rare condition that can be preceded by a viral or bacterial infection that
results in an autoimmune reaction against myelinated nerve cells. The destruction of the myelin sheath around
these neurons results in a loss of sensation and function. The first symptoms of this condition are tingling and
weakness in the affected tissues. The symptoms intensify over a period of several weeks and can culminate in
complete paralysis. Severe cases can be life-threatening. Infections by several different microbial pathogens,
including Campylobacter jejuni (the most common risk factor), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, varicellazoster virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,[1] and Zika virus[2] have been identified as triggers for GBS. Anti-myelin
antibodies from patients with GBS have been demonstrated to also recognize C. jejuni. It is possible that crossreactive antibodies, antibodies that react with similar antigenic sites on different proteins, might be formed
during an infection and may lead to this autoimmune response.
GBS is solely identified by the appearance of clinical symptoms. There are no other diagnostic tests available.
Fortunately, most cases spontaneously resolve within a few months with few permanent effects, as there is no
available vaccine. GBS can be treated by plasmapheresis. In this procedure, the patient’s plasma is filtered
from their blood, removing autoantibodies.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1169

26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the nervous system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the nervous system

Bacterial infections that affect the nervous system are serious and can be life-threatening. Fortunately, there are only
a few bacterial species commonly associated with neurological infections.

Bacterial Meningitis
Bacterial meningitis is one of the most serious forms of meningitis. Bacteria that cause meningitis often gain access
to the CNS through the bloodstream after trauma or as a result of the action of bacterial toxins. Bacteria may also
spread from structures in the upper respiratory tract, such as the oropharynx, nasopharynx, sinuses, and middle ear.
Patients with head wounds or cochlear implants (an electronic device placed in the inner ear) are also at risk for
developing meningitis.
Many of the bacteria that can cause meningitis are commonly found in healthy people. The most common causes
of non-neonatal bacterial meningitis are Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus
influenzae. All three of these bacterial pathogens are spread from person to person by respiratory secretions. Each
can colonize and cross through the mucous membranes of the oropharynx and nasopharynx, and enter the blood.
Once in the blood, these pathogens can disseminate throughout the body and are capable of both establishing an
infection and triggering inflammation in any body site, including the meninges (Figure 26.5). Without appropriate
systemic antibacterial therapy, the case-fatality rate can be as high as 70%, and 20% of those survivors may be left
with irreversible nerve damage or tissue destruction, resulting in hearing loss, neurologic disability, or loss of a limb.
Mortality rates are much lower (as low as 15%) in populations where appropriate therapeutic drugs and preventive
vaccines are available.[3]

Figure 26.5 (a) A normal human brain removed during an autopsy. (b) The brain of a patient who died from bacterial
meningitis. Note the pus under the dura mater (being retracted by the forceps) and the red hemorrhagic foci on the
meninges. (credit b: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

1. Yuki, Nobuhiro and Hans-Peter Hartung, “Guillain–Barré Syndrome,” New England Journal of Medicine 366, no. 24 (2012): 2294-304.
2. Cao-Lormeau, Van-Mai, Alexandre Blake, Sandrine Mons, Stéphane Lastère, Claudine Roche, Jessica Vanhomwegen, Timothée Dub et
al., “Guillain-Barré Syndrome Outbreak Associated with Zika Virus Infection in French Polynesia: A Case-Control Study,” The Lancet 387,
no. 10027 (2016): 1531-9.
3. Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison et
al., “Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25.

1170

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

A variety of other bacteria, including Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli, are also capable of causing
meningitis. These bacteria cause infections of the arachnoid mater and CSF after spreading through the circulation
in blood or by spreading from an infection of the sinuses or nasopharynx. Streptococcus agalactiae, commonly
found in the microbiota of the vagina and gastrointestinal tract, can also cause bacterial meningitis in newborns after
transmission from the mother either before or during birth.
The profound inflammation caused by these microbes can result in early symptoms that include severe headache,
fever, confusion, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and stiff neck. Systemic inflammatory responses associated with
some types of bacterial meningitis can lead to hemorrhaging and purpuric lesions on skin, followed by even more
severe conditions that include shock, convulsions, coma, and death—in some cases, in the span of just a few hours.
Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is best confirmed by analysis of CSF obtained by a lumbar puncture. Abnormal
levels of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) (> 10 PMNs/mm3), glucose (< 45 mg/dL), and protein (> 45 mg/
dL) in the CSF are suggestive of bacterial meningitis.[4] Characteristics of specific forms of bacterial meningitis are
detailed in the subsections that follow.

Meningococcal Meningitis
Meningococcal meningitis is a serious infection caused by the gram-negative coccus N. meningitidis. In some cases,
death can occur within a few hours of the onset of symptoms. Nonfatal cases can result in irreversible nerve damage,
resulting in hearing loss and brain damage, or amputation of extremities because of tissue necrosis.
Meningococcal meningitis can infect people of any age, but its prevalence is highest among infants, adolescents,
and young adults.[5] Meningococcal meningitis was once the most common cause of meningitis epidemics in human
populations. This is still the case in a swath of sub-Saharan Africa known as the meningitis belt, but meningococcal
meningitis epidemics have become rare in most other regions, thanks to meningococcal vaccines. However, outbreaks
can still occur in communities, schools, colleges, prisons, and other populations where people are in close direct
contact.
N. meningitidis has a high affinity for mucosal membranes in the oropharynx and nasopharynx. Contact with
respiratory secretions containing N. meningitidis is an effective mode of transmission. The pathogenicity of N.
meningitidis is enhanced by virulence factors that contribute to the rapid progression of the disease. These include
lipooligosaccharide (LOS) endotoxin, type IV pili for attachment to host tissues, and polysaccharide capsules that
help the cells avoid phagocytosis and complement-mediated killing. Additional virulence factors include IgA protease
(which breaks down IgA antibodies), the invasion factors Opa, Opc, and porin (which facilitate transcellular entry
through the blood-brain barrier), iron-uptake factors (which strip heme units from hemoglobin in host cells and use
them for growth), and stress proteins that protect bacteria from reactive oxygen molecules.
A unique sign of meningococcal meningitis is the formation of a petechial rash on the skin or mucous membranes,
characterized by tiny, red, flat, hemorrhagic lesions. This rash, which appears soon after disease onset, is a response to
LOS endotoxin and adherence virulence factors that disrupt the endothelial cells of capillaries and small veins in the
skin. The blood vessel disruption triggers the formation of tiny blood clots, causing blood to leak into the surrounding
tissue. As the infection progresses, the levels of virulence factors increase, and the hemorrhagic lesions can increase
in size as blood continues to leak into tissues. Lesions larger than 1.0 cm usually occur in patients developing
shock, as virulence factors cause increased hemorrhage and clot formation. Sepsis, as a result of systemic damage
from meningococcal virulence factors, can lead to rapid multiple organ failure, shock, disseminated intravascular
coagulation, and death.
Because meningococcoal meningitis progresses so rapidly, a greater variety of clinical specimens are required for
the timely detection of N. meningitidis. Required specimens can include blood, CSF, naso- and oropharyngeal swabs,
urethral and endocervical swabs, petechial aspirates, and biopsies. Safety protocols for handling and transport of
4. Popovic, T., et al. World Health Organization, “Laboratory Manual for the Diagnosis of Meningitis Caused by Neisseria meningitidis,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenza,” 1999.
5. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Meningococcal Disease,” August 5, 2015. Accessed June 28, 2015.
http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/index.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1171

specimens suspected of containing N. meningitidis should always be followed, since cases of fatal meningococcal
disease have occurred in healthcare workers exposed to droplets or aerosols from patient specimens. Prompt
presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis can occur when CSF is directly evaluated by Gram stain,
revealing extra- and intracellular gram-negative diplococci with a distinctive coffee-bean microscopic morphology
associated with PMNs (Figure 26.6). Identification can also be made directly from CSF using latex agglutination
and immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic tests specific for N. meningitidis. Species identification can also be
performed using DNA sequence-based typing schemes for hypervariable outer membrane proteins of N. meningitidis,
which has replaced sero(sub)typing.
Meningococcal infections can be treated with antibiotic therapy, and third-generation cephalosporins are most often
employed. However, because outcomes can be negative even with treatment, preventive vaccination is the best form
of treatment. In 2010, countries in Africa’s meningitis belt began using a new serogroup A meningococcal conjugate
vaccine. This program has dramatically reduced the number of cases of meningococcal meningitis by conferring
individual and herd immunity.
Twelve different capsular serotypes of N. meningitidis are known to exist. Serotypes A, B, C, W, X, and Y are the
most prevalent worldwide. The CDC recommends that children between 11–12 years of age be vaccinated with a
single dose of a quadrivalent vaccine that protects against serotypes A, C, W, and Y, with a booster at age 16.[6]
An additional booster or injections of serogroup B meningococcal vaccine may be given to individuals in high-risk
settings (such as epidemic outbreaks on college campuses).

Figure 26.6 N. meningitidis (arrows) associated with neutrophils (the larger stained cells) in a gram-stained CSF
sample. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Micro Connections
Meningitis on Campus
College students living in dorms or communal housing are at increased risk for contracting epidemic meningitis.
From 2011 to 2015, there have been at least nine meningococcal outbreaks on college campuses in the United
States. These incidents involved a total of 43 students (of whom four died).[7] In spite of rapid diagnosis and
aggressive antimicrobial treatment, several of the survivors suffered from amputations or serious neurological
problems.
Prophylactic vaccination of first-year college students living in dorms is recommended by the CDC, and
insurance companies now cover meningococcal vaccination for students in college dorms. Some colleges
have mandated vaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine for certain students entering college
(Figure 26.7).

6. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Recommended Immunization Schedule for Persons Aged 0 Through 18 Years, United
States, 2016,” February 1, 2016. Accessed on June 28, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/child-adolescent.html.

1172

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.7 To prevent campus outbreaks, some colleges now require students to be vaccinated against
meningogoccal meningitis. (credit: modification of work by James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Pneumococcal Meningitis
Pneumococcal meningitis is caused by the encapsulated gram-positive bacterium S. pneumoniae (pneumococcus,
also called strep pneumo). This organism is commonly found in the microbiota of the pharynx of 30–70% of young
children, depending on the sampling method, while S. pneumoniae can be found in fewer than 5% of healthy adults.
Although it is often present without disease symptoms, this microbe can cross the blood-brain barrier in susceptible
individuals. In some cases, it may also result in septicemia. Since the introduction of the Hib vaccine, S. pneumoniae
has become the leading cause of meningitis in humans aged 2 months through adulthood.
S. pneumoniae can be identified in CSF samples using gram-stained specimens, latex agglutination, and
immunochromatographic RDT specific for S. pneumoniae. In gram-stained samples, S. pneumoniae appears as grampositive, lancet-shaped diplococci (Figure 26.8). Identification of S. pneumoniae can also be achieved using cultures
of CSF and blood, and at least 93 distinct serotypes can be identified based on the quellung reaction to unique capsular
polysaccharides. PCR and RT-PCR assays are also available to confirm identification.
Major virulence factors produced by S. pneumoniae include PI-1 pilin for adherence to host cells (pneumococcal
adherence) and virulence factor B (PavB) for attachment to cells of the respiratory tract; choline-binding proteins
(cbpA) that bind to epithelial cells and interfere with immune factors IgA and C3; and the cytoplasmic bacterial toxin
pneumolysin that triggers an inflammatory response.
With the emergence of drug-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae, pneumococcal meningitis is typically treated with
broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as levofloxacin, cefotaxime, penicillin, or other β-lactam antibiotics. The two
available pneumococcal vaccines are described in Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract.

7. National Meningitis Association, “Serogroup B Meningococcal Disease Outbreaks on U.S. College Campuses,” 2016. Accessed June 28,
2016. http://www.nmaus.org/disease-prevention-information/serogroup-b-meningococcal-disease/outbreaks/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1173

Figure 26.8 (a) Digitally colorized fluorescent antibody stained micrograph of Streptococcus pneumoniae in CSF. (b)
S. pneumoniae growing on blood agar. (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Nathan Reading)

Haemophilus influenzae Type b
Meningitis due to H. influenzae serotype b (Hib), an encapsulated pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli, is now
uncommon in most countries, because of the use of the effective Hib vaccine. Without the use of the Hib vaccine,
H. influenzae can be the primary cause of meningitis in children 2 months thru 5 years of age. H. influenzae can be
found in the throats of healthy individuals, including infants and young children. By five years of age, most children
have developed immunity to this microbe. Infants older than 2 months of age, however, do not produce a sufficient
protective antibody response and are susceptible to serious disease. The intracranial pressure caused by this infection
leads to a 5% mortality rate and 20% incidence of deafness or brain damage in survivors.[8]
H. influenzae produces at least 16 different virulence factors, including LOS, which triggers inflammation, and
Haemophilus adhesion and penetration factor (Hap), which aids in attachment and invasion into respiratory epithelial
cells. The bacterium also has a polysaccharide capsule that helps it avoid phagocytosis, as well as factors such as
IgA1 protease and P2 protein that allow it to evade antibodies secreted from mucous membranes. In addition, factors
such as hemoglobin-binding protein (Hgp) and transferrin-binding protein (Tbp) acquire iron from hemoglobin and
transferrin, respectively, for bacterial growth.
Preliminary diagnosis of H. influenzae infections can be made by direct PCR and a smear of CSF. Stained smears
will reveal intracellular and extracellular PMNs with small, pleomorphic, gram-negative coccobacilli or filamentous
forms that are characteristic of H. influenzae. Initial confirmation of this genus can be based on its fastidious growth
on chocolate agar. Identification is confirmed with requirements for exogenous biochemical growth cofactors NAD
and heme (by MALDI-TOF), latex agglutination, and RT-PCR.
Meningitis caused by H. influenzae is usually treated with doxycycline, fluoroquinolones, second- and thirdgeneration cephalosporins, and carbapenems. The best means of preventing H. influenza infection is with the use
of the Hib polysaccharide conjugate vaccine. It is recommended that all children receive this vaccine at 2, 4, and 6
months of age, with a final booster dose at 12 to 15 months of age.[9]

8. United States Department of Health and Human Services, “Hib (Haemophilus Influenzae Type B),” Accessed June 28, 2016.
http://www.vaccines.gov/diseases/hib/#.
9. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Meningococcal Disease, Disease Trends,” 2015. Accessed September 13, 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/index.html.

1174

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Neonatal Meningitis
S. agalactiae, Group B streptococcus (GBS), is an encapsulated gram-positive bacterium that is the most common
cause of neonatal meningitis, a term that refers to meningitis occurring in babies up to 3 months of age.[10] S.
agalactiae can also cause meningitis in people of all ages and can be found in the urogenital and gastrointestinal
microbiota of about 10–30% of humans.
Neonatal infection occurs as either early onset or late-onset disease. Early onset disease is defined as occurring in
infants up to 7 days old. The infant initially becomes infected by S. agalactiae during childbirth, when the bacteria
may be transferred from the mother’s vagina. Incidence of early onset neonatal meningitis can be greatly reduced by
giving intravenous antibiotics to the mother during labor.
Late-onset neonatal meningitis occurs in infants between 1 week and 3 months of age. Infants born to mothers with S.
agalactiae in the urogenital tract have a higher risk of late-onset menigitis, but late-onset infections can be transmitted
from sources other than the mother; often, the source of infection is unknown. Infants who are born prematurely
(before 37 weeks of pregnancy) or to mothers who develop a fever also have a greater risk of contracting late-onset
neonatal meningitis.
Signs and symptoms of early onset disease include temperature instability, apnea (cessation of breathing), bradycardia
(slow heart rate), hypotension, difficulty feeding, irritability, and limpness. When asleep, the baby may be difficult to
wake up. Symptoms of late-onset disease are more likely to include seizures, bulging fontanel (soft spot), stiff neck,
hemiparesis (weakness on one side of the body), and opisthotonos (rigid body with arched back and head thrown
backward).
S. agalactiae produces at least 12 virulence factors that include FbsA that attaches to host cell surface proteins, PI-1
pili that promotes the invasion of human endothelial cells, a polysaccharide capsule that prevents the activation of the
alternative complement pathway and inhibits phagocytosis, and the toxin CAMP factor, which forms pores in host
cell membranes and binds to IgG and IgM antibodies.
Diagnosis of neonatal meningitis is often, but not uniformly, confirmed by positive results from cultures of CSF or
blood. Tests include routine culture, antigen detection by enzyme immunoassay, serotyping of different capsule types,
PCR, and RT-PCR. It is typically treated with β-lactam antibiotics such as intravenous penicillin or ampicillin plus
gentamicin. Even with treatment, roughly 10% mortality is seen in infected neonates.[11]

• Which groups are most vulnerable to each of the bacterial meningitis diseases?
• For which of the bacterial meningitis diseases are there vaccines presently available?
• Which organism can cause epidemic meningitis?

Clostridium-Associated Diseases
Species in the genus Clostridium are gram-positive, endospore-forming rods that are obligate anaerobes. Endospores
of Clostridium spp. are widespread in nature, commonly found in soil, water, feces, sewage, and marine sediments.
Clostridium spp. produce more types of protein exotoxins than any other bacterial genus, including two exotoxins

10. Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison et
al., “Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25.
11. Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison et
al., “Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25; Heath, Paul T.,
Gail Balfour, Abbie M. Weisner, Androulla Efstratiou, Theresa L. Lamagni, Helen Tighe, Liam AF O’Connell et al., “Group B Streptococcal
Disease in UK and Irish Infants Younger than 90 Days,” The Lancet 363, no. 9405 (2004): 292-4.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1175

with protease activity that are the most potent known biological toxins: botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) and tetanus
neurotoxin (TeNT). These two toxins have lethal doses of 0.2–10 ng per kg body weight.
BoNT can be produced by unique strains of C. butyricum, and C. baratii; however, it is primarily associated with C.
botulinum and the condition of botulism. TeNT, which causes tetanus, is only produced by C. tetani. These powerful
neural exotoxins are the primary virulence factors for these pathogens. The mode of action for these toxins was
described in Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens and illustrated in Figure 15.16.
Diagnosis of tetanus or botulism typically involves bioassays that detect the presence of BoNT and TeNT in fecal
specimens, blood (serum), or suspect foods. In addition, both C. botulinum and C. tetani can be isolated and cultured
using commercially available media for anaerobes. ELISA and RT-PCR tests are also available.

Tetanus
Tetanus is a noncommunicable disease characterized by uncontrollable muscle spasms (contractions) caused by the
action of TeNT. It generally occurs when C. tetani infects a wound and produces TeNT, which rapidly binds to neural
tissue, resulting in an intoxication (poisoning) of neurons. Depending on the site and extent of infection, cases of
tetanus can be described as localized, cephalic, or generalized. Generalized tetanus that occurs in a newborn is called
neonatal tetanus.
Localized tetanus occurs when TeNT only affects the muscle groups close to the injury site. There is no CNS
involvement, and the symptoms are usually mild, with localized muscle spasms caused by a dysfunction in the
surrounding neurons. Individuals with partial immunity—especially previously vaccinated individuals who neglect to
get the recommended booster shots—are most likely to develop localized tetanus as a result of C. tetani infecting a
puncture wound.
Cephalic tetanus is a rare, localized form of tetanus generally associated with wounds on the head or face. In rare
cases, it has occurred in cases of otitis media (middle ear infection). Cephalic tetanus often results in patients seeing
double images, because of the spasms affecting the muscles that control eye movement.
Both localized and cephalic tetanus may progress to generalized tetanus—a much more serious condition—if TeNT
is able to spread further into body tissues. In generalized tetanus, TeNT enters neurons of the PNS. From there, TeNT
travels from the site of the wound, usually on an extremity of the body, retrograde (back up) to inhibitory neurons
in the CNS. There, it prevents the release of gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the neurotransmitter responsible
for muscle relaxation. The resulting muscle spasms often first occur in the jaw muscles, leading to the characteristic
symptom of lockjaw (inability to open the mouth). As the toxin progressively continues to block neurotransmitter
release, other muscles become involved, resulting in uncontrollable, sudden muscle spasms that are powerful enough
to cause tendons to rupture and bones to fracture. Spasms in the muscles in the neck, back, and legs may cause the
body to form a rigid, stiff arch, a posture called opisthotonos (Figure 26.9). Spasms in the larynx, diaphragm, and
muscles of the chest restrict the patient’s ability to swallow and breathe, eventually leading to death by asphyxiation
(insufficient supply of oxygen).
Neonatal tetanus typically occurs when the stump of the umbilical cord is contaminated with spores of C. tetani after
delivery. Although this condition is rare in the United States, neonatal tetanus is a major cause of infant mortality in
countries that lack maternal immunization for tetanus and where birth often occurs in unsanitary conditions. At the
end of the first week of life, infected infants become irritable, feed poorly, and develop rigidity with spasms. Neonatal
tetanus has a very poor prognosis with a mortality rate of 70%–100%.[12]
Treatment for patients with tetanus includes assisted breathing through the use of a ventilator, wound debridement,
fluid balance, and antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or penicillin to halt the growth of C. tetani. In addition,
patients are treated with TeNT antitoxin, preferably in the form of human immunoglobulin to neutralize nonfixed
toxin and benzodiazepines to enhance the effect of GABA for muscle relaxation and anxiety.

12. UNFPA, UNICEF WHO, “Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus Elimination by 2005,” 2000. http://www.unicef.org/immunization/files/
MNTE_strategy_paper.pdf.

1176

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

A tetanus toxoid (TT) vaccine is available for protection and prevention of tetanus. It is the T component of vaccines
such as DTaP, Tdap, and Td. The CDC recommends children receive doses of the DTaP vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 15–18
months of age and another at 4–6 years of age. One dose of Td is recommended for adolescents and adults as a TT
booster every 10 years.[13]

Figure 26.9 A tetanus patient exhibiting the rigid body posture known as opisthotonos. (credit: Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)

Botulism
Botulism is a rare but frequently fatal illness caused by intoxication by BoNT. It can occur either as the result of an
infection by C. botulinum, in which case the bacteria produce BoNT in vivo, or as the result of a direct introduction
of BoNT into tissues.
Infection and production of BoNT in vivo can result in wound botulism, infant botulism, and adult intestinal toxemia.
Wound botulism typically occurs when C. botulinum is introduced directly into a wound after a traumatic injury, deep
puncture wound, or injection site. Infant botulism, which occurs in infants younger than 1 year of age, and adult
intestinal toxemia, which occurs in immunocompromised adults, results from ingesting C. botulinum endospores in
food. The endospores germinate in the body, resulting in the production of BoNT in the intestinal tract.
Intoxications occur when BoNT is produced outside the body and then introduced directly into the body through food
(foodborne botulism), air (inhalation botulism), or a clinical procedure (iatrogenic botulism). Foodborne botulism, the
most common of these forms, occurs when BoNT is produced in contaminated food and then ingested along with the
food (recall Case in Point: A Streak of Bad Potluck). Inhalation botulism is rare because BoNT is unstable as
an aerosol and does not occur in nature; however, it can be produced in the laboratory and was used (unsuccessfully)
as a bioweapon by terrorists in Japan in the 1990s. A few cases of accidental inhalation botulism have also occurred.
Iatrogenic botulism is also rare; it is associated with injections of BoNT used for cosmetic purposes (see Micro
Connections: Medicinal Uses of Botulinum Toxin).
When BoNT enters the bloodstream in the gastrointestinal tract, wound, or lungs, it is transferred to the
neuromuscular junctions of motor neurons where it binds irreversibly to presynaptic membranes and prevents the
release of acetylcholine from the presynaptic terminal of motor neurons into the neuromuscular junction. The
consequence of preventing acetylcholine release is the loss of muscle activity, leading to muscle relaxation and
eventually paralysis.
If BoNT is absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract, early symptoms of botulism include blurred vision, drooping
eyelids, difficulty swallowing, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or possibly diarrhea. This is
13. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Tetanus Vaccination,” 2013. Accessed June 29, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/tetanus/
vaccination.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1177

followed by progressive flaccid paralysis, a gradual weakening and loss of control over the muscles. A patient’s
experience can be particularly terrifying, because hearing remains normal, consciousness is not lost, and he or she is
fully aware of the progression of his or her condition. In infants, notable signs of botulism include weak cry, decreased
ability to suckle, and hypotonia (limpness of head or body). Eventually, botulism ends in death from respiratory
failure caused by the progressive paralysis of the muscles of the upper airway, diaphragm, and chest.
Botulism is treated with an antitoxin specific for BoNT. If administered in time, the antitoxin stops the progression of
paralysis but does not reverse it. Once the antitoxin has been administered, the patient will slowly regain neurological
function, but this may take several weeks or months, depending on the severity of the case. During recovery, patients
generally must remain hospitalized and receive breathing assistance through a ventilator.

• How frequently should the tetanus vaccination be updated in adults?
• What are the most common causes of botulism?
• Why is botulism not treated with an antibiotic?

Micro Connections
Medicinal Uses of Botulinum Toxin
Although it is the most toxic biological material known to man, botulinum toxin is often intentionally injected into
people to treat other conditions. Type A botulinum toxin is used cosmetically to reduce wrinkles. The injection
of minute quantities of this toxin into the face causes the relaxation of facial muscles, thereby giving the skin a
smoother appearance. Eyelid twitching and crossed eyes can also be treated with botulinum toxin injections.
Other uses of this toxin include the treatment of hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating). In fact, botulinum toxin
can be used to moderate the effects of several other apparently nonmicrobial diseases involving inappropriate
nerve function. Such diseases include cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson’s disease. Each of
these diseases is characterized by a loss of control over muscle contractions; treatment with botulinum toxin
serves to relax contracted muscles.

Listeriosis
Listeria monocytogenes is a nonencapsulated, nonsporulating, gram-positive rod and a foodborne pathogen that
causes listeriosis. At-risk groups include pregnant women, neonates, the elderly, and the immunocompromised
(recall the Clinical Focus case studies in Microbial Growth and Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity).
Listeriosis leads to meningitis in about 20% of cases, particularly neonates and patients over the age of 60. The CDC
identifies listeriosis as the third leading cause of death due to foodborne illness, with overall mortality rates reaching
16%.[14] In pregnant women, listeriosis can cause also cause spontaneous abortion in pregnant women because of the
pathogen’s unique ability to cross the placenta.
L. monocytogenes is generally introduced into food items by contamination with soil or animal manure used as
fertilizer. Foods commonly associated with listeriosis include fresh fruits and vegetables, frozen vegetables, processed

14. Scallan, Elaine, Robert M. Hoekstra, Frederick J. Angulo, Robert V. Tauxe, Marc-Alain Widdowson, Sharon L. Roy, Jeffery L. Jones,
and Patricia M. Griffin, “Foodborne Illness Acquired in the United States—Major Pathogens,” Emerging Infectious Diseases 17, no. 1
(2011): 7-15.

1178

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

meats, soft cheeses, and raw milk.[15] Unlike most other foodborne pathogens, Listeria is able to grow at temperatures
between 0 °C and 50 °C, and can therefore continue to grow, even in refrigerated foods.
Ingestion of contaminated food leads initially to infection of the gastrointestinal tract. However, L. monocytogenes
produces several unique virulence factors that allow it to cross the intestinal barrier and spread to other body
systems. Surface proteins called internalins (InlA and InlB) help L. monocytogenes invade nonphagocytic cells and
tissues, penetrating the intestinal wall and becoming disseminating through the circulatory and lymphatic systems.
Internalins also enable L. monocytogenes to breach other important barriers, including the blood-brain barrier and
the placenta. Within tissues, L. monocytogenes uses other proteins called listeriolysin O and ActA to facilitate
intercellular movement, allowing the infection to spread from cell to cell (Figure 26.10).
L. monocytogenes is usually identified by cultivation of samples from a normally sterile site (e.g., blood or CSF).
Recovery of viable organisms can be enhanced using cold enrichment by incubating samples in a broth at 4 °C
for a week or more. Distinguishing types and subtypes of L. monocytogenes—an important step for diagnosis and
epidemiology—is typically done using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Identification can also be achieved using
chemiluminescence DNA probe assays and MALDI-TOF.
Treatment for listeriosis involves antibiotic therapy, most commonly with ampicillin and gentamicin. There is no
vaccine available.

Figure 26.10 (a) An electron micrograph of Listeria monocytogenes infecting a host cell. (b) Listeria is able to use
host cell components to cause infection. For example, phagocytosis allows it to enter host cells, and the host’s
cytoskeleton provides the materials to help the pathogen move to other cells. (credit a: modification of work by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Keith Ireton)

• How does Listeria enter the nervous system?

15. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Listeria Outbreaks,” 2016. Accessed June 29, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/listeria/
outbreaks/index.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1179

Hansen’s Disease (Leprosy)
Hansen’s disease (also known as leprosy) is caused by a long, thin, filamentous rod-shaped bacterium
Mycobacterium leprae, an obligate intracellular pathogen. M. leprae is classified as gram-positive bacteria, but it is
best visualized microscopically with an acid-fast stain and is generally referred to as an acid-fast bacterium. Hansen’s
disease affects the PNS, leading to permanent damage and loss of appendages or other body parts.
Hansen’s disease is communicable but not highly contagious; approximately 95% of the human population cannot be
easily infected because they have a natural immunity to M. leprae. Person-to-person transmission occurs by inhalation
into nasal mucosa or prolonged and repeated contact with infected skin. Armadillos, one of only five mammals
susceptible to Hansen’s disease, have also been implicated in transmission of some cases.[16]
In the human body, M. leprae grows best at the cooler temperatures found in peripheral tissues like the nose,
toes, fingers, and ears. Some of the virulence factors that contribute to M. leprae’s pathogenicity are located on
the capsule and cell wall of the bacterium. These virulence factors enable it to bind to and invade Schwann cells,
resulting in progressive demyelination that gradually destroys neurons of the PNS. The loss of neuronal function
leads to hypoesthesia (numbness) in infected lesions. M. leprae is readily phagocytized by macrophages but is able
to survive within macrophages in part by neutralizing reactive oxygen species produced in the oxidative burst of the
phagolysosome. Like L. monocytogenes, M. leprae also can move directly between macrophages to avoid clearance
by immune factors.
The extent of the disease is related to the immune response of the patient. Initial symptoms may not appear for as long
as 2 to 5 years after infection. These often begin with small, blanched, numb areas of the skin. In most individuals,
these will resolve spontaneously, but some cases may progress to a more serious form of the disease. Tuberculoid
(paucibacillary) Hansen’s disease is marked by the presence of relatively few (three or less) flat, blanched skin lesions
with small nodules at the edges and few bacteria present in the lesion. Although these lesions can persist for years
or decades, the bacteria are held in check by an effective immune response including cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
Individuals who are unable to contain the infection may later develop lepromatous (multibacillary) Hansen’s disease.
This is a progressive form of the disease characterized by nodules filled with acid-fast bacilli and macrophages.
Impaired function of infected Schwann cells leads to peripheral nerve damage, resulting in sensory loss that leads to
ulcers, deformities, and fractures. Damage to the ulnar nerve (in the wrist) by M. leprae is one of the most common
causes of crippling of the hand. In some cases, chronic tissue damage can ultimately lead to loss of fingers or toes.
When mucosal tissues are also involved, disfiguring lesions of the nose and face can also occur (Figure 26.11).
Hansen’s disease is diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs and symptoms of the disease, and confirmed by the
presence of acid-fast bacilli on skin smears or in skin biopsy specimens (Figure 26.11). M. leprae does not grow in
vitro on any known laboratory media, but it can be identified by culturing in vivo in the footpads of laboratory mice
or armadillos. Where needed, PCR and genotyping of M. leprae DNA in infected human tissue may be performed for
diagnosis and epidemiology.
Hansen’s disease responds well to treatment and, if diagnosed and treated early, does not cause disability. In the
United States, most patients with Hansen’s disease are treated in ambulatory care clinics in major cities by the
National Hansen’s Disease program, the only institution in the United States exclusively devoted to Hansen’s disease.
Since 1995, WHO has made multidrug therapy for Hansen’s disease available free of charge to all patients worldwide.
As a result, global prevalence of Hansen’s disease has declined from about 5.2 million cases in 1985 to roughly
176,000 in 2014.[17] Multidrug therapy consists of dapsone and rifampicin for all patients and a third drug, clofazimin,
for patients with multibacillary disease.
Currently, there is no universally accepted vaccine for Hansen’s disease. India and Brazil use a tuberculosis vaccine
against Hansen’s disease because both diseases are caused by species of Mycobacterium. The effectiveness of this
method is questionable, however, since it appears that the vaccine works in some populations but not in others.
16. Sharma, Rahul, Pushpendra Singh, W. J. Loughry, J. Mitchell Lockhart, W. Barry Inman, Malcolm S. Duthie, Maria T. Pena et al.,
“Zoonotic Leprosy in the Southeastern United States,” Emerging Infectious Diseases 21, no. 12 (2015): 2127-34.
17. World Health Organization, “Leprosy Fact Sheet,” 2016. Accessed September 13, 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs101/en/.

1180

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.11 (a) The nose of a patient with Hansen’s disease. Note the lepromatous/multibacillary lesions around
the nostril. (b) Hansen’s disease is caused by Mycobacterium leprae, a gram-positive bacillus. (credit a, b:
modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What prevents the progression from tuberculoid to lepromatus leprosy?
• Why does Hansen’s disease typically affect the nerves of the extremities?

Eye on Ethics

Leper Colonies
Disfiguring, deadly diseases like leprosy have historically been stigmatized in many cultures. Before leprosy
was understood, victims were often isolated in leper colonies, a practice mentioned frequently in ancient texts,
including the Bible. But leper colonies are not just an artifact of the ancient world. In Hawaii, a leper colony
established in the late nineteenth century persisted until the mid-twentieth century, its residents forced to live in
deplorable conditions.[18] Although leprosy is a communicable disease, it is not considered contagious (easily
communicable), and it certainly does not pose enough of a threat to justify the permanent isolation of its
victims. Today, we reserve the practices of isolation and quarantine to patients with more dangerous diseases,
such as Ebola or multiple-drug-resistant bacteria like Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Staphylococcus aureus.
The ethical argument for this practice is that isolating infected patients is necessary to prevent the transmission
and spread of highly contagious diseases—even when it goes against the wishes of the patient.
Of course, it is much easier to justify the practice of temporary, clinical quarantining than permanent social
segregation, as occurred in leper colonies. In the 1980s, there were calls by some groups to establish camps
for people infected with AIDS. Although this idea was never actually implemented, it begs the question—where
do we draw the line? Are permanent isolation camps or colonies ever medically or socially justifiable? Suppose
there were an outbreak of a fatal, contagious disease for which there is no treatment. Would it be justifiable
to impose social isolation on those afflicted with the disease? How would we balance the rights of the infected
with the risk they pose to others? To what extent should society expect individuals to put their own health at
risk for the sake of treating others humanely?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1181

Disease Profile
Bacterial Infections of the Nervous System
Despite the formidable defenses protecting the nervous system, a number of bacterial pathogens are known
to cause serious infections of the CNS or PNS. Unfortunately, these infections are often serious and life
threatening. Figure 26.12 summarizes some important infections of the nervous system.

18. National Park Service, “A Brief History of Kalaupapa,” Accessed February 2, 2016. http://www.nps.gov/kala/learn/historyculture/abrief-history-of-kalaupapa.htm.

1182

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.12

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1183

26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common acellular pathogens that can cause infections of the nervous system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the nervous system

A number of different viruses and subviral particles can cause diseases that affect the nervous system. Viral diseases
tend to be more common than bacterial infections of the nervous system today. Fortunately, viral infections are
generally milder than their bacterial counterparts and often spontaneously resolve. Some of the more important
acellular pathogens of the nervous system are described in this section.

Viral Meningitis
Although it is much more common than bacterial meningitis, viral meningitis is typically less severe. Many different
viruses can lead to meningitis as a sequela of the primary infection, including those that cause herpes, influenza,
measles, and mumps. Most cases of viral meningitis spontaneously resolve, but severe cases do occur.

Arboviral Encephalitis
Several types of insect-borne viruses can cause encephalitis. Collectively, these viruses are referred to as arboviruses
(because they are arthropod-borne), and the diseases they cause are described as arboviral encephalitis. Most
arboviruses are endemic to specific geographical regions. Arborviral encephalitis diseases found in the United States
include eastern equine encephalitis (EEE), western equine encephalitis (WEE), St. Louis encephalitis, and West Nile
encephalitis (WNE). Expansion of arboviruses beyond their endemic regions sometimes occurs, generally as a result
of environmental changes that are favorable to the virus or its vector. Increased travel of infected humans, animals, or
vectors has also allowed arboviruses to spread into new regions.
In most cases, arboviral infections are asymptomatic or lead to a mild disease. However, when symptoms do occur,
they include high fever, chills, headaches, vomiting, diarrhea, and restlessness. In elderly patients, severe arboviral
encephalitis can rapidly lead to convulsions, coma, and death.
Mosquitoes are the most common biological vectors for arboviruses, which tend to be enveloped ssRNA viruses.
Thus, prevention of arboviral infections is best achieved by avoiding mosquitoes—using insect repellent, wearing
long pants and sleeves, sleeping in well-screened rooms, using bed nets, etc.
Diagnosis of arboviral encephalitis is based on clinical symptoms and serologic testing of serum or CSF. There are
no antiviral drugs to treat any of these arboviral diseases, so treatment consists of supportive care and management of
symptoms.
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) is caused by eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV), which can cause severe
disease in horses and humans. Birds are reservoirs for EEEV with accidental transmission to horses and humans by
Aedes, Coquillettidia, and Culex species of mosquitoes. Neither horses nor humans serve as reservoirs. EEE is most
common in US Gulf Coast and Atlantic states. EEE is one of the more severe mosquito-transmitted diseases in the
United States, but fortunately, it is a very rare disease in the United States (Figure 26.13).[19][20]
Western equine encephalitis (WEE) is caused by western equine encephalitis virus (WEEV). WEEV is usually
transmitted to horses and humans by the Culex tarsalis mosquitoes and, in the past decade, has caused very few cases
of encephalitis in humans in the United States. In humans, WEE symptoms are less severe than EEE and include
19. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Disease Cases and Deaths Reported to CDC by
Year and Clinical Presentation, 2004–2013,” 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/EasternEquineEncephalitis/resources/EEEV-Cases-byYear_2004-2013.pdf.
20. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Eastern Equine Encephalitis, Symptoms & Treatment, 2016,” Accessed June 29, 2016.
https://www.cdc.gov/easternequineencephalitis/tech/symptoms.html.

1184

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

fever, chills, and vomiting, with a mortality rate of 3–4%. Like EEEV, birds are the natural reservoir for WEEV.
Periodically, for indeterminate reasons, epidemics in human cases have occurred in North America in the past. The
largest on record was in 1941, with more than 3400 cases.[21]

Figure 26.13 (a) A false color TEM of a mosquito salivary gland cell shows an infection of the eastern equine
encephalitis virus (red). (b) CT (left) and MRI (right) scans of the brains of children with eastern equine encephalitis
infections, showing abnormalities (arrows) resulting from the infection. (credit a, b: modifications of work by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

St. Louis encephalitis (SLE), caused by St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), is a rare form of encephalitis with
symptoms occurring in fewer than 1% of infected patients. The natural reservoirs for SLEV are birds. SLEV is most
often found in the Ohio-Mississippi River basin of the central United States and was named after a severe outbreak
in Missouri in 1934. The worst outbreak of St. Louis encephalitis occurred in 1975, with over 2000 cases reported.[22]
Humans become infected when bitten by C. tarsalis, C. quinquefasciatus, or C. pipiens mosquitoes carrying SLEV.
Most patients are asymptomatic, but in a small number of individuals, symptoms range from mild flu-like syndromes
to fatal encephalitis. The overall mortality rate for symptomatic patients is 5–15%. [23]
Japanese encephalitis, caused by Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), is the leading cause of vaccine-preventable
encephalitis in humans and is endemic to some of the most populous countries in the world, including China,
India, Japan, and all of Southeast Asia. JEV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes, usually the species C.
tritaeniorhynchus. The biological reservoirs for JEV include pigs and wading birds. Most patients with JEV infections
are asymptomatic, with symptoms occurring in fewer than 1% of infected individuals. However, about 25% of those
who do develop encephalitis die, and among those who recover, 30–50% have psychiatric, neurologic, or cognitive
impairment.[24] Fortunately, there is an effective vaccine that can prevent infection with JEV. The CDC recommends
this vaccine for travelers who expect to spend more than one month in endemic areas.
As the name suggests, West Nile virus (WNV) and its associated disease, West Nile encephalitis (WNE), did not
originate in North America. Until 1999, it was endemic in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia; however, the first US
21. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Western Equine Encephalitis—United States and Canada, 1987,” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report 36, no. 39 (1987): 655.
22. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Saint Louis encephalitis, Epidemiology & Geographic Distribution,” Accessed June
30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/sle/technical/epi.html.
23. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Saint Louis encephalitis, Symptoms and Treatment,” Accessed June 30, 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/sle/technical/symptoms.html.
24. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Japanese Encephalitis, Symptoms and Treatment,” Accessed June 30, 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/japaneseencephalitis/symptoms/index.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1185

cases were identified in New York in 1999, and by 2004, the virus had spread across the entire continental United
States. Over 35,000 cases, including 1400 deaths, were confirmed in the five-year period between 1999 and 2004.
WNV infection remains reportable to the CDC.
WNV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes from its natural reservoir, infected birds, with 70–80% of
infected patients experiencing no symptoms. Most symptomatic cases involve only mild, flu-like symptoms, but
fewer than 1% of infected people develop severe and sometimes fatal encephalitis or meningitis. The mortality rate in
WNV patients who develop neurological disease is about 10%. More information about West Nile virus can be found
in Modes of Disease Transmission.

Link to Learning
This interactive map (https://www.openstax.org/l/22arboviralUS) identifies
cases of several arboviral diseases in humans and reservoir species by state
and year for the United States.

• Why is it unlikely that arboviral encephalitis viruses will be eradicated in the future?
• Which is the most common form of viral encephalitis in the United States?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
Levofloxacin is a quinolone antibiotic that is often prescribed to treat bacterial infections of the respiratory tract,
including pneumonia and bronchitis. But after taking the medication for a week, David returned to his physician
sicker than before. He claimed that the antibiotic had no effect on his earlier symptoms. In addition, he now
was experiencing headaches, a stiff neck, and difficulty focusing at work. He also showed the doctor a rash
that had developed on his arms over the past week. His doctor, more concerned now, began to ask about
David's activities over the past two weeks.
David explained that he had been recently working on a project to disassemble an old barn. His doctor
collected sputum samples and scrapings from David’s rash for cultures. A spinal tap was also performed to
examine David’s CSF. Microscopic examination of his CSF revealed encapsulated yeast cells. Based on this
result, the doctor prescribed a new antimicrobial therapy using amphotericin B and flucytosine.

• Why was the original treatment ineffective?
• Why is the presence of a capsule clinically important?
Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box. Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

Zika Virus Infection
Zika virus infection is an emerging arboviral disease associated with human illness in Africa, Southeast Asia, and
South and Central America; however, its range is expanding as a result of the widespread range of its mosquito
vector. The first cases originating in the United States were reported in 2016.The Zika virus was initially described

1186

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

in 1947 from monkeys in the Zika Forest of Uganda through a network that monitored yellow fever. It was not
considered a serious human pathogen until the first large-scale outbreaks occurred in Micronesia in 2007;[25] however,
the virus has gained notoriety over the past decade, as it has emerged as a cause of symptoms similar to other arboviral
infections that include fever, skin rashes, conjunctivitis, muscle and joint pain, malaise, and headache. Mosquitoes
of the Aedes genus are the primary vectors, although the virus can also be transmitted sexually, from mother to baby
during pregnancy, or through a blood transfusion.
Most Zika virus infections result in mild symptoms such as fever, a slight rash, or conjunctivitis. However, infections
in pregnant women can adversely affect the developing fetus. Reports in 2015 indicate fetal infections can result in
brain damage, including a serious birth defect called microcephaly, in which the infant is born with an abnormally
small head (Figure 26.14).[26]
Diagnosis of Zika is primarily based on clinical symptoms. However, the FDA recently authorized the use of a Zika
virus RNA assay, Trioplex RT-PCR, and Zika MAC-ELISA to test patient blood and urine to confirm Zika virus
disease. There are currently no antiviral treatments or vaccines for Zika virus, and treatment is limited to supportive
care.

Figure 26.14 (a) This colorized electron micrograph shows Zika virus particles (red). (b) Women infected by the Zika
virus during pregnancy may give birth to children with microcephaly, a deformity characterized by an abnormally small
head and brain. (credit a, b: modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What are the signs and symptoms of Zika virus infection in adults?
• Why is Zika virus infection considered a serious public health threat?

Rabies
Rabies is a deadly zoonotic disease that has been known since antiquity. The disease is caused by rabies virus
(RV), a member of the family Rhabdoviridae, and is primarily transmitted through the bite of an infected mammal.
Rhabdoviridae are enveloped RNA viruses that have a distinctive bullet shape (Figure 26.15); they were first studied
25. Sikka, Veronica, Vijay Kumar Chattu, Raaj K. Popli, Sagar C. Galwankar, Dhanashree Kelkar, Stanley G. Sawicki, Stanislaw P.
Stawicki, and Thomas J. Papadimos, “The Emergence of Zika Virus as a Global Health Security Threat: A Review and a Consensus
Statement of the INDUSEM Joint Working Group (JWG),” Journal of Global Infectious Diseases 8, no. 1 (2016): 3.
26. Mlakar, Jernej, Misa Korva, Nataša Tul, Mara Popović, Mateja Poljšak-Prijatelj, Jerica Mraz, Marko Kolenc et al., “Zika Virus
Associated with Microcephaly,” New England Journal of Medicine 374, no. 10 (2016): 951-8.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1187

by Louis Pasteur, who obtained rabies virus from rabid dogs and cultivated the virus in rabbits. He successfully
prepared a rabies vaccine using dried nerve tissues from infected animals. This vaccine was used to first treat an
infected human in 1885.
The most common reservoirs in the United States are wild animals such as raccoons (30.2% of all animal cases during
2014), bats (29.1%), skunks (26.3%), and foxes (4.1%); collectively, these animals were responsible for a total of
92.6% of animal rabies cases in the United States in 2014. The remaining 7.4% of cases that year were in domesticated
animals such as dogs, cats, horses, mules, sheep, goats, and llamas.[27] While there are typically only one or two
human cases per year in the United States, rabies still causes tens of thousands of human deaths per year worldwide,
primarily in Asia and Africa.
The low incidence of rabies in the United States is primarily a result of the widespread vaccination of dogs and
cats. An oral vaccine is also used to protect wild animals, such as raccoons and foxes, from infection. Oral vaccine
programs tend to focus on geographic areas where rabies is endemic.[28] The oral vaccine is usually delivered in a
package of bait that is dropped by airplane, although baiting in urban areas is done by hand to maximize safety.[29]
Many countries require a quarantine or proof of rabies vaccination for domestic pets being brought into the country.
These procedures are especially strict in island nations where rabies is not yet present, such as Australia.
The incubation period for rabies can be lengthy, ranging from several weeks or months to over a year. As the virus
replicates, it moves from the site of the bite into motor and sensory axons of peripheral nerves and spreads from
nerve to nerve using a process called retrograde transport, eventually making its way to the CNS through the spinal
ganglia. Once rabies virus reaches the brain, the infection leads to encephalitis caused by the disruption of normal
neurotransmitter function, resulting in the symptoms associated with rabies. The virions act in the synaptic spaces
as competitors with a variety of neurotransmitters for acetylcholine, GABA, and glycine receptors. Thus, the action
of rabies virus is neurotoxic rather than cytotoxic. After the rabies virus infects the brain, it can continue to spread
through other neuronal pathways, traveling out of the CNS to tissues such as the salivary glands, where the virus can
be released. As a result, as the disease progresses the virus can be found in many other tissues, including the salivary
glands, taste buds, nasal cavity, and tears.
The early symptoms of rabies include discomfort at the site of the bite, fever, and headache. Once the virus reaches
the brain and later symptoms appear, the disease is always fatal. Terminal rabies cases can end in one of two ways:
either furious or paralytic rabies. Individuals with furious rabies become very agitated and hyperactive. Hydrophobia
(a fear of water) is common in patients with furious rabies, which is caused by muscular spasms in the throat when
swallowing or thinking about water. Excess salivation and a desire to bite can lead to foaming of the mouth. These
behaviors serve to enhance the likelihood of viral transmission, although contact with infected secretions like saliva or
tears alone is sufficient for infection. The disease culminates after just a few days with terror and confusion, followed
by cardiovascular and respiratory arrest. In contrast, individuals with paralytic rabies generally follow a longer course
of disease. The muscles at the site of infection become paralyzed. Over a period of time, the paralysis slowly spreads
throughout the body. This paralytic form of disease culminates in coma and death.
Before present-day diagnostic methods were available, rabies diagnosis was made using a clinical case history and
histopathological examination of biopsy or autopsy tissues, looking for the presence of Negri bodies. We now know
these histologic changes cannot be used to confirm a rabies diagnosis. There are no tests that can detect rabies virus
in humans at the time of the bite or shortly thereafter. Once the virus has begun to replicate (but before clinical
symptoms occur), the virus can be detected using an immunofluorescence test on cutaneous nerves found at the base
of hair follicles. Saliva can also be tested for viral genetic material by reverse transcription followed by polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). Even when these tests are performed, most suspected infections are treated as positive in the
27. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Rabies, Wild Animals,” 2016. Accessed September 13, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
rabies/location/usa/surveillance/wild_animals.html.
28. Slate, Dennis, Charles E. Rupprecht, Jane A. Rooney, Dennis Donovan, Donald H. Lein, and Richard B. Chipman, “Status of Oral
Rabies Vaccination in Wild Carnivores in the United States,” Virus Research 111, no. 1 (2005): 68-76.
29. Finnegan, Christopher J., Sharon M. Brookes, Nicholas Johnson, Jemma Smith, Karen L. Mansfield, Victoria L. Keene, Lorraine M.
McElhinney, and Anthony R. Fooks, “Rabies in North America and Europe,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 95, no. 1 (2002):
9-13. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1279140/.

1188

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

absence of contravening evidence. It is better that patients undergo unnecessary therapy because of a false-positive
result, rather than die as the result of a false-negative result.
Human rabies infections are treated by immunization with multiple doses of an attenuated vaccine to develop active
immunity in the patient (see the Clinical Focus feature in the chapter on Acellular Pathogens). Vaccination of
an already-infected individual has the potential to work because of the slow progress of the disease, which allows
time for the patient’s immune system to develop antibodies against the virus. Patients may also be treated with
human rabies immune globulin (antibodies to the rabies virus) to encourage passive immunity. These antibodies will
neutralize any free viral particles. Although the rabies infection progresses slowly in peripheral tissues, patients are
not normally able to mount a protective immune response on their own.

Figure 26.15 Virions of the rabies virus have a characteristic bullet-like shape. (credit: modification of work by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• How does the bite from an infected animal transmit rabies?
• What is the goal of wildlife vaccination programs for rabies?
• How is rabies treated in a human?

Poliomyelitis
Poliomyelitis (polio), caused by poliovirus, is a primarily intestinal disease that, in a small percentage of cases,
proceeds to the nervous system, causing paralysis and, potentially, death. Poliovirus is highly contagious, with
transmission occurring by the fecal-oral route or by aerosol or droplet transmission. Approximately 72% of all
poliovirus infections are asymptomatic; another 25% result only in mild intestinal disease, producing nausea, fever,
and headache.[30] However, even in the absence of symptoms, patients infected with the virus can shed it in feces and
oral secretions, potentially transmitting the virus to others. In about one case in every 200, the poliovirus affects cells
in the CNS.[31]
30. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Global Health – Polio,” 2014. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/polio/
about/index.htm.
31. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Global Health – Polio,” 2014. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/polio/
about/index.htm.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1189

After it enters through the mouth, initial replication of poliovirus occurs at the site of implantation in the pharynx and
gastrointestinal tract. As the infection progresses, poliovirus is usually present in the throat and in the stool before the
onset of symptoms. One week after the onset of symptoms, there is less poliovirus in the throat, but for several weeks,
poliovirus continues to be excreted in the stool. Poliovirus invades local lymphoid tissue, enters the bloodstream, and
then may infect cells of the CNS. Replication of poliovirus in motor neurons of the anterior horn cells in the spinal
cord, brain stem, or motor cortex results in cell destruction and leads to flaccid paralysis. In severe cases, this can
involve the respiratory system, leading to death. Patients with impaired respiratory function are treated using positivepressure ventilation systems. In the past, patients were sometimes confined to Emerson respirators, also known as
iron lungs (Figure 26.16).
Direct detection of the poliovirus from the throat or feces can be achieved using reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR)
or genomic sequencing to identify the genotype of the poliovirus infecting the patient. Serological tests can be used to
determine whether the patient has been previously vaccinated. There are no therapeutic measures for polio; treatment
is limited to various supportive measures. These include pain relievers, rest, heat therapy to ease muscle spasms,
physical therapy and corrective braces if necessary to help with walking, and mechanical ventilation to assist with
breathing if necessary.

Figure 26.16 (a) An Emerson respiratory (or iron lung) that was used to help some polio victims to breathe. (b) Polio
can also result in impaired motor function. (credit b: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Two different vaccines were introduced in the 1950s that have led to the dramatic decrease in polio worldwide
(Figure 26.17). The Salk vaccine is an inactivated polio virus that was first introduced in 1955. This vaccine is
delivered by intramuscular injection. The Sabin vaccine is an oral polio vaccine that contains an attenuated virus; it
was licensed for use in 1962. There are three serotypes of poliovirus that cause disease in humans; both the Salk and
the Sabin vaccines are effective against all three.
Attenuated viruses from the Sabin vaccine are shed in the feces of immunized individuals and thus have the potential
to infect nonimmunized individuals. By the late 1990s, the few polio cases originating in the United States could
be traced back to the Sabin vaccine. In these cases, mutations of the attenuated virus following vaccination likely
allowed the microbe to revert to a virulent form. For this reason, the United States switched exclusively to the Salk
vaccine in 2000. Because the Salk vaccine contains an inactivated virus, there is no risk of transmission to others (see
Vaccines). Currently four doses of the vaccine are recommended for children: at 2, 4, and 6–18 months of age, and
at 4–6 years of age.
In 1988, WHO launched the Global Polio Eradication Initiative with the goal of eradicating polio worldwide through
immunization. That goal is now close to being realized. Polio is now endemic in only a few countries, including
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Nigeria, where vaccination efforts have been disrupted by military conflict or political
instability.

1190

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.17 (a) Polio is caused by the poliovirus. (b) Two American virologists developed the first polio vaccines:
Albert Sabin (left) and Jonas Salk (right). (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)

Micro Connections
The Terror of Polio
In the years after World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union entered a period known as the Cold War.
Although there was no armed conflict, the two super powers were diplomatically and economically isolated
from each other, as represented by the so-called Iron Curtain between the Soviet Union and the rest of the
world. After 1950, migration or travel outside of the Soviet Union was exceedingly difficult, and it was equally
difficult for foreigners to enter the Soviet Union. The United States also placed strict limits on Soviets entering
the country. During the Eisenhower administration, only 20 graduate students from the Soviet Union were
allowed to come to study in the United States per year.
Yet even the Iron Curtain was no match for polio. The Salk vaccine became widely available in the West in
1955, and by the time the Sabin vaccine was ready for clinical trials, most of the susceptible population in the
United States and Canada had already been vaccinated against polio. Sabin needed to look elsewhere for
study participants. At the height of the Cold War, Mikhail Chumakov was allowed to come to the United States
to study Sabin’s work. Likewise, Sabin, an American microbiologist, was allowed to travel to the Soviet Union
to begin clinical trials. Chumakov organized Soviet-based production and managed the experimental trials to
test the new vaccine in the Soviet Union. By 1959, over ten million Soviet children had been safely treated with
Sabin’s vaccine.
As a result of a global vaccination campaign with the Sabin vaccine, the overall incidence of polio has dropped
dramatically. Today, polio has been nearly eliminated around the world and is only rarely seen in the United
States. Perhaps one day soon, polio will become the third microbial disease to be eradicated from the general
population [small pox and rinderpest (the cause of cattle plague) being the first two].

• How is poliovirus transmitted?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1191

• Compare the pros and cons of each of the two polio vaccines.

Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
Acellular infectious agents called prions are responsible for a group of related diseases known as transmissible
spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) that occurs in humans and other animals (see Viroids, Virusoids, and
Prions). All TSEs are degenerative, fatal neurological diseases that occur when brain tissue becomes infected by
prions. These diseases have a slow onset; symptoms may not become apparent until after an incubation period of
years and perhaps decades, but death usually occurs within months to a few years after the first symptoms appear.
TSEs in animals include scrapie, a disease in sheep that has been known since the 1700s, and chronic wasting
disease, a disease of deer and elk in the United States and Canada. Mad cow disease is seen in cattle and can be
transmitted to humans through the consumption of infected nerve tissues. Human prion diseases include CreutzfeldtJakob disease and kuru, a rare disease endemic to Papua New Guinea.
Prions are infectious proteinaceous particles that are not viruses and do not contain nucleic acid. They are typically
transmitted by exposure to and ingestion of infected nervous system tissues, tissue transplants, blood transfusions, or
contaminated fomites. Prion proteins are normally found in a healthy brain tissue in a form called PrPC. However, if
this protein is misfolded into a denatured form (PrPSc), it can cause disease. Although the exact function of PrPC is
not currently understood, the protein folds into mostly alpha helices and binds copper. The rogue protein, on the other
hand, folds predominantly into beta-pleated sheets and is resistant to proteolysis. In addition, PrPSc can induce PrPC
to become misfolded and produce more rogue protein (Figure 26.18).
As PrPSc accumulates, it aggregates and forms fibrils within nerve cells. These protein complexes ultimately cause the
cells to die. As a consequence, brain tissues of infected individuals form masses of neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid
plaques that give the brain a spongy appearance, which is why these diseases are called spongiform encephalopathy
(Figure 6.26). Damage to brain tissue results in a variety of neurological symptoms. Most commonly, affected
individuals suffer from memory loss, personality changes, blurred vision, uncoordinated movements, and insomnia.
These symptoms gradually worsen over time and culminate in coma and death.
The gold standard for diagnosing TSE is the histological examination of brain biopsies for the presence of
characteristic amyloid plaques, vacuoles, and prion proteins. Great care must be taken by clinicians when handling
suspected prion-infected materials to avoid becoming infected themselves. Other tissue assays search for the presence
of the 14-3-3 protein, a marker for prion diseases like Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. New assays, like RT-QuIC (realtime quaking-induced conversion), offer new hope to effectively detect the abnormal prion proteins in tissues earlier
in the course of infection. Prion diseases cannot be cured. However, some medications may help slow their progress.
Medical support is focused on keeping patients as comfortable as possible despite progressive and debilitating
symptoms.

Figure 26.18 The replicative cycle of misfolded prion proteins.

1192

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Link to Learning
Because prion-contaminated materials are potential sources of infection for
clinical scientists and physicians, both the World Health Organization
(https://www.openstax.org/l/22WHOprion) and CDC
(https://www.openstax.org/l/22CDCprion) provide information to inform,
educate and minimize the risk of infections due to prions.

• Do prions reproduce in the conventional sense?
• What is the connection between prions and the removal of animal byproducts from the food of farm animals?

Disease Profile
Acellular Infections of the Nervous System
Serious consequences are the common thread among these neurological diseases. Several cause debilitating
paralysis, and some, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and rabies, are always or nearly always fatal. Since
few drugs are available to combat these infections, vector control and vaccination are critical for prevention
and containment. Figure 26.19 summarizes some important viral and prion infections of the nervous system.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.19

1193

1194

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous
System
Learning Objectives
• Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the nervous system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases affecting the nervous system

Fungal infections of the nervous system, called neuromycoses, are rare in healthy individuals. However,
neuromycoses can be devastating in immunocompromised or elderly patients. Several eukaryotic parasites are also
capable of infecting the nervous system of human hosts. Although relatively uncommon, these infections can also be
life-threatening in immunocompromised individuals. In this section, we will first discuss neuromycoses, followed by
parasitic infections of the nervous system.

Cryptococcocal Meningitis
Cryptococcus neoformans is a fungal pathogen that can cause meningitis. This yeast is commonly found in soils
and is particularly associated with pigeon droppings. It has a thick capsule that serves as an important virulence
factor, inhibiting clearance by phagocytosis. Most C. neoformans cases result in subclinical respiratory infections
that, in healthy individuals, generally resolve spontaneously with no long-term consequences (see Respiratory
Mycoses). In immunocompromised patients or those with other underlying illnesses, the infection can progress
to cause meningitis and granuloma formation in brain tissues. Cryptococcus antigens can also serve to inhibit cellmediated immunity and delayed-type hypersensitivity.
Cryptococcus can be easily cultured in the laboratory and identified based on its extensive capsule (Figure 26.20).
C. neoformans is frequently cultured from urine samples of patients with disseminated infections.
Prolonged treatment with antifungal drugs is required to treat cryptococcal infections. Combined therapy is required
with amphotericin B plus flucytosine for at least 10 weeks. Many antifungal drugs have difficulty crossing the bloodbrain barrier and have strong side effects that necessitate low doses; these factors contribute to the lengthy time of
treatment. Patients with AIDS are particularly susceptible to Cryptococcus infections because of their compromised
immune state. AIDS patients with cryptococcosis can also be treated with antifungal drugs, but they often have
relapses; lifelong doses of fluconazole may be necessary to prevent reinfection.

Figure 26.20 An India ink-negative stain of C. neoformans showing the thick capsules around the spherical yeast
cells. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

• Why are neuromycoses infections rare in the general population?
• How is a cryptococcal infection acquired?

Disease Profile
Neuromycoses
Neuromycoses typically occur only in immunocompromised individuals and usually only invade the nervous
system after first infecting a different body system. As such, many diseases that sometimes affect the nervous
system have already been discussed in previous chapters. Figure 26.21 presents some of the most common
fungal infections associated with neurological disease. This table includes only the neurological aspects
associated with these diseases; it does not include characteristics associated with other body systems.

Figure 26.21

Clinical Focus
Resolution
David’s new prescription for two antifungal drugs, amphotericin B and flucytosine, proved effective, and his
condition began to improve. Culture results from David’s sputum, skin, and CSF samples confirmed a fungal
infection. All were positive for C. neoformans. Serological tests of his tissues were also positive for the C.
neoformans capsular polysaccharide antigen.

1195

1196

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Since C. neoformans is known to occur in bird droppings, it is likely that David had been exposed to the fungus
while working on the barn. Despite this exposure, David’s doctor explained to him that immunocompetent
people rarely contract cryptococcal meningitis and that his immune system had likely been compromised by
the anti-inflammatory medication he was taking to treat his Crohn’s disease. However, to rule out other possible
causes of immunodeficiency, David’s doctor recommended that he be tested for HIV.
After David tested negative for HIV, his doctor took him off the corticosteroid he was using to manage his
Crohn’s disease, replacing it with a different class of drug. After several weeks of antifungal treatments, David
managed a full recovery.
Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Amoebic Meningitis
Primary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM) is caused by Naegleria fowleri. This amoeboflagellate is commonly
found free-living in soils and water. It can exist in one of three forms—the infective amoebic trophozoite form,
a motile flagellate form, and a resting cyst form. PAM is a rare disease that has been associated with young and
otherwise healthy individuals. Individuals are typically infected by the amoeba while swimming in warm bodies of
freshwater such as rivers, lakes, and hot springs. The pathogenic trophozoite infects the brain by initially entering
through nasal passages to the sinuses; it then moves down olfactory nerve fibers to penetrate the submucosal
nervous plexus, invades the cribriform plate, and reaches the subarachnoid space. The subarachnoid space is highly
vascularized and is a route of dissemination of trophozoites to other areas of the CNS, including the brain (Figure
26.22). Inflammation and destruction of gray matter leads to severe headaches and fever. Within days, confusion
and convulsions occur and quickly progress to seizures, coma, and death. The progression can be very rapid, and the
disease is often not diagnosed until autopsy.
N. fowleri infections can be confirmed by direct observation of CSF; the amoebae can often be seen moving while
viewing a fresh CSF wet mount through a microscope. Flagellated forms can occasionally also be found in CSF. The
amoebae can be stained with several stains for identification, including Giemsa-Wright or a modified trichrome stain.
Detection of antigens with indirect immunofluorescence, or genetic analysis with PCR, can be used to confirm an
initial diagnosis. N. fowleri infections are nearly always fatal; only 3 of 138 patients with PAM in the United States
have survived.[32] A new experimental drug called miltefosine shows some promise for treating these infections.
This drug is a phosphotidylcholine derivative that is thought to inhibit membrane function in N. fowleri, triggering
apoptosis and disturbance of lipid-dependent cell signaling pathways.[33] When administered early in infection and
coupled with therapeutic hypothermia (lowering the body’s core temperature to reduce the cerebral edema associated
with infection), this drug has been successfully used to treat primary amoebic encephalitis.

32. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Naegleria fowleri—Primary Amoebic Meningoencephalitis (PAM)—Amebic
Encephalitis,” 2016. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/naegleria/treatment.html.
33. Dorlo, Thomas PC, Manica Balasegaram, Jos H. Beijnen, and Peter J. de Vries, “Miltefosine: A Review of Its Pharmacology and
Therapeutic Efficacy in the Treatment of Leishmaniasis,” Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 67, no. 11 (2012): 2576-97.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1197

Figure 26.22 Free-living amoeba in human brain tissue from a patient suffering from PAM. (credit: modification of
work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

Granulomatous Amoebic Encephalitis
Acanthamoeba and Balamuthia species are free-living amoebae found in many bodies of fresh water. Human
infections by these amoebae are rare. However, they can cause amoebic keratitis in contact lens wearers (see
Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Eyes), disseminated infections in immunocompromised patients,
and granulomatous amoebic encephalitis (GAE) in severe cases. Compared to PAM, GAE tend to be subacute
infections. The microbe is thought to enter through either the nasal sinuses or breaks in the skin. It is disseminated
hematogenously and can invade the CNS. There, the infections lead to inflammation, formation of lesions, and
development of typical neurological symptoms of encephalitis (Figure 26.23). GAE is nearly always fatal.
GAE is often not diagnosed until late in the infection. Lesions caused by the infection can be detected using CT or
MRI. The live amoebae can be directly detected in CSF or tissue biopsies. Serological tests are available but generally
are not necessary to make a correct diagnosis, since the presence of the organism in CSF is definitive. Some antifungal
drugs, like fluconazole, have been used to treat acanthamoebal infections. In addition, a combination of miltefosine
and voriconazole (an inhibitor of ergosterol biosynthesis) has recently been used to successfully treat GAE. Even with
treatment, however, the mortality rate for patients with these infections is high.

Figure 26.23 (a) Brain tissue from a patient who died of granulomatous amebic encephalitis (GAE) caused by
Balamuthia mandrillaris. (b) A close-up of the necrosis in the center of the brain section. (credit a, b: modifications of
work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

1198

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

• How is granulomatous amoebic encephalitis diagnosed?

Human African Trypanosomiasis
Human African trypanosomiasis (also known as African sleeping sickness) is a serious disease endemic to two
distinct regions in sub-Saharan Africa. It is caused by the insect-borne hemoflagellate Trypanosoma brucei. The
subspecies Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense causes East African trypanosomiasis (EAT), and another subspecies,
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense causes West African trypanosomiasis (WAT). A few hundred cases of EAT are
currently reported each year.[34] WAT is more commonly reported and tends to be a more chronic disease. Around
7000 to 10,000 new cases of WAT are identified each year.[35]
T. brucei is primarily transmitted to humans by the bite of the tsetse fly (Glossina spp.). Soon after the bite of a tsetse
fly, a chancre forms at the site of infection. The flagellates then spread, moving into the circulatory system (Figure
26.24). These systemic infections result in an undulating fever, during which symptoms persist for two or three days
with remissions of about a week between bouts. As the disease enters its final phase, the pathogens move from the
lymphatics into the CNS. Neurological symptoms include daytime sleepiness, insomnia, and mental deterioration. In
EAT, the disease runs its course over a span of weeks to months. In contrast, WAT often occurs over a span of months
to years.
Although a strong immune response is mounted against the trypanosome, it is not sufficient to eliminate the pathogen.
Through antigenic variation, Trypanosoma can change their surface proteins into over 100 serological types. This
variation leads to the undulating form of the initial disease. The initial septicemia caused by the infection leads to
high fevers. As the immune system responds to the infection, the number of organisms decrease, and the clinical
symptoms abate. However, a subpopulation of the pathogen then alters its surface coat antigens by antigenic variation
and evades the immune response. These flagellates rapidly proliferate and cause another bout of disease. If untreated,
these infections are usually fatal.
Clinical symptoms can be used to recognize the early signs of African trypanosomiasis. These include the formation
of a chancre at the site of infection and Winterbottom’s sign. Winterbottom’s sign refers to the enlargement of lymph
nodes on the back of the neck—often indicative of cerebral infections. Trypanosoma can be directly observed in
stained samples including blood, lymph, CSF, and skin biopsies of chancres from patients. Antibodies against the
parasite are found in most patients with acute or chronic disease. Serologic testing is generally not used for diagnosis,
however, since the microscopic detection of the parasite is sufficient. Early diagnosis is important for treatment.
Before the nervous system is involved, drugs like pentamidine (an inhibitor of nuclear metabolism) and suramin
(mechanism unclear) can be used. These drugs have fewer side effects than the drugs needed to treat the second
stage of the disease. Once the sleeping sickness phase has begun, harsher drugs including melarsoprol (an arsenic
derivative) and eflornithine can be effective. Following successful treatment, patients still need to have follow-up
examinations of their CSF for two years to detect possible relapses of the disease. The most effective means of
preventing these diseases is to control the insect vector populations.

34. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Parasites – African Trypanosomiasis (also known as Sleeping Sickness), East African
Trypanosomiasis FAQs,” 2012. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sleepingsickness/gen_info/faqs-east.html.
35. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Parasites – African Trypanosomiasis (also known as Sleeping Sickness),
Epidemiology & Risk Factors,” 2012. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sleepingsickness/epi.html.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1199

Figure 26.24 Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African sleeping sickness, in a human blood smear.
(credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

• What is the symptom of a systemic Trypanosoma infection?
• What are the symptoms of a neurological Trypanosoma infection?
• Why are trypanosome infections so difficult to eradicate?

Neurotoxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondii is an ubiquitous intracellular parasite that can cause neonatal infections. Cats are the definitive
host, and humans can become infected after eating infected meat or, more commonly, by ingesting oocysts shed in
the feces of cats (see Parasitic Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems). T. gondii enters
the circulatory system by passing between the endothelial cells of blood vessels.[36] Most cases of toxoplasmosis
are asymptomatic. However, in immunocompromised patients, neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infections
are one of the most common causes of brain abscesses.[37] The organism is able to cross the blood-brain barrier by
infecting the endothelial cells of capillaries in the brain. The parasite reproduces within these cells, a step that appears
to be necessary for entry to the brain, and then causes the endothelial cell to lyse, releasing the progeny into brain
tissues. This mechanism is quite different than the method it uses to enter the bloodstream in the first place.[38]
The brain lesions associated with neurotoxoplasmosis can be detected radiographically using MRI or CAT scans
(Figure 26.25). Diagnosis can be confirmed by direct observation of the organism in CSF. RT-PCR assays can also
be used to detect T. gondii through genetic markers.
Treatment of neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infections requires six weeks of multi-drug therapy with
pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and folinic acid. Long-term maintenance doses are often required to prevent recurrence.
36. Carruthers, Vern B., and Yasuhiro Suzuki, “Effects of Toxoplasma gondii Infection on the Brain,” Schizophrenia Bulletin 33, no. 3
(2007): 745-51.
37. Uppal, Gulshan, “CNS Toxoplasmosis in HIV,” 2015. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/
1167298-overview#a3.
38. Konradt, Christoph, Norikiyo Ueno, David A. Christian, Jonathan H. Delong, Gretchen Harms Pritchard, Jasmin Herz, David J. Bzik et
al., “Endothelial Cells Are a Replicative Niche for Entry of Toxoplasma gondii to the Central Nervous System,” Nature Microbiology 1
(2016): 16001.

1200

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.25 This Toxoplasma gondii cyst, observed in mouse brain tissue, contains thousands of inactive
parasites. (credit: modification of work by USDA)

• Under what conditions is Toxoplasma infection serious?
• How does Toxoplasma circumvent the blood-brain barrier?

Neurocysticercosis
Cysticercosis is a parasitic infection caused by the larval form of the pork tapeworm, Taenia solium. When the larvae
invade the brain and spinal cord, the condition is referred to as neurocysticercosis. This condition affects millions of
people worldwide and is the leading cause of adult onset epilepsy in the developing world.[39]
The life cycle of T. solium is discussed in Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract. Following
ingestion, the eggs hatch in the intestine to form larvae called cysticerci. Adult tapeworms form in the small intestine
and produce eggs that are shed in the feces. These eggs can infect other individuals through fecal contamination
of food or other surfaces. Eggs can also hatch within the intestine of the original patient and lead to an ongoing
autoinfection. The cystercerci, can migrate to the blood and invade many tissues in the body, including the CNS.
Neurocysticercosis is usually diagnosed through noninvasive techniques. Epidemiological information can be used as
an initial screen; cysticercosis is endemic in Central and South America, Africa, and Asia. Radiological imaging (MRI
and CT scans) is the primary method used to diagnose neurocysticercosis; imaging can be used to detect the one- to
two-centimeter cysts that form around the parasites (Figure 26.26). Elevated levels of eosinophils in the blood can
also indicate a parasitic infection. EIA and ELISA are also used to detect antigens associated with the pathogen.

39. DeGiorgio, Christopher M., Marco T. Medina, Reyna Durón, Chi Zee, and Susan Pietsch Escueta, “Neurocysticercosis,” Epilepsy
Currents 4, no. 3 (2004): 107-11.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1201

Figure 26.26 Brain CT scans of sagittal (left) and axial (right) sections of a brain with neurocysticercosis. Numerous
cysts are visible in both images, as indicated by the arrows. (credit: modification of work by Segamwenge IL, Kioko
NP)

The treatment for neurocysticercosis depends on the location, number, size, and stage of cysticerci present.
Antihelminthic chemotherapy includes albendazole and praziquantel. Because these drugs kill viable cysts, they
may acutely increase symptoms by provoking an inflammatory response caused by the release of Taenia cysticerci
antigens, as the cysts are destroyed by the drugs. To alleviate this response, corticosteroids that cross the blood-brain
barrier (e.g., dexamethasone) can be used to mitigate these effects. Surgical intervention may be required to remove
intraventricular cysts.

Disease Profile
Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System
Parasites that successfully invade the nervous system can cause a wide range of neurological signs and
symptoms. Often, they inflict lesions that can be visualized through radiologic imaging. A number of these
infections are fatal, but some can be treated (with varying levels of success) by antimicrobial drugs (Figure
26.27).

1202

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Figure 26.27

• What neurological condition is associated with neurocysticercosis?
• How is neurocysticercosis diagnosed?

Summary
26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System
• The nervous system consists of two subsystems: the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system.
• The skull and three meninges (the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater) protect the brain.
• Tissues of the PNS and CNS are formed of cells called glial cells and neurons.
• Since the blood-brain barrier excludes most microbes, there is no normal microbiota in the CNS.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1203

• Some pathogens have specific virulence factors that allow them to breach the blood-brain barrier.
Inflammation of the brain or meninges caused by infection is called encephalitis or meningitis, respectively.
These conditions can lead to blindness, deafness, coma, and death.
26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System
• Bacterial meningitis can be caused by several species of encapsulated bacteria, including Haemophilus
influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Streptococcus agalactiae (group B
streptococci). H. influenzae affects primarily young children and neonates, N. meningitidis is the only
communicable pathogen and mostly affects children and young adults, S. pneumoniae affects mostly young
children, and S. agalactiae affects newborns during or shortly after birth.
• Symptoms of bacterial meningitis include fever, neck stiffness, headache, confusion, convulsions, coma, and
death.
• Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is made through observations and culture of organisms in CSF. Bacterial
meningitis is treated with antibiotics. H. influenzae and N. meningitidis have vaccines available.
• Clostridium species cause neurological diseases, including botulism and tetanus, by producing potent
neurotoxins that interfere with neurotransmitter release. The PNS is typically affected. Treatment of
Clostridium infection is effective only through early diagnosis with administration of antibiotics to control the
infection and antitoxins to neutralize the endotoxin before they enter cells.
• Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne pathogen that can infect the CNS, causing meningitis. The infection
can be spread through the placenta to a fetus. Diagnosis is through culture of blood or CSF. Treatment is with
antibiotics and there is no vaccine.
• Hansen’s disease (leprosy) is caused by the intracellular parasite Mycobacterium leprae. Infections cause
demylenation of neurons, resulting in decreased sensation in peripheral appendages and body sites. Treatment
is with multi-drug antibiotic therapy, and there is no universally recognized vaccine.
26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System
• Viral meningitis is more common and generally less severe than bacterial menigitis. It can result from
secondary sequelae of many viruses or be caused by infections of arboviruses.
• Various types of arboviral encephalitis are concentrated in particular geographic locations throughout the
world. These mosquito-borne viral infections of the nervous system are typically mild, but they can be lifethreatening in some cases.
• Zika virus is an emerging arboviral infection with generally mild symptoms in most individuals, but
infections of pregnant women can cause the birth defect microcephaly.
• Polio is typically a mild intestinal infection but can be damaging or fatal if it progresses to a neurological
disease.
• Rabies is nearly always fatal when untreated and remains a significant problem worldwide.
• Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and kuru are caused by
prions. These diseases are untreatable and ultimately fatal. Similar prion diseases are found in animals.
26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System
• Neuromycoses are uncommon in immunocompetent people, but immunocompromised individuals with
fungal infections have high mortality rates. Treatment of neuromycoses require prolonged therapy with
antifungal drugs at low doses to avoid side effects and overcome the effect of the blood-brain barrier.
• Some protist infections of the nervous systems are fatal if not treated, including primary amoebic meningitis,
granulomatous amoebic encephalitis, human African trypanosomiasis, and neurotoxoplasmosis.
• The various forms of ameobic encephalitis caused by the different amoebic infections are typically fatal even
with treatment, but they are rare.
• African trypanosomiasis is a serious but treatable disease endemic to two distinct regions in sub-Saharan
Africa caused by the insect-borne hemoflagellate Trypanosoma brucei.
• Neurocysticercosis is treated using antihelminthic drugs or surgery to remove the large cysts from the CNS.

1204

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Review Questions
Multiple Choice

1. What is the outermost membrane surrounding the
brain called?
a. pia mater
b. arachnoid mater
c. dura mater
d. alma mater
2. What term refers to an inflammation of brain
tissues?
a. encephalitis
b. meningitis
c. sinusitis
d. meningoencephalitis

8. What sign/symptom would NOT be associated with
infant botulism?
a. difficulty suckling
b. limp body
c. stiff neck
d. weak cry
9. Which of the following can NOT be prevented with
a vaccine?
a. tetanus
b. pneumococcal meningitis
c. meningococcal meningitis
d. listeriosis

3. Nerve cells form long projections called ________.
a. soma
b. axons
c. dendrites
d. synapses

10. How is leprosy primarily transmitted from person
to person?
a. contaminated toilet seats
b. shaking hands
c. blowing nose
d. sexual intercourse

4. Chemicals called ________ are stored in neurons
and released when the cell is stimulated by a signal.
a. toxins
b. cytokines
c. chemokines
d. neurotransmitters

11. Which of these diseases can be prevented with a
vaccine for humans?
a. eastern equine encephalitis
b. western equine encephalitis
c. West Nile encephalitis
d. Japanese encephalitis

5. The central nervous system is made up of
a. sensory organs and muscles.
b. the brain and muscles.
c. the sensory organs and spinal cord.
d. the brain and spinal column.

12. Which of these diseases does NOT require the
introduction of foreign nucleic acid?
a. kuru
b. polio
c. rabies
d. St. Louis encephalitis

6. Which of the following organisms causes epidemic
meningitis cases at college campuses?
a. Haemophilus influenzae type b
b. Neisseria meningitidis
c. Streptococcus pneumoniae
d. Listeria monocytogenes
7. Which of the following is the most common cause of
neonatal meningitis?
a. Haemophilus influenzae b
b. Streptococcus agalactiae
c. Neisseria meningitidis
d. Streptococcus pneumoniae

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

13. Which of these is true of the Sabin but NOT the
Salk polio vaccine?
a. requires four injections
b. currently administered in the United States
c. mimics the normal route of infection
d. is an inactivated vaccine
14. Which of the following animals is NOT a typical
reservoir for the spread of rabies?
a. dog
b. bat
c. skunk
d. chicken

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1205

15. Which of these diseases results in meningitis
caused by an encapsulated yeast?
a. cryptococcosis
b. histoplasmosis
c. candidiasis
d. coccidiomycosis
16. What kind of stain is most commonly used to
visualize the capsule of cryptococcus?
a. Gram stain
b. simple stain
c. negative stain
d. fluorescent stain
17. Which of the following is the causative agent of
East African trypanosomiasis?
a. Trypanosoma cruzi
b. Trypanosoma vivax
c. Trypanosoma brucei rhodanese
d. Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
18. Which of the following is the causative agent of
primary amoebic meningoencephalitis?
a. Naegleria fowleri
b. Entameba histolyticum
c. Amoeba proteus
d. Acanthamoeba polyphaga
19. What is the biological vector for African sleeping
sickness?
a. mosquito
b. tsetse fly
c. deer tick
d. sand fly
20.
How
do
humans
usually
neurocysticercosis?
a. the bite of an infected arthropod
b. exposure to contaminated cat feces
c. swimming in contaminated water
d. ingestion of undercooked pork

contract

21. Which of these is the most important cause of adult
onset epilepsy?
a. neurocysticercosis
b. neurotoxoplasmosis
c. primary amoebic meningoencephalitis
d. African trypanosomiasis

1206

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Matching

22. Match each strategy for microbial invasion of the CNS with its description.
___intercellular entry

A. pathogen gains entry by infecting peripheral white blood cells

___transcellular entry

B. pathogen bypasses the blood-brain barrier by travel along the olfactory or
trigeminal cranial nerves

___leukocyte-facilitated
entry

C. pathogen passes through the cells of the blood-brain barrier

___nonhematogenous entry

D. pathogen passes between the cells of the blood-brain barrier

Fill in the Blank

23. The cell body of a neuron is called the ________.
24. A signal is transmitted down the ________ of a nerve cell.
25. The ________ is filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
26. The ________ ________ prevents access of microbes in the blood from gaining access to the central nervous
system.
27. The ________ are a set of membranes that cover and protect the brain.
28. The form of meningitis that can cause epidemics is caused by the pathogen ________.
29. The symptoms of tetanus are caused by the neurotoxin ________.
30. ________ is another name for leprosy.
31. Botulism prevents the release of the neurotransmitter ________.
32. ________ is a neurological disease that can be prevented with the DTaP vaccine.
33. Tetanus patients exhibit ________ when muscle spasms causes them to arch their backs.
34. The rogue form of the prion protein is called ________.
35. ________ are the most common reservoir for the rabies virus worldwide.
36. ________ was the scientist who developed the inactivated polio vaccine.
37. ________ is a prion disease of deer and elk.
38. The rogue form of prion protein exists primarily in the ________ conformation.
39. The ________ is the main virulence factor of Cryptococcus neoformans.
40. The drug of choice for fungal infections of the nervous system is ________.
41. The larval forms of a tapeworm are known as ________.
42. ________ sign appears as swollen lymph nodes at the back of the neck in early African trypanosomiasis.
43. ________ African trypanosomiasis causes a chronic form of sleeping sickness.
44. The definitive host for Toxoplasma gondii is ________.
45. Trypanosomes can evade the immune response through ________ variation.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

1207

Short Answer

46. Briefly describe the defenses of the brain against trauma and infection.
47. Describe how the blood-brain barrier is formed.
48. Identify the type of cell shown, as well as the following structures: axon, dendrite, myelin sheath, soma, and
synapse.

49. A physician suspects the lesion and pustule pictured here are indicative of tuberculoid leprosy. If the diagnosis
is correct, what microorganism would be found in a skin biopsy?

Figure 26.28 (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

50. Explain how a person could contract variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease by consuming products from a cow with
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease).
51. Why do nervous system infections by fungi require such long treatment times?
52. Briefly describe how humans are infected by Naegleria fowleri.
53. Briefly describe how humans can develop neurocysticercosis.

1208

Chapter 26 | Nervous System Infections

Critical Thinking

54. What important function does the blood-brain barrier serve? How might this barrier be problematic at times?
55. Explain how tetanospasmin functions to cause disease.
56. The most common causes of bacterial meningitis can be the result of infection by three very different bacteria.
Which bacteria are they and how are these microbes similar to each other?
57. Explain how infant botulism is different than foodborne botulism.
58. If the Sabin vaccine is being used to eliminate polio worldwide, explain why a country with a near zero infection
rate would opt to use the Salk vaccine but not the Sabin vaccine?
59. The graph shown tracks the body temperature of a patient infected with Trypanosoma brucei. How would you
describe this pattern, and why does it occur?

Figure 26.29 (credit: modification of work by Wellcome Images)

60. Fungal meningoencephalitis is often the ultimate cause of death for AIDS patients. What factors make these
infections more problematic than those of bacterial origin?
61. Compare East African trypanosomiasis with West African trypanosomiasis.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

443

Chapter 11

Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.1 Escherichia coli (left) may not appear to have much in common with an elephant (right), but the genetic
blueprints for these vastly different organisms are both encoded in DNA. (credit left: modification of work by NIAID;
credit right: modification of work by Tom Lubbock)

Chapter Outline
11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material
11.2 DNA Replication
11.3 RNA Transcription
11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)
11.5 Mutations
11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity
11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon Theory

Introduction
In 1954, French scientist and future Nobel laureate Jacques Monod (1910–1976) famously said, “What is true
in E. coli is true in the elephant,” suggesting that the biochemistry of life was maintained throughout evolution
and is shared in all forms of known life. Since Monod’s famous statement, we have learned a great deal about
the mechanisms of gene regulation, expression, and replication in living cells. All cells use DNA for information
storage, share the same genetic code, and use similar mechanisms to replicate and express it. Although many aspects
of genetics are universally shared, variations do exist among contemporary genetic systems. We now know that
within the shared overall theme of the genetic mechanism, there are significant differences among the three domains
of life: Eukarya, Archaea, and Bacteria. Additionally, viruses, cellular parasites but not themselves living cells,
show dramatic variation in their genetic material and the replication and gene expression processes. Some of these
differences have allowed us to engineer clinical tools such as antibiotics and antiviral drugs that specifically inhibit
the reproduction of pathogens yet are harmless to their hosts.

444

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material
Learning Objectives
• Explain the two functions of the genome
• Explain the meaning of the central dogma of molecular biology
• Differentiate between genotype and phenotype and explain how environmental factors influence phenotype

DNA serves two essential functions that deal with cellular information. First, DNA is the genetic material responsible
for inheritance and is passed from parent to offspring for all life on earth. To preserve the integrity of this genetic
information, DNA must be replicated with great accuracy, with minimal errors that introduce changes to the DNA
sequence. A genome contains the full complement of DNA within a cell and is organized into smaller, discrete units
called genes that are arranged on chromosomes and plasmids. The second function of DNA is to direct and regulate
the construction of the proteins necessary to a cell for growth and reproduction in a particular cellular environment.
A gene is composed of DNA that is “read” or transcribed to produce an RNA molecule during the process of
transcription. One major type of RNA molecule, called messenger RNA (mRNA), provides the information for the
ribosome to catalyze protein synthesis in a process called translation. The processes of transcription and translation
are collectively referred to as gene expression. Gene expression is the synthesis of a specific protein with a sequence
of amino acids that is encoded in the gene. The flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein is described
by the central dogma (Figure 11.2). This central dogma of molecular biology further elucidates the mechanism
behind Beadle and Tatum’s “one gene-one enzyme” hypothesis (see Using Microorganisms to Discover the
Secrets of Life). Each of the processes of replication, transcription, and translation includes the stages of 1)
initiation, 2) elongation (polymerization), and 3) termination. These stages will be described in more detail in this
chapter.

Figure 11.2 The central dogma states that DNA encodes messenger RNA, which, in turn, encodes protein.

A cell’s genotype is the full collection of genes it contains, whereas its phenotype is the set of observable
characteristics that result from those genes. The phenotype is the product of the array of proteins being produced by

Clinical Focus
Part 1
Mark is 60-year-old software engineer who suffers from type II diabetes, which he monitors and keeps under
control largely through diet and exercise. One spring morning, while doing some gardening, he scraped his
lower leg while walking through blackberry brambles. He continued working all day in the yard and did not
bother to clean the wound and treat it with antibiotic ointment until later that evening. For the next 2 days, his
leg became increasingly red, swollen, and warm to the touch. It was sore not only on the surface, but deep in
the muscle. After 24 hours, Mark developed a fever and stiffness in the affected leg. Feeling increasingly weak,
he called a neighbor, who drove him to the emergency department.

• Did Mark wait too long to seek medical attention? At what point do his signs and symptoms warrant
seeking medical attention?

• What types of infections or other conditions might be responsible for Mark’s symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

445

the cell at a given time, which is influenced by the cell’s genotype as well as interactions with the cell’s environment.
Genes code for proteins that have functions in the cell. Production of a specific protein encoded by an individual gene
often results in a distinct phenotype for the cell compared with the phenotype without that protein. For this reason, it
is also common to refer to the genotype of an individual gene and its phenotype. Although a cell’s genotype remains
constant, not all genes are used to direct the production of their proteins simultaneously. Cells carefully regulate
expression of their genes, only using genes to make specific proteins when those proteins are needed (Figure 11.3).

Figure 11.3 Phenotype is determined by the specific genes within a genotype that are expressed under specific
conditions. Although multiple cells may have the same genotype, they may exhibit a wide range of phenotypes
resulting from differences in patterns of gene expression in response to different environmental conditions.

• What are the two functions of DNA?
• Distinguish between the genotype and phenotype of a cell.
• How can cells have the same genotype but differ in their phenotype?

Eye on Ethics

Use and Abuse of Genome Data
Why can some humans harbor opportunistic pathogens like Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus,
or Streptococcus pyogenes, in their upper respiratory tracts but remain asymptomatic carriers, while other
individuals become seriously ill when infected? There is evidence suggesting that differences in susceptibility
to infection between patients may be a result, at least in part, of genetic differences between human hosts. For
example, genetic differences in human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) and red blood cell antigens among hosts
have been implicated in different immune responses and resulting disease progression from infection with H.
influenzae.
Because the genetic interplay between pathogen and host may contribute to disease outcomes, understanding
differences in genetic makeup between individuals may be an important clinical tool. Ecological genomics
is a relatively new field that seeks to understand how the genotypes of different organisms interact with
each other in nature. The field answers questions about how gene expression of one organism affects gene
expression of another. Medical applications of ecological genomics will focus on how pathogens interact with
specific individuals, as opposed to humans in general. Such analyses would allow medical professionals to

446

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

use knowledge of an individual’s genotype to apply more individualized plans for treatment and prevention of
disease.
With the advent of next-generation sequencing, it is relatively easy to obtain the entire genomic sequences of
pathogens; a bacterial genome can be sequenced in as little as a day.[1] The speed and cost of sequencing
the human genome has also been greatly reduced and, already, individuals can submit samples to receive
extensive reports on their personal genetic traits, including ancestry and carrier status for various genetic
diseases. As sequencing technologies progress further, such services will continue to become less expensive,
more extensive, and quicker.
However, as this day quickly approaches, there are many ethical concerns with which society must grapple.
For example, should genome sequencing be a standard practice for everybody? Should it be required by law
or by employers if it will lower health-care costs? If one refuses genome sequencing, does he or she forfeit his
or her right to health insurance coverage? For what purposes should the data be used? Who should oversee
proper use of these data? If genome sequencing reveals predisposition to a particular disease, do insurance
companies have the right to increase rates? Will employers treat an employee differently? Knowing that
environmental influences also affect disease development, how should the data on the presence of a particular
disease-causing allele in an individual be used ethically? The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of
2008 (GINA) currently prohibits discriminatory practices based on genetic information by both health insurance
companies and employers. However, GINA does not cover life, disability, or long-term care insurance policies.
Clearly, all members of society must continue to engage in conversations about these issues so that such
genomic data can be used to improve health care while simultaneously protecting an individual’s rights.

11.2 DNA Replication
Learning Objectives
• Explain the meaning of semiconservative DNA replication
• Explain why DNA replication is bidirectional and includes both a leading and lagging strand
• Explain why Okazaki fragments are formed
• Describe the process of DNA replication and the functions of the enzymes involved
• Identify the differences between DNA replication in bacteria and eukaryotes
• Explain the process of rolling circle replication

The elucidation of the structure of the double helix by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 provided a hint as to
how DNA is copied during the process of replication. Separating the strands of the double helix would provide two
templates for the synthesis of new complementary strands, but exactly how new DNA molecules were constructed
was still unclear. In one model, semiconservative replication, the two strands of the double helix separate during
DNA replication, and each strand serves as a template from which the new complementary strand is copied; after
replication, each double-stranded DNA includes one parental or “old” strand and one “new” strand. There were two
competing models also suggested: conservative and dispersive, which are shown in Figure 11.4.

1. D.J. Edwards, K.E. Holt. “Beginner’s Guide to Comparative Bacterial Genome Analysis Using Next-Generation Sequence Data.”
Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 3 no. 1 (2013):2.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

447

Figure 11.4 There were three models suggested for DNA replication. In the conservative model, parental DNA
strands (blue) remained associated in one DNA molecule while new daughter strands (red) remained associated in
newly formed DNA molecules. In the semiconservative model, parental strands separated and directed the synthesis
of a daughter strand, with each resulting DNA molecule being a hybrid of a parental strand and a daughter strand. In
the dispersive model, all resulting DNA strands have regions of double-stranded parental DNA and regions of doublestranded daughter DNA.

Matthew Meselson (1930–) and Franklin Stahl (1929–) devised an experiment in 1958 to test which of these
models correctly represents DNA replication (Figure 11.5). They grew E. coli for several generations in a medium
containing a “heavy” isotope of nitrogen (15N) that was incorporated into nitrogenous bases and, eventually, into
the DNA. This labeled the parental DNA. The E. coli culture was then shifted into a medium containing 14N and
allowed to grow for one generation. The cells were harvested and the DNA was isolated. The DNA was separated
by ultracentrifugation, during which the DNA formed bands according to its density. DNA grown in 15N would be
expected to form a band at a higher density position than that grown in 14N. Meselson and Stahl noted that after
one generation of growth in 14N, the single band observed was intermediate in position in between DNA of cells
grown exclusively in 15N or 14N. This suggested either a semiconservative or dispersive mode of replication. Some
cells were allowed to grow for one more generation in 14N and spun again. The DNA harvested from cells grown
for two generations in 14N formed two bands: one DNA band was at the intermediate position between 15N and 14N,
and the other corresponded to the band of 14N DNA. These results could only be explained if DNA replicates in a
semiconservative manner. Therefore, the other two models were ruled out. As a result of this experiment, we now
know that during DNA replication, each of the two strands that make up the double helix serves as a template from
which new strands are copied. The new strand will be complementary to the parental or “old” strand. The resulting
DNA molecules have the same sequence and are divided equally into the two daughter cells.

448

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.5 Meselson and Stahl experimented with E. coli grown first in heavy nitrogen (15N) then in 14N. DNA
grown in 15N (blue band) was heavier than DNA grown in 14N (red band), and sedimented to a lower level on
ultracentrifugation. After one round of replication, the DNA sedimented halfway between the 15N and 14N levels
(purple band), ruling out the conservative model of replication. After a second round of replication, the dispersive
model of replication was ruled out. These data supported the semiconservative replication model.

• What would have been the conclusion of Meselson and Stahl’s experiment if, after the first generation, they
had found two bands of DNA?

DNA Replication in Bacteria
DNA replication has been well studied in bacteria primarily because of the small size of the genome and the mutants
that are available. E. coli has 4.6 million base pairs (Mbp) in a single circular chromosome and all of it is replicated in
approximately 42 minutes, starting from a single origin of replication and proceeding around the circle bidirectionally
(i.e., in both directions). This means that approximately 1000 nucleotides are added per second. The process is quite
rapid and occurs with few errors.
DNA replication uses a large number of proteins and enzymes (Table 11.1). One of the key players is the enzyme
DNA polymerase, also known as DNA pol. In bacteria, three main types of DNA polymerases are known: DNA pol
I, DNA pol II, and DNA pol III. It is now known that DNA pol III is the enzyme required for DNA synthesis; DNA
pol I and DNA pol II are primarily required for repair. DNA pol III adds deoxyribonucleotides each complementary to
a nucleotide on the template strand, one by one to the 3’-OH group of the growing DNA chain. The addition of these

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

449

nucleotides requires energy. This energy is present in the bonds of three phosphate groups attached to each nucleotide
(a triphosphate nucleotide), similar to how energy is stored in the phosphate bonds of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
(Figure 11.6). When the bond between the phosphates is broken and diphosphate is released, the energy released
allows for the formation of a covalent phosphodiester bond by dehydration synthesis between the incoming nucleotide
and the free 3’-OH group on the growing DNA strand.

Figure 11.6 This structure shows the guanosine triphosphate deoxyribonucleotide that is incorporated into a
growing DNA strand by cleaving the two end phosphate groups from the molecule and transferring the energy to the
sugar phosphate bond. The other three nucleotides form analogous structures.

Initiation
The initiation of replication occurs at specific nucleotide sequence called the origin of replication, where various
proteins bind to begin the replication process. E. coli has a single origin of replication (as do most prokaryotes), called
oriC, on its one chromosome. The origin of replication is approximately 245 base pairs long and is rich in adeninethymine (AT) sequences.
Some of the proteins that bind to the origin of replication are important in making single-stranded regions of DNA
accessible for replication. Chromosomal DNA is typically wrapped around histones (in eukaryotes and archaea) or
histone-like proteins (in bacteria), and is supercoiled, or extensively wrapped and twisted on itself. This packaging
makes the information in the DNA molecule inaccessible. However, enzymes called topoisomerases change the
shape and supercoiling of the chromosome. For bacterial DNA replication to begin, the supercoiled chromosome is
relaxed by topoisomerase II, also called DNA gyrase. An enzyme called helicase then separates the DNA strands
by breaking the hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs. Recall that AT sequences have fewer hydrogen
bonds and, hence, have weaker interactions than guanine-cytosine (GC) sequences. These enzymes require ATP
hydrolysis. As the DNA opens up, Y-shaped structures called replication forks are formed. Two replication forks
are formed at the origin of replication, allowing for bidirectional replication and formation of a structure that looks
like a bubble when viewed with a transmission electron microscope; as a result, this structure is called a replication
bubble. The DNA near each replication fork is coated with single-stranded binding proteins to prevent the singlestranded DNA from rewinding into a double helix.
Once single-stranded DNA is accessible at the origin of replication, DNA replication can begin. However, DNA
pol III is able to add nucleotides only in the 5’ to 3’ direction (a new DNA strand can be only extended in this
direction). This is because DNA polymerase requires a free 3’-OH group to which it can add nucleotides by forming
a covalent phosphodiester bond between the 3’-OH end and the 5’ phosphate of the next nucleotide. This also means
that it cannot add nucleotides if a free 3’-OH group is not available, which is the case for a single strand of DNA.
The problem is solved with the help of an RNA sequence that provides the free 3’-OH end. Because this sequence
allows the start of DNA synthesis, it is appropriately called the primer. The primer is five to 10 nucleotides long and
complementary to the parental or template DNA. It is synthesized by RNA primase, which is an RNA polymerase.
Unlike DNA polymerases, RNA polymerases do not need a free 3’-OH group to synthesize an RNA molecule. Now
that the primer provides the free 3’-OH group, DNA polymerase III can now extend this RNA primer, adding DNA
nucleotides one by one that are complementary to the template strand (Figure 11.4).

Elongation
During elongation in DNA replication, the addition of nucleotides occurs at its maximal rate of about 1000
nucleotides per second. DNA polymerase III can only extend in the 5’ to 3’ direction, which poses a problem at

450

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

the replication fork. The DNA double helix is antiparallel; that is, one strand is oriented in the 5’ to 3’ direction
and the other is oriented in the 3’ to 5’ direction (see Structure and Function of DNA). During replication,
one strand, which is complementary to the 3’ to 5’ parental DNA strand, is synthesized continuously toward the
replication fork because polymerase can add nucleotides in this direction. This continuously synthesized strand is
known as the leading strand. The other strand, complementary to the 5’ to 3’ parental DNA, grows away from
the replication fork, so the polymerase must move back toward the replication fork to begin adding bases to a new
primer, again in the direction away from the replication fork. It does so until it bumps into the previously synthesized
strand and then it moves back again (Figure 11.7). These steps produce small DNA sequence fragments known
as Okazaki fragments, each separated by RNA primer. Okazaki fragments are named after the Japanese research
team and married couple Reiji and Tsuneko Okazaki, who first discovered them in 1966. The strand with the Okazaki
fragments is known as the lagging strand, and its synthesis is said to be discontinuous.
The leading strand can be extended from one primer alone, whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for each of
the short Okazaki fragments. The overall direction of the lagging strand will be 3’ to 5’, and that of the leading strand
5’ to 3’. A protein called the sliding clamp holds the DNA polymerase in place as it continues to add nucleotides.
The sliding clamp is a ring-shaped protein that binds to the DNA and holds the polymerase in place. Beyond its role
in initiation, topoisomerase also prevents the overwinding of the DNA double helix ahead of the replication fork as
the DNA is opening up; it does so by causing temporary nicks in the DNA helix and then resealing it. As synthesis
proceeds, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA. The primers are removed by the exonuclease activity of DNA
polymerase I, and the gaps are filled in. The nicks that remain between the newly synthesized DNA (that replaced the
RNA primer) and the previously synthesized DNA are sealed by the enzyme DNA ligase that catalyzes the formation
of covalent phosphodiester linkage between the 3’-OH end of one DNA fragment and the 5’ phosphate end of the
other fragment, stabilizing the sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA molecule.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

451

Figure 11.7 At the origin of replication, topoisomerase II relaxes the supercoiled chromosome. Two replication forks
are formed by the opening of the double-stranded DNA at the origin, and helicase separates the DNA strands, which
are coated by single-stranded binding proteins to keep the strands separated. DNA replication occurs in both
directions. An RNA primer complementary to the parental strand is synthesized by RNA primase and is elongated by
DNA polymerase III through the addition of nucleotides to the 3’-OH end. On the leading strand, DNA is synthesized
continuously, whereas on the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches called Okazaki fragments. RNA
primers within the lagging strand are removed by the exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I, and the Okazaki
fragments are joined by DNA ligase.

Termination
Once the complete chromosome has been replicated, termination of DNA replication must occur. Although much
is known about initiation of replication, less is known about the termination process. Following replication, the
resulting complete circular genomes of prokaryotes are concatenated, meaning that the circular DNA chromosomes
are interlocked and must be separated from each other. This is accomplished through the activity of bacterial
topoisomerase IV, which introduces double-stranded breaks into DNA molecules, allowing them to separate from
each other; the enzyme then reseals the circular chromosomes. The resolution of concatemers is an issue unique
to prokaryotic DNA replication because of their circular chromosomes. Because both bacterial DNA gyrase and
topoisomerase IV are distinct from their eukaryotic counterparts, these enzymes serve as targets for a class of
antimicrobial drugs called quinolones.

452

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

The Molecular Machinery Involved in Bacterial DNA Replication
Enzyme or
Factor

Function

DNA pol I

Exonuclease activity removes RNA primer and replaces it with newly synthesized DNA

DNA pol III

Main enzyme that adds nucleotides in the 5’ to 3’ direction

Helicase

Opens the DNA helix by breaking hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous bases

Ligase

Seals the gaps between the Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand to create one
continuous DNA strand

Primase

Synthesizes RNA primers needed to start replication

Singlestranded
binding
proteins

Bind to single-stranded DNA to prevent hydrogen bonding between DNA strands, reforming
double-stranded DNA

Sliding clamp

Helps hold DNA pol III in place when nucleotides are being added

Topoisomerase
II (DNA
gyrase)

Relaxes supercoiled chromosome to make DNA more accessible for the initiation of
replication; helps relieve the stress on DNA when unwinding, by causing breaks and then
resealing the DNA

Topoisomerase
IV

Introduces single-stranded break into concatenated chromosomes to release them from each
other, and then reseals the DNA

Table 11.1

• Which enzyme breaks the hydrogen bonds holding the two strands of DNA together so that replication can
occur?

• Is it the lagging strand or the leading strand that is synthesized in the direction toward the opening of the
replication fork?

• Which enzyme is responsible for removing the RNA primers in newly replicated bacterial DNA?

DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
Eukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger than prokaryotic genomes and are typically composed of
multiple linear chromosomes (Table 11.2). The human genome, for example, has 3 billion base pairs per haploid set
of chromosomes, and 6 billion base pairs are inserted during replication. There are multiple origins of replication on
each eukaryotic chromosome (Figure 11.8); the human genome has 30,000 to 50,000 origins of replication. The rate
of replication is approximately 100 nucleotides per second—10 times slower than prokaryotic replication.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

453

Figure 11.8 Eukaryotic chromosomes are typically linear, and each contains multiple origins of replication.

The essential steps of replication in eukaryotes are the same as in prokaryotes. Before replication can start, the DNA
has to be made available as a template. Eukaryotic DNA is highly supercoiled and packaged, which is facilitated
by many proteins, including histones (see Structure and Function of Cellular Genomes). At the origin of
replication, a prereplication complex composed of several proteins, including helicase, forms and recruits other
enzymes involved in the initiation of replication, including topoisomerase to relax supercoiling, single-stranded
binding protein, RNA primase, and DNA polymerase. Following initiation of replication, in a process similar to that
found in prokaryotes, elongation is facilitated by eukaryotic DNA polymerases. The leading strand is continuously
synthesized by the eukaryotic polymerase enzyme pol δ, while the lagging strand is synthesized by pol ε. A sliding
clamp protein holds the DNA polymerase in place so that it does not fall off the DNA. The enzyme ribonuclease H
(RNase H), instead of a DNA polymerase as in bacteria, removes the RNA primer, which is then replaced with DNA
nucleotides. The gaps that remain are sealed by DNA ligase.
Because eukaryotic chromosomes are linear, one might expect that their replication would be more straightforward.
As in prokaryotes, the eukaryotic DNA polymerase can add nucleotides only in the 5’ to 3’ direction. In the leading
strand, synthesis continues until it reaches either the end of the chromosome or another replication fork progressing
in the opposite direction. On the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches, each of which is initiated by
a separate primer. When the replication fork reaches the end of the linear chromosome, there is no place to make a
primer for the DNA fragment to be copied at the end of the chromosome. These ends thus remain unpaired and, over
time, they may get progressively shorter as cells continue to divide.
The ends of the linear chromosomes are known as telomeres and consist of noncoding repetitive sequences. The
telomeres protect coding sequences from being lost as cells continue to divide. In humans, a six base-pair sequence,
TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times to form the telomere. The discovery of the enzyme telomerase (Figure
11.9) clarified our understanding of how chromosome ends are maintained. Telomerase contains a catalytic part and
a built-in RNA template. It attaches to the end of the chromosome, and complementary bases to the RNA template
are added on the 3’ end of the DNA strand. Once the 3’ end of the lagging strand template is sufficiently elongated,
DNA polymerase can add the nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. In this way, the ends of
the chromosomes are replicated. In humans, telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adult stem cells; it is not
active in adult somatic cells and may be associated with the aging of these cells. Eukaryotic microbes including fungi
and protozoans also produce telomerase to maintain chromosomal integrity. For her discovery of telomerase and its
action, Elizabeth Blackburn (1948–) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine or Physiology in 2009.

454

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.9 In eukaryotes, the ends of the linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase
enzyme.

Comparison of Bacterial and Eukaryotic Replication
Property

Bacteria

Eukaryotes

Genome structure

Single circular chromosome

Multiple linear chromosomes

Number of origins per chromosome

Single

Multiple

Rate of replication

1000 nucleotides per second

100 nucleotides per second

Telomerase

Not present

Present

RNA primer removal

DNA pol I

RNase H

Strand elongation

DNA pol III

pol δ, pol ε

Table 11.2

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

455

Link to Learning
This animation (https://openstax.org/l/22DNAreplicani) illustrates the process
of DNA replication.

• How does the origin of replication differ between eukaryotes and prokaryotes?
• What polymerase enzymes are responsible for DNA synthesis during eukaryotic replication?
• What is found at the ends of the chromosomes in eukaryotes and why?

DNA Replication of Extrachromosomal Elements: Plasmids and Viruses
To copy their nucleic acids, plasmids and viruses frequently use variations on the pattern of DNA replication
described for prokaryote genomes. For more information on the wide range of viral replication strategies, see The
Viral Life Cycle.

Rolling Circle Replication
Whereas many bacterial plasmids (see Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells) replicate by a process
similar to that used to copy the bacterial chromosome, other plasmids, several bacteriophages, and some viruses of
eukaryotes use rolling circle replication (Figure 11.10). The circular nature of plasmids and the circularization
of some viral genomes on infection make this possible. Rolling circle replication begins with the enzymatic nicking
of one strand of the double-stranded circular molecule at the double-stranded origin (dso) site. In bacteria, DNA
polymerase III binds to the 3’-OH group of the nicked strand and begins to unidirectionally replicate the DNA using
the un-nicked strand as a template, displacing the nicked strand as it does so. Completion of DNA replication at the
site of the original nick results in full displacement of the nicked strand, which may then recircularize into a singlestranded DNA molecule. RNA primase then synthesizes a primer to initiate DNA replication at the single-stranded
origin (sso) site of the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecule, resulting in a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA)
molecule identical to the other circular DNA molecule.

456

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.10 The process of rolling circle replication results in the synthesis of a single new copy of the circular
DNA molecule, as shown here.

• Is there a lagging strand in rolling circle replication? Why or why not?

11.3 RNA Transcription
Learning Objectives
• Explain how RNA is synthesized using DNA as a template
• Distinguish between transcription in prokaryotes and eukaryotes

During the process of transcription, the information encoded within the DNA sequence of one or more genes is
transcribed into a strand of RNA, also called an RNA transcript. The resulting single-stranded RNA molecule,
composed of ribonucleotides containing the bases adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and uracil (U), acts as a
mobile molecular copy of the original DNA sequence. Transcription in prokaryotes and in eukaryotes requires the
DNA double helix to partially unwind in the region of RNA synthesis. The unwound region is called a transcription
bubble. Transcription of a particular gene always proceeds from one of the two DNA strands that acts as a template,
the so-called antisense strand. The RNA product is complementary to the template strand of DNA and is almost
identical to the nontemplate DNA strand, or the sense strand. The only difference is that in RNA, all of the T
nucleotides are replaced with U nucleotides; during RNA synthesis, U is incorporated when there is an A in the
complementary antisense strand.

Transcription in Bacteria
Bacteria use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe all of their genes. Like DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase
adds nucleotides one by one to the 3’-OH group of the growing nucleotide chain. One critical difference in activity
between DNA polymerase and RNA polymerase is the requirement for a 3’-OH onto which to add nucleotides: DNA
polymerase requires such a 3’-OH group, thus necessitating a primer, whereas RNA polymerase does not. During

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

457

transcription, a ribonucleotide complementary to the DNA template strand is added to the growing RNA strand and a
covalent phosphodiester bond is formed by dehydration synthesis between the new nucleotide and the last one added.
In E. coli, RNA polymerase comprises six polypeptide subunits, five of which compose the polymerase core enzyme
responsible for adding RNA nucleotides to a growing strand. The sixth subunit is known as sigma (σ). The σ factor
enables RNA polymerase to bind to a specific promoter, thus allowing for the transcription of various genes. There
are various σ factors that allow for transcription of various genes.

Initiation
The initiation of transcription begins at a promoter, a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machinery binds
and initiates transcription. The nucleotide pair in the DNA double helix that corresponds to the site from which the
first 5’ RNA nucleotide is transcribed is the initiation site. Nucleotides preceding the initiation site are designated
“upstream,” whereas nucleotides following the initiation site are called “downstream” nucleotides. In most cases,
promoters are located just upstream of the genes they regulate. Although promoter sequences vary among bacterial
genomes, a few elements are conserved. At the –10 and –35 positions within the DNA prior to the initiation site
(designated +1), there are two promoter consensus sequences, or regions that are similar across all promoters and
across various bacterial species. The –10 consensus sequence, called the TATA box, is TATAAT. The –35 sequence is
recognized and bound by σ.

Elongation
The elongation in transcription phase begins when the σ subunit dissociates from the polymerase, allowing the core
enzyme to synthesize RNA complementary to the DNA template in a 5’ to 3’ direction at a rate of approximately 40
nucleotides per second. As elongation proceeds, the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme and
rewound behind it (Figure 11.11).

Figure 11.11 During elongation, the bacterial RNA polymerase tracks along the DNA template, synthesizes mRNA
in the 5’ to 3’ direction, and unwinds and rewinds the DNA as it is read.

Termination
Once a gene is transcribed, the bacterial polymerase must dissociate from the DNA template and liberate the newly
made RNA. This is referred to as termination of transcription. The DNA template includes repeated nucleotide
sequences that act as termination signals, causing RNA polymerase to stall and release from the DNA template,
freeing the RNA transcript.

458

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• Where does σ factor of RNA polymerase bind DNA to start transcription?
• What occurs to initiate the polymerization activity of RNA polymerase?
• Where does the signal to end transcription come from?

Transcription in Eukaryotes
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with a few significant
differences (see Table 11.3). Eukaryotes use three different polymerases, RNA polymerases I, II, and III, all
structurally distinct from the bacterial RNA polymerase. Each transcribes a different subset of genes. Interestingly,
archaea contain a single RNA polymerase that is more closely related to eukaryotic RNA polymerase II than to its
bacterial counterpart. Eukaryotic mRNAs are also usually monocistronic, meaning that they each encode only a single
polypeptide, whereas prokaryotic mRNAs of bacteria and archaea are commonly polycistronic, meaning that they
encode multiple polypeptides.
The most important difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes is the latter’s membrane-bound nucleus, which
influences the ease of use of RNA molecules for protein synthesis. With the genes bound in a nucleus, the eukaryotic
cell must transport protein-encoding RNA molecules to the cytoplasm to be translated. Protein-encoding primary
transcripts, the RNA molecules directly synthesized by RNA polymerase, must undergo several processing steps
to protect these RNA molecules from degradation during the time they are transferred from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm and translated into a protein. For example, eukaryotic mRNAs may last for several hours, whereas the
typical prokaryotic mRNA lasts no more than 5 seconds.
The primary transcript (also called pre-mRNA) is first coated with RNA-stabilizing proteins to protect it from
degradation while it is processed and exported out of the nucleus. The first type of processing begins while the
primary transcript is still being synthesized; a special 7-methylguanosine nucleotide, called the 5’ cap, is added to
the 5’ end of the growing transcript. In addition to preventing degradation, factors involved in subsequent protein
synthesis recognize the cap, which helps initiate translation by ribosomes. Once elongation is complete, another
processing enzyme then adds a string of approximately 200 adenine nucleotides to the 3’ end, called the poly-A tail.
This modification further protects the pre-mRNA from degradation and signals to cellular factors that the transcript
needs to be exported to the cytoplasm.
Eukaryotic genes that encode polypeptides are composed of coding sequences called exons (ex-on signifies that they
are expressed) and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role). Transcribed RNA
sequences corresponding to introns do not encode regions of the functional polypeptide and are removed from the premRNA during processing. It is essential that all of the intron-encoded RNA sequences are completely and precisely
removed from a pre-mRNA before protein synthesis so that the exon-encoded RNA sequences are properly joined
together to code for a functional polypeptide. If the process errs by even a single nucleotide, the sequences of the
rejoined exons would be shifted, and the resulting polypeptide would be nonfunctional. The process of removing
intron-encoded RNA sequences and reconnecting those encoded by exons is called RNA splicing and is facilitated by
the action of a spliceosome containing small nuclear ribonucleo proteins (snRNPs). Intron-encoded RNA sequences
are removed from the pre-mRNA while it is still in the nucleus. Although they are not translated, introns appear to
have various functions, including gene regulation and mRNA transport. On completion of these modifications, the
mature transcript, the mRNA that encodes a polypeptide, is transported out of the nucleus, destined for the cytoplasm
for translation. Introns can be spliced out differently, resulting in various exons being included or excluded from
the final mRNA product. This process is known as alternative splicing. The advantage of alternative splicing is that
different types of mRNA transcripts can be generated, all derived from the same DNA sequence. In recent years, it
has been shown that some archaea also have the ability to splice their pre-mRNA.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

459

Comparison of Transcription in Bacteria Versus Eukaryotes
Property

Bacteria

Eukaryotes

Number of polypeptides encoded per mRNA

Monocistronic or polycistronic

Exclusively monocistronic

Strand elongation

core + σ = holoenzyme

RNA polymerases I, II, or III

Addition of 5’ cap

No

Yes

Addition of 3’ poly-A tail

No

Yes

Splicing of pre-mRNA

No

Yes

Table 11.3

Link to Learning
Visualize how mRNA splicing (https://openstax.org/l/22mrnasplice) happens
by watching the process in action in this video. See how introns are removed
during RNA splicing (https://openstax.org/l/22rnasplice) here.

• In eukaryotic cells, how is the RNA transcript from a gene for a protein modified after it is transcribed?
• Do exons or introns contain information for protein sequences?

Clinical Focus
Part 2
In the emergency department, a nurse told Mark that he had made a good decision to come to the hospital
because his symptoms indicated an infection that had gotten out of control. Mark’s symptoms had progressed,
with the area of skin affected and the amount of swelling increasing. Within the affected area, a rash had
begun, blistering and small gas pockets underneath the outermost layer of skin had formed, and some of the
skin was becoming gray. Based on the putrid smell of the pus draining from one of the blisters, the rapid
progression of the infection, and the visual appearance of the affected skin, the physician immediately began
treatment for necrotizing fasciitis. Mark’s physician ordered a culture of the fluid draining from the blister and
also ordered blood work, including a white blood cell count.
Mark was admitted to the intensive care unit and began intravenous administration of a broad-spectrum
antibiotic to try to minimize further spread of the infection. Despite antibiotic therapy, Mark’s condition
deteriorated quickly. Mark became confused and dizzy. Within a few hours of his hospital admission, his
blood pressure dropped significantly and his breathing became shallower and more rapid. Additionally,
blistering increased, with the blisters intensifying in color to purplish black, and the wound itself seemed to be
progressing rapidly up Mark’s leg.

• What are possible causative agents of Mark’s necrotizing fasciitis?

460

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• What are some possible explanations for why the antibiotic treatment does not seem to be working?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)
Learning Objectives
• Describe the genetic code and explain why it is considered almost universal
• Explain the process of translation and the functions of the molecular machinery of translation
• Compare translation in eukaryotes and prokaryotes

The synthesis of proteins consumes more of a cell’s energy than any other metabolic process. In turn, proteins account
for more mass than any other macromolecule of living organisms. They perform virtually every function of a cell,
serving as both functional (e.g., enzymes) and structural elements. The process of translation, or protein synthesis,
the second part of gene expression, involves the decoding by a ribosome of an mRNA message into a polypeptide
product.

The Genetic Code
Translation of the mRNA template converts nucleotide-based genetic information into the “language” of amino acids
to create a protein product. A protein sequence consists of 20 commonly occurring amino acids. Each amino acid is
defined within the mRNA by a triplet of nucleotides called a codon. The relationship between an mRNA codon and
its corresponding amino acid is called the genetic code.
The three-nucleotide code means that there is a total of 64 possible combinations (43, with four different nucleotides
possible at each of the three different positions within the codon). This number is greater than the number of amino
acids and a given amino acid is encoded by more than one codon (Figure 11.12). This redundancy in the genetic
code is called degeneracy. Typically, whereas the first two positions in a codon are important for determining which
amino acid will be incorporated into a growing polypeptide, the third position, called the wobble position, is less
critical. In some cases, if the nucleotide in the third position is changed, the same amino acid is still incorporated.
Whereas 61 of the 64 possible triplets code for amino acids, three of the 64 codons do not code for an amino acid; they
terminate protein synthesis, releasing the polypeptide from the translation machinery. These are called stop codons
or nonsense codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to specifying the amino acid
methionine, it also typically serves as the start codon to initiate translation. The reading frame, the way nucleotides
in mRNA are grouped into codons, for translation is set by the AUG start codon near the 5’ end of the mRNA. Each
set of three nucleotides following this start codon is a codon in the mRNA message.
The genetic code is nearly universal. With a few exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic code for
protein synthesis, which is powerful evidence that all extant life on earth shares a common origin. However, unusual
amino acids such as selenocysteine and pyrrolysine have been observed in archaea and bacteria. In the case of
selenocysteine, the codon used is UGA (normally a stop codon). However, UGA can encode for selenocysteine using
a stem-loop structure (known as the selenocysteine insertion sequence, or SECIS element), which is found at the 3’
untranslated region of the mRNA. Pyrrolysine uses a different stop codon, UAG. The incorporation of pyrrolysine
requires the pylS gene and a unique transfer RNA (tRNA) with a CUA anticodon.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

461

Figure 11.12 This figure shows the genetic code for translating each nucleotide triplet in mRNA into an amino acid
or a termination signal in a nascent protein. The first letter of a codon is shown vertically on the left, the second letter
of a codon is shown horizontally across the top, and the third letter of a codon is shown vertically on the right. (credit:
modification of work by National Institutes of Health)

• How many bases are in each codon?
• What amino acid is coded for by the codon AAU?
• What happens when a stop codon is reached?

The Protein Synthesis Machinery
In addition to the mRNA template, many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of translation.
The composition of each component varies across taxa; for instance, ribosomes may consist of different numbers
of ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and polypeptides depending on the organism. However, the general structures and
functions of the protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the
input of an mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors.

Ribosomes
A ribosome is a complex macromolecule composed of catalytic rRNAs (called ribozymes) and structural rRNAs, as
well as many distinct polypeptides. Mature rRNAs make up approximately 50% of each ribosome. Prokaryotes have
70S ribosomes, whereas eukaryotes have 80S ribosomes in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum, and 70S
ribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are not
synthesizing proteins and reassociate during the initiation of translation. In E. coli, the small subunit is described
as 30S (which contains the 16S rRNA subunit), and the large subunit is 50S (which contains the 5S and 23S rRNA
subunits), for a total of 70S (Svedberg units are not additive). Eukaryote ribosomes have a small 40S subunit (which
contains the 18S rRNA subunit) and a large 60S subunit (which contains the 5S, 5.8S and 28S rRNA subunits), for a

462

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

total of 80S. The small subunit is responsible for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit binds tRNAs
(discussed in the next subsection).
Each mRNA molecule is simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synthesizing protein in the same direction:
reading the mRNA from 5’ to 3’ and synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus. The
complete structure containing an mRNA with multiple associated ribosomes is called a polyribosome (or polysome).
In both bacteria and archaea, before transcriptional termination occurs, each protein-encoding transcript is already
being used to begin synthesis of numerous copies of the encoded polypeptide(s) because the processes of transcription
and translation can occur concurrently, forming polyribosomes (Figure 11.13). The reason why transcription and
translation can occur simultaneously is because both of these processes occur in the same 5’ to 3’ direction, they both
occur in the cytoplasm of the cell, and because the RNA transcript is not processed once it is transcribed. This allows
a prokaryotic cell to respond to an environmental signal requiring new proteins very quickly. In contrast, in eukaryotic
cells, simultaneous transcription and translation is not possible. Although polyribosomes also form in eukaryotes,
they cannot do so until RNA synthesis is complete and the RNA molecule has been modified and transported out of
the nucleus.

Figure 11.13 In prokaryotes, multiple RNA polymerases can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous
ribosomes concurrently translate the mRNA transcripts into polypeptides. In this way, a specific protein can rapidly
reach a high concentration in the bacterial cell.

Transfer RNAs
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are structural RNA molecules and, depending on the species, many different types of tRNAs
exist in the cytoplasm. Bacterial species typically have between 60 and 90 types. Serving as adaptors, each tRNA type
binds to a specific codon on the mRNA template and adds the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain.
Therefore, tRNAs are the molecules that actually “translate” the language of RNA into the language of proteins. As
the adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a small package.
The tRNA molecule interacts with three factors: aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, ribosomes, and mRNA.
Mature tRNAs take on a three-dimensional structure when complementary bases exposed in the single-stranded RNA
molecule hydrogen bond with each other (Figure 11.14). This shape positions the amino-acid binding site, called
the CCA amino acid binding end, which is a cytosine-cytosine-adenine sequence at the 3’ end of the tRNA, and the
anticodon at the other end. The anticodon is a three-nucleotide sequence that bonds with an mRNA codon through
complementary base pairing.
An amino acid is added to the end of a tRNA molecule through the process of tRNA “charging,” during which
each tRNA molecule is linked to its correct or cognate amino acid by a group of enzymes called aminoacyl tRNA
synthetases. At least one type of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the 20 amino acids. During this
process, the amino acid is first activated by the addition of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and then transferred to
the tRNA, making it a charged tRNA, and AMP is released.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

463

Figure 11.14 (a) After folding caused by intramolecular base pairing, a tRNA molecule has one end that contains
the anticodon, which interacts with the mRNA codon, and the CCA amino acid binding end. (b) A space-filling model
is helpful for visualizing the three-dimensional shape of tRNA. (c) Simplified models are useful when drawing complex
processes such as protein synthesis.

• Describe the structure and composition of the prokaryotic ribosome.
• In what direction is the mRNA template read?
• Describe the structure and function of a tRNA.

The Mechanism of Protein Synthesis
Translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we will explore how translation occurs in E. coli, a
representative prokaryote, and specify any differences between bacterial and eukaryotic translation.

Initiation
The initiation of protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex. In E. coli, this complex
involves the small 30S ribosome, the mRNA template, three initiation factors that help the ribosome assemble
correctly, guanosine triphosphate (GTP) that acts as an energy source, and a special initiator tRNA carrying N-formylmethionine (fMet-tRNAfMet) (Figure 11.15). The initiator tRNA interacts with the start codon AUG of the mRNA
and carries a formylated methionine (fMet). Because of its involvement in initiation, fMet is inserted at the beginning
(N terminus) of every polypeptide chain synthesized by E. coli. In E. coli mRNA, a leader sequence upstream of the
first AUG codon, called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (also known as the ribosomal binding site AGGAGG), interacts
through complementary base pairing with the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This interaction anchors
the 30S ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mRNA template. At this point, the 50S ribosomal subunit
then binds to the initiation complex, forming an intact ribosome.

464

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

In eukaryotes, initiation complex formation is similar, with the following differences:
• The initiator tRNA is a different specialized tRNA carrying methionine, called Met-tRNAi
• Instead of binding to the mRNA at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes

the 5’ cap of the eukaryotic mRNA, then tracks along the mRNA in the 5’ to 3’ direction until the AUG start
codon is recognized. At this point, the 60S subunit binds to the complex of Met-tRNAi, mRNA, and the 40S
subunit.

Figure 11.15 Translation in bacteria begins with the formation of the initiation complex, which includes the small
ribosomal subunit, the mRNA, the initiator tRNA carrying N-formyl-methionine, and initiation factors. Then the 50S
subunit binds, forming an intact ribosome.

Elongation
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongation of translation are the same. In E. coli, the binding of the
50S ribosomal subunit to produce the intact ribosome forms three functionally important ribosomal sites: The A
(aminoacyl) site binds incoming charged aminoacyl tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds charged tRNAs carrying
amino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated from
their corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases dissociated tRNAs so that they can be recharged with free amino
acids. There is one notable exception to this assembly line of tRNAs: During initiation complex formation, bacterial
fMet−tRNAfMet or eukaryotic Met-tRNAi enters the P site directly without first entering the A site, providing a free
A site ready to accept the tRNA corresponding to the first codon after the AUG.
Elongation proceeds with single-codon movements of the ribosome each called a translocation event. During each
translocation event, the charged tRNAs enter at the A site, then shift to the P site, and then finally to the E site for
removal. Ribosomal movements, or steps, are induced by conformational changes that advance the ribosome by three

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

465

bases in the 3’ direction. Peptide bonds form between the amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tRNA
and the carboxyl group of the amino acid attached to the P-site tRNA. The formation of each peptide bond is catalyzed
by peptidyl transferase, an RNA-based ribozyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. The amino acid
bound to the P-site tRNA is also linked to the growing polypeptide chain. As the ribosome steps across the mRNA,
the former P-site tRNA enters the E site, detaches from the amino acid, and is expelled. Several of the steps during
elongation, including binding of a charged aminoacyl tRNA to the A site and translocation, require energy derived
from GTP hydrolysis, which is catalyzed by specific elongation factors. Amazingly, the E. coli translation apparatus
takes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino acid, meaning that a 200 amino-acid protein can be translated in just 10
seconds.

Termination
The termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered for which
there is no complementary tRNA. On aligning with the A site, these nonsense codons are recognized by release
factors in prokaryotes and eukaryotes that result in the P-site amino acid detaching from its tRNA, releasing the newly
made polypeptide. The small and large ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA and from each other; they are
recruited almost immediately into another translation init iation complex.
In summary, there are several key features that distinguish prokaryotic gene expression from that seen in eukaryotes.
These are illustrated in Figure 11.16 and listed in Figure 11.17.

Figure 11.16 (a) In prokaryotes, the processes of transcription and translation occur simultaneously in the
cytoplasm, allowing for a rapid cellular response to an environmental cue. (b) In eukaryotes, transcription is localized
to the nucleus and translation is localized to the cytoplasm, separating these processes and necessitating RNA
processing for stability.

466

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.17

Protein Targeting, Folding, and Modification
During and after translation, polypeptides may need to be modified before they are biologically active. Posttranslational modifications include:
1. removal of translated signal sequences—short tails of amino acids that aid in directing a protein to a specific

cellular compartment
2. proper “folding” of the polypeptide and association of multiple polypeptide subunits, often facilitated by

chaperone proteins, into a distinct three-dimensional structure
3. proteolytic processing of an inactive polypeptide to release an active protein component, and
4. various chemical modifications (e.g., phosphorylation, methylation, or glycosylation) of individual amino

acids.

• What are the components of the initiation complex for translation in prokaryotes?
• What are two differences between initiation of prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation?
• What occurs at each of the three active sites of the ribosome?
• What causes termination of translation?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

467

11.5 Mutations
Learning Objectives
• Compare point mutations and frameshift mutations
• Describe the differences between missense, nonsense, and silent mutations
• Describe the differences between light and dark repair
• Explain how different mutagens act
• Explain why the Ames test can be used to detect carcinogens
• Analyze sequences of DNA and identify examples of types of mutations

A mutation is a heritable change in the DNA sequence of an organism. The resulting organism, called a mutant,
may have a recognizable change in phenotype compared to the wild type, which is the phenotype most commonly
observed in nature. A change in the DNA sequence is conferred to mRNA through transcription, and may lead to
an altered amino acid sequence in a protein on translation. Because proteins carry out the vast majority of cellular
functions, a change in amino acid sequence in a protein may lead to an altered phenotype for the cell and organism.

Effects of Mutations on DNA Sequence
There are several types of mutations that are classified according to how the DNA molecule is altered. One type,
called a point mutation, affects a single base and most commonly occurs when one base is substituted or replaced by
another. Mutations also result from the addition of one or more bases, known as an insertion, or the removal of one
or more bases, known as a deletion.

• What type of a mutation occurs when a gene has two fewer nucleotides in its sequence?

Effects of Mutations on Protein Structure and Function
Point mutations may have a wide range of effects on protein function (Figure 11.18). As a consequence of the
degeneracy of the genetic code, a point mutation will commonly result in the same amino acid being incorporated into
the resulting polypeptide despite the sequence change. This change would have no effect on the protein’s structure,
and is thus called a silent mutation. A missense mutation results in a different amino acid being incorporated into
the resulting polypeptide. The effect of a missense mutation depends on how chemically different the new amino acid
is from the wild-type amino acid. The location of the changed amino acid within the protein also is important. For
example, if the changed amino acid is part of the enzyme’s active site, then the effect of the missense mutation may be
significant. Many missense mutations result in proteins that are still functional, at least to some degree. Sometimes the
effects of missense mutations may be only apparent under certain environmental conditions; such missense mutations
are called conditional mutations. Rarely, a missense mutation may be beneficial. Under the right environmental
conditions, this type of mutation may give the organism that harbors it a selective advantage. Yet another type of
point mutation, called a nonsense mutation, converts a codon encoding an amino acid (a sense codon) into a stop
codon (a nonsense codon). Nonsense mutations result in the synthesis of proteins that are shorter than the wild type
and typically not functional.
Deletions and insertions also cause various effects. Because codons are triplets of nucleotides, insertions or deletions
in groups of three nucleotides may lead to the insertion or deletion of one or more amino acids and may not cause
significant effects on the resulting protein’s functionality. However, frameshift mutations, caused by insertions or
deletions of a number of nucleotides that are not a multiple of three are extremely problematic because a shift in the

468

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

reading frame results (Figure 11.18). Because ribosomes read the mRNA in triplet codons, frameshift mutations can
change every amino acid after the point of the mutation. The new reading frame may also include a stop codon before
the end of the coding sequence. Consequently, proteins made from genes containing frameshift mutations are nearly
always nonfunctional.

Figure 11.18 Mutations can lead to changes in the protein sequence encoded by the DNA.

• What are the reasons a nucleotide change in a gene for a protein might not have any effect on the phenotype
of that gene?

• Is it possible for an insertion of three nucleotides together after the fifth nucleotide in a protein-coding gene
to produce a protein that is shorter than normal? How or how not?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

469

Micro Connections
A Beneficial Mutation
Since the first case of infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was reported in 1981, nearly 40
million people have died from HIV infection,[2] the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS). The virus targets helper T cells that play a key role in bridging the innate and adaptive immune
response, infecting and killing cells normally involved in the body’s response to infection. There is no cure for
HIV infection, but many drugs have been developed to slow or block the progression of the virus. Although
individuals around the world may be infected, the highest prevalence among people 15–49 years old is in subSaharan Africa, where nearly one person in 20 is infected, accounting for greater than 70% of the infections
worldwide[3] (Figure 11.19). Unfortunately, this is also a part of the world where prevention strategies and
drugs to treat the infection are the most lacking.
In recent years, scientific interest has been piqued by the discovery of a few individuals from northern Europe
who are resistant to HIV infection. In 1998, American geneticist Stephen J. O’Brien at the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) and colleagues published the results of their genetic analysis of more than 4,000 individuals.
These indicated that many individuals of Eurasian descent (up to 14% in some ethnic groups) have a deletion
mutation, called CCR5-delta 32, in the gene encoding CCR5. CCR5 is a coreceptor found on the surface of T
cells that is necessary for many strains of the virus to enter the host cell. The mutation leads to the production
of a receptor to which HIV cannot effectively bind and thus blocks viral entry. People homozygous for this
mutation have greatly reduced susceptibility to HIV infection, and those who are heterozygous have some
protection from infection as well.
It is not clear why people of northern European descent, specifically, carry this mutation, but its prevalence
seems to be highest in northern Europe and steadily decreases in populations as one moves south. Research
indicates that the mutation has been present since before HIV appeared and may have been selected for in
European populations as a result of exposure to the plague or smallpox. This mutation may protect individuals
from plague (caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis) and smallpox (caused by the variola virus) because this
receptor may also be involved in these diseases. The age of this mutation is a matter of debate, but estimates
suggest it appeared between 1875 years to 225 years ago, and may have been spread from Northern Europe
through Viking invasions.
This exciting finding has led to new avenues in HIV research, including looking for drugs to block CCR5 binding
to HIV in individuals who lack the mutation. Although DNA testing to determine which individuals carry the
CCR5-delta 32 mutation is possible, there are documented cases of individuals homozygous for the mutation
contracting HIV. For this reason, DNA testing for the mutation is not widely recommended by public health
officials so as not to encourage risky behavior in those who carry the mutation. Nevertheless, inhibiting the
binding of HIV to CCR5 continues to be a valid strategy for the development of drug therapies for those infected
with HIV.

2. World Health Organization. “ Global Health Observatory (GHO) Data, HIV/AIDS.” http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/. Accessed August 5,
2016.
3. World Health Organization. “ Global Health Observatory (GHO) Data, HIV/AIDS.” http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/. Accessed August 5,
2016.

470

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.19 HIV is highly prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, but its prevalence is quite low in some other
parts of the world.

Causes of Mutations
Mistakes in the process of DNA replication can cause spontaneous mutations to occur. The error rate of DNA
polymerase is one incorrect base per billion base pairs replicated. Exposure to mutagens can cause induced
mutations, which are various types of chemical agents or radiation (Table 11.4). Exposure to a mutagen can increase
the rate of mutation more than 1000-fold. Mutagens are often also carcinogens, agents that cause cancer. However,
whereas nearly all carcinogens are mutagenic, not all mutagens are necessarily carcinogens.

Chemical Mutagens
Various types of chemical mutagens interact directly with DNA either by acting as nucleoside analogs or by
modifying nucleotide bases. Chemicals called nucleoside analogs are structurally similar to normal nucleotide bases
and can be incorporated into DNA during replication (Figure 11.20). These base analogs induce mutations because
they often have different base-pairing rules than the bases they replace. Other chemical mutagens can modify normal
DNA bases, resulting in different base-pairing rules. For example, nitrous acid deaminates cytosine, converting it to
uracil. Uracil then pairs with adenine in a subsequent round of replication, resulting in the conversion of a GC base
pair to an AT base pair. Nitrous acid also deaminates adenine to hypoxanthine, which base pairs with cytosine instead
of thymine, resulting in the conversion of a TA base pair to a CG base pair.
Chemical mutagens known as intercalating agents work differently. These molecules slide between the stacked
nitrogenous bases of the DNA double helix, distorting the molecule and creating atypical spacing between nucleotide
base pairs (Figure 11.21). As a result, during DNA replication, DNA polymerase may either skip replicating

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

471

several nucleotides (creating a deletion) or insert extra nucleotides (creating an insertion). Either outcome may lead
to a frameshift mutation. Combustion products like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are particularly dangerous
intercalating agents that can lead to mutation-caused cancers. The intercalating agents ethidium bromide and acridine
orange are commonly used in the laboratory to stain DNA for visualization and are potential mutagens.

Figure 11.20 (a) 2-aminopurine nucleoside (2AP) structurally is a nucleoside analog to adenine nucleoside,
whereas 5-bromouracil (5BU) is a nucleoside analog to thymine nucleoside. 2AP base pairs with C, converting an AT
base pair to a GC base pair after several rounds of replication. 5BU pairs with G, converting an AT base pair to a GC
base pair after several rounds of replication. (b) Nitrous acid is a different type of chemical mutagen that modifies
already existing nucleoside bases like C to produce U, which base pairs with A. This chemical modification, as shown
here, results in converting a CG base pair to a TA base pair.

472

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.21 Intercalating agents, such as acridine, introduce atypical spacing between base pairs, resulting in DNA
polymerase introducing either a deletion or an insertion, leading to a potential frameshift mutation.

Radiation
Exposure to either ionizing or nonionizing radiation can each induce mutations in DNA, although by different
mechanisms. Strong ionizing radiation like X-rays and gamma rays can cause single- and double-stranded breaks
in the DNA backbone through the formation of hydroxyl radicals on radiation exposure (Figure 11.22). Ionizing
radiation can also modify bases; for example, the deamination of cytosine to uracil, analogous to the action of
nitrous acid.[4] Ionizing radiation exposure is used to kill microbes to sterilize medical devices and foods, because
of its dramatic nonspecific effect in damaging DNA, proteins, and other cellular components (see Using Physical
Methods to Control Microorganisms).
Nonionizing radiation, like ultraviolet light, is not energetic enough to initiate these types of chemical changes.
However, nonionizing radiation can induce dimer formation between two adjacent pyrimidine bases, commonly two
thymines, within a nucleotide strand. During thymine dimer formation, the two adjacent thymines become covalently
linked and, if left unrepaired, both DNA replication and transcription are stalled at this point. DNA polymerase may
proceed and replicate the dimer incorrectly, potentially leading to frameshift or point mutations.

4. K.R. Tindall et al. “Changes in DNA Base Sequence Induced by Gamma-Ray Mutagenesis of Lambda Phage and Prophage.” Genetics
118 no. 4 (1988):551–560.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

473

Figure 11.22 (a) Ionizing radiation may lead to the formation of single-stranded and double-stranded breaks in the
sugar-phosphate backbone of DNA, as well as to the modification of bases (not shown). (b) Nonionizing radiation like
ultraviolet light can lead to the formation of thymine dimers, which can stall replication and transcription and introduce
frameshift or point mutations.

A Summary of Mutagenic Agents
Mutagenic Agents

Mode of Action

Effect on DNA

Resulting Type of
Mutation

Nucleoside analogs
2-aminopurine

Is inserted in place of A but
base pairs with C

Converts AT to GC
base pair

Point

5-bromouracil

Is inserted in place of T but
base pairs with G

Converts AT to GC
base pair

Point

Deaminates C to U

Converts GC to AT
base pair

Point

Distorts double helix, creates
unusual spacing between
nucleotides

Introduces small
deletions and
insertions

Frameshift

X-rays, γ-rays

Forms hydroxyl radicals

Causes single- and
double-strand DNA
breaks

Repair
mechanisms may
introduce mutations

X-rays, γ-rays

Modifies bases (e.g.,
deaminating C to U)

Converts GC to AT
base pair

Point

Causes DNA
replication errors

Frameshift or point

Nucleotide-modifying agent
Nitrous oxide

Intercalating agents
Acridine orange, ethidium
bromide, polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons
Ionizing radiation

Nonionizing radiation
Ultraviolet

Table 11.4

Forms pyrimidine (usually
thymine) dimers

474

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• How does a base analog introduce a mutation?
• How does an intercalating agent introduce a mutation?
• What type of mutagen causes thymine dimers?

DNA Repair
The process of DNA replication is highly accurate, but mistakes can occur spontaneously or be induced by mutagens.
Uncorrected mistakes can lead to serious consequences for the phenotype. Cells have developed several repair
mechanisms to minimize the number of mutations that persist.

Proofreading
Most of the mistakes introduced during DNA replication are promptly corrected by most DNA polymerases through
a function called proofreading. In proofreading, the DNA polymerase reads the newly added base, ensuring that it is
complementary to the corresponding base in the template strand before adding the next one. If an incorrect base has
been added, the enzyme makes a cut to release the wrong nucleotide and a new base is added.

Mismatch Repair
Some errors introduced during replication are corrected shortly after the replication machinery has moved. This
mechanism is called mismatch repair. The enzymes involved in this mechanism recognize the incorrectly added
nucleotide, excise it, and replace it with the correct base. One example is the methyl-directed mismatch repair in E.
coli. The DNA is hemimethylated. This means that the parental strand is methylated while the newly synthesized
daughter strand is not. It takes several minutes before the new strand is methylated. Proteins MutS, MutL, and MutH
bind to the hemimethylated site where the incorrect nucleotide is found. MutH cuts the nonmethylated strand (the
new strand). An exonuclease removes a portion of the strand (including the incorrect nucleotide). The gap formed is
then filled in by DNA pol III and ligase.

Repair of Thymine Dimers
Because the production of thymine dimers is common (many organisms cannot avoid ultraviolet light), mechanisms
have evolved to repair these lesions. In nucleotide excision repair (also called dark repair), enzymes remove the
pyrimidine dimer and replace it with the correct nucleotides (Figure 11.23). In E. coli, the DNA is scanned by an
enzyme complex. If a distortion in the double helix is found that was introduced by the pyrimidine dimer, the enzyme
complex cuts the sugar-phosphate backbone several bases upstream and downstream of the dimer, and the segment
of DNA between these two cuts is then enzymatically removed. DNA pol I replaces the missing nucleotides with the
correct ones and DNA ligase seals the gap in the sugar-phosphate backbone.
The direct repair (also called light repair) of thymine dimers occurs through the process of photoreactivation in
the presence of visible light. An enzyme called photolyase recognizes the distortion in the DNA helix caused by
the thymine dimer and binds to the dimer. Then, in the presence of visible light, the photolyase enzyme changes
conformation and breaks apart the thymine dimer, allowing the thymines to again correctly base pair with the
adenines on the complementary strand. Photoreactivation appears to be present in all organisms, with the exception
of placental mammals, including humans. Photoreactivation is particularly important for organisms chronically
exposed to ultraviolet radiation, like plants, photosynthetic bacteria, algae, and corals, to prevent the accumulation of
mutations caused by thymine dimer formation.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

475

Figure 11.23 Bacteria have two mechanisms for repairing thymine dimers. (a) In nucleotide excision repair, an
enzyme complex recognizes the distortion in the DNA complex around the thymine dimer and cuts and removes the
damaged DNA strand. The correct nucleotides are replaced by DNA pol I and the nucleotide strand is sealed by DNA
ligase. (b) In photoreactivation, the enzyme photolyase binds to the thymine dimer and, in the presence of visible
light, breaks apart the dimer, restoring the base pairing of the thymines with complementary adenines on the opposite
DNA strand.

476

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• During mismatch repair, how does the enzyme recognize which is the new and which is the old strand?
• How does an intercalating agent introduce a mutation?
• What type of mutation does photolyase repair?

Identifying Bacterial Mutants
One common technique used to identify bacterial mutants is called replica plating. This technique is used to detect
nutritional mutants, called auxotrophs, which have a mutation in a gene encoding an enzyme in the biosynthesis
pathway of a specific nutrient, such as an amino acid. As a result, whereas wild-type cells retain the ability to
grow normally on a medium lacking the specific nutrient, auxotrophs are unable to grow on such a medium. During
replica plating (Figure 11.24), a population of bacterial cells is mutagenized and then plated as individual cells on a
complex nutritionally complete plate and allowed to grow into colonies. Cells from these colonies are removed from
this master plate, often using sterile velvet. This velvet, containing cells, is then pressed in the same orientation onto
plates of various media. At least one plate should also be nutritionally complete to ensure that cells are being properly
transferred between the plates. The other plates lack specific nutrients, allowing the researcher to discover various
auxotrophic mutants unable to produce specific nutrients. Cells from the corresponding colony on the nutritionally
complete plate can be used to recover the mutant for further study.

• Why are cells plated on a nutritionally complete plate in addition to nutrient-deficient plates when looking for
a mutant?

The Ames Test
The Ames test, developed by Bruce Ames (1928–) in the 1970s, is a method that uses bacteria for rapid, inexpensive
screening of the carcinogenic potential of new chemical compounds. The test measures the mutation rate associated
with exposure to the compound, which, if elevated, may indicate that exposure to this compound is associated with
greater cancer risk. The Ames test uses as the test organism a strain of Salmonella typhimurium that is a histidine
auxotroph, unable to synthesize its own histidine because of a mutation in an essential gene required for its synthesis.
After exposure to a potential mutagen, these bacteria are plated onto a medium lacking histidine, and the number of
mutants regaining the ability to synthesize histidine is recorded and compared with the number of such mutants that
arise in the absence of the potential mutagen (Figure 11.25). Chemicals that are more mutagenic will bring about
more mutants with restored histidine synthesis in the Ames test. Because many chemicals are not directly mutagenic
but are metabolized to mutagenic forms by liver enzymes, rat liver extract is commonly included at the start of this
experiment to mimic liver metabolism. After the Ames test is conducted, compounds identified as mutagenic are
further tested for their potential carcinogenic properties by using other models, including animal models like mice
and rats.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

477

Figure 11.24 Identification of auxotrophic mutants, like histidine auxotrophs, is done using replica plating. After
mutagenesis, colonies that grow on nutritionally complete medium but not on medium lacking histidine are identified
as histidine auxotrophs.

Figure 11.25 The Ames test is used to identify mutagenic, potentially carcinogenic chemicals. A Salmonella
histidine auxotroph is used as the test strain, exposed to a potential mutagen/carcinogen. The number of reversion
mutants capable of growing in the absence of supplied histidine is counted and compared with the number of natural
reversion mutants that arise in the absence of the potential mutagen.

• What mutation is used as an indicator of mutation rate in the Ames test?

478

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• Why can the Ames test work as a test for carcinogenicity?

11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity
Learning Objectives
• Compare the processes of transformation, transduction, and conjugation
• Explain how asexual gene transfer results in prokaryotic genetic diversity
• Explain the structure and consequences for bacterial genetic diversity of transposons

Typically, when we consider genetic transfer, we think of vertical gene transfer, the transmission of genetic
information from generation to generation. Vertical gene transfer is by far the main mode of transmission of
genetic information in all cells. In sexually reproducing organisms, crossing-over events and independent assortment
of individual chromosomes during meiosis contribute to genetic diversity in the population. Genetic diversity is
also introduced during sexual reproduction, when the genetic information from two parents, each with different
complements of genetic information, are combined, producing new combinations of parental genotypes in the diploid
offspring. The occurrence of mutations also contributes to genetic diversity in a population. Genetic diversity of
offspring is useful in changing or inconsistent environments and may be one reason for the evolutionary success of
sexual reproduction.
When prokaryotes and eukaryotes reproduce asexually, they transfer a nearly identical copy of their genetic material
to their offspring through vertical gene transfer. Although asexual reproduction produces more offspring more
quickly, any benefits of diversity among those offspring are lost. How then do organisms whose dominant
reproductive mode is asexual create genetic diversity? In prokaryotes, horizontal gene transfer (HGT), the
introduction of genetic material from one organism to another organism within the same generation, is an important
way to introduce genetic diversity. HGT allows even distantly related species to share genes, influencing their
phenotypes. It is thought that HGT is more prevalent in prokaryotes but that only a small fraction of the prokaryotic
genome may be transferred by this type of transfer at any one time. As the phenomenon is investigated more
thoroughly, it may be revealed to be even more common. Many scientists believe that HGT and mutation are
significant sources of genetic variation, the raw material for the process of natural selection, in prokaryotes. Although
HGT is more common among evolutionarily related organisms, it may occur between any two species that live
together in a natural community.
HGT in prokaryotes is known to occur by the three primary mechanisms that are illustrated in Figure 11.26:
1. Transformation: naked DNA is taken up from the environment
2. Transduction: genes are transferred between cells in a virus (see The Viral Life Cycle)
3. Conjugation: use of a hollow tube called a conjugation pilus to transfer genes between cells

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

479

Figure 11.26 There are three prokaryote-specific mechanisms leading to horizontal gene transfer in prokaryotes. a)
In transformation, the cell takes up DNA directly from the environment. The DNA may remain separate as a plasmid
or be incorporated into the host genome. b) In transduction, a bacteriophage injects DNA that is a hybrid of viral DNA
and DNA from a previously infected bacterial cell. c) In conjugation, DNA is transferred between cells through a
cytoplasmic bridge after a conjugation pilus draws the two cells close enough to form the bridge.

• What are three ways sexual reproduction introduces genetic variation into offspring?
• What is a benefit of asexual reproduction?
• What are the three mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer in prokaryotes?

Transformation
Frederick Griffith was the first to demonstrate the process of transformation. In 1928, he showed that live,
nonpathogenic Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria could be transformed into pathogenic bacteria through exposure
to a heat-killed pathogenic strain. He concluded that some sort of agent, which he called the “transforming principle,”
had been passed from the dead pathogenic bacteria to the live, nonpathogenic bacteria. In 1944, Oswald Avery
(1877–1955), Colin MacLeod (1909–1972), and Maclyn McCarty (1911–2005) demonstrated that the transforming
principle was DNA (see Using Microorganisms to Discover the Secrets of Life).
In transformation, the prokaryote takes up naked DNA found in its environment and that is derived from other cells
that have lysed on death and released their contents, including their genome, into the environment. Many bacteria are
naturally competent, meaning that they actively bind to environmental DNA, transport it across their cell envelopes
into their cytoplasm, and make it single stranded. Typically, double-stranded foreign DNA within cells is destroyed
by nucleases as a defense against viral infection. However, these nucleases are usually ineffective against singlestranded DNA, so this single-stranded DNA within the cell has the opportunity to recombine into the bacterial
genome. A molecule of DNA that contains fragments of DNA from different organisms is called recombinant DNA.
(Recombinant DNA will be discussed in more detail in Microbes and the Tools of Genetic Engineering.)
If the bacterium incorporates the new DNA into its own genome through recombination, the bacterial cell may
gain new phenotypic properties. For example, if a nonpathogenic bacterium takes up DNA for a toxin gene from a
pathogen and then incorporates it into its chromosome, it, too, may become pathogenic. Plasmid DNA may also be
taken up by competent bacteria and confer new properties to the cell. Overall, transformation in nature is a relatively
inefficient process because environmental DNA levels are low because of the activity of nucleases that are also

480

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

released during cellular lysis. Additionally, genetic recombination is inefficient at incorporating new DNA sequences
into the genome.
In nature, bacterial transformation is an important mechanism for the acquisition of genetic elements encoding
virulence factors and antibiotic resistance. Genes encoding resistance to antimicrobial compounds have been shown to
be widespread in nature, even in environments not influenced by humans. These genes, which allow microbes living
in mixed communities to compete for limited resources, can be transferred within a population by transformation, as
well as by the other processes of HGT. In the laboratory, we can exploit the natural process of bacterial transformation
for genetic engineering to make a wide variety of medicinal products, as discussed in Microbes and the Tools of
Genetic Engineering.

• Why does a bacterial cell make environmental DNA brought into the cell into a single-stranded form?

Transduction
Viruses that infect bacteria (bacteriophages) may also move short pieces of chromosomal DNA from one bacterium
to another in a process called transduction (see Figure 6.9). Recall that in generalized transduction, any piece
of chromosomal DNA may be transferred to a new host cell by accidental packaging of chromosomal DNA into a
phage head during phage assembly. By contrast, specialized transduction results from the imprecise excision of a
lysogenic prophage from the bacterial chromosome such that it carries with it a piece of the bacterial chromosome
from either side of the phage’s integration site to a new host cell. As a result, the host may acquire new properties.
This process is called lysogenic conversion. Of medical significance, a lysogenic phage may carry with it a virulence
gene to its new host. Once inserted into the new host’s chromosome, the new host may gain pathogenicity. Several
pathogenic bacteria, including Corynebacterium diphtheriae (the causative agent of diphtheria) and Clostridium
botulinum (the causative agent of botulism), are virulent because of the introduction of toxin-encoding genes by
lysogenic bacteriophages, affirming the clinical relevance of transduction in the exchange of genes involved in
infectious disease. Archaea have their own viruses that translocate genetic material from one individual to another.

• What is the agent of transduction of prokaryotic cells?
• In specialized transduction, where does the transducing piece of DNA come from?

Case in Point
The Clinical Consequences of Transduction
Paul, a 23-year-old relief worker from Atlanta, traveled to Haiti in 2011 to provide aid following the 2010
earthquake. After working there for several weeks, he suddenly began experiencing abdominal distress,
including severe cramping, nausea, vomiting, and watery diarrhea. He also began to experience intense
muscle cramping. At a local clinic, the physician suspected that Paul’s symptoms were caused by cholera
because there had been a cholera outbreak after the earthquake. Because cholera is transmitted by the
fecal-oral route, breaches in sanitation infrastructure, such as often occur following natural disasters, may
precipitate outbreaks. The physician confirmed the presumptive diagnosis using a cholera dipstick test. He

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

481

then prescribed Paul a single dose of doxycycline, as well as oral rehydration salts, instructing him to drink
significant amounts of clean water.
Cholera is caused by the gram-negative curved rod Vibrio cholerae (Figure 11.27). Its symptoms largely
result from the production of the cholera toxin (CT), which ultimately activates a chloride transporter to pump
chloride ions out of the epithelial cells into the gut lumen. Water then follows the chloride ions, causing the
prolific watery diarrhea characteristic of cholera. The gene encoding the cholera toxin is incorporated into the
bacterial chromosome of V. cholerae through infection of the bacterium with the lysogenic filamentous CTX
phage, which carries the CT gene and introduces it into the chromosome on integration of the prophage. Thus,
pathogenic strains of V. cholerae result from horizontal gene transfer by specialized transduction.

• Why are outbreaks of cholera more common as a result of a natural disaster?
• Why is muscle cramping a common symptom of cholera? Why is treatment with oral rehydration salts
so important for the treatment of cholera?

• In areas stricken by cholera, what are some strategies that people could use to prevent disease
transmission?

Figure 11.27 A scanning electron micrograph of Vibrio cholerae shows its characteristic curved rod shape.

Conjugation
In conjugation, DNA is directly transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a conjugation pilus, which
brings the organisms into contact with one another. In E. coli, the genes encoding the ability to conjugate are located
on a bacterial plasmid called the F plasmid, also known as the fertility factor, and the conjugation pilus is called
the F pilus. The F-plasmid genes encode both the proteins composing the F pilus and those involved in rolling circle
replication of the plasmid. Cells containing the F plasmid, capable of forming an F pilus, are called F+ cells or donor
cells, and those lacking an F plasmid are called F− cells or recipient cells.

Conjugation of the F Plasmid
During typical conjugation in E. coli, the F pilus of an F+ cell comes into contact with an F– cell and retracts, bringing
the two cell envelopes into contact (Figure 11.28). Then a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells at the site
of the conjugation pilus. As rolling circle replication of the F plasmid occurs in the F+ cell, a single-stranded copy of
the F plasmid is transferred through the cytoplasmic bridge to the F− cell, which then synthesizes the complementary
strand, making it double stranded. The F− cell now becomes an F+ cell capable of making its own conjugation pilus.
Eventually, in a mixed bacterial population containing both F+ and F− cells, all cells will become F+ cells. Genes on
the E. coli F plasmid also encode proteins preventing conjugation between F+ cells.

482

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.28 Typical conjugation of the F plasmid from an F+ cell to an F− cell is brought about by the conjugation
pilus bringing the two cells into contact. A single strand of the F plasmid is transferred to the F − cell, which is then
made double stranded.

Conjugation of F’ and Hfr Cells
Although typical conjugation in E. coli results in the transfer of the F-plasmid DNA only, conjugation may also
transfer chromosomal DNA. This is because the F plasmid occasionally integrates into the bacterial chromosome
through recombination between the plasmid and the chromosome, forming an Hfr cell (Figure 11.29). “Hfr” refers
to the high frequency of recombination seen when recipient F− cells receive genetic information from Hfr cells
through conjugation. Similar to the imprecise excision of a prophage during specialized transduction, the integrated
F plasmid may also be imprecisely excised from the chromosome, producing an F’ plasmid that carries with it some
chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site. On conjugation, this DNA is introduced to the recipient cell and
may be either maintained as part of the F’ plasmid or be recombined into the recipient cell’s bacterial chromosome.
Hfr cells may also treat the bacterial chromosome like an enormous F plasmid and attempt to transfer a copy of it
to a recipient F− cell. Because the bacterial chromosome is so large, transfer of the entire chromosome takes a long
time (Figure 11.30). However, contact between bacterial cells during conjugation is transient, so it is unusual for the
entire chromosome to be transferred. Host chromosomal DNA near the integration site of the F plasmid, displaced by
the unidirectional process of rolling circle replication, is more likely to be transferred and recombined into a recipient
cell’s chromosome than host genes farther away. Thus, the relative location of bacterial genes on the Hfr cell’s genome
can be mapped based on when they are transferred through conjugation. As a result, prior to the age of widespread
bacterial genome sequencing, distances on prokaryotic genome maps were often measured in minutes.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

483

Figure 11.29 (a) The F plasmid can occasionally integrate into the bacterial chromosome, producing an Hfr cell. (b)
Imprecise excision of the F plasmid from the chromosome of an Hfr cell may lead to the production of an F’ plasmid
that carries chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site. This F’ plasmid can be transferred to an F − cell by
conjugation.

Figure 11.30 (a) An Hfr cell may attempt to transfer the entire bacterial chromosome to an F− cell, treating the
chromosome like an extremely large F plasmid. However, contact between cells during conjugation is temporary.
Chromosomal genes closest to the integration site (gene 1) that are first displaced during rolling circle replication will
be transferred more quickly than genes far away from the integration site (gene 4). Hence, they are more likely to be
recombined into the recipient F− cell’s chromosome. (b) The time it takes for a gene to be transferred, as detected by
recombination into the F− cell’s chromosome, can be used to generate a map of the bacterial genome, such as this
genomic map of E. coli. Note that it takes approximately 100 minutes for the entire genome (4.6 Mbp) of an Hfr strain
of E. coli to be transferred by conjugation.

Consequences and Applications of Conjugation
Plasmids are an important type of extrachromosomal DNA element in bacteria and, in those cells that harbor them,
are considered to be part of the bacterial genome. From a clinical perspective, plasmids often code for genes involved
in virulence. For example, genes encoding proteins that make a bacterial cell resistant to a particular antibiotic are
encoded on R plasmids. R plasmids, in addition to their genes for antimicrobial resistance, contain genes that control
conjugation and transfer of the plasmid. R plasmids are able to transfer between cells of the same species and between
cells of different species. Single R plasmids commonly contain multiple genes conferring resistance to multiple
antibiotics.

484

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Genes required for the production of various toxins and molecules important for colonization during infection
may also be found encoded on plasmids. For example, verotoxin-producing strains of E. coli (VTEC) appear to
have acquired the genes encoding the Shiga toxin from its gram-negative relative Shigella dysenteriae through the
acquisition of a large plasmid encoding this toxin. VTEC causes severe diarrheal disease that may result in hemolytic
uremic syndrome (HUS), which may be lead to kidney failure and death.
In nonclinical settings, bacterial genes that encode metabolic enzymes needed to degrade specialized atypical
compounds like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are also frequently encoded on plasmids. Additionally,
certain plasmids have the ability to move from bacterial cells to other cell types, like those of plants and animals,
through mechanisms distinct from conjugation. Such mechanisms and their use in genetic engineering are covered in
Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics.

Link to Learning
Click through this animation (https://openstax.org/l/22conjuganim) to learn
more about the process of conjugation.

• What type of replication occurs during conjugation?
• What occurs to produce an Hfr E. coli cell?
• What types of traits are encoded on plasmids?

Transposition
Genetic elements called transposons (transposable elements), or “jumping genes,” are molecules of DNA that
include special inverted repeat sequences at their ends and a gene encoding the enzyme transposase (Figure 11.31).
Transposons allow the entire sequence to independently excise from one location in a DNA molecule and integrate
into the DNA elsewhere through a process called transposition. Transposons were originally discovered in maize
(corn) by American geneticist Barbara McClintock (1902–1992) in the 1940s. Transposons have since been found
in all types of organisms, both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Thus, unlike the three previous mechanisms discussed,
transposition is not prokaryote-specific. Most transposons are nonreplicative, meaning they move in a “cut-and-paste”
fashion. Some may be replicative, however, retaining their location in the DNA while making a copy to be inserted
elsewhere (“copy and paste”). Because transposons can move within a DNA molecule, from one DNA molecule to
another, or even from one cell to another, they have the ability to introduce genetic diversity. Movement within the
same DNA molecule can alter phenotype by inactivating or activating a gene.
Transposons may carry with them additional genes, moving these genes from one location to another with them. For
example, bacterial transposons can relocate antibiotic resistance genes, moving them from chromosomes to plasmids.
This mechanism has been shown to be responsible for the colocalization of multiple antibiotic resistance genes on
a single R plasmid in Shigella strains causing bacterial dysentery. Such an R plasmid can then be easily transferred
among a bacterial population through the process of conjugation.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

485

Figure 11.31 Transposons are segments of DNA that have the ability to move from one location to another because
they code for the enzyme transposase. In this example, a nonreplicative transposon has disrupted gene B. The
consequence of that the transcription of gene B may now have been interrupted.

• What are two ways a transposon can affect the phenotype of a cell it moves to?

Table 11.5 summarizes the processes discussed in this section.
Summary of Mechanisms of Genetic Diversity in Prokaryotes
Term

Definition

Conjugation

Transfer of DNA through direct contact using a conjugation pilus

Transduction

Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria in which genes are transferred through viral
infection

Transformation

Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in which naked environmental DNA is taken up by a
bacterial cell

Transposition

Process whereby DNA independently excises from one location in a DNA molecule and
integrates elsewhere

Table 11.5

Clinical Focus
Part 3
Despite continued antibiotic treatment, Mark’s infection continued to progress rapidly. The infected region
continued to expand, and he had to be put on a ventilator to help him breathe. Mark’s physician ordered
surgical removal of the infected tissue. Following an initial surgery, Mark’s wound was monitored daily to
ensure that the infection did not return, but it continued to spread.

486

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

After two additional rounds of surgery, the infection finally seemed to be contained. A few days later, Mark was
removed from the ventilator and was able to breathe on his own. However, he had lost a great deal of skin and
soft tissue on his lower leg.

• Why does the removal of infected tissue stem the infection?
• What are some likely complications of this method of treatment?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon Theory
Learning Objectives
• Compare inducible operons and repressible operons
• Describe why regulation of operons is important

Each nucleated cell in a multicellular organism contains copies of the same DNA. Similarly, all cells in two pure
bacterial cultures inoculated from the same starting colony contain the same DNA, with the exception of changes that
arise from spontaneous mutations. If each cell in a multicellular organism has the same DNA, then how is it that cells
in different parts of the organism’s body exhibit different characteristics? Similarly, how is it that the same bacterial
cells within two pure cultures exposed to different environmental conditions can exhibit different phenotypes? In both
cases, each genetically identical cell does not turn on, or express, the same set of genes. Only a subset of proteins in
a cell at a given time is expressed.
Genomic DNA contains both structural genes, which encode products that serve as cellular structures or enzymes, and
regulatory genes, which encode products that regulate gene expression. The expression of a gene is a highly regulated
process. Whereas regulating gene expression in multicellular organisms allows for cellular differentiation, in singlecelled organisms like prokaryotes, it primarily ensures that a cell’s resources are not wasted making proteins that the
cell does not need at that time.
Elucidating the mechanisms controlling gene expression is important to the understanding of human health.
Malfunctions in this process in humans lead to the development of cancer and other diseases. Understanding the
interaction between the gene expression of a pathogen and that of its human host is important for the understanding
of a particular infectious disease. Gene regulation involves a complex web of interactions within a given cell among
signals from the cell’s environment, signaling molecules within the cell, and the cell’s DNA. These interactions lead
to the expression of some genes and the suppression of others, depending on circumstances.
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes share some similarities in their mechanisms to regulate gene expression; however, gene
expression in eukaryotes is more complicated because of the temporal and spatial separation between the processes
of transcription and translation. Thus, although most regulation of gene expression occurs through transcriptional
control in prokaryotes, regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes occurs at the transcriptional level and posttranscriptionally (after the primary transcript has been made).

Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
In bacteria and archaea, structural proteins with related functions are usually encoded together within the genome in a
block called an operon and are transcribed together under the control of a single promoter, resulting in the formation
of a polycistronic transcript (Figure 11.32). In this way, regulation of the transcription of all of the structural genes
encoding the enzymes that catalyze the many steps in a single biochemical pathway can be controlled simultaneously,
because they will either all be needed at the same time, or none will be needed. For example, in E. coli, all of the
structural genes that encode enzymes needed to use lactose as an energy source lie next to each other in the lactose (or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

487

lac) operon under the control of a single promoter, the lac promoter. French scientists François Jacob (1920–2013)
and Jacques Monod at the Pasteur Institute were the first to show the organization of bacterial genes into operons,
through their studies on the lac operon of E. coli. For this work, they won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
in 1965. Although eukaryotic genes are not organized into operons, prokaryotic operons are excellent models for
learning about gene regulation generally. There are some gene clusters in eukaryotes that function similar to operons.
Many of the principles can be applied to eukaryotic systems and contribute to our understanding of changes in gene
expression in eukaryotes that can result pathological changes such as cancer.
Each operon includes DNA sequences that influence its own transcription; these are located in a region called the
regulatory region. The regulatory region includes the promoter and the region surrounding the promoter, to which
transcription factors, proteins encoded by regulatory genes, can bind. Transcription factors influence the binding
of RNA polymerase to the promoter and allow its progression to transcribe structural genes. A repressor is a
transcription factor that suppresses transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by binding to a DNA
sequence within the regulatory region called the operator, which is located between the RNA polymerase binding site
of the promoter and the transcriptional start site of the first structural gene. Repressor binding physically blocks RNA
polymerase from transcribing structural genes. Conversely, an activator is a transcription factor that increases the
transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by facilitating RNA polymerase binding to the promoter.
An inducer, a third type of regulatory molecule, is a small molecule that either activates or represses transcription by
interacting with a repressor or an activator.
In prokaryotes, there are examples of operons whose gene products are required rather consistently and whose
expression, therefore, is unregulated. Such operons are constitutively expressed, meaning they are transcribed and
translated continuously to provide the cell with constant intermediate levels of the protein products. Such genes
encode enzymes involved in housekeeping functions required for cellular maintenance, including DNA replication,
repair, and expression, as well as enzymes involved in core metabolism. In contrast, there are other prokaryotic
operons that are expressed only when needed and are regulated by repressors, activators, and inducers.

Figure 11.32 In prokaryotes, structural genes of related function are often organized together on the genome and
transcribed together under the control of a single promoter. The operon’s regulatory region includes both the
promoter and the operator. If a repressor binds to the operator, then the structural genes will not be transcribed.
Alternatively, activators may bind to the regulatory region, enhancing transcription.

• What are the parts in the DNA sequence of an operon?

488

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• What types of regulatory molecules are there?

Regulation by Repression
Prokaryotic operons are commonly controlled by the binding of repressors to operator regions, thereby preventing
the transcription of the structural genes. Such operons are classified as either repressible operons or inducible
operons. Repressible operons, like the tryptophan (trp) operon, typically contain genes encoding enzymes required for
a biosynthetic pathway. As long as the product of the pathway, like tryptophan, continues to be required by the cell,
a repressible operon will continue to be expressed. However, when the product of the biosynthetic pathway begins
to accumulate in the cell, removing the need for the cell to continue to make more, the expression of the operon is
repressed. Conversely, inducible operons, like the lac operon of E. coli, often contain genes encoding enzymes in a
pathway involved in the metabolism of a specific substrate like lactose. These enzymes are only required when that
substrate is available, thus expression of the operons is typically induced only in the presence of the substrate.

The trp Operon: A Repressible Operon
E. coli can synthesize tryptophan using enzymes that are encoded by five structural genes located next to each other
in the trp operon (Figure 11.33). When environmental tryptophan is low, the operon is turned on. This means that
transcription is initiated, the genes are expressed, and tryptophan is synthesized. However, if tryptophan is present in
the environment, the trp operon is turned off. Transcription does not occur and tryptophan is not synthesized.
When tryptophan is not present in the cell, the repressor by itself does not bind to the operator; therefore, the operon
is active and tryptophan is synthesized. However, when tryptophan accumulates in the cell, two tryptophan molecules
bind to the trp repressor molecule, which changes its shape, allowing it to bind to the trp operator. This binding of
the active form of the trp repressor to the operator blocks RNA polymerase from transcribing the structural genes,
stopping expression of the operon. Thus, the actual product of the biosynthetic pathway controlled by the operon
regulates the expression of the operon.

Figure 11.33 The five structural genes needed to synthesize tryptophan in E. coli are located next to each other in
the trp operon. When tryptophan is absent, the repressor protein does not bind to the operator, and the genes are
transcribed. When tryptophan is plentiful, tryptophan binds the repressor protein at the operator sequence. This
physically blocks the RNA polymerase from transcribing the tryptophan biosynthesis genes.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

489

Link to Learning
Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/22trpoperon) to learn more about the
trp operon.

The lac Operon: An Inducible Operon
The lac operon is an example of an inducible operon that is also subject to activation in the absence of glucose
(Figure 11.34). The lac operon encodes three structural genes necessary to acquire and process the disaccharide
lactose from the environment, breaking it down into the simple sugars glucose and galactose. For the lac operon to be
expressed, lactose must be present. This makes sense for the cell because it would be energetically wasteful to create
the enzymes to process lactose if lactose was not available.
In the absence of lactose, the lac repressor is bound to the operator region of the lac operon, physically preventing
RNA polymerase from transcribing the structural genes. However, when lactose is present, the lactose inside the cell
is converted to allolactose. Allolactose serves as an inducer molecule, binding to the repressor and changing its shape
so that it is no longer able to bind to the operator DNA. Removal of the repressor in the presence of lactose allows
RNA polymerase to move through the operator region and begin transcription of the lac structural genes.

Figure 11.34 The three structural genes that are needed to degrade lactose in E. coli are located next to each other
in the lac operon. When lactose is absent, the repressor protein binds to the operator, physically blocking the RNA
polymerase from transcribing the lac structural genes. When lactose is available, a lactose molecule binds the
repressor protein, preventing the repressor from binding to the operator sequence, and the genes are transcribed.

The lac Operon: Activation by Catabolite Activator Protein
Bacteria typically have the ability to use a variety of substrates as carbon sources. However, because glucose is
usually preferable to other substrates, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that alternative substrates are only used
when glucose has been depleted. Additionally, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that the genes encoding enzymes
for using alternative substrates are expressed only when the alternative substrate is available. In the 1940s, Jacques
Monod was the first to demonstrate the preference for certain substrates over others through his studies of E. coli’s
growth when cultured in the presence of two different substrates simultaneously. Such studies generated diauxic
growth curves, like the one shown in Figure 11.35. Although the preferred substrate glucose is used first, E. coli

490

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

grows quickly and the enzymes for lactose metabolism are absent. However, once glucose levels are depleted, growth
rates slow, inducing the expression of the enzymes needed for the metabolism of the second substrate, lactose. Notice
how the growth rate in lactose is slower, as indicated by the lower steepness of the growth curve.
The ability to switch from glucose use to another substrate like lactose is a consequence of the activity of an enzyme
called Enzyme IIA (EIIA). When glucose levels drop, cells produce less ATP from catabolism (see Catabolism of
Carbohydrates), and EIIA becomes phosphorylated. Phosphorylated EIIA activates adenylyl cyclase, an enzyme
that converts some of the remaining ATP to cyclic AMP (cAMP), a cyclic derivative of AMP and important signaling
molecule involved in glucose and energy metabolism in E. coli. As a result, cAMP levels begin to rise in the cell
(Figure 11.36).
The lac operon also plays a role in this switch from using glucose to using lactose. When glucose is scarce, the
accumulating cAMP caused by increased adenylyl cyclase activity binds to catabolite activator protein (CAP),
also known as cAMP receptor protein (CRP). The complex binds to the promoter region of the lac operon (Figure
11.37). In the regulatory regions of these operons, a CAP binding site is located upstream of the RNA polymerase
binding site in the promoter. Binding of the CAP-cAMP complex to this site increases the binding ability of RNA
polymerase to the promoter region to initiate the transcription of the structural genes. Thus, in the case of the lac
operon, for transcription to occur, lactose must be present (removing the lac repressor protein) and glucose levels must
be depleted (allowing binding of an activating protein). When glucose levels are high, there is catabolite repression
of operons encoding enzymes for the metabolism of alternative substrates. Because of low cAMP levels under these
conditions, there is an insufficient amount of the CAP-cAMP complex to activate transcription of these operons. See
Table 11.6 for a summary of the regulation of the lac operon.

Figure 11.35 When grown in the presence of two substrates, E. coli uses the preferred substrate (in this case
glucose) until it is depleted. Then, enzymes needed for the metabolism of the second substrate are expressed and
growth resumes, although at a slower rate.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

491

Figure 11.36 When ATP levels decrease due to depletion of glucose, some remaining ATP is converted to cAMP by
adenylyl cyclase. Thus, increased cAMP levels signal glucose depletion.

Figure 11.37 (a) In the presence of cAMP, CAP binds to the promoters of operons, like the lac operon, that encode
genes for enzymes for the use of alternate substrates. (b) For the lac operon to be expressed, there must be
activation by cAMP-CAP as well as removal of the lac repressor from the operator.

Conditions Affecting Transcription of the lac Operon
Glucose

CAP binds

Lactose

Repressor binds

Transcription

+

–

–

+

No

+

–

+

–

Some

–

+

–

+

No

–

+

+

–

Yes

Table 11.6

492

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Link to Learning
Watch an animated tutorial (https://openstax.org/l/22lacoperon) about the
workings of lac operon here.

• What affects the binding of the trp operon repressor to the operator?
• How and when is the behavior of the lac repressor protein altered?
• In addition to being repressible, how else is the lac operon regulated?

Global Responses of Prokaryotes
In prokaryotes, there are also several higher levels of gene regulation that have the ability to control the transcription
of many related operons simultaneously in response to an environmental signal. A group of operons all controlled
simultaneously is called a regulon.

Alarmones
When sensing impending stress, prokaryotes alter the expression of a wide variety of operons to respond in
coordination. They do this through the production of alarmones, which are small intracellular nucleotide derivatives.
Alarmones change which genes are expressed and stimulate the expression of specific stress-response genes. The
use of alarmones to alter gene expression in response to stress appears to be important in pathogenic bacteria. On
encountering host defense mechanisms and other harsh conditions during infection, many operons encoding virulence
genes are upregulated in response to alarmone signaling. Knowledge of these responses is key to being able to fully
understand the infection process of many pathogens and to the development of therapies to counter this process.

Alternate σ Factors
Since the σ subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase confers specificity as to which promoters should be transcribed,
altering the σ factor used is another way for bacteria to quickly and globally change what regulons are transcribed at
a given time. The σ factor recognizes sequences within a bacterial promoter, so different σ factors will each recognize
slightly different promoter sequences. In this way, when the cell senses specific environmental conditions, it may
respond by changing which σ factor it expresses, degrading the old one and producing a new one to transcribe the
operons encoding genes whose products will be useful under the new environmental condition. For example, in
sporulating bacteria of the genera Bacillus and Clostridium (which include many pathogens), a group of σ factors
controls the expression of the many genes needed for sporulation in response to sporulation-stimulating signals.

• What is the name given to a collection of operons that can be regulated as a group?
• What type of stimulus would trigger the transcription of a different σ factor?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

493

Additional Methods of Regulation in Bacteria: Attenuation and
Riboswitches
Although most gene expression is regulated at the level of transcription initiation in prokaryotes, there are also
mechanisms to control both the completion of transcription as well as translation concurrently. Since their discovery,
these mechanisms have been shown to control the completion of transcription and translation of many prokaryotic
operons. Because these mechanisms link the regulation of transcription and translation directly, they are specific to
prokaryotes, because these processes are physically separated in eukaryotes.
One such regulatory system is attenuation, whereby secondary stem-loop structures formed within the 5’ end of an
mRNA being transcribed determine if transcription to complete the synthesis of this mRNA will occur and if this
mRNA will be used for translation. Beyond the transcriptional repression mechanism already discussed, attenuation
also controls expression of the trp operon in E. coli (Figure 11.38). The trp operon regulatory region contains a
leader sequence called trpL between the operator and the first structural gene, which has four stretches of RNA that
can base pair with each other in different combinations. When a terminator stem-loop forms, transcription terminates,
releasing RNA polymerase from the mRNA. However, when an antiterminator stem-loop forms, this prevents the
formation of the terminator stem-loop, so RNA polymerase can transcribe the structural genes.
A related mechanism of concurrent regulation of transcription and translation in prokaryotes is the use of a
riboswitch, a small region of noncoding RNA found within the 5’ end of some prokaryotic mRNA molecules
(Figure 11.39. A riboswitch may bind to a small intracellular molecule to stabilize certain secondary structures of
the mRNA molecule. The binding of the small molecule determines which stem-loop structure forms, thus influencing
the completion of mRNA synthesis and protein synthesis.

494

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.38 When tryptophan is plentiful, translation of the short leader peptide encoded by trpL proceeds, the
terminator loop between regions 3 and 4 forms, and transcription terminates. When tryptophan levels are depleted,
translation of the short leader peptide stalls at region 1, allowing regions 2 and 3 to form an antiterminator loop, and
RNA polymerase can transcribe the structural genes of the trp operon.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

495

Figure 11.39 Riboswitches found within prokaryotic mRNA molecules can bind to small intracellular molecules,
stabilizing certain RNA structures, influencing either the completion of the synthesis of the mRNA molecule itself (left)
or the protein made using that mRNA (right).

Other Factors Affecting Gene Expression in Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
Although the focus on our discussion of transcriptional control used prokaryotic operons as examples, eukaryotic
transcriptional control is similar in many ways. As in prokaryotes, eukaryotic transcription can be controlled through
the binding of transcription factors including repressors and activators. Interestingly, eukaryotic transcription can be
influenced by the binding of proteins to regions of DNA, called enhancers, rather far away from the gene, through
DNA looping facilitated between the enhancer and the promoter (Figure 11.40). Overall, regulating transcription is
a highly effective way to control gene expression in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. However, the control of gene
expression in eukaryotes in response to environmental and cellular stresses can be accomplished in additional ways
without the binding of transcription factors to regulatory regions.

496

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Figure 11.40 In eukaryotes, an enhancer is a DNA sequence that promotes transcription. Each enhancer is made
up of short DNA sequences called distal control elements. Activators bound to the distal control elements interact with
mediator proteins and transcription factors. Two different genes may have the same promoter but different distal
control elements, enabling differential gene expression.

DNA-Level Control
In eukaryotes, the DNA molecules or associated histones can be chemically modified in such a way as to influence
transcription; this is called epigenetic regulation. Methylation of certain cytosine nucleotides in DNA in response
to environmental factors has been shown to influence use of such DNA for transcription, with DNA methylation
commonly correlating to lowered levels of gene expression. Additionally, in response to environmental factors,
histone proteins for packaging DNA can also be chemically modified in multiple ways, including acetylation and
deacetylation, influencing the packaging state of DNA and thus affecting the availability of loosely wound DNA for
transcription. These chemical modifications can sometimes be maintained through multiple rounds of cell division,
making at least some of these epigenetic changes heritable.

Link to Learning
This video (https://openstax.org/l/22epigreg) describes how epigenetic
regulation controls gene expression.

• What stops or allows transcription to proceed when attenuation is operating?
• What determines the state of a riboswitch?
• Describe the function of an enhancer.
• Describe two mechanisms of epigenetic regulation in eukaryotes.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

497

Clinical Focus
Resolution
Although Mark survived his bout with necrotizing fasciitis, he would now have to undergo a skin-grafting
surgery, followed by long-term physical therapy. Based on the amount of muscle mass he lost, it is unlikely that
his leg will return to full strength, but his physical therapist is optimistic that he will regain some use of his leg.
Laboratory testing revealed the causative agent of Mark’s infection was a strain of group A streptococcus
(Group A strep). As required by law, Mark’s case was reported to the state health department and ultimately to
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). At the CDC, the strain of group A strep isolated from
Mark was analyzed more thoroughly for methicillin resistance.
Methicillin resistance is genetically encoded and is becoming more common in group A strep through horizontal
gene transfer. In necrotizing fasciitis, blood flow to the infected area is typically limited because of the action
of various genetically encoded bacterial toxins. This is why there is typically little to no bleeding as a result
of the incision test. Unfortunately, these bacterial toxins limit the effectiveness of intravenous antibiotics in
clearing infection from the skin and underlying tissue, meaning that antibiotic resistance alone does not explain
the ineffectiveness of Mark’s treatment. Nevertheless, intravenous antibiotic therapy was warranted to help
minimize the possible outcome of sepsis, which is a common outcome of necrotizing fasciitis. Through genomic
analysis by the CDC of the strain isolated from Mark, several of the important virulence genes were shown
to be encoded on prophages, indicating that transduction is important in the horizontal gene transfer of these
genes from one bacterial cell to another.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.

Summary
11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material
• DNA serves two important cellular functions: It is the genetic material passed from parent to offspring and
it serves as the information to direct and regulate the construction of the proteins necessary for the cell to
perform all of its functions.
• The central dogma states that DNA organized into genes specifies the sequences of messenger RNA
(mRNA), which, in turn, specifies the amino acid sequence of proteins.
• The genotype of a cell is the full collection of genes a cell contains. Not all genes are used to make proteins
simultaneously. The phenotype is a cell’s observable characteristics resulting from the proteins it is producing
at a given time under specific environmental conditions.
11.2 DNA Replication
• The DNA replication process is semiconservative, which results in two DNA molecules, each having one
parental strand of DNA and one newly synthesized strand.
• In bacteria, the initiation of replication occurs at the origin of replication, where supercoiled DNA is
unwound by DNA gyrase, made single-stranded by helicase, and bound by single-stranded binding protein
to maintain its single-stranded state. Primase synthesizes a short RNA primer, providing a free 3’-OH group
to which DNA polymerase III can add DNA nucleotides.
• During elongation, the leading strand of DNA is synthesized continuously from a single primer. The lagging
strand is synthesized discontinuously in short Okazaki fragments, each requiring its own primer. The RNA
primers are removed and replaced with DNA nucleotides by bacterial DNA polymerase I, and DNA ligase
seals the gaps between these fragments.
• Termination of replication in bacteria involves the resolution of circular DNA concatemers by topoisomerase
IV to release the two copies of the circular chromosome.

498

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• Eukaryotes typically have multiple linear chromosomes, each with multiple origins of replication. Overall,
replication in eukaryotes is similar to that in prokaryotes.
• The linear nature of eukaryotic chromosomes necessitates telomeres to protect genes near the end of the
chromosomes. Telomerase extends telomeres, preventing their degradation, in some cell types.
• Rolling circle replication is a type of rapid unidirectional DNA synthesis of a circular DNA molecule used
for the replication of some plasmids.
11.3 RNA Transcription
• During transcription, the information encoded in DNA is used to make RNA.
• RNA polymerase synthesizes RNA, using the antisense strand of the DNA as template by adding
complementary RNA nucleotides to the 3’ end of the growing strand.
• RNA polymerase binds to DNA at a sequence called a promoter during the initiation of transcription.
• Genes encoding proteins of related functions are frequently transcribed under the control of a single promoter
in prokaryotes, resulting in the formation of a polycistronic mRNA molecule that encodes multiple
polypeptides.
• Unlike DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase does not require a 3’-OH group to add nucleotides, so a primer
is not needed during initiation.
• Termination of transcription in bacteria occurs when the RNA polymerase encounters specific DNA
sequences that lead to stalling of the polymerase. This results in release of RNA polymerase from the DNA
template strand, freeing the RNA transcript.
• Eukaryotes have three different RNA polymerases. Eukaryotes also have monocistronic mRNA, each
encoding only a single polypeptide.
• Eukaryotic primary transcripts are processed in several ways, including the addition of a 5’ cap and a 3′-polyA tail, as well as splicing, to generate a mature mRNA molecule that can be transported out of the nucleus
and that is protected from degradation.
11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)
• In translation, polypeptides are synthesized using mRNA sequences and cellular machinery, including tRNAs
that match mRNA codons to specific amino acids and ribosomes composed of RNA and proteins that catalyze
the reaction.
• The genetic code is degenerate in that several mRNA codons code for the same amino acids. The genetic
code is almost universal among living organisms.
• Prokaryotic (70S) and cytoplasmic eukaryotic (80S) ribosomes are each composed of a large subunit and a
small subunit of differing sizes between the two groups. Each subunit is composed of rRNA and protein.
Organelle ribosomes in eukaryotic cells resemble prokaryotic ribosomes.
• Some 60 to 90 species of tRNA exist in bacteria. Each tRNA has a three-nucleotide anticodon as well as a
binding site for a cognate amino acid. All tRNAs with a specific anticodon will carry the same amino acid.
• Initiation of translation occurs when the small ribosomal subunit binds with initiation factors and an initiator
tRNA at the start codon of an mRNA, followed by the binding to the initiation complex of the large ribosomal
subunit.
• In prokaryotic cells, the start codon codes for N-formyl-methionine carried by a special initiator tRNA. In
eukaryotic cells, the start codon codes for methionine carried by a special initiator tRNA. In addition, whereas
ribosomal binding of the mRNA in prokaryotes is facilitated by the Shine-Dalgarno sequence within the
mRNA, eukaryotic ribosomes bind to the 5’ cap of the mRNA.
• During the elongation stage of translation, a charged tRNA binds to mRNA in the A site of the ribosome; a
peptide bond is catalyzed between the two adjacent amino acids, breaking the bond between the first amino
acid and its tRNA; the ribosome moves one codon along the mRNA; and the first tRNA is moved from the P
site of the ribosome to the E site and leaves the ribosomal complex.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

499

• Termination of translation occurs when the ribosome encounters a stop codon, which does not code for a
tRNA. Release factors cause the polypeptide to be released, and the ribosomal complex dissociates.
• In prokaryotes, transcription and translation may be coupled, with translation of an mRNA molecule
beginning as soon as transcription allows enough mRNA exposure for the binding of a ribosome, prior to
transcription termination. Transcription and translation are not coupled in eukaryotes because transcription
occurs in the nucleus, whereas translation occurs in the cytoplasm or in association with the rough
endoplasmic reticulum.
• Polypeptides often require one or more post-translational modifications to become biologically active.
11.5 Mutations
• A mutation is a heritable change in DNA. A mutation may lead to a change in the amino-acid sequence of a
protein, possibly affecting its function.
• A point mutation affects a single base pair. A point mutation may cause a silent mutation if the mRNA
codon codes for the same amino acid, a missense mutation if the mRNA codon codes for a different amino
acid, or a nonsense mutation if the mRNA codon becomes a stop codon.
• Missense mutations may retain function, depending on the chemistry of the new amino acid and its location
in the protein. Nonsense mutations produce truncated and frequently nonfunctional proteins.
• A frameshift mutation results from an insertion or deletion of a number of nucleotides that is not a multiple
of three. The change in reading frame alters every amino acid after the point of the mutation and results in a
nonfunctional protein.
• Spontaneous mutations occur through DNA replication errors, whereas induced mutations occur through
exposure to a mutagen.
• Mutagenic agents are frequently carcinogenic but not always. However, nearly all carcinogens are mutagenic.
• Chemical mutagens include base analogs and chemicals that modify existing bases. In both cases, mutations
are introduced after several rounds of DNA replication.
• Ionizing radiation, such as X-rays and γ-rays, leads to breakage of the phosphodiester backbone of DNA and
can also chemically modify bases to alter their base-pairing rules.
• Nonionizing radiation like ultraviolet light may introduce pyrimidine (thymine) dimers, which, during DNA
replication and transcription, may introduce frameshift or point mutations.
• Cells have mechanisms to repair naturally occurring mutations. DNA polymerase has proofreading activity.
Mismatch repair is a process to repair incorrectly incorporated bases after DNA replication has been
completed.
• Pyrimidine dimers can also be repaired. In nucleotide excision repair (dark repair), enzymes recognize the
distortion introduced by the pyrimidine dimer and replace the damaged strand with the correct bases, using
the undamaged DNA strand as a template. Bacteria and other organisms may also use direct repair, in which
the photolyase enzyme, in the presence of visible light, breaks apart the pyrimidines.
• Through comparison of growth on the complete plate and lack of growth on media lacking specific nutrients,
specific loss-of-function mutants called auxotrophs can be identified.
• The Ames test is an inexpensive method that uses auxotrophic bacteria to measure mutagenicity of a chemical
compound. Mutagenicity is an indicator of carcinogenic potential.
11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity
• Horizontal gene transfer is an important way for asexually reproducing organisms like prokaryotes to
acquire new traits.
• There are three mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer typically used by bacteria: transformation,
transduction, and conjugation.
• Transformation allows for competent cells to take up naked DNA, released from other cells on their death,
into their cytoplasm, where it may recombine with the host genome.

500

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

• In generalized transduction, any piece of chromosomal DNA may be transferred by accidental packaging
of the degraded host chromosome into a phage head. In specialized transduction, only chromosomal DNA
adjacent to the integration site of a lysogenic phage may be transferred as a result of imprecise excision of the
prophage.
• Conjugation is mediated by the F plasmid, which encodes a conjugation pilus that brings an F plasmidcontaining F+ cell into contact with an F- cell.
• The rare integration of the F plasmid into the bacterial chromosome, generating an Hfr cell, allows for transfer
of chromosomal DNA from the donor to the recipient. Additionally, imprecise excision of the F plasmid from
the chromosome may generate an F’ plasmid that may be transferred to a recipient by conjugation.
• Conjugation transfer of R plasmids is an important mechanism for the spread of antibiotic resistance in
bacterial communities.
• Transposons are molecules of DNA with inverted repeats at their ends that also encode the enzyme
transposase, allowing for their movement from one location in DNA to another. Although found in both
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, transposons are clinically relevant in bacterial pathogens for the movement of
virulence factors, including antibiotic resistance genes.
11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon Theory
• Gene expression is a tightly regulated process.
• Gene expression in prokaryotes is largely regulated at the point of transcription. Gene expression in eukaryotes
is additionally regulated post-transcriptionally.
• Prokaryotic structural genes of related function are often organized into operons, all controlled by
transcription from a single promoter. The regulatory region of an operon includes the promoter itself and the
region surrounding the promoter to which transcription factors can bind to influence transcription.
• Although some operons are constitutively expressed, most are subject to regulation through the use of
transcription factors (repressors and activators). A repressor binds to an operator, a DNA sequence within
the regulatory region between the RNA polymerase binding site in the promoter and first structural gene,
thereby physically blocking transcription of these operons. An activator binds within the regulatory region of
an operon, helping RNA polymerase bind to the promoter, thereby enhancing the transcription of this operon.
An inducer influences transcription through interacting with a repressor or activator.
• The trp operon is a classic example of a repressible operon. When tryptophan accumulates, tryptophan binds
to a repressor, which then binds to the operator, preventing further transcription.
• The lac operon is a classic example an inducible operon. When lactose is present in the cell, it is converted to
allolactose. Allolactose acts as an inducer, binding to the repressor and preventing the repressor from binding
to the operator. This allows transcription of the structural genes.
• The lac operon is also subject to activation. When glucose levels are depleted, some cellular ATP is converted
into cAMP, which binds to the catabolite activator protein (CAP). The cAMP-CAP complex activates
transcription of the lac operon. When glucose levels are high, its presence prevents transcription of the lac
operon and other operons by catabolite repression.
• Small intracellular molecules called alarmones are made in response to various environmental stresses,
allowing bacteria to control the transcription of a group of operons, called a regulon.
• Bacteria have the ability to change which σ factor of RNA polymerase they use in response to environmental
conditions to quickly and globally change which regulons are transcribed.
• Prokaryotes have regulatory mechanisms, including attenuation and the use of riboswitches, to
simultaneously control the completion of transcription and translation from that transcript. These mechanisms
work through the formation of stem loops in the 5’ end of an mRNA molecule currently being synthesized.
• There are additional points of regulation of gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In eukaryotes,
epigenetic regulation by chemical modification of DNA or histones, and regulation of RNA processing are
two methods.

Review Questions
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

Multiple Choice

1. DNA does all but which of the following?
a. serves as the genetic material passed from parent
to offspring
b. remains
constant
despite
changes
in
environmental conditions
c. provides the instructions for the synthesis of
messenger RNA
d. is read by ribosomes during the process of
translation
2. According to the central dogma, which of the
following represents the flow of genetic information in
cells?
a. protein to DNA to RNA
b. DNA to RNA to protein
c. RNA to DNA to protein
d. DNA to protein to RNA
3. Which of the following is the enzyme that replaces
the RNA nucleotides in a primer with DNA nucleotides?
a.
b.
c.
d.

DNA polymerase III
DNA polymerase I
primase
helicase

4. Which of the following is not involved in the
initiation of replication?
a. ligase
b. DNA gyrase
c. single-stranded binding protein
d. primase
5. Which of the following enzymes involved in DNA
replication is unique to eukaryotes?
a. helicase
b. DNA polymerase
c. ligase
d. telomerase
6. Which of the following would be synthesized using
5′-CAGTTCGGA-3′ as a template?
a. 3′-AGGCTTGAC-4′
b. 3′-TCCGAACTG-5′
c. 3′-GTCAAGCCT-5′
d. 3′-CAGTTCGGA-5′
7. During which stage of bacterial transcription is the σ
subunit of the RNA polymerase involved?
a. initiation
b. elongation
c. termination
d. splicing

501

8. Which of the following components is involved in
the initiation of transcription?
a. primer
b. origin
c. promoter
d. start codon
9. Which of the following is not a function of the 5’
cap and 3’ poly-A tail of a mature eukaryotic mRNA
molecule?
a. to facilitate splicing
b. to prevent mRNA degradation
c. to aid export of the mature transcript to the
cytoplasm
d. to aid ribosome binding to the transcript
10. Mature mRNA from a eukaryote would contain
each of these features except which of the following?
a. exon-encoded RNA
b. intron-encoded RNA
c. 5’ cap
d. 3’ poly-A tail
11. Which of the following is the name of the threebase sequence in the mRNA that binds to a tRNA
molecule?
a. P site
b. codon
c. anticodon
d. CCA binding site
12. Which component is the last to join the initiation
complex during the initiation of translation?
a. the mRNA molecule
b. the small ribosomal subunit
c. the large ribosomal subunit
d. the initiator tRNA
13. During elongation in translation, to which
ribosomal site does an incoming charged tRNA
molecule bind?
a. A site
b. P site
c. E site
d. B site
14. Which of the following is the amino acid that
appears at the N-terminus of all newly translated
prokaryotic and eukaryotic polypeptides?
a. tryptophan
b. methionine
c. selenocysteine
d. glycine

502

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

15. When the ribosome reaches a nonsense codon,
which of the following occurs?
a. a methionine is incorporated
b. the polypeptide is released
c. a peptide bond forms
d. the A site binds to a charged tRNA

22. Which of the following refers to the uptake of
naked DNA from the surrounding environment?
a. conjugation
b. generalized transduction
c. specialized transduction
d. transformation

16. Which of the following is a change in the sequence
that leads to formation of a stop codon?
a. missense mutation
b. nonsense mutation
c. silent mutation
d. deletion mutation

23. The F plasmid is involved in which of the following
processes?
a. conjugation
b. transduction
c. transposition
d. transformation

17. The formation of pyrimidine dimers results from
which of the following?
a. spontaneous errors by DNA polymerase
b. exposure to gamma radiation
c. exposure to ultraviolet radiation
d. exposure to intercalating agents

24. Which of the following refers to the mechanism
of horizontal gene transfer naturally responsible for the
spread of antibiotic resistance genes within a bacterial
population?
a. conjugation
b. generalized transduction
c. specialized transduction
d. transformation

18. Which of the following is an example of a
frameshift mutation?
a. a deletion of a codon
b. missense mutation
c. silent mutation
d. deletion of one nucleotide
19. Which of the following is the type of DNA repair in
which thymine dimers are directly broken down by the
enzyme photolyase?
a. direct repair
b. nucleotide excision repair
c. mismatch repair
d. proofreading
20. Which of the following regarding the Ames test is
true?
a. It is used to identify newly formed auxotrophic
mutants.
b. It is used to identify mutants with restored
biosynthetic activity.
c. It is used to identify spontaneous mutants.
d. It is used to identify mutants lacking
photoreactivation activity.
21. Which is the mechanism by which improper
excision of a prophage from a bacterial chromosome
results in packaging of bacterial genes near the
integration site into a phage head?
a. conjugation
b. generalized transduction
c. specialized transduction
d. transformation

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

25. An operon of genes encoding enzymes in a
biosynthetic pathway is likely to be which of the
following?
a. inducible
b. repressible
c. constitutive
d. monocistronic
26. An operon encoding genes that are transcribed and
translated continuously to provide the cell with constant
intermediate levels of the protein products is said to be
which of the following?
a. repressible
b. inducible
c. constitutive
d. activated
27. Which of the following conditions leads to
maximal expression of the lac operon?
a. lactose present, glucose absent
b. lactose present, glucose present
c. lactose absent, glucose absent
d. lactose absent, glucose present
28. Which of the following is a type of regulation of
gene expression unique to eukaryotes?
a. attenuation
b. use of alternate σ factor
c. chemical modification of histones
d. alarmones

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

503

True/False

29. Cells are always producing proteins from every gene they possess.
30. More primers are used in lagging strand synthesis than in leading strand synthesis.
31. Each codon within the genetic code encodes a different amino acid.
32. Carcinogens are typically mutagenic.
33. Asexually reproducing organisms lack mechanisms for generating genetic diversity within a population.
Fill in the Blank

34. The process of making an RNA copy of a gene is called ________.
35. A cell’s ________ remains constant whereas its phenotype changes in response to environmental influences.
36. The enzyme responsible for relaxing supercoiled DNA to allow for the initiation of replication is called
________.
37. Unidirectional replication of a circular DNA molecule like a plasmid that involves nicking one DNA strand and
displacing it while synthesizing a new strand is called ________.
38. A ________ mRNA is one that codes for multiple polypeptides.
39. The protein complex responsible for removing intron-encoded RNA sequences from primary transcripts in
eukaryotes is called the ________.
40. The third position within a codon, in which changes often result in the incorporation of the same amino acid into
the growing polypeptide, is called the ________.
41. The enzyme that adds an amino acid to a tRNA molecule is called ________.
42. A chemical mutagen that is structurally similar to a nucleotide but has different base-pairing rules is called a
________.
43. The enzyme used in light repair to split thymine dimers is called ________.
44. The phenotype of an organism that is most commonly observed in nature is called the ________.
45. A small DNA molecule that has the ability to independently excise from one location in a larger DNA molecule
and integrate into the DNA elsewhere is called a ________.
46. ________ is a group of mechanisms that allow for the introduction of genetic material from one organism to
another organism within the same generation.
47. The DNA sequence, to which repressors may bind, that lies between the promoter and the first structural gene is
called the ________.
48. The prevention of expression of operons encoding substrate use pathways for substrates other than glucose when
glucose is present is called _______.
Short Answer

49. Can two observably different cells have the same genotype? Explain.
50. Why is primase required for DNA replication?
51. What is the role of single-stranded binding protein in DNA replication?

504

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

52. Below is a DNA sequence. Envision that this is a section of a DNA molecule that has separated in preparation
for replication, so you are only seeing one DNA strand. Construct the complementary DNA sequence (indicating 5’
and 3’ ends).
DNA sequence: 3’-T A C T G A C T G A C G A T C-5’
53. What is the purpose of RNA processing in eukaryotes? Why don’t prokaryotes require similar processing?
54. Below is a DNA sequence. Envision that this is a section of a DNA molecule that has separated in preparation
for transcription, so you are only seeing the antisense strand. Construct the mRNA sequence transcribed from this
template.
Antisense DNA strand: 3’-T A C T G A C T G A C G A T C-5’
55. Why does translation terminate when the ribosome reaches a stop codon? What happens?
56. How does the process of translation differ between prokaryotes and eukaryotes?
57. What is meant by the genetic code being nearly universal?
58. Below is an antisense DNA sequence. Translate the mRNA molecule synthesized using the genetic code,
recording the resulting amino acid sequence, indicating the N and C termini.
Antisense DNA strand: 3’-T A C T G A C T G A C G A T C-5’
59. Why is it more likely that insertions or deletions will be more detrimental to a cell than point mutations?
60. Briefly describe two ways in which chromosomal DNA from a donor cell may be transferred to a recipient cell
during the process of conjugation.
61. Describe what happens when a nonsense mutation is introduced into the gene encoding transposase within a
transposon.
62. What are two ways that bacteria can influence the transcription of multiple different operons simultaneously in
response to a particular environmental condition?
Critical Thinking

63. A pure culture of an unknown bacterium was streaked onto plates of a variety of media. You notice that the
colony morphology is strikingly different on plates of minimal media with glucose compared to that seen on trypticase
soy agar plates. How can you explain these differences in colony morphology?
64. Review Figure 11.4 and Figure 11.5. Why was it important that Meselson and Stahl continue their experiment
to at least two rounds of replication after isotopic labeling of the starting DNA with 15N, instead of stopping the
experiment after only one round of replication?
65. If deoxyribonucleotides that lack the 3’-OH groups are added during the replication process, what do you expect
will occur?
66. Predict the effect of an alteration in the sequence of nucleotides in the –35 region of a bacterial promoter.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

505

67. Label the following in the figure: ribosomal E, P, and A sites; mRNA; codons; anticodons; growing polypeptide;
incoming amino acid; direction of translocation; small ribosomal unit; large ribosomal unit.

68. Prior to the elucidation of the genetic code, prominent scientists, including Francis Crick, had predicted that
each mRNA codon, coding for one of the 20 amino acids, needed to be at least three nucleotides long. Why is it not
possible for codons to be any shorter?
69. Below are several DNA sequences that are mutated compared with the wild-type sequence: 3’-T A C T G A
C T G A C G A T C-5’. Envision that each is a section of a DNA molecule that has separated in preparation for
transcription, so you are only seeing the template strand. Construct the complementary DNA sequences (indicating
5’ and 3’ ends) for each mutated DNA sequence, then transcribe (indicating 5’ and 3’ ends) the template strands, and
translate the mRNA molecules using the genetic code, recording the resulting amino acid sequence (indicating the N
and C termini). What type of mutation is each?
Mutated DNA Template Strand #1: 3’-T A C T G T C T G A C G A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:
Mutated DNA Template Strand #2: 3’-T A C G G A C T G A C G A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:
Mutated DNA Template Strand #3: 3’-T A C T G A C T G A C T A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:
Mutated DNA Template Strand #4: 3’-T A C G A C T G A C T A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:

70. Why do you think the Ames test is preferable to the use of animal models to screen chemical compounds for
mutagenicity?

506

Chapter 11 | Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics

71. The following figure is from Monod’s original work on diauxic growth showing the growth of E. coli in the
simultaneous presence of xylose and glucose as the only carbon sources. Explain what is happening at points A–D
with respect to the carbon source being used for growth, and explain whether the xylose-use operon is being expressed
(and why). Note that expression of the enzymes required for xylose use is regulated in a manner similar to the
expression of the enzymes required for lactose use.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix A

1209

Appendix A

Fundamentals Of Physics And
Chemistry Important To
Microbiology
Like all other matter, the matter that comprises microorganisms is governed by the laws of chemistry and physics. The
chemical and physical properties of microbial pathogens—both cellular and acellular—dictate their habitat, control
their metabolic processes, and determine how they interact with the human body. This appendix provides a review of
some of the fundamental principles of chemistry and physics that are essential to an understanding of microbiology.
Many of the chapters in this text—especially Microbial Biochemistry and Microbial Metabolism—assume that
the reader already has an understanding of the concepts reviewed here.

Atomic Structure
Life is made up of matter. Matter occupies space and has mass. All matter is composed of atoms. All atoms contain
protons, electrons, and neutrons (Figure A1). The only exception is hydrogen (H), which is made of one proton
and one electron. A proton is a positively charged particle that resides in the nucleus (the core of the atom) of an
atom and has a mass of 1 atomic mass unit (amu) and a charge of +1. An electron is a negatively charged particle
that travels in the space around the nucleus. Electrons are distributed in different energy levels called electron shells.
Electrons have a negligible mass and a charge of –1. Neutrons, like protons, reside in the nucleus of an atom. They
have a mass of 1 amu and no charge (neutral). The positive (proton) and negative (electron) charges balance each
other in a neutral atom, which has a net zero charge. Because protons and neutrons each have a mass of 1 amu, the
mass of an atom is equal to the number of protons and neutrons of that atom. The number of electrons does not factor
into the overall mass because electron mass is so small.

Figure A1 Atoms are made up of protons and neutrons located within the nucleus and electrons surrounding the
nucleus.

Chemical Elements
All matter is composed of atoms of elements. Elements have unique physical and chemical properties and are
substances that cannot easily be transformed either physically or chemically into other substances. Each element
has been given a name, usually derived from Latin or English. The elements also have one- or two-letter symbols

1210

Appendix A

representing the name; for example, sodium (Na), gold (Au), and silver (Ag) have abbreviations derived from their
original Latin names natrium, aurum, and argentum, respectively. Examples with English abbreviations are carbon
(C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), and nitrogen (N). A total of 118 different elements (92 of which occur naturally) have
been identified and organized into the periodic table of elements. Of the naturally occurring elements, fewer than 30
are found in organisms on Earth, and four of those (C, H, O, and N) make up approximately 96% of the mass of an
organism.[1]
Each unique element is identified by the number of protons in its atomic nucleus. In addition to protons, each
element's atomic nucleus contains an equal or greater number of neutrons (with the exception of hydrogen, which has
only one proton). The total number of protons per element is described as the atomic number, and the combined
mass of protons and neutrons is called the atomic mass or mass number. Therefore, it is possible to determine the
number of neutrons by subtracting the atomic number from the mass number.
Isotopes are different forms of the same element that have the same number of protons, but a different number of
neutrons. Many elements have several isotopes with one or two commonly occurring isotopes in nature. For example,
carbon-12 (12C), the most common isotope of carbon (98.6% of all C found on Earth),[2] contains six protons and six
neutrons. Therefore, it has a mass number of 12 (6 protons + 6 neutrons) and an atomic number of 6.
There are two additional types of isotopes in nature: heavy isotopes, and radioisotopes. Heavy isotopes have one or
more extra neutrons while still maintaining a stable atomic nucleus. An example of a heavy isotope is carbon-13 (13C)
(1.1% of all carbon).[3] 13C has a mass number of 13 (6 protons + 7 neutrons). Since the atomic number of 13C is 6,
it is still the element carbon; however, it has more mass than the more common form of the element, 12C, because of
the extra neutron in the nucleus. Carbon-14 (14C) (0.0001% of all carbon)[4] is an example of a radioisotope. 14C has
a mass number of 14 (6 protons + 8 neutrons); however, the extra neutrons in 14C result in an unstable nucleus. This
instability leads to the process of radioactive decay. Radioactive decay involves the loss of one or more neutrons and
the release of energy in the form of gamma rays, alpha particles, or beta particles (depending on the isotope).
Heavy isotopes and radioisotopes of carbon and other elements have proven to be useful in research, industry, and
medicine.

Chemical Bonds
There are three types of chemical bonds that are important when describing the interaction of atoms both within and
between molecules in microbiology: (1) covalent bonds, which can be either polar or non-polar, (2) ionic bonds, and
(3) hydrogen bonds. There are other types of interactions such as London dispersion forces and van der Waals forces
that could also be discussed when describing the physical and chemical properties of the intermolecular interactions
of atoms, but we will not include descriptions of these forces here.
Chemical bonding is determined by the outermost shell of electrons, called the valence electrons (VE), of an atom.
The number of VE is important when determining the number and type of chemical bonds an atom will form.

Covalent Bonds
The strongest chemical bond between two or more atoms is a covalent bond. These bonds form when an electron
is shared between two atoms, and these are the most common form of chemical bond in living organisms. Covalent
bonds form between the atoms of elements that make up the biological molecules in our cells. An example of a simple
molecule formed with covalent bonds is water, H2O, with one VE per H atom and 6 VE per O atom. Because of the
VE configuration, each H atom is able to accept one additional VE and each O atom is able to accept two additional
VE. When sharing electrons, the hydrogen and oxygen atoms that combine to form water molecules become bonded
1. Schrijver, Karel, and Iris Schrijver. Living with the Stars: How the Human Body Is Connected to the Life Cycles of the Earth, the Planets,
and the Stars. Oxford University Press, USA, 2015.
2. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “Stable and Radiocarbon Isotopes of Carbon Dioxide.” Web page. Accessed Feb 19,
2016 [http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/outreach/isotopes/chemistry.html]
3. ibid.
4. ibid.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix A

1211

together by covalent bonds (Figure A2). The electron from the hydrogen atom divides its time between the outer
electron shell of the hydrogen atom and the outermost electron shell of the oxygen atom. To completely fill the outer
shell of an oxygen atom, two electrons from two hydrogen atoms are needed, hence the subscript “2” indicating two
atoms of H in a molecule of H2O. This sharing is a lower energy state for all of the atoms involved than if they existed
without their outer shells filled.
There are two types of covalent bonds: polar and nonpolar. Nonpolar covalent bonds form between two atoms
of the same or different elements that share the electrons equally (Figure A2). In a polar covalent bond, the
electrons shared by the atoms spend more time closer to one nucleus than to the other nucleus. Because of the unequal
distribution of electrons between the different nuclei, a slightly positive (δ+) or slightly negative (δ–) charge develops.
Water is an example of a molecule formed with polar covalent bonds (Figure A2).

1212

Appendix A

Figure A2 The water molecule (top left) depicts a polar bond with a slightly positive charge on the hydrogen atoms
and a slightly negative charge on the oxygen. Methane (top right) is an example of a nonpolar covalent bond. Sodium
chloride (bottom) is a substance formed from ionic bonds between sodium and chlorine.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix A

1213

Ions and Ionic Bonds
When an atom does not contain equal numbers of protons and electrons, it is called an ion. Because the number of
electrons does not equal the number of protons, each ion has a net charge. Positive ions are formed by losing electrons
and are called cations. Negative ions are formed by gaining electrons and are called anions.
For example, a sodium atom has only has one electron in its outermost shell. It takes less energy for the sodium atom
to donate that one electron than it does to accept seven more electrons, which it would need to fill its outer shell. If
the sodium atom loses an electron, it now has 11 protons and only 10 electrons, leaving it with an overall charge of
+1. It is now called a sodium ion (Na+).
A chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer shell. Again, it is more energy efficient for the chlorine atom to gain
one electron than to lose seven. Therefore, it will more likely gain an electron to form an ion with 17 protons and
18 electrons, giving it a net negative (–1) charge. It is now called a chloride ion (Cl–). This movement of electrons
from one atom to another is referred to as electron transfer. Because positive and negative charges attract, these ions
stay together and form an ionic bond, or a bond between ions. When Na+ and Cl– ions combine to produce NaCl,
an electron from a sodium atom stays with the other seven from the chlorine atom, and the sodium and chloride ions
attract each other in a lattice of ions with a net zero charge (Figure A2).
Polyatomic ions consist of multiple atoms joined by covalent bonds; but unlike a molecule, a polyatomic ion has a
positive or negative charge. It behaves as a cation or anion and can therefore form ionic bonds with other ions to form
ionic compounds. The atoms in a polyatomic ion may be from the same element or different elements.
Table A1 lists some cations and anions that commonly occur in microbiology. Note that this table includes
monoatomic as well as polyatomic ions.
Some Common Ions in Microbiology
Cations

Anions

sodium

Na+

chloride

Cl–

hydrogen

H+

bicarbonate

HCO 3 −

potassium

K+

carbonate

CO 3 2−

ammonium

NH 4 +

hydrogen sulfate

H 2 SO 4 2−

copper (I)

Cu+

hydrogen sulfide

HS–

copper (II)

Cu2+

hydroxide

OH–

iron (II)

Fe2+

hypochlorite

ClO–

iron (III)

Fe3+

nitrite

NO 2 −

nitrate

NO 3 −

peroxide

O 2 2−

phosphate

PO 4 3−

pyrophosphate

P 2 O 7 4−

sulfite

SO 3 2−

thiosulfate

S 2 O 3 2−

Table A1

1214

Appendix A

Molecular Formula, Molecular Mass, and the Mole
For molecules formed by covalent bonds, the molecular formula represents the number and types of elemental
atoms that compose the molecule. As an example, consider a molecule of glucose, which has the molecular formula
C6H12O6. This molecular formula indicates that a single molecule of glucose is formed from six carbon atoms, twelve
hydrogen atoms, and six oxygen atoms.
The molecular mass of a molecule can be calculated using the molecular formula and the atomic mass of each
element in the molecule. The number of each type of atom is multiplied by the atomic mass; then the products are
added to get the molecular mass. For example the molecular mass of glucose, C6H12O6 (Figure A3), is calculated
as:
amu × 6 atoms = 72 amu
mass of carbon
= 12 atom
amu × 12 atoms = 12 amu
mass of hydrogen
= 1 atom
amu × 6 atoms = 96 amu
mass of oxygen
= 16 atom
molecular mass of glucose = 72 amu + 12 amu + 96 amu = 180 amu

Figure A3 The molecular structure of glucose showing the numbers of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms.
Glucose has a molecular mass of 180 amu.

The number of entities composing a mole has been experimentally determined to be 6.022 × 1023, a fundamental
constant named Avogadro’s number (NA) or the Avogadro constant. This constant is properly reported with an
explicit unit of “per mole.”

Energy
Thermodynamics refers to the study of energy and energy transfer involving physical matter.
Matter participating in a particular case of energy transfer is called a system, and everything outside of that matter
is called the surroundings. There are two types of systems: open and closed. In an open system, energy can
be exchanged with its surroundings. A closed system cannot exchange energy with its surroundings. Biological
organisms are open systems. Energy is exchanged between them and their surroundings as they use energy from the
sun to perform photosynthesis or consume energy-storing molecules and release energy to the environment by doing
work and releasing heat. Like all things in the physical world, energy is subject to physical laws. In general, energy
is defined as the ability to do work, or to create some kind of change. Energy exists in different forms. For example,
electrical energy, light energy, and heat energy are all different types of energy. The first law of thermodynamics,
often referred to as the law of conservation of energy, states that the total amount of energy in the universe is constant
and conserved. Energy exists in many different forms. According to the first law of thermodynamics, energy may be
transferred from place to place or transformed into different forms, but it cannot be created or destroyed.
The challenge for all living organisms is to obtain energy from their surroundings in forms that they can transfer
or transform into usable energy to do work. Microorganisms have evolved to meet this challenge. Chemical energy
stored within organic molecules such as sugars and fats is transferred and transformed through a series of cellular
chemical reactions into energy within molecules of ATP. Energy in ATP molecules is easily accessible to do work.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix A

1215

Examples of the types of work that cells need to do include building complex molecules, transporting materials,
powering the motion of cilia or flagella, and contracting muscle fibers to create movement.
A microorganism’s primary tasks of obtaining, transforming, and using energy to do work may seem simple.
However, the second law of thermodynamics explains why these tasks are more difficult than they appear. All
energy transfers and transformations are never completely efficient. In every energy transfer, some amount of energy
is lost in a form that is unusable. In most cases, this form is heat energy. Thermodynamically, heat energy is defined
as the energy transferred from one system to another that is not work. For example, some energy is lost as heat energy
during cellular metabolic reactions.
The more energy that is lost by a system to its surroundings, the less ordered and more random the system is. Scientists
refer to the measure of randomness or disorder within a system as entropy. High entropy means high disorder and low
energy. Molecules and chemical reactions have varying entropy as well. For example, entropy increases as molecules
at a high concentration in one place diffuse and spread out. The second law of thermodynamics says that energy will
always be lost as heat in energy transfers or transformations. Microorganisms are highly ordered, requiring constant
energy input to be maintained in a state of low entropy.

Chemical Reactions
Chemical reactions occur when two or more atoms bond together to form molecules or when bonded atoms are
broken apart. The substances used in a chemical reaction are called the reactants (usually found on the left side of
a chemical equation), and the substances produced by the reaction are known as the products (usually found on the
right side of a chemical equation). An arrow is typically drawn between the reactants and products to indicate the
direction of the chemical reaction; this direction is not always a “one-way street.”
An example of a simple chemical reaction is the breaking down of hydrogen peroxide molecules, each of which
consists of two hydrogen atoms bonded to two oxygen atoms (H2O2). The reactant hydrogen peroxide is broken down
into water, containing one oxygen atom bound to two hydrogen atoms (H2O), and oxygen, which consists of two
bonded oxygen atoms (O2). In the equation below, the reaction includes two hydrogen peroxide molecules and two
water molecules. This is an example of a balanced chemical equation, wherein the number of atoms of each element is
the same on each side of the equation. According to the law of conservation of matter, the number of atoms before and
after a chemical reaction should be equal, such that no atoms are, under normal circumstances, created or destroyed.
2H 2 O 2 ⎛⎝hydrogen peroxide ⎞⎠ ⟶ 2H 2 O(water) + O 2 (oxygen)
Some chemical reactions, such as the one shown above, can proceed in one direction until the reactants are all used
up. Equations that describe these reactions contain a unidirectional arrow and are irreversible. Reversible reactions
are those that can go in either direction. In reversible reactions, reactants are turned into products, but when the
concentration of product rises above a certain threshold (characteristic of the particular reaction), some of these
products will be converted back into reactants; at this point, the designations of products and reactants are reversed.
The changes in concentration continue until a certain relative balance in concentration between reactants and products
occurs—a state called chemical equilibrium. At this point, both the forward and reverse reactions continue to occur,
but they do so at the same rate, so the concentrations of reactants and products do not change. These situations of
reversible reactions are often denoted by a chemical equation with a double-headed arrow pointing towards both the
reactants and products. For example, when carbon dioxide dissolves in water, it can do so as a gas dissolved in water
or by reacting with water to produce carbonic acid. In the cells of some microorganisms, the rate of carbonic acid
production is accelerated by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, as indicated in the following equation:
CO 2 + H 2 O

carbonic
anhydrase

⇌

H 2 CO 3 ⇌ H+ + HCO 3−

Properties of Water and Solutions

The hydrogen and oxygen atoms within water molecules form polar covalent bonds. There is no overall charge to a
water molecule, but there is one ∂+ on each hydrogen atom and two ∂– on the oxygen atom. Each water molecule
attracts other water molecules because of the positive and negative charges in the different parts of the molecule

1216

Appendix A

(Figure A4). Water also attracts other polar molecules (such as sugars), forming hydrogen bonds. When a substance
readily forms hydrogen bonds with water, it can dissolve in water and is referred to as hydrophilic (“water-loving”).
Hydrogen bonds are not readily formed with nonpolar substances like oils and fats. These nonpolar compounds are
hydrophobic (“water-fearing”) and will orient away from and avoid water.

Figure A4 Hydrogen bonds form between slightly positive (∂+) and slightly negative (∂–) charges of polar covalent
molecules such as water.

The hydrogen bonds in water allow it to absorb and release heat energy more slowly than many other substances.
This means that water moderates temperature changes within organisms and in their environments. As energy input
continues, the balance between hydrogen-bond formation and breaking swings toward fewer hydrogen bonds: more
bonds are broken than are formed. This process results in the release of individual water molecules at the surface of
the liquid (such as a body of water, the leaves of a plant, or the skin of an organism) in a process called evaporation.
Conversely, as molecular motion decreases and temperatures drop, less energy is present to break the hydrogen bonds
between water molecules. These bonds remain intact and begin to form a rigid, lattice-like structure (e.g., ice). When
frozen, ice is less dense (the molecules are farther apart) than liquid water. This means that ice floats on the surface of
a body of water. In lakes, ponds, and oceans, ice will form on the surface of the water, creating an insulating barrier
to protect the animal and plant life beneath from freezing in the water. If this did not happen, plants and animals
living in water would freeze in a block of ice and could not move freely, making life in cold temperatures difficult or
impossible.
Because water is polar, with slight positive and negative charges, ionic compounds and polar molecules can readily
dissolve in it. Water is, therefore, what is referred to as a solvent—a substance capable of dissolving another
substance. The charged particles will form hydrogen bonds with a surrounding layer of water molecules. This is
referred to as a sphere of hydration and serves to keep the ions separated or dispersed in the water (Figure A5).
These spheres of hydration are also referred to as hydration shells. The polarity of the water molecule makes it an
effective solvent and is important in its many roles in living systems.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix A

1217

Figure A5 When table salt (NaCl) is mixed in water, spheres of hydration form around the ions.

The ability of insects to float on and skate across pond water results from the property of cohesion. In cohesion, water
molecules are attracted to each other (because of hydrogen bonding), keeping the molecules together at the liquid-air
(gas) interface. Cohesion gives rise to surface tension, the capacity of a substance to withstand rupture when placed
under tension or stress.
These cohesive forces are also related to water’s property of adhesion, or the attraction between water molecules and
other molecules. This is observed when water “climbs” up a straw placed in a glass of water. You will notice that
the water appears to be higher on the sides of the straw than in the middle. This is because the water molecules are
attracted to the straw and therefore adhere to it.
Cohesion and adhesion are also factors in bacterial colonies and biofilm formation. Cohesion keeps the colony intact
(helps it “stick” to a surface), while adhesion keeps the cells adhered to each other. Cohesive and adhesive forces
are important for sustaining life. For example, because of these forces, water in natural surroundings provides the
conditions necessary to allow bacterial and archaeal cells to adhere and accumulate on surfaces.

1218

Appendix A

Acids and Bases
The pH of a solution is a measure of hydrogen ion (H+) and hydroxide ion (OH–) concentrations and is described as
acidity or alkalinity, respectively. Acidity and alkalinity (also referred to as basicity) can be measured and calculated.
pH can be simply represented by the mathematic equation, pH = −log 10 ⎡⎣H+ ⎤⎦. On the left side of the equation, the

"p" means "the negative logarithm of " and the H represents the [H+]. On the right side of the equation, [H+] is the
concentration of H+ in moles/L . What is not represented in this simple equation is the contribution of the OH–, which
also participates in acidity or alkalinity. Calculation of pH results in a number range of 0 to 14 called the pH scale
(Figure A6). A pH value between 0 and 6.9 indicates an acid. It is also referred to as a low pH, due to a high [H+]
and low [OH–] concentration. A pH value between 7.1 and 14 indicates an alkali or base. It is also referred to as a
high pH, due to a low [H+] and high [OH–] concentration. A pH of 7 is described as a neutral pH and occurs when
[H+] equals [OH–].

Figure A6 The pH scale measures the concentration of hydrogen ions [H+] and [OH–] in a substance. (credit:
modification of work by Edward Stevens)

A change of one unit on the pH scale represents a change in the [H+] by a factor of 10, a change in two units represents
a change in the [H+] by a factor of 100. Thus, small changes in pH represent large changes in [H+].

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix B

1219

Appendix B

Mathematical Basics
Squares and Other Powers
An exponent, or a power, is mathematical shorthand for repeated multiplications. For example, the exponent “2”
means to multiply the base for that exponent by itself (in the example here, the base is “5”):
5 2 = 5 × 5 = 25
The exponent is “2” and the base is the number “5.” This expression (multiplying a number by itself) is also called a
square. Any number raised to the power of 2 is being squared. Any number raised to the power of 3 is being cubed:
5 3 = 5 × 5 × 5 = 125
A number raised to the fourth power is equal to that number multiplied by itself four times, and so on for higher
powers. In general:
nx = n × nx − 1

Calculating Percents

A percent is a way of expressing a fractional amount of something using a whole divided into 100 parts. A percent is
a ratio whose denominator is 100. We use the percent symbol, %, to show percent. Thus, 25% means a ratio of 25 ,
100
3
100
3% means a ratio of
, and 100 % percent means
, or a whole.
100
100

Converting Percents
A percent can be converted to a fraction by writing the value of the percent as a fraction with a denominator of 100
and simplifying the fraction if possible.
25% = 25 = 1
100 4
A percent can be converted to a decimal by writing the value of the percent as a fraction with a denominator of 100
and dividing the numerator by the denominator.
10% = 10 = 0.10
100
To convert a decimal to a percent, write the decimal as a fraction. If the denominator of the fraction is not 100, convert
it to a fraction with a denominator of 100, and then write the fraction as a percent.
0.833 = 833 = 83.3 = 83.3%
1000 100
To convert a fraction to a percent, first convert the fraction to a decimal, and then convert the decimal to a percent.
3 = 0.75 = 75 = 75%
4
100
Suppose a researcher finds that 15 out of 23 students in a class are carriers of Neisseria meningitides. What percentage
of students are carriers? To find this value, first express the numbers as a fraction.
carriers = 15
total students 23
Then divide the numerator by the denominator.
15 = 15 ÷ 23 ≈ 0.65
23

1220

Appendix B

Finally, to convert a decimal to a percent, multiply by 100.
0.65 × 100 = 65%
The percent of students who are carriers is 65%.
You might also get data on occurrence and non-occurrence; for example, in a sample of students, 9 tested positive for
Toxoplasma antibodies, while 28 tested negative. What is the percentage of seropositive students? The first step is to
determine the “whole,” of which the positive students are a part. To do this, sum the positive and negative tests.
positive + negative = 9 + 28 = 37
The whole sample consisted of 37 students. The fraction of positives is:
positive
= 9
total students 37
To find the percent of students who are carriers, divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100.
9 = 9 ÷ 37 ≈ 0.24
37
0.24 × 100 = 24%
The percent of positive students is about 24%.
Another way to think about calculating a percent is to set up equivalent fractions, one of which is a fraction with 100
as the denominator, and cross-multiply. The previous example would be expressed as:
9 = x
37 100
Now, cross multiply and solve for the unknown:
9 × 100
9 × 100
37
900
37
24

= 37x
= x

Divide both sides by 37

= x

Multiply

≈ x

Divide

The answer, rounded, is the same.

Multiplying and Dividing by Tens
In many fields, especially in the sciences, it is common to multiply decimals by powers of 10. Let’s see what happens
when we multiply 1.9436 by some powers of 10.
1.9436(10) = 19.436
1.9436(100) = 194.36
1.9436(1000) = 1943.6
The number of places that the decimal point moves is the same as the number of zeros in the power of ten. Table B1
summarizes the results.
Multiply by

Zeros

Decimal point moves . . .

10

1

1 place to the right

100

2

2 places to the right

1,000

3

3 places to the right

10,000

4

4 places to the right

Table B1

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix B

1221

We can use this pattern as a shortcut to multiply by powers of ten instead of multiplying using the vertical format. We
can count the zeros in the power of 10 and then move the decimal point that same number of places to the right.
So, for example, to multiply 45.86 by 100, move the decimal point 2 places to the right.

Sometimes when we need to move the decimal point, there are not enough decimal places. In that case, we use zeros
as placeholders. For example, let’s multiply 2.4 by 100. We need to move the decimal point 2 places to the right.
Since there is only one digit to the right of the decimal point, we must write a 0 in the hundredths place.

When dividing by powers of 10, simply take the opposite approach and move the decimal to the left by the number
of zeros in the power of ten.
Let’s see what happens when we divide 1.9436 by some powers of 10.
1.9436 ÷ 10 = 0.19436
1.9436 ÷ 100 = 0.019436
1.9436 ÷ 1000 = 0.0019436
If there are insufficient digits to move the decimal, add zeroes to create places.

Scientific Notation
Scientific notation is used to express very large and very small numbers as a product of two numbers. The first number
of the product, the digit term, is usually a number not less than 1 and not greater than 10. The second number of the
product, the exponential term, is written as 10 with an exponent. Some examples of scientific notation are given in
Table B2.
Standard Notation

Scientific Notation

1000

1 × 103

100

1 × 102

10

1 × 101

1

1 × 100

0.1

1 × 10−1

0.01

1 × 10−2

Table B2

Scientific notation is particularly useful notation for very large and very small numbers, such as 1,230,000,000 = 1.23
× 109, and 0.00000000036 = 3.6 × 10−10.

Expressing Numbers in Scientific Notation
Converting any number to scientific notation is straightforward. Count the number of places needed to move the
decimal next to the left-most non-zero digit: that is, to make the number between 1 and 10. Then multiply that number
by 10 raised to the number of places you moved the decimal. The exponent is positive if you moved the decimal to
the left and negative if you moved the decimal to the right. So

1222

Appendix B

2386 = 2.386 × 1000 = 2.386 × 10 3
and
0.123 = 1.23 × 0.1 = 1.23 × 10 −1
The power (exponent) of 10 is equal to the number of places the decimal is shifted.

Logarithms
The common logarithm (log) of a number is the power to which 10 must be raised to equal that number. For example,
the common logarithm of 100 is 2, because 10 must be raised to the second power to equal 100. Additional examples
are in Table B3.
Number

Exponential Form

Common Logarithm

1000

103

3

10

101

1

1

100

0

0.1

10−1

−1

0.001

10−3

−3

Table B3

To find the common logarithm of most numbers, you will need to use the LOG button on a calculator.

Rounding and Significant Digits
In reporting numerical data obtained via measurements, we use only as many significant figures as the accuracy of the
measurement warrants. For example, suppose a microbiologist using an automated cell counter determines that there
are 525,341 bacterial cells in a one-liter sample of river water. However, she records the concentration as 525,000
cells per liter and uses this rounded number to estimate the number of cells that would likely be found in 10 liters
of river water. In this instance, the last three digits of the measured quantity are not considered significant. They are
rounded to account for variations in the number of cells that would likely occur if more samples were measured.
The importance of significant figures lies in their application to fundamental computation. In addition and subtraction,
the sum or difference should contain as many digits to the right of the decimal as that in the least certain (indicated
by underscoring in the following example) of the numbers used in the computation.
Suppose a microbiologist wishes to calculate the total mass of two samples of agar.
4.38 3_ g
3.002 1_ g
______
7.38 5_ g
The least certain of the two masses has three decimal places, so the sum must have three decimal places.
In multiplication and division, the product or quotient should contain no more digits than than in the factor containing
the least number of significant figures. Suppose the microbiologist would like to calculate how much of a reagent
would be present in 6.6 mL if the concentration is 0.638 g/mL.
g
0.63 8_
× 6. 6_ mL = 4.1 g
mL
Again, the answer has only one decimal place because this is the accuracy of the least accurate number in the
calculation.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix B

1223

When rounding numbers, increase the retained digit by 1 if it is followed by a number larger than 5 (“round up”). Do
not change the retained digit if the digits that follow are less than 5 (“round down”). If the retained digit is followed
by 5, round up if the retained digit is odd, or round down if it is even (after rounding, the retained digit will thus
always be even).

Generation Time
It is possible to write an equation to calculate the cell numbers at any time if the number of starting cells and doubling
time are known, as long as the cells are dividing at a constant rate. We define N0 as the starting number of bacteria,
the number at time t = 0. Ni is the number of bacteria at time t = i, an arbitrary time in the future. Finally we will set j
equal to the number of generations, or the number of times the cell population doubles during the time interval. Then
we have,
Ni = N0 × 2 j
This equation is an expression of growth by binary fission.
In our example, N0 = 4, the number of generations, j, is equal to 3 after 90 minutes because the generation time is 30
minutes. The number of cells can be estimated from the following equation:
Ni = N0 × 2 j

N 90 = 4 × 2 3
N 90 = 4 × 8 = 32
The number of cells after 90 minutes is 32.

Most Probable Number
The table in Figure B1 contains values used to calculate the most probable number example given in How
Microbes Grow.

1224

Figure B1

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Appendix B

Appendix C

1245

Appendix C

Glossary
454 sequencing (pyrosequencing) a next generation
sequencing technique in which fragmented DNA has
DNA adapters attached, is amplified by PCR, is
attached to a bead, and then placed into a well with
sequencing reagents, and the flash of light produced
by the release of pyrophosphate on addition of a
nucleotide is monitored
5’ cap methylguanosine nucleotide added to 5’ end
of a eukaryotic primary transcript
70S ribosome a ribosome composed of 50S and 30S
subunits
80S ribosome cytoplasmic eukaryotic ribosome
composed of 60S and 40S subunits

A
α-helix secondary structure consisting of a helix
stabilized by hydrogen bonds between nearby amino
acid residues in a polypeptide
A (aminoacyl) site functional site of an intact
ribosome that binds incoming charged aminoacyl
tRNAs
A-B exotoxin class of exotoxin that contains A
subunits, which enter the cell and disrupt cellular
activities, and B subunits, which bind to host cell
receptors
ABO blood group system set of glycoprotein
antigens found on the surface of red blood cells; the
presence or absence of specific carbohydrates
determining blood type
absorbance when a molecule captures energy from
a photon and vibrates or stretches, using the energy
Acanthamoeba keratitis a condition characterized
by damage to the cornea and possible blindness
caused by parasitic infection of the protozoan
Acanthamoeba
acellular not made of cells
acid-fast stain a stain that differentiates cells that
have waxy mycolic acids in their gram-positive cell
walls
acidic dye a chromophore with a negative charge
that attaches to positively charged structures
acidophile organism that grows optimally at a pH
near 3.0
acne a skin disease in which hair follicles or pores
become clogged, leading to the formation of
comedones and infected lesions
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
disease caused by HIV, characterized by
opportunistic infections and rare cancers
actin a protein that polymerizes to form
microfilaments
activation energy energy needed to form or break
chemical bonds and convert a reactant or reactants to
a product or products
activator protein that increases the transcription of a
gene in response to an external stimulus
active carrier an infected individual who can
transmit the pathogen to others regardless of whether
symptoms are currently present
active immunity stimulation of one’s own adaptive
immune responses
active site location within an enzyme where
substrate(s) bind
acute disease disease of a relatively short duration
that develops and progresses in a predictable pattern
acute glomerulonephritis inflammation of the
glomeruli of the kidney, probably resulting from
deposition of immune complexes and an
autoimmune response caused by self-antigen
mimicry by a pathogen
acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis a severe
form of gingivitis, also called trench mouth
acute otitis media inflammatory disease of the
middle ear resulting from a microbial infection

acute rheumatic fever sequela of streptococcal
pharyngitis; comorbidities include arthritis and
carditis
acute-phase proteins antimicrobial molecules
produced by liver cells in response to pathogeninduced stimulation events
acyclovir antiviral guanosine analog; inhibits DNA
replication
adaptive immunity third-line defense characterized
by specificity and memory
Addison disease autoimmune disease affecting
adrenal gland function
adenine purine nitrogenous base found in
nucleotides
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) nucleotide derivative
and relative of ATP containing only one high-energy
phosphate bond
adenosine monophosphate (AMP) adenine
molecule bonded to a ribose molecule and to a single
phosphate group, having no high-energy phosphate
bonds
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) energy currency of
the cell; a nucleotide derivative that safely stores
chemical energy in its two high-energy phosphate
bonds
adhesins molecules on the surface of pathogens that
promote colonization of host tissue
adhesion the capability of microbes to attach to host
cells
aerobic respiration use of an oxygen molecule as
the final electron acceptor of the electron transport
system
aerotolerant anaerobe organism that does not use
oxygen but tolerates its presence
affinity maturation function of the immune system
by which B cells, upon re-exposure to antigen, are
selected to produce higher affinity antibodies
affinity measure of how tightly an antibody-binding
site binds to its epitope
aflatoxin chemical produced by the fungus
Aspergillus flavus; both a toxin and the most potent
known natural carcinogen
African sleeping sickness see human African
trypanosomiasis
agarose gel electrophoresis a method for separating
populations of DNA molecules of varying sizes by
differential migration rates caused by a voltage
gradient through a horizontal gel matrix
agglutination binding of different pathogen cells by
Fab regions of the same antibody to aggregate and
enhance elimination from body
agranulocytes leukocytes that lack granules in the
cytoplasm
alarmone small intracellular derivative of a
nucleotide that signals a global bacterial response
(i.e., activating a regulon of operons) to an
environmental stress
albendazole antihelminthic drug of the
benzimidazole class that binds to helminthic βtubulin, preventing microtubule formation
algae (singular: alga) any of various unicellular and
multicellular photosynthetic eukaryotic organisms;
distinguished from plants by their lack of vascular
tissues and organs
alkaliphile organism that grows optimally at pH
above 9.0
alkylating agent type of strong disinfecting
chemical that acts by replacing a hydrogen atom
within a molecule with an alkyl group, thereby
inactivating enzymes and nucleic acids
allergen antigen capable of inducing type I
hypersensitivity reaction
allergy hypersensitivity response to an allergen
allograft transplanted tissue from an individual of
the same species that is genetically different from the
recipient

allosteric activator molecule that binds to an
enzyme’s allosteric site, increasing the affinity of the
enzyme’s active site for the substrate(s)
allosteric site location within an enzyme, other than
the active site, to which molecules can bind,
regulating enzyme activity
allylamines class of antifungal drugs that inhibit
ergosterol biosynthesis at an early point in the
pathway
Alphaproteobacteria class of Proteobacteria that
are all oligotrophs
alveoli cul-de-sacs or small air pockets within the
lung that facilitate gas exchange
amantadine antiviral drug that targets the influenza
virus by preventing viral escape from endosomes
upon host cell uptake, thus preventing viral RNA
release and subsequent viral replication
amensalism type of symbiosis in which one
population harms the other but remains unaffected
itself
Ames test method that uses auxotrophic bacteria to
detect mutations resulting from exposure to
potentially mutagenic chemical compounds
amino acid a molecule consisting of a hydrogen
atom, a carboxyl group, and an amine group bonded
to the same carbon. The group bonded to the carbon
varies and is represented by an R in the structural
formula
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase enzyme that binds to a
tRNA molecule and catalyzes the addition of the
correct amino acid to the tRNA
aminoglycosides protein synthesis inhibitors that
bind to the 30S subunit and interfere with the
ribosome’s proofreading ability, leading to the
generation of faulty proteins that insert into and
disrupt the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane
amoebiasis intestinal infection caused by
Entamoeba histolytica
amoebic dysentery severe form of intestinal
infection caused by Entamoeba histolytica,
characterized by severe diarrhea with blood and
mucus
amphipathic a molecule containing both polar and
nonpolar parts
amphitrichous having two flagella or tufts of
multiple flagella, with one flagellum or tuft located
at each end of the bacterial cell
amphotericin B antifungal drug of the polyene class
that is used to treat several systemic fungal
infections
amplitude the height of a wave
anabolism chemical reactions that convert simpler
molecules into more complex ones
anaerobe chamber closed compartment used to
handle and grow obligate anaerobic cultures
anaerobe jar container devoid of oxygen used to
grow obligate anaerobes
anaerobic respiration use of a non-oxygen
inorganic molecule, like CO2, nitrate, nitrite,
oxidized iron, or sulfate, as the final electron
acceptor at the end of the electron transport system
analytical epidemiology study of disease outbreaks
to establish associations between an agent and a
disease state through observational studies
comparing groups of individuals
anaphylactic shock another term for anaphylaxis
anaphylaxis systemic and potentially lifethreatening type I hypersensitivity reaction
anergy peripheral tolerance mechanism that
prevents self-reactive T cells from being activated by
self-antigens through lack of co-stimulation
annealing formation of hydrogen bonds between the
nucleotide base pairs of two single-stranded
complementary nucleic acid sequences

Appendix C

1246

anoxygenic photosynthesis type of photosynthesis
found in many photosynthetic bacteria, including the
purple and green bacteria, where an electron donor
other than H2O is used to replace an electron lost by
a reaction center pigment, resulting no oxygen
production
anthrax a disease caused by Bacillus anthracis; the
cutaneous form causes a skin lesion to develop;
gastrointestinal and inhalation anthrax have high
mortality rates
antibiogram compilation of the antimicrobial
susceptibilities recorded for local bacterial strains,
which is useful for monitoring local trends in
antimicrobial resistance and aiding the prescription
of appropriate empiric antibacterial therapy
antibiotic-associated diarrhea diarrhea that
develops after antibiotic treatment as a result of
disruption to the normal microbiota; C. difficile is a
particularly serious example
antibody screen test to make sure that a potential
blood recipient has not produced antibodies to
antigens other than the ABO and Rh antigens
antibody Y-shaped glycoprotein molecule produced
by B cells that binds to specific epitopes on an
antigen
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC) mechanism by which large pathogens are
marked for destruction by specific antibodies and
then killed by secretion of cytotoxins by natural
killer cells, macrophages, or eosinophils
anticodon three-nucleotide sequence of a mature
tRNA that interacts with an mRNA codon through
complementary base pairing
antigen (also, immunogen) a molecule that
stimulates an adaptive immune response
antigenic able to stimulate an adaptive immune
response
antigenic drift form of slight antigenic variation that
occurs because of point mutations in the genes that
encode surface proteins
antigenic shift form of major antigenic variation
that occurs because of gene reassortment
antigenic variation changing of surface antigens
(carbohydrates or proteins) such that they are no
longer recognized by the host’s immune system
antigen-presenting cells (APC) macrophages,
dendritic cells, and B cells that process and present
foreign pathogen antigens for the purpose of
activating T cells and adaptive immune defenses
antimetabolites compounds that are competitive
inhibitors for bacterial metabolic enzymes
antimicrobial drugs chemical compounds,
including naturally produced drugs, semisynthetic
derivatives, and synthetic compounds, that target
specific microbial structures and enzymes, killing
specific microbes or inhibiting their growth
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) class of
nonspecific, cell-derived chemical mediators with
broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties
antiparallel two strands of DNA helix oriented in
opposite directions; one strand is oriented in the 5’ to
3’ direction, while the other is oriented in the 3’ to 5’
direction
antisense RNA small noncoding RNA molecules
that inhibit gene expression by binding to mRNA
transcripts via complementary base pairing
antisense strand transcription template strand of
DNA; the strand that is transcribed for gene
expression
antisepsis protocol that removes potential pathogens
from living tissue
antiseptic antimicrobial chemical that can be used
safely on living tissue
antiserum serum obtained from an animal
containing antibodies against a particular antigen
that was artificially introduced to the animal
apoenzyme enzyme without its cofactor or
coenzyme
apoptosis programmed and organized cell death
without lysis of the cell
arachnoid mater middle membrane surrounding the
brain that produces cerebrospinal fluid
arboviral encephalitis infection by an arthropodborne virus that results in an inflammation of the
brain

arbovirus any of a variety of viruses that are
transmitted by arthropod vectors
archaea any of various unicellular prokaryotic
microorganisms, typically having cell walls
containing pseudopeptidoglycan
Archaea domain of life separate from the domains
Bacteria and Eukarya
artemisinin antiprotozoan and antifungal drug
effective against malaria that is thought to increase
intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species in
target microbes
artery large, thick-walled vessel that carries blood
from the heart to the body tissues
Arthus reaction localized type III hypersensitivity
artificial active immunity immunity acquired
through exposure to pathogens and pathogen
antigens through a method other than natural
infection
artificial passive immunity transfer of antibodies
produced by a donor to another individual for the
purpose of preventing or treating disease
ascariasis soil-transmitted intestinal infection caused
by the large nematode roundworm Ascaris
lumbricoides
ascocarps cup-shaped fruiting bodies of an
ascomycete fungus
ascospore asexual spore produced by ascomycete
fungi
ascus structure of ascomycete fungi containing
spores
asepsis sterile state resulting from proper use of
microbial control protocols
aseptic technique method or protocol designed to
prevent microbial contamination of sterile objects,
locations, or tissues
aspergillosis fungal infection caused by the mold
Aspergillus; immunocompromised patients are
primarily at risk
asymptomatic carrier an infected individual who
exhibits no signs or symptoms of disease yet is
capable of transmitting the pathogen to others
asymptomatic not exhibiting any symptoms of
disease
atomic force microscope a scanning probe
microscope that uses a thin probe that is passed just
above the specimen to measure forces between the
atoms and the probe
ATP synthase integral membrane protein that
harnesses the energy of the proton motive force by
allowing hydrogen ions to diffuse down their
electrochemical gradient, causing components of this
protein to spin, making ATP from ADP and Pi
attachment binding of phage or virus to host cell
receptors
attenuation regulatory system of prokaryotes
whereby secondary stem-loop structures formed
within the 5’ end of an mRNA being transcribed
determine both if transcription to complete the
synthesis of this mRNA will occur and if this mRNA
will be used for translation
autoclave specialized device for the moist-heat
sterilization of materials through the application of
pressure to steam, allowing the steam to reach
temperatures above the boiling point of water
autocrine function refers to a cytokine signal
released from a cell to a receptor on its own surface
autograft tissue transplanted from a location on an
individual to a different location on the same
individual
autoimmune disease loss of tolerance to self,
resulting in immune-mediated destruction of self
cells and tissues
autoinducer signaling molecule produced by a
bacterial cell that can modify the activity of
surrounding cells; associated with quorum sensing
autoradiography the method of producing a
photographic image from radioactive decay; in
molecular genetics the method allows the
visualization of radioactively-labeled DNA probes
that have hybridized to a nucleic acid sample
autotroph organism that converts inorganic carbon
dioxide into organic carbon
auxotroph nutritional mutant with a loss-of-function
mutation in a gene encoding the biosynthesis of a
specific nutrient such as an amino acid

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

avidity strength of the sum of the interactions
between an antibody and antigen
axon long projection of a neuron along which an
electrochemical signal is transmitted
azithromycin semisynthetic macrolide with
increased spectrum of activity, decreased toxicity,
and increased half-life compared with erythromycin

B
β-lactamases bacterially produced enzymes that
cleave the β-lactam ring of susceptible β-lactam
antimicrobials, rendering them inactive and
conferring resistance
β-lactams group of antimicrobials that inhibit cell
wall synthesis; includes the penicillins,
cephalosporins, carbapenems, and monobactams;
inhibits the transpeptidase cross-linking activity of
penicillin-binding proteins
β-oxidation process of fatty acid degradation that
sequentially removes two-carbon acetyl groups,
producing NADH and FADH2, on entry into the
Krebs cycle
β-pleated sheet secondary structure consisting of
pleats formed by hydrogen bonds between localized
segments of amino acid residues on the backbone of
the polypeptide chain
B-cell receptors (BCRs) membrane-bound IgD and
IgM antibody that bind specific antigen epitopes
with Fab antigen-binding region
B lymphocyte antibody-producing cells of humoral
immunity; B cell
babesiosis tickborne protozoan infection caused by
Babesia spp. and characterized by malaise, fatigue,
fever, headache, myalgia, and joint pain
bacillary dysentery gastrointestinal illness caused
by Shigella bacteria, also called shigellosis
bacillus (bacilli) rod-shaped prokaryotic cell
bacitracin group of structurally similar peptides that
block the movement of peptidoglycan precursors
across the cell membrane, inhibiting peptidoglycan
synthesis
bacteremia condition marked by the presence of
bacteria in the blood
bacteria (singular: bacterium) any of various
unicellular prokaryotic microorganisms typically
(but not always) having cell wells that contain
peptidoglycan
bacterial lawn layer of confluent bacterial growth
on an agar plate
bacterial meningitis bacterial infection that results
in an inflammation of the meninges
bacterial vaginosis a condition caused by an
overgrowth of bacteria in the vagina that may or may
not cause symptoms
bactericidal irreversible inhibition of a microbe’s
ability to divide
bactericide chemical or physical treatment that kills
bacteria
bacteriochlorophylls green, purple, or blue
pigments of bacteria; they are similar to chlorophyll
of plants
bacteriology the study of bacteria
bacteriophage virus that infects bacteria
bacteriostatic having the ability to inhibit bacterial
growth, generally by means of chemical or physical
treatment; reversible inhibition of a microbe’s ability
to divide
barophile organism that grows under high
atmospheric pressure
basal body component of eukaryotic flagellum or
cilium composed of nine microtubule triplets and
attaches the flagellum or cilium to the cell
base sequence identity of the specific nucleotides
present in a nucleic acid strand and their order within
the strand
basic dye a chromophore with a positive charge that
attaches to negatively charged structures
basidia (basidium, sing.) small club-shaped
structures of basidiomycete fungi where
basidiospores are produced

Appendix C

basidiocarps fruiting bodies of basidiomycete fungi
basidiospores spores produced sexually via budding
in basidiomycete fungi
basophils leukocytes with granules containing
histamine and other chemicals that facilitate allergic
responses and inflammation when released
benzimidazoles class of antihelminthic drugs that
bind to helminthic β-tubulin, preventing microtubule
formation
Betaproteobacteria class of Proteobacteria that are
all eutrophs
binary fission predominant form of bacterial
reproduction in which one cell divides into two
daughter cells of equal size, which separate, each
offspring receiving a complete copy of the parental
genome
binocular having two eyepieces
binomial nomenclature a universal convention for
the scientific naming of organisms using Latinized
names for genus and species
biofilm complex ecosystem of bacteria embedded in
a matrix
biogeochemical cycle recycling of inorganic matter
between living organisms and their nonliving
environment
bioinformatics the analysis of large amounts of
information required for interpretation of these data
biological transmission movement of a pathogen
between hosts facilitated by a biological vector in
which the pathogen grows and reproduces
biological vector an animal (typically an arthropod)
that is infected with a pathogen and is capable of
transmitting the pathogen from one host to another
biomarker a protein expressed by a cell or tissue
that is indicative of disease
biomolecule a molecule that is part of living matter
bioremediation use of microbes to remove
xenobiotics or environmental pollutants from a
contaminated site
biosynthesis replication of viral genome and other
protein components
biotechnology the science of using living systems to
benefit humankind
bisbiguanide type of chemical compound with
antiseptic properties; disrupts cell membranes at low
concentrations and causes congealing of intracellular
contents at high concentrations
blastomycosis fungal disease associated with
infections by Blastomyces dermatitidis; can cause
disfiguring scarring of the hands and other
extremities
blepharitis inflammation of the eyelids
blocking antibodies antigen-specific antibodies
(usually of the IgG type) produced via
desensitization therapy
blood-brain barrier tight cell junctions of the
endothelia lining the blood vessels that serve the
central nervous system, preventing passage of
microbes from the bloodstream into the brain and
cerebrospinal fluid
blue-white screening a technique commonly used
for identifying transformed bacterial cells containing
recombinant plasmids using lacZ-encoding plasmid
vectors
blunt ends ends of DNA molecules lacking singlestranded complementary overhangs that are
produced when some restriction enzymes cut DNA
botulism form of flaccid paraylsis caused by the
ingestion of a neurotoxin produced by Clostridium
botulinum
bradykinin activated form of a proinflammatory
molecule induced in the presence of invader
microbes; opens gaps between cells in blood vessels,
allowing fluid and cells to leak into surrounding
tissue
bridge reaction reaction linking glycolysis to the
Krebs cycle during which each pyruvate is
decarboxylated and oxidized (forming NADH), and
the resulting two-carbon acetyl group is attached to a
large carrier called coenzyme A, resulting in the
formation of acetyl-CoA and CO; also called the
transition reaction

1247

brightfield microscope a compound light
microscope with two lenses; it produces a dark
image on a bright background
broad-spectrum antimicrobial drug that targets
many different types of microbes
bronchi major air passages leading to the lungs after
bifurcating at the windpipe
bronchioles smaller air passages within the lung that
are formed as the bronchi become further subdivided
bronchitis inflammation of the bronchi
brucellosis zoonotic disease caused by bacteria of
the genus Brucella that results in undulant fever
bubo swollen, inflamed lymph node that forms as a
result of a microbial infection
bubonic plague most common form of plague in
humans, marked by the presence of swollen lymph
nodes (buboes)
budding unequal reproductive division in which a
smaller cell detaches from the parent cell
budding yeasts yeasts that divide by budding off of
daughter cells
Burkitt lymphoma disease characterized by rapidly
growing solid tumor; caused by Epstein-Barr virus
(HHV-4)
burst release of new virions by a lysed host cell
infected by a virus
burst size the number of virions released from a host
cell when it is lysed because of a viral infection

C
Calvin-Benson cycle most common CO2 fixation
pathway in most photoautotrophs; involves lightindependent reactions of photosynthesis that occur in
the cytoplasm of photosynthetic bacteria and in the
stroma of eukaryotic chloroplasts
Campylobacter jejuni gastroenteritis gastroenteritis
caused by C. jejuni; generally mild but sometimes
with serious complications
candidiasis fungal infection caused by Candida
spp., especially C. albicans; can affect various
regions of the body, e.g., skin (cutaneous
candidiasis), oral cavity (oral thrush), or vagina
(yeast infection)
candle jar container with a tight-fitting lid in which
a burning candle consumes oxygen and releases
carbon dioxide, thereby creating an environment
suitable for capnophiles
capillary small blood vessel found in the interstitial
space of tissue; delivers nutrients and oxygen, and
removes waste products
capnophile organism that requires carbon dioxide
levels higher than atmospheric concentration
capsid protein coat surrounding the genome of the
virus
capsomere individual protein subunits that make up
the capsid
capsule staining a negative staining technique that
stains around a bacterial capsule while leaving the
capsule clear
capsule type of glycocalyx with organized layers of
polysaccharides that aid in bacterial adherence to
surfaces and in evading destruction by immune cells
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE)
group of bacteria that have developed resistance to
all β-lactams, including carbapenems, and many
other drug classes
carbohydrate the most abundant type of
biomolecule, consisting of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen
carbon skeleton chain of carbon atoms to which one
or more functional groups are bound
carboxysome an inclusion composed of an outer
shell of thousands of protein subunits. Its interior is
filled with ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/
oxygenase (RuBisCO) and carbonic anhydrase,
which are both used for carbon metabolism
carbuncle abscess containing a large, deep, purulent
skin lesion
carcinogen agent that causes cancer

case-control study a type of observational study in
which a group of affected individuals are compared,
usually retrospectively, to a similar group of
unaffected individuals
catabolic activator protein (CAP)/cAMP receptor
protein (CRP) protein that, when bound to cAMP in
the presence of low levels of glucose, binds to the
promoters of operons that control the processing of
alternative sugars
catabolism chemical reactions that break down
complex molecules into simpler ones
catabolite repression repression of the transcription
of operons encoding enzymes for the use of
substrates other than glucose when glucose levels are
high
catalase enzyme that breaks down hydrogen
peroxide to water and oxygen
catalyst molecule that increases the rate of a
chemical reaction but is not used or changed during
the chemical reaction and, thus, is reusable
catarrhal stage in pertussis, a disease stage marked
by inflammation of the mucous membranes
combined with excessive secretions
cat-scratch disease bacterial infection of the lymph
nodes caused by Bartonella henselae; frequently
transmitted via a cat scratch
causative agent the pathogen or substance
responsible for causing a particular disease; etiologic
agent
CCA amino acid binding end region of a mature
tRNA that binds to an amino acid
celiac disease disease largely of the small intestine
caused by an immune response to gluten that results
in the production of autoantibodies and an
inflammatory response
cell envelope the combination of external cellular
structures (e.g., plasma membrane, cell wall, outer
membrane, glycocalyces) that collectively contain
the cytoplasm and internal structures of a cell
cell membrane lipid bilayer with embedded proteins
and carbohydrates that defines the boundary of the
cell (also called the cytoplasmic membrane or
plasma membrane)
cell morphology cell shape, structure, and
arrangement, as viewed microscopically
cell theory the theory that all organisms are
composed of cells and that the cell is the
fundamental unit of life
cell wall a structure in the cell envelope of some
cells that helps the cell maintain its shape and
withstand changes in osmotic pressure
cellular immunity adaptive immunity involving T
cells and the destruction of pathogens and infected
cells
cellulitis a subcutaneous skin infection that develops
in the dermis or hypodermis, resulting in a red,
painful inflammation
cellulose a structural polysaccharide composed of
glucose monomers linked together in a linear chain
by glycosidic bonds
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) the national public health agency in the
United States
central dogma scientific principle explaining the
flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to
protein
central nervous system (CNS) portion of the
nervous system made up of the brain and spinal cord
central tolerance negative selection of self-reactive
T cells in thymus
centriole a component of a centrosome with the
structural array of nine parallel microtubules
arranged in triplets; involved in eukaryotic cell
division
centrosome a microtubule-organizing center for the
mitotic spindle found in animal cells; it separates
chromosomes during cell division and is composed
of a pair of centrioles positioned at right angles to
each other
cephalosporins a group of cell wall synthesis
inhibitors within the class of β-lactams
cercarial dermatitis inflammation of the skin
caused by a reaction to cercaria of Schistosoma spp.,
which can penetrate the skin and blood vessels; also
called swimmer’s itch or clam digger’s itch

Appendix C

1248

cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sterile liquid produced in
the brain that fills the subarachnoid space of the
brain and spinal column
cervix the part of the uterus that connects to the
vagina
CFB group phylum consisting of the gram-negative,
rod-shaped nonproteobacteria genera Cytophaga,
Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides
Chagas disease potentially fatal protozoan infection
caused by Trypanosoma cruzi and endemic to
Central and South America; transmitted by the
triatomine bug (kissing bug)
chancroid an STI caused by Haemophilus ducreyi
that produces soft chancres on genitals
charged tRNA activated tRNA molecule carrying
its cognate amino acid
chemical mediators chemicals or enzymes
produced by a variety of cells; provide nonspecific
antimicrobial defense mechanisms
chemically defined media media in which all
components are chemically defined
chemiosmosis flow of hydrogen ions across the
membrane through ATP synthase
chemokines chemotactic cytokines that recruit
specific subsets of leukocytes to infections, damaged
tissue, and sites of inflammation
chemotaxis directional movement of a cell in
response to a chemical attractant
chemotroph organism that gets its energy from the
transfer of electrons originating from chemical
compounds
chickenpox common childhood disease caused by
the varicella-zoster virus and marked by the
formation of pustular lesions on the trunk
chikungunya fever mosquito-borne viral disease
caused by the chikungunya virus and characterized
by high fever, joint pain, rash, and blisters
chirality property of stereoisomer molecules by
which their structures are nonsuperimposable mirrorimages
chitin polysaccharide that is an important
component of fungal cell walls
chlamydia a common STI caused by Chlamydia
trachomatis
chloramphenicol protein synthesis inhibitor with
broad-spectrum activity that binds to the 50S
subunit, inhibiting peptide bond formation
chlorophyll a type of photosynthetic pigment found
in some prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
chloroplast organelle found in plant and algal cells
in which photosynthesis occurs
cholera gastrointestinal illness caused by Vibrio
cholera characterized by severe diarrhea
chromatin combination of DNA with DNA binding
proteins
chromogenic substrate colorless substrate
(chromogen) that is converted into a colored end
product by the enzyme
chromophores pigments that absorb and reflect
particular wavelengths of light (giving them a color)
chromosome discrete DNA structure within a cell
that controls cellular activities
chronic disease any disease that progresses and
persists over a long time
chronic granulomatous disease primary
immunodeficiency caused by an impaired ability of
phagocytic cells to kill ingested bacteria in the
phagolysosome
chronic wasting disease prion disease of deer and
elk in the United States and Canada
cilia (singular: cilium) short filamentous structures
found on some eukaryotic cells; each is composed of
microtubules in a 9+2 array, and may be used for
locomotion, feeding, and/or movement of
extracellular particles that come in contact with the
cell
ciliated epithelial cells hair-like cells in the
respiratory tract that beat, pushing mucus secretions
and trapped debris away from the sensitive tissues of
the lungs
ciliates protists with cilia (Ciliophora), including
Paramecium and Stentor, classified within the
Chromalveolata

cisternae the sacs of the endoplasmic reticulum
citric acid cycle see Krebs cycle
class switching genetic rearrangement of constant
region gene segments in plasma cells to switch
antibody production from IgM to IgG, IgA, or IgE
clindamycin semisynthetic protein synthesis
inhibitor of the lincosamide class that binds to the
50S subunit, inhibiting peptide bond formation
clone a genetically identical cell or individual
Clostridium perfringens gastroenteritis relatively
mild gastrointestinal illness caused by C. perfringens
clusters of differentiation (CD) cell-surface
glycoproteins that serve to identify and distinguish
white blood cells
coagulase enzyme that causes the activation of
fibrinogen to form fibrin, promoting clotting of the
blood
coarse focusing knob a knob on a microscope that
produces relatively large movements to adjust focus
coccidioidomycosis disease caused by the highly
infectious fungal pathogen Coccidioides immitis and
related species
codon three-nucleotide sequence within mRNA that
specifies a particular amino acid to be incorporated
into the polypeptide being synthesized
coenocyte multinucleated eukaryotic cell that forms
as a result of multiple rounds of nuclear division
without the accompanying division of the plasma
membrane
coenocytic hyphae nonseptate hyphae that are
multinucleate and lack cell walls or membranes
between cells; characteristic of some fungi
coenzyme organic molecule required for proper
enzyme function that is not consumed and is
reusable
cofactor inorganic ion that helps stabilize enzyme
conformation and function
cognate amino acid amino acid added to a specific
tRNA molecule that correctly corresponds to the
tRNA’s anticodon and, hence, the mRNA’s codon,
reflecting the genetic code
cohort method a method used in observational
studies in which a group of individuals is followed
over time and factors potentially important in the
development of disease are evaluated
colistin membrane-active polymyxin that was
historically used for bowel decontamination but now
used for systemic infections with drug-resistant
pathogens
colitis inflammation of the large intestine
collagenase enzyme that digests collagen, the
dominant protein in connective tissue
colony-forming unit (CFU) a counting quantity
represented by a colony formed on solid medium
from a single cell or a few cells
commensalism type of symbiosis in which one
population benefits and the other is not affected
commercial sterilization type of sterilization
protocol used in food production; uses conditions
that are less harsh (lower temperatures) to preserve
food quality but still effectively destroy vegetative
cells and endospores of common foodborne
pathogens such as Clostridium botulinum
common cold most common cause of rhinitis in
humans; associated with a variety of adenoviruses,
coronaviruses, and rhinoviruses
common source spread a mode of disease
transmission in which every infection originates
from the same source
communicable able to be transmitted directly or
indirectly from one person to another
community group of interacting populations of
organisms
competitive inhibitor molecule that binds to an
enzyme’s active site, preventing substrate binding
competitive interactions interactions between
populations in which one of them competes with
another for resources
complement activation cascading activation of the
complement proteins in the blood, resulting in
opsonization, inflammation, and lysis of pathogens

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

complement fixation test test for antibodies against
a specific pathogen using complement-mediated
hemolysis
complement system series of proteins that can
become activated in the presence of invading
microbes, resulting in opsonization, inflammation,
and lysis of pathogens
complementary base pairs base pairing due to
hydrogen bonding that occurs between a specific
purine and a specific pyrimidine; A bonds with T (in
DNA), and C bonds with G
complementary DNA (cDNA) a DNA molecule
complementary to mRNA that is made through the
activity of reverse transcriptase
complex media media that contain extracts of
animals and plants that are not chemically defined
complex virus virus shape that often includes
intricate characteristics not seen in the other
categories of capsid
compound microscope a microscope that uses
multiple lenses to focus light from the specimen
condenser lens a lens on a microscope that focuses
light from the light source onto the specimen
conditional mutation mutant form of a gene whose
mutant phenotype is expressed only under certain
environmental conditions
confocal microscope a scanning laser microscope
that uses fluorescent dyes and excitation lasers to
create three-dimensional images
conidia asexual fungal spores not enclosed in a sac;
produced in a chain at the end of specialized hyphae
called conidiophores
conjugate vaccine a vaccine consisting of a
polysaccharide antigen conjugated to a protein to
enhance immune response to the polysaccharide;
conjugate vaccines are important for young children
who do not respond well to polysaccharide antigens
conjugated protein protein carrying a
nonpolypeptidic portion
conjugation mechanism of horizontal gene transfer
in bacteria in which DNA is directly transferred from
one bacterial cell to another by a conjugation pilus
conjugation pilus (sex pilus) hollow tube composed
of protein encoded by the conjugation plasmid that
brings two bacterial cells into contact with each
other for the process of conjugation
conjunctiva the mucous membranes covering the
eyeball and inner eyelid
conjunctivitis inflammation of the conjunctiva, the
mucous membrane covering the eye and inside of the
eyelid
constitutively expressed describes genes that are
transcribed and translated continuously to provide
the cell with constant intermediate levels of the
protein products
contact dermatitis inflammation of the skin
resulting from a type IV hypersensitivity to an
allergen or irritant
contact see exposure
contact transmission movement of a pathogen
between hosts due to contact between the two; may
be direct or indirect
contagious easily spread from person to person
continuous cell line derived from transformed cells
or tumors, these cells are often able to be subcultured
many times, or, in the case of immortal cell lines,
grown indefinitely
continuous common source spread a mode of
disease transmission in which every infection
originates from the same source and that source
produces infections for longer than one incubation
period
contractile vacuoles organelles found in some cells,
especially in some protists, that take up water and
then move the water out of the cell for
osmoregulatory purposes (i.e., to maintain an
appropriate salt and water balance)
contrast visible differences between parts of a
microscopic specimen
convalescence stage the final stage of a whooping
cough infection, marked by a chronic cough
Coombs’ reagent antiserum containing antihuman
immunoglobulins used to facilitate hemagglutination
by cross-linking the human antibodies attached to
red blood cells

Appendix C

cooperative interactions interactions between
populations in which both benefit
cortex tightly packed layer of fungal filaments at the
outer surface of a lichen; foliose lichens have a
second cortex layer beneath the medulla
counterstain a secondary stain that adds contrasting
color to cells from which the primary stain has been
washed out by a decolorizing agent
crenation shriveling of a cell
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease form of transmissible
spongiform encephalopathy found in humans;
typically a fatal disease
crisis phase point at which a fever breaks, reaching
a peak before the hypothalamus resets back to
normal body temperature
critical item object that must be sterile because it
will be used inside the body, often penetrating sterile
tissues or the bloodstream
cross-match in the major cross-match, donor red
blood cells are checked for agglutination using
recipient serum; in the minor cross-match, donor
serum is checked for agglutinizing antibodies against
recipient red blood cells
cross-presentation a mechanism by which dendritic
cells process antigens for MHC I presentation to
CD8 T cells through phagocytosis of the pathogen
(which would normally lead to MHC II presentation)
cross-resistance when a single resistance
mechanism confers resistance to multiple
antimicrobial drugs
cross-sectional study a type of observational study
in which measurements are made on cases, both
affected and unaffected, at one point in time and the
measurements analyzed to uncover associations with
the disease state
crustose lichens lichens that are tightly attached to
the substrate, giving them a crusty appearance
cryptococcosis fungal pneumonia caused by the
encapsulated yeast Cryptococcus neoformans
commonly found in bird droppings
cryptosporidiosis intestinal infection caused by
Cryptosporidium parvum or C. hominis
culture density the number of cells per volume of
broth
culture medium combination of compounds in
solution that supports growth
cutaneous mycosis any fungal infection that affects
the surface of the skin, hair, or nails
cyanobacteria phototrophic, chlorophyll-containing
bacteria that produce large amounts of gaseous
oxygen
cyclic AMP (cAMP) intracellular signaling
molecule made through the action of adenylyl
cyclase from ATP when glucose levels are low, with
the ability to bind to a catabolite activator protein to
allow it to bind to regulatory regions and activate the
transcription of operons encoding enzymes for
metabolism of alternative substrates
cyclic photophosphorylation pathway used in
photosynthetic organisms when the cell’s need for
ATP outweighs that for NADPH, thus bypassing
NADPH production
cyclosporiasis intestinal infection caused by
Cyclospora cayetanensis
cystic echinococcosis hydatid disease, an infection
caused by the tapeworm Echinococcus granulosus
that can cause cyst formation
cysticerci larval form of a tapeworm
cystitis inflammation of the bladder
cysts microbial cells surrounded by a protective
outer covering; some microbial cysts are formed to
help the microbe survive harsh conditions, whereas
others are a normal part of the life cycle
cytochrome oxidase final ETS complex used in
aerobic respiration that transfers energy-depleted
electrons to oxygen to form H2O
cytokine storm an excessive release of cytokines,
typically triggered by a superantigen, that results in
unregulated activation of T cells
cytokines protein molecules that act as a chemical
signals; produced by cells in response to a
stimulation event

1249

cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection human
herpesvirus 5 infection that is typically
asymptomatic but can become serious in
immunocompromised patients, transplant recipients,
and developing fetuses
cytopathic effect cell abnormality resulting from a
viral infection
cytoplasm the gel-like material composed of water
and dissolved or suspended chemicals contained
within the plasma membrane of a cell
cytoplasmic membrane see cell membrane
cytoproct a protozoan cell structure that is
specialized for excretion
cytosine pyrimidine nitrogenous base found in
nucleotides
cytoskeleton a network of filaments or tubules in the
eukaryotic cell that provides shape and structural
support for cells; aids movement of materials
throughout the cell
cytostome a protozoan cell structure that is
specialized for phagocytosis (i.e., to take in food)
cytotoxic T cells effector cells of cellular immunity
that target and eliminate cells infected with
intracellular pathogens through induction of
apoptosis
cytotoxicity harmful effects to host cell

D
dacryocystitis inflammation of the lacrimal sac
often associated with a plugged nasolacrimal duct
daptomycin cyclic lipopetide that disrupts the
bacterial cell membrane
darkfield microscope a compound light microscope
that produces a bright image on a dark background;
typically a modified brightfield microscope
death phase (decline phase) phase of the growth
curve at which the number of dying cells exceeds the
number of new cells formed
decimal reduction time (DRT) or D-value amount
of time it takes for a specific protocol to produce a
one order of magnitude decrease in the number of
organisms; that is, death of 90% of the population
decolorizing agent a substance that removes a stain,
usually from some parts of the specimen
deeply branching bacteria bacteria that occupy the
lowest branches of the phylogenetic tree of life
definitive host the preferred host organism for a
parasite, in which the parasite reaches maturity and
may reproduce sexually
degeneracy redundancy in the genetic code because
a given amino acid is encoded by more than one
nucleotide triplet codon
degerming protocol that significantly reduces
microbial numbers by using mild chemicals (e.g.,
soap) and gentle scrubbing of a small area of skin or
tissue to avoid the transmission of pathogenic
microbes
degranulation release of the contents of mast cell
granules in response to the cross-linking of IgE
molecules on the cell surface with allergen
molecules
dehydration synthesis chemical reaction in which
monomer molecules bind end to end in a process that
results in the formation of water molecules as a
byproduct
deletion type of mutation involving the removal of
one or more bases from a DNA sequence
Deltaproteobacteria class of Proteobacteria that
includes sulfate-reducing bacteria
denatured protein protein that has lost its secondary
and tertiary structures (and quaternary structure, if
applicable) without the loss of its primary structure
dendrites branched extensions of the soma of a
neuron that interact with other cells
dengue fever mosquito-borne viral hemorrhagic
disease; also known as breakbone fever
dental calculus calcified heavy plaque on teeth, also
called tartar
dental caries cavities formed in the teeth as a result
of tooth decay caused by microbial activity

deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) double-stranded
nucleic acid composed of deoxyribonucleotides that
serves as the genetic material of the cell
deoxyribonucleotides DNA nucleotides containing
deoxyribose as the pentose sugar component
dermatophyte any fungus of the genera
Microsporum, Epidermophyton, or Trichophyton,
which feed on keratin (a protein found in skin, hair,
and nails) and can cause cutaneous infections
dermis the second layer of human skin, found
between the epidermis and the hypodermis
descriptive epidemiology a method of studying a
disease outbreak using case histories, contact
interviews, medical information, and other sources
of information
desensitization injections of antigen that lead to
production of antigen-specific IgG molecules,
effectively outcompeting IgE molecules on the
surface of sensitized mast cells for antigen
desiccation method of microbial control involving
the removal of water from cells through drying or
dehydration
desquamation peeling and shedding of outermost
skin
diapedesis process by which leukocytes pass
through capillary walls to reach infected tissue; also
called extravasation
diaphragm a component of a microscope; typically
consists of a disk under the stage with holes of
various sizes; can be adjusted to allow more or less
light from the light source to reach the specimen
differential interference-contrast microscope a
microscope that uses polarized light to increase
contrast
differential media media that contain additives that
make it possible to distinguish bacterial colonies
based on metabolic activities of the organisms
differential staining staining that uses multiple dyes
to differentiate between structures or organisms
diffraction the changing of direction (bending or
spreading) that occurs when a light wave interacts
with an opening or barrier
dikaryotic having two separate nuclei within one
cell
dimorphic fungus a fungus that can take the form of
a yeast or a mold, depending on environmental
conditions
dioecious refers to sexually reproducing organisms
in which individuals have either male or female
reproductive organs (not both)
diphtheria serious infection of the larynx, caused by
the toxigenic bacterium Corynebacterium
diphtheriae
diploid having two copies of each chromosome
direct agglutination assay assay that can be used to
detect the agglutination of bacteria by the action of
antibodies in patient serum
direct antihuman globulin test (DAT) another
name for a direct Coombs’ test
direct contact transmission movement of a
pathogen between hosts by physical contact or
transfer in droplets at a distance less than one meter
direct Coombs’ test assay that looks for antibodies
in vivo against red blood cells caused by various
types of infections, drug reactions, and autoimmune
disorders
direct ELISA enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent
assay in which the antigens are immobilized in the
well of a microtiter plate; only a single antibody is
used in the test
direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test FA
technique in which the labeled antibody binds to the
target antigen
direct hemagglutination assay test that determines
the titer of certain bacteria and viruses that causes
clumping of red blood cells
direct microscopic cell count counting of cells
using a calibrated slide under a light microscope
direct repair (light repair or photoreactivation)
light-dependent mechanism for repairing pyrimidine
dimers involving the enzyme photolyase
disaccharide one of two monosaccharides linked
together by a glycosidic bond

Appendix C

1250

disease any condition in which the normal structure
or function of the body is damaged or impaired
disinfectant antimicrobial chemical applied to a
fomite during disinfection that may be toxic to
tissues
disinfection protocol that removes potential
pathogens from a fomite
disk-diffusion method a technique for measuring of
the effectiveness of one or more antimicrobial agents
against a known bacterium; involves measuring the
zone(s) of inhibition around the chemical agent(s) in
a culture of the bacterium
dispersion the separation of light of different
frequencies due to different degrees of refraction
disulfide bridge covalent bond between the sulfur
atoms of two sulfhydryl side chains
DNA gyrase (topoisomerase II) bacterial
topoisomerase that relaxes the supercoiled
chromosome to make DNA more accessible for the
initiation of replication
DNA ligase enzyme that catalyzes the formation of a
covalent phosphodiester linkage between the 3’-OH
end of one DNA fragment and the 5’ phosphate end
of another DNA fragment
DNA packaging process in which histones or other
DNA binding proteins perform various levels of
DNA wrapping and attachment to scaffolding
proteins to allow the DNA to fit inside a cell
DNA polymerase class of enzymes that adds
nucleotides to the free 3’-OH group of a growing
DNA chain that are complementary to the template
strand
DNA primers short, synthetic, single-stranded DNA
fragments of known sequence that bind to specific
target sequences within a sample due to
complementarity between the target DNA sequence
and the primer; commonly used in PCR but may be
used in other hybridization techniques
DNA probe a single-stranded DNA fragment that is
complementary to part of the gene (DNA or RNA)
of interest
DNAse pathogen-produced nuclease that degrades
extracellular DNA
dosage amount of medication given during a certain
time interval
double immunodiffusion see Ouchterlony assay
doubling time the time it takes for the population to
double; also referred to as generation time
droplet transmission direct contact transmission of
a pathogen transferred in sneezed or coughed
droplets of mucus that land on the new host within a
radius of one meter
drug resistance ability of a microbe to persist and
grow in the presence of an antimicrobial drug
dry-heat sterilization protocol that involves the
direct application of high heat
dura mater tough, outermost membrane that
surrounds the brain
dynein motor proteins that interact with
microtubules in eukaryotic flagella and cilia
dysentery intestinal inflammation that causes
diarrhea with blood and mucus
dysuria urination accompanied by burning,
discomfort, or pain

E
E (exit) site functional site of an intact ribosome that
releases dissociated uncharged tRNAs so that they
can be recharged with free amino acids
East African trypanosomiasis acute form of
African trypanosomiasis caused by Trypanosoma
brucei rhodesiense
eastern equine encephalitis serious, but rare,
mosquito-borne viral infection of the brain that is
found primarily on the Atlantic and Gulf coast states
of the United States
Ebola virus disease (EVD) potentially fatal viral
hemorrhagic fever found primarily in western Africa
and transmitted through contact with body fluids
eclipse phase period after viral infection during
which the infective virus is not detected, either
intracellularly or extracellularly, and biosynthesis is
occurring

ectoplasm outer, more gelatinous layer of cytoplasm
under a protist cell membrane
edema swelling due to accumulation of fluid and
protein in tissue as a result of increased permeability
of capillary walls during an inflammatory response;
chronic edema can also result from blockage of
lymphatic vessels, as in the case of elephantiasis
effector cells activated cells of cellular immunity
that are involved in the immediate immune response,
primarily to defend the body against pathogens
electron carrier cellular molecule that accepts highenergy electrons from reduced molecules like foods
and later serves as an electron donor in subsequent
redox reactions
electron microscope a type of microscope that uses
short-wavelength electron beams rather than light to
increase magnification and resolution
electron transport system (ETS) series of
membrane-associated protein complexes and
associated mobile accessory electron carriers
important in the generation of the proton motive
force required for ATP production by chemiosmosis;
the last component involved in the cellular
respiration of glucose
electroporation a genetic engineering technique in
which cells are exposed to a short electric pulse,
inducing them to take up DNA molecules from their
environment
elementary bodies metabolically and reproductively
inactive, endospore-like form of intracellular
bacteria that spreads infection outside of cells
elongation in DNA replication stage of DNA
replication during which DNA polymerase adds
nucleotides, complementary to the parental strand, to
the 3’ end of a growing DNA strand
elongation in transcription stage of transcription
during which RNA polymerase extends the RNA
molecule by adding RNA nucleotides,
complementary to the template DNA strand
elongation of translation stage of translation during
which amino acids are added one by one to the Cterminus of the growing polypeptide
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathway type
of glycolysis found in animals and the most common
in microbes
emerging infectious disease a disease that is new to
the human population or has increased in prevalence
over the previous 20 years
enantiomers stereoisomers that are mirror images of
each other and nonsuperimposable
encephalitis inflammation of the tissues of the brain
encystment the process of forming a cyst
endemic disease an illness that is constantly present
(often at low levels) in a population
endergonic reaction chemical reaction that requires
energy beyond activation energy to occur
endocarditis inflammation of the endocardium,
especially the heart valves
endocrine function refers to a cytokine signal
released from a cell and carried by the bloodstream
to a distant recipient cell
endocytosis the uptake of molecules through plasma
membrane invagination and vacuole/vesicle
formation
endomembrane system a series of organelles
(endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatuses,
lysosomes, and transport vesicles) arranged as
membranous tubules, sacs, and disks that synthesize
many cell components
endoplasm inner, more fluid layer of cytoplasm
under a protist cell membrane (inside of the
ectoplasm)
endoplasmic reticulum part of the endomembrane
system that is an interconnected array of tubules and
flattened sacs with a single lipid bilayer that may be
either rough or smooth; important in synthesizing
proteins and lipids
endospore a cellular structure formed by some
bacteria in response to adverse conditions; preserves
DNA of the cell in a dormant state until conditions
are favorable again
endospore staining a differential staining technique
that uses two stains to make bacterial endospores
appear distinct from the rest of the cell

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

endosymbiotic theory the theory that mitochondria
and chloroplasts arose as a result of prokaryotic cells
establishing a symbiotic relationship within a
eukaryotic host
endothelia layer of epithelial cells lining blood
vessels, lymphatics, the blood-brain barrier, and
some other tissues
endotoxin lipid A component of lipopolysaccharides
in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria
enriched media media that contain additional
essential nutrients to support growth
enrichment culture media providing growth
conditions that favor the expansion of an organism
present in low numbers
enteric bacteria of the family Enterobacteriaceae,
which live in the human intestinal tract
enteritis inflammation of the lining of the intestine
enterobiasis intestinal infection caused by the
pinworm Enterobius vermicularis
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) E. coli bacteria
that cause severe gastrointestinal illness with
potential serious complications such as hemolytic
uremic syndrome
enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) E. coli bacteria that
cause relatively mild gastrointestinal illness
enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) E. coli bacteria
that cause serious gastrointestinal illness
enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) E. coli bacteria that
cause a relatively mild illness commonly called
traveler’s diarrhea
enterotoxin toxin that affects the intestines
Entner-Doudoroff (ED) pathway alternative
glycolytic pathway used by some bacteria
enveloped virus a virus formed with a nucleic-acid
packed capsid surrounded by a lipid layer
enzyme catalyst for biochemical reactions inside
cells
enzyme immunoassay (EIA) type of assay wherein
an enzyme is coupled to an antibody; addition of a
chromogenic substrate for the antibody allows
quantification or identification of the antigen bound
by the antibody
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
specialized form of EIA in which either the primary
antibody or the antigen is first attached to a solid
surface such as the well of a microtiter plate
eosinophils leukocytes with granules containing
histamine and major basic protein; facilitate allergic
responses and protection against parasitic protozoa
and helminths
epidemic disease an illness with a higher-thanexpected incidence in a given period within a given
population
epidemic typhus severe and sometimes fatal
infection caused by Rickettsia prowazekii and
transmitted by body lice
epidemiology the study of where and when
infectious diseases occur in a population and how
they are transmitted and maintained in nature
epidermis the outermost layer of human skin
epididymis coiled tube that collects sperm from the
testes and passes it on to the vas deferens
epididymitis inflammation of the epididymis caused
by a bacterial infection
epigenetic regulation chemical modification of
DNA or associated histones to influence
transcription
epiglottis flap of cartilage that covers the larynx
during swallowing; diverts food to the esophagus
and prevents it from entering the respiratory tract
epiglottitis inflammation of the epiglottis
epiphyte a plant that grows on another plant
epitope smaller exposed region on an antigen that is
recognized by B-cell and T-cell receptors and
antibodies
Epsilonproteobacteria class of Proteobacteria that
are microaerophilic
equivalence zone region where the
antibody–antigen ratio produces the greatest amount
of precipitin in a precipitin reaction

Appendix C

erysipelas a skin infection, typically caused by
Streptococcus pyogenes, that presents as a red, large,
intensely inflamed patch of skin involving the
dermis, usually with clear borders, typically on the
legs or face
erythema nodosum a condition that causes
inflammation in the subcutaneous fat cells of the
hypodermis resulting in red nodules
erythema redness at the site of inflammation,
usually due to dilation of blood vessels in the area to
help bring in white blood cells
erythrocyte red blood cell
erythrogenic toxin exotoxin produced by some
strains of Streptococcus pyogenes; activity of the
toxin can produce the characteristic rash of scarlet
fever
erythromycin protein synthesis inhibitor of the
macrolide class that is often used as an alternative to
penicillin
eschar a localized mass of dead skin tissue
Etest simple, rapid method for determining MIC,
involving commercially available plastic strips that
contain a gradient of an antimicrobial and are placed
on an agar plate inoculated with a bacterial lawn
etiologic agent the pathogen or substance
responsible for causing a particular disease;
causative agent
etiology the science of the causes of disease
Eukarya the domain of life that includes all
unicellular and multicellular organisms with cells
that contain membrane-bound nuclei and organelles
eukaryote an organism made up of one or more
cells that contain a membrane-bound nucleus and
organelles
eukaryotic cell has a nucleus surrounded by a
complex nuclear membrane that contains multiple,
rod-shaped chromosomes
eustachian tube small passage between the
nasopharynx and the middle ear that allows pressure
to equalize across the tympanic membrane
eutrophs microorganisms that require a copious
amount of organic nutrients; also called copiotrophs
excystment the process of emerging from a cyst
exergonic reaction chemical reaction that does not
require energy beyond activation energy to proceed;
releases energy when the reaction occurs
exocytosis the release of the contents of transport
vesicles to the cell’s exterior by fusion of the
transport vesicle’s membrane with the plasma
membrane
exoenzyme secreted enzyme that enhances the
ability of microorganisms to invade host cells
exon protein-coding sequence of a eukaryotic gene
that is transcribed into RNA and spliced together to
code for a polypeptide
exonuclease enzymatic activity that removes RNA
primers in DNA introduced by primase
exotoxin biologically active product that causes
adverse changes in the host cells
experimental epidemiology the use of laboratory
and clinical studies to directly study disease in a
population
experimental study a type of scientific study that
involves manipulation of the study subjects by the
researcher through application of specific treatments
hypothesized to affect the outcome while
maintaining rigorously controlled conditions
exposure contact between potential pathogen and
host; also called contamination or contact
extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) βlactamases carried by some gram-negative bacteria
that provide resistance to all penicillins,
cephalosporins, monobactams, and β-lactamaseinhibitor combinations, but not carbapenems
extensively drug resistant Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (XDR-TB) strains of M. tuberculosis
that are resistant to rifampin and isoniazid, and also
are resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one
of three other drugs (amikacin, kanamycin, or
capreomycin)

1251

extracellular matrix material composed of
proteoglycans and fibrous proteins secreted by some
eukaryotic cells that lack cell walls; helps
multicellular structures withstand physical stresses
and coordinates signaling from the external surface
of the cell to the interior of the cell
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) hydrated
gel secreted by bacteria in a biofilm containing
polysaccharides, proteins, nucleic acids, and some
lipids
extrachromosomal DNA additional molecules of
DNA distinct from the chromosomes that are also
part of the cell’s genome
extravasation process by which leukocytes pass
through capillary walls to reach infected tissue; also
called diapedesis

F

F– (recipient) cell E. coli cell lacking the F plasmid
and thus incapable of forming a conjugation pilus
but capable of receiving the F plasmid during
conjugation
F pilus (F pili) specialized type of pilus that aids in
DNA transfer between cells; conjugation pilus of E.
coli
F plasmid (fertility factor) bacterial plasmid in E.
coli containing genes encoding the ability to
conjugate, including genes encoding the formation
of the conjugation pilus
F’ plasmid integrated F plasmid imprecisely excised
from the chromosome; carries with it some
chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site
F+ (donor) cell E. coli cell containing the F plasmid,
capable of forming a conjugation pilus
Fab region arm of an antibody molecule that
includes an antigen-binding site
facultative anaerobe organism that grows better in
the presence of oxygen but can proliferate in its
absence
false negative negative result to a test for an
infection or condition (e.g., presence of antigen,
antibody, or nucleic acid) when the infection or
condition is actually present
false positive positive result to a test for an infection
or condition (e.g., presence of antigen, antibody, or
nucleic acid) when the infection or condition is
actually absent
fastidious organism organism that has extensive
growth requirements
fatty acid lipid that contains long-chain
hydrocarbons terminated with a carboxylic acid
functional group
fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) analysis technique
in which the microbe’s fatty acids are extracted,
converted to volatile methyl esters, and analyzed by
gas chromatography, yielding chromatograms that
may be compared to reference data for identification
purposes
Fc region region on the trunk of an antibody
molecule involved in complement activation and
opsonization
feedback inhibition mechanism of regulating
metabolic pathway whereby the product of a
metabolic pathway noncompetitively binds to an
enzyme early on in the pathway, temporarily
preventing the synthesis of the product
fermentation process that uses an organic molecule
as a final electron acceptor to regenerate NAD+ from
NADH such that glycolysis can continue
fever system-wide sign of inflammation that raises
the body temperature and stimulates the immune
response
fifth disease a highly contagious illness, more
commonly affecting children, marked by a
distinctive “slapped-cheek” rash and caused by
parvovirus B19
fimbriae filamentous appendages found by the
hundreds on some bacterial cells; they aid adherence
to host cells
fine focusing knob a knob on a microscope that
produces relatively small movements to adjust focus
fixation the process by which cells are killed and
attached to a slide

flagella long, rigid, spiral structures used by
prokaryotic cells for motility in aqueous
environments; composed of a filament made of
flagellin, a hook, and motor (basal body) that are
attached to the cell envelope
flagella staining a staining protocol that uses a
mordant to coat the flagella with stain until they are
thick enough to be seen
flagellum (eukaryotic) (plural: flagella) long,
whip-like, filamentous external structure found on
some eukaryotic cells; composed of microtubules in
a 9+2 arrangement; used for locomotion
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD/FADH2)
oxidized/reduced forms of an electron carrier in cells
flocculant visible aggregation that forms between a
substance in suspension (e.g., lipid in water) and
antibodies against the substance
flow cytometry technique analyzing cells for
fluorescence intensity; specific subsets of cells are
usually labeled in some way prior to the analysis
fluconazole antifungal drug of the imidazole class
that is administered orally or intravenously for the
treatment of several types of systemic yeast
infections
fluid mosaic model refers to the ability of
membrane components to move fluidly within the
plane of the membrane, as well as the mosaic-like
composition of the components
flukes any of the parasitic nonsegmented flatworms
(trematodes) that have an oral sucker and sometimes
a second ventral sucker; they attach to the inner
walls of intestines, lungs, large blood vessels, or the
liver in human hosts
fluorescence microscope a microscope that uses
natural fluorochromes or fluorescent stains to
increase contrast
fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS)
technique for using a flow cytometer to physically
separate cells into two populations based on
fluorescence intensity
fluorescent antibody (FA) techniques suite of
assays that use a fluorescently labeled antibody to
bind to and so make an antigen easy to visualize
fluorescent enzyme immunoassay (FEIA) EIA in
which the substrate is a fluorogen that becomes
fluorescent following reaction with the enzyme
fluorescent the ability of certain materials to absorb
energy and then immediately release that energy in
the form of light
fluorochromes chromophores that fluoresce (absorb
and then emit light)
fluorogen nonfluorescent molecule that becomes
fluorescent on enzyme or laser activation
fluorophore molecule that fluoresces when excited
by light
fluoroquinolones class of synthetic antimicrobials
that inhibit the activity of DNA gyrase, preventing
DNA replication
focal infection infection in which the pathogen
causes infection in one location that then spreads to a
secondary location
focal length the distance from the lens to the image
point when the object is at a definite distance from
the lens (this is also the distance to the focal point)
focal point a property of the lens; the image point
when light entering the lens is parallel (i.e., the
object is an infinite distance from the lens)
foliose lichens lichens that have lobes that may
appear to resemble leaves
folliculitis a skin infection characterized by localized
inflammation of hair follicles, typically producing an
itchy red rash
fomite inanimate item that may harbor microbes and
aid in disease transmission
foodborne disease disease that is transmitted
through contaminated food
fragmentation newly formed cells split away from
the parent filament in actinomycetes and
cyanobacteria
frameshift mutation mutation resulting from either
an insertion or a deletion in a number of nucleotides
that, if not a multiple of three, changes every amino
acid after the mutation
free ribosome eukaryotic 80S ribosome found in the
cytoplasm; synthesizes water-soluble proteins

Appendix C

1252

frequency the rate of vibration for a light wave or
other electromagnetic wave
fruticose lichens lichens that are generally branched
with a rounded appearance
functional groups specific groups of atoms that may
occur within a molecule, conferring specific
chemical properties
fungi (singular: fungus) any of various unicellular or
multicellular eukaryotic organisms, typically having
cell walls made out of chitin and lacking
photosynthetic pigments, vascular tissues, and
organs
fungicide chemical or physical treatment that kills
fungi
fungistatic having the ability to inhibit fungal
growth, generally by means of chemical or physical
treatment
furuncle a small, purulent skin lesion; sometimes
called a boil
fusion inhibitor antiviral drug that blocks the fusion
of HIV receptors to the coreceptors required for
virus entry into the cell, specifically, chemokine
receptor type 5

G
Gammaproteobacteria class of Proteobacteria that
is very diverse and includes a number of human
pathogens
gas gangrene rapidly spreading infection of necrotic
tissues caused by the gram-positive anaerobe
Clostridium perfringens and other Clostridium spp.
gastritis inflammation of the lining of the stomach
gastroenteritis inflammation of the lining of the
stomach and intestine
gene expression production of proteins from the
information contained in DNA through the processes
of transcription and translation
gene gun an apparatus that shoots gold or tungsten
particles coated with recombinant DNA molecules at
high speeds into plant protoplasts
gene silencing a genetic engineering technique in
which researchers prevent the expression of a
particular gene by using small interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) or microRNAs (miRNAs) to interfere with
translation
gene therapy a form of treatment for diseases that
result from genetic mutations; involves the
introduction of nonmutated, functional genes into the
genome of the patient, often by way of a viral vector
generalized transduction transfer of a random piece
of bacterial chromosome DNA by the phage
generation time see doubling time
genes segments of DNA molecules that code for
proteins or stable RNA molecules
genetic code correspondence between mRNA
nucleotide codons and the translated amino acids
genetic engineering the direct alteration of an
organism’s genetics to achieve desirable traits
genital herpes an STI caused by the herpes simplex
virus
genital warts soft, pink, irregular growths that
develop in the external genitalia or anus as a result of
human papillomavirus infection
genome entire genetic content of a cell
genomic library a repository of an organism’s entire
genome maintained as cloned fragments in the
genomes of strains of a host organism
genomics the study and comparison of entire
genomes, including the complete set of genes, their
nucleotide sequence and organization, and their
interactions within a species and with other species
genotype full collection of genes that a cell contains
within its genome
germ theory of disease the theory that many
diseases are the result of microbial infection
germination process of an endospore returning to
the vegetative state
Ghon complex calcified lesion containing
Mycobacterium tuberculosis; forms in the lungs of
patients with tuberculosis

giardiasis intestinal infection caused by Giardia
lamblia
gingivitis inflammation of the gums that can cause
bleeding
glial cell assists in the organization of neurons,
provides a scaffold for some aspects of neuron
function, and aids in recovery from neural injury
glomerulonephritis a type of kidney infection
involving the glomeruli of the nephrons
glomerulus capillary bed in the nephron of the
kidney that filters blood to form urine
glycocalyx cell envelope structure (either capsules or
slime layer) outside the cell wall in some bacteria;
allows bacteria to adhere to surfaces, aids in biofilm
formation, and provides protection from predation
glycogen highly branched storage polysaccharide in
animal cells and bacteria
glycolipid complex lipid that contains a
carbohydrate moiety
glycolysis first step in the breakdown of glucose, the
most common example of which is the EmbdenMeyerhoff-Parnas pathway, producing two
pyruvates, two NADH molecules, and two (net
yield) ATP per starting glucose molecule
glycopeptides class of antibacterials that inhibit cell
wall synthesis by binding to peptidoglycan subunits
and blocking their insertion into the cell wall
backbone, as well as blocking transpeptidation
glycoprotein conjugated protein with a carbohydrate
attached
glycosidic bond forms between the hydroxyl groups
of two sugar molecules
Golgi apparatus an organelle of the endomembrane
system that is composed of a series of flattened
membranous disks, called dictyosomes, each having
a single lipid bilayer, that are stacked together;
important in the processing of lipids and proteins
gonorrhea a common STI of the reproductive
system caused by Neisseria gonorrheae
graft-versus-host disease specific type of
transplantation reaction in which a transplanted
immune system (e.g., a bone marrow transplant)
contains APCs and T cells that are activated and
attack the recipient’s tissue
Gram stain procedure a differential staining
technique that distinguishes bacteria based upon
their cell wall structure
granulocytes leukocytes found in the peripheral
blood that are characterized by numerous granules in
the cytoplasm; granulocytes include neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils
granuloma walled-off area of chronically inflamed
tissue containing microbial pathogens, macrophages,
and cellular materials unable to be eliminated
granulomatous amoebic encephalitis (GAE)
serious brain infection of immunocompromised
individuals caused by Acanthamoeba or Balamuthia
mandrillaris
granzymes proteases released from a natural killer
cell that enter the cytoplasm of a target cell, inducing
apoptosis
Graves disease hyperthyroidism caused by an
autoimmune disease affecting thyroid function
green nonsulfur bacteria similar to green sulfur
bacteria but use substrates other than sulfides for
oxidation
green sulfur bacteria phototrophic, anaerobic
bacteria that use sulfide for oxidation and produce
large amounts of green bacteriochlorophyll
growth curve a graph modeling the number of cells
in a culture over time
guanine purine nitrogenous base found in
nucleotides
Guillain-Barré syndrome an autoimmune disease,
often triggered by bacterial and viral infections,
characterized by the destruction of myelin sheaths
around neurons, resulting in flaccid paralysis
gummas granulomatous lesions that develop in
tertiary syphilis

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

H
hair follicle a structure embedded in the dermis from
which hair grows
halophile organism that depends on high
concentrations of salt in the environment to grow
halotolerant organism that grows in the presence of
high salt concentration but does not require it
Hansen’s Disease chronic bacterial infection of
peripheral nervous tissues caused by the acid-fast
bacterium, Mycobacterium leprae; also known as
leprosy
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome acute lung
infection by a hantavirus following inhalation of
aerosols from the urine or feces of infected rodents
haploid having one copy of each chromosome
hapten a molecule that is too small to be antigenic
alone but becomes antigenic when conjugated to a
larger protein molecule
hard chancre a generally painless ulcer that
develops at the site of infection in primary syphilis
Hashimoto thyroiditis hypothyroidism caused by
an autoimmune disease affecting thyroid function
healthcare-associated infection (HAI) an infection
acquired in a hospital or other health-care facility
unrelated to the reason for which the patient was
initially admitted; nosocomial infection
heavy chains longest identical peptide chains in
antibody molecules (two per antibody monomer),
composed of variable and constant region segments
helical virus cylindrical or rod shaped
helicase enzyme that unwinds DNA by breaking the
hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs,
using ATP
helminth a multicellular parasitic worm
helper T cells class of T cells that is the central
orchestrator of the cellular and humoral defenses of
adaptive immunity and the cellular defenses of
innate immunity
hemagglutination visible clumping of red blood
cells that can be caused by some viruses, bacteria,
and certain diseases in which antibodies are
produced that bind to self-red blood cells
hematopoiesis formation, development, and
differentiation of blood cells from pluripotent
hematopoietic stem cells
hematuria condition in which there is blood in the
urine
hemolysin class of exotoxin that targets and lyses
red blood cells, as well as other cells
hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) type II
hypersensitivity reaction that occurs when maternal
anti-Rh antibodies cross the placenta and target fetal
Rh+ red blood cells for lysis
hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR) condition
resulting after an incompatible blood transfusion;
caused by type II hypersensitivity reaction and
destruction of red blood cells
hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome serious
hemorrhagic fever caused by hantavirus infection
HEPA filter high-efficiency particulate air filter
with an effective pore size that captures bacterial
cells, endospores, and viruses as air passes through,
removing them from the air
hepatitis inflammation of the liver
herd immunity a reduction in disease prevalence
brought about when few individuals in a population
are susceptible to an infectious agent
herpes keratitis eye infection caused by herpes
simplex virus
herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) the type of
herpesvirus most commonly associated with genital
herpes
herpetic gingivostomatitis inflammation of the
mouth and gums often caused by the HSV-1 virus
heterolactic fermentation process producing a
mixture of lactic acid, ethanol and/or acetic acid, and
CO2 as fermentation products; the microbes that do
this use pentose phosphate pathway glycolysis,
which is why they generate multiple fermentation
products

Appendix C

heterotroph organism that uses fixed organic carbon
compounds as its carbon source
hexose monophosphate shunt see pentose
phosphate pathway
Hfr cell E. coli cell in which an F plasmid has
integrated into the host cell’s chromosome
high G+C gram-positive bacteria bacteria that
have more than 50% guanine and cytosine
nucleotides in their DNA
high-energy phosphate bond bond between the
negatively charged phosphate groups that holds a lot
of potential energy
histamine proinflammatory molecule released by
basophils and mast cells in response to stimulation
by other cytokines and chemical mediators
histones DNA-binding proteins found in eukaryotes
and archaea that aid in orderly packaging of
chromosomal DNA
histoplasmosis fungal disease caused by the
dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum
holoenzyme enzyme with a bound cofactor or
coenzyme
holozoic refers to protozoans that consume food
particles through phagoctytosis
homolactic fermentation process producing only
lactic acid as a fermentation product; the microbes
that do this use Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas glycolysis
hookworm infection soil-transmitted intestinal
infection caused by the nematodes Necator
americanus and Ancylostoma doudenale
horizontal direct transmission movement of a
pathogen from one host to another (excluding
mother to embryo, fetus, or infant) in a population
through physical contact or through droplet
transmission
horizontal gene transfer introduction of genetic
material from one organism to another organism
within the same generation
host range the types of host cells that a particular
virus is able to infect
HTST high-temperature short-time pasteurization is
a method of pasteurization commonly used for milk
in which the milk is exposed to a temperature of 72
°C for 15 seconds
human African trypanosomiasis serious infection
caused by Trypanosoma brucei and spread by the
bite of the tsetse fly
human granulocytic anaplasmosis zoonotic
tickborne disease caused by the obligate intracellular
pathogen Anaplasma phagocytophilum
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) retrovirus
responsible for acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS) in humans
human papillomavirus (HPV) a group of common
sexually transmitted viruses that may be associated
with genital warts or with cervical cancer
humanized monoclonal antibodies chimeric
antibodies with mouse variable regions and human
constant regions
humoral immunity adaptive immunity mediated by
antibodies produced by B cells
hyaluronidase enzyme produced by pathogens that
degrades hyaluronic acid between adjacent cells in
connective tissue
hybridization the joining of two complementary
single-stranded DNA molecules
hybridoma clones of cell produced by fusing a
normal B cell with a myeloma cell that is capable of
producing monoclonal antibodies indefinitely
hydatid disease cystic echinococcosis, an infection
caused by the tapeworm Echinococcus granulosus
hydrophilic “water loving”; refers to a polar
molecule or portion of a molecule capable of strong
attraction to water molecules
hydrophobic “water fearing”; refers to a nonpolar
molecule or portion of a molecule not capable of
strong attraction to water molecules
hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) type III and IV
hypersensitivities in the lungs that are caused by
environmental or occupational exposure to allergens
such as mold and dust
hypersensitivity potentially damaging immune
response against an antigen

1253

hyperthermophile a microorganism that has an
optimum growth temperature close to the
temperature of boiling water
hypertonic medium an environment in which the
solute concentration outside a cell exceeds that
inside the cell, causing water molecules to move out
of the cell, resulting in crenation (shriveling) or
plasmolysis.
hyphae tubular, filamentous structures that makes up
most fungi
hypodermis the layer of tissue under the dermis,
consisting primarily of fibrous and adipose
connective tissue
hypotonic medium an environment in which the
solute concentration inside a cell exceeds that
outside the cell, causing water molecules to move
into the cell, possibly leading to swelling and
possibly lysis

I
iatrogenic disease disease caused by or acquired
during a medical procedure
icosahedral three-dimensional, 20-sided structure
with 12 vertices
IgA antibody dimer primarily found in breast milk,
mucus, saliva, and tears
IgD membrane-body antibody monomer functioning
as receptor on the surface of B cells
IgE antibody monomer involved in defense against
parasites and allergic reactions
IgG antibody monomer most abundant in serum;
able to cross placenta; most versatile class of
antibody in terms of function
IgM antibody that is a monomer when functioning
as a receptor on surface of B cells but a pentamer
when secreted in response to specific pathogens; first
antibody to respond during primary and secondary
responses
illuminator the light source on a microscope
image point (focus) a property of the lens and the
distance of the object to the lens; the point at which
an image is in focus (the image point is often called
the focus)
imidazoles class of antifungal drugs that inhibit
ergosterol biosynthesis
immune complex large group of antigens bound by
antibodies; large enough to settle out of fluid
suspension
immunochromatographic assay assay in which
fluids are pulled through test strips by capillary
action and antigen captured by mobile antibodycolored bead conjugates; a second, fixed antibody
localizes the colored bead, allowing visualization
immunocytochemistry (ICC) staining technique in
which cells are fixed and holes dissolved in the
membrane to allow passage of labeled antibodies to
bind specific intracellular targets
immunoelectrophoresis (IEP) assay following
protein electrophoresis (PAGE) of serum, in which
antisera against specific serum proteins are added to
troughs cut parallel to the electrophoresis track,
causing the formation of precipitin arcs
immunofiltration technique in which antibody or
antigen can be concentrated by passing fluids
through porous membranes, and target molecules are
captured as they pass
immunofluorescence a technique that uses a
fluorescence microscope and antibody-specific
fluorochromes to determine the presence of specific
pathogens in a specimen
immunoglobulin antibody
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining technique in
which labeled antibodies are bound to specific cells
in a tissue section
immunology the study of the immune system
immunostain use of EIA technology to deliver stain
to particular cells in a tissue (immunohistochemistry)
or specific targets within a cell
(immunocytochemistry)

impetigo a skin infection that may result in vesicles,
blisters, or bullae especially around the mouth,
commonly caused by Staphylococcus aureus, S.
pyogenes, or a combination of both S. aureus and S.
pyogenes
in vitro outside the organism in a test tube or
artificial environment
in vivo inside the organism
inactivated vaccine vaccine composed of whole
pathogen cells or viruses that have been killed or
inactivated through treatment with heat, radiation, or
chemicals
incidence the number of individuals with new
infections of a particular disease in a given period of
time
inclusion conjunctivitis inflammation of the
conjunctiva in newborns caused by Chlamydia
trachomatis transmitted during childbirth
inclusions prokaryotic cell cytoplasmic structures
for storing specific nutrients and other resources
needed by cells
incubation period the first stage of acute disease,
during which the pathogen begins multiplying in the
host and signs and symptoms are not observable
indirect agglutination assay assay that can be used
to detect the agglutination of small latex beads;
beads may be coated with antigen when looking for
the presence of specific antibodies, or with antibody
when looking for the presence of antigen
indirect antiglobulin test (IAT) see indirect
Coombs’ test
indirect contact transmission transfer of an
infectious agent between hosts through contact with
a fomite
indirect Coombs’ test assay, performed in vitro
prior to blood transfusions, that looks for antibodies
against red blood cell antigens (other than the A and
B antigens) that are unbound in a patient’s serum
indirect ELISA EIA in which an antigen from a
pathogen is first attached to the wells of a microtiter
plate; the antigen then captures antibodies from
patient serum to determine whether the patient
currently has or previosly had the disease
indirect fluorescent antibody test assay for
antigen-specific antibodies wherein the antigen
captures the antibody, which is subsequently
detected using a labeled anti-immunoglobulin mAb
induced mutation mutation caused by a mutagen
inducer small molecule that either activates or
represses transcription
inducible operon bacterial operon, typically
containing genes encoding enzymes in a degradative
pathway, whose expression is induced by the
substrate to be degraded when the substrate is
available for the cell to use, but that is otherwise
repressed in the absence of the substrate
induction prophage DNA is excised from the
bacterial genome
infection the successful colonization of a
microorganism within a host
infectious arthritis (septic arthritis) inflammation
of joint tissues in response to a microbial infection
infectious disease disease caused by a pathogen
infectious mononucleosis common and mild
infection caused by Epstein-Barr virus (HHV-4) or
cytomegalovirus (HHV-5); transmitted by direct
contact with body fluids such as saliva
inflammation innate nonspecific immune response
characterized by erythema, edema, heat, pain, and
altered function, typically at the site of injury or
infection but sometimes becoming systemic.
influenza highly contagious and acute viral disease
of the respiratory tract caused by the influenza virus
initiation factors proteins that participate in
ribosome assembly during initiation
initiation of DNA replication stage of replication
during which various proteins bind to the origin of
replication to begin the replication process
initiation of transcription stage of transcription
during which RNA polymerase binds to a promoter
and transcription begins

Appendix C

1254

initiation of translation stage of translation during
which an initiation complex composed of the small
ribosomal subunit, the mRNA template, initiation
factors, GTP, and a special initiator tRNA forms, and
the large ribosomal subunit then binds to the
initiation complex
inoculum small number of cells added to medium to
start a culture
inorganic phosphate (Pi) single phosphate group in
solution
insertion type of mutation involving the addition of
one or more bases into a DNA sequence
integrase inhibitors antiviral drugs that block the
activity of the HIV integrase responsible for
recombination of a DNA copy of the viral genome
into the host cell chromosome
intercalating agent molecule that slides between the
stacked nitrogenous bases of the DNA double helix,
potentially resulting in a frameshift mutation
interference distortion of a light wave due to
interaction with another wave
interferons cytokines released by cells that have
been infected with a virus; stimulate antiviral
responses in nearby cells as well as the cells
secreting the interferons
interleukins cytokines largely produced by immune
system cells that help coordinate efforts against
invading pathogens
intermediate filament one of a diverse group of
cytoskeletal fibers that act as cables within the cell
and anchor the nucleus, comprise the nuclear lamina,
or contribute to the formation of desmosomes
intermediate host a host in which a parasite goes
through some stages of its life cycle before migrating
to the definitive host
intermittent common source spread a mode of
disease transmission in which every infection
originates from the same source and that source
produces infections for a period before stopping and
then starting again
intertrigo a rash that occurs in a skin fold
intestinal fluke a trematode worm that infects the
intestine, often caused by Fasciolopsis buski
intracellular targeting toxin see A-B exotoxin
intrinsic growth rate genetically determined
generation time under specific conditions for a
bacterial strain
intron intervening sequence of a eukaryotic gene
that does not code for protein and whose
corresponding RNA sequences are removed from the
primary transcript during splicing
intubation placement of a tube into the trachea,
generally to open the airway or to administer drugs
or oxygen
in-use test a technique for monitoring the correct use
of disinfectants in a clinical setting; involves placing
used, diluted disinfectant onto an agar plate to see if
microbial colonies will grow
invasion dissemination of a pathogen through local
tissues or throughout the body
iodophor compound in which iodine is complexed
to an organic molecule, increasing the stability and
efficacy of iodine as a disinfectant
ionizing radiation high-energy form of radiation
that is able to penetrate surfaces and sterilize
materials by damaging microbial cell components
and DNA
ischemia condition marked by the inadequate flow
of blood to the tissues
isograft tissue grafted from one monozygotic twin to
another
isohemagglutinins IgM class antibodies produced
against A or B red blood cell antigens
isomers molecules that have the same atomic
makeup but differ in the structural arrangement of
the atoms
isoniazid antimetabolite that inhibits biosynthesis of
mycolic acid; used for the treatment of
mycobacterial infections
isoprenoid branched lipid derived from five-carbon
isoprene molecules

isotonic medium a solution in which the solute
concentrations inside and outside the cell are
approximately equal, thereby creating no net
movement of water molecules across the cell
membrane
ivermectin antihelminthic drug of the avermectin
class that binds to invertebrate glutamate-gated
chloride channels to block neuronal transmission in
helminths

J
Japanese encephalitis arboviral disease caused by
the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) and endemic to
Asia
jaundice yellowish color of the skin and mucous
membranes caused by excessive bilirubin caused by
a failure of the liver to effectively process the
breakdown of hemoglobin

K
keratin a fibrous protein found in hair, nails, and
skin
keratitis inflammation of the cornea
keratoconjunctivitis inflammation of both the
cornea and the conjunctiva
kidney organ that filters the blood, producing urine
Kinyoun technique a method of acid-fast staining
that does not use heat to infuse the primary stain,
carbolfuchsin, into acid-fast cells
Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion test simple, rapid
method for determining susceptibility and resistance
of a bacterial pathogen to antibacterial drugs. The
test involves drug-impregnated disks placed on an
agar plate inoculated with a bacterial lawn.
Koplik’s spots white spots that form on the inner
lining of the cheek of patients with measles
Krebs cycle cyclic pathway during which each twocarbon unit entering the cycle is further oxidized,
producing three NADH, one FADH2, and one ATP
by substrate-level phosphorylation, releasing two
CO2 molecules and regenerating the molecule used
in the first step; also called the citric acid cycle or
the tricarboxylic acid cycle
kuru rare form of transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy endemic to Papua New Guinea

L
lacrimal duct connects the lacrimal gland to the
lacrimal sac
lacrimal gland a gland situated above the eye that
secretes tears
lacrimal punctum opening in each upper and lower
eyelid
lacrimal sac a to a reservoir for tears; also known as
the dacrocyst or tear sac
lag period the time between antigen exposure and
production of antibodies
lag phase interval before exponential growth of a
microbial population during which cells adjust to a
new environment
lagging strand strand of DNA made discontinuously
by DNA polymerase
laryngitis inflammation of the larynx
laryngopharynx lower portion of the pharynx that
connects to the larynx
larynx region of the respiratory tract containing the
vocal cords; also referred to as the voice box
latent disease disease that goes into a dormant
nonreplicative state after the acute disease and can
persist in this state for years, with the risk of
reactivation back into acute disease
latent virus virus that remains dormant in the host
genome
lateral flow test see immunochromatographic assays
leading strand strand of DNA made continuously in
the 5’ to 3’ direction by DNA polymerase

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

Legionnaires disease atypical pneumonia occurring
in older individuals; caused by the inhalation of
Legionella pneumophila aerosolized in water
leishmaniasis protozoan infection caused by
Leishmania spp. and transmitted by sand flies
leprosy see Hansen’s disease
leptospirosis bacterial infection of the kidney caused
by Leptospira spp.; may spread to the liver, lungs,
brain, and other organs
leukocidin class of exotoxin that targets and lyses
leukocytes
leukocytes white blood cells of various types,
including granulocytes, lymphocytes, and monocytes
leukotrienes lipid-based chemical mediators
produced by leukocytes and other tissue cells;
promote inflammation and allergic responses
lichen symbiotic association of a fungus with an
algae or cyanobacterium
ligation repair of the sugar-phosphate backbone of
the DNA, making the DNA molecule continuous
light chains the shorter identical peptide chains of
an antibody molecule (two per antibody monomer),
composed of variable and constant region segments
light-dependent reaction process by which energy
from sunlight is absorbed by pigment molecules in
photosynthetic membranes and converted into stored
chemical energy in the forms of ATP and NADPH
light-harvesting complex group of multiple proteins
and associated pigments that each may absorb light
energy to become excited, and transfer this energy
from one pigment molecule to another until the
energy is delivered to a reaction center pigment
light-independent reaction process by which
chemical energy, in the form of ATP and NADPH
produced by the light-dependent reactions, is used to
fix inorganic CO2 into organic sugar; usually
referred to as the Calvin-Benson cycle
lincomycin naturally produced protein synthesis
inhibitor of the lincosamide class that binds to the
50S subunit, inhibiting peptide bond formation
lincosamides class of protein synthesis inhibitors
that are similar to macrolides
linked recognition a mechanism whereby a B cell
and the helper T cell with which it interacts
recognize the same antigen
lipase extracellular enzyme that degrades
triglycerides
lipid bilayer biological membranes composed of
two layers of phospholipid molecules with the
nonpolar tails associating to form a hydrophobic
barrier between the polar heads; also called unit
membrane
lipid macromolecule composed primarily of carbon
and hydrogen; source of nutrients for organisms, a
storage form for carbon and energy, a part of the
structure of membranes, and may function as
hormones, pharmaceuticals, fragrances, and
pigments
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) lipid molecules with
attached sugars that are found as components of
gram-negative outer membranes
lipoprotein conjugated protein attached to a lipid
listeriosis bacterial disease caused from the
ingestion of the microbe Listeria monocytogenes
lithotroph chemotroph that uses inorganic chemicals
as its electron source; also known as chemoautotroph
live attenuated vaccine vaccine with live pathogen
that has been attenuated to become less virulent in
order to produce an active but subclinical infection
liver fluke a trematode worm that affects the bile
duct of the liver, including Fasciola hepatica and F.
gigantica
local infection infection in one limited area
log phase interval of growth when cells divide
exponentially; also known as the exponential growth
phase
loiasis a disease caused by the parasitic Loa loa
worm, which is transmitted by deerflies; adult
worms live in the subcutaneous tissue and cause
inflammation, swelling, and eye pain as they migrate
through the skin and the conjunctiva of the eye
lophotrichous having a single tuft of flagella located
at one end of a bacterial cell

Appendix C

low G+C gram-positive bacteria bacteria that have
less than 50% of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in
their DNA
lumen space inside the cisternae of the endoplasmic
reticulum in eukaryotic cells
Lyme disease tickborne disease caused by the
spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi
lymph nodes bean-shaped organs situated
throughout the body that contain areas called
germinal centers, which are rich in B and T
lymphocytes; also contain macrophages and
dendritic cells for antigen presentation
lymphadenitis inflammation of the lymph nodes
lymphangitis inflammation of the lymphatic vessels
lymphogranuloma venereum infection caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis in tropical regions
lyophilization rapid freezing, followed by placement
under a vacuum, of a material so that water is lost by
sublimation, thereby inhibiting microbial growth
lysis destruction of the host cell
lysogen bacterium carrying the prophage
lysogenic conversion (phage conversion) alteration
of host characteristics or phenotypes due to the
presence of phage
lysogenic cycle life cycle of some phages in which
the genome of the infecting phage is integrated into
the bacterial chromosome and replicated during
bacterial reproduction until it excises and enters a
lytic phase of the life cycle
lysogeny process of integrating the phage into the
host genome
lysosome an organelle of the endomembrane system
that contains digestive enzymes that break down
engulfed material such as foodstuffs, infectious
particles, or damaged cellular components
lytic cycle infection process that leads to the lysis of
host cells

M
M protein a streptococcal cell wall protein that
protects the bacteria from being phagocytized. It is
associated with virulence and stimulates a strong
immune response
macrolides class of protein synthesis inhibitors
containing a large, complex ring structure that binds
to the 50S subunit, inhibiting peptide bond formation
macromolecule polymer assembled from of
individual units, monomers, that bind together like
building blocks
macronucleus larger nucleus in ciliate protists that
have two nuclei; polyploid with a reduced genome of
metabolic genes and derived from the micronucleus
macronutrient element required in abundance in
cells; account for approximately 99% of the cell’s
dry weight
macrophages monocytes that have left the
bloodstream and differentiated into tissue-specific
phagocytes
mad cow disease form of transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy primarily affecting cattle; can be
transmitted to humans by consumption of
contaminated cattle products
magnetosomes inclusions in certain bacterial cells
containing magnetic iron oxide or iron sulfide, which
allows bacteria to align along a magnetic field by
magnetotaxis
magnetotaxis directional movement of bacterial
cells using flagella in response to a magnetic field
magnification the power of a microscope (or lens)
to produce an image that appears larger than the
actual specimen, expressed as a factor of the actual
size
major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
collection of genes that code for MHC glycoproteins
expressed on the surface of all nucleated cells
malaise a general feeling of being unwell
malaria potentially fatal, mosquito-borne protozoan
infection caused by several species of Plasmodium
and characterized by a relapsing fever, nausea,
vomiting, and fatigue

1255

mast cells granulocytes similar in origin and
function to basophils, but residing in tissues
matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization time of
flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF)
technique in which the sample (e.g., a microbe
colony) is mixed with a special matrix and irradiated
with a high-energy laser to generate characteristic
gaseous ions that are subjected to mass spectral
analysis, yielding mass spectra that may be
compared to reference data for identification
purposes
maturation assembly of viral components to
produce a functional virus
mature naïve T cell a T cell that has exited the
thymus after thymic selection but has not yet been
activated
maximum growth pH highest pH value that an
organism can tolerate for growth
maximum growth temperature highest
temperature at which a microorganism will divide or
survive
maximum permissible oxygen concentration
highest concentration of oxygen at which an
organism will grow
measles highly contagious respiratory disease
caused by the measles virus (MeV); marked by an
intense macular rash and high fever; also known as
rubeola
mebendazole antihelminthic drug of the
benzimidazole class that binds to helminthic βtubulin, preventing microtubule formation
mechanical transmission transfer of a pathogen
between hosts by a mechanical vector
mechanical vector an animal that transfers a
pathogen from one host to another or from a
reservoir to a host without being infected by the
pathogen itself
median infectious dose (ID50) concentration of
pathogen that will produce active infection in 50% of
test animals inoculated
median lethal dose (LD50) concentration of
pathogen that kills 50% of infected test animals
medulla loosely packed layer of fungal filaments
located underneath the cortex of a lichen
membrane attack complex (MAC) ring structure
formed from complement proteins C6 through C9
that penetrates the membranes of a targeted cell,
causing cell lysis and death
membrane filtration method to remove bacteria
from liquid, typically heat-sensitive solutions, using
filters with an effective pore size of 0.2 µm or
smaller, depending on need
membrane filtration technique known volumes are
vacuum filtered aseptically through a membrane
with a pore size small enough to trap
microorganisms, which are counted after growth on
plates
membrane-bound ribosome 80S eukaryotic
ribosome attached to rough endoplasmic reticulum
membrane-disrupting toxin toxin that affects cell
membrane function by either forming pores or
disrupting the phospholipid bilayer
memory B cell an activated and differentiated B cell
that is programmed to respond to secondary
exposures to a specific antigen
memory helper T cell a long-lived T cell
programmed to recognize and quickly mount a
secondary response to a specific pathogen upon reexposure
memory the ability of the specific adaptive immune
system to quickly respond to pathogens to which it
has previously been exposed
meninges membranes that surround the brain
meningitis inflammation of the meningeal
membranes that surround the brain
meningococcal meningitis bacterial infection
caused by Neisseria meningitidis that results in an
inflammation of the meninges
meningoencephalitis inflammatory response that
involves both the brain and the membranes that
surround it
MERS Middle East respiratory syndrome; first
described in Saudi Arabia in 2013; caused by a
zoonotic coronavirus that results in flu-like
symptoms

mesophile a microorganism that grows best at
moderate temperatures, typically between about 20
°C and 45 °C
metabolism all of the chemical reactions inside of
cells
metachromatic granule a type of inclusion
containing volutin, a polymerized inorganic
phosphate that appears red when stained with
methylene blue
metagenomics the sequencing of genomic fragments
from microbial communities, allowing researchers to
study genes from a collection of multiple species
metatranscriptomics the science of studying a
collection of mRNA molecules produced from
microbial communities; involves studying gene
expression patterns from a collection of multiple
species
methanogen microorganism that produces gaseous
methane
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) pathogen resistant to all β-lactams through
acquisition of a new low-affinity penicillin-binding
protein, and often resistant to many other drug
classes
metronidazole antibacterial and antiprotozoan drug
of the nitroimidazole class that is activated in
anaerobic target cell and introduces DNA strand
breakage, thus interfering with DNA replication in
target cells
MHC I molecule glycoprotein expressed on the
surface of all nucleated cells and involved in the
presentation of normal “self” antigens and foreign
antigens from intracellular pathogens
MHC II molecule glycoprotein expressed only on
the surface of antigen-presenting cells and involved
in the presentation of foreign antigens from
pathogens ingested by phagocytosis
micelle simple spherical arrangement of amphipathic
lipid molecules with nonpolar tails aggregated within
the interior and polar heads forming the outer surface
microaerophile organism that requires oxygen at
levels lower than atmospheric concentration
microarray analysis a technique used to compare
two samples of genomic DNA or cDNA; the DNA
or cDNA fragments are immobilized on a chip and
labeled with different fluorescent dyes, allowing for
comparison of sequences or gene-expression patterns
microbe generally, an organism that is too small to
be seen without a microscope; also known as a
microorganism
microbial death curve graphical representation of
the progress of a particular microbial control
protocol
microbial ecology study of the interactions between
microbial populations microbiology the study of
microorganisms
microbiome all prokaryotic and eukaryotic
microorganisms that are associated with a certain
organism
microfilament cytoskeletal fiber composed of actin
filaments
microinjection the direct injection of DNA into the
cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell using a glass
micropipette
micronucleus smaller nucleus in ciliate protists that
have two nuclei; diploid, somatic, and used for
sexual reproduction through conjugation
micronutrient indispensable element present in
cells in lower amounts than macronutrients; also
called trace element
microorganism generally, an organism that is too
small to be seen without a microscope; also known
as a microbe
microsporidia fungi that lack mitochondria,
centrioles, and peroxisomes; some can be human
pathogens
microtiter plates plastic dishes with multiple small
wells
microtubule hollow tube composed of tubulin
dimers (α and β tubulin); the structural component of
the cytoskeleton, centrioles, flagella, and cilia
miliary tuberculosis hematogenous dissemination
and spread of Mycobacterium tuberculosis from
tubercles

Appendix C

1256

minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) lowest
antibacterial drug concentration that kills ≥99.9% of
a starting inoculum of bacteria
minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) lowest
concentration of an antibacterial drug that inhibits
visible growth of a bacterial strain
minimum growth pH lowest pH value that an
organism can tolerate for growth
minimum growth temperature lowest temperature
at which a microorganism will divide or survive
minimum permissible oxygen concentration
lowest concentration of oxygen at which an
organism will grow
missense mutation point mutation that results in a
different amino acid being incorporated into the
resulting polypeptide
mitochondrial matrix the innermost space of the
mitochondrion enclosed by two membranes; the
location of many metabolic enzymes as well as the
mitochondrial DNA and 70S ribosomes
mitochondrion (plural: mitochondria) large,
complex organelle that is the site of cellular
respiration in eukaryotic cells
mode of action way in which a drug affects a
microbe at the cellular level
moist-heat sterilization protocol that involves
steam under pressure in an autoclave, allowing the
steam to reach temperatures higher than the boiling
point of water
mold a multicellular fungus, typically made up of
long filaments
molecular cloning the purposeful fragmentation of
DNA followed by attachment to another piece of
DNA to produce a recombinant molecule, followed
by introduction of this recombinant molecule into an
easily manipulated host to allow for the creation of
multiple copies of a gene of interest
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) antibodies produced
in vitro that only bind to a single epitope
monocular having a single eyepiece
monocytes large, agranular, mononuclear leukocytes
found in the peripheral blood; responsible for
phagocytosis of pathogens and damaged cells
monoecious refers to sexually reproducing
organisms in which individuals have both male and
female reproductive organs
monomer small organic molecule that binds with
like molecules, forming a polymer or macromolecule
monosaccharide monomer for the synthesis of
carbohydrate polymers; the simplest carbohydrate,
called a simple sugar
monotrichous having one flagellum, typically
located on one end of the bacterial cell
morbidity a state of illness
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR)
the trade/industry publication for epidemiologists,
reporting US public health data compiled by the
CDC
morbidity rate the number of cases of a disease
expressed as a percentage of the population or
number per standard part of the population, such as
100,000
mordant a chemical added to a specimen that sets a
stain
mortality death
mortality rate the number of deaths from a disease
expressed as a percentage of the population or
number per standard part of the population, such as
100,000
most probable number (MPN) statistical value
representing the viable bacterial population in a
sample obtained after a series of dilutions and
multiple tube inoculations
mRNA short-lived type of RNA that serves as the
intermediary between DNA and the synthesis of
protein products
mucociliary escalator system by which mucus and
debris are propelled up and out of the respiratory
tract by the beating of respiratory cilia and the
mechanical actions of coughing or swallowing
mucormycosis rare form of pneumonia that can be
caused by an invasive infection of different fungi in
the order Mucorales, such as Rhizopus or Mucor

mucous membrane moist layer of epithelial cells
and interspersed goblet cells that lines the inner
surfaces of the body, usually bathed in antimicrobial
secretions from the cells of the membrane
mucus viscous secretion produced by cells and
glands in various mucous membranes throughout the
body; helps trap and remove microbes and debris
from the body
multidrug-resistant microbes (MDR) group of
pathogens that carry one or more resistance
mechanisms, making them resistant to multiple
antimicrobials; also called superbugs
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(MDR-TB) strains of M. tuberculosis that are
resistant to both rifampin and isoniazid, the drug
combination typically prescribed for the treatment of
tuberculosis
multiple sclerosis autoimmune attack on the myelin
sheaths and nerve cells in the central nervous system
mumps a viral illness that causes swelling of the
parotid glands; rare in the United States because of
effective vaccination
murine typhus fleaborne infection caused by
Rickettsia typhi and characterized by fever, rash, and
pneumonia
mutagen type of chemical agent or radiation that can
induce mutations
mutant organism harboring a mutation that often
has a recognizable change in phenotype compared to
the wild type
mutation heritable change in the DNA sequence of
an organism
mutualism type of symbiosis in which two
populations benefit from, and depend on, each other
myasthenia gravis autoimmune disease affecting
the acetylcholine receptors in the neuromuscular
junction, resulting in weakened muscle contraction
capability
mycelium vegetative network of branched, tubular
hyphae
mycolic acids waxy molecules associated with
peptidoglycan in some gram-positive, acid-fast
bacteria, chiefly mycobacteria
mycology the study of fungi
Mycoplasma pneumonia also known as walking
pneumonia; a milder form of atypical pneumonia
caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae
mycoses (mycosis, sing.) refers to diseases caused
by fungi
mycotoxin biologically active product of pathogenic
fungi that causes adverse changes in the host cells
myelin sheath insulating layer that surrounds the
axon of some neurons and helps to promote signal
propagation
myocarditis inflammation of the heart muscle
tissues

N
naïve mature B cell a B cell that has not yet been
activated
naked virus virus composed of a nucleic acid core,
either DNA or RNA, surrounded by a capsid
nalidixic acid member of the quinolone family that
functions by inhibiting the activity of DNA gyrase,
blocking DNA replication
narrow-spectrum antimicrobial drug that targets
only a specific subset of microbes
nasal cavity air-filled space in the skull immediately
behind the nose
nasolacrimal duct tear duct connecting the lacrimal
glands to the nasal cavity
nasolacrimal duct tear fluid flows from each eye
through this duct to the inner nose
nasopharynx part of the upper throat (pharynx)
extending from the posterior nasal cavity; carries air
inhaled through the nose
native structure three-dimensional structure of
folded fully functional proteins
natural active immunity immunity that develops as
a result of natural infection with a pathogen

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

natural antibiotic antimicrobial compound that is
produced naturally by microorganisms in nature
natural killer cells (NK cells) lymphoid cells that
recognize and destroy abnormal target cells by
inducing apoptosis
natural passive immunity transfer of maternal
antibodies from mother to fetus (transplacentally) or
infant (via breastmilk)
necrotizing fasciitis a serious infection, also known
as flesh-eating disease, that leads to rapid destruction
of tissue through the action of exotoxin A; it can be
caused by S. pyogenes or several other bacterial
species
negative (–) single-strand RNA (–ssRNA) a viral
RNA strand that cannot be translated until it is
replicated into positive single-strand RNA by viral
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
negative stain a stain that produces color around the
structure of interest while not coloring the structure
itself
Nematoda phylum comprising roundworms
neonatal herpes herpes infection of the newborn,
generally caused by infection during birth
neonatal meningitis meningitis caused by Group B
streptococcus and occurring primarily in neonates
(less than 2 months old)
neonatal tetanus tetanus acquired through infection
of the cut umbilical cord
neurocysticercosis parasitic invasion of brain tissues
by the larvae of the pork tapeworm, Taenia solium
neuromycosis any fungal infection of the nervous
system
neuron specialized cell found throughout the
nervous system that transmits signals through the
nervous system using electrochemical processes
neuropathy numbness or tingling sensation caused
by damage to peripheral nerves
neurotoxoplasmosis disease caused by the invasion
of brain tissues by the protozoan Toxoplasma gondii;
typically only affects immunocompromised patients
neurotransmitter compound that is released at the
synapse of neurons to stimulate or suppress the
actions of other cells
neutralism type of symbiosis that does not affect
either of the two populations
neutralization binding of an antibody to a pathogen
or toxin, preventing attachment to target cells
neutrophile organism that grows best at a near a
neutral pH of 6.5–7.5
neutrophils leukocytes with a multilobed nucleus
found in large numbers in peripheral blood; able to
leave the bloodstream to phagocytose pathogens in
infected tissues; also called polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (PMNs)
next generation sequencing a group of automated
techniques used for rapid DNA sequencing
nicotine adenine dinucleotide (NAD+/NADH)
oxidized/reduced forms of an electron carrier in cells
nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADP+/NADPH) oxidized/reduced forms of an
electron carrier in cells
nitrogen fixation bacterial biochemical pathways
that incorporate inorganic nitrogen gas into organic
forms more easily used by other organisms
nitrogenous base nitrogen-containing ring structure
within a nucleotide that is responsible for
complementary base pairing between nucleic acid
strands
noncoding DNA regions of an organism’s genome
that, unlike genes, do not encode proteins
noncommunicable disease disease that is not
transmitted from one person to another
noncompetitive (allosteric) inhibitor molecule that
binds to allosteric sites, inducing a conformational
change in the enzyme’s structure that prevents it
from functioning
noncritical item object that may contact intact skin
but does not penetrate it; requires cleanliness but not
a high level of disinfection
noncyclic photophosphorylation pathway used in
photosynthetic organisms when both ATP and
NADPH are required by the cell
nonenveloped virus naked virus

Appendix C

nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) a nonspecific
infection of the urethra that is not caused by
Neisseria gonorrheae
noninfectious disease disease caused by something
other than an infectious agent (e.g., genetics,
environment, nutritional deficiencies)
nonionizing radiation low-energy radiation, like
ultraviolet light, that can induce dimer formation
between two adjacent pyrimidine bases, resulting in
DNA polymerase stalling and possible formation of
a frameshift mutation
nonsense mutation point mutation that converts a
codon encoding an amino acid (a sense codon) into a
stop codon (a nonsense codon)
nontreponemal serologic tests qualitative and
quantitative indirect diagnostic tests for syphilis
northern blot a technique in molecular genetics
used to detect the amount of RNA made by gene
expression within a tissue or organism sample; RNA
fragments within a sample are separated by agarose
gel electrophoresis, immobilized on a membrane,
and then exposed to a specific DNA probe labeled
with a radioactive or fluorescent molecular beacon to
aid in detection
nosocomial disease disease acquired in a hospital
setting
notifiable disease a disease for which all cases must
legally be reported to regional, state, and/or federal
public health agencies
nuclear envelope (also called the nuclear
membrane) a structure defining the boundary of the
nucleus; composed of two distinct lipid bilayers that
are contiguous with each other and with the
endoplasmic reticulum
nuclear lamina a meshwork of intermediate
filaments (mainly lamins) found just inside the
nuclear envelope; provides structural support to the
nucleus
nucleic acid class of macromolecules composed of
nucleotide monomers polymerized into strands
nucleoid concentrated area of DNA genome and
associated proteins found in a prokaryotic cell that is
not surrounded by a membrane
nucleoid-associated protein (NAP) protein that
assists in the organization and packaging of the
chromosome in prokaryotic cells
nucleolus a dense region within the nucleus where
ribosomal RNA biosynthesis occurs and
preribosomal complexes are made
nucleoside analog chemical that is structurally
similar to a normal nucleotide base that can be
incorporated into DNA instead of normal bases
during replication but that has different base pairing
rules than the normal base for which it was
substituted, inducing mutation
nucleotide excision repair (dark repair) enzymatic
mechanism to repair pyrimidine dimers by cutting
the dimer-containing DNA strand on both sides of
dimer, removing the intervening strand and replacing
the bases with the correct ones
nucleotide nucleic acid monomer composed of a
pentose sugar, a phosphate group, and a nitrogenous
base
nucleus a membrane-bound structure of eukaryotic
cells that houses the DNA genome
numerical aperture a measure of a lens’s ability to
gather light

O
objective lenses on a light microscope, the lenses
closest to the specimen, typically located at the ends
of turrets
obligate aerobe organism that requires oxygen for
growth
obligate anaerobe organism that dies in the
presence of oxygen
obligate intracellular pathogen microorganism that
cannot synthesize its own ATP and, therefore, must
rely on a host cell for energy; behaves like a parasite
when inside a host cell, but is metabolically inactive
outside of a host cell
observational study a type of scientific study that
involves measurement of study subjects on variables
hypothesized to be associated with the outcome of
interest, but without any manipulation of the subjects

1257

ocular lens on a microscope, the lens closest to the
eye (also called an eyepiece)
oil immersion lens a special objective lens on a
microscope designed to be used with immersion oil
to improve resolution
Okazaki fragment short fragment of DNA made
during lagging strand synthesis
oligopeptide peptide having up to approximately 20
amino acids
oligotroph organism capable of living in lownutrient environments
opacity the property of absorbing or blocking light
operator DNA sequence located between the
promoter region and the first coding gene to which a
repressor protein can bind
operon a group of genes with related functions often
found clustered together within the prokaryotic
chromosome and transcribed under the control of a
single promoter and operator repression sequence
ophthalmia neonatorum inflammation of the
conjunctiva in newborns caused by Neisseria
gonorrhoeae transmitted during childbirth
opisthotonos characteristic symptom of tetanus that
results in uncontrolled muscular spasms and
backward arching of the neck and spine
opportunistic pathogen microorganism that can
cause disease in individuals with compromised host
defenses
opsonin any molecule that binds to and coats the
outside of a pathogen, identifying it for destruction
by phagocytes (examples include antibodies and the
complement proteins C3b and C4b)
opsonization process of coating a pathogen with a
chemical substance (an opsonin) that allows
phagocytic cells to recognize, engulf, and destroy the
pathogen more easily
optimum growth pH the pH at which an organism
grows best
optimum growth temperature the temperature at
which a microorganism’s growth rate is highest
optimum oxygen concentration the ideal
concentration of oxygen for a particular
microorganism
oral herpes an infection caused by herpes simplex
virus that results in cold sores, most commonly on
and around the lips
oral thrush Candida infection of the mouth
orchitis inflammation of one or both of the testes
organic molecule composed primarily of carbon;
typically contains at least one carbon atom bound to
one or more hydrogen atoms
organotroph chemotroph that uses organic
molecules as its electron source; also known as
chemoheterotroph
origin of replication specific nucleotide sequence
where replication begins
oropharynx area where air entering mouth enters
the pharynx
osmosis diffusion of water across a semipermeable
membrane
osmotic pressure the force or pressure generated by
water diffusing across a semipermeable membrane,
driven by differences in solute concentration across
the membrane
osteomyelitis inflammation of bone tissue
otitis externa an infection of the external ear canal,
most commonly caused by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa; often called swimmer’s ear
otitis inflammation of the ear
otitis media with effusion accumulation of fluid
inside the middle ear with or without infection
Ouchterlony assay test in which antigen and
antisera are added to neighboring wells in an agar
gel, allowing visualization of precipitin arcs
outer membrane a phospholipid bilayer external to
the peptidoglycan layer found in gram-negative cell
walls

oxazolidinones class of synthetic protein synthesis
inhibitors that interfere with formation of the
initiation complex for translation and prevent
translocation of the growing protein from the
ribosomal A site to the P site
oxidation reaction chemical reaction that removes
electrons (often as part of H atoms) from donor
molecules, leaving them oxidized
oxidative phosphorylation mechanism for making
ATP that uses the potential energy stored within an
electrochemical gradient to add Pi to ADP
oxygenic photosynthesis type of photosynthesis
found in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, and in
which H2O is used as the electron donor to replace
an electron lost by a reaction center pigment,
resulting in oxygen as a byproduct

P
P (peptidyl) site functional site of an intact
ribosome that binds charged tRNAs carrying amino
acids that have formed peptide bonds with the
growing polypeptide chain but have not yet
dissociated from their corresponding tRNA
palatine tonsil lymphoid tissue located near the
oropharynx
pandemic disease an epidemic that is worldwide as
opposed to regional
papilloma growth on the skin associated with
infection by any of the human papilloma viruses
(HPV); commonly known as a wart
paracrine function refers to a cytokine signal
released from a cell to a receptor on a nearby cell
parasitism type of symbiosis in which one
population benefits while harming the other
parasitology the study of parasites
parenteral route means of entry by a pathogen
through skin or mucous membranes when these
barriers are breached
paroxysmal stage most serious stage of pertussis
(whooping cough), characterized by severe and
prolonged coughing spells
passive carrier an individual capable of transmitting
a pathogen to another individual without becoming
infected
passive immunity adaptive immune defenses
received from another individual or animal
pasteurization form of microbial control using heat
that is applied to foods; kills pathogens and reduces
the number of spoilage-causing microbes while
maintaining food quality
pathogen a disease-causing microorganism
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
common molecular motifs found on pathogens
pathogenicity ability of a microbial agent to cause
disease
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) receptors on
the surface or in the interior of phagocytic cells that
bind to pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs)
pellicle structure that underlies the plasma
membrane in protists, providing additional support
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) infection of the
female reproductive organs that may spread from the
vagina to the cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, and
ovaries
penetration entry of phage or virus into a host cell
through injection, endocytosis, or membrane fusion
penicillin β-lactam antibacterial that was the first
cell wall synthesis inhibitor developed
penis external genital organ in males through which
urine and semen are discharged
pentamidine antiprotozoan drug that appears to
degrade kDNA in target cells, as well as inhibit
protein synthesis
pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) alternative
glycolytic pathway that produces intermediates used
for the biosynthesis of nucleotides and amino acids;
also called the phosphogluconate pathway or the
hexose monophosphate shunt
peptic ulcer an ulcer in the lining of the stomach or
duodenum, often associated with Helicobacter pylori

Appendix C

1258

peptide bond bond between the carboxyl group of
one amino acid and the amine group of another;
formed with the loss of a water molecule
peptidoglycan (murein) the polymer of alternating
N-acetylmuramic acid NAM and Nacetylglucosamine (NAG) subunits linked together
by peptide chains; a major constituent of bacterial
cell walls
peptidyl transferase RNA-based ribozyme that is
part of the 50S ribosomal subunit and catalyzes
formation of the peptide bond between the amino
acid bound to a tRNA and the growing polypeptide
chain
perforin compound released from a natural killer
cell that creates pores in the target cell through
which other toxins (particularly granzymes) can gain
access to the cytoplasm
pericarditis inflammation of the sac that surrounds
the heart
period of convalescence fifth stage of acute disease,
during which the patient returns to normal function
period of decline fourth stage of disease, during
which the number of pathogens present in the host
decreases, along with signs and symptoms of disease
period of illness third stage of acute disease, during
which the number of pathogens present in the host is
greatest and the signs and symptoms of disease are
most severe
periodontal disease a condition in which the gums
are inflamed and may erode
periodontitis inflammation of the gums that is more
severe than gingivitis, spreading deeper into the
tissues
peripheral nervous system network of neurons that
connects the CNS with organs, sensory organs, and
muscles throughout the body
peripheral tolerance mechanism by which
regulatory T cells inhibit self-reactive immune
responses in T cells that have already exited the
thymus
periplasmic space the space between the cell wall
and the plasma membrane, primarily in gramnegative bacteria
peristalsis muscular contractions of the
gastrointestinal tract that propel ingested material
through the stomach, intestines, and, eventually,
through the rectum and out of the body
peritrichous having numerous flagella covering the
entire surface of a bacterial cell
peroxidase enzyme that catalyzes the detoxification
of peroxides
peroxisome in eukaryotic cells, a membrane-bound
organelle (not part of the endomembrane system)
that produces hydrogen peroxide to break down
various types of molecules; also plays a role in lipid
biosynthesis
peroxygen type of strong oxidizing agent that causes
free radical formation in cells; can be used as a
disinfectant or antiseptic
persister dormant cell that survives in the death
phase and is resistant to most antibiotics
pertussis contagious illness caused by Bordetella
pertussis that causes severe coughing fits followed
by a whooping sound during inhalation; commonly
known as whooping cough
pertussis toxin main virulence factor accounting for
the symptoms of whooping cough
petechiae small red or purple spots on the skin that
result from blood leaking out of damaged vessels
Petroff-Hausser counting chamber calibrated slide
that allows counting of bacteria in a specific volume
under a microscope
Peyer’s patches lymphoid tissue in the ileum that
monitors and fights infections
phagemid a plasmid capable of being replicated as a
plasmid and also incorporated into a phage head
phagocytosis a type of endocytosis in which large
particles are engulfed by membrane invagination,
after which the particles are enclosed in a pocket,
which is pinched off from the membrane to form a
vacuole
phagolysosome compartment in a phagocytic cell
that results when the phagosome is fused with the
lysosome, leading to the destruction of the pathogens
inside

phagosome compartment in the cytoplasm of a
phagocytic cell that contains the phagocytosed
pathogen enclosed by part of the cell membrane
pharmacogenomics (toxicogenomics) the
evaluation of the effectiveness and safety of drugs on
the basis of information from an individual’s
genomic sequence as well as examination of changes
in gene expression in response to the drug
pharyngitis inflammation of the pharynx
pharynx region connecting the nose and mouth to
the larynx: the throat
phase-contrast microscope a light microscope that
uses an annular stop and annular plate to increase
contrast
phenol coefficient measure of the effectiveness of a
chemical agent through comparison with that of
phenol on Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhi
phenolics class of chemical disinfectants and
antiseptics characterized by a phenol group that
denatures proteins and disrupts membranes
phenotype observable characteristics of a cell or
organism
phosphodiester bonds linkage whereby the
phosphate group attached to the 5ʹ carbon of the
sugar of one nucleotide bonds to the hydroxyl group
of the 3ʹ carbon of the sugar of the next nucleotide
phosphogluconate pathway see pentose phosphate
pathway
phospholipase enzyme that degrades phospholipids
phospholipid complex lipid that contains a
phosphate group
phospholipid-derived fatty acids (PLFA) analysis
technique in which membrane phospholipids are
saponified to release the fatty acids of the
phospholipids, which can be subjected to FAME
analysis for identification purposes
phosphorescence the ability of certain materials to
absorb energy and then release that energy as light
after a delay
photosynthesis process whereby phototrophic
organisms convert solar energy into chemical energy
that can then be used to build carbohydrates
photosynthetic pigment pigment molecule used by
a cell to absorb solar energy; each one appears the
color of light that it transmits or reflects
photosystem organized unit of pigments found
within a photosynthetic membrane, containing both a
light-harvesting complex and a reaction center
phototaxis directional movement using flagella in
response to light
phototroph organism that gets its energy from light
phototrophic bacteria nontaxonomic group of
bacteria that use sunlight as their primary source of
energy
phylogeny the evolutionary history of a group of
organisms
phytoplankton photosynthetic plankton
pia mater fragile and innermost membrane layer
surrounding the brain
pili long protein extensions on the surface of some
bacterial cells; specialized F or sex pilus aids in
DNA transfer between cells
pinocytosis a type of endocytosis in which small
dissolved materials are endocytosed into smaller
vesicles
plague infectious epidemic disease caused by
Yersinia pestis
plankton microscopic organisms that float in the
water and are carried by currents; they may be
autotrophic (phytoplankton) or heterotrophic
(zooplankton)
planktonic free-floating or drifting in suspension
plantibodies monoclonal antibodies produced in
plants that are genetically engineered to express
mouse or human antibodies
plaque clear area on bacterial lawn caused by viral
lysis of host cells
plasma cell activated and differentiated B cell that
produces and secretes antibodies

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

plasma fluid portion of the blood that contains all
clotting factors
plasma membrane (also called the cell membrane
or cytoplasmic membrane) lipid bilayer with
embedded proteins that defines the boundary of the
cell
plasmalemma protist plasma membrane
plasmid small, circular, double-stranded DNA
molecule that is typically independent from the
bacterial chromosome
plasmolysis the separation of the plasma membrane
away from the cell wall when a cell is exposed to a
hypertonic environment
platelets cell fragments in the peripheral blood that
originate from megakaryocyte cells in the bone
marrow; also called thrombocytes
Platyhelminthes phylum comprising flatworms
pleconaril an antiviral drug targeting picornaviruses
that prevents the uncoating of virus particles upon
their infection of host cells
pleomorphic able to change shape
pneumococcal meningitis bacterial infection caused
by Streptococcus pneumoniae that results in an
inflammation of the meninges
Pneumocystis pneumonia common pulmonary
infection in patients with AIDS; caused by P.
jirovecii
pneumonia pulmonary inflammation that causes the
lungs to fill with fluids
pneumonic plague rare form of plague that causes
massive hemorrhages in the lungs and is
communicable through aerosols
point mutation mutation, most commonly a base
substitution, that affects a single base pair
point source spread a form of common source
spread in which the transmission of a disease from
the source occurs for a brief period that is less than
the pathogen’s incubation period
polar tubule a tube-like structure produced by
spores of parasitic Microsporidia fungi that pierces
host cell membranes
poliomyelitis (polio) disease caused by an infection
of the enteric polio virus characterized by
inflammation of the motor neurons of the brain stem
and spinal cord; can result in paralysis
poly-A tail string of approximately 200 adenine
nucleotides added to the 3’ end of a eukaryotic
primary mRNA transcript to stabilize it
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) a
method for separating populations of proteins and
DNA fragments during Sanger sequencing of
varying sizes by differential migration rates caused
by a voltage gradient through a vertical gel matrix
polycistronic mRNA single mRNA molecule
commonly produced during prokaryotic transcription
that carries information encoding multiple
polypeptides
polyclonal antibodies antibodies produced in a
normal immune response, in which multiple clones
of B cells respond to many different epitopes on an
antigen
polyenes class of antifungal drugs that bind to
ergosterol to form membrane pores, disrupting
fungal cell membrane integrity
polyhedral virus virus with a three-dimensional
shape with many facets
polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) a type of cellular
inclusion surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer
embedded with protein
polylinker site or multiple cloning site (MCS) a
short sequence containing multiple unique restriction
enzyme recognition sites that are used for inserting
foreign DNA into the plasmid after restriction
digestion of both the foreign DNA and the plasmid
polymer macromolecule composed of individual
units, monomers, that bind together like building
blocks.
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) an in vitro
molecular technique that rapidly amplifies the
number of copies of specific DNA sequences to
make the amplified DNA available for other
analyses
polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) see
neutrophils

Appendix C

polymyxins lipophilic polypeptide antibiotics that
target the lipopolysaccharide component of gramnegative bacteria and ultimately disrupt the integrity
of their outer and inner membranes
polypeptide polymer having from approximately 20
to 50 amino acids
polyphyletic refers to a grouping of organisms that
is not descended from a single common ancestor
polyribosome (polysome) structure including an
mRNA molecule that is being translated by multiple
ribosomes concurrently
polysaccharide polymer composed of hundreds of
monosaccharides linked together by glycosidic
bonds; also called glycans
portal of entry anatomical feature of the body
through which pathogens can enter host tissue
portal of exit anatomical feature of the body through
which pathogens can leave diseased individual
positive (+) strand viral RNA strand that acts like
messenger RNA and can be directly translated inside
the host cell
positive stain a stain that colors the structure of
interest
pour plate method a technique used for inoculating
plates with diluted bacterial samples for the purpose
of cell counting; cells are mixed with warm liquid
agar before being poured into Petri dishes
praziquantel antihelminthic drug that induces a
calcium influx into tapeworms, leading to spasm and
paralysis
precipitin complex lattice of antibody and antigen
that becomes too large to stay in solution
precipitin ring test assay in which layers of antisera
and antigen in a test tube form precipitin at the
interface of the two solutions
prevalence the total number or proportion of
individuals in a population ill with a specific disease
primary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM)
acute and deadly parasitic infection of brain tissues
by the amoeba Naegleria fowleri
primary antibody in a sandwich ELISA, the
antibody that is attached to wells of a microtiter plate
to capture antigen from a solution, or in an indirect
ELISA, the antigen-specific antibody present in a
patient’s serum
primary cell culture cells taken directly from an
animal or plant and cultured in vitro
primary immunodeficiency genetic condition that
results in impaired immune function
primary infection initial infection produced by a
pathogen
primary lymphoid tissue one of two types of
lymphatic tissue; comprises bone marrow and the
thymus
primary pathogen microorganism that can cause
disease in the host regardless of the effectiveness of
the host’s immune system
primary response the adaptive immune response
produced upon first exposure to a specific antigen
primary stain refers, in differential staining
techniques, to the first dye added to the specimen
primary structure bonding sequence of amino acids
in a polypeptide chain protein macromolecule that
results when the number of amino acids linked
together becomes very large, or when multiple
polypeptides are used as building subunits
primary transcript RNA molecule directly
synthesized by RNA polymerase in eukaryotes
before undergoing the additional processing required
to become a mature mRNA molecule
primase RNA polymerase enzyme that synthesizes
the RNA primer required to initiate DNA synthesis
primer short complementary sequence of five to 10
RNA nucleotides synthesized on the template strand
by primase that provides a free 3’-OH group to
which DNA polymerase can add DNA nucleotides
prion acellular infectious particle consisting of just
proteins that can cause progressive diseases in
animals and humans
prodromal period second stage of acute disease,
during which the pathogen continues to multiply in
the host and nonspecific signs and symptoms
become observable
progeny virus newly assembled virions ready for
release outside the cell

1259

proglottid body segment of a cestode (tapeworm)
prokaryote an organism whose cell structure does
not include a membrane-bound nucleus
prokaryotic cell a cell lacking a nucleus bound by a
complex nuclear membrane
promoter DNA sequence onto which the
transcription machinery binds to initiate transcription
propagated spread the progression of an infectious
disease from person to person, either indirectly or
directly, through a population of susceptible
individuals as one infected individual transmits the
agent to others, who transmit it to others yet again
prophage phage genome that has incorporated into
the host genome
prospective study a research design that follows
cases from the beginning of the study through time
to associate measured variables with outcomes
prostate gland gland that contributes fluid to semen
prostatitis inflammation of the prostate gland
protease enzyme involved in protein catabolism that
removes individual amino acids from the ends of
peptide chains
protease inhibitor class of antiviral drugs, used in
HIV therapy and hepatitis C therapy, that inhibits
viral-specific proteases, preventing viral maturation
protein signature an array of proteins expressed by
a cell or tissue under a specific condition
Proteobacteria phylum of gram-negative bacteria
proteomic analysis study of all accumulated
proteins of an organism
proteomics the study of the entire complement of
proteins in an organism; involves monitoring
differences in gene expression patterns between cells
at the protein level
protists informal name for diverse group of
eukaryotic organisms, including unicellular, colonial,
and multicellular types that lack specialized tissues
proton motive force electrochemical gradient
formed by the accumulation of hydrogen ions (also
known as protons) on one side of a membrane
relative to the other protozoan (plural: protozoa) a
unicellular eukaryotic organism, usually motile
protozoans informal term for some protists,
generally those that are nonphotosynthetic,
unicellular, and motile protozoology the study of
protozoa
provirus animal virus genome that has integrated
into the host chromosome
pseudohyphae short chains of yeast cells stuck
together
pseudomembrane grayish layer of dead cells, pus,
fibrin, red blood cells, and bacteria that forms on
mucous membranes of the nasal cavity, tonsils,
pharynx, and larynx of individuals with diphtheria
pseudomembranous colitis inflammation of the
large intestine with the formation of a
pseudomembrane; caused by C. difficile
pseudopodia temporary projections involved in
ameboid movement; these “false feet” form by gelsol cycling of actin polymerization/depolymerization
psittacosis zoonotic Chlamydophila infection from
birds that causes a rare form of pneumonia
psoriasis autoimmune disease involving
inflammatory reactions in and thickening of skin
psychrophile a microorganism that grows best at
cold temperatures; most have an optimum growth
temperature of about 15 °C and can survive
temperatures below 0 °C; most cannot survive
temperatures above 20 °C
psychrotroph a microorganism that grows best at
cool temperatures, typically between about 4 °C and
25 °C, with optimum growth at about 20 °C
puerperal sepsis sepsis associated with a bacterial
infection incurred by a woman during or after
childbirth
purines nitrogenous bases containing a double-ring
structure with a six-carbon ring fused to a fivecarbon ring; includes adenine and guanine
purple nonsulfur bacteria phototrophic bacteria
that are similar to purple sulfur bacteria except they
use hydrogen rather than hydrogen sulfide for
oxidation

purple sulfur bacteria phototrophic bacteria that
oxidize hydrogen sulfide into elemental sulfur and
sulfuric acid; their purple color is due to the
pigments bacteriochlorophylls and carotenoids
purulent an infection that produces pus; suppurative
pus accumulation of dead pathogens, neutrophils,
tissue fluid, and other bystander cells that may have
been killed by phagocytes at the site of an infection
pyelonephritis an infection of one or both kidneys
pyocyanin blue pigments produced by some strains
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
pyoderma any suppurative (pus-producing)
infection of the skin
pyoverdin a water-soluble, yellow-green or yellowbrown pigment produced by some strains of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
pyrimidines nitrogenous bases containing a single
six-carbon ring; includes cytosine and thymine in
DNA
pyrophosphate (PPi) two connected phosphate
groups in solution
pyuria pus or white blood cells in the urine

Q
Q fever highly infectious zoonotic disease caused by
Coxiella burnetii that farmers can contract from their
animals by inhalation
quarantine the isolation of an individual for the
purpose of preventing the spread of disease
quaternary ammonium salts (quats) group of
cationic detergents, named for the characteristic
quaternary nitrogen atom that confers a positive
charge, that make up an important class of
disinfectants and antiseptics
quaternary structure structure of protein
complexes formed by the combination of several
separate polypeptides or subunits
quinolines class of antiprotozoan drugs long used
for the treatment of malaria; interferes with heme
detoxification
quorum sensing cell-to-cell communication in
bacteria; enables a coordinated response from cells
when the population reaches a threshold density

R
R plasmid plasmid containing genes encoding
proteins that make a bacterial cell resistant to one or
more antibiotics
rabies contagious viral disease primarily transmitted
by the bite of infected mammals that can cause acute
encephalitis resulting in madness, aggressiveness,
coma, and death
radial immunodiffusion precipitin reaction in
which antigen added to a well in an antiserumimpregnated gel diffuses, producing a precipitin ring
whose diameter squared is directly proportional to
antigen concentration
rat-bite fever relapsing fever caused by either
Bacillus moniliformis or Spirillum minor; can be
transmitted by the bite of a rat or through contact
with rat feces or urine
reaction center protein complex in a photosystem,
containing a pigment molecule that can undergo
oxidation upon excitation by a light-harvesting
pigment, actually giving up an electron
reactivation tuberculosis secondary infection by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis that forms later in life;
occurs when the bacteria escape from the Ghon
complexes and establish focal infections at other
sites in immunocompromised individuals
reactive oxygen species (ROS) unstable and toxic
ions and molecules derived from partial reduction of
oxygen
reading frame way nucleotides in mRNA are
grouped into codons

Appendix C

1260

real-time PCR (quantitative PCR, qPCR) a
variant of PCR involving the use of fluorescence to
allow for the monitoring of the increase in doublestranded template during a PCR reaction as it occurs,
allowing for the quantitation of the original target
sequence
receptor-mediated endocytosis a type of
endocytosis in which extracellular ligands are
targeted to specific cells through their binding to
specific cell surface receptors
recognition site a specific, often palindromic, DNA
sequence recognized by a restriction enzyme that is
typically four to six base pairs long and reads the
same in the 5ʹ to 3ʹ direction on one strand as it does
in the 5ʹ to 3ʹ direction on the complementary strand
recombinant DNA molecule a DNA molecule
resulting from the cutting and insertion of DNA from
one organism into the DNA of another organism,
resulting in a new combination of genetic material
recombinant DNA pharmaceuticals
pharmaceuticals produced as a result of genetic
engineering
recombinant DNA technology the process by
which DNA from one organism is cut and new
pieces of foreign DNA from a second organism are
inserted, artificially creating new combinations of
genetic material within the organism
redox potential tendency for a molecule to acquire
electrons and become reduced; electrons flow from
molecules with lower redox potentials to those with
higher redox potentials
redox reaction pairing of an oxidation reaction with
a reduction reaction
reduction reaction chemical reaction that adds
electrons to acceptor molecules, leaving them
reduced
reemerging infectious disease a disease that was
once under control or largely eradicated that has
begun causing new outbreaks due to changes in
susceptible populations, the environment, or the
pathogen itself
reflection when light bounces back from a surface
refraction bending of light waves, which occurs
when a light wave passes from one medium to
another
refractive index a measure of the magnitude of
slowing of light waves by a particular medium
regulatory T cells class of T cells that are activated
by self-antigens and serve to inhibit peripheral selfreacting T cells from causing damage and
autoimmunity
rejection process by which adaptive immune
responses recognize transplanted tissue as non-self,
mounting a response that destroys the tissue or leads
to the death of the individual
relapsing fever louse- or tickborne disease caused
by Borrelia recurrentis or B. hermsii and
characterized by a recurrent fever
replica plating plating technique in which cells
from colonies growing on a complete medium are
inoculated onto various types of minimal media
using a piece of sterile velvet, ensuring that the
orientation of cells deposited on all plates is the
same so that growth (or absence thereof) can be
compared between plates
replication bubble circular structure formed when
the DNA strands are separated for replication
replication fork Y-shaped structure that forms
during the process of replication as DNA unwinds
and opens up to separate the DNA strands
replication process by which DNA is copied
reporter genes genes that encode easily observable
characteristics, allowing for their expression to be
easily monitored
repressible operon bacterial operon, that typically
containing genes encoding enzymes required for a
biosynthetic pathway and that is expressed when the
product of the pathway continues to be required but
is repressed when the product of the pathway
accumulates, removing the need for continued
expression
repressor protein that suppresses transcription of a
gene or operon in response to an external stimulus
reservoir a living host or nonliving site in which a
pathogenic organism can survive or multiply

resident microbiota microorganisms that constantly
live in the human body
resolution the ability to distinguish between two
points in an image
restriction endonuclease (restriction enzyme)
bacterial enzyme that cuts DNA fragments at a
unique, often palindromic, recognition site; used in
genetic engineering for splicing DNA fragments
together into recombinant molecules
restriction fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP) a genetic variant identified by differing
numbers or sizes of DNA fragments generated after
digestion of a DNA sample with a restriction
endonuclease; the variants are caused by the loss or
gain of restriction sites, or the insertion or deleting of
sequences between restriction sites.
retort large industrial autoclave used for moist heat
sterilization on a large scale
retrospective study a research design that associates
historical data with present cases
retrovirus positive ssRNA virus that produces and
uses reverse transcriptase to make an ssDNA copy of
the retroviral genome that can then be made into
dsDNA and integrate into the host cell chromosome
to form a provirus within the host chromosome.
reverse transcriptase enzyme found in retroviruses
that can make a copy of ssDNA from ssRNA
reverse transcriptase inhibitor classes of antiviral
drugs that involve nucleoside analog competitive
inhibition and non-nucleoside noncompetitive
inhibition of the HIV reverse transcriptase
reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) a variation
of PCR used to obtain DNA copies of a specific
mRNA molecule that begins with the conversion of
mRNA molecules to cDNA by the enzyme reverse
transcriptase
Reye syndrome potentially life-threatening sequelae
to some viral infections that result in the swelling of
the liver and brain; aspirin use has also been linked
to this syndrome
Rh factor red blood cell surface antigen that can
trigger type II hypersensitivity reactions
rheostat a dimmer switch that controls the intensity
of the illuminator on a light microscope
rheumatic fever serious clinical sequela of an
infection with Streptococcus pyogenes that can result
in damage to joints or the valves of the heart
rheumatoid arthritis systemic autoimmune disease
in which immune complexes form and deposit in the
joints and their linings, leading to inflammation and
destruction
rhinitis inflammation of the nasal cavity
rhizines structures made of hyphae found on some
lichens; aid in attachment to a surface
ribonucleic acid (RNA) single-stranded nucleic acid
composed of ribonucleotides; important in
transcription and translation (protein synthesis)
ribonucleotides RNA nucleotides containing ribose
as the pentose sugar component and a nitrogenous
base
ribosome a complex intracellular structure that
synthesizes proteins
riboswitch small region of noncoding RNA found
within the 5’ end of some prokaryotic mRNA
molecules that may bind to a small intracellular
molecule, influencing the completion of transcription
and/or translation
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RuBisCO)
first enzyme of the Calvin cycle responsible for
adding a CO2 molecule onto a five-carbon ribulose
bisphosphate (RuBP) molecule
rifampin semisynthetic member of the rifamycin
class that blocks bacterial RNA polymerase activity,
inhibiting transcription
rimantadine antiviral drug that targets the influenza
virus by preventing viral escape from endosomes
upon host cell uptake, preventing viral RNA release
and subsequent viral replication
ringworm a tinea (cutaneous mycosis of the skin),
typically characterized by a round, red, slightly
raised lesion that heals outward from the center,
giving it the appearance of a round worm
RNA interference (RNAi) process by which
antisense RNAs or small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
interfere with gene expression by binding to mRNA,
preventing translation and protein synthesis

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

RNA polymerase enzyme that adds nucleotides to
the 3’-OH group of the growing mRNA molecule
that are complementary to the template strand,
forming covalent phosphodiester bonds between the
nucleotides in the RNA
RNA splicing process of removing intron-encoded
RNA sequences from eukaryotic primary transcripts
and reconnecting those encoded by exons
RNA transcript mRNA produced during
transcription
Rocky Mountain spotted fever potentially fatal
tickborne disease caused by Rickettsia rickettsii
characterized by fever, body aches, and a rash
rogue form misfolded form of the PrP protein that is
normally found in the cell membrane and has the
tendency to aggregate in neurons, causing extensive
cell death and brain damage
rolling circle replication type of rapid
unidirectional DNA synthesis of a circular DNA
molecule
roseola a rash-causing illness, most commonly
affecting children, associated with human
herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6)
rough endoplasmic reticulum a type of
endoplasmic reticulum containing bound 80S
ribosomes for the synthesis of proteins destined for
the plasma membrane
route of administration method used to introduce a
drug into the body
rRNA type of stable RNA that is a major constituent
of ribosomes, ensuring proper alignment of the
mRNA and the ribosomes as well as catalyzing the
formation of the peptide bonds between two aligned
amino acids during protein synthesis
rubella German measles, caused by the rubella virus
runs (running) purposeful, directional movement of
a prokaryotic cell propelled by counterclockwise
flagellar rotation

S
σ factor subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase
conferring promoter specificity that can be
substituted with a different version in response to an
environmental condition, allowing for a quick and
global change of the regulon transcribed
saccharide carbohydrate
salmonellosis gastrointestinal illness caused by
Salmonella bacteria
salpingitis inflammation of the fallopian tubes
sandwich ELISA EIA in which the primary
antibody is first attached to the wells of a microtiter
plate, allowing it to capture antigen from an
unknown solution to be quantified
Sanger DNA sequencing (dideoxy method, chain
termination method) the original DNA sequencing
technique in which dideoxy nucleotides, each
labeled with a molecular beacon, are used to
terminate chain elongation; the resulting
incrementally sized fragments are then separated by
electrophoresis to determine the sequence of the
DNA molecule
sanitization protocol that reduces microbial load on
inanimate surfaces to levels deemed safe for public
health
saprozoic refers to protozoans that ingest small,
soluble food molecules
SARS severe acute respiratory syndrome; caused by
a zoonotic coronavirus that results in flu-like
symptoms
saturated fatty acid lipid with hydrocarbon chains
containing only single bonds, which results in the
maximum number of hydrogen atoms per chain
scanning electron microscope (SEM) a type of
electron microscope that bounces electrons off of the
specimen, forming an image of the surface
scanning probe microscope a microscope that uses
a probe that travels across the surface of a specimen
at a constant distance while the current, which is
sensitive to the size of the gap, is measured
scanning tunneling microscope a microscope that
uses a probe that is passed just above the specimen
as a constant voltage bias creates the potential for an
electric current between the probe and the specimen

Appendix C

scarlet fever bacterial infection caused by
Streptococcus pyogenes, marked by a high fever and
a disseminated scarlet rash
schistosomiasis helminthic infection caused by
Schistosoma spp.; transmitted from a snail
intermediate host to human swimmers or bathers in
freshwater
schizogony asexual reproduction in protozoans that
is characterized by multiple cell divisions (one cell
dividing to form many smaller cells)
scolex the head region of a cestode (tapeworm),
which typically has suckers and/or hooks for
attachment to the host
scrapie form of transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy that primarily affects sheep
sebaceous gland a gland located in hair follicles that
secretes sebum
sebum lipid-rich substance secreted by the
sebaceous glands of the skin
secondary antibody antibody to which an enzyme is
attached for use in ELISA assays; in direct and
sandwich ELISAs, it is specific for the antigen being
quantified, whereas in indirect ELISA, it is specific
for the primary antibody
secondary immunodeficiency impaired immune
response due to infection, metabolic disturbance,
poor diet, stress, or other acquired factors
secondary infection second infection that develops
after a primary infection as a result of the primary
disease compromising immune defenses or
antibiotics, thus eliminating protective microbiota
secondary lymphoid tissue one of two types of
lymphatic tissue; comprises the spleen, lymph nodes,
Peyer’s patches, and mucosa associated lymphoid
tissue (MALT)
secondary response the adaptive immune response
produced in response to a specific antigen to which
the body has previously been exposed
secondary structure structure stabilized by
hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl and amine
groups of a polypeptide chain; may be an α-helix or
a β-pleated sheet, or both
secretory vesicle membranous sac that carries
molecules through the plasma membrane to be
released (secreted) from the cell
selective IgA deficiency primary immunodeficiency
in which individuals produce normal levels of IgG
and IgM, but are unable to produce secretory IgA
selective media media that contain additives that
encourage the growth of some bacteria while
inhibiting others
selective toxicity desirable quality of an
antimicrobial drug indicating that it preferentially
kills or inhibits the growth of the target microbe
while causing minimal or no harm to the host
semiconservative DNA replication pattern of DNA
replication process whereby each of the two parental
DNA strands acts as a template for new DNA to be
synthesized, producing hybrid old- and new-strand
daughter molecules
semicritical item object that contacts mucous
membranes or nonintact skin but does not penetrate
tissues; requires a high level of disinfection
seminal vesicles glands that contribute fluid to
semen
semisynthetic antimicrobial chemically modified
derivative of a natural antibiotic
sense strand strand of DNA that is not transcribed
for gene expression; it is complementary to the
antisense strand
sepsis systemic inflammatory response to an
infection that results in high fever and edema,
causing organ damage and possibly leading to shock
and death
septate hyphae hyphae that contain walls between
individual cells; characteristic of some fungi
septic arthritis see infectious arthritis
septic shock serious condition marked by the loss of
blood pressure resulting from an inflammatory
response against a systemic infection
septic the condition of being septicemic; having an
infection in the blood
septicemia condition in which pathogens are
multiplying in blood

1261

septicemic plague form of plague that occurs when
the bacterial pathogen gains access to the
bloodstream
septum separating structure that forms during cell
division; also describes the separating wall between
cells in a filament
sequela (plural: sequelae) condition that arises as a
consequence of a prior disease
serial dilution sequential transfer of known volumes
of culture samples from one tube to another to
perform a several-fold dilution of the original culture
seroconversion point in an infection at which
antibody to a pathogen is detectible using an
immunoassay
serotype strain or variation of the same species of
bacteria; also called serovar
serovar specific strain of bacteria identified by
agglutination using strain-specific antisera
serum fluid portion of the blood after clotting has
occurred; generally lacks clotting factors
serum sickness systemic type III hypersensitivity
reaction
sessile attached to a surface
severe combined immunodeficiency disease
(SCID) genetic disorder resulting in impaired
function of B cells and T cells
sex pilus specialized type of pilus that aids in DNA
transfer between some prokaryotic cells
sheath part of the tail on a bacteriophage that
contracts to introduce the viral DNA into the
bacterium
shigellosis gastrointestinal illness caused by Shigella
bacteria, also called bacillary dysentery
shingles acute and painful rash that forms following
the reactivation of a latent chickenpox infection
shock extreme drop in blood pressure that, among
other causes, can result from a strong immune
response to the activity of toxins or response to
bacterial products and can result in death
shuttle vector a plasmid that can move between
bacterial and eukaryotic cells
side chain the variable functional group, R, attached
to the α carbon of an amino acid
sign objective and measurable indication of a disease
silent mutation point mutation that results in the
same amino acid being incorporated into the
resulting polypeptide
simple microscope a type of microscope with only
one lens to focus light from the specimen
simple staining a staining technique that uses a
single dye
single-stranded binding protein protein that coats
the single strands of DNA near each replication fork
to prevent the single-stranded DNA from rewinding
into a double helix
sinusitis inflammation of the sinuses
S-layer cell envelope layer composed of protein
covering the cell walls of some bacteria and archaea;
in some archaea, may function as the cell wall
slime layer a type of glycocalyx with unorganized
layers of polysaccharides that aid bacterial adherence
to surfaces
smear a thin layer of a specimen on a slide
smooth endoplasmic reticulum a type of
endoplasmic reticulum that lacks ribosomes, is
involved in the biosynthesis of lipids and in
carbohydrate metabolism, and serves as the site of
detoxification of toxic compounds within the cell
soft chancres soft, painful ulcers associated with the
STI chancroid
soma cell body of a neuron
sonication method of microbial control that involves
application of ultrasound waves to form cavitation
within a solution, including inside cells, disrupting
cell components as a result

Southern blot a technique in molecular genetics
used to detect the presence of certain DNA
sequences within a given DNA sample; DNA
fragments within the sample are separated by
agarose gel electrophoresis, immobilized on a
membrane, and then exposed to a specific DNA
probe labeled with a radioactive or fluorescent
molecular beacon to aid in detection
specialized transduction transfer of a specific piece
of bacterial chromosomal DNA near the site of
integration by the phage
specificity the ability of the specific adaptive
immune system to target specific pathogens or toxins
spike viral glycoprotein embedded within the viral
capsid or envelope used for attachment to host cells
spirochetes a group of long, thin, spiral-shaped
fastidious bacteria that includes the human
pathogens that cause syphilis, Lyme disease, and
leptospirosis
spleen abdominal organ consisting of secondary
lymphoid tissue that filters blood and captures
pathogens and antigens that pass into it; also
contains specialized macrophages and dendritic cells
that are crucial for antigen presentation
spliceosome protein complex containing small
nuclear ribonucleoproteins that catalyzes the splicing
out of intron-encoded RNA sequences from the
primary transcript during RNA maturation in
eukaryotes
spontaneous generation the now-disproven theory
that life can arise from nonliving matter
spontaneous mutation mutation not caused by a
mutagen that occurs through DNA replication errors
sporadic disease an illness that occurs at relatively
low levels with no discernible pattern or trend,
frequently with no geographic focus
spores specialized cells that may be used for
reproduction or may be specialized to withstand
harsh conditions
sporotrichosis subcutaneous infection caused by the
fungus Sporothrix schenkii, which causes skin
lesions and can potentially spread to the lymphatic
system; also known as rose gardener’s disease or
rose thorn disease
sporulation the process by which a vegetative cell
produces a dormant endospore
spread plate method a technique used for
inoculating plates with diluted bacterial samples for
the purpose of cell counting; the liquid sample is
pipetted onto solid medium and spread uniformly
across the plate
St. Louis encephalitis mosquito-borne viral
infection of the brain that occurs primarily in the
central and southern United States
stage the platform of a microscope on which slides
are placed
staining the addition of stains or dyes to a
microscopic specimen for the purpose of enhancing
contrast
staphylococcal food poisoning gastrointestinal
illness caused by toxins produced by Staphylococcus
aureus
staphylolysins a class of staphylococcal exotoxins
that are cytotoxic to skin cells and white blood cells
starch energy-storage polysaccharide in plants;
composed of two types of glucose polymers:
amylose and amylopectin
start codon AUG codon, specifying methionine,
which is typically the codon that initiates translation
stationary phase interval during which the number
of cells formed by cell division is equal to the
number of cells dying
stereoisomers isomers that differ in the spatial
arrangements of atoms
sterilant strong chemical that effectively kills all
microbes and viruses in or on an inanimate item
sterile field specified area that is free of all
vegetative microbes, endospores, and viruses
sterilization protocol that completely removes all
vegetative cells, endospores, and viruses from an
item
steroid lipid with complex, ringed structures found
in cell membranes and hormones
sterol the most common type of steroid; contains an
OH group at one specific position on one of the
molecule’s carbon rings

Appendix C

1262

sticky ends short, single-stranded complementary
overhangs that may be produced when many
restriction enzymes cut DNA
stigma light-sensing eyespot found in Euglena
stop codon (nonsense codon) one of three codons
for which there is no tRNA with a complementary
anticodon; a signal within the mRNA for termination
of translation
stratum corneum a layer of dead, keratinized cells
that forms the uppermost layer of the epidermis
strep throat (streptococcal pharyngitis) bacterial
pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes
streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome (STSS)
condition similar to staphylococcal toxic shock
syndrome but with greater likelihood of bacteremia,
necrotizing fasciitis, and acute respiratory distress
syndrome
stroma a gel-like fluid that makes up much of a
chloroplast’s volume, and in which the thylakoids
floats
strongyloidiasis soil-transmitted intestinal infection
caused by the helminth Strongyloides stercoralis
structural formula graphic representation of the
molecular structure showing how the atoms are
arranged
structural isomers molecules composed of the same
numbers and types of atoms but with different
bonding sequences
subacute bacterial endocarditis form of
endocarditis in which damage to the valves of the
heart occurs over months as a result of blood clot
formation and immune-response-induced fibrosis of
the valves
subclinical disease disease that does not present any
signs or symptoms
subcutaneous mycosis any fungal infection that
penetrates the epidermis and dermis to enter deeper
tissues
substrate chemical reactants of an enzymatic
reaction
substrate-level phosphorylation direct method of
ATP production in which a high-energy phosphate
group is removed from an organic molecule and
added to an ADP molecule
subunit vaccine vaccine that contains only key
antigens as opposed to whole pathogens
sugar-phosphate backbone alternating sugarphosphate structure composing the framework of a
nucleic acid strand that results from phosphodiester
bond formation between nucleotides
sulfonamides (sulfa drugs) group of structurally
related synthetic antimicrobial compounds that
function as antimetabolites, competitively inhibiting
an enzyme in the bacterial folic acid synthesis
pathway
superantigen class of exotoxin that triggers a strong
nonspecific immune response with excessive
production of cytokines (cytokine storm) causing
inflammation, high fever, shock, and, potentially,
death
supercoiled extensive wrapping and twisting of a
DNA molecule, allowing the DNA to fit within a
small space
supercoiling process in which DNA is underwound
or overwound to fit inside a cell
supercritical fluid molecule, commonly carbon
dioxide, brought to high pressures to reach a state
that has physical properties between those of liquids
and gases, allowing it to effectively penetrate
surfaces and cells to form carbonic acid, which
lowers the pH of cells considerably, leading to
sterilization
superinfection secondary infection that may
develop as a result of long-term, broad-spectrum
antimicrobial use
superoxide dismutase enzyme that catalyzes the
breakdown of superoxide anions
suppurative producing pus; purulent
surfactant group of chemical compounds used for
degerming; lower the surface tension of water,
creating emulsions that mechanically carry away
microorganisms
sweat gland one of numerous tubular glands
embedded in the dermis that secretes the watery
substance known as perspiration

symbiosis any interaction between different species
within a community
symptom subjective experience of disease felt by
the patient
synapse junction between a neuron and another cell
syncytia multinucleated cells that form from the
fusion of normal cells during infections or other
processes
syndrome group of signs and symptoms
characteristic of a particular disease
syngamy process in which haploid gametes fuse
synthetic antimicrobial antimicrobial developed
from a chemical not found in nature
syphilis an STI caused by the bacterium Treponema
pallidum
systemic autoimmune disease autoimmune disease
that affect the organism as a whole, rather than a
single organ
systemic infection infection that has spread to
multiple locations or body systems
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
severe inflammatory response to the presence of
microbes in the blood; can lead to sepsis
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) systemic
autoimmune disease producing inflammatory type
III hypersensitivities as antibodies form immune
complexes with nuclear and cytoplasmic antigens
systemic mycosis a fungal infection that spreads
throughout the body

T
T-cell receptors (TCR) molecules on T cells
involved in the recognition of processed foreign
epitopes presented with MHC I or MHC II
T lymphocyte lymphocyte that serves as the central
orchestrator, bridging humoral, cellular, and innate
immunity, and serves as the effector cells of cellular
immunity; T cell
taeniasis infection caused by Taenia or
Diphyllobothrium
tail fiber long protein component on the lower part
of a phage used for specific attachment to bacterial
cell
tail pins points extended at the base of a
bacteriophage sheath that, along with tail fibers, lead
to phage attachment to a bacterial cell
tapeworms segmented, hermaphroditic, parasitic
flatworms (Platyhelminthes)
tartar calcified heavy plaque on teeth, also called
dental calculus taxonomy the classification,
description, identification, and naming of living
organisms
T-dependent antigen a protein antigen that is only
capable of activating a B cell with the cooperation of
a helper T cell
TDP thermal death point is the lowest temperature at
which all microorganisms are killed in a 10-minute
exposure
TDT thermal death time is the length of time needed
to kill all microorganisms in a sample at a given
temperature
telomerase enzyme that attaches to the end of a
linear chromosome and adds nucleotides to the 3’
end of one of the DNA strands, maintaining the
telomere sequence, thus preventing loss of DNA
from the end of the chromosome
telomere repetitive, noncoding sequence found at
the end of a linear eukaryotic chromosome that
protects the genes near the end of the chromosome
from deletion as the DNA molecule is repeatedly
replicated
temperate phage bacteriophage that can incorporate
viral genome into the host cell chromosome and
replicate with the host cell until new viruses are
produced; a phage that undergoes the lysogenic
cycle
teratogenic able to disrupt the normal development
of a fetus in utero
terbinafine antifungal drug of the allylamine class
that is used topically for the treatment of
dermatophytic skin infections

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

termination of DNA replication stage of replication
during which DNA replication is halted once the
chromosome has been fully replicated
termination of transcription stage of transcription
that occurs when RNA polymerase has reached
specific DNA sequences, leading to release of the
enzyme from the DNA template, freeing the RNA
transcript and, thus, halting transcription
termination of translation stage of translation
during which a nonsense codon aligns with the A
site, signaling release factors to release of the
polypeptide, leading to the dissociation of the small
and large ribosomal subunits from the mRNA and
from each other
tertiary structure large-scale, three-dimensional
structure of a polypeptide
test sensitivity probability that a diagnostic test will
find evidence of the targeted disease when the
pathogen is present
test specificity probability that a diagnostic test will
not find evidence of the targeted disease when the
pathogen is absent
testes (singular testis) pair of glands located in the
scrotum of males that produce sperm and
testosterone
tetanus bacterial disease caused by exotoxin
produced by Clostridium tetani that causes a rigid
paralysis
tetracyclines class of protein synthesis inhibitors
that bind to the 30S subunit, blocking the association
of tRNAs with the ribosome during translation
TH1 cells subtype of T cells that stimulate cytotoxic
T cells, macrophages, neutrophils, and NK cells
TH17 cells subtype of T cell that are essential for
defense against specific pathogens and infections,
such as chronic mucocutaneous infections with C.
albicans
TH2 cells subtype of T cells that stimulate B cells
and direct their differentiation; also involved in
directing antibody class switching
thallus body of fleshy fungi (more generally, a body
without a root, stem, or leaf) that commonly cooccurs with HIV infection; the microbes move to the
lymphatic system in the groin
thermophile a microorganism that grows best at
warm temperatures, typically between about 50 °C
and 80 °C
thin sections thin slices of tissue for examination
under a TEM
thioglycolate medium medium designed to test the
aerotolerance of bacteria; it contains a low
concentration of agar to allow motile bacteria to
move throughout the medium
thioglycolate tube culture contains reducing
medium through which oxygen diffuses from the
tube opening, producing a range of oxygen
environments down the length of the tube
thrombocytes see platelets
thylakoids a highly dynamic collection of
membranous sacs found in the stroma of
chloroplasts; site of photosynthesis
thymic selection a three-step process of negative
and positive selection of T cells in the thymus
thymine dimer covalent linkage between two
adjacent thymine bases on exposure to ultraviolet
radiation
thymine pyrimidine nitrogenous base found only in
DNA nucleotides
tincture solution of an antiseptic compound
dissolved in alcohol
T-independent antigen a nonprotein antigen that
can activate a B cell without cooperation from a
helper T cell
tinea any cutaneous fungal infection caused by
dermatophytes, such as tinea corporis, tinea capitis,
tinea cruris, and tinea pedis
tinea capitis cutaneous mycosis of the scalp; also
known as ringworm of the scalp
tinea corporis cutaneous mycosis of the body; also
known as ringworm of the body
tinea cruris cutaneous mycosis of the groin region;
also known as jock itch
tinea pedis cutaneous mycosis of the feet; also
known as athlete’s foot

Appendix C

tissue tropism tendency of most viruses to infect
only certain tissue types within a host
titer concentration obtained by titration; the
reciprocal of a measurement of biological activity
determined by finding the dilution of an unknown
(e.g., antigen-specific antibody in an antiserum) that
shows the defined end-point; always expressed as a
whole number
tolerance lack of an anti-self immune response
toll-like receptors (TLRs) pathogen recognition
receptors (PRRs) that may be found on the external
surface of phagocytes or facing inward in interior
compartments
tonsillitis inflammation of the tonsils
topoisomerase type of enzyme that helps maintain
the structure of supercoiled chromosomes,
preventing overwinding of DNA during certain
cellular processes like DNA replication
topoisomerase II enzyme responsible for facilitating
topological transitions of DNA, relaxing it from its
supercoiled state
total magnification in a light microscope is a value
calculated by multiplying the magnification of the
ocular by the magnification of the objective lenses
toxemia presence of toxins in the blood
toxic shock syndrome severe condition marked by
the loss of blood pressure and blood clot formation
caused by a bacterial superantigen, toxic shock
syndrome toxin
toxigenicity ability of a pathogen to produce toxins
to cause damage to host cells
toxin poison produced by a pathogen
toxoid vaccine vaccine that contains inactivated
bacterial toxins
toxoplasmosis typically asymptomatic protozoan
infection caused by Toxoplasma spp. and transmitted
through contact with cysts in cat feces; infections in
pregnant women may cause birth defects or
miscarriage
trace element indispensable element present in cells
in lower amounts than macronutrients; also called
micronutrient
trachea also known as the windpipe, this is a
stiffened tube of cartilage that runs from the larynx
to the bronchi
trachoma a type of conjunctivitis, caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis, that is a major cause of
preventable blindness
transcription bubble region of unwinding of the
DNA double helix during transcription
transcription factors proteins encoded by
regulatory genes that function by influencing the
binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter and
allowing its progression to transcribe structural
genes
transcription process of synthesizing RNA using
the information encoded in DNA
transcriptomics the study of the entire collection of
mRNA molecules produced by cells; involves
monitoring differences in gene expression patterns
between cells at the mRNA level
transduction mechanism of horizontal gene transfer
in bacteria in which genes are transferred through
viral infection
transendothelial migration process by which
circulating leukocytes exit the bloodstream via the
microvascular endothelium
transfection the introduction of recombinant DNA
molecules into eukaryotic hosts
transformation mechanism of horizontal gene
transfer in bacteria in which naked environmental
DNA is taken up by a bacterial cell
transgenic describing an organism into which
foreign DNA from a different species has been
introduced
transient microbiota microorganisms, sometimes
pathogenic, that are only temporarily found in the
human body

1263

transition reaction reaction linking glycolysis to the
Krebs cycle, during which each pyruvate is
decarboxylated and oxidized (forming NADH), and
the resulting two-carbon acetyl group is attached to a
large carrier molecule called coenzyme A, resulting
in the formation of acetyl-CoA and CO; also called
the bridge reaction
translation (protein synthesis) process of protein
synthesis whereby a ribosome decodes an mRNA
message into a polypeptide product
transmissible spongiform encephalopathy
degenerative disease caused by prions; leads to the
death of neurons in the brain
transmission electron microscope (TEM) a type of
electron microscope that uses an electron beam,
focused with magnets, that passes through a thin
specimen
transmittance the amount of light that passes
through a medium
transparency the property of allowing light to pass
through
transport vesicle membranous sac that carries
molecules between various components of the
endomembrane system
transposition process whereby a DNA sequence
known as a transposon independently excises from
one location in a DNA molecule and integrates
elsewhere
transposon (transposable element) molecule of
DNA that can independently excise from one
location in a DNA molecule and integrate into the
DNA elsewhere
trench fever louseborne disease caused by
Bartonella quintana and characterized by high fever,
body aches, conjunctivitis, ocular pain, severe
headaches, and severe bone pain
trench mouth a severe form of gingivitis, also
called acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
treponemal serologic tests tests for syphilis that
measure the amount of antibody directed against
antigens associated with Treponema pallidum
triacylglycerol three fatty acids chemically linked to
a glycerol molecule; also called a triglyceride
triazoles ergosterol biosynthesis inhibitors used to
treat several types of systemic yeast infections;
exhibit more selective toxicity than the imidazoles
and are associated with fewer side effects
tricarboxylic acid cycle see Krebs cycle
trichinosis soil-transmitted intestinal infection
caused by the nematode Trichinella spiralis;
associated with cyst formation
trichomoniasis a common STI caused by
Trichomonas vaginalis
trichuriasis intestinal infection caused by the
whipworm Trichuris trichiura
triglyceride three fatty acids chemically linked to a
glycerol molecule; also called a triacylglycerol
trimethoprim synthetic antimicrobial compound
that functions as an antimetabolite to an enzyme in
the bacterial folic acid synthesis pathway
tRNA small type of stable RNA that carries the
correct amino acid to the site of protein synthesis in
the ribosome and base pairs with the mRNA to allow
the amino acid it carries to be inserted in the
polypeptide chain being synthesized
trophozoite a life cycle phase in which protists are
actively feeding and growing
tubercle small, rounded lesion
tuberculosis life-threatening form of microbial
infection marked by the presence of acid-fast
bacteria growing in nodules (especially in the lungs)
tularemia infection of the lymphatic system by
Francisella tularensis; also known as rabbit fever
tumbles (tumbling) random, circuitous movement
of a bacterial cell, propelled by clockwise flagellar
rotation
tumor collection or aggregate of cells; can be benign
(noncancerous) or malignant (cancerous)
tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid a naturally occurring
plasmid of the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens
that researchers use as a shuttle vector to introduce a
desired DNA fragment into plant cells
turbidity cloudiness of a culture due to refraction of
light by cells and particles

two-photon microscope a microscope that uses
long-wavelength or infrared light to fluoresce
fluorochromes in the specimen
tympanic membrane also referred to as the ear
drum, this structure separates the outer and middle
ear
type 1 diabetes mellitus hyperglycemia caused by
an autoimmune disease affecting insulin production
by β cells of the pancreas
type I hypersensitivity rapid-onset allergic reaction
due to cross-linking of antigen-specific IgE on the
outside of mast cells, resulting in release of
inflammatory mediators
type II hypersensitivity cytotoxic reaction triggered
by IgG and IgM antibodies binding to antigens on
cell surfaces
type III hypersensitivity inflammatory reaction
induced by formation of immune complexes and
their deposition in tissues and blood vessels
type IV hypersensitivity delayed T-cell-mediated
inflammatory reaction that takes longer to manifest
than the first three hypersensitivity types, due to the
need for activation of antigen-presenting cell and Tcell subsets
typhoid fever serious illness caused by infection
with certain serotypes of Salmonella

U
UHT pasteurization method of pasteurization that
exposes milk to ultra-high temperatures (near 140
°C) for a few seconds, effectively sterilizing it so
that it can be sealed and stored for long periods
without refrigeration
ulcer open sore
ultramicrotome a device that cuts thin sections for
electron microscopy
unit membrane biological membrane composed of
two layers of phospholipid molecules with the
nonpolar tails associating to form a hydrophobic
barrier between the polar heads; also called lipid
bilayer
unsaturated fatty acid lipid with hydrocarbon
chains containing one or more carbon-carbon double
bonds and subsequently fewer than the maximum
number of hydrogen atoms per chain
uracil pyrimidine nitrogenous base found only in
RNA nucleotides
ureter duct that transports urine from the kidneys to
the urinary bladder
ureteritis inflammation of the ureter
urethra duct through which urine passes from the
urinary bladder to leave the body through the urinary
meatus
urethritis inflammation of the urethra
urinary bladder an organ that stores urine until it is
ready to be excreted
urinary meatus the opening through which urine
leaves the body
use-dilution test a technique for determining the
effectiveness of a chemical disinfectant on a surface;
involves dipping a surface in a culture of the targeted
microorganism, disinfecting the surface, and then
transferring the surface to a fresh medium to see if
bacteria will grow
uterus female reproductive organ in which a
fertilized egg implants and develops

V
vaccination inoculation of a patient with attenuated
pathogens or antigens to activate adaptive immunity
and protect against infection
vagina female reproductive organ that extends from
the vulva to the cervix
vaginitis inflammation of the vagina
vaginosis an infection of the vagina caused by
overgrowth of resident bacteria
vancomycin cell wall synthesis inhibitor of the
glycopeptide class

Appendix C

1264

vancomycin-intermediate Staphylococcus aureus
(VISA) pathogen with intermediate vancomycin
resistance due to increased targets for and trapping
of vancomycin in the outer cell wall
vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE)
pathogens resistant to vancomycin through a target
modification of peptidoglycan subunit peptides that
inhibit binding by vancomycin
vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(VRSA) pathogen with resistance to vancomycin
that has arisen as a result of the horizontal gene
transfer of vancomycin resistance genes from VRE
variolation the historical practice of inoculating a
healthy patient with infectious material from a
person infected with smallpox in order to promote
immunity to the disease
vas deferens pair of ducts in the male reproductive
system that conduct sperm from the testes and
seminal fluid to the ejaculatory duct
vasculitis inflammation affecting blood vessels
(either arteries or veins)
VDRL (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory)
test test for syphilis that detects anti-treponemal
antibodies to the phospholipids produced due to the
tissue destruction by Treponema pallidum;
antibodies are detected through a flocculation
reaction with cardiolipin extracted from beef heart
tissue
vector animal (typically an arthropod) that transmits
a pathogen from one host to another host; DNA
molecules that carry DNA fragments from one
organism to another
vegetative cell a cell that is actively growing and
dividing, and does not contain an endospore
vehicle transmission transfer of a pathogen between
hosts via contaminated food, water, or air
vein blood vessel that returns blood from the tissues
to the heart for recirculation
vertical direct transmission transfer of a pathogen
from mother to child during pregnancy, birth, or
breastfeeding
vertical gene transfer transfer of genes from parent
to offspring
viable cell live cell; live cells are usually detected as
colony-forming units
viable plate count direct method of measuring
microbial growth in a culture; the number of viable
or live cells is usually expressed in CFU/mL
viral conjunctivitis inflammation of the conjunctiva
caused by a viral infection
viral envelope lipid membrane obtained from
phospholipid membranes of the cell that surrounds
the capsid
viral hemagglutination inhibition assay assay used
to quantify the amount of neutralizing antibody
against a virus by showing a decrease in
hemagglutination caused by a standardized amount
of virus
viral titer number of virions per unit volume
viremia presence of virus in blood
viricide chemical or physical treatment that destroys
or inactivates viruses
virion inert particle that is the reproductive form of a
virus

W
water activity water content of foods or other
materials
wavelength the distance between one peak of a
wave and the next peak
Weil’s disease advanced stage of leptospirosis in
which the kidney and liver become seriously
infected
West African trypanosomiasis chronic form of
African trypanosomiasis caused by Trypanosoma
brucei gambiense
West Nile encephalitis mosquito-borne disease
caused by the West Nile virus (WNV) that can result
in swelling of the brain and death in severe cases
western blot technique used to detect the presence
of a certain protein within a given protein sample in
which proteins within the sample are separated by
PAGE, immobilized on a membrane, and then
exposed first to an antibody that binds to the protein
of interest and then second to an antibody equipped
with a molecular beacon that will bind to the first
antibody
western equine encephalitis serious but rare
mosquito-borne viral infection of the brain that is
found primarily in the central and western United
States
wet mount a slide preparation technique in which a
specimen is placed on the slide in a drop of liquid
wheal-flare reaction localized type I
hypersensitivity reaction, involving a raised, itchy
bump (wheal) and redness (flare), to injected
allergen
whooping cough common name for pertussis
wild type phenotype of an organism that is most
commonly observed in nature
Winterbottom’s sign acute swelling of lymph nodes
at the back of the neck that is an early sign of
African trypanosomiasis
wobble position third position of a codon that, when
changed, typically results in the incorporation of the
same amino acid because of the degeneracy of the
genetic code
World Health Organization (WHO) international
public health organization within the United Nations;
monitors and communicates international public
health information and coordinates international
public health programs and emergency interventions

X
xenobiotic compound synthesized by humans and
introduced to an environment in much higher
concentrations than expected in nature
xenograft transplanted tissue from a donor that is of
a different species than the recipient
X-linked agammaglobulinemia genetic disorder
resulting in an inability to produce antibodies
x-y mechanical stage knobs knobs on a microscope
that are used to adjust the position of the specimen
on the stage surface, generally to center it directly
above the light

viroid infectious plant pathogen composed of RNA

Y

virology the study of viruses
virulence degree to which an organism is
pathogenic; severity of disease signs and symptoms
virulence factor product of a pathogen that assists in
its ability to cause infection and disease
virulent phage bacteriophage for which infection
leads to the death of the host cell; a phage that
undergoes the lytic cycle
virus an acellular microorganism, consisting of
proteins and genetic material (DNA or RNA), that
can replicate itself by infecting a host cell
virusoid small piece of RNA associated with larger
RNA of some infectious plant viruses
volutin inclusions of polymerized inorganic
phosphate; also called metachromatic granules

yeast any unicellular fungus
yeast infection fungal infection of the vagina
typically caused by an overgrowth of resident
Candida spp.
yellow fever mild to potentially fatal mosquitoborne viral disease caused by the yellow fever virus

vulva the female external genitalia

Z
Ziehl-Neelsen technique a method of acid-fast
staining that uses heat to infuse the primary stain,
carbolfuchsin, into acid-fast cells
zone of inhibition clear zone around a filter disk
impregnated with an antimicrobial drug, indicating
growth inhibition due to the antimicrobial drug
zoonosis see zoonotic disease

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

zoonotic disease any disease that is transmitted to
humans by animals
zooplankton heterotrophic plankton
Z-scheme electron flow seen in noncyclic
photophosphorylation in plants, algae, and
cyanobacteria due to the use of both PSI and PSII
zygospores spores used by Zygomycetes for sexual
reproduction; they have hard walls formed from the
fusion of reproductive cells from two individuals

Answer Key

1265

Answer Key
Chapter 1
1. D 2. D 3. A 4. B 5. C 6. C 7. D 8. A 9. B 10. D 11. C 12. A 13. D 14. B 15. scientific history 16. Lyme
17. fermentation 18. genus, species 19. Protista and Monera 20. Prokaryotes 21. Viruses 22. pathogen 23. helminths
24. virology 25. nucleus
Chapter 2
1. C 2. D 3. C 4. A 5. C 6. B 7. C 8. C, D 9. A 10. D 11. D 12. D 13. B 14. C 15. D 16. B 17. A 18. False 19. False
20. True 21. spontaneous generation 22. epidemiology 23. miasma 24. Robert Hooke 25. bacilli 26. volutin (or
metachromatic granule) 27. hydrogen peroxide 28. actin
Chapter 3
1. C 2. C 3. C 4. A 5. C 6. D 7. A 8. B 9. D 10. A 11. C 12. B 13. A 14. B 15. plasmalemma 16. Fungi
17. Trematoda 18. dioecious 19. coenocytic 20. yeasts 21. antibiotics 22. pyrenoids 23. secondary endosymbiosis
Chapter 4
1. B 2. A and B 3. B 4. B 5. C 6. B 7. D 8. D 9. B 10. A 11. B 12. D 13. C 14. D 15. C 16. True 17. bacteriophage
18. complex 19. naked or nonenveloped 20. tail fibers 21. reverse transcriptase 22. eclipse 23. Electron
24. cytopathic effects 25. RNA, helper virus
Chapter 5

1. C 2. B 3. A 4. D 5. A 6. C 7. A 8. C 9. A 10. C 11. A 12. D 13. B 14. C 15. illness 16. noncommunicable
17. opportunistic 18. LD50 19. focal 20. adhesion 21. CD4 22. surface; proteins; sugars 23. protein synthesis
24. shift; drift 25. protease and phospholipase 26. protease
Chapter 6
1. B 2. A 3. C 4. A 5. D 6. B 7. C 8. B 9. C 10. B 11. D 12. A 13. A 14. C 15. B 16. A 17. C, A, D, B 18. A, C, B 19.
peristalsis 20. cilia 21. goblet 22. bacteriocins 23. plasma 24. chemotaxis 25. thrombocytes 26. pluripotent
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) 27. neutrophils 28. macrophage 29. mast cells 30. extravasation 31. patternrecognition receptors (PRRs) 32. granuloma 33. hypothalamus 34. erythema
Chapter 7
1. A 2. B 3. D 4. C 5. A 6. B 7. B 8. B 9. D 10. B 11. A 12. D 13. B 14. C 15. D 16. B 17. D 18. A 19. d, e, c, a, b 20. C,
A, B, D 21. memory 22. Humoral 23. constant 24. antigen-binding 25. presentation 26. β2 microglobulin 27.
cytotoxic 28. helper 29. variable 30. thymus 31. memory 32. T-dependent 33. repetitive 34. attenuated
35. Artificial passive 36. variolation
Chapter 8
1. B 2. A 3. A 4. A 5. C 6. A 7. B 8. D 9. C 10. D 11. A 12. B 13. C 14. C 15. A 16. B, D, A, C 17. IgE 18. IgG 19. B 20.
IV 21. thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor 22. MHC 23. graft-versus-host 24. genetic 25. acquired 26. preventive
27. therapeutic
Chapter 9
1. A 2. B 3. B 4. D 5. C 6. D 7. C 8. A 9. B 10. A 11. B 12. B 13. C 14. C 15. A 16. C 17. False 18. True 19. False 20.
False 21. True 22. noncritical 23. commercial sterilization 24. steam 25. copper, nickel, zinc 26. greater
27. high-level 28. susceptibility or sensitivity
Chapter 10
1. B 3. B 4. A 5. C 6. D 7. B 8. A 9. C 10. C 11. B 12. D 13. A 14. C 15. A 16. D 17. A 18. A 19. C 20. D 21. D 22. False
23. false 24. true 25. false 26. true 27. actinomycetes 28. Clostridium difficile 29. prokaryotic
30. neuraminidase inhibitors 31. nasal 32. Etest

1266

Answer Key

Chapter 11
1. A 2. B 3. B 4. D 5. C 6. D 7. C 8. A 9. B 10. A 11. B 12. B 13. C 14. C 15. A 16. C 17. False 18. True 19. False E, B,
A, C 10. C, D, E, B, A 11. C, D, B, A 12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or CDC 13. Propagated
spread 14. point source 15. nosocomial or healthcare-associated 16. vector 17. WHO (World Health Organization)
Chapter 12
1. C 2. B 3. A 4. D 5. C 6. A 7. A 8. B 9. C 10. A 11. A 12. B 13. C 14. B 15. A 16. A 17. C 18. A 19. A 20. stratum corneum
21. conjunctiva 22. pus 23. roseola 24. sporotrichosis 25. loiasis 26. cornea
Chapter 13
1. C 2. A 3. B 4. C 5. A 6. D 7. A 8. C 9. A 10. C 11. D 12. A 13. D 14. B 15. C 16. B 17. D 18. A 19. C 20. D 21. mucociliary
escalator 22. capsules 23. IgA 24. Laryngitis 25. Alveolar macrophages 26. Ghon complexes 27. otitis media 28. quellung
reaction 29. Psittacosis 30. erythrogenic toxin 31. rubella 32. cytokine storm 33. acyclovir 34. antigenic drift 35. MMR 36.
spherules 37. capsule 38. aspergillomas 39. the desert southwest 40. arthrospores
Chapter 14
1. C 2. D 3. A 4. B 5. C 6. B 7. A 8. C 9. C 10. A 11. D 12. C 13. A 14. Lactobacillus 15. kidneys 16. chancroid 17. warts 18.
C. albicans 19. Trichomonas vaginalis 20. vaginosis 21. An STI is a broader term, including colonization by organisms that
may not necessarily cause disease.
Chapter 15
1. D 2. A 3. B 4. C 5. C 6. B 7. C 8. C 9. B 10. A 11. D 12. D 13. C 15. B 16. A 17. Large intestine or colon 18. tartar 19.
Clostridium difficile 20. bilirubin 21. giardia 22. bile
Chapter 16
1. D 2. C 3. B 4. B 5. B 6. D 7. C 8. A 9. C 10. B 11. A 12. D 13. A 14. C 15. A 16. petechiae 17. the subclavian veins 18.
bull’s eye-rash 19. Septic shock 20. Burkitt lymphoma 21. Arboviruses 22. Epstein-Barr virus
23. Anopheles 24. Chagas disease 25. swimmer’s itch
Chapter 17
1. C 2. A 3. B 4. D 5. D 6. B 7. B 8. C 9. D 10. C 11. D 12. A 13. C 14. D 15. A 16. C 17. C 18. A 19. B 20. D 21. A 22. D, C,
A, B 23. soma 24. axon 25. subarachnoid space 26. blood-brain barrier 27. meninges 28. Neisseria meningitidis 29.
tetanospasmin 30. Hansen’s disease 31. acetylcholine 32. Tetanus 33. opisthotonos 34. PrPSc 35. Dogs 36. Jonas Salk 37.
Chronic wasting disease 38. beta sheet 39. capsule 40. Amphotericin B 41. cysticerci 42. Winterbottom’s 43. West 44. cats
45. antigenic
Chapter 18
1. D 2. B 3. B 4. A 5. D 6. C 7. A 8. C 9. A 10. B 11. B 12. C 13. A 14. B 15. B 16. B 17. C 18. D 19. A 20. B 21. C 22. D 23. A
24. A 25. B 26. C 27. A 28. C 29. False 30. True 31. False 32. True 33. False 34. transcription 35. genotype or genome 36.
DNA gyrase or topoisomerase II 37. rolling circle replication 38. polycistronic 39. Spliceosome 40. wobble position 41.
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase 42. nucleoside analog 43. photolyase 44. wild type 45. transposon or transposable element 46.
Horizontal gene transfer 47. operator 48. catabolite repression
OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12087/1.4

