1
LIFE BEGINS
WITH CELLS

A single ~200 micrometer (m) cell, the human egg, with
sperm, which are also single cells. From the union of an egg
and sperm will arise the 10 trillion cells of a human body.
[Photo Researchers, Inc.]

L

ike ourselves, the individual cells that form our bodies
can grow, reproduce, process information, respond to
stimuli, and carry out an amazing array of chemical reactions. These abilities define life. We and other multicellular
organisms contain billions or trillions of cells organized into
complex structures, but many organisms consist of a single
cell. Even simple unicellular organisms exhibit all the hallmark properties of life, indicating that the cell is the fundamental unit of life. As the twenty-first century opens, we face
an explosion of new data about the components of cells,
what structures they contain, how they touch and influence
each other. Still, an immense amount remains to be learned,
particularly about how information flows through cells and
how they decide on the most appropriate ways to respond.
Molecular cell biology is a rich, integrative science that
brings together biochemistry, biophysics, molecular biology,
microscopy, genetics, physiology, computer science, and developmental biology. Each of these fields has its own emphasis and style of experimentation. In the following
chapters, we will describe insights and experimental approaches drawn from all of these fields, gradually weaving
the multifaceted story of the birth, life, and death of cells. We
start in this prologue chapter by introducing the diversity of
cells, their basic constituents and critical functions, and what
we can learn from the various ways of studying cells.

1.1 The Diversity and Commonality
of Cells
Cells come in an amazing variety of sizes and shapes (Figure
1-1). Some move rapidly and have fast-changing structures, as
we can see in movies of amoebae and rotifers. Others are
largely stationary and structurally stable. Oxygen kills some
cells but is an absolute requirement for others. Most cells in
multicellular organisms are intimately involved with other
cells. Although some unicellular organisms live in isolation,
others form colonies or live in close association with other
types of organisms, such as the bacteria that help plants to extract nitrogen from the air or the bacteria that live in our intestines and help us digest food. Despite these and numerous

OUTLINE
1.1 The Diversity and Commonality of Cells
1.2 The Molecules of a Cell
1.3 The Work of Cells
1.4 Investigating Cells and Their Parts
1.5 A Genome Perspective on Evolution
1

2

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

▲ FIGURE 1-1 Cells come in an astounding assortment of
shapes and sizes. Some of the morphological variety of cells is
illustrated in these photographs. In addition to morphology, cells
differ in their ability to move, internal organization (prokaryotic
versus eukaryotic cells), and metabolic activities. (a) Eubacteria;
note dividing cells. These are Lactococcus lactis, which are used
to produce cheese such as Roquefort, Brie, and Camembert.
(b) A mass of archaebacteria (Methanosarcina) that produce their
energy by converting carbon dioxide and hydrogen gas to
methane. Some species that live in the rumen of cattle give rise
to >150 liters of methane gas/day. (c) Blood cells, shown in false
color. The red blood cells are oxygen-bearing erythrocytes, the
white blood cells (leukocytes) are part of the immune system
and fight infection, and the green cells are platelets that provide
substances to make blood clot at a wound. (d) Large single cells:
fossilized dinosaur eggs. (e) A colonial single-celled green alga,
Volvox aureus. The large spheres are made up of many individual
cells, visible as blue or green dots. The yellow masses inside are
daughter colonies, each made up of many cells. (f) A single

Purkinje neuron of the cerebellum, which can form more than a
hundred thousand connections with other cells through the
branched network of dendrites. The cell was made visible by
introduction of a fluorescent protein; the cell body is the bulb at
the bottom. (g) Cells can form an epithelial sheet, as in the slice
through intestine shown here. Each finger-like tower of cells, a
villus, contains many cells in a continuous sheet. Nutrients are
transferred from digested food through the epithelial sheet to the
blood for transport to other parts of the body. New cells form
continuously near the bases of the villi, and old cells are shed
from the top. (h) Plant cells are fixed firmly in place in vascular
plants, supported by a rigid cellulose skeleton. Spaces between
the cells are joined into tubes for transport of water and food.

other differences, all cells share certain structural features and
carry out many complicated processes in basically the same
way. As the story of cells unfolds throughout this book, we
will focus on the molecular basis of both the differences and
similarities in the structure and function of various cells.

gle closed compartment that is surrounded by the plasma
membrane, lacks a defined nucleus, and has a relatively simple
internal organization (Figure 1-2a). All prokaryotes have cells
of this type. Bacteria, the most numerous prokaryotes, are
single-celled organisms; the cyanobacteria, or blue-green algae,
can be unicellular or filamentous chains of cells. Although bacterial cells do not have membrane-bounded compartments,
many proteins are precisely localized in their aqueous interior,
or cytosol, indicating the presence of internal organization. A
single Escherichia coli bacterium has a dry weight of about

All Cells Are Prokaryotic or Eukaryotic
The biological universe consists of two types of cells—
prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Prokaryotic cells consist of a sin-

[Part (a) Gary Gaugler/ Photo Researchers, Inc. Part (b) Ralph Robinson/
Visuals Inlimited, Inc. Part (c) NIH/Photo Researchers, Inc. Part (d)
John D. Cunningham/Visuals Unlimited, Inc. Part (e) Carolina
Biological/Visuals Unlimited, Inc. Part (f) Helen M. Blau, Stanford
University. Part (g) Jeff Gordon, Washington University School of
Medicine. Part (h) Richard Kessel and C. Shih/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.]

1.1 • The Diversity and Commonality of Cells
(a) Prokaryotic cell

3

(b) Eukaryotic cell
Nucleus

Periplasmic space
and cell wall

Golgi vesicles

Lysosome

Outer membrane

Inner (plasma)
membrane

Nucleoid

Mitochondrion
0.5 m
Endoplasmic reticulum

Nucleoid

1 m

Nuclear membrane
Plasma membrane
Golgi vesicles
Nucleus

Mitochondrion
Peroxisome
Lysosome

Inner (plasma) membrane
Cell wall
Periplasmic space
Outer membrane
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum

Secretory vesicle

▲ FIGURE 1-2 Prokaryotic cells have a simpler internal
organization than eukaryotic cells. (a) Electron micrograph of a
thin section of Escherichia coli, a common intestinal bacterium.
The nucleoid, consisting of the bacterial DNA, is not enclosed
within a membrane. E. coli and some other bacteria are
surrounded by two membranes separated by the periplasmic
space. The thin cell wall is adjacent to the inner membrane.
(b) Electron micrograph of a plasma cell, a type of white blood
cell that secretes antibodies. Only a single membrane (the plasma
membrane) surrounds the cell, but the interior contains many
membrane-limited compartments, or organelles. The defining

characteristic of eukaryotic cells is segregation of the cellular DNA
within a defined nucleus, which is bounded by a double
membrane. The outer nuclear membrane is continuous with the
rough endoplasmic reticulum, a factory for assembling proteins.
Golgi vesicles process and modify proteins, mitochondria generate
energy, lysosomes digest cell materials to recycle them,
peroxisomes process molecules using oxygen, and secretory
vesicles carry cell materials to the surface to release them.

25  1014 g. Bacteria account for an estimated 1–1.5 kg of
the average human’s weight. The estimated number of bacteria on earth is 5  1030, weighing a total of about 1012 kg.
Prokaryotic cells have been found 7 miles deep in the ocean
and 40 miles up in the atmosphere; they are quite adaptable!
The carbon stored in bacteria is nearly as much as the carbon
stored in plants.
Eukaryotic cells, unlike prokaryotic cells, contain a defined membrane-bound nucleus and extensive internal mem-

branes that enclose other compartments, the organelles (Figure 1-2b). The region of the cell lying between the plasma
membrane and the nucleus is the cytoplasm, comprising the
cytosol (aqueous phase) and the organelles. Eukaryotes comprise all members of the plant and animal kingdoms, including the fungi, which exist in both multicellular forms (molds)
and unicellular forms (yeasts), and the protozoans (proto,
primitive; zoan, animal), which are exclusively unicellular.
Eukaryotic cells are commonly about 10–100 m across,

[Part (a) courtesy of I. D. J. Burdett and R. G. E. Murray. Part (b) from
P. C. Cross and K. L. Mercer, 1993, Cell and Tissue Ultrastructure:
A Functional Perspective, W. H. Freeman and Company.]

4

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells
Animals

Plants
Fungi

Ciliates

Euglena

Microsporidia

EUKARYOTA
Slime molds
Diplomonads
(Giardia lamblia)

EUBACTERIA

E. coli

Sulfolobus
ARCHAEA

B. subtilus
Thermotoga

Thermococcus
Methanobacterium
Halococcus

Flavobacteria
Green sulfur
bacteria

Borrelia
burgdorferi

Halobacterium
Methanococcus
jannaschii

so many similarities. In recent years, detailed analysis of the
DNA sequences from a variety of prokaryotic organisms has
revealed two distinct types: the so-called “true” bacteria, or eubacteria, and archaea (also called archaebacteria or archaeans).
Working on the assumption that organisms with more similar
genes evolved from a common progenitor more recently than
those with more dissimilar genes, researchers have developed
the evolutionary lineage tree shown in Figure 1-3. According to
this tree, the archaea and the eukaryotes diverged from the true
bacteria before they diverged from each other.
Many archaeans grow in unusual, often extreme, environments that may resemble ancient conditions when life
first appeared on earth. For instance, halophiles (“salt loving”) require high concentrations of salt to survive, and
thermoacidophiles (“heat and acid loving”) grow in hot (80 C)
sulfur springs, where a pH of less than 2 is common. Still
other archaeans live in oxygen-free milieus and generate
methane (CH4) by combining water with carbon dioxide.

Unicellular Organisms Help and Hurt Us
Presumed common progenitor
of all extant organisms
Presumed common progenitor
of archaebacteria and eukaryotes

▲ FIGURE 1-3 All organisms from simple bacteria to
complex mammals probably evolved from a common, singlecelled progenitor. This family tree depicts the evolutionary
relations among the three major lineages of organisms. The
structure of the tree was initially ascertained from morphological
criteria: Creatures that look alike were put close together. More
recently the sequences of DNA and proteins have been
examined as a more information-rich criterion for assigning
relationships. The greater the similarities in these macromolecular
sequences, the more closely related organisms are thought to
be. The trees based on morphological comparisons and the fossil
record generally agree well with those those based on molecular
data. Although all organisms in the eubacterial and archaean
lineages are prokaryotes, archaea are more similar to eukaryotes
than to eubacteria (“true” bacteria) in some respects. For
instance, archaean and eukaryotic genomes encode homologous
histone proteins, which associate with DNA; in contrast, bacteria
lack histones. Likewise, the RNA and protein components of
archaean ribosomes are more like those in eukaryotes than
those in bacteria.

generally much larger than bacteria. A typical human fibroblast, a connective tissue cell, might be about 15 m
across with a volume and dry weight some thousands of
times those of an E. coli bacterial cell. An amoeba, a singlecelled protozoan, can be more than 0.5 mm long. An ostrich
egg begins as a single cell that is even larger and easily visible to the naked eye.
All cells are thought to have evolved from a common progenitor because the structures and molecules in all cells have

Bacteria and archaebacteria, the most abundant single-celled
organisms, are commonly 1–2 m in size. Despite their small
size and simple architecture, they are remarkable biochemical factories, converting simple chemicals into complex biological molecules. Bacteria are critical to the earth’s ecology,
but some cause major diseases: bubonic plague (Black Death)
from Yersinia pestis, strep throat from Streptomyces, tuberculosis from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, anthrax from
Bacillus anthracis, cholera from Vibrio cholerae, food poisoning from certain types of E. coli and Salmonella.
Humans are walking repositories of bacteria, as are all
plants and animals. We provide food and shelter for a staggering number of “bugs,” with the greatest concentration in
our intestines. Bacteria help us digest our food and in turn
are able to reproduce. A common gut bacterium, E. coli is
also a favorite experimental organism. In response to signals
from bacteria such as E. coli, the intestinal cells form appropriate shapes to provide a niche where bacteria can live, thus
facilitating proper digestion by the combined efforts of the
bacterial and the intestinal cells. Conversely, exposure to intestinal cells changes the properties of the bacteria so that
they participate more effectively in digestion. Such communication and response is a common feature of cells.
The normal, peaceful mutualism of humans and bacteria
is sometimes violated by one or both parties. When bacteria
begin to grow where they are dangerous to us (e.g., in the bloodstream or in a wound), the cells of our immune system fight
back, neutralizing or devouring the intruders. Powerful antibiotic medicines, which selectively poison prokaryotic cells,
provide rapid assistance to our relatively slow-developing
immune response. Understanding the molecular biology of bacterial cells leads to an understanding of how bacteria are normally poisoned by antibiotics, how they become resistant to
antibiotics, and what processes or structures present in bacterial but not human cells might be usefully targeted by new drugs.

1.1 • The Diversity and Commonality of Cells
(a)

5

(b)

Sporulation

2

Merozoites

Merozoites

4

Gametocytes

Liver

5

Human
1
Mosquito
Sporozoites

6

Sperm

Egg

7
8
Oocyst

Zygote

▲ FIGURE 1-4 Plasmodium organisms, the parasites that
cause malaria, are single-celled protozoans with a
remarkable life cycle. Many Plasmodium species are known,
and they can infect a variety of animals, cycling between insect
and vertebrate hosts. The four species that cause malaria in
humans undergo several dramatic transformations within their
human and mosquito hosts. (a) Diagram of the life cycle.
Sporozoites enter a human host when an infected Anopheles
mosquito bites a person 1 . They migrate to the liver where they
develop into merozoites, which are released into the blood 2 .
Merozoites differ substantially from sporozoites, so this
transformation is a metamorphosis (Greek, “to transform” or
“many shapes”). Circulating merozoites invade red blood cells
(RBCs) and reproduce within them 3 . Proteins produced by
some Plasmodium species move to the surface of infected
RBCs, causing the cells to adhere to the walls of blood vessels.
This prevents infected RBCs cells from circulating to the spleen
where cells of the immune system would destroy the RBCs and
the Plasmodium organisms they harbor. After growing and
reproducing in RBCs for a period of time characteristic of each
Plasmodium species, the merozoites suddenly burst forth in
synchrony from large numbers of infected cells 4 . It is this

event that brings on the fevers and shaking chills that are
the well-known symptoms of malaria. Some of the
released merozoites infect additional RBCs, creating a
cycle of production and infection. Eventually, some
merozoites develop into male and female gametocytes
5 , another metamorphosis. These cells, which contain half
the usual number of chromosomes, cannot survive for long
unless they are transferred in blood to an Anopheles
mosquito. In the mosquito’s stomach, the gametocytes are
transformed into sperm or eggs (gametes), yet another
metamorphosis marked by development of long hairlike
flagella on the sperm 6 . Fusion of sperm and eggs
generates zygotes 7 , which implant into the cells of the
stomach wall and grow into oocysts, essentially factories
for producing sporozoites. Rupture of an oocyst releases
thousands of sporozoites 8 ; these migrate to the salivary
glands, setting the stage for infection of another human
host. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of mature oocysts
and emerging sporozoites. Oocysts abut the external
surface of stomach wall cells and are encased within a
membrane that protects them from the host immune
system. [Part (b) courtesy of R. E. Sinden.]

Like bacteria, protozoa are usually beneficial members of
the food chain. They play key roles in the fertility of soil, controlling bacterial populations and excreting nitrogenous and
phosphate compounds, and are key players in waste treatment systems—both natural and man-made. These unicellular eukaryotes are also critical parts of marine ecosystems,
consuming large quantities of phytoplankton and harboring
photosynthetic algae, which use sunlight to produce biologically useful energy forms and small fuel molecules.
However, some protozoa do give us grief: Entamoeba
histolytica causes dysentery; Trichomonas vaginalis, vagini-

tis; and Trypanosoma brucei, sleeping sickness. Each year the
worst of the protozoa, Plasmodium falciparum and related
species, is the cause of more than 300 million new cases of
malaria, a disease that kills 1.5 to 3 million people annually.
These protozoans inhabit mammals and mosquitoes alternately, changing their morphology and behavior in response
to signals in each of these environments. They also recognize receptors on the surfaces of the cells they infect. The
complex life cycle of Plasmodium dramatically illustrates
how a single cell can adapt to each new challenge it encounters (Figure 1-4). All of the transformations in cell type that

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

3

Video: Plasmodium Sporozoite Entering and Exiting a Liver Cell

Red blood cell

6

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

occur during the Plasmodium life cycle are governed by instructions encoded in the genetic material of this parasite and
triggered by environmental inputs.
The other group of single-celled eukaryotes, the yeasts,
also have their good and bad points, as do their multicellular
cousins, the molds. Yeasts and molds, which collectively constitute the fungi, have an important ecological role in breaking down plant and animal remains for reuse. They also

(a)

Mating between haploid
1 cells of opposite mating
type
α
a

2

Vegetative growth
of diploid cells

Diploid cells (a/α)
Bud

5

Vegetative
growth
of haploid
cells

4

make numerous antibiotics and are used in the manufacture
of bread, beer, wine, and cheese. Not so pleasant are fungal
diseases, which range from relatively innocuous skin infections, such as jock itch and athlete’s foot, to life-threatening
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, a common cause of death
among AIDS patients.

Even Single Cells Can Have Sex
The common yeast used to make bread and beer, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, appears fairly frequently in this book because it has proven to be a great experimental organism. Like
many other unicellular organisms, yeasts have two mating
types that are conceptually like the male and female gametes
(eggs and sperm) of higher organisms. Two yeast cells of opposite mating type can fuse, or mate, to produce a third cell
type containing the genetic material from each cell (Figure
1-5). Such sexual life cycles allow more rapid changes in genetic inheritance than would be possible without sex, resulting in valuable adaptations while quickly eliminating
detrimental mutations. That, and not just Hollywood, is
probably why sex is so ubiquitous.

Viruses Are the Ultimate Parasites
Four haploid
ascospores
within ascus

Ascus ruptures,
spores germinate

Starvation causes
3 ascus formation,
meiosis

(b)

Budding (S. cerevisiae)

▲ FIGURE 1-5 The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
reproduces sexually and asexually. (a) Two cells that differ in
mating type, called a and , can mate to form an a/ cell 1 .
The a and  cells are haploid, meaning they contain a single copy
of each yeast chromosome, half the usual number. Mating yields
a diploid a/ cell containing two copies of each chromosome.
During vegetative growth, diploid cells multiply by mitotic
budding, an asexual process 2 . Under starvation conditions,
diploid cells undergo meiosis, a special type of cell division, to
form haploid ascospores 3 . Rupture of an ascus releases four
haploid spores, which can germinate into haploid cells 4 . These
also can multiply asexually 5 . (b) Scanning electron micrograph
of budding yeast cells. After each bud breaks free, a scar is left
at the budding site so the number of previous buds can be
counted. The orange cells are bacteria. [Part (b) M. Abbey/Visuals
Unlimited, Inc.]

Virus-caused diseases are numerous and all too familiar:
chicken pox, influenza, some types of pneumonia, polio,
measles, rabies, hepatitis, the common cold, and many others. Smallpox, once a worldwide scourge, was eradicated by
a decade-long global immunization effort beginning in the
mid-1960s. Viral infections in plants (e.g., dwarf mosaic
virus in corn) have a major economic impact on crop production. Planting of virus-resistant varieties, developed by
traditional breeding methods and more recently by genetic
engineering techniques, can reduce crop losses significantly.
Most viruses have a rather limited host range, infecting certain bacteria, plants, or animals (Figure 1-6).
Because viruses cannot grow or reproduce on their own,
they are not considered to be alive. To survive, a virus must
infect a host cell and take over its internal machinery to synthesize viral proteins and in some cases to replicate the viral
genetic material. When newly made viruses are released, the
cycle starts anew. Viruses are much smaller than cells, on the
order of 100 nanometer (nm) in diameter; in comparison,
bacterial cells are usually 1000 nm (1 nm109 meters). A
virus is typically composed of a protein coat that encloses a
core containing the genetic material, which carries the information for producing more viruses (Chapter 4). The coat
protects a virus from the environment and allows it to stick
to, or enter, specific host cells. In some viruses, the protein
coat is surrounded by an outer membrane-like envelope.
The ability of viruses to transport genetic material into
cells and tissues represents a medical menace and a medical
opportunity. Viral infections can be devastatingly destructive,
causing cells to break open and tissues to fall apart. However,
many methods for manipulating cells depend upon using

7

1.1 • The Diversity and Commonality of Cells
(a) T4 bacteriophage

(b) Tobacco mosaic virus

50 nm

(c) Adenovirus

100 nm

50 nm

▲ FIGURE 1-6 Viruses must infect a host cell to grow and
reproduce. These electron micrographs illustrate some of the
structural variety exhibited by viruses. (a) T4 bacteriophage
(bracket) attaches to a bacterial cell via a tail structure. Viruses
that infect bacteria are called bacteriophages, or simply phages.
(b) Tobacco mosaic virus causes a mottling of the leaves of

infected tobacco plants and stunts their growth. (c) Adenovirus
causes eye and respiratory tract infections in humans. This virus
has an outer membranous envelope from which long
glycoprotein spikes protrude. [Part (a) from A. Levine, 1991, Viruses,

viruses to convey genetic material into cells. To do this, the
portion of the viral genetic material that is potentially harmful is replaced with other genetic material, including human
genes. The altered viruses, or vectors, still can enter cells toting the introduced genes with them (Chapter 9). One day, diseases caused by defective genes may be treated by using viral
vectors to introduce a normal copy of a defective gene into
patients. Current research is dedicated to overcoming the considerable obstacles to this approach, such as getting the introduced genes to work at the right places and times.

sues, organs, and appendages. Our two hands have the same
kinds of cells, yet their different arrangements—in a mirror
image—are critical for function. In addition, many cells exhibit distinct functional and/or structural asymmetries, a
property often called polarity. From such polarized cells arise

Scientific American Library, p. 20. Part (b) courtesy of R. C. Valentine.
Part (c) courtesy of Robley C. Williams, University of California.]

 FIGURE 1-7 The first

(a)

(b)

(c)

[Claude Edelmann/Photo
Researchers, Inc.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

In 1827, German physician Karl von Baer discovered that
mammals grow from eggs that come from the mother’s
ovary. Fertilization of an egg by a sperm cell yields a zygote,
a visually unimpressive cell 200 m in diameter. Every
human being begins as a zygote, which houses all the necessary instructions for building the human body containing
about 100 trillion (1014) cells, an amazing feat. Development
begins with the fertilized egg cell dividing into two, four, then
eight cells, forming the very early embryo (Figure 1-7). Continued cell proliferation and then differentiation into distinct
cell types gives rise to every tissue in the body. One initial
cell, the fertilized egg (zygote), generates hundreds of different kinds of cells that differ in contents, shape, size, color,
mobility, and surface composition. We will see how genes
and signals control cell diversification in Chapters 15 and 22.
Making different kinds of cells—muscle, skin, bone, neuron, blood cells—is not enough to produce the human body.
The cells must be properly arranged and organized into tis-

Video: Early Embryonic Development

We Develop from a Single Cell

few cell divisions of a
fertilized egg set the
stage for all subsequent
development. A developing
mouse embryo is shown at
(a) the two-cell, (b) four-cell,
and (c) eight-cell stages.
The embryo is surrounded
by supporting membranes.
The corresponding steps
in human development
occur during the first few
days after fertilization.

8

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

asymmetric, polarized tissues such as the lining of the intestines and structures like hands and hearts. The features that
make some cells polarized, and how they arise, also are covered in later chapters.

Stem Cells, Cloning, and Related Techniques
Offer Exciting Possibilities but Raise
Some Concerns
Identical twins occur naturally when the mass of cells composing an early embryo divides into two parts, each of which
develops and grows into an individual animal. Each cell in
an eight-cell-stage mouse embryo has the potential to give
rise to any part of the entire animal. Cells with this capability are referred to as embryonic stem (ES) cells. As we learn
in Chapter 22, ES cells can be grown in the laboratory (cultured) and will develop into various types of differentiated
cells under appropriate conditions.
The ability to make and manipulate mammalian embryos
in the laboratory has led to new medical opportunities as
well as various social and ethical concerns. In vitro fertilization, for instance, has allowed many otherwise infertile couples to have children. A new technique involves extraction of
nuclei from defective sperm incapable of normally fertilizing an egg, injection of the nuclei into eggs, and implantation
of the resulting fertilized eggs into the mother.
In recent years, nuclei taken from cells of adult animals
have been used to produce new animals. In this procedure,
the nucleus is removed from a body cell (e.g., skin or blood
cell) of a donor animal and introduced into an unfertilized
mammalian egg that has been deprived of its own nucleus.
This manipulated egg, which is equivalent to a fertilized egg,
is then implanted into a foster mother. The ability of such a
donor nucleus to direct the development of an entire animal
suggests that all the information required for life is retained
in the nuclei of some adult cells. Since all the cells in an animal produced in this way have the genes of the single original donor cell, the new animal is a clone of the donor (Figure
1-8). Repeating the process can give rise to many clones. So
far, however, the majority of embryos produced by this technique of nuclear-transfer cloning do not survive due to birth
defects. Even those animals that are born live have shown
abnormalities, including accelerated aging. The “rooting”
of plants, in contrast, is a type of cloning that is readily accomplished by gardeners, farmers, and laboratory technicians.
The technical difficulties and possible hazards of nucleartransfer cloning have not deterred some individuals from pursuing the goal of human cloning. However, cloning of
humans per se has very limited scientific interest and is opposed by most scientists because of its high risk. Of greater
scientific and medical interest is the ability to generate specific
cell types starting from embryonic or adult stem cells. The scientific interest comes from learning the signals that can unleash the potential of the genes to form a certain cell type. The
medical interest comes from the possibility of treating the nu-

▲ FIGURE 1-8 Five genetically identical cloned sheep. An
early sheep embryo was divided into five groups of cells and
each was separately implanted into a surrogate mother, much
like the natural process of twinning. At an early stage the cells
are able to adjust and form an entire animal; later in development
the cells become progressively restricted and can no longer do
so. An alternative way to clone animals is to replace the nuclei of
multiple single-celled embryos with donor nuclei from cells of an
adult sheep. Each embryo will be genetically identical to the
adult from which the nucleus was obtained. Low percentages of
embryos survive these procedures to give healthy animals, and
the full impact of the techniques on the animals is not yet known.
[Geoff Tompkinson/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.]

merous diseases in which particular cell types are damaged
or missing, and of repairing wounds more completely.

1.2 The Molecules of a Cell
Molecular cell biologists explore how all the remarkable
properties of the cell arise from underlying molecular events:
the assembly of large molecules, binding of large molecules
to each other, catalytic effects that promote particular chemical reactions, and the deployment of information carried by
giant molecules. Here we review the most important kinds of
molecules that form the chemical foundations of cell structure and function.

Small Molecules Carry Energy, Transmit Signals,
and Are Linked into Macromolecules
Much of the cell’s contents is a watery soup flavored with
small molecules (e.g., simple sugars, amino acids, vitamins)
and ions (e.g., sodium, chloride, calcium ions). The locations
and concentrations of small molecules and ions within the
cell are controlled by numerous proteins inserted in cellular
membranes. These pumps, transporters, and ion channels
move nearly all small molecules and ions into or out of the
cell and its organelles (Chapter 7).

1.2 • The Molecules of a Cell

One of the best-known small molecules is adenosine
triphosphate (ATP), which stores readily available chemical
energy in two of its chemical bonds (see Figure 2-24). When
cells split apart these energy-rich bonds in ATP, the released
energy can be harnessed to power an energy-requiring
process like muscle contraction or protein biosynthesis. To
obtain energy for making ATP, cells break down food molecules. For instance, when sugar is degraded to carbon dioxide and water, the energy stored in the original chemical
bonds is released and much of it can be “captured” in ATP
(Chapter 8). Bacterial, plant, and animal cells can all make
ATP by this process. In addition, plants and a few other organisms can harvest energy from sunlight to form ATP in
photosynthesis.
Other small molecules act as signals both within and between cells; such signals direct numerous cellular activities
(Chapters 13–15). The powerful effect on our bodies of a
frightening event comes from the instantaneous flooding of
the body with epinephrine, a small-molecule hormone that
mobilizes the “fight or flight” response. The movements
needed to fight or flee are triggered by nerve impulses that
flow from the brain to our muscles with the aid of neurotransmitters, another type of small-molecule signal that we
discuss in Chapter 7.
Certain small molecules (monomers) in the cellular soup
can be joined to form polymers through repetition of a single
type of chemical-linkage reaction (see Figure 2-11). Cells
produce three types of large polymers, commonly called
macromolecules: polysaccharides, proteins, and nucleic
acids. Sugars, for example, are the monomers used to form

polysaccharides. These macromolecules are critical structural
components of plant cell walls and insect skeletons. A typical
polysaccharide is a linear or branched chain of repeating
identical sugar units. Such a chain carries information: the
number of units. However if the units are not identical, then
the order and type of units carry additional information. As
we see in Chapter 6, some polysaccharides exhibit the greater
informational complexity associated with a linear code made
up of different units assembled in a particular order. This
property, however, is most typical of the two other types of
biological macromolecules—proteins and nucleic acids.

Proteins Give Cells Structure and Perform Most
Cellular Tasks
The varied, intricate structures of proteins enable them to
carry out numerous functions. Cells string together 20 different amino acids in a linear chain to form a protein (see
Figure 2-13). Proteins commonly range in length from 100 to
1000 amino acids, but some are much shorter and others
longer. We obtain amino acids either by synthesizing them
from other molecules or by breaking down proteins that we
eat. The “essential” amino acids, from a dietary standpoint,
are the eight that we cannot synthesize and must obtain from
food. Beans and corn together have all eight, making their
combination particularly nutritious. Once a chain of amino
acids is formed, it folds into a complex shape, conferring a
distinctive three-dimensional structure and function on each
protein (Figure 1-9).

Insulin

Glutamine synthetase

Hemoglobin

▲ FIGURE 1-9 Proteins vary greatly in size, shape, and
function. These models of the water-accessible surface of some
representative proteins are drawn to a common scale and reveal
the numerous projections and crevices on the surface. Each
protein has a defined three-dimensional shape (conformation)
that is stabilized by numerous chemical interactions discussed in
Chapters 2 and 3. The illustrated proteins include enzymes

9

DNA molecule

Immunoglobulin

Adenylate
kinase

Lipid bilayer

(glutamine synthetase and adenylate kinase), an antibody
(immunoglobulin), a hormone (insulin), and the blood’s oxygen
carrier (hemoglobin). Models of a segment of the nucleic acid
DNA and a small region of the lipid bilayer that forms cellular
membranes (see Section 1.3) demonstrate the relative width of
these structures compared with typical proteins. [Courtesy of
Gareth White.]

10

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

Some proteins are similar to one another and therefore
can be considered members of a protein family. A few hundred such families have been identified. Most proteins are designed to work in particular places within a cell or to be
released into the extracellular (extra, “outside”) space. Elaborate cellular pathways ensure that proteins are transported
to their proper intracellular (intra, within) locations or secreted (Chapters 16 and 17).
Proteins can serve as structural components of a cell, for
example, by forming an internal skeleton (Chapters 5, 19, and
20). They can be sensors that change shape as temperature, ion
concentrations, or other properties of the cell change. They
can import and export substances across the plasma membrane (Chapter 7). They can be enzymes, causing chemical reactions to occur much more rapidly than they would without
the aid of these protein catalysts (Chapter 3). They can bind to
a specific gene, turning it on or off (Chapter 11). They can be
extracellular signals, released from one cell to communicate
with other cells, or intracellular signals, carrying information
within the cell (Chapters 13–15). They can be motors that
move other molecules around, burning chemical energy (ATP)
to do so (Chapters 19 and 20).
How can 20 amino acids form all the different proteins
needed to perform these varied tasks? Seems impossible at
first glance. But if a “typical” protein is about 400 amino
acids long, there are 20400 possible different protein sequences. Even assuming that many of these would be functionally equivalent, unstable, or otherwise discountable, the
number of possible proteins is well along toward infinity.
Next we might ask how many protein molecules a cell
needs to operate and maintain itself. To estimate this number, let’s take a typical eukaryotic cell, such as a hepatocyte
(liver cell). This cell, roughly a cube 15 m (0.0015 cm) on
a side, has a volume of 3.4  109 cm3 (or milliliters). Assuming a cell density of 1.03 g/ml, the cell would weigh
3.5  109 g. Since protein accounts for approximately 20
percent of a cell’s weight, the total weight of cellular protein is 7  10 10 g. The average yeast protein has a mo-

lecular weight of 52,700 (g/mol). Assuming this value is
typical of eukaryotic proteins, we can calculate the total
number of protein molecules per liver cell as about 7.9 
109 from the total protein weight and Avogadro’s number,
the number of molecules per mole of any chemical compound (6.02  10 23). To carry this calculation one step
further, consider that a liver cell contains about 10,000
different proteins; thus, a cell contains close to a million
molecules of each type of protein on average. In actuality
the abundance of different proteins varies widely, from the
quite rare insulin-binding receptor protein (20,000 molecules) to the abundant structural protein actin (5  10 8
molecules).

Nucleic Acids Carry Coded Information
for Making Proteins at the Right Time and Place
The information about how, when, and where to produce each
kind of protein is carried in the genetic material, a polymer
called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). The three-dimensional
structure of DNA consists of two long helical strands that are
coiled around a common axis, forming a double helix. DNA
strands are composed of monomers called nucleotides; these
often are referred to as bases because their structures contain
cyclic organic bases (Chapter 4).
Four different nucleotides, abbreviated A, T, C, and G,
are joined end to end in a DNA strand, with the base parts
projecting out from the helical backbone of the strand. Each
DNA double helix has a simple construction: wherever there
is an A in one strand there is a T in the other, and each C is
matched with a G (Figure 1-10). This complementary matching of the two strands is so strong that if complementary
strands are separated, they will spontaneously zip back together in the right salt and temperature conditions. Such
hybridization is extremely useful for detecting one strand using
the other. For example, if one strand is purified and attached
to a piece of paper, soaking the paper in a solution containing the other complementary strand will lead to zippering,

Parental
strands

Daughter
strands

A G T C

▲ FIGURE 1-10 DNA consists of two complementary
strands wound around each other to form a double helix.
(Left) The double helix is stabilized by weak hydrogen bonds
between the A and T bases and between the C and G bases.
(Right) During replication, the two strands are unwound and used

as templates to produce complementary strands. The outcome is
two copies of the original double helix, each containing one of
the original strands and one new daughter (complementary)
strand.

1.2 • The Molecules of a Cell

even if the solution also contains many other DNA strands
that do not match.
The genetic information carried by DNA resides in its sequence, the linear order of nucleotides along a strand. The
information-bearing portion of DNA is divided into discrete
functional units, the genes, which typically are 5000 to
100,000 nucleotides long. Most bacteria have a few thousand genes; humans, about 40,000. The genes that carry instructions for making proteins commonly contain two parts:
a coding region that specifies the amino acid sequence of a
protein and a regulatory region that controls when and in
which cells the protein is made.
Cells use two processes in series to convert the coded information in DNA into proteins (Figure 1-11). In the first,
called transcription, the coding region of a gene is copied
into a single-stranded ribonucleic acid (RNA) version of the
double-stranded DNA. A large enzyme, RNA polymerase,
catalyzes the linkage of nucleotides into a RNA chain using
DNA as a template. In eukaryotic cells, the initial RNA
product is processed into a smaller messenger RNA (mRNA)
molecule, which moves to the cytoplasm. Here the ribosome,
an enormously complex molecular machine composed of
both RNA and protein, carries out the second process, called
translation. During translation, the ribosome assembles and
links together amino acids in the precise order dictated by the
mRNA sequence according to the nearly universal genetic
code. We examine the cell components that carry out transcription and translation in detail in Chapter 4.
All organisms have ways to control when and where their
genes can be transcribed. For instance, nearly all the cells in
our bodies contain the full set of human genes, but in each
cell type only some of these genes are active, or turned on,
and used to make proteins. That’s why liver cells produce
some proteins that are not produced by kidney cells, and vice
versa. Moreover, many cells can respond to external signals
or changes in external conditions by turning specific genes on
or off, thereby adapting their repertoire of proteins to meet
current needs. Such control of gene activity depends on
DNA-binding proteins called transcription factors, which
bind to DNA and act as switches, either activating or repressing transcription of particular genes (Chapter 11).
Transcription factors are shaped so precisely that they are
able to bind preferentially to the regulatory regions of just a
few genes out of the thousands present in a cell’s DNA. Typically a DNA-binding protein will recognize short DNA sequences about 6–12 base pairs long. A segment of DNA
containing 10 base pairs can have 410 possible sequences
(1,048,576) since each position can be any of four nucleotides. Only a few copies of each such sequence will occur
in the DNA of a cell, assuring the specificity of gene activation
and repression. Multiple copies of one type of transcription
factor can coordinately regulate a set of genes if binding sites
for that factor exist near each gene in the set. Transcription
factors often work as multiprotein complexes, with more
than one protein contributing its own DNA-binding specificity to selecting the regulated genes. In complex organisms,

11

1
Activation

DNA
Start

2
Transcription
pre-mRNA
Nucleus

3
Processing

mRNA

Protein

4

Cytosol

Translation

Transcription
factor

RNA
polymerase

Ribosome

Transcribed region of DNA
Nontranscribed region of DNA
Protein-coding region of RNA
Noncoding region of RNA
Amino acid chain

▲ FIGURE 1-11 The coded information in DNA is converted
into the amino acid sequences of proteins by a multistep
process. Step 1 : Transcription factors bind to the regulatory
regions of the specific genes they control and activate them.
Step 2 : Following assembly of a multiprotein initiation complex
bound to the DNA, RNA polymerase begins transcription of an
activated gene at a specific location, the start site. The
polymerase moves along the DNA linking nucleotides into a
single-stranded pre-mRNA transcript using one of the DNA
strands as a template. Step 3 : The transcript is processed to
remove noncoding sequences. Step 4 : In a eukaryotic cell, the
mature messenger RNA (mRNA) moves to the cytoplasm, where
it is bound by ribosomes that read its sequence and assemble a
protein by chemically linking amino acids into a linear chain.

hundreds of different transcription factors are employed to
form an exquisite control system that activates the right genes
in the right cells at the right times.

The Genome Is Packaged into Chromosomes
and Replicated During Cell Division
Most of the DNA in eukaryotic cells is located in the nucleus,
extensively folded into the familiar structures we know as
chromosomes (Chapter 10). Each chromosome contains a single linear DNA molecule associated with certain proteins. In
prokaryotic cells, most or all of the genetic information resides

12

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

in a single circular DNA molecule about a millimeter in length;
this molecule lies, folded back on itself many times, in the central region of the cell (see Figure 1-2a). The genome of an organism comprises its entire complement of DNA. With the
exception of eggs and sperm, every normal human cell has 46
chromosomes (Figure 1-12). Half of these, and thus half of the
genes, can be traced back to Mom; the other half, to Dad.
Every time a cell divides, a large multiprotein replication
machine, the replisome, separates the two strands of doublehelical DNA in the chromosomes and uses each strand as a
template to assemble nucleotides into a new complementary
strand (see Figure 1-10). The outcome is a pair of double helices, each identical to the original. DNA polymerase, which
is responsible for linking nucleotides into a DNA strand, and
the many other components of the replisome are described in
Chapter 4. The molecular design of DNA and the remarkable
properties of the replisome assure rapid, highly accurate copying. Many DNA polymerase molecules work in concert, each
one copying part of a chromosome. The entire genome of fruit
flies, about 1.2  108 nucleotides long, can be copied in three
minutes! Because of the accuracy of DNA replication, nearly
all the cells in our bodies carry the same genetic instructions,
and we can inherit Mom’s brown hair and Dad’s blue eyes.
A rather dramatic example of gene control involves inactivation of an entire chromosome in human females.
Women have two X chromosomes, whereas men have one

▲ FIGURE 1-12 Chromosomes can be “painted” for easy
identification. A normal human has 23 pairs of morphologically
distinct chromosomes; one member of each pair is inherited
from the mother and the other member from the father. (Left) A
chromosome spread from a human body cell midway through
mitosis, when the chromosomes are fully condensed. This
preparation was treated with fluorescent-labeled staining
reagents that allow each of the 22 pairs and the X and Y

X chromosome and one Y chromosome, which has different genes than the X chromosome. Yet the genes on the X
chromosome must, for the most part, be equally active in female cells (XX) and male cells (XY). To achieve this balance,
one of the X chromosomes in female cells is chemically modified and condensed into a very small mass called a Barr
body, which is inactive and never transcribed.
Surprisingly, we inherit a small amount of genetic material entirely and uniquely from our mothers. This is the circular DNA present in mitochondria, the organelles in
eukaryotic cells that synthesize ATP using the energy released
by the breakdown of nutrients. Mitochondria contain multiple copies of their own DNA genomes, which code for
some of the mitochondrial proteins (Chapter 10). Because
each human inherits mitochondrial DNA only from his or
her mother (it comes with the egg but not the sperm), the distinctive features of a particular mitochondrial DNA can be
used to trace maternal history. Chloroplasts, the organelles
that carry out photosynthesis in plants, also have their own
circular genomes.

Mutations May Be Good, Bad, or Indifferent
Mistakes occasionally do occur spontaneously during DNA
replication, causing changes in the sequence of nucleotides.
Such changes, or mutations, also can arise from radiation

chromosomes to appear in a different color when viewed in a
fluorescence microscope. This technique of multiplex
fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) sometimes is called
chromosome painting (Chapter 10). (Right) Chromosomes from
the preparation on the left arranged in pairs in descending order
of size, an array called a karyotype. The presence of X and Y
chromosomes identifies the sex of the individual as male.
[Courtesy of M. R. Speicher.]

1.3 • The Work of Cells

that causes damage to the nucleotide chain or from chemical poisons, such as those in cigarette smoke, that lead to errors during the DNA-copying process (Chapter 23).
Mutations come in various forms: a simple swap of one nucleotide for another; the deletion, insertion, or inversion of
one to millions of nucleotides in the DNA of one chromosome; and translocation of a stretch of DNA from one chromosome to another.
In sexually reproducing animals like ourselves, mutations
can be inherited only if they are present in cells that potentially contribute to the formation of offspring. Such germ-line
cells include eggs, sperm, and their precursor cells. Body cells
that do not contribute to offspring are called somatic cells.
Mutations that occur in these cells never are inherited, although they may contribute to the onset of cancer. Plants have
a less distinct division between somatic and germ-line cells,
since many plant cells can function in both capacities.
Mutated genes that encode altered proteins or that cannot be controlled properly cause numerous inherited diseases. For example, sickle cell disease is attributable to a
single nucleotide substitution in the hemoglobin gene, which
encodes the protein that carries oxygen in red blood cells.
The single amino acid change caused by the sickle cell mutation reduces the ability of red blood cells to carry oxygen
from the lungs to the tissues. Recent advances in detecting
disease-causing mutations and in understanding how they affect cell functions offer exciting possibilities for reducing
their often devastating effects.
Sequencing of the human genome has shown that a very
large proportion of our DNA does not code for any RNA or
have any discernible regulatory function, a quite unexpected
finding. Mutations in these regions usually produce no immediate effects—good or bad. However, such “indifferent”
mutations in nonfunctional DNA may have been a major
player in evolution, leading to creation of new genes or new
regulatory sequences for controlling already existing genes.
For instance, since binding sites for transcription factors typically are only 10–12 nucleotides long, a few single-nucleotide
mutations might convert a nonfunctional bit of DNA into a
functional protein-binding regulatory site.
Much of the nonessential DNA in both eukaryotes and
prokaryotes consists of highly repeated sequences that can
move from one place in the genome to another. These mobile
DNA elements can jump (transpose) into genes, most commonly damaging but sometimes activating them. Jumping
generally occurs rarely enough to avoid endangering the host
organism. Mobile elements, which were discovered first in
plants, are responsible for leaf color variegation and the
diverse beautiful color patterns of Indian corn kernels. By
jumping in and out of genes that control pigmentation as
plant development progresses, the mobile elements give rise
to elaborate colored patterns. Mobile elements were later
found in bacteria in which they often carry and, unfortunately, disseminate genes for antibiotic resistance.
Now we understand that mobile elements have multiplied and slowly accumulated in genomes over evolutionary

13

time, becoming a universal property of genomes in presentday organisms. They account for an astounding 45 percent
of the human genome. Some of our own mobile DNA elements are copies—often highly mutated and damaged—of
genomes from viruses that spend part of their life cycle as
DNA segments inserted into host-cell DNA. Thus we carry
in our chromosomes the genetic residues of infections acquired by our ancestors. Once viewed only as molecular parasites, mobile DNA elements are now thought to have
contributed significantly to the evolution of higher organisms (Chapter 10).

1.3 The Work of Cells
In essence, any cell is simply a compartment with a watery
interior that is separated from the external environment by
a surface membrane (the plasma membrane) that prevents
the free flow of molecules in and out of cells. In addition, as
we’ve noted, eukaryotic cells have extensive internal membranes that further subdivide the cell into various compartments, the organelles. The plasma membrane and other
cellular membranes are composed primarily of two layers of
phospholipid molecules. These bipartite molecules have a
“water-loving” (hydrophilic) end and a “water-hating” (hydrophobic) end. The two phospholipid layers of a membrane are oriented with all the hydrophilic ends directed toward the inner and outer surfaces and the hydrophobic ends
buried within the interior (Figure 1-13). Smaller amounts of

Cholesterol

Water-seeking
head group

Fatty chains
Water

▲ FIGURE 1-13 The watery interior of cells is surrounded
by the plasma membrane, a two-layered shell of
phospholipids. The phospholipid molecules are oriented with
their fatty acyl chains (black squiggly lines) facing inward and
their water-seeking head groups (white spheres) facing outward.
Thus both sides of the membrane are lined by head groups,
mainly charged phosphates, adjacent to the watery spaces inside
and outside the cell. All biological membranes have the same
basic phospholipid bilayer structure. Cholesterol (red) and various
proteins (not shown) are embedded in the bilayer. In actuality,
the interior space is much larger relative to the volume of the
plasma membrane depicted here.

14

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

other lipids, such as cholesterol, and many kinds of proteins
are inserted into the phospholipid framework. The lipid molecules and some proteins can float sidewise in the plane of
the membrane, giving membranes a fluid character. This fluidity allows cells to change shape and even move. However,
the attachment of some membrane proteins to other molecules inside or outside the cell restricts their lateral movement. We learn more about membranes and how molecules
cross them in Chapters 5 and 7.
The cytosol and the internal spaces of organelles differ
from each other and from the cell exterior in terms of acidity,
ionic composition, and protein contents. For example, the
composition of salts inside the cell is often drastically different from what is outside. Because of these different “microclimates,” each cell compartment has its own assigned tasks
in the overall work of the cell (Chapter 5). The unique functions and micro-climates of the various cell compartments
are due largely to the proteins that reside in their membranes
or interior.
We can think of the entire cell compartment as a factory
dedicated to sustaining the well-being of the cell. Much cellular work is performed by molecular machines, some
housed in the cytosol and some in various organelles. Here
we quickly review the major tasks that cells carry out in their
pursuit of the good life.

Cells Build and Degrade Numerous
Molecules and Structures

Overview Animation: Biological Energy Interconversions

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

As chemical factories, cells produce an enormous number of
complex molecules from simple chemical building blocks. All

of this synthetic work is powered by chemical energy extracted primarily from sugars and fats or sunlight, in the case
of plant cells, and stored primarily in ATP, the universal
“currency” of chemical energy (Figure 1-14). In animal and
plant cells, most ATP is produced by large molecular machines located in two organelles, mitochondria and chloroplasts. Similar machines for generating ATP are located in
the plasma membrane of bacterial cells. Both mitochondria
and chloroplasts are thought to have originated as bacteria
that took up residence inside eukaryotic cells and then became welcome collaborators (Chapter 8). Directly or indirectly, all of our food is created by plant cells using sunlight
to build complex macromolecules during photosynthesis.
Even underground oil supplies are derived from the decay
of plant material.
Cells need to break down worn-out or obsolete parts into
small molecules that can be discarded or recycled. This
housekeeping task is assigned largely to lysosomes, organelles crammed with degradative enzymes. The interior of
lysosomes has a pH of about 5.0, roughly 100 times more
acidic than that of the surrounding cytosol. This aids in the
breakdown of materials by lysosomal enzymes, which are
specially designed to function at such a low pH. To create the
low pH environment, proteins located in the lysosomal membrane pump hydrogen ions into the lysosome using energy
supplied from ATP (Chapter 7). Lysosomes are assisted in the
cell’s cleanup work by peroxisomes. These small organelles
are specialized for breaking down the lipid components of
membranes and rendering various toxins harmless.
Most of the structural and functional properties of cells
depend on proteins. Thus for cells to work properly, the nu-

Light (photosynthesis) or
compounds with high
potential energy (respiration)

ADP + Pi

ATP

Energy

Synthesis of
cellular macromolecules (DNA,
RNA, proteins,
polysaccharides)

Synthesis of other
cellular constituents
(such as membrane
phospholipids and
certain required
metabolites)

Cellular movements,
including muscle contraction, crawling movements of entire cells,
and movement of
chromosomes during
mitosis

▲ FIGURE 1-14 ATP is the most common molecule used
by cells to capture and transfer energy. ATP is formed from
ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) by photosynthesis in plants

Transport of
molecules against
a concentration
gradient

Generation of an
electric potential
across a membrane
(important for nerve
function)

Heat

and by the breakdown of sugars and fats in most cells. The
energy released by the splitting (hydrolysis) of Pi from ATP
drives many cellular processes.

1.3 • The Work of Cells

merous proteins composing the various working compartments must be transported from where they are made to
their proper locations (Chapters 16 and 17). Some proteins
are made on ribosomes that are free in the cytosol. Proteins
secreted from the cell and most membrane proteins, however,
are made on ribosomes associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). This organelle produces, processes, and ships
out both proteins and lipids. Protein chains produced on the
ER move to the Golgi apparatus, where they are further
modified before being forwarded to their final destinations.
Proteins that travel in this way contain short sequences of
amino acids or attached sugar chains (oligosaccharides) that
serve as addresses for directing them to their correct destinations. These addresses work because they are recognized
and bound by other proteins that do the sorting and shipping
in various cell compartments.

Animal Cells Produce Their Own External
Environment and Glues
The simplest multicellular animals are single cells embedded
in a jelly of proteins and polysaccharides called the extracellular matrix. Cells themselves produce and secrete these materials, thus creating their own immediate environment
(Chapter 6). Collagen, the single most abundant protein in
the animal kingdom, is a major component of the extracellular matrix in most tissues. In animals, the extracellular matrix cushions and lubricates cells. A specialized, especially
tough matrix, the basal lamina, forms a supporting layer underlying sheetlike cell layers and helps prevent the cells from
ripping apart.
The cells in animal tissues are “glued” together by celladhesion molecules (CAMs) embedded in their surface
membranes. Some CAMs bind cells to one another; other
types bind cells to the extracellular matrix, forming a cohesive unit. The cells of higher plants contain relatively few
such molecules; instead, plants cells are rigidly tied together
by extensive interlocking of the cell walls of neighboring

Intermediate filaments

cells. The cytosols of adjacent animal or plant cells often are
connected by functionally similar but structurally different
“bridges” called gap junctions in animals and plasmodesmata in plants. These structures allow cells to exchange small
molecules including nutrients and signals, facilitating coordinated functioning of the cells in a tissue.

Cells Change Shape and Move
Although cells sometimes are spherical, they more commonly
have more elaborate shapes due to their internal skeletons
and external attachments. Three types of protein filaments,
organized into networks and bundles, form the cytoskeleton
within animal cells (Figure 1-15). The cytoskeleton prevents
the plasma membrane of animal cells from relaxing into a
sphere (Chapter 5); it also functions in cell locomotion and
the intracellular transport of vesicles, chromosomes, and
macromolecules (Chapters 19 and 20). The cytoskeleton can
be linked through the cell surface to the extracellular matrix
or to the cytoskeleton of other cells, thus helping to form tissues (Chapter 6).
All cytoskeletal filaments are long polymers of protein
subunits. Elaborate systems regulate the assembly and disassembly of the cytoskeleton, thereby controlling cell shape. In
some cells the cytoskeleton is relatively stable, but in others
it changes shape continuously. Shrinkage of the cytoskeleton
in some parts of the cell and its growth in other parts can produce coordinated changes in shape that result in cell locomotion. For instance, a cell can send out an extension that
attaches to a surface or to other cells and then retract the cell
body from the other end. As this process continues due to coordinated changes in the cytoskeleton, the cell moves forward. Cells can move at rates on the order of 20 m/second.
Cell locomotion is used during embryonic development of
multicellular animals to shape tissues and during adulthood
to defend against infection, to transport nutrients, and to heal
wounds. This process does not play a role in the growth and
development of multicellular plants because new plant cells

Microtubules

▲ FIGURE 1-15 The three types of cytoskeletal filaments
have characteristic distributions within cells. Three views of
the same cell. A cultured fibroblast was treated with three
different antibody preparations. Each antibody binds specifically
to the protein monomers forming one type of filament and is
chemically linked to a differently colored fluorescent dye (green,

15

Microfilaments

blue, or red). Visualization of the stained cell in a fluorescence
microscope reveals the location of filaments bound to a particular
dye-antibody preparation. In this case, intermediate filaments are
stained green; microtubules, blue; and microfilaments, red. All
three fiber systems contribute to the shape and movements of
cells. [Courtesy of V. Small.]

16

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells
(a)
Surface receptors

are generated by the division of existing cells that share cell
walls. As a result, plant development involves cell enlargement but not movement of cells from one position to another.

Bound signal

Cells Sense and Send Information
A living cell continuously monitors its surroundings and adjusts its own activities and composition accordingly. Cells
also communicate by deliberately sending signals that can
be received and interpreted by other cells. Such signals are
common not only within an individual organism, but also
between organisms. For instance, the odor of a pear detected
by us and other animals signals a food source; consumption
of the pear by an animal aids in distributing the pear’s seeds.
Everyone benefits! The signals employed by cells include simple small chemicals, gases, proteins, light, and mechanical
movements. Cells possess numerous receptor proteins for detecting signals and elaborate pathways for transmitting them
within the cell to evoke a response. At any time, a cell may be
able to sense only some of the signals around it, and how a
cell responds to a signal may change with time. In some
cases, receiving one signal primes a cell to respond to a subsequent different signal in a particular way.
Both changes in the environment (e.g., an increase or decrease in a particular nutrient or the light level) and signals
received from other cells represent external information that
cells must process. The most rapid responses to such signals
generally involve changes in the location or activity of preexisting proteins. For instance, soon after you eat a carbohydrate-rich meal, glucose pours into your bloodstream. The
rise in blood glucose is sensed by  cells in the pancreas,
which respond by releasing their stored supply of the protein
hormone insulin. The circulating insulin signal causes glucose transporters in the cytoplasm of fat and muscle cells to
move to the cell surface, where they begin importing glucose.
Meanwhile, liver cells also are furiously taking in glucose via
a different glucose transporter. In both liver and muscle cells,
an intracellular signaling pathway triggered by binding of insulin to cell-surface receptors activates a key enzyme needed
to make glycogen, a large glucose polymer (Figure 1-16a).
The net result of these cell responses is that your blood glucose level falls and extra glucose is stored as glycogen, which
your cells can use as a glucose source when you skip a meal
to cram for a test.
The ability of cells to send and respond to signals is crucial to development. Many developmentally important signals are secreted proteins produced by specific cells at
specific times and places in a developing organism. Often a
receiving cell integrates multiple signals in deciding how to
behave, for example, to differentiate into a particular tissue
type, to extend a process, to die, to send back a confirming
signal (yes, I’m here!), or to migrate.
The functions of about half the proteins in humans,
roundworms, yeast, and several other eukaryotic organisms
have been predicted based on analyses of genomic sequences
(Chapter 9). Such analyses have revealed that at least 10–15
percent of the proteins in eukaryotes function as secreted ex-

Inactive enzyme

Active enzyme

(b)
Cytosolic
receptor

Receptor-hormone
complex
mRNA
Protein

mRNA

Nucleus

Increased transcription
of specific genes

▲ FIGURE 1-16 External signals commonly cause a change
in the activity of preexisting proteins or in the amounts
and types of proteins that cells produce. (a) Binding of a
hormone or other signaling molecule to its specific receptors
can trigger an intracellular pathway that increases or decreases
the activity of a preexisting protein. For example, binding of
insulin to receptors in the plasma membrane of liver and muscle
cells leads to activation of glycogen synthase, a key enzyme in
the synthesis of glycogen from glucose. (b) The receptors for
steroid hormones are located within cells, not on the cell
surface. The hormone-receptor complexes activate transcription
of specific target genes, leading to increased production of the
encoded proteins. Many signals that bind to receptors on the
cell surface also act, by more complex pathways, to modulate
gene expression.

tracellular signals, signal receptors, or intracellular signaltransduction proteins, which pass along a signal through a
series of steps culminating in a particular cellular response
(e.g., increased glycogen synthesis). Clearly, signaling and
signal transduction are major activities of cells.

Cells Regulate Their Gene Expression to Meet
Changing Needs
In addition to modulating the activities of existing proteins,
cells often respond to changing circumstances and to signals
from other cells by altering the amount or types of proteins they
contain. Gene expression, the overall process of selectively
reading and using genetic information, is commonly controlled
at the level of transcription, the first step in the production of
proteins. In this way cells can produce a particular mRNA only
when the encoded protein is needed, thus minimizing wasted
energy. Producing a mRNA is, however, only the first in a chain
of regulated events that together determine whether an active
protein product is produced from a particular gene.

1.3 • The Work of Cells

The most remarkable feature of cells and entire organisms is
their ability to reproduce. Biological reproduction, combined

Nondividing
cells

Resting
cells
G1

G0

RNA and
protein
synthesis

M
Cell
division

DNA
replication

S

RNA and
protein
synthesis
G2

▲ FIGURE 1-17 During growth, eukaryotic cells
continually progress through the four stages of the cell
cycle, generating new daughter cells. In most
proliferating cells, the four phases of the cell cycle proceed
successively, taking from 10–20 hours depending on cell
type and developmental state. During interphase, which
consists of the G1, S, and G2 phases, the cell roughly
doubles its mass. Replication of DNA during S leaves the
cell with four copies of each type of chromosome. In the
mitotic (M) phase, the chromosomes are evenly partitioned
to two daughter cells, and the cytoplasm divides roughly in
half in most cases. Under certain conditions such as
starvation or when a tissue has reached its final size, cells
will stop cycling and remain in a waiting state called G0.
Most cells in G0 can reenter the cycle if conditions change.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Cells Grow and Divide

with continuing evolutionary selection for a highly functional
body plan, is why today’s horseshoe crabs look much as they
did 300 million years ago, a time span during which entire
mountain ranges have risen or fallen. The Teton Mountains in
Wyoming, now about 14,000 feet high and still growing, did
not exist a mere 10 million years ago. Yet horseshoe crabs,
with a life span of about 19 years, have faithfully reproduced
their ancient selves more than half a million times during that
period. The common impression that biological structure is
transient and geological structure is stable is the exact opposite of the truth. Despite the limited duration of our individual lives, reproduction gives us a potential for immortality
that a mountain or a rock does not have.
The simplest type of reproduction entails the division of
a “parent” cell into two “daughter” cells. This occurs as part
of the cell cycle, a series of events that prepares a cell to divide
followed by the actual division process, called mitosis. The
eukaryotic cell cycle commonly is represented as four stages
(Figure 1-17). The chromosomes and the DNA they carry are
copied during the S (synthesis) phase. The replicated chromosomes separate during the M (mitotic) phase, with each
daughter cell getting a copy of each chromosome during cell
division. The M and S phases are separated by two gap stages,
the G1 phase and G2 phase, during which mRNAs and proteins are made. In single-celled organisms, both daughter cells

Overview Animation: Life Cycle of a Cell

Transcriptional control of gene expression was first decisively demonstrated in the response of the gut bacterium
E. coli to different sugar sources. E. coli cells prefer glucose
as a sugar source, but they can survive on lactose in a pinch.
These bacteria use both a DNA-binding repressor protein
and a DNA-binding activator protein to change the rate of
transcription of three genes needed to metabolize lactose depending on the relative amounts of glucose and lactose present (Chapter 4). Such dual positive/negative control of gene
expression fine tunes the bacterial cell’s enzymatic equipment
for the job at hand.
Like bacterial cells, unicellular eukaryotes may be subjected to widely varying environmental conditions that require extensive changes in cellular structures and function.
For instance, in starvation conditions yeast cells stop growing and form dormant spores (see Figure 1-4). In multicellular organisms, however, the environment around most cells is
relatively constant. The major purpose of gene control in us
and in other complex organisms is to tailor the properties of
various cell types to the benefit of the entire animal or plant.
Control of gene activity in eukaryotic cells usually involves a balance between the actions of transcriptional activators and repressors. Binding of activators to specific DNA
regulatory sequences called enhancers turns on transcription,
and binding of repressors to other regulatory sequences
called silencers turns off transcription. In Chapters 11 and
12, we take a close look at transcriptional activators and repressors and how they operate, as well as other mechanisms
for controlling gene expression. In an extreme case, expression of a particular gene could occur only in part of the
brain, only during evening hours, only during a certain stage
of development, only after a large meal, and so forth.
Many external signals modify the activity of transcriptional activators and repressors that control specific genes.
For example, lipid-soluble steroid hormones, such as estrogen and testosterone, can diffuse across the plasma membrane and bind to their specific receptors located in the
cytoplasm or nucleus (Figure 1-16b). Hormone binding
changes the shape of the receptor so that it can bind to specific enhancer sequences in the DNA, thus turning the receptor into a transcriptional activator. By this rather simple
signal-transduction pathway, steroid hormones cause cells to
change which genes they transcribe (Chapter 11). Since
steroid hormones can circulate in the bloodstream, they can
affect the properties of many or all cells in a temporally coordinated manner. Binding of many other hormones and of
growth factors to receptors on the cell surface triggers different signal-transduction pathways that also lead to changes
in the transcription of specific genes (Chapters 13–15). Although these pathways involve multiple components and are
more complicated than those transducing steroid hormone
signals, the general idea is the same.

17

18

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

often (though not always) resemble the parent cell. In multicellular organisms, stem cells can give rise to two different
cells, one that resembles the parent cell and one that does not.
Such asymmetric cell division is critical to the generation of
different cell types in the body (Chapter 22).
During growth the cell cycle operates continuously, with
newly formed daughter cells immediately embarking on their
own path to mitosis. Under optimal conditions bacteria can divide to form two daughter cells once every 30 minutes. At this
rate, in an hour one cell becomes four; in a day one cell becomes more than 1014, which if dried would weigh about 25
grams. Under normal circumstances, however, growth cannot
continue at this rate because the food supply becomes limiting.
Most eukaryotic cells take considerably longer than bacterial cells to grow and divide. Moreover, the cell cycle in adult
plants and animals normally is highly regulated (Chapter 21).
This tight control prevents imbalanced, excessive growth of
tissues while assuring that worn-out or damaged cells are replaced and that additional cells are formed in response to new
circumstances or developmental needs. For instance, the proliferation of red blood cells increases substantially when a person ascends to a higher altitude and needs more capacity to
capture oxygen. Some highly specialized cells in adult animals,
such as nerve cells and striated muscle cells, rarely divide, if
at all. The fundamental defect in cancer is loss of the ability
to control the growth and division of cells. In Chapter 23, we
examine the molecular and cellular events that lead to inappropriate, uncontrolled proliferation of cells.
Mitosis is an asexual process since the daughter cells
carry the exact same genetic information as the parental cell.
In sexual reproduction, fusion of two cells produces a third
cell that contains genetic information from each parental
cell. Since such fusions would cause an ever-increasing number of chromosomes, sexual reproductive cycles employ a
special type of cell division, called meiosis, that reduces the
number of chromosomes in preparation for fusion (see Figure 9-3). Cells with a full set of chromosomes are called
diploid cells. During meiosis, a diploid cell replicates its chromosomes as usual for mitosis but then divides twice without
copying the chromosomes in-between. Each of the resulting
four daughter cells, which has only half the full number of
chromosomes, is said to be haploid.
Sexual reproduction occurs in animals and plants, and
even in unicellular organisms such as yeasts (see Figure 1-5).
Animals spend considerable time and energy generating eggs
and sperm, the haploid cells, called gametes, that are used for
sexual reproduction. A human female will produce about half
a million eggs in a lifetime, all these cells form before she is
born; a young human male, about 100 million sperm each day.
Gametes are formed from diploid precursor germ-line cells,
which in humans contain 46 chromosomes. In humans the X
and Y chromosomes are called sex chromosomes because they
determine whether an individual is male or female. In human
diploid cells, the 44 remaining chromosomes, called autosomes, occur as pairs of 22 different kinds. Through meiosis, a
man produces sperm that have 22 chromosomes plus either an
X or a Y, and a woman produces ova (unfertilized eggs) with

FEMALE

MALE

44 A
XX

44 A
XY

Diploid (2n)

Meiosis

Haploid (1n)

22 A
X

22 A
X

22 A
X

22 A
Y

One type
of female
gamete
Diploid (2n)

Fertilization

44 A
XX

44 A
XY

Female
zygote

Male
zygote

Two types
of male
gamete

▲ FIGURE 1-18 Dad made you a boy or girl. In animals,
meiosis of diploid precursor cells forms eggs and sperm
(gametes). The male parent produces two types of sperm and
determines the sex of the zygote. In humans, as shown here,
X and Y are the sex chromosomes; the zygote must receive a
Y chromosome from the male parent to develop into a male.
Aautosomes (non-sex chromosomes).

22 chromosomes plus an X. Fusion of an egg and sperm (fertilization) yields a fertilized egg, the zygote, with 46 chromosomes, one pair of each of the 22 kinds and a pair of X’s in
females or an X and a Y in males (Figure 1-18). Errors during
meiosis can lead to disorders resulting from an abnormal number of chromosomes. These include Down’s syndrome, caused
by an extra chromosome 21, and Klinefelter’s syndrome,
caused by an extra X chromosome.

Cells Die from Aggravated Assault or an
Internal Program
When cells in multicellular organisms are badly damaged or
infected with a virus, they die. Cell death resulting from such
a traumatic event is messy and often releases potentially
toxic cell constituents that can damage surrounding cells.
Cells also may die when they fail to receive a life-maintaining
signal or when they receive a death signal. In this type of programmed cell death, called apoptosis, a dying cell actually
produces proteins necessary for self-destruction. Death by
apoptosis avoids the release of potentially toxic cell constituents (Figure 1-19).
Programmed cell death is critical to the proper development and functioning of our bodies (Chapter 22). During
fetal life, for instance, our hands initially develop with “webbing” between the fingers; the cells in the webbing subsequently die in an orderly and precise pattern that leaves the

1.4 • Investigating Cells and Their Parts

19

fingers and thumb free to play the piano. Nerve cells in the
brain soon die if they do not make proper or useful electrical connections with other cells. Some developing lymphocytes, the immune-system cells intended to recognize foreign
proteins and polysaccharides, have the ability to react
against our own tissues. Such self-reactive lymphocytes become programmed to die before they fully mature. If these
cells are not weeded out before reaching maturity, they can
cause autoimmune diseases in which our immune system destroys the very tissues it is meant to protect.

1.4 Investigating Cells and Their Parts
▲ FIGURE 1-19 Apoptotic cells break apart without
spewing forth cell constituents that might harm neighboring
cells. White blood cells normally look like the cell on the left.
Cells undergoing programmed cell death (apoptosis), like the cell
on the right, form numerous surface blebs that eventually are
released. The cell is dying because it lacks certain growth signals.
Apoptosis is important to eliminate virus-infected cells, remove
cells where they are not needed (like the webbing that
disappears as fingers develop), and to destroy immune system
cells that would react with our own bodies. [Gopal Murti/Visuals
Unlimited, Inc.]

(a)

(b)

To build an integrated understanding of how the various molecular components that underlie cellular functions work together in a living cell, we must draw on various perspectives.
Here, we look at how five disciplines—cell biology, biochemistry, genetics, genomics, and developmental biology—can
contribute to our knowledge of cell structure and function.
The experimental approaches of each field probe the cell’s
inner workings in different ways, allowing us to ask different types of questions about cells and what they do. Cell division provides a good example to illustrate the role of
different perspectives in analyzing a complex cellular process.
The realm of biology ranges in scale more than a billionfold (Figure 1-20). Beyond that, it’s ecology and earth science

(c)

(d)

PHOTO
DNA base pairs

Nanometers

Small
molecules

Assemblies
Macromolecules

Atoms
Glucose
C_C bond

10-10 m
0.1 nm

10-8 m
10 nm

Multicellular organisms

Cells

Ribosome
Hemoglobin

10-9 m
1 nm

Meters

Millimeters

Micrometers

C. elegans

Bacterium

Mitochondrion

Red blood
cell

10-7 m
100 nm

10-5 m
10 µm

10-6 m
1 µm

▲ FIGURE 1-20 Biologists are interested in objects ranging
in size from small molecules to the tallest trees. A sampling
of biological objects aligned on a logarithmic scale. (a) The DNA
double helix has a diameter of about 2 nm. (b) Eight-cell-stage
human embryo three days after fertilization, about 200 m

Newborn human

Bumblebee

10-4 m
100 µm

10-3 m
1 mm

10-2 m
10 mm

10-1 m
100 mm

100 m
1m

across. (c) A wolf spider, about 15 mm across. (d) Emperor
penguins are about 1 m tall. [Part (a) Will and Deni McIntyre. Part (b)
Yorgas Nikas/Photo Researchers, Inc. Part (c) Gary Gaugler/Visuals
Unlimited, Inc. Part (d) Hugh S. Rose/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.]

20

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

at the “macro” end, chemistry and physics at the “micro” end.
The visible plants and animals that surround us are measured
in meters (100–102 m). By looking closely, we can see a biological world of millimeters (1 mm  103 m) and even tenths
of millimeters (104 m). Setting aside oddities like chicken
eggs, most cells are 1–100 micrometers (1 m  106 m) long
and thus clearly visible only when magnified. To see the structures within cells, we must go farther down the size scale to
10–100 nanometers (1 nm  109 m).

Cell Biology Reveals the Size, Shape,
and Location of Cell Components
Actual observation of cells awaited development of the first,
crude microscopes in the early 1600s. A compound microscope, the most useful type of light microscope, has two
lenses. The total magnifying power is the product of the
magnification by each lens. As better lenses were invented,
the magnifying power and the ability to distinguish closely
spaced objects, the resolution, increased greatly. Modern
compound microscopes magnify the view about a thousandfold, so that a bacterium 1 micrometer (1 m) long looks like
it’s a millimeter long. Objects about 0.2 m apart can be discerned in these instruments.
Microscopy is most powerful when particular components of the cell are stained or labeled specifically, enabling
them to be easily seen and located within the cell. A simple
example is staining with dyes that bind specifically to DNA
to visualize the chromosomes. Specific proteins can be detected by harnessing the binding specificity of antibodies,
the proteins whose normal task is to help defend animals
against infection and foreign substances. In general, each
type of antibody binds to one protein or large polysaccharide and no other (Chapter 3). Purified antibodies can be
chemically linked to a fluorescent molecule, which permits
their detection in a special fluorescence microscope (Chapter 5). If a cell or tissue is treated with a detergent that partially dissolves cell membranes, fluorescent antibodies can
drift in and bind to the specific protein they recognize.
When the sample is viewed in the microscope, the bound
fluorescent antibodies identify the location of the target protein (see Figure 1-15).
Better still is pinpointing proteins in living cells with intact membranes. One way of doing this is to introduce an
engineered gene that codes for a hybrid protein: part of the
hybrid protein is the cellular protein of interest; the other
part is a protein that fluoresces when struck by ultraviolet
light. A common fluorescent protein used for this purpose
is green fluorescent protein (GFP), a natural protein that
makes some jellyfish colorful and fluorescent. GFP “tagging” could reveal, for instance, that a particular protein
is first made on the endoplasmic reticulum and then is
moved by the cell into the lysosomes. In this case, first the
endoplasmic reticulum and later the lysosomes would glow
in the dark.

▲ FIGURE 1-21 During the later stages of mitosis,
microtubules (red) pull the replicated chromosomes (black)
toward the ends of a dividing cell. This plant cell is stained
with a DNA-binding dye (ethidium) to reveal chromosomes and
with fluorescent-tagged antibodies specific for tubulin to reveal
microtubules. At this stage in mitosis, the two copies of each
replicated chromosome (called chromatids) have separated and
are moving away from each other. [Courtesy of Andrew Bajer.]

Chromosomes are visible in the light microscope only
during mitosis, when they become highly condensed. The extraordinary behavior of chromosomes during mitosis first
was discovered using the improved compound microscopes
of the late 1800s. About halfway through mitosis, the replicated chromosomes begin to move apart. Microtubules, one
of the three types of cytoskeletal filaments, participate in this
movement of chromosomes during mitosis. Fluorescent tagging of tubulin, the protein subunit that polymerizes to form
microtubules, reveals structural details of cell division that
otherwise could not be seen and allows observation of chromosome movement (Figure 1-21).
Electron microscopes use a focused beam of electrons instead of a beam of light. In transmission electron microscopy,
specimens are cut into very thin sections and placed under a
high vacuum, precluding examination of living cells. The resolution of transmission electron microscopes, about 0.1 nm,
permits fine structural details to be distinguished, and their
powerful magnification would make a 1-m-long bacterial
cell look like a soccer ball. Most of the organelles in eukaryotic cells and the double-layered structure of the plasma
membrane were first observed with electron microscopes
(Chapter 5). With new specialized electron microscopy techniques, three-dimensional models of organelles and large
protein complexes can be constructed from multiple images.
But to obtain a more detailed look at the individual macromolecules within cells, we must turn to techniques within the
purview of biochemistry.

1

2

21

Io
ch n ex
ro ch
m an
at
og ge
ra
ph
y
Ge
ch l fi
ro ltra
m ti
at on
og
ra
ph
y
Af
ch fini
ro ty
m
at
og
ra
ph
y

Sa
fra lt
cti
on
at
io
n

Biochemists extract the contents of cells and separate the
constituents based on differences in their chemical or physical properties, a process called fractionation. Of particular
interest are proteins, the workhorses of many cellular
processes. A typical fractionation scheme involves use of
various separation techniques in a sequential fashion.
These separation techniques commonly are based on differences in the size of molecules or the electrical charge on
their surface (Chapter 3). To purify a particular protein of
interest, a purification scheme is designed so that each step
yields a preparation with fewer and fewer contaminating
proteins, until finally only the protein of interest remains
(Figure 1-22).
The initial purification of a protein of interest from a cell
extract often is a tedious, time-consuming task. Once a small
amount of purified protein is obtained, antibodies to it can
be produced by methods discussed in Chapter 6. For a biochemist, antibodies are near-perfect tools for isolating larger
amounts of a protein of interest for further analysis. In effect,
antibodies can “pluck out” the protein they specifically recognize and bind from a semipure sample containing numerous different proteins. An increasingly common alternative is
to engineer a gene that encodes a protein of interest with a
small attached protein “tag,” which can be used to pull out
the protein from whole cell extracts.
Purification of a protein is a necessary prelude to studies
on how it catalyzes a chemical reaction or carries out other
functions and how its activity is regulated. Some enzymes are
made of multiple protein chains (subunits) with one chain
catalyzing a chemical reaction and other chains regulating
when and where that reaction occurs. The molecular machines that perform many critical cell processes constitute
even larger assemblies of proteins. By separating the individual proteins composing such assemblies, their individual catalytic or other activities can be assessed. For example,
purification and study of the activity of the individual proteins composing the DNA replication machine provided
clues about how they work together to replicate DNA during
cell division (Chapter 4).
The folded, three-dimensional structure, or conformation, of a protein is vital to its function. To understand the relation between the function of a protein and its form, we
need to know both what it does and its detailed structure.
The most widely used method for determining the complex
structures of proteins, DNA, and RNA is x-ray crystallography. Computer-assisted analysis of the data often permits the
location of every atom in a large, complex molecule to be determined. The double-helix structure of DNA, which is key
to its role in heredity, was first proposed based on x-ray crystallographic studies. Throughout this book you will encounter numerous examples of protein structures as we zero
in on how proteins work.

Ho
m
og
en
at

Biochemistry Reveals the Molecular Structure
and Chemistry of Purified Cell Constituents

e

1.4 • Investigating Cells and Their Parts

3

4

5

▲ FIGURE 1-22 Biochemical purification of a protein from a
cell extract often requires several separation techniques. The
purification can be followed by gel electrophoresis of the starting
protein mixture and the fractions obtained from each purification
step. In this procedure, a sample is applied to wells in the top of
a gelatin-like slab and an electric field is applied. In the presence
of appropriate salt and detergent concentrations, the proteins
move through the fibers of the gel toward the anode, with larger
proteins moving more slowly through the gel than smaller ones
(see Figure 3-32). When the gel is stained, separated proteins are
visible as distinct bands whose intensities are roughly
proportional to the protein concentration. Shown here are
schematic depictions of gels for the starting mixture of proteins
(lane 1) and samples taken after each of several purification
steps. In the first step, salt fractionation, proteins that
precipitated with a certain amount of salt were re-dissolved;
electrophoresis of this sample (lane 2) shows that it contains
fewer proteins than the original mixture. The sample then was
subjected in succession to three types of column
chromatography that separate proteins by electrical charge, size,
or binding affinity for a particular small molecule (see Figure
3-34). The final preparation is quite pure, as can be seen from the
appearance of just one protein band in lane 5. [After J. Berg et al.,
2002, Biochemistry, W. H. Freeman and Company, p. 87.]

Genetics Reveals the Consequences
of Damaged Genes
Biochemical and crystallographic studies can tell us much
about an individual protein, but they cannot prove that it is
required for cell division or any other cell process. The importance of a protein is demonstrated most firmly if a mu-

22

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

tation that prevents its synthesis or makes it nonfunctional
adversely affects the process under study.
We define the genotype of an organism as its composition
of genes; the term also is commonly used in reference to different versions of a single gene or a small number of genes
of interest in an individual organism. A diploid organism
generally carries two versions (alleles) of each gene, one derived from each parent. There are important exceptions, such
as the genes on the X and Y chromosomes in males of some
species including our own. The phenotype is the visible outcome of a gene’s action, like blue eyes versus brown eyes or
the shapes of peas. In the early days of genetics, the location
and chemical identity of genes were unknown; all that could
be followed were the observable characteristics, the phenotypes. The concept that genes are like “beads” on a long
“string,” the chromosome, was proposed early in the 1900s
based on genetic work with the fruit fly Drosophila.
In the classical genetics approach, mutants are isolated
that lack the ability to do something a normal organism can
do. Often large genetic “screens” are done, looking for many
different mutant individuals (e.g., fruit flies, yeast cells) that
are unable to complete a certain process, such as cell division
or muscle formation. In experimental organisms or cultured
cells, mutations usually are produced by treatment with a
mutagen, a chemical or physical agent that promotes mutations in a largely random fashion. But how can we isolate
and maintain mutant organisms or cells that are defective in
some process, such as cell division, that is necessary for survival? One way is to look for temperature-sensitive mutants.
These mutants are able to grow at one temperature, the permissive temperature, but not at another, usually higher temperature, the nonpermissive temperature. Normal cells can
grow at either temperature. In most cases, a temperaturesensitive mutant produces an altered protein that works at
the permissive temperature but unfolds and is nonfunctional
at the nonpermissive temperature. Temperature-sensitive
screens are readily done with viruses, bacteria, yeast, roundworms, and fruit flies.
By analyzing the effects of numerous different temperaturesensitive mutations that altered cell division, geneticists discovered all the genes necessary for cell division without knowing
anything, initially, about which proteins they encode or how
these proteins participate in the process. The great power of genetics is to reveal the existence and relevance of proteins without prior knowledge of their biochemical identity or molecular
function. Eventually these “mutation-defined” genes were isolated and replicated (cloned) with recombinant DNA techniques discussed in Chapter 9. With the isolated genes in hand,
the encoded proteins could be produced in the test tube or in
engineered bacteria or cultured cells. Then the biochemists
could investigate whether the proteins associate with other proteins or DNA or catalyze particular chemical reactions during
cell division (Chapter 21).
The analysis of genome sequences from various organisms during the past decade has identified many previously
unknown DNA regions that are likely to encode proteins

(i.e., protein-coding genes). The general function of the protein encoded by a sequence-identified gene may be deduced
by analogy with known proteins of similar sequence. Rather
than randomly isolating mutations in novel genes, several
techniques are now available for inactivating specific genes
by engineering mutations into them (Chapter 9). The effects
of such deliberate gene-specific mutations provide information about the role of the encoded proteins in living organisms. This application of genetic techniques starts with a
gene/protein sequence and ends up with a mutant phenotype;
traditional genetics starts with a mutant phenotype and ends
up with a gene/protein sequence.

Genomics Reveals Differences in the Structure
and Expression of Entire Genomes
Biochemistry and genetics generally focus on one gene and its
encoded protein at a time. While powerful, these traditional
approaches do not give a comprehensive view of the structure and activity of an organism’s genome, its entire set of
genes. The field of genomics does just that, encompassing the
molecular characterization of whole genomes and the determination of global patterns of gene expression. The recent
completion of the genome sequences for more than 80
species of bacteria and several eukaryotes now permits comparisons of entire genomes from different species. The results
provide overwhelming evidence of the molecular unity of life
and the evolutionary processes that made us what we are (see
Section 1.5). Genomics-based methods for comparing thousands of pieces of DNA from different individuals all at the
same time are proving useful in tracing the history and migrations of plants and animals and in following the inheritance of diseases in human families.
New methods using DNA microarrays can simultaneously detect all the mRNAs present in a cell, thereby indicating which genes are being transcribed. Such global
patterns of gene expression clearly show that liver cells transcribe a quite different set of genes than do white blood cells
or skin cells. Changes in gene expression also can be monitored during a disease process, in response to drugs or other
external signals, and during development. For instance, the
recent identification of all the mRNAs present in cultured fibroblasts before, during, and after they divide has given us
an overall view of transcriptional changes that occur during
cell division (Figure 1-23). Cancer diagnosis is being transformed because previously indistinguishable cancer cells
have distinct gene expression patterns and prognoses (Chapter 23). Similar studies with different organisms and cell
types are revealing what is universal about the genes involved
in cell division and what is specific to particular organisms.
The entire complement of proteins in a cell, its proteome,
is controlled in part by changes in gene transcription. The
regulated synthesis, processing, localization, and degradation
of specific proteins also play roles in determining the proteome of a particular cell, and the association of certain proteins with one another is critical to the functional abilities

1.4 • Investigating Cells and Their Parts

▲ FIGURE 1-23 DNA microarray analysis gives a global
view of changes in transcription following addition of serum
to cultured human cells. Serum contains growth factors that
stimulate nondividing cells to begin growing and dividing. DNA
microarray analysis can detect the relative transcription of genes
in two different cell populations (see Figure 9-35). The microarray
consists of tiny spots of DNA attached to a microscope slide.
Each spot contains many copies of a DNA sequence from a
single human gene. One preparation of RNA, containing all the
different types of RNA being made in nongrowing cells cultured
without serum, is labeled with green fluorescent molecules.
Another RNA population from growing, serum-treated, cells is
labeled with red. The two are mixed and hybridized to the slide,
where they "zipper up" with their corresponding genes. Green
spots (e.g., spot 3) therefore indicate genes that are transcribed
in nondividing (serum-deprived) cells; red spots (e.g., spot 4)
indicate genes that are transcribed in dividing cells, and yellow
spots (e.g., spots 1 and 2) indicate genes that are transcribed
equally in dividing and nondividing cells. [From V. R. Iyer et al., 1999,

23

bodies require an enormous amount of communication and
division of labor. During the development of multicellular organisms, differentiation processes form hundreds of cell
types, each specialized for a particular task: transmission of
electrical signals by neurons, transport of oxygen by red
blood cells, destruction of infecting bacteria by macrophages, contraction by muscle cells, chemical processing by
liver cells.
Many of the differences among differentiated cells are
due to production of specific sets of proteins needed to carry
out the unique functions of each cell type. That is, only a
subset of an organism’s genes is transcribed at any given time
or in any given cell. Such differential gene expression at different times or in different cell types occurs in bacteria, fungi,
plants, animals, and even viruses. Differential gene expression is readily apparent in an early fly embryo in which all
the cells look alike until they are stained to detect the proteins encoded by particular genes (Figure 1-24). Transcription can change within one cell type in response to an
external signal or in accordance with a biological clock;
some genes, for instance, undergo a daily cycle between low
and high transcription rates.

Science 283:83.]

of cells. New techniques for monitoring the presence and interactions of numerous proteins simultaneously, called proteomics, are one way of assembling a comprehensive view
of the proteins and molecular machines important for cell
functioning. The field of proteomics will advance dramatically once high-throughput x-ray crystallography, currently
under development, permits researchers to rapidly determine
the structures of hundreds or thousands of proteins.

Developmental Biology Reveals Changes in
the Properties of Cells as They Specialize
Another approach to viewing cells comes from studying how
they change during development of a complex organism.
Bacteria, algae, and unicellular eukaryotes (protozoans,
yeasts) often, but by no means always, can work solo. The
concerted actions of the trillions of cells that compose our

▲ FIGURE 1-24 Differential gene expression can be
detected in early fly embryos before cells are
morphologically different. An early Drosophila embryo has
about 6000 cells covering its surface, most of which are
indistinguishable by simple light microscopy. If the embryo is
made permeable to antibodies with a detergent that partially
dissolves membranes, the antibodies can find and bind to the
proteins they recognize. In this embryo we see antibodies
tagged with a fluorescent label bound to proteins that are in the
nuclei; each small sphere corresponds to one nucleus. Three
different antibodies were used, each specific for a different
protein and each giving a distinct color (yellow, green, or blue) in
a fluorescence microscope. The red color is added to highlight
overlaps between the yellow and blue stains. The locations of the
different proteins show that the cells are in fact different at this
early stage, with particular genes turned on in specific stripes of
cells. These genes control the subdivision of the body into
repeating segments, like the black and yellow stripes of a hornet.
[Courtesy of Sean Carroll, University of Wisconsin.]

24

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

Producing different kinds of cells is not enough to make an
organism, any more than collecting all the parts of a truck in
one pile gives you a truck. The various cell types must be organized and assembled into all the tissues and organs. Even
more remarkable, these body parts must work almost immediately after their formation and continue working during the
growth process. For instance, the human heart begins to beat
when it is less than 3 mm long, when we are mere 23-day-old
embryos, and continues beating as it grows into a fist-size
muscle. From a few hundred cells to billions, and still ticking.
In the developing organism, cells grow and divide at
some times and not others, they assemble and communicate,
they prevent or repair errors in the developmental process,
and they coordinate each tissue with others. In the adult organism, cell division largely stops in most organs. If part of
an organ such as the liver is damaged or removed, cell division resumes until the organ is regenerated. The legend goes
that Zeus punished Prometheus for giving humans fire by
chaining him to a rock and having an eagle eat his liver. The
punishment was eternal because, as the Greeks evidently
knew, the liver regenerates.
Developmental studies involve watching where, when,
and how different kinds of cells form, discovering which signals trigger and coordinate developmental events, and understanding the differential gene action that underlies
differentiation (Chapters 15 and 22). During development
we can see cells change in their normal context of other cells.
Cell biology, biochemistry, cell biology, genetics, and genomics approaches are all employed in studying cells during
development.

 FIGURE 1-25 Each experimental organism used in cell
biology has advantages for certain types of studies. Viruses
and bacteria have small genomes amenable to genetic
dissection. Many insights into gene control initially came from
studies with these organisms. The yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae has the cellular organization of a eukaryote but is a
relatively simple single-celled organism that is easy to grow and
to manipulate genetically. In the nematode worm Caenorhabditis
elegans, which has a small number of cells arranged in a nearly
identical way in every worm, the formation of each individual cell
can be traced. The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, first used to
discover the properties of chromosomes, has been especially
valuable in identifying genes that control embryonic
development. Many of these genes are evolutionarily conserved
in humans. The zebrafish Danio rerio is used for rapid genetic
screens to identify genes that control development and
organogenesis. Of the experimental animal systems, mice (Mus
musculus) are evolutionarily the closest to humans and have
provided models for studying numerous human genetic and
infectious diseases. The mustard-family weed Arabidopsis
thaliana, sometimes described as the Drosophila of the plant
kingdom, has been used for genetic screens to identify genes
involved in nearly every aspect of plant life. Genome sequencing
is completed for many viruses and bacterial species, the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the roundworm C. elegans, the fruit
fly D. melanogaster, humans, and the plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
It is mostly completed for mice and in progress for zebrafish.
Other organisms, particularly frogs, sea urchins, chickens, and
slime molds, continue to be immensely valuable for cell biology
research. Increasingly, a wide variety of other species are used,
especially for studies of evolution of cells and mechanisms. [Part

Choosing the Right Experimental Organism
for the Job

(a) Visuals Unlimited, Inc. Part (b) Kari Lountmaa/Science Photo Library/
Photo Researchers, Inc. Part (c) Scimat/Photo Researchers, Inc. Part (d)
Photo Researchers, Inc. Part (e) Darwin Dale/Photo Researchers, Inc. Part
(f) Inge Spence/Visuals Unlimited, Inc. Part (g) J. M. Labat/Jancana/Visuals
Unlimited, Inc. Part (h) Darwin Dale/Photo Researchers, Inc.]

Our current understanding of the molecular functioning of
cells rests on studies with viruses, bacteria, yeast, protozoa,
slime molds, plants, frogs, sea urchins, worms, insects, fish,
chickens, mice, and humans. For various reasons, some organisms are more appropriate than others for answering particular questions. Because of the evolutionary conservation
of genes, proteins, organelles, cell types, and so forth, discoveries about biological structures and functions obtained
with one experimental organism often apply to others. Thus
researchers generally conduct studies with the organism that
is most suitable for rapidly and completely answering the
question being posed, knowing that the results obtained in
one organism are likely to be broadly applicable. Figure 1-25
summarizes the typical experimental uses of various organisms whose genomes have been sequenced completely or
nearly so. The availability of the genome sequences for these
organisms makes them particularly useful for genetics and
genomics studies.
Bacteria have several advantages as experimental organisms: They grow rapidly, possess elegant mechanisms for
controlling gene activity, and have powerful genetics. This

latter property relates to the small size of bacterial genomes,
the ease of obtaining mutants, the availability of techniques
for transferring genes into bacteria, an enormous wealth of
knowledge about bacterial gene control and protein functions, and the relative simplicity of mapping genes relative
to one another in the genome. Single-celled yeasts not only
have some of the same advantages as bacteria, but also possess the cell organization, marked by the presence of a nucleus and organelles, that is characteristic of all eukaryotes.
Studies of cells in specialized tissues make use of animal
and plant “models,” that is, experimental organisms with attributes typical of many others. Nerve cells and muscle cells,
for instance, traditionally were studied in mammals or in
creatures with especially large or accessible cells, such as the
giant neural cells of the squid and sea hare or the flight muscles of birds. More recently, muscle and nerve development
have been extensively studied in fruit flies (Drosophila
melanogaster), roundworms (Caenorhabditis elegans), and
zebrafish in which mutants can be readily isolated. Organisms with large-celled embryos that develop outside the

1.4 • Investigating Cells and Their Parts
(a)

25

(b)

Viruses

Bacteria

Proteins involved in DNA, RNA,
protein synthesis
Gene regulation
Cancer and control of cell
proliferation
Transport of proteins and
organelles inside cells
Infection and immunity
Possible gene therapy approaches

Proteins involved in DNA, RNA,
protein synthesis,
metabolism
Gene regulation
Targets for new antibiotics
Cell cycle
Signaling

(c)

(d)

Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

Roundworm (Caenorhabditis
elegans)

Control of cell cycle and cell division
Protein secretion and membrane
biogenesis
Function of the cytoskeleton
Cell differentiation
Aging
Gene regulation and chromosome
structure

(e)

Development of the body plan
Cell lineage
Formation and function of the
nervous system
Control of programmed cell death
Cell proliferation and cancer genes
Aging
Behavior
Gene regulation and chromosome
structure
(f)

Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)

Zebrafish

Development of the body plan
Generation of differentiated cell
lineages
Formation of the nervous system,
heart, and musculature
Programmed cell death
Genetic control of behavior
Cancer genes and control of cell
proliferation
Control of cell polarization
Effects of drugs, alcohol, pesticides

Development of vertebrate body
tissues
Formation and function of brain and
nervous system
Birth defects
Cancer

(g)

(h)

Mice, including cultured cells

Plant (Arabidopsis thaliana)

Development of body tissues
Function of mammalian immune
system
Formation and function of brain
and nervous system
Models of cancers and other
human diseases
Gene regulation and inheritance
Infectious disease

Development and patterning of
tissues
Genetics of cell biology
Agricultural applications
Physiology
Gene regulation
Immunity
Infectious disease

mother (e.g., frogs, sea urchins, fish, and chickens) are extremely useful for tracing the fates of cells as they form different tissues and for making extracts for biochemical studies. For

instance, a key protein in regulating mitosis was first
identified in studies with frog and sea urchin embryos
and subsequently purified from extracts (Chapter 21).

26

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

Using recombinant DNA techniques researchers can
engineer specific genes to contain mutations that inactivate
or increase production of their encoded proteins. Such
genes can be introduced into the embryos of worms, flies,
frogs, sea urchins, chickens, mice, a variety of plants, and
other organisms, permitting the effects of activating a gene
abnormally or inhibiting a normal gene function to be assessed. This approach is being used extensively to produce
mouse versions of human genetic diseases. New techniques
specifically for inactivating particular genes by injecting
short pieces of RNA are making quick tests of gene functions possible in many organisms.
Mice have one enormous advantage over other experimental organisms: they are the closest to humans of any animal for which powerful genetic approaches are feasible.
Engineered mouse genes carrying mutations similar to those
associated with a particular inherited disease in humans can
be introduced into mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. These
cells can be injected into an early embryo, which is then implanted into a pseudopregnant female mouse (Chapter 9). If
the mice that develop from the injected ES cells exhibit diseases similar to the human disease, then the link between the
disease and mutations in a particular gene or genes is supported. Once mouse models of a human disease are available, further studies on the molecular defects causing the
disease can be done and new treatments can be tested,
thereby minimizing human exposure to untested treatments.
A continuous unplanned genetic screen has been performed on human populations for millennia. Thousands of
inherited traits have been identified and, more recently,
mapped to locations on the chromosomes. Some of these
traits are inherited propensities to get a disease; others are
eye color or other minor characteristics. Genetic variations in
virtually every aspect of cell biology can be found in human
populations, allowing studies of normal and disease states
and of variant cells in culture.
Less-common experimental organisms offer possibilities
for exploring unique or exotic properties of cells and for
studying standard properties of cells that are exaggerated in
a useful fashion in a particular animal. For example, the ends
of chromosomes, the telomeres, are extremely dilute in most
cells. Human cells typically contain 92 telomeres (46 chromosomes  2 ends per chromosome). In contrast, some protozoa with unusual “fragmented” chromosomes contain
millions of telomeres per cell. Recent discoveries about
telomere structure have benefited greatly from using this natural variation for experimental advantage.

individual proteins, hundreds of macromolecular machines,
and most of our organelles, all as a result of our shared evolutionary history. New insights into molecular cell biology
arising from genomics are leading to a fuller appreciation of
the elegant molecular machines that arose during billions of
years of genetic tinkering and evolutionary selection for the
most efficient, precise designs. Despite all that we currently
know about cells, many new proteins, new macromolecular
assemblies, and new activities of known ones remain to be
discovered. Once a more complete description of cells is in
hand, we will be ready to fully investigate the rippling, flowing dynamics of living systems.

1.5 A Genome Perspective
on Evolution

As humans, we probably have a biased and somewhat exaggerated view of our status in the animal kingdom. Pride in
our swollen forebrain and its associated mental capabilities
may blind us to the remarkably sophisticated abilities of
other species: navigation by birds, the sonar system of bats,
homing by salmon, or the flight of a fly.

Comprehensive studies of genes and proteins from many organisms are giving us an extraordinary documentation of the
history of life. We share with other eukaryotes thousands of

Metabolic Proteins, the Genetic Code,
and Organelle Structures Are Nearly Universal
Even organisms that look incredibly different share many biochemical properties. For instance, the enzymes that catalyze
degradation of sugars and many other simple chemical reactions in cells have similar structures and mechanisms in most
living things. The genetic code whereby the nucleotide sequences of mRNA specifies the amino acid sequences of proteins can be read equally well by a bacterial cell and a human
cell. Because of the universal nature of the genetic code, bacterial “factories” can be designed to manufacture growth factors, insulin, clotting factors, and other human proteins with
therapeutic uses. The biochemical similarities among organisms also extend to the organelles found in eukaryotic cells.
The basic structures and functions of these subcellular components are largely conserved in all eukaryotes.
Computer analysis of DNA sequence data, now available
for numerous bacterial species and several eukaryotes, can
locate protein-coding genes within genomes. With the aid of
the genetic code, the amino acid sequences of proteins can be
deduced from the corresponding gene sequences. Although
simple conceptually, “finding” genes and deducing the amino
acid sequences of their encoded proteins is complicated in
practice because of the many noncoding regions in eukaryotic DNA (Chapter 9). Despite the difficulties and occasional
ambiguities in analyzing DNA sequences, comparisons of the
genomes from a wide range of organisms provide stunning,
compelling evidence for the conservation of the molecular
mechanisms that build and change organisms and for the
common evolutionary history of all species.

Many Genes Controlling Development
Are Remarkably Similar in Humans
and Other Animals

1.5 • A Genome Perspective on Evolution
(a)

Genes

Fly

Mammal

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

27

 FIGURE 1-26 Similar genes, conserved during evolution,
regulate many developmental processes in diverse animals.
Insects and mammals are estimated to have had a common
ancestor about half a billion years ago. They share genes that
control similar processes, such as growth of heart and eyes and
organization of the body plan, indicating conservation of function
from ancient times. (a) Hox genes are found in clusters on the
chromosomes of most or all animals. Hox genes encode related
proteins that control the activities of other genes. Hox genes
direct the development of different segments along the head-totail axis of many animals as indicated by corresponding colors.
Each gene is activated (transcriptually) in a specific region along
the head-to-toe axis and controls the growth of tissues there. For
example, in mice the Hox genes are responsible for the
distinctive shapes of vertebrae. Mutations affecting Hox genes in
flies cause body parts to form in the wrong locations, such as
legs in lieu of antennae on the head. These genes provide a
head-to-tail address and serve to direct formation of the right
structures in the right places. (b) Development of the large
compound eyes in fruit flies requires a gene called eyeless
(named for the mutant phenotype). (c) Flies with inactivated
eyeless genes lack eyes. (d) Normal human eyes require the
human gene, called Pax6, that corresponds to eyeless. (e) People
lacking adequate Pax6 function have the genetic disease aniridia,
a lack of irises in the eyes. Pax6 and eyeless encode highly
related proteins that regulate the activities of other genes, and
are descended from the same ancestral gene. [Parts (a) and (b)
Andreas Hefti, Interdepartmental Electron Microscopy (IEM) Biocenter,
University of Basel. Part (d) © Simon Fraser/Photo Researchers, Inc.]

This is not to say that all genes or proteins are evolutionarily conserved. Many striking examples exist of proteins
that, as far as we can tell, are utterly absent from certain lineages of animals. Plants, not surprisingly, exhibit many such
differences from animals after a billion-year separation in
their evolution. Yet certain DNA-binding proteins differ between peas and cows at only two amino acids out of 102!
Despite all the evidence for evolutionary unity at the cellular and physiological levels, everyone expected that genes
regulating animal development would differ greatly from
one phylum to the next. After all, insects and sea urchins
and mammals look so different. We must have many unique
proteins to create a brain like ours . . . or must we? The
fruits of research in developmental genetics during the past
two decades reveal that insects and mammals, which have
a common ancestor about half a billion years ago, possess
many similar development-regulating genes (Figure 1-26).
Indeed, a large number of these genes appear to be conserved in many and perhaps all animals. Remarkably, the
developmental functions of the proteins encoded by these
genes are also often preserved. For instance, certain proteins
involved in eye development in insects are related to protein regulators of eye development in mammals. Same for
development of the heart, gut, lungs, and capillaries and for
placement of body parts along the head-to-tail and backto-front body axes (Chapter 15).

Darwin’s Ideas About the Evolution of Whole
Animals Are Relevant to Genes
Darwin did not know that genes exist or how they change,
but we do: the DNA replication machine makes an error, or
a mutagen causes replacement of one nucleotide with another or breakage of a chromosome. Some changes in the
genome are innocuous, some mildly harmful, some deadly;
a very few are beneficial. Mutations can change the sequence
of a gene in a way that modifies the activity of the encoded
protein or alters when, where, and in what amounts the protein is produced in the body.
Gene-sequence changes that are harmful will be lost from
a population of organisms because the affected individuals
cannot survive as well as their relatives. This selection
process is exactly what Darwin described without knowing
the underlying mechanisms that cause organisms to vary.
Thus the selection of whole organisms for survival is really
a selection of genes, or more accurately sets of genes. A population of organisms often contains many variants that are

28

CHAPTER 1 • Life Begins with Cells

all roughly equally well-suited to the prevailing conditions.
When conditions change—a fire, a flood, loss of preferred
food supply, climate shift—variants that are better able to
adapt will survive, and those less suited to the new conditions will begin to die out. In this way, the genetic composition of a population of organisms can change over time.

Human Medicine Is Informed by Research
on Other Organisms
Mutations that occur in certain genes during the course of
our lives contribute to formation of various human cancers.
The normal, wild-type forms of such “cancer-causing” genes
generally encode proteins that help regulate cell proliferation
or death (Chapter 23). We also can inherit from our parents
mutant copies of genes that cause all manner of genetic diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, sickle cell
anemia, and Huntington’s disease. Happily we can also inherit genes that make us robustly resist disease. A remarkable
number of genes associated with cancer and other human

diseases are present in evolutionarily distant animals. For example, a recent study shows that more than three-quarters of
the known human disease genes are related to genes found in
the fruit fly Drosophila.
With the identification of human disease genes in other
organisms, experimental studies in experimentally tractable
organisms should lead to rapid progress in understanding
the normal functions of the disease-related genes and what
occurs when things go awry. Conversely, the disease states
themselves constitute a genetic analysis with well-studied
phenotypes. All the genes that can be altered to cause a certain disease may encode a group of functionally related
proteins. Thus clues about the normal cellular functions of
proteins come from human diseases and can be used to
guide initial research into mechanism. For instance, genes
initially identified because of their link to cancer in humans
can be studied in the context of normal development in various model organisms, providing further insight about the
functions of their protein products.

2
CHEMICAL
FOUNDATIONS

Polysaccharide chains on the surface of cellulose visualized by
atomic force microscopy. [Courtesy of M. Miles from A. A. Baker et
al., 2000, Biophys J. 79:1139–1145.]

T

he life of a cell depends on thousands of chemical interactions and reactions exquisitely coordinated with
one another in time and space and under the influence
of the cell’s genetic instructions and its environment. How
does a cell extract critical nutrients and information from its
environment? How does a cell convert the energy stored
in nutrients into work (movement, synthesis of critical components)? How does a cell transform nutrients into the fundamental structures required for its survival (cell wall,
nucleus, nucleic acids, proteins, cytoskeleton)? How does a
cell link itself to other cells to form a tissue? How do cells
communicate with one another so that the organism as
a whole can function? One of the goals of molecular cell biology is to answer such questions about the structure and
function of cells and organisms in terms of the properties of
individual molecules and ions.
Life first arose in a watery environment, and the properties of this ubiquitous substance have a profound influence
on the chemistry of life. Constituting 70–80 percent by
weight of most cells, water is the most abundant molecule
in biological systems. About 7 percent of the weight of living matter is composed of inorganic ions and small molecules
such as amino acids (the building blocks of proteins), nucleotides (the building blocks of DNA and RNA), lipids (the
building blocks of biomembranes), and sugars (the building
blocks of starches and cellulose), the remainder being the
macromolecules and macromolecular aggregates composed
of these building blocks.
Many biomolecules (e.g., sugars) readily dissolve in
water; these water-liking molecules are described as hydrophilic. Other biomolecules (e.g., fats like triacylglycerols)

shun water; these are said to be hydrophobic (water-fearing).
Still other biomolecules (e.g., phospholipids), referred to as
amphipathic, are a bit schizophrenic, containing both hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. These are used to build
the membranes that surround cells and their internal organelles (Chapter 5). The smooth functioning of cells, tissues, and organisms depends on all these molecules, from the
smallest to the largest. Indeed, the chemistry of the simple
proton (H) with a mass of 1 dalton (Da) can be as important to the survival of a human cell as that of each gigantic
DNA molecule with a mass as large as 8.6  1010 Da (single strand of DNA from human chromosome 1).
A relatively small number of principles and facts of chemistry are essential for understanding cellular processes at the
molecular level (Figure 2-1). In this chapter we review some
of these key principles and facts, beginning with the covalent bonds that connect atoms into a molecule and the noncovalent forces that stabilize groups of atoms within and
between molecules. We then consider the key properties of
the basic building blocks of cellular structures. After reviewing those aspects of chemical equilibrium that are most relevant to biological systems, we end the chapter with basic

OUTLINE
2.1

Atomic Bonds and Molecular Interactions

2.2

Chemical Building Blocks of Cells

2.3

Chemical Equilibrium

2.4

Biochemical Energetics
29

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

(a)

(b)

Protein A

O
H
O

−
+

CH3
N
H

CH3

CH3

CH3
CH3

O
C

CH3

+ +
_ _

C

H
O

30

O

Noncovalent
interactions

C

Protein B

Small molecule
subunits
(c)

Macromolecule

(d)
γ

"High-energy"
phosphoanhydride
bonds

β

kf
α

kr
keq =

kf
kr

▲ FIGURE 2-1 Chemistry of life: key concepts. (a) Covalent and
noncovalent interactions lie at the heart of all biomolecules, as
when two proteins with complementary shapes and chemical
properties come together to form a tightly bound complex. In
addition to the covalent bonds that hold the atoms of an amino acid
together and link amino acids together, noncovlent interactions help
define the structure of each individual protein and serve to help hold
the complementary structures together. (b) Small molecules serve
as building blocks for larger structures. For example, to generate
the information-carrying macromolecule DNA, the four small
nucleotide building blocks deoxyadenylate (A), deoxythymidylate (T),
deoxyguanylate (G), and deoxycytidylate (C) are covalently linked
together into long strings (polymers), which then dimerize into the
double helix. (c) Chemical reactions are reversible, and the distribution
of the chemicals between starting compounds (left) and the products

principles of biochemical energetics, including the central
role of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) in capturing and transferring energy in cellular metabolism.

2.1 Atomic Bonds and Molecular
Interactions
Strong and weak attractive forces between atoms are the glue
that holds them together in individual molecules and permits
interactions between different biological molecules. Strong
forces form a covalent bond when two atoms share one pair
of electrons (“single” bond) or multiple pairs of electrons
(“double” bond, “triple” bond, etc.). The weak attractive
forces of noncovalent interactions are equally important in

Adenosine
triphosphate
(ATP)

of the reactions (right ) depends on the rate constants of the
forward (kf, upper arrow) and reverse (kr, lower arrow) reactions.
In the reaction shown, the forward reaction rate constant is
faster than the reverse reaction, indicated by the thickness of the
arrows. The ratio of these Keq, provides an informative measure
of the relative amounts of products and reactants that will be
present at equilibrium. (d) In many cases, the source of energy
for chemical reactions in cells is the hydrolysis of the molecule
ATP. This energy is released when a high-energy phosphoanhydride
bond linking the α and β or the β and γ phosphates in the ATP
molecule (yellow) is broken by the addition of a water molecule.
Proteins can efficiently transfer the energy of ATP hydrolysis to
other chemicals, thus fueling other chemical reactions, or to
other biomolecules for physical work.

determining the properties and functions of biomolecules
such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids.
There are four major types of noncovalent interactions: ionic
interactions, hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions,
and the hydrophobic effect.

Each Atom Has a Defined Number
and Geometry of Covalent Bonds
Hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur
are the most abundant elements found in biological molecules. These atoms, which rarely exist as isolated entities,
readily form covalent bonds with other atoms, using electrons that reside in the outermost electron orbitals surrounding their nuclei. As a rule, each type of atom forms a

2.1 • Atomic Bonds and Molecular Interactions

characteristic number of covalent bonds with other atoms,
with a well-defined geometry determined by the atom’s size
and by both the distribution of electrons around the nucleus
and the number of electrons that it can share. In some cases
(e.g., carbon), the number of stable covalent bonds formed is
fixed; in other cases (e.g., sulfur), different numbers of stable covalent bonds are possible.
All the biological building blocks are organized around
the carbon atom, which normally forms four covalent bonds
with two to four other atoms. As illustrated by the methane
(CH4) molecule, when carbon is bonded to four other atoms,
the angle between any two bonds is 109.5º and the positions
of bonded atoms define the four points of a tetrahedron
(Figure 2-2a). This geometry helps define the structures of
many biomolecules. A carbon (or any other) atom bonded to
four dissimilar atoms or groups in a nonplanar configuration
is said to be asymmetric. The tetrahedral orientation of bonds
formed by an asymmetric carbon atom can be arranged in
three-dimensional space in two different ways, producing
molecules that are mirror images of each other, a property
called chirality. Such molecules are called optical isomers, or

(a) Methane
H

H
109.5°
H

C

H

C

H

H

H

H

(b) Formaldehyde
O

H
C

O

H

H

C

~120°
H

Chemical
structure

Ball-and-stick
model

Space-filling
model

▲ FIGURE 2-2 Geometry of bonds when carbon is covalently
linked to four or three other atoms. (a) If a carbon atom forms
four single bonds, as in methane (CH4), the bonded atoms (all H
in this case) are oriented in space in the form of a tetrahedron.
The letter representation on the left clearly indicates the atomic
composition of the molecule and the bonding pattern. The ball-andstick model in the center illustrates the geometric arrangement of
the atoms and bonds, but the diameters of the balls representing
the atoms and their nonbonding electrons are unrealistically small
compared with the bond lengths. The sizes of the electron clouds
in the space-filling model on the right more accurately represent
the structure in three dimensions. (b) A carbon atom also can be
bonded to three, rather than four, other atoms, as in formaldehyde
(CH2O). In this case, the carbon bonding electrons participate in
two single bonds and one double bond, which all lie in the same
plane. Unlike atoms connected by a single bond, which usually can
rotate freely about the bond axis, those connected by a double
bond cannot.

TABLE 2-1

Atom
and Outer
Electrons

31

Bonding Properties of Atoms Most
Abundant in Biomolecules
Usual Number
of Covalent Bonds

Bond Geometry
H

H

1

O

2

O

S

2, 4, or 6

S

N

3 or 4

N

P

5

P

C

4

C

stereoisomers. Many molecules in cells contain at least one
asymmetric carbon atom, often called a chiral carbon atom.
The different stereoisomers of a molecule usually have completely different biological activities because the arrangement
of atoms within their structures differs, yielding their unique
abilities to interact and chemically react with other molecules.
Carbon can also bond to three other atoms in which all
atoms are in a common plane. In this case, the carbon atom
forms two typical single bonds with two atoms and a double bond (two shared electron pairs) with the third atom
(Figure 2-2b). In the absence of other constraints, atoms
joined by a single bond generally can rotate freely about the
bond axis, while those connected by a double bond cannot.
The rigid planarity imposed by double bonds has enormous
significance for the shapes and flexibility of large biological
molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids.
The number of covalent bonds formed by other common
atoms is shown in Table 2-1. A hydrogen atom forms only
one bond. An atom of oxygen usually forms only two covalent bonds, but has two additional pairs of electrons that can
participate in noncovalent interactions. Sulfur forms two covalent bonds in hydrogen sulfide (H2S), but also can accommodate six covalent bonds, as in sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and
its sulfate derivatives. Nitrogen and phosphorus each have
five electrons to share. In ammonia (NH3), the nitrogen atom
forms three covalent bonds; the pair of electrons around the
atom not involved in a covalent bond can take part in noncovalent interactions. In the ammonium ion (NH4), nitrogen forms four covalent bonds, which have a tetrahedral
geometry. Phosphorus commonly forms five covalent bonds,
as in phosphoric acid (H3PO4) and its phosphate derivatives,
which form the backbone of nucleic acids. Phosphate groups
attached to proteins play a key role in regulating the activity of many proteins (Chapter 3), and the central molecule
in cellular energetics, ATP, contains three phosphate groups
(see Section 2.4).

32

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

Electrons Are Shared Unequally
in Polar Covalent Bonds

δ−

In many molecules, the bonded atoms exert different attractions for the electrons of the covalent bond, resulting in unequal sharing of the electrons. The extent of an atom’s ability
to attract an electron is called its electronegativity. A bond
between atoms with identical or similar electronegativities
is said to be nonpolar. In a nonpolar bond, the bonding electrons are essentially shared equally between the two atoms,
as is the case for most COC and COH bonds. However, if
two atoms differ in their electronegativities, the bond between them is said to be polar.
One end of a polar bond has a partial negative charge
(), and the other end has a partial positive charge (). In
an OOH bond, for example, the greater electronegativity of
the oxygen atom relative to hydrogen results in the electrons
spending more time around the oxygen atom than the hydrogen. Thus the OOH bond possesses an electric dipole, a positive charge separated from an equal but opposite negative
charge. We can think of the oxygen atom of the OOH bond
as having, on average, a charge of 25 percent of an electron,
with the H atom having an equivalent positive charge. Because of its two OOH bonds, water molecules (H2O) are
dipoles that form electrostatic, noncovalent interactions with
one another and with other molecules (Figure 2-3). These
interactions play a critical role in almost every biochemical
interaction and are thus fundamental to cell biology.
The polarity of the OUP double bond in H3PO4 results
in a “resonance hybrid,” a structure between the two forms
shown below in which nonbonding electrons are shown as
pairs of dots:

H

O

H

H

O

O

P
O

O

H

H

O



P

O

O

−

δ−

Dipole
moment
δ+

H

104.5°

H

δ+

+

▲ FIGURE 2-3 The dipole nature of a water molecule. The
symbol  represents a partial charge (a weaker charge than the
one on an electron or a proton). Because of the difference in
the electronegativities of H and O, each of the polar HOO bonds
in water has a dipole moment. The sizes and directions of the
dipole moments of each of the bonds determine the net dipole
moment of the molecule.

Covalent Bonds Are Much Stronger and More
Stable Than Noncovalent Interactions
Covalent bonds are very stable because the energies required
to break them are much greater than the thermal energy
available at room temperature (25 ºC) or body temperature
(37 ºC). For example, the thermal energy at 25 ºC is approximately 0.6 kilocalorie per mole (kcal/mol), whereas the
energy required to break the carbon-carbon single bond
(COC) in ethane is about 140 times larger (Figure 2-4). Consequently at room temperature (25 ºC), fewer than 1 in 1012
ethane molecules is broken into a pair of ·CH3 radicals, each
containing an unpaired, nonbonding electron.
Covalent single bonds in biological molecules have energies similar to that of the COC bond in ethane. Because
more electrons are shared between atoms in double bonds,
they require more energy to break than single bonds. For instance, it takes 84 kcal/mol to break a single COO bond, but
170 kcal/mol to break a CUO double bond. The most common double bonds in biological molecules are CUO, CUN,
CUC, and PUO.
The energy required to break noncovalent interactions
is only 1–5 kcal/mol, much less than the bond energies of
covalent bonds (see Figure 2-4). Indeed, noncovalent interactions are weak enough that they are constantly being

H



In the resonance hybrid on the right, one of the electrons
from the PUO double bond has accumulated around the O
atom, giving it a negative charge and leaving the P atom with
a positive charge. These charges are important in noncovalent interactions.

Noncovalent interactions

▲

FIGURE 2-4 Relative energies of
covalent bonds and noncovalent
interactions. Bond energies are determined
as the energy required to break a particular
type of linkage. Covalent bonds are one to
two powers of 10 stronger than noncovalent
interactions. The latter are somewhat greater
than the thermal energy of the environment
at normal room temperature (25 ˚C). Many
biological processes are coupled to the
energy released during hydrolysis of a
phosphoanhydride bond in ATP.

O

Covalent bonds

Electrostatic
van der
Waals

Hydrogen
bonds

Thermal
energy

0.24 × 100

Hydrolysis of ATP
phosphoanhydride bond

0.24 × 101

0.24 × 102

C−C

C=C

0.24 × 103
kcal/mol

2.1 • Atomic Bonds and Molecular Interactions

33

formed and broken at room temperature. Although these
interactions are weak and have a transient existence at
physiological temperatures (25–37 ºC), multiple noncovalent interactions can act together to produce highly stable
and specific associations between different parts of a large
molecule or between different macromolecules. We first review the four main types of noncovalent interactions and
then consider their role in the binding of biomolecules to
one another and to other molecules.

The relative strength of the interaction between two ions,
A and C, depends on the concentration of other ions in a
solution. The higher the concentration of other ions (e.g., Na
and Cl), the more opportunities A and C have to interact
ionically with these other ions, and thus the lower the energy
required to break the interaction between A and C. As a
result, increasing the concentrations of salts such as NaCl in
a solution of biological molecules can weaken and even disrupt the ionic interactions holding the biomolecules together.

Ionic Interactions Are Attractions
Between Oppositely Charged Ions

Hydrogen Bonds Determine Water Solubility
of Uncharged Molecules

Ionic interactions result from the attraction of a positively
charged ion—a cation—for a negatively charged ion—an
anion. In sodium chloride (NaCl), for example, the bonding
electron contributed by the sodium atom is completely transferred to the chlorine atom. Unlike covalent bonds, ionic
interactions do not have fixed or specific geometric
orientations, because the electrostatic field around an ion—
its attraction for an opposite charge—is uniform in all
directions.
In aqueous solutions, simple ions of biological significance, such as Na, K, Ca2, Mg2, and Cl, do not exist
as free, isolated entities. Instead, each is hydrated, surrounded by a stable shell of water molecules, which are held
in place by ionic interactions between the central ion and the
oppositely charged end of the water dipole (Figure 2-5).
Most ionic compounds dissolve readily in water because the
energy of hydration, the energy released when ions tightly
bind water molecules, is greater than the lattice energy that
stabilizes the crystal structure. Parts or all of the aqueous hydration shell must be removed from ions when they directly
interact with proteins. For example, water of hydration is
lost when ions pass through protein pores in the cell membrane during nerve conduction (Chapter 7).

A hydrogen bond is the interaction of a partially positively
charged hydrogen atom in a molecular dipole (e.g., water)
with unpaired electrons from another atom, either in the
same (intramolecular) or in a different (intermolecular) molecule. Normally, a hydrogen atom forms a covalent bond
with only one other atom. However, a hydrogen atom covalently bonded to an electronegative donor atom D may form
an additional weak association, the hydrogen bond, with an
acceptor atom A, which must have a nonbonding pair of
electrons available for the interaction:

Mg2

H
O
H

▲ FIGURE 2-5 Electrostatic interaction between water and
a magnesium ion (Mg2). Water molecules are held in place
by electrostatic interactions between the two positive charges
on the ion and the partial negative charge on the oxygen of each
water molecule. In aqueous solutions, all ions are surrounded by
a similar hydration shell.

D





H  A



D



H



A



Hydrogen bond

The length of the covalent DOH bond is a bit longer than it
would be if there were no hydrogen bond, because the acceptor “pulls” the hydrogen away from the donor. An important feature of all hydrogen bonds is directionality. In the
strongest hydrogen bonds, the donor atom, the hydrogen
atom, and the acceptor atom all lie in a straight line. Nonlinear hydrogen bonds are weaker than linear ones; still, multiple nonlinear hydrogen bonds help to stabilize the
three-dimensional structures of many proteins.
Hydrogen bonds are both longer and weaker than covalent bonds between the same atoms. In water, for example,
the distance between the nuclei of the hydrogen and oxygen
atoms of adjacent, hydrogen-bonded molecules is about 0.27
nm, about twice the length of the covalent OOH bonds
within a single water molecule (Figure 2-6a). The strength
of a hydrogen bond between water molecules (approximately 5 kcal/mol) is much weaker than a covalent OOH
bond (roughly 110 kcal/mol), although it is greater than that
for many other hydrogen bonds in biological molecules (1–2
kcal/mol). The extensive hydrogen bonding between water
molecules accounts for many of the key properties of this
compound, including its unusually high melting and boiling
points and its ability to interact with many other molecules.
The solubility of uncharged substances in an aqueous environment depends largely on their ability to form hydrogen
bonds with water. For instance, the hydroxyl group (OOH)
in methanol (CH3OH) and the amino group (ONH2) in
methylamine (CH3NH2) can form several hydrogen bonds
with water, enabling these molecules to dissolve in water to

34

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations
(b)

(a)

(c)

O

H

H
H

O

H

H
H
H

O

H

H

H

O

O

Water-water

H
H

O

C

N

H

O

H
N

H

CH3

Methanol-water

▲ FIGURE 2-6 Hydrogen bonding of water with itself
and with other compounds. Each pair of nonbonding outer
electrons in an oxygen or nitrogen atom can accept a hydrogen
atom in a hydrogen bond. The hydroxyl and the amino groups can
also form hydrogen bonds with water. (a) In liquid water, each
water molecule apparently forms transient hydrogen bonds with

high concentrations (Figure 2-6b). In general, molecules with
polar bonds that easily form hydrogen bonds with water can
readily dissolve in water; that is, they are hydrophilic. Many
biological molecules contain, in addition to hydroxyl and
amino groups, peptide and ester groups, which form hydrogen bonds with water (Figure 2-6c). X-ray crystallography
combined with computational analysis permits an accurate
depiction of the distribution of electrons in covalent bonds
and the outermost unbonded electrons of atoms, as illustrated in Figure 2-7. These unbonded electrons can form hydrogen bonds with donor hydrogens.

CH3

H

H

O

H

O

H

H

O
H

O

O

O

H

H

H

H

H

O

H

C

Peptide group−water

Methylamine-water

O

H

O

Ester group−water

several others, creating a dynamic network of hydrogen-bonded
molecules. (b) Water also can form hydrogen bonds with
methanol and methylamine, accounting for the high solubility of
these compounds. (c) The peptide group and ester group, which
are present in many biomolecules, commonly participate in
hydrogen bonds with water or polar groups in other molecules.

H

N

C

O

Van der Waals Interactions Are
Caused by Transient Dipoles
When any two atoms approach each other closely, they create a weak, nonspecific attractive force called a van der
Waals interaction. These nonspecific interactions result from
the momentary random fluctuations in the distribution of the
electrons of any atom, which give rise to a transient unequal
distribution of electrons. If two noncovalently bonded atoms
are close enough together, electrons of one atom will perturb
the electrons of the other. This perturbation generates a transient dipole in the second atom, and the two dipoles will attract each other weakly (Figure 2-8). Similarly, a polar
covalent bond in one molecule will attract an oppositely oriented dipole in another.
Van der Waals interactions, involving either transiently
induced or permanent electric dipoles, occur in all types of
molecules, both polar and nonpolar. In particular, van der
Waals interactions are responsible for the cohesion between
molecules of nonpolar liquids and solids, such as heptane,
CH3O(CH2)5OCH3, that cannot form hydrogen bonds or
ionic interactions with other molecules. The strength of van
der Waals interactions decreases rapidly with increasing distance; thus these noncovalent bonds can form only when

Cα
▲ FIGURE 2-7 Distribution of bonding and outer nonbonding electrons in the peptide group. Shown here is one
amino acid within a protein called crambin. The black lines
diagrammatically represent the covalent bonds between atoms.
The red (negative) and blue (positive) lines represent contours of
charge. The greater the number of contour lines, the higher the
charge. The high density of red contour lines between atoms
represents the covalent bonds (shared electron pairs). The two
sets of red contour lines emanating from the oxygen (O) and not
falling on a covalent bond (black line) represent the two pairs
of nonbonded electrons on the oxygen that are available to
participate in hydrogen bonding. The high density of blue contour
lines near the hydrogen (H) bonded to nitrogen (N) represents a
partial positive charge, indicating that this H can act as a donor in
hydrogen bonding. [From C. Jelsch et al., 2000, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci.
USA 97:3171. Courtesy of M. M. Teeter.]

2.1 • Atomic Bonds and Molecular Interactions

δ

δ δ

Covalent
radius
(0.062 nm)

δ

van der Waals
radius
(0.14 nm)

▲ FIGURE 2-8 Two oxygen molecules in van der Waals
contact. In this space-filling model, red indicates negative charge
and blue indicates positive charge. Transient dipoles in the
electron clouds of all atoms give rise to weak attractive forces,
called van der Waals interactions. Each type of atom has a
characteristic van der Waals radius at which van der Waals
interactions with other atoms are optimal. Because atoms repel
one another if they are close enough together for their outer
electrons to overlap, the van der Waals radius is a measure of
the size of the electron cloud surrounding an atom. The covalent
radius indicated here is for the double bond of OUO; the singlebond covalent radius of oxygen is slightly longer.

atoms are quite close to one another. However, if atoms get
too close together, they become repelled by the negative
charges of their electrons. When the van der Waals attraction
between two atoms exactly balances the repulsion between
their two electron clouds, the atoms are said to be in van der
Waals contact. The strength of the van der Waals interaction
is about 1 kcal/mol, weaker than typical hydrogen bonds and
only slightly higher than the average thermal energy of molecules at 25 ºC. Thus multiple van der Waals interactions, a
van der Waals interaction in conjunction with other noncovalent interactions, or both are required to significantly influence intermolecular contacts.

35

Nonpolar molecules or nonpolar portions of molecules
tend to aggregate in water owing to a phenomenon called the
hydrophobic effect. Because water molecules cannot form
hydrogen bonds with nonpolar substances, they tend to form
“cages” of relatively rigid hydrogen-bonded pentagons and
hexagons around nonpolar molecules (Figure 2-9, left). This
state is energetically unfavorable because it decreases the
randomness (entropy) of the population of water molecules.
(The role of entropy in chemical systems is discussed in a
later section.) If nonpolar molecules in an aqueous environment aggregate with their hydrophobic surfaces facing each
other, there is a reduction in the hydrophobic surface area
exposed to water (Figure 2-9, right). As a consequence, less
water is needed to form the cages surrounding the nonpolar
molecules, and entropy increases (an energetically more favorable state) relative to the unaggregated state. In a sense,
then, water squeezes the nonpolar molecules into spontaneously forming aggregates. Rather than constituting an attractive force such as in hydrogen bonds, the hydrophobic
effect results from an avoidance of an unstable state (extensive water cages around individual nonpolar molecules).
Nonpolar molecules can also associate, albeit weakly,
through van der Waals interactions. The net result of the hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions is a very powerful tendency for hydrophobic molecules to interact with one
another, not with water. Simply put, like dissolves like. Polar
molecules dissolve in polar solvents such as water; nonpolar
molecules dissolve in nonpolar solvents such as hexane.

Nonpolar
substance

Highly ordered
water molecules

Waters released into bulk
solution

Hydrophobic
aggregation

The Hydrophobic Effect Causes Nonpolar
Molecules to Adhere to One Another
Because nonpolar molecules do not contain charged groups,
possess a dipole moment, or become hydrated, they are insoluble or almost insoluble in water; that is, they are hydrophobic. The covalent bonds between two carbon atoms
and between carbon and hydrogen atoms are the most common nonpolar bonds in biological systems. Hydrocarbons—
molecules made up only of carbon and hydrogen—are
virtually insoluble in water. Large triacylglycerols (or triglycerides), which comprise animal fats and vegetable oils, also
are insoluble in water. As we see later, the major portion of
these molecules consists of long hydrocarbon chains. After
being shaken in water, triacylglycerols form a separate phase.
A familiar example is the separation of oil from the waterbased vinegar in an oil-and-vinegar salad dressing.

Unaggregated state:
Water population highly ordered
Lower entropy; energetically
unfavorable

Aggregated state:
Water population less ordered
Higher entropy; energetically
more favorable

▲ FIGURE 2-9 Schematic depiction of the hydrophobic
effect. Cages of water molecules that form around nonpolar
molecules in solution are more ordered than water molecules in
the surrounding bulk liquid. Aggregation of nonpolar molecules
reduces the number of water molecules involved in highly
ordered cages, resulting in a higher-entropy, more energetically
favorable state (right ) compared with the unaggregated state (left).

2.2 • Chemical Building Blocks of Cells

In an aqueous environment, nonpolar molecules or nonpolar portions of larger molecules are driven together by
the hydrophobic effect, thereby reducing the extent of their
direct contact with water molecules (see Figure 2-9).

Chemical Building Blocks of Cells

2.2

■

37

The three most abundant biological macromolecules—
proteins, nucleic acids, and polysaccharides—are all polymers composed of multiple covalently linked identical or
nearly identical small molecules, or monomers (Figure 2-11).
The covalent bonds between monomer molecules usually are
formed by dehydration reactions in which a water molecule
is lost:

Molecular complementarity is the lock-and-key fit between molecules whose shapes, charges, and other physical properties are complementary. Multiple noncovalent interactions can form between complementary molecules,
causing them to bind tightly (see Figure 2-10), but not between molecules that are not complementary.

■

HOX1OOH  HOX2OOH n HOX1OX2OOH  H2O

The high degree of binding specificity that results from
molecular complementarity is one of the features that distinguish biochemistry from typical solution chemistry.

■

POLYMERS

MONOMERS

H2N

H

O

C

C

Proteins are linear polymers containing ten to several
thousand amino acids linked by peptide bonds. Nucleic acids

H

OH

H

H

H

O

H

H

O

H

H

O

H

H

O

N

C

C

N

C

C

N

C

C

N

C

C

R1

R

R2

R3

H

N



O
C

C

OH

R5

OH

R4

H2O

Polypeptide

Amino acid

B4
O
P
O

O

B2

B3

O
3

5

O

Sugar 1



O

O

3

HO

3

HO

P

O

5

HO

3

O

P



O

5

3

O



O

O

5

4

4

O

HO

1

HO

OH

OH

Monosaccharide

OH

HO
1

HO

O

H2O



1

OH

O

HO

OH

4

OH

OH

O

OH

OH
OH O

5



4

OH O

O


O

O
Nucleic acid

Nucleotide

P

P



HO

B1

Base

O

Polysaccharide

1

HO

OH

OH

H2O

Polar group
Hydrophilic
head group

Phosphate
Glycerol
C

O C

O
Hydrophobic
fatty acyl
tails
Phospholipid bilayer

Glycerophospholipid

▲ FIGURE 2-11 Covalent and noncovalent linkage of
monomers to form biopolymers and membranes. Overview of
the cell’s chemical building blocks and the macrostructures formed
from them. (Top) The three major types of biological
macromolecules are each assembled by the polymerization of
multiple small molecules (monomers) of a particular type:
proteins from amino acids (Chapter 3), nucleic acids from

nucleotides (Chapter 4), and polysaccharides from
monosaccharides (sugars). The monomers are covalently linked
into polymers by coupled reactions whose net result is
condensation through the dehydration reaction shown. (Bottom)
In contrast, phospholipid monomers noncovalently assemble into
bilayer structure, which forms the basis of all cellular membranes
(Chapter 5).

38

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

are linear polymers containing hundreds to millions of nucleotides linked by phosphodiester bonds. Polysaccharides
are linear or branched polymers of monosaccharides (sugars)
such as glucose linked by glycosidic bonds.
A similar approach is used to form various large structures in which the repeating components associate by noncovalent interactions. For instance, the fibers of the
cytoskeleton are composed of many repeating protein molecules. And, as we discuss below, phospholipids assemble
noncovalently to form a two-layered (bilayer) structure that
is the basis of all cellular membranes (see Figure 2-11). Thus
a repeating theme in biology is the construction of large molecules and structures by the covalent or noncovalent association of many similar or identical smaller molecules.

Amino Acids Differing Only in Their
Side Chains Compose Proteins
The monomeric building blocks of proteins are 20 amino
acids, all of which have a characteristic structure consisting
of a central  carbon atom (C) bonded to four different
chemical groups: an amino (NH2) group, a carboxyl
(COOH) group, a hydrogen (H) atom, and one variable
group, called a side chain, or R group. Because the  carbon
in all amino acids except glycine is asymmetric, these molecules can exist in two mirror-image forms called by convention the D (dextro) and the L (levo) isomers (Figure 2-12).
The two isomers cannot be interconverted (one made identical with the other) without breaking and then re-forming
a chemical bond in one of them. With rare exceptions, only
the L forms of amino acids are found in proteins. We discuss
the properties of the covalent peptide bond that links amino
acids into long chains in Chapter 3.
To understand the structures and functions of proteins,
you must be familiar with some of the distinctive properties
of the amino acids, which are determined by their side
chains. The side chains of different amino acids vary in size,
shape, charge, hydrophobicity, and reactivity. Amino acids
can be classified into several broad categories based primarily on their solubility in water, which is influenced by the
polarity of their side chains (Figure 2-13). Amino acids with
polar side chains are hydrophilic and tend to be on the surfaces of proteins; by interacting with water, they make proteins soluble in aqueous solutions and can form noncovalent
interactions with other water-soluble molecules. In contrast,
amino acids with nonpolar side chains are hydrophobic; they
avoid water and often aggregate to help form the waterinsoluble cores of many proteins. The polarity of amino acid
side chains thus is responsible for shaping the final threedimensional structure of proteins.
A subset of the hydrophilic amino acids are charged (ionized) at the pH (≈7) typical of physiological conditions (see
Section 2.3). Arginine and lysine are positively charged; aspartic acid and glutamic acid are negatively charged (their
charged forms are called aspartate and glutamate). These
four amino acids are the prime contributors to the overall
charge of a protein. A fifth amino acid, histidine, has an im-

idazole side chain, which can shift from being positively
charged to uncharged with small changes in the acidity of
its environment:
CH2
C

N


H

H

C
C

H

H

N

C
C

C

CH2

H

N

H

pH 5.8

H

N

pH 7.8

The activities of many proteins are modulated by shifts in
environmental acidity through protonation of histidine side
chains. Asparagine and glutamine are uncharged but have
polar side chains containing amide groups with extensive
hydrogen-bonding capacities. Similarly, serine and threonine
are uncharged but have polar hydroxyl groups, which also
participate in hydrogen bonds with other polar molecules.
The side chains of hydrophobic amino acids are insoluble
or only slightly soluble in water. The noncyclic side chains
of alanine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, and methionine consist
entirely of hydrocarbons, except for the one sulfur atom in
methionine, and all are nonpolar. Phenylalanine, tyrosine,
and tryptophan have large bulky aromatic side chains.
In later chapters, we will see in detail how hydrophobic
residues line the surface of proteins that are embedded within
biomembranes.
Lastly, cysteine, glycine, and proline exhibit special roles
in proteins because of the unique properties of their side
chains. The side chain of cysteine contains a reactive
sulfhydryl group (OSH), which can oxidize to form a covalent disulfide bond (OSOSO) to a second cysteine:

H

N

H

C

CH2

C

O

H

N

H

C

O

C

CH2

SH  HS

S

S

N

H

CH2C

H

C

O

N

H

C

H

C

O

CH2

Regions within a protein chain or in separate chains
sometimes are cross-linked through disulfide bonds. Disulfide
bonds are commonly found in extracellular proteins, where
they help stabilize the folded structure. The smallest amino
acid, glycine, has a single hydrogen atom as its R group. Its
small size allows it to fit into tight spaces. Unlike the other
common amino acids, the side chain of proline bends around
to form a ring by covalently bonding to the nitrogen atom
(amino group) attached to the C. As a result, proline is very
rigid and creates a fixed kink in a protein chain, limiting how
a protein can fold in the region of proline residues.

2.2 • Chemical Building Blocks of Cells

▲

▲ FIGURE 2-12 Common structure of amino acids. The 

COO−

carbon atom (C) of each amino acid is bonded to four chemical
groups. The side chain, or R group, is unique to each type of
amino acid (see Figure 2-13). Because the C in all amino acids,
except glycine, is asymmetric, these molecules have two mirrorimage forms, designated L and D. Although the chemical
properties of such optical isomers are identical, their biological
activities are distinct. Only L amino acids are found in proteins.

COO−

NH3+

Cα

H

39

NH3+

Cα

H

R
D isomer

R
L isomer

HYDROPHOBIC AMINO ACIDS
COO
H N
3

C

COO
H N
3

H

C

CH3

COO

H

H N
3

C

H

H

C

CH3

CH
H3C

COO

CH3

H N
3

CH2
H3C

CH3

C

COO
H N
3

H

C

CH2

CH2

CH

CH2

CH3

H

COO
H N
3

C

COO
H N
3

H

C

CH2

Valine
(Val or V)

Isoleucine
(Ile or I)

Methionine
(Met or M)

Acidic amino acids

H N
3

C

COO
H N
3

H

C

H N
3

COO
H N
3

H

C

CH2

CH2

C

NH

CH2

CH2
C
H

N
H

NH2

C

C

H N
3

Histidine
(His or H)

C

H

COO
H

3N

C

H

H

C

OH

CH2
OH

CH3

Serine
(Ser or S)

Threonine
(Thr or T)

COO

H

H N
3

CH2

Arginine
(Arg or R)

Tryptophan
(Trp or W)

COO

COO
H N
3



COO

H 2N

C

H

COO
H

3N

SPECIAL AMINO ACIDS
COO
H

3N

C
CH2

H

COO
H N
3

C
H

H2C

SH
Cysteine
(Cys or C)

H

COO
H
C
H N
CH2
2

Glycine
(Gly or G)

CH2

Proline
(Pro or P)

C

H

CH2

CH2

C

CH2
O

C
H 2N

Glutamate
(Glu or E)

CH
NH

Polar amino acids with uncharged R groups

CH2

NH2
Lysine
(Lys or K)

H

Aspartate
(Asp or D)

CH

NH

CH2

Tyrosine
(Tyr or Y)

COO

CH2

NH3

Phenylalanine
(Phe or F)



CH2

CH2

C

H

OH

CH2

H

CH2

C

C

COO

Basic amino acids
COO

3N

S

Leucine
(Leu or L)

HYDROPHILIC AMINO ACIDS

H

H

CH2

CH3
Alanine
(Ala or A)

COO

Asparagine
(Asn or N)

O

Glutamine
(Gln or Q)

▲ FIGURE 2-13 The 20 common amino acids used to
build proteins. The side chain (R group; red) determines the
characteristic properties of each amino acid and is the basis
for grouping amino acids into three main categories: hydrophobic,
hydrophilic, and special. Shown are the ionized forms that exist at
the pH (≈7) of the cytosol. In parentheses are the three-letter and
one-letter abbreviations for each amino acid.

40

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

Some amino acids are more abundant in proteins than
other amino acids. Cysteine, tryptophan, and methionine are
rare amino acids; together they constitute approximately 5
percent of the amino acids in a protein. Four amino acids—
leucine, serine, lysine, and glutamic acid—are the most abundant amino acids, totaling 32 percent of all the amino acid
residues in a typical protein. However, the amino acid composition of proteins can vary widely from these values.

PURINES
NH2
C
N1
HC 2

NH2
6

HC 2

3

5C
4C

N

N

7

8 CH
9

N

5
4

H

O

O
Phosphate

H

H
2

3

OH

Ribose
1

H

H

H
3

2

OH

1

H

O

CH2
4

OH
H

OH
5

P

O

HOCH2

O
O

OH

Ribose
Adenosine 5-monophosphate
(AMP)

4

HN1

7

8 CH

C2

9

C

N

H2N

6

3

N

5C
4

7

8 CH
9

C

N

N

H

H

Adenine (A)

Guanine (G)

O

(b)

C
N1

3

C

N

5C

PYRIMIDINES

Two types of chemically similar nucleic acids, DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid), are the principal
information-carrying molecules of the cell. The monomers
from which DNA and RNA are built, called nucleotides, all
have a common structure: a phosphate group linked by a
phosphoester bond to a pentose (a five-carbon sugar molecule)
that in turn is linked to a nitrogen- and carbon-containing ring
structure commonly referred to as a “base” (Figure 2-14a). In
RNA, the pentose is ribose; in DNA, it is deoxyribose (Figure
2-14b). The bases adenine, guanine, and cytosine are found
in both DNA and RNA; thymine is found only in DNA, and
uracil is found only in RNA.
Adenine and guanine are purines, which contain a pair of
fused rings; cytosine, thymine, and uracil are pyrimidines,
which contain a single ring (Figure 2-15). The bases are often
abbreviated A, G, C, T, and U, respectively; these same singleletter abbreviations are also commonly used to denote the
entire nucleotides in nucleic acid polymers. In nucleotides,

Adenine

6

N

Five Different Nucleotides Are
Used to Build Nucleic Acids

(a)

O

5

O

HOCH2
4

H

OH
H

H
OH

C
HN3
C
O

2

4

1

2

H

2-Deoxyribose

▲ FIGURE 2-14 Common structure of nucleotides.
(a) Adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP), a nucleotide present
in RNA. By convention, the carbon atoms of the pentose sugar
in nucleotides are numbered with primes. In natural nucleotides,
the 1' carbon is joined by a  linkage to the base (in this case
adenine); both the base (blue) and the phosphate on the 5'
hydroxyl (red) extend above the plane of the furanose ring.
(b) Ribose and deoxyribose, the pentoses in RNA and DNA,
respectively.

NH2

C
6

CH

N

4

HN3

5CH

C

2

C
5C
6

1

N

O

CH3

N3
C

CH
O

H

H
Uracil (U)

2

4

1

5CH
6

CH

N
H

Thymine (T)

Cytosine (C)

▲ FIGURE 2-15 Chemical structures of the principal bases
in nucleic acids. In nucleic acids and nucleotides, nitrogen 9 of
purines and nitrogen 1 of pyrimidines (red) are bonded to the
1 carbon of ribose or deoxyribose. U is only in RNA, and T is
only in DNA. Both RNA and DNA contain A, G, and C.

the 1 carbon atom of the sugar (ribose or deoxyribose) is
attached to the nitrogen at position 9 of a purine (N9) or at
position 1 of a pyrimidine (N1). The acidic character of nucleotides is due to the phosphate group, which under normal
intracellular conditions releases a hydrogen ion (H), leaving the phosphate negatively charged (see Figure 2-14a).
Most nucleic acids in cells are associated with proteins,
which form ionic interactions with the negatively charged
phosphates.
Cells and extracellular fluids in organisms contain small
concentrations of nucleosides, combinations of a base and a
sugar without a phosphate. Nucleotides are nucleosides that
have one, two, or three phosphate groups esterified at the 5
hydroxyl. Nucleoside monophosphates have a single esterified phosphate (see Figure 2-14a); diphosphates contain a
pyrophosphate group:
O

1

H
3

O



O

O
O

P


O

O

P


O

Pyrophosphate

and triphosphates have a third phosphate. Table 2-2 lists the
names of the nucleosides and nucleotides in nucleic acids and
the various forms of nucleoside phosphates. The nucleoside
triphosphates are used in the synthesis of nucleic acids,
which we cover in Chapter 4. Among their other functions in
the cell, GTP participates in intracellular signaling and acts
as an energy reservoir, particularly in protein synthesis, and
ATP, discussed later in this chapter, is the most widely used
biological energy carrier.

2.2 • Chemical Building Blocks of Cells

TABLE 2-2

41

Terminology of Nucleosides and Nucleotides
Bases
Purines

Pyrimidines

Adenine (A)

Guanine (G)

Cytosine (C)

Uracil (U)
Thymine [T]

in RNA

Adenosine

Guanosine

Cytidine

Uridine

in DNA

Deoxyadenosine

Deoxyguanosine

Deoxycytidine

Deoxythymidine

in RNA

Adenylate

Guanylate

Cytidylate

Uridylate

in DNA

Deoxyadenylate

Deoxyguanylate

Deoxycytidylate

Deoxythymidylate

Nucleoside monophosphates

AMP

GMP

CMP

UMP

Nucleoside diphosphates

ADP

GDP

CDP

UDP

Nucleoside triphosphates

ATP

GTP

CTP

UTP

Deoxynucleoside mono-,
di-, and triphosphates

dAMP, etc.

Nucleosides

Nucleotides

{
{

Monosaccharides Joined by Glycosidic Bonds
Form Linear and Branched Polysaccharides
The building blocks of the polysaccharides are the simple
sugars, or monosaccharides. Monosaccharides are carbohydrates, which are literally covalently bonded combinations of
carbon and water in a one-to-one ratio (CH2O)n, where n
equals 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7. Hexoses (n = 6) and pentoses (n = 5)
are the most common monosaccharides. All monosaccharides contain hydroxyl (OOH) groups and either an aldehyde or a keto group:
O
C

C

O
H

Aldehyde
D-Glucose

C

C

(a)

H

6
5

HCOH O
4

H

OH

H

H
H

3

2

H

1

HO

C

H

C

OH
H

D-Glucofuranose

6

C

2
3
4
5

H

OH

4

H

CH2OH
5
O
H
OH H

HO
H

OH

H
1

OH
3

OH

2

OH

D-Glucopyranose

6

(rare)

(common)

CH2OH

D-Glucose

(b)

(C6H12O6) is the principal external source of
energy for most cells in higher organisms and can exist in
three different forms: a linear structure and two different
hemiacetal ring structures (Figure 2-16a). If the aldehyde
group on carbon 1 reacts with the hydroxyl group on carbon
5, the resulting hemiacetal, D-glucopyranose, contains a sixmember ring. In the  anomer of D-glucopyranose, the hydroxyl group attached to carbon 1 points “downward” from
the ring as shown in Figure 2-16a; in the  anomer, this hydroxyl points “upward.” In aqueous solution the  and 
anomers readily interconvert spontaneously; at equilibrium
there is about one-third  anomer and two-thirds , with
very little of the open-chain form. Because enzymes can distinguish between the  and  anomers of D-glucose, these
forms have distinct biological roles. Condensation of the hydroxyl group on carbon 4 of the linear glucose with its alde-

C

OH

H

O

1

H

C

C

Keto

O

1

C

CH2OH

HO
HO
H
H

C
C
C
C

O

1

C
2
3
4
5

H
H
OH
OH

6

CH2OH

D-Mannose

H
HO
HO
H

C
C
C
C

2
3
4
5

OH
H
H
OH

6

CH2OH

D-Galactose

▲ FIGURE 2-16 Chemical structures of hexoses. All hexoses
have the same chemical formula (C6H12O6) and contain an aldehyde
or keto group. (a) The ring forms of D-glucose are generated from
the linear molecule by reaction of the aldehyde at carbon 1 with
the hydroxyl on carbon 5 or carbon 4. The three forms are readily
interconvertible, although the pyranose form (right) predominates
in biological systems. (b) In D-mannose and D-galactose, the
configuration of the H (green) and OH (blue) bound to one carbon
atom differs from that in glucose. These sugars, like glucose, exist
primarily as pyranoses.

42

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

polymers. Glycosidic bonds are usually formed between a covalently modified sugar and the growing polymer chain.
Such modifications include a phosphate (e.g., glucose 6phosphate) or a nucleotide (e.g., UDP-galactose):

hyde group results in the formation of D-glucofuranose, a
hemiacetal containing a five-member ring. Although all three
forms of D-glucose exist in biological systems, the pyranose
form is by far the most abundant.
Many biologically important sugars are six-carbon sugars that are structurally related to D-glucose (Figure 2-16b).
Mannose is identical with glucose except that the orientation
of the groups bonded to carbon 2 is reversed. Similarly,
galactose, another hexose, differs from glucose only in the
orientation of the groups attached to carbon 4. Interconversion of glucose and mannose or galactose requires the breaking and making of covalent bonds; such reactions are carried
out by enzymes called epimerases.
The pyranose ring in Figure 2-16a is depicted as planar. In
fact, because of the tetrahedral geometry around carbon
atoms, the most stable conformation of a pyranose ring has a
nonplanar, chairlike shape. In this conformation, each bond
from a ring carbon to a nonring atom (e.g., H or O) is either
nearly perpendicular to the ring, referred to as axial (a), or
nearly in the plane of the ring, referred to as equatorial (e):
H

a
e

e

O
a

HO

e
a

HO

e

H

H

a

1

H

OH

H
-D-Glucopyranose

Pyranoses

The enzymes that make the glycosidic bonds linking
monosaccharides into polysaccharides are specific for the 
or  anomer of one sugar and a particular hydroxyl group on
the other. In principle, any two sugar molecules can be linked
in a variety of ways because each monosaccharide has multiple hydroxyl groups that can participate in the formation of
glycosidic bonds. Furthermore, any one monosaccharide has
the potential of being linked to more than two other monosaccharides, thus generating a branch point and nonlinear

HO

1

OH
 
H

H

H
4

OH

1

H

H

OH

1

H

OH
H

OH

H
O

O

O
O

P


Uridine



O

OH

O

P
O

UDP-galactose

CH2OH
O
H
OH H

OH

H2O

CH2OH
O
H
OH H

H
1

H

H

HO

HO

CH2OH
O
H
OH H



O

4

OH
H

H

▲

▲ FIGURE 2-17 Formation

CH2OH
O
H
OH H

6

CH2OH
O
H

The epimerase enzymes that interconvert different monosaccharides often do so using the nucleotide sugars rather than
the unsubstituted sugars.
Disaccharides, formed from two monosaccharides, are
the simplest polysaccharides. The disaccharide lactose, composed of galactose and glucose, is the major sugar in milk;
the disaccharide sucrose, composed of glucose and fructose,
is a principal product of plant photosynthesis and is refined
into common table sugar (Figure 2-17).
Larger polysaccharides, containing dozens to hundreds
of monosaccharide units, can function as reservoirs for glucose, as structural components, or as adhesives that help
hold cells together in tissues. The most common storage carbohydrate in animal cells is glycogen, a very long, highly
branched polymer of glucose. As much as 10 percent by
weight of the liver can be glycogen. The primary storage carbohydrate in plant cells, starch, also is a glucose polymer. It
occurs in an unbranched form (amylose) and lightly
branched form (amylopectin). Both glycogen and starch are
composed of the  anomer of glucose. In contrast, cellulose,
the major constituent of plant cell walls, is an unbranched
polymer of the  anomer of glucose. Human digestive enzymes can hydrolyze the  glycosidic bonds in starch, but not
the  glycosidic bonds in cellulose. Many species of plants,
bacteria, and molds produce cellulose-degrading enzymes.

O
H
HO

3

OH

OPO32
O
H

Glucose 6-phosphate

2

H

H

HO

6

CH2OH

4

5

a

e

6

CH2

of the disaccharides lactose
and sucrose. In any glycosidic
linkage, the anomeric carbon
of one sugar molecule (in
either the  or  conformation)
is linked to a hydroxyl oxygen
on another sugar molecule. The
linkages are named accordingly:
thus lactose contains a (1 n 4)
bond, and sucrose contains an
(1 n 2) bond.

H

H

OH

Galactose

H

CH2OH
O
H
OH H

H
1  
OH

HO
H

OH

Glucose

H

OH

CH2OH
O
2

H

H2O

H

HO
CH2OH

OH

OH

Lactose

H

HO

H

OH

Glucose

H

Fructose

CH2OH
O
H
OH H

HO
H

H
1 

CH2OH
O
2

O

H

Sucrose

HO
CH2OH

OH

OH

H

H

2.2 • Chemical Building Blocks of Cells

Cows and termites can break down cellulose because they
harbor cellulose-degrading bacteria in their gut.
Many complex polysaccharides contain modified sugars
that are covalently linked to various small groups, particularly amino, sulfate, and acetyl groups. Such modifications
are abundant in glycosaminoglycans, major polysaccharide
components of the extracellular matrix that we describe in
Chapter 6.

“essential” polyunsaturated fatty acids, linoleic acid (C18:2)
and linolenic acid (C18:3), cannot be synthesized by mammals
and must be supplied in their diet. Mammals can synthesize
other common fatty acids. Two stereoisomeric configurations,
cis and trans, are possible around each carbon-carbon double
bond:
H2C

CH2
C

TABLE 2-3

H

H2C

C

H

Fatty Acids Are Precursors
for Many Cellular Lipids

C

C

CH2

H

H
Cis

Before considering phospholipids and their role in the structure of biomembranes, we briefly review the properties of
fatty acids. Like glucose, fatty acids are an important energy
source for many cells and are stored in the form of triacylglycerols within adipose tissue (Chapter 8). Fatty acids also
are precursors for phospholipids and many other lipids with
a variety of functions (Chapter 18).
Fatty acids consist of a hydrocarbon chain attached to a
carboxyl group (OCOOH). They differ in length, although
the predominant fatty acids in cells have an even number of
carbon atoms, usually 14, 16, 18, or 20. The major fatty
acids in phospholipids are listed in Table 2-3. Fatty acids
often are designated by the abbreviation Cx:y, where x is the
number of carbons in the chain and y is the number of double bonds. Fatty acids containing 12 or more carbon atoms
are nearly insoluble in aqueous solutions because of their
long hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains.
Fatty acids with no carbon-carbon double bonds are said
to be saturated; those with at least one double bond are unsaturated. Unsaturated fatty acids with more than one carboncarbon double bond are referred to as polyunsaturated. Two

Trans

A cis double bond introduces a rigid kink in the otherwise
flexible straight chain of a fatty acid (Figure 2-18). In general, the fatty acids in biological systems contain only cis
double bonds.
Fatty acids can be covalently attached to another molecule
by a type of dehydration reaction called esterification, in which
the OH from the carboxyl group of the fatty acid and a H from
a hydroxyl group on the other molecule are lost. In the combined molecule formed by this reaction, the portion derived
from the fatty acid is called an acyl group, or fatty acyl group.
This is illustrated by triacylglycerols, which contain three acyl
groups esterfied to glycerol:
O

H3C

(CH2)n C

O

CH2

O

CH

O

CH2

O

H3C

(CH2)n C
O

H3C

(CH2)n C

Triacylglycerol

Fatty Acids That Predominate in Phospholipids

Common Name of
Acid (Ionized Form
in Parentheses)

Abbreviation

43

Chemical Formula

SATURATED FATTY ACIDS
Myristic (myristate)

C14:0

CH3(CH2)12COOH

Palmitic (palmitate)

C16:0

CH3(CH2)14COOH

Stearic (stearate)

C18:0

CH3(CH2)16COOH

Oleic (oleate)

C18:1

CH3(CH2)7CHUCH(CH2)7COOH

Linoleic (linoleate)

C18:2

CH3(CH2)4CHUCHCH2CHUCH(CH2)7COOH

Arachidonic (arachidonate)

C20:4

CH3(CH2)4(CHUCHCH2)3CHUCH(CH2)3COOH

UNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS

44

H3C

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

O
C
O

Palmitate
(ionized form of palmitic acid)

H3C

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

O
C
O

Oleate
(ionized form of oleic acid)

▲ FIGURE 2-18 The effect of a double bond on the shape
of fatty acids. Shown are space-filling models and chemical
structures of the ionized form of palmitic acid, a saturated fatty
acid with 16 C atoms, and oleic acid, an unsaturated one with

If the acyl groups are long enough, these molecules are
insoluble in water even though they contain three polar ester
bonds. Fatty acyl groups also form the hydrophobic portion
of phospholipids, which we discuss next.

Phospholipids Associate Noncovalently to Form
the Basic Bilayer Structure of Biomembranes
Biomembranes are large flexible sheets that serve as the
boundaries of cells and their intracellular organelles and
form the outer surfaces of some viruses. Membranes literally define what is a cell (the outer membrane and the contents within the membrane) and what is not (the extracellular
space outside the membrane). Unlike the proteins, nucleic
acids, and polysaccharides, membranes are assembled by the
noncovalent association of their component building blocks.

18 C atoms. In saturated fatty acids, the hydrocarbon chain is
often linear; the cis double bond in oleate creates a rigid kink in
the hydrocarbon chain. [After L. Stryer, 1994, Biochemistry, 4th ed.,
W. H. Freeman and Company, p. 265.]

The primary building blocks of all biomembranes are phospholipids, whose physical properties are responsible for the
formation of the sheetlike structure of membranes.
Phospholipids consist of two long-chain, nonpolar fatty
acyl groups linked (usually by an ester bond) to small, highly
polar groups, including a phosphate. In phosphoglycerides,
the major class of phospholipids, fatty acyl side chains are esterified to two of the three hydroxyl groups in glycerol. The
third hydroxyl group is esterified to phosphate. The simplest
phospholipid, phosphatidic acid, contains only these components. In most phospholipids found in membranes, the phosphate group is esterified to a hydroxyl group on another
hydrophilic compound. In phosphatidylcholine, for example,
choline is attached to the phosphate (Figure 2-19). The negative charge on the phosphate as well as the charged or polar
groups esterified to it can interact strongly with water. The

Fatty acid chains

O

Hydrophobic tail

Hydrophilic head

C

CH2

O O
C

CH

O

H2C
Glycerol

PHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE

▲ FIGURE 2-19 Phosphatidylcholine, a typical phosphoglyceride. All phosphoglycerides are amphipathic, having a
hydrophobic tail (yellow) and a hydrophilic head (blue) in which
glycerol is linked via a phosphate group to an alcohol. Either of

Phosphate

O
P
O

CH3

H2
C
O
O−

N+
C
H2

CH3
CH3

Choline

or both the fatty acyl side chains in a phosphoglyceride may be
saturated or unsaturated. In phosphatidic acid (red), the simplest
phospholipid, the phosphate is not linked to an alcohol.

2.2 • Chemical Building Blocks of Cells

phosphate and its associated esterified group, the “head”
group of a phospholipid, is hydrophilic, whereas the fatty
acyl chains, the “tails,” are hydrophobic.
The amphipathic nature of phospholipids, which governs
their interactions, is critical to the structure of biomembranes. When a suspension of phospholipids is mechanically
dispersed in aqueous solution, the phospholipids aggregate
into one of three forms: spherical micelles and liposomes and
sheetlike, two-molecule-thick phospholipid bilayers (Figure
2-20). The type of structure formed by a pure phospholipid
or a mixture of phospholipids depends on several factors, including the length of the fatty acyl chains, their degree of
saturation, and temperature. In all three structures, the hydrophobic effect causes the fatty acyl chains to aggregate and
exclude water molecules from the “core.” Micelles are rarely
formed from natural phosphoglycerides, whose fatty acyl
chains generally are too bulky to fit into the interior of a
micelle. If one of the two fatty acyl chains is removed by
hydrolysis, forming a lysophospholipid, the predominant
type of aggregate that forms is the micelle. Common detergents and soaps form micelles in aqueous solution that behave as tiny ball bearings, thus giving soap solutions their
slippery feel and lubricating properties.
Under suitable conditions, phospholipids of the composition present in cells spontaneously form symmetric phospholipid bilayers. Each phospholipid layer in this lamellar

45

structure is called a leaflet. The fatty acyl chains in each
leaflet minimize contact with water by aligning themselves
tightly together in the center of the bilayer, forming a
hydrophobic core that is about 3 nm thick (see Figure 2-20).
The close packing of these nonpolar tails is stabilized by the
hydrophobic effect and van der Waals interactions between
them. Ionic and hydrogen bonds stabilize the interaction of
the phospholipid polar head groups with one another and
with water.
A phospholipid bilayer can be of almost unlimited size—
from micrometers (m) to millimeters (mm) in length or
width—and can contain tens of millions of phospholipid
molecules. Because of their hydrophobic core, bilayers are
virtually impermeable to salts, sugars, and most other small
hydrophilic molecules. The phospholipid bilayer is the basic
structural unit of nearly all biological membranes; thus, although they contain other molecules (e.g., cholesterol, glycolipids, proteins), biomembranes have a hydrophobic core
that separates two aqueous solutions and acts as a permeability barrier. The structural organization of biomembranes
and the general properties of membrane proteins are described in Chapter 5.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 2.2
Chemical Building Blocks of Cells
Three major biopolymers are present in cells: proteins,
composed of amino acids linked by peptide bonds; nucleic
acids, composed of nucleotides linked by phosphodiester
bonds; and polysaccharides, composed of monosaccharides
(sugars) linked by glycosidic bonds (see Figure 2-11).

■

Many molecules in cells contain at least one asymmetric carbon atom, which is bonded to four dissimilar atoms.
Such molecules can exist as optical isomers (mirror images), designated D and L, which have different biological
activities. In biological systems, nearly all sugars are D isomers, while nearly all amino acids are L isomers.
■

Micelle
Liposome

Differences in the size, shape, charge, hydrophobicity,
and reactivity of the side chains of amino acids determine
the chemical and structural properties of proteins (see Figure 2-13).

■

Amino acids with hydrophobic side chains tend to cluster in the interior of proteins away from the surrounding
aqueous environment; those with hydrophilic side chains
usually are toward the surface.

■

Phospholipid bilayer

▲ FIGURE 2-20 Cross-sectional views of the three structures formed by phospholipids in aqueous solutions. The
white spheres depict the hydrophilic heads of the phospholipids,
and the squiggly black lines (in the yellow regions) represent
the hydrophobic tails. Shown are a spherical micelle with a
hydrophobic interior composed entirely of fatty acyl chains; a
spherical liposome, which has two phospholipid layers and an
aqueous center; and a two-molecule-thick sheet of phospholipids,
or bilayer, the basic structural unit of biomembranes.

The bases in the nucleotides composing DNA and RNA
are heterocyclic rings attached to a pentose sugar. They
form two groups: the purines—adenine (A) and guanine
(G)—and the pyrimidines—cytosine (C), thymine (T), and
uracil (U) (see Figure 2-15). A, G, T, and C are in DNA,
and A, G, U, and C are in RNA.

■

■ Glucose and other hexoses can exist in three forms: an
open-chain linear structure, a six-member (pyranose) ring, and

46

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

a five-member (furanose) ring (see Figure 2-16). In biological
systems, the pyranose form of D-glucose predominates.

next section, we examine energy changes during reactions
and their relationship to equilibria.

Glycosidic bonds are formed between either the  or 
anomer of one sugar and a hydroxyl group on another
sugar, leading to formation of disaccharides and other polysaccharides (see Figure 2-17).

Equilibrium Constants Reflect
the Extent of a Chemical Reaction

■

The long hydrocarbon chain of a fatty acid may contain
no carbon-carbon double bond (saturated) or one or more
double bonds (unsaturated), which bends the chain.

■

Phospholipids are amphipathic molecules with a hydrophobic tail (often two fatty acyl chains) and a hydrophilic
head (see Figure 2-19).
■

In aqueous solution, the hydrophobic effect and van der
Waals interactions organize and stabilize phospholipids
into one of three structures: a micelle, liposome, or sheetlike bilayer (see Figure 2-20).

■

In a phospholipid bilayer, which constitutes the basic
structure of all biomembranes, fatty acyl chains in each
leaflet are oriented toward one another, forming a hydrophobic core, and the polar head groups line both surfaces and directly interact with the aqueous solution.

The equilibrium constant Keq depends on the nature of the
reactants and products, the temperature, and the pressure
(particularly in reactions involving gases). Under standard
physical conditions (25 ºC and 1 atm pressure, for biological systems), the Keq is always the same for a given reaction,
whether or not a catalyst is present.
For the general reaction
aA  bB  cC 

zZ  yY  xX 

where capital letters represent particular molecules or atoms
and lowercase letters represent the number of each in the reaction formula, the equilibrium constant is given by
x

■

Chemical Equilibrium

We now shift our discussion to chemical reactions in which
bonds, primarily covalent bonds in reactant chemicals, are
broken and new bonds are formed to generate reaction products. At any one time several hundred different kinds of
chemical reactions are occurring simultaneously in every cell,
and many chemicals can, in principle, undergo multiple
chemical reactions. Both the extent to which reactions can
proceed and the rate at which they take place determine the
chemical composition of cells.
When reactants first mix together—before any products
have been formed—their rate of reaction is determined in
part by their initial concentrations. As the reaction products
accumulate, the concentration of each reactant decreases and
so does the reaction rate. Meanwhile, some of the product
molecules begin to participate in the reverse reaction, which
re-forms the reactants (microscopic reversibility). This reverse reaction is slow at first but speeds up as the concentration of product increases. Eventually, the rates of the forward
and reverse reactions become equal, so that the concentrations of reactants and products stop changing. The system
is then said to be in chemical equilibrium.
At equilibrium the ratio of products to reactants, called
the equilibrium constant, is a fixed value that is independent of the rate at which the reaction occurs. The rate of a
chemical reaction can be increased by a catalyst, which
brings reactants together and accelerates their interactions,
but is not permanently changed during a reaction. In this section, we discuss several aspects of chemical equilibria; in the

y

z

[X] [Y] [Z]
a
c
[A] [B]b [C]

Keq

(2-2)

where brackets denote the concentrations of the molecules.
The rate of the forward reaction (left to right in Equation
2-1) is
Rateforward

2.3

(2-1)

kf[A]a[B]b[C]c

where kf is the rate constant for the forward reaction. Similarly, the rate of the reverse reaction (right to left in Equation
2-1) is
Ratereverse

kr[X]x[Y]y[Z]z

where kr is the rate constant for the reverse reaction. At
equilibrium the forward and reverse rates are equal, so
Rateforward/Ratereverse 1. By rearranging these equations,
we can express the equilibrium constant as the ratio of the
rate constants
Keq

kf
kr

(2-3)

Chemical Reactions in Cells Are at Steady State
Under appropriate conditions and given sufficient time, individual biochemical reactions carried out in a test tube eventually will reach equilibrium. Within cells, however, many
reactions are linked in pathways in which a product of one
reaction serves as a reactant in another or is pumped out of
the cell. In this more complex situation, when the rate of formation of a substance is equal to the rate of its consumption,
the concentration of the substance remains constant, and the
system of linked reactions for producing and consuming that
substance is said to be in a steady state (Figure 2-21). One
consequence of such linked reactions is that they prevent the
accumulation of excess intermediates, protecting cells from
the harmful effects of intermediates that have the potential of
being toxic at high concentrations.

2.3 • Chemical Equilibrium
(a) Test tube equilibrium concentrations
BBB
BBB
BBB

AAA

(b) Intracellular steady-state concentrations
BBB
BBB

AA

CC
CC

▲ FIGURE 2-21 Comparison of reactions at equilibrium and
steady state. (a) In the test tube, a biochemical reaction (A n B)
eventually will reach equilibrium in which the rates of the forward
and reverse reactions are equal (as indicated by the reaction
arrows of equal length). (b) In metabolic pathways within cells,
the product B commonly would be consumed, in this example by
conversion to C. A pathway of linked reactions is at steady state
when the rate of formation of the intermediates (e.g., B) equals
their rate of consumption. As indicated by the unequal length of
the arrows, the individual reversible reactions constituting a
metabolic pathway do not reach equilibrium. Moreover, the
concentrations of the intermediates at steady state differ from
what they would be at equilibrium.

Dissociation Constants for Binding Reactions
Reflect the Affinity of Interacting Molecules

[P][D]
[PD]

1 molecule of DNA and 10 molecules of the DNA-binding
protein P. In this case, given a Kd of 1010 M, 99 percent of
the time this specific DNA sequence will have a molecule of
protein bound to it, and 1 percent of the time it will not, even
though the cell contains only 10 molecules of the protein!
Clearly, P and D bind very tightly (have a high affinity), as reflected by the low value of the dissociation constant for their
binding reaction.
The large size of biological macromolecules, such as proteins, can result in the availability of multiple surfaces for
complementary intermolecular interactions. As a consequence, many macromolecules have the capacity to bind
multiple other molecules simultaneously. In some cases,
these binding reactions are independent, with their own distinct Kd values that are constant. In other cases, binding of
a molecule at one site on a macromolecule can change the
three-dimensional shape of a distant site, thus altering the
binding interactions at that distant site. This is an important
mechanism by which one molecule can alter (regulate) the
activity of a second molecule (e.g., a protein) by changing its
capacity to interact with a third molecule. We examine this
regulatory mechanism in more detail in Chapter 3.

Biological Fluids Have Characteristic pH Values

The concept of chemical equilibrium also applies to the binding of one molecule to another. Many important cellular
processes depend on such binding “reactions,” which involve
the making and breaking of various noncovalent interactions
rather than covalent bonds, as discussed above. A common
example is the binding of a ligand (e.g., the hormone insulin
or adrenaline) to its receptor on the surface of a cell, triggering a biological response. Another example is the binding of
a protein to a specific sequence of base pairs in a molecule
of DNA, which frequently causes the expression of a nearby
gene to increase or decrease (Chapter 11). If the equilibrium
constant for a binding reaction is known, the intracellular
stability of the resulting complex can be predicted. To illustrate the general approach for determining the concentration
of noncovalently associated complexes, we will calculate the
extent to which a protein is bound to DNA in a cell.
Most commonly, binding reactions are described in terms
of the dissociation constant Kd, which is the reciprocal of the
equilibrium constant. For the binding reaction P  D
PD, where PD is the specific complex of a protein (P) and
DNA (D), the dissociation constant is given by
Kd

47

(2-4)

Typical reactions in which a protein binds to a specific DNA
sequence have a Kd of 1010M, where M symbolizes molarity, or moles per liter (mol/L). To relate the magnitude of this
dissociation constant to the intracellular ratio of bound to
unbound DNA, let’s consider the simple example of a bacterial cell having a volume of 1.5  1015 L and containing

The solvent inside cells and in all extracellular fluids is water.
An important characteristic of any aqueous solution is the
concentration of positively charged hydrogen ions (H) and
negatively charged hydroxyl ions (OH). Because these ions
are the dissociation products of H2O, they are constituents
of all living systems, and they are liberated by many reactions
that take place between organic molecules within cells.
When a water molecule dissociates, one of its polar
HOO bonds breaks. The resulting hydrogen ion, often referred to as a proton, has a short lifetime as a free particle
and quickly combines with a water molecule to form a hydronium ion (H3O). For convenience, however, we refer to
the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution, [H], even
though this really represents the concentration of hydronium
ions, [H3O]. Dissociation of H2O generates one OH ion
along with each H. The dissociation of water is a reversible
reaction,
H  OH

H2 O

At 25 ºC, [H][OH] 1014 M2, so that in pure water,
[H] [OH] 107 M.
The concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution is expressed conventionally as its pH, defined as the negative log
of the hydrogen ion concentration. The pH of pure water at
25 ºC is 7:
pH

log[H  ]

log

1
[H  ]

log

1
107

7

It is important to keep in mind that a 1 unit difference in
pH represents a tenfold difference in the concentration of

48

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

protons. On the pH scale, 7.0 is considered neutral: pH values below 7.0 indicate acidic solutions (higher [H]), and
values above 7.0 indicate basic (alkaline) solutions. For instance, gastric juice, which is rich in hydrochloric acid (HCl),
has a pH of about 1. Its [H] is roughly a millionfold greater
than that of cytoplasm with a pH of about 7.
Although the cytosol of cells normally has a pH of about
7.2, the pH is much lower (about 4.5) in the interior of lysosomes, one type of organelle in eukaryotic cells. The many
degradative enzymes within lysosomes function optimally in
an acidic environment, whereas their action is inhibited in
the near neutral environment of the cytoplasm. This illustrates that maintenance of a specific pH is imperative for
proper functioning of some cellular structures. On the other
hand, dramatic shifts in cellular pH may play an important
role in controlling cellular activity. For example, the pH of
the cytoplasm of an unfertilized sea urchin egg is 6.6. Within
1 minute of fertilization, however, the pH rises to 7.2; that is,
the H concentration decreases to about one-fourth its original value, a change that is necessary for subsequent growth
and division of the egg.

The equilibrium constant for this reaction, denoted Ka (subscript a for “acid”), is defined as Ka [H][A]/[HA]. Taking the logarithm of both sides and rearranging the result
yields a very useful relation between the equilibrium constant
and pH:
pH

pKa  log

[A]
[HA]

(2-5)

where pKa equals –log Ka.
From this expression, commonly known as the HendersonHasselbalch equation, it can be seen that the pKa of any acid
is equal to the pH at which half the molecules are dissociated
and half are neutral (undissociated). This is because when pKa
pH, then log ([A]/[HA]) 0, and therefore [A] [HA].
The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation allows us to calculate the
degree of dissociation of an acid if both the pH of the solution
and the pKa of the acid are known. Experimentally, by measuring the [A] and [HA] as a function of the solution’s pH, one
can calculate the pKa of the acid and thus the equilibrium
constant Ka for the dissociation reaction.

Hydrogen Ions Are Released
by Acids and Taken Up by Bases

Buffers Maintain the pH of Intracellular
and Extracellular Fluids

In general, an acid is any molecule, ion, or chemical group
that tends to release a hydrogen ion (H), such as hydrochloric acid (HCl) and the carboxyl group (OCOOH),
which tends to dissociate to form the negatively charged carboxylate ion (OCOO). Likewise, a base is any molecule,
ion, or chemical group that readily combines with a H,
such as the hydroxyl ion (OH), ammonia (NH3), which
forms an ammonium ion (NH4), and the amino group
(ONH2).
When acid is added to an aqueous solution, the [H] increases (the pH goes down). Conversely, when a base is
added to a solution, the [H] decreases (the pH goes up). Because [H][OH] 1014M2, any increase in [H] is coupled with a decrease in [OH], and vice versa.
Many biological molecules contain both acidic and basic
groups. For example, in neutral solutions (pH 7.0), amino
acids exist predominantly in the doubly ionized form in
which the carboxyl group has lost a proton and the amino
group has accepted one:

A growing cell must maintain a constant pH in the cytoplasm of about 7.2–7.4 despite the metabolic production of
many acids, such as lactic acid and carbon dioxide; the latter reacts with water to form carbonic acid (H2CO3). Cells
have a reservoir of weak bases and weak acids, called
buffers, which ensure that the cell’s pH remains relatively
constant despite small fluctuations in the amounts of H or
OH being generated by metabolism or by the uptake or secretion of molecules and ions by the cell. Buffers do this by
“soaking up” excess H or OH when these ions are added
to the cell or are produced by metabolism.
If additional acid (or base) is added to a solution that
contains a buffer at its pKa value (a 1:1 mixture of HA and
A), the pH of the solution changes, but it changes less than
it would if the buffer had not been present. This is because
protons released by the added acid are taken up by the ionized form of the buffer (A); likewise, hydroxyl ions generated by the addition of base are neutralized by protons
released by the undissociated buffer (HA). The capacity of a
substance to release hydrogen ions or take them up depends
partly on the extent to which the substance has already taken
up or released protons, which in turn depends on the pH of
the solution. The ability of a buffer to minimize changes in
pH, its buffering capacity, depends on the relationship between its pKa value and the pH, which is expressed by the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation.
The titration curve for acetic acid shown in Figure 2-22
illustrates the effect of pH on the fraction of molecules in
the un-ionized (HA) and ionized forms (A). At one pH unit
below the pKa of an acid, 91 percent of the molecules are in
the HA form; at one pH unit above the pKa, 91 percent are



NH3
H

C



COO

R

where R represents the side chain. Such a molecule, containing an equal number of positive and negative ions, is called
a zwitterion. Zwitterions, having no net charge, are neutral.
At extreme pH values, only one of these two ionizable
groups of an amino acid will be charged.
The dissociation reaction for an acid (or acid group in a
larger molecule) HA can be written as HA
H   A .

2.3 • Chemical Equilibrium
8

CH3COOH

CH3COO − + H +

6

pH

pK a = 4.75
4

2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Fraction of dissociated CH3COOH
Added OH−

▲ FIGURE 2-22 The titration curve of acetic acid
(CH3COOH). The pKa for the dissociation of acetic acid to
hydrogen and acetate ions is 4.75. At this pH, half the acid
molecules are dissociated. Because pH is measured on a logarithmic
scale, the solution changes from 91 percent CH3COOH at
pH 3.75 to 9 percent CH3COOH at pH 5.75. The acid has maximum
buffering capacity in this pH range.

49

in the A form. At pH values more than one unit above or
below the pKa, the buffering capacity of weak acids and
bases declines rapidly. In other words, the addition of the
same number of moles of acid to a solution containing a mixture of HA and A that is at a pH near the pKa will cause less
of a pH change than it would if the HA and A were not
present or if the pH were far from the pKa value.
All biological systems contain one or more buffers. Phosphate ions, the ionized forms of phosphoric acid, are present in considerable quantities in cells and are an important
factor in maintaining, or buffering, the pH of the cytoplasm.
Phosphoric acid (H3PO4) has three protons that are capable
of dissociating, but they do not dissociate simultaneously.
Loss of each proton can be described by a discrete dissociation reaction and pKa as shown in Figure 2-23. The titration
curve for phosphoric acid shows that the pKa for the dissociation of the second proton is 7.2. Thus at pH 7.2, about 50
percent of cellular phosphate is H2PO4 and about 50 percent is HPO42 according to the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation. For this reason, phosphate is an excellent buffer
at pH values around 7.2, the approximate pH of the cytoplasm of cells, and at pH 7.4, the pH of human blood.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 2.3
Chemical Equilibrium
A chemical reaction is at equilibrium when the rate of
the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction (no net change in the concentration of the reactants
or products).

■

14

pKa = 12.7
HPO 42−

12

The equilibrium constant Keq of a reaction reflects the
ratio of products to reactants at equilibrium and thus is a
measure of the extent of the reaction and the relative stabilities of the reactants and products.

■

PO 43− + H+

10

pH

8

pKa = 7.2

H2PO4−

HPO 42− + H+

6

■ For any reaction, the equilibrium constant Keq equals
the ratio of the forward rate constant to the reverse rate
constant (kf /kr).

4
pKa = 2.1
2

■ The Keq depends on the temperature, pressure, and
chemical properties of the reactants and products, but is
independent of the reaction rate and of the initial concentrations of reactants and products.

H3PO4

H2PO 4− + H+

0
Added OH−

▲ FIGURE 2-23 The titration curve of phosphoric acid
(H3PO4). This biologically ubiquitous molecule has three hydrogen
atoms that dissociate at different pH values; thus, phosphoric
acid has three pKa values, as noted on the graph. The shaded
areas denote the pH ranges—within one pH unit of the three pKa
values—where the buffering capacity of phosphoric acid is high.
In these regions the addition of acid (or base) will cause relatively
small changes in the pH.

Within cells, the linked reactions in metabolic pathways
generally are at steady state, not equilibrium, at which rate
of formation of the intermediates equals their rate of consumption (see Figure 2-21).

■

The dissociation constant Kd for a reaction involving the
noncovalent binding of two molecules is a measure of the
stability of the complex formed between the molecules
(e.g., ligand-receptor or protein-DNA complexes).

■

The pH is the negative logarithm of the concentration
of hydrogen ions (–log [H]). The pH of the cytoplasm is
normally about 7.2–7.4, whereas the interior of lysosomes
has a pH of about 4.5.

■

50

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

Acids release protons (H) and bases bind them. In biological molecules, the carboxyl and phosphate groups are
the most common acidic groups; the amino group is the
most common basic group.
■

Buffers are mixtures of a weak acid (HA) and its corresponding base form (A), which minimize the change in
pH of a solution when acid or alkali is added. Biological
systems use various buffers to maintain their pH within a
very narrow range.

■

2.4

Biochemical Energetics

The production of energy, its storage, and its use are central
to the economy of the cell. Energy may be defined as the ability to do work, a concept applicable to automobile engines
and electric power plants in our physical world and to cellular engines in the biological world. The energy associated
with chemical bonds can be harnessed to support chemical
work and the physical movements of cells.

Several Forms of Energy Are Important
in Biological Systems
There are two principal forms of energy: kinetic and potential. Kinetic energy is the energy of movement—the motion
of molecules, for example. The second form of energy, potential energy, or stored energy, is particularly important in
the study of biological or chemical systems.

Kinetic Energy Heat, or thermal energy, is a form of kinetic
energy—the energy of the motion of molecules. For heat to
do work, it must flow from a region of higher temperature—
where the average speed of molecular motion is greater—to
one of lower temperature. Although differences in temperature can exist between the internal and external environments
of cells, these thermal gradients do not usually serve as the
source of energy for cellular activities. The thermal energy in
warm-blooded animals, which have evolved a mechanism for
thermoregulation, is used chiefly to maintain constant organismic temperatures. This is an important function, since the
rates of many cellular activities are temperature-dependent.
For example, cooling mammalian cells from their normal
body temperature of 37 ºC to 4 ºC can virtually “freeze” or
stop many cellular processes (e.g., intracellular membrane
movements).
Radiant energy is the kinetic energy of photons, or waves
of light, and is critical to biology. Radiant energy can be converted to thermal energy, for instance when light is absorbed
by molecules and the energy is converted to molecular
motion. During photosynthesis, light energy absorbed by
specialized molecules (e.g., chlorophyll) is subsequently converted into the energy of chemical bonds (Chapter 8).
Mechanical energy, a major form of kinetic energy in biology, usually results from the conversion of stored chemical

energy. For example, changes in the lengths of cytoskeletal
filaments generates forces that push or pull on membranes
and organelles (Chapter 19).
Electric energy—the energy of moving electrons or other
charged particles—is yet another major form of kinetic
energy.

Potential Energy Several forms of potential energy are biologically significant. Central to biology is chemical potential
energy, the energy stored in the bonds connecting atoms in
molecules. Indeed, most of the biochemical reactions described in this book involve the making or breaking of at
least one covalent chemical bond. We recognize this energy
when chemicals undergo energy-releasing reactions. For example, the high potential energy in the covalent bonds of glucose can be released by controlled enzymatic combustion in
cells (see later discussion). This energy is harnessed by the
cell to do many kinds of work.
A second biologically important form of potential energy
is the energy in a concentration gradient. When the concentration of a substance on one side of a barrier, such as a
membrane, is different from that on the other side, a concentration gradient exists. All cells form concentration gradients between their interior and the external fluids by
selectively exchanging nutrients, waste products, and ions
with their surroundings. Also, organelles within cells (e.g.,
mitochondria, lysosomes) frequently contain different concentrations of ions and other molecules; the concentration of
protons within a lysosome, as we saw in the last section, is
about 500 times that of the cytoplasm.
A third form of potential energy in cells is an electric
potential—the energy of charge separation. For instance,
there is a gradient of electric charge of ≈200,000 volts per cm
across the plasma membrane of virtually all cells. We discuss
how concentration gradients and the potential difference
across cell membranes are generated and maintained in
Chapter 7.

Cells Can Transform One Type
of Energy into Another
According to the first law of thermodynamics, energy is neither created nor destroyed, but can be converted from one
form to another. (In nuclear reactions mass is converted to
energy, but this is irrelevant to biological systems.) In photosynthesis, for example, the radiant energy of light is transformed into the chemical potential energy of the covalent
bonds between the atoms in a sucrose or starch molecule. In
muscles and nerves, chemical potential energy stored in covalent bonds is transformed, respectively, into the kinetic
energy of muscle contraction and the electric energy of nerve
transmission. In all cells, potential energy, released by breaking certain chemical bonds, is used to generate potential energy in the form of concentration and electric potential
gradients. Similarly, energy stored in chemical concentration
gradients or electric potential gradients is used to synthesize

2.4 • Biochemical Energetics

chemical bonds or to transport molecules from one side of a
membrane to another to generate a concentration gradient.
This latter process occurs during the transport of nutrients
such as glucose into certain cells and transport of many
waste products out of cells.
Because all forms of energy are interconvertible, they can
be expressed in the same units of measurement. Although the
standard unit of energy is the joule, biochemists have traditionally used an alternative unit, the calorie (1 joule 0.239
calories). Throughout this book, we use the kilocalorie to
measure energy changes (1 kcal = 1000 cal).

The Change in Free Energy Determines
the Direction of a Chemical Reaction
Because biological systems are generally held at constant
temperature and pressure, it is possible to predict the direction of a chemical reaction from the change in the free energy
G, named after J. W. Gibbs, who showed that “all systems
change in such a way that free energy [G] is minimized.” In
the case of a chemical reaction, reactants
products, the
change in free energy G is given by
G

Gproducts  Greactants

The relation of G to the direction of any chemical reaction
can be summarized in three statements:
If G is negative, the forward reaction (from left to
right as written) will tend to occur spontaneously.

■

If G is positive, the reverse reaction (from right to left
as written) will tend to occur.

■

If G is zero, both forward and reverse reactions occur
at equal rates; the reaction is at equilibrium.

■

The standard free-energy change of a reaction Gº is the
value of the change in free energy under the conditions of
298 K (25 ºC), 1 atm pressure, pH 7.0 (as in pure water), and
initial concentrations of 1 M for all reactants and products
except protons, which are kept at 107 M (pH 7.0). Most biological reactions differ from standard conditions, particularly in the concentrations of reactants, which are normally
less than 1 M.
The free energy of a chemical system can be defined as
G H  TS, where H is the bond energy, or enthalpy, of
the system; T is its temperature in degrees Kelvin (K); and S
is the entropy, a measure of its randomness or disorder. If
temperature remains constant, a reaction proceeds spontaneously only if the free-energy change G in the following
equation is negative:
G

HT S

(2-6)

In an exothermic reaction, the products contain less bond energy than the reactants, the liberated energy is usually converted to heat (the energy of molecular motion), and H is
negative. In an endothermic reaction, the products contain

51

more bond energy than the reactants, heat is absorbed, and
H is positive. The combined effects of the changes in the enthalpy and entropy determine if the G for a reaction is positive or negative. An exothermic reaction ( H 0) in which
entropy increases ( S 0) occurs spontaneously ( G 0).
An endothermic reaction ( H 0) will occur spontaneously
if S increases enough so that the T S term can overcome
the positive H.
Many biological reactions lead to an increase in order,
and thus a decrease in entropy ( S 0). An obvious example is the reaction that links amino acids together to form a
protein. A solution of protein molecules has a lower entropy
than does a solution of the same amino acids unlinked, because the free movement of any amino acid in a protein is
restricted when it is bound into a long chain. Often cells
compensate for decreases in entropy by “coupling” such synthetic reactions with independent reactions that have a very
highly negative G (see below). In this fashion cells can convert sources of energy in their environment into the building
of highly organized structures and metabolic pathways that
are essential for life.
The actual change in free energy G during a reaction
is influenced by temperature, pressure, and the initial concentrations of reactants and products and usually differs
from Gº. Most biological reactions—like others that take
place in aqueous solutions—also are affected by the pH of
the solution. We can estimate free-energy changes for different temperatures and initial concentrations, using the
equation
G

Gº  RT ln Q

Gº'  RT ln

[products]
[reactants]

(2-7)

where R is the gas constant of 1.987 cal/(degree·mol), T is
the temperature (in degrees Kelvin), and Q is the initial ratio
of products to reactants. For a reaction A  B
C, in
which two molecules combine to form a third, Q in Equation
2-7 equals [C]/[A][B]. In this case, an increase in the initial
concentration of either [A] or [B] will result in a large negative value for G and thus drive the reaction toward more
formation of C.
Regardless of the Gº for a particular biochemical
reaction, it will proceed spontaneously within cells only if
G is negative, given the usual intracellular concentrations
of reactants and products. For example, the conversion of
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) to dihydroxyacetone
phosphate (DHAP), two intermediates in the breakdown of
glucose,
G3P

DHAP

has a Gº of 1840 cal/mol. If the initial concentrations of
G3P and DHAP are equal, then G
Gº, because RT ln 1
0; in this situation, the reversible reaction G3P
DHAP
will proceed in the direction of DHAP formation until equilibrium is reached. However, if the initial [DHAP] is 0.1 M
and the initial [G3P] is 0.001 M, with other conditions being
standard, then Q in Equation 2-7 equals 0.1/0.001 100,

52

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

giving a G of 887 cal/mole. Under these conditions,
the reaction will proceed in the direction of formation of
G3P.
The G for a reaction is independent of the reaction rate.
Indeed, under usual physiological conditions, few, if any, of
the biochemical reactions needed to sustain life would occur
without some mechanism for increasing reaction rates. As we
describe in Chapter 3, the rates of reactions in biological systems are usually determined by the activity of enzymes, the
protein catalysts that accelerate the formation of products
from reactants without altering the value of G.

The Gº of a Reaction Can Be
Calculated from Its Keq
A chemical mixture at equilibrium is already in a state of
minimal free energy; that is, no free energy is being generated
or released. Thus, for a system at equilibrium ( G
0,
Q Keq), we can write
Gº

2.3RT log Keq

1362 log Keq

(2-8)

under standard conditions (note the change to base 10 logarithms). Thus, if the concentrations of reactants and products at equilibrium (i.e., the Keq) are determined, the value of
Gº can be calculated. For example, Keq for the interconversion of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to dihydroxyacetone
phosphate (G3P
DHAP) is 22.2 under standard conditions. Substituting this value into Equation 2-8, we can easily calculate the Gº for this reaction as 1840 cal/mol.
By rearranging Equation 2-8 and taking the antilogarithm, we obtain
Keq

10

( Gº/2.3RT)

(2-9)

From this expression, it is clear that if Gº is negative, the
exponent will be positive and hence Keq will be greater than
1. Therefore at equilibrium there will be more products than
reactants; in other words, the formation of products from reactants is favored. Conversely, if Gº is positive, the exponent will be negative and Keq will be less than 1.

(1) A

BX

G

5 kcal/mol

(2) X

Y Z

G

10 kcal/mol

BYZ

Gº'

5 kcal/mol

Sum: A

In the absence of the second reaction, there would be much
more A than B at equilibrium. However, because the conversion of X to Y  Z is such a favorable reaction, it will pull
the first process toward the formation of B and the consumption of A. Energetically unfavorable reactions in cells
often are coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP, as we discuss
next.

Hydrolysis of ATP Releases Substantial Free
Energy and Drives Many Cellular Processes
In almost all organisms, adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, is
the most important molecule for capturing, transiently storing, and subsequently transferring energy to perform work
(e.g., biosynthesis, mechanical motion). The useful energy
in an ATP molecule is contained in phosphoanhydride bonds,
which are covalent bonds formed from the condensation of
two molecules of phosphate by the loss of water:
O

O


O

OH

P

HO





P

O


O

O

O
O



O

P

O

O  H2O

P

O

O

An ATP molecule has two key phosphoanhydride bonds
(Figure 2-24). Hydrolysis of a phosphoanhydride bond (~) in
each of the following reactions has a highly negative Gº
of about 7.3 kcal/mol:

NH2
C

An Unfavorable Chemical Reaction
Can Proceed If It Is Coupled with
an Energetically Favorable Reaction
Many processes in cells are energetically unfavorable ( G 0)
and will not proceed spontaneously. Examples include the
synthesis of DNA from nucleotides and transport of a substance across the plasma membrane from a lower to a higher
concentration. Cells can carry out an energy-requiring reaction ( G1 0) by coupling it to an energy-releasing reaction ( G2
0) if the sum of the two reactions has a net
negative G.
Suppose, for example, that the reaction A
B  X has
a G of 5 kcal/mol and that the reaction X
Y  Z has
a G of 10 kcal/mol.

Phosphoanhydride bonds

O
O

P
O

O
O

P
O

N

C

HC

C

CH
N

O
O

N

P

O

CH2



H

O

N

O
H
H

H
HO

OH

Adenosine triphosphate
(ATP)

▲ FIGURE 2-24 Adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The two
phosphoanhydride bonds (red) in ATP, which link the three
phosphate groups, each has a G˚ of 7.3 kcal/mol for hydrolysis. Hydrolysis of these bonds, especially the terminal one, drives
many energy-requiring reactions in biological systems.

2.4 • Biochemical Energetics

Ap~p~p  H2O On Ap~p  Pi  H
(ATP)

(ADP)

Ap~p~p  H2O On Ap  PPi  H
(ATP)

(AMP)

Ap~p  H2O On Ap  Pi  H
(ADP)

(AMP)

In these reactions, Pi stands for inorganic phosphate (PO43)
and PPi for inorganic pyrophosphate, two phosphate groups
linked by a phosphodiester bond. As the top two reactions
show, the removal of a phosphate or a pyrophosphate group
from ATP leaves adenosine diphosphate (ADP) or adenosine
monophosphate (AMP), respectively.
A phosphoanhydride bond or other high-energy bond
(commonly denoted by ~) is not intrinsically different from
other covalent bonds. High-energy bonds simply release especially large amounts of energy when broken by addition of
water (hydrolyzed). For instance, the Gº for hydrolysis of
a phosphoanhydride bond in ATP (7.3 kcal/mol) is more
than three times the Gº for hydrolysis of the phosphoester
bond (red) in glycerol 3-phosphate (2.2 kcal/mol):
O
HO

OH

P

O

O

CH2

CH

CH2OH



Glycerol 3-phosphate

A principal reason for this difference is that ATP and its hydrolysis products ADP and Pi are highly charged at neutral
pH. During synthesis of ATP, a large input of energy is required to force the negative charges in ADP and Pi together.
Conversely, much energy is released when ATP is hydrolyzed
to ADP and Pi. In comparison, formation of the phosphoester bond between an uncharged hydroxyl in glycerol and Pi
requires less energy, and less energy is released when this
bond is hydrolyzed.
Cells have evolved protein-mediated mechanisms for
transferring the free energy released by hydrolysis of phosphoanhydride bonds to other molecules, thereby driving reactions that would otherwise be energetically unfavorable.
For example, if the G for the reaction B  C On D is positive but less than the G for hydrolysis of ATP, the reaction
can be driven to the right by coupling it to hydrolysis of the
terminal phosphoanhydride bond in ATP. In one common
mechanism of such energy coupling, some of the energy
stored in this phosphoanhydride bond is transferred to the
one of the reactants by breaking the bond in ATP and forming a covalent bond between the released phosphate group
and one of the reactants. The phosphorylated intermediate
generated in this fashion can then react with C to form D 
Pi in a reaction that has a negative G :
B  Ap~p~p On B~p  Ap~p
B~p  C On D  Pi

53

The overall reaction
B  C  ATP

D  ADP  Pi

is energetically favorable ( G  0).
An alternative mechanism of energy coupling is to use the
energy released by ATP hydrolysis to change the conformation of the molecule to an “energy-rich” stressed state. In
turn, the energy stored as conformational stress can be released as the molecule “relaxes” back into its unstressed conformation. If this relaxation process can be mechanistically
coupled to another reaction, the released energy can be harnessed to drive important cellular processes.
As with many biosynthetic reactions, transport of molecules into or out of the cell often has a positive G and thus
requires an input of energy to proceed. Such simple transport
reactions do not directly involve the making or breaking of
covalent bonds; thus the Gº is 0. In the case of a substance
moving into a cell, Equation 2-7 becomes
[Cin]
G RT ln
(2-10)
[Cout]
where [Cin] is the initial concentration of the substance inside the cell and [Cout] is its concentration outside the cell. We
can see from Equation 2-10 that G is positive for transport
of a substance into a cell against its concentration gradient
(when [Cin] [Cout]); the energy to drive such “uphill” transport often is supplied by the hydrolysis of ATP. Conversely,
when a substance moves down its concentration gradient
([Cout] [Cin]), G is negative. Such “downhill” transport
releases energy that can be coupled to an energy-requiring reaction, say, the movement of another substance uphill across
a membrane or the synthesis of ATP itself (see Chapter 7).

ATP Is Generated During Photosynthesis
and Respiration
Clearly, to continue functioning cells must constantly replenish their ATP supply. The initial energy source whose energy is ultimately transformed into the phosphoanhydride
bonds of ATP and bonds in other compounds in nearly all
cells is sunlight. In photosynthesis, plants and certain microorganisms can trap the energy in light and use it to synthesize ATP from ADP and Pi. Much of the ATP produced
in photosynthesis is hydrolyzed to provide energy for the
conversion of carbon dioxide to six-carbon sugars, a process
called carbon fixation:
ATP ADP  Pi
6 CO2  6 H2O

C6H12O6  6 O2

In animals, the free energy in sugars and other molecules derived from food is released in the process of respiration. All
synthesis of ATP in animal cells and in nonphotosynthetic
microorganisms results from the chemical transformation of
energy-rich compounds in the diet (e.g., glucose, starch). We
discuss the mechanisms of photosynthesis and cellular respiration in Chapter 8.

54

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

The complete oxidation of glucose to yield carbon dioxide

O
C

O

C

O

H

C

H

C

H

H

C

H

C

H

C

O

C6H12O6  6 O2 On 6 CO2  6 H2O
has a Gº of 686 kcal/mol and is the reverse of photosynthetic carbon fixation. Cells employ an elaborate set of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions to couple the metabolism of
1 molecule of glucose to the synthesis of as many as
30 molecules of ATP from 30 molecules of ADP. This
oxygen-dependent (aerobic) degradation (catabolism) of
glucose is the major pathway for generating ATP in all animal cells, nonphotosynthetic plant cells, and many bacterial cells.
Light energy captured in photosynthesis is not the only
source of chemical energy for all cells. Certain microorganisms that live in deep ocean vents, where sunlight is completely absent, derive the energy for converting ADP and Pi
into ATP from the oxidation of reduced inorganic compounds. These reduced compounds originate in the center
of the earth and are released at the vents.

O

C



O



2 e 2 H

O



O

Succinate

Fumarate

▲ FIGURE 2-25 Conversion of succinate to fumarate. In this
oxidation reaction, which occurs in mitochondria as part of the
citric acid cycle, succinate loses two electrons and two protons.
These are transferred to FAD, reducing it to FADH2.

ric) ions, a reaction that occurs as part of the process by
which carbohydrates are degraded in mitochondria. Each
oxygen atom receives two electrons, one from each of two
Fe2 ions:
2 Fe2  1⁄2 O2 On 2 Fe3  O2



NAD and FAD Couple Many Biological
Oxidation and Reduction Reactions
In many chemical reactions, electrons are transferred from
one atom or molecule to another; this transfer may or may
not accompany the formation of new chemical bonds. The
loss of electrons from an atom or a molecule is called oxidation, and the gain of electrons by an atom or a molecule is
called reduction. Because electrons are neither created nor
destroyed in a chemical reaction, if one atom or molecule is
oxidized, another must be reduced. For example, oxygen
draws electrons from Fe2 (ferrous) ions to form Fe3 (fer-

Thus Fe2 is oxidized, and O2 is reduced. Such reactions in
which one molecule is reduced and another oxidized often
are referred to as redox reactions. Oxygen is an electron acceptor in many redox reactions in aerobic cells.
Many biologically important oxidation and reduction reactions involve the removal or the addition of hydrogen
atoms (protons plus electrons) rather than the transfer of isolated electrons on their own. The oxidation of succinate to
fumarate, which also occurs in mitochondria, is an example
(Figure 2-25). Protons are soluble in aqueous solutions (as
H3O), but electrons are not and must be transferred di-

(b)

(a)

Oxidized: FAD
Oxidized: NAD
H

H

O
C
+
N

H



NH2  H 
2e

O
C

••

Nicotinamide

H

Reduced: NADH

Reduced: FADH2
H

O

H3C

N

H3C

N

H
N

 2 H
 2 e

NH2

N

N

O

Flavin

H

H

H3C

N

H3C

N
H

Ribose

Ribitol

Ribitol

2P

2P

2P

Adenosine

Adenosine



NAD  H  2 e

NADH

▲ FIGURE 2-26 The electron-carrying coenzymes NAD and


FAD. (a) NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) is reduced to
NADH by addition of two electrons and one proton simultaneously.
In many biological redox reactions (e.g., succinate n fumarate),
a pair of hydrogen atoms (two protons and two electrons) are
removed from a molecule. One of the protons and both electrons

N

O

H

2P



H
N

Ribose

Adenosine

O

Adenosine




FAD 2 H  2 e

FADH2

are transferred to NAD; the other proton is released into solution.
(b) FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) is reduced to FADH2 by
addition of two electrons and two protons. In this two-step reaction,
addition of one electron together with one proton first generates
a short-lived semiquinone intermediate (not shown), which then
accepts a second electron and proton.

Key Terms

rectly from one atom or molecule to another without a
water-dissolved intermediate. In this type of oxidation reaction, electrons often are transferred to small electron-carrying molecules, sometimes referred to as coenzymes. The most
common of these electron carriers are NAD (nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide), which is reduced to NADH, and FAD
(flavin adenine dinucleotide), which is reduced to FADH2
(Figure 2-26). The reduced forms of these coenzymes can
transfer protons and electrons to other molecules, thereby reducing them.
To describe redox reactions, such as the reaction of ferrous ion (Fe2) and oxygen (O2), it is easiest to divide them
into two half-reactions:
Oxidation of Fe2:
Reduction of O2:

2 Fe2 On 2 Fe3  2 e
2 e  1⁄2 O2 On O2
2

In this case, the reduced oxygen (O ) readily reacts with
two protons to form one water molecule (H2O). The readiness with which an atom or a molecule gains an electron is its
reduction potential E. The tendency to lose electrons, the oxidation potential, has the same magnitude but opposite sign
as the reduction potential for the reverse reaction.
Reduction potentials are measured in volts (V) from an
arbitrary zero point set at the reduction potential of the following half-reaction under standard conditions (25 ºC,
1 atm, and reactants at 1 M):
reduction

Biochemical Energetics
The change in free energy G is the most useful measure for predicting the direction of chemical reactions in biological systems. Chemical reactions tend to proceed in the
direction for which G is negative.

■

Directly or indirectly, light energy captured by photosynthesis in plants and photosynthetic bacteria is the ultimate source of chemical energy for almost all cells.

■

The chemical free-energy change Gº equals 2.3 RT
log Keq. Thus the value of Gº can be calculated from the
experimentally determined concentrations of reactants and
products at equilibrium.

■

A chemical reaction having a positive G can proceed
if it is coupled with a reaction having a negative G of
larger magnitude.

■

Many otherwise energetically unfavorable cellular processes are driven by hydrolysis of phosphoanhydride bonds
in ATP (see Figure 2-24).

■

An oxidation reaction (loss of electrons) is always coupled with a reduction reaction (gain of electrons).

■

Biological oxidation and reduction reactions often are
coupled by electron-carrying coenzymes such as NAD
and FAD (see Figure 2-26).
■

■

oxidation

The value of E for a molecule or an atom under standard
conditions is its standard reduction potential E0. A molecule or ion with a positive E0 has a higher affinity for electrons than the H ion does under standard conditions.
Conversely, a molecule or ion with a negative E0 has a lower
affinity for electrons than the H ion does under standard
conditions. Like the values of Gº, standard reduction potentials may differ somewhat from those found under the
conditions in a cell because the concentrations of reactants in
a cell are not 1 M.
In a redox reaction, electrons move spontaneously toward atoms or molecules having more positive reduction
potentials. In other words, a compound having a more negative reduction potential can transfer electrons to (i.e., reduce) a compound with a more positive reduction
potential. In this type of reaction, the change in electric potential E is the sum of the reduction and oxidation potentials for the two half-reactions. The E for a redox reaction
is related to the change in free energy G by the following
expression:
n (23,064) E (volts)

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 2.4

Oxidation-reduction reactions with a positive E have
a negative G and thus tend to proceed spontaneously.

H  e 399999994 1⁄2 H2

G (cal/mol)

55

(2-11)

where n is the number of electrons transferred. Note that a
redox reaction with a positive E value will have a negative
G and thus will tend to proceed from left to right.

KEY TERMS
acid 48
 carbon atom (C) 38
amino acids 38
amphipathic 29
base 48
buffers 48
chemical potential energy 50
covalent bond 30
dehydration reaction 37
G (free-energy change) 51
disulfide bond 38
energy coupling 53
enthalpy (H) 51
entropy (S) 51
equilibrium constant 46
fatty acids 43
hydrogen bond 33
hydrophilic 29
hydrophobic 29

hydrophobic effect 35
ionic interactions 33
molecular complementarity 36
monosaccharides 41
nucleosides 40
nucleotides 40
oxidation 55
pH 47
phosphoanhydride bonds 52
phospholipid bilayers 45
polar 32
polymer 37
redox reaction 54
reduction 55
saturated 43
steady state 46
stereoisomers 31
unsaturated 43
van der Waals interactions 34

56

CHAPTER 2 • Chemical Foundations

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. The gecko is a reptile with an amazing ability to climb
smooth surfaces, including glass. Recent discoveries indicate
that geckos stick to smooth surfaces via van der Waals interactions between septae on their feet and the smooth surface. How is this method of stickiness advantageous over
covalent interactions? Given that van der Waals forces are
among the weakest molecular interactions, how can the
gecko’s feet stick so effectively?
2. The K channel is an example of a transmembrane protein (a protein that spans the phospholipid bilayer of the
plasma membrane). What types of amino acids are likely to
be found (a) lining the channel through which K passes;
(b) in contact with the phospholipid bilayer containing fatty
acid; (c) in the cytosolic domain of the protein; and (d) in
the extracellular domain of the protein?
3. V-M-Y-Y-E-N: This is the single-letter amino acid abbreviation for a peptide. Draw the structure of this peptide.
What is the net charge of this peptide at pH 7.0? An enzyme
called a protein tyrosine kinase can attach phosphates to the
hydroxyl groups of tyrosine. What is the net charge of the
peptide at pH 7.0 after it has been phosphorylated by a tyrosine kinase? What is the likely source of phosphate utilized
by the kinase for this reaction?
4. Disulfide bonds help to stabilize the three-dimensional
structure of proteins. What amino acids are involved in the
formation of disulfide bonds? Does the formation of a disulfide bond increase or decrease entropy ( S)?
5. In the 1960s, the drug thalidomide was prescribed to
pregnant women to treat morning sickness. However,
thalidomide caused severe limb defects in the children of
some women who took the drug, and its use for morning
sickness was discontinued. It is now known that thalidomide
was administered as a mixture of two stereoisomeric compounds, one of which relieved morning sickness and the
other of which was responsible for the birth defects. What
are stereoisomers? Why might two such closely related compounds have such different physiologic effects?
6. Name the compound shown below. Is this nucleotide a
component of DNA, RNA, or both? Name one other function of this compound.
O
C
6

HN1
C

2

H2N
O


O

3

N

5C
4

7

8 CH
9

C

N

N

O
5

O

P
O

O


O

P
O

O


O

P
O

O


CH2
4

O

H

H

1

H

H
3

OH

2

OH

7. The chemical basis of blood-group specificity resides in
the carbohydrates displayed on the surface of red blood cells.
Carbohydrates have the potential for great structural diversity. Indeed, the structural complexity of the oligosaccharides
that can be formed from four sugars is greater than that for
oligopeptides from four amino acids. What properties of carbohydrates make this great structural diversity possible?
8. Ammonia (NH3) is a weak base that under acidic conditions becomes protonated to the ammonium ion in the following reaction:
NH3  H n NH4
NH3 freely permeates biological membranes, including those
of lysosomes. The lysosome is a subcellular organelle with a
pH of about 5.0; the pH of cytoplasm is 7.0. What is the effect on the pH of the fluid content of lysosomes when cells
are exposed to ammonia? Note: Protonated ammonia does
not diffuse freely across membranes.
9. Consider the binding reaction L  R n LR, where L is
a ligand and R is its receptor. When 1  103 M L is added
to a solution containing 5  102 M R, 90% of the L binds
to form LR. What is the Keq of this reaction? How will the
Keq be affected by the addition of a protein that catalyzes this
binding reaction? What is the Kd?
10. What is the ionization state of phosphoric acid in the cytoplasm? Why is phosphoric acid such a physiologically important compound?
11. The G for the reaction X  Y n XY is 1000
cal/mol. What is the G at 25C (298 Kelvin) starting with
0.01 M each X, Y, and XY? Suggest two ways one could
make this reaction energetically favorable.

REFERENCES
Alberty, R. A., and R. J. Silbey. 2000. Physical Chemistry, 3d ed.
Wiley.
Atkins, P. W. 2000. The Elements of Physical Chemistry, 3d ed.
W. H. Freeman and Company.
Berg, J. M., J. L. Tymoczko, and L. Stryer. 2002. Biochemistry,
5th ed. W. H. Freeman and Company.
Cantor, P. R., and C. R. Schimmel. 1980. Biophysical Chemistry.
W. H. Freeman and Company.
Davenport, H. W. 1974. ABC of Acid-Base Chemistry, 6th ed.
University of Chicago Press.
Edsall, J. T., and J. Wyman. 1958. Biophysical Chemistry, vol.
1. Academic Press.
Eisenberg, D., and D. Crothers. 1979. Physical Chemistry with
Applications to the Life Sciences. Benjamin-Cummings.
Gennis, R. B. 1989. Biomembranes: Molecular Structure and
Function. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Guyton, A. C., and J. E. Hall. 2000. Textbook of Medical Physiology, 10th ed. Saunders.
Hill, T. J. 1977. Free Energy Transduction in Biology. Academic
Press.
Klotz, I. M. 1978. Energy Changes in Biochemical Reactions.
Academic Press.

References
Lehninger, A. L., D. L. Nelson, and M. M. Cox. 2000. Principles of Biochemistry, 3d ed. Worth.
Murray, R. K., et al. 1999. Harper’s Biochemistry, 25th ed.
Lange.
Nicholls, D. G., and S. J. Ferguson. 1992. Bioenergetics 2. Academic Press.
Oxtoby, D., H. Gillis, and N. Nachtrieb. 2003. Principles of
Modern Chemistry, 5th ed. Saunders.
Sharon, N. 1980. Carbohydrates. Sci. Am. 243(5):90–116.
Tanford, C. 1980. The Hydrophobic Effect: Formation of Micelles and Biological Membranes, 2d ed. Wiley.

57

Tinoco, I., K. Sauer, and J. Wang. 2001. Physical Chemistry—
Principles and Applications in Biological Sciences, 4th ed. Prentice
Hall.
Van Holde, K., W. Johnson, and P. Ho. 1998. Principles of Physical Biochemistry. Prentice Hall.
Voet, D., and J. Voet. 1995. Biochemistry, 2d ed. Wiley.
Watson, J. D., et al. 2003. Molecular Biology of the Gene, 5th
ed. Benjamin-Cummings.
Wood, W. B., et al. 1981. Biochemistry: A Problems Approach,
2d ed. Benjamin-Cummings.

3
PROTEIN STRUCTURE
AND FUNCTION

Electron density map of the F1-ATPase associated with
a ring of 10 c-subunits from the F0 domain of ATP
synthase, a molecular machine that carries out the
synthesis of ATP in eubacteria, chloroplasts, and
mitochondria. [Courtesy of Andrew Leslie, MRC Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.]

P

roteins, the working molecules of a cell, carry out the
program of activities encoded by genes. This program
requires the coordinated effort of many different types
of proteins, which first evolved as rudimentary molecules
that facilitated a limited number of chemical reactions. Gradually, many of these primitive proteins evolved into a wide
array of enzymes capable of catalyzing an incredible range of
intracellular and extracellular chemical reactions, with a
speed and specificity that is nearly impossible to attain in a
test tube. With the passage of time, other proteins acquired
specialized abilities and can be grouped into several broad
functional classes: structural proteins, which provide structural rigidity to the cell; transport proteins, which control the
flow of materials across cellular membranes; regulatory proteins, which act as sensors and switches to control protein
activity and gene function; signaling proteins, including cellsurface receptors and other proteins that transmit external
signals to the cell interior; and motor proteins, which cause
motion.
A key to understanding the functional design of proteins
is the realization that many have “moving” parts and are capable of transmitting various forces and energy in an orderly
fashion. However, several critical and complex cell
processes—synthesis of nucleic acids and proteins, signal
transduction, and photosynthesis—are carried out by huge

macromolecular assemblies sometimes referred to as molecular machines.
A fundamental goal of molecular cell biologists is to understand how cells carry out various processes essential for
life. A major contribution toward achieving this goal is the
identification of all of an organism’s proteins—that is, a list
of the parts that compose the cellular machinery. The compilation of such lists has become feasible in recent years with
the sequencing of entire genomes—complete sets of genes—
of more and more organisms. From a computer analysis of

OUTLINE
3.1 Hierarchical Structure of Proteins
3.2 Folding, Modification, and Degradation
of Proteins
3.3 Enzymes and the Chemical Work of Cells
3.4 Molecular Motors and the Mechanical Work
of Cells
3.5 Common Mechanisms for Regulating Protein
Function
3.6 Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins
59

60

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

genome sequences, researchers can deduce the number and
primary structure of the encoded proteins (Chapter 9). The
term proteome was coined to refer to the entire protein complement of an organism. For example, the proteome of the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae consists of about 6000 different proteins; the human proteome is only about five times
as large, comprising about 32,000 different proteins. By
comparing protein sequences and structures, scientists can
classify many proteins in an organism’s proteome and deduce
their functions by homology with proteins of known function. Although the three-dimensional structures of relatively
few proteins are known, the function of a protein whose
structure has not been determined can often be inferred from
its interactions with other proteins, from the effects result(a)

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Primary (sequence)

Secondary (local folding)

Tertiary (long-range folding)

3.1 Hierarchical Structure of Proteins

Quaternary (multimeric organization)

Supramolecular (large-scale assemblies)
(b)
"off"
Regulation

Signaling

"on"
Structure

FUNCTION

Movement

ing from genetically mutating it, from the biochemistry of the
complex to which it belongs, or from all three.
In this chapter, we begin our study of how the structure
of a protein gives rise to its function, a theme that recurs
throughout this book (Figure 3-1). The first section examines
how chains of amino acid building blocks are arranged and
the various higher-order folded forms that the chains assume.
The next section deals with special proteins that aid in the
folding of proteins, modifications that take place after the
protein chain has been synthesized, and mechanisms that degrade proteins. The third section focuses on proteins as catalysts and reviews the basic properties exhibited by all
enzymes. We then introduce molecular motors, which convert chemical energy into motion. The structure and function
of these functional classes of proteins and others are detailed
in numerous later chapters. Various mechanisms that cells
use to control the activity of proteins are covered next. The
chapter concludes with a section on commonly used techniques in the biologist’s tool kit for isolating proteins and
characterizing their properties.

Transport

Catalysis
A

B

▲ FIGURE 3-1 Overview of protein structure and function.
(a) The linear sequence of amino acids (primary structure) folds
into helices or sheets (secondary structure) which pack into a
globular or fibrous domain (tertiary structure). Some individual
proteins self-associate into complexes (quaternary structure) that
can consist of tens to hundreds of subunits (supramolecular
assemblies). (b) Proteins display functions that include catalysis of
chemical reactions (enzymes), flow of small molecules and ions
(transport), sensing and reaction to the environment (signaling),
control of protein activity (regulation), organization of the genome,
lipid bilayer membrane, and cytoplasm (structure), and generation
of force for movement (motor proteins). These functions and
others arise from specific binding interactions and conformational
changes in the structure of a properly folded protein.

Although constructed by the polymerization of only 20 different amino acids into linear chains, proteins carry out an
incredible array of diverse tasks. A protein chain folds into
a unique shape that is stabilized by noncovalent interactions
between regions in the linear sequence of amino acids. This
spatial organization of a protein—its shape in three dimensions—is a key to understanding its function. Only when a
protein is in its correct three-dimensional structure, or conformation, is it able to function efficiently. A key concept in
understanding how proteins work is that function is derived
from three-dimensional structure, and three-dimensional
structure is specified by amino acid sequence. Here, we consider the structure of proteins at four levels of organization,
starting with their monomeric building blocks, the amino
acids.

The Primary Structure of a Protein Is Its Linear
Arrangement of Amino Acids
We reviewed the properties of the amino acids used in synthesizing proteins and their linkage by peptide bonds into linear chains in Chapter 2. The repeated amide N,  carbon
(C), and carbonyl C atoms of each amino acid residue form
the backbone of a protein molecule from which the various
side-chain groups project (Figure 3-2). As a consequence of
the peptide linkage, the backbone exhibits directionality because all the amino groups are located on the same side of
the C atoms. Thus one end of a protein has a free (unlinked)
amino group (the N-terminus) and the other end has a free
carboxyl group (the C-terminus). The sequence of a protein
chain is conventionally written with its N-terminal amino
acid on the left and its C-terminal amino acid on the right.

3.1 • Hierarchical Structure of Proteins
aa1
R

aa2

aa3

Peptide
bond

R

R

Peptide
bond

▲ FIGURE 3-2 Structure of a tripeptide. Peptide bonds
(yellow) link the amide nitrogen atom (blue) of one amino acid
(aa) with the carbonyl carbon atom (gray) of an adjacent one in
the linear polymers known as peptides or polypeptides,
depending on their length. Proteins are polypeptides that have
folded into a defined three-dimensional structure (conformation).
The side chains, or R groups (green), extending from the 
carbon atoms (black) of the amino acids composing a protein
largely determine its properties. At physiological pH values, the
terminal amino and carboxyl groups are ionized.
The primary structure of a protein is simply the linear
arrangement, or sequence, of the amino acid residues that
compose it. Many terms are used to denote the chains
formed by the polymerization of amino acids. A short chain
of amino acids linked by peptide bonds and having a defined
sequence is called a peptide; longer chains are referred to as
polypeptides. Peptides generally contain fewer than 20–30
amino acid residues, whereas polypeptides contain as many
as 4000 residues. We generally reserve the term protein for
a polypeptide (or for a complex of polypeptides) that has a
well-defined three-dimensional structure. It is implied that
proteins and peptides are the natural products of a cell.
The size of a protein or a polypeptide is reported as its
mass in daltons (a dalton is 1 atomic mass unit) or as its molecular weight (MW), which is a dimensionless number. For
example, a 10,000-MW protein has a mass of 10,000 daltons
(Da), or 10 kilodaltons (kDa). In the last section of this chapter, we will consider different methods for measuring the sizes
and other physical characteristics of proteins. The known and
predicted proteins encoded by the yeast genome have an average molecular weight of 52,728 and contain, on average,
466 amino acid residues. The average molecular weight of
amino acids in proteins is 113, taking into account their average relative abundance. This value can be used to estimate the
number of residues in a protein from its molecular weight or,
conversely, its molecular weight from the number of residues.

Secondary Structures Are the Core Elements
of Protein Architecture
The second level in the hierarchy of protein structure consists
of the various spatial arrangements resulting from the folding of localized parts of a polypeptide chain; these arrangements are referred to as secondary structures. A single

61

polypeptide may exhibit multiple types of secondary structure depending on its sequence. In the absence of stabilizing
noncovalent interactions, a polypeptide assumes a randomcoil structure. However, when stabilizing hydrogen bonds
form between certain residues, parts of the backbone fold
into one or more well-defined periodic structures: the alpha
() helix, the beta () sheet, or a short U-shaped turn. In an
average protein, 60 percent of the polypeptide chain exist as
 helices and  sheets; the remainder of the molecule is in
random coils and turns. Thus,  helices and  sheets are the
major internal supportive elements in proteins. In this section, we explore forces that favor the formation of secondary
structures. In later sections, we examine how these structures
can pack into larger arrays.

The  Helix In a polypeptide segment folded into an  helix,
the carbonyl oxygen atom of each peptide bond is hydrogenbonded to the amide hydrogen atom of the amino acid four
residues toward the C-terminus. This periodic arrangement of
bonds confers a directionality on the helix because all the
hydrogen-bond donors have the same orientation (Figure 3-3).

R
R
R

R
R

3.6 residues per
helical turn

R
R
R
R

R
R
R

R

▲ FIGURE 3-3 The  helix, a common secondary structure
in proteins. The polypeptide backbone (red) is folded into a spiral
that is held in place by hydrogen bonds between backbone
oxygen and hydrogen atoms. The outer surface of the helix is
covered by the side-chain R groups (green).

62

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

 FIGURE 3-4 The  sheet, another common
secondary structure in proteins. (a) Top view of
a simple two-stranded  sheet with antiparallel 
strands. The stabilizing hydrogen bonds between
the  strands are indicated by green dashed lines.
The short turn between the  strands also is stabilized
by a hydrogen bond. (b) Side view of a  sheet.
The projection of the R groups (green) above and
below the plane of the sheet is obvious in this view.
The fixed angle of the peptide bond produces a
pleated contour.

(a)

R
R

R
R
R

R

R

R
R

R

R

(b)

R

R

R

The stable arrangement of amino acids in the  helix holds
the backbone in a rodlike cylinder from which the side chains
point outward. The hydrophobic or hydrophilic quality of the
helix is determined entirely by the side chains because the
polar groups of the peptide backbone are already engaged in
hydrogen bonding in the helix.

The  Sheet Another type of secondary structure, the  sheet,

consists of laterally packed  strands. Each  strand is a short
(5- to 8-residue), nearly fully extended polypeptide segment.
Hydrogen bonding between backbone atoms in adjacent 
strands, within either the same polypeptide chain or between
different polypeptide chains, forms a  sheet (Figure 3-4a). The
planarity of the peptide bond forces a  sheet to be pleated;
hence this structure is also called a  pleated sheet, or simply a
pleated sheet. Like  helices,  strands have a directionality defined by the orientation of the peptide bond. Therefore, in a
pleated sheet, adjacent  strands can be oriented in the same
(parallel) or opposite (antiparallel) directions with respect to
each other. In both arrangements, the side chains project from
both faces of the sheet (Figure 3-4b). In some proteins,  sheets
form the floor of a binding pocket; the hydrophobic core of
other proteins contains multiple  sheets.

Turns Composed of three or four residues, turns are located
on the surface of a protein, forming sharp bends that redirect
the polypeptide backbone back toward the interior. These
short, U-shaped secondary structures are stabilized by a hydrogen bond between their end residues (see Figure 3-4a).
Glycine and proline are commonly present in turns. The lack
of a large side chain in glycine and the presence of a built-in
bend in proline allow the polypeptide backbone to fold into
a tight U shape. Turns allow large proteins to fold into highly
compact structures. A polypeptide backbone also may contain longer bends, or loops. In contrast with turns, which ex-

R

R

R

R

R

R

R

R
R

R
R

R R

hibit just a few well-defined structures, loops can be formed
in many different ways.

Overall Folding of a Polypeptide Chain Yields
Its Tertiary Structure
Tertiary structure refers to the overall conformation of a
polypeptide chain—that is, the three-dimensional arrangement of all its amino acid residues. In contrast with secondary structures, which are stabilized by hydrogen bonds,
tertiary structure is primarily stabilized by hydrophobic interactions between the nonpolar side chains, hydrogen bonds
between polar side chains, and peptide bonds. These stabilizing forces hold elements of secondary structure— helices,
 strands, turns, and random coils—compactly together.
Because the stabilizing interactions are weak, however, the
tertiary structure of a protein is not rigidly fixed but undergoes continual and minute fluctuation. This variation in
structure has important consequences in the function and
regulation of proteins.
Different ways of depicting the conformation of proteins
convey different types of information. The simplest way to
represent three-dimensional structure is to trace the course of
the backbone atoms with a solid line (Figure 3-5a); the most
complex model shows every atom (Figure 3-5b). The former,
a C trace, shows the overall organization of the polypeptide
chain without consideration of the amino acid side chains;
the latter, a ball-and-stick model, details the interactions between side-chain atoms, which stabilize the protein’s conformation, as well as the atoms of the backbone. Even though
both views are useful, the elements of secondary structure are
not easily discerned in them. Another type of representation
uses common shorthand symbols for depicting secondary
structure—for example, coiled ribbons or solid cylinders for
 helices, flat ribbons or arrows for  strands, and flexible

3.1 • Hierarchical Structure of Proteins
(a) Cα backbone trace

(c) Ribbons

 FIGURE 3-5 Various graphic

(b) Ball and stick

(d) Solvent-accessible surface

thin strands for turns and loops (Figure 3-5c). This type of
representation makes the secondary structures of a protein
easy to see.
However, none of these three ways of representing protein structure convey much information about the protein
surface, which is of interest because it is where other molecules bind to a protein. Computer analysis can identify the
surface atoms that are in contact with the watery environment. On this water-accessible surface, regions having a
common chemical character (hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity) and electrical character (basic or acidic) can be mapped.
Such models reveal the topography of the protein surface and
the distribution of charge, both important features of binding sites, as well as clefts in the surface where small molecules often bind (Figure 3-5d). This view represents a protein
as it is “seen” by another molecule.

Motifs Are Regular Combinations of Secondary
Structures
Particular combinations of secondary structures, called motifs or folds, build up the tertiary structure of a protein. In
some cases, motifs are signatures for a specific function. For
example, the helix-loop-helix is a Ca2-binding motif
marked by the presence of certain hydrophilic residues at invariant positions in the loop (Figure 3-6a). Oxygen atoms in

63

representations of the structure of Ras,
a monomeric guanine nucleotide-binding
protein. The inactive, guanosine
diphosphate (GDP)–bound form is shown
in all four panels, with GDP always depicted
in blue spacefill. (a) The C backbone trace
demonstrates how the polypeptide is
packed into the smallest possible volume.
(b) A ball-and-stick representation reveals
the location of all atoms. (c) A ribbon
representation emphasizes how  strands
(blue) and  helices (red) are organized in
the protein. Note the turns and loops
connecting pairs of helices and strands.
(d) A model of the water-accessible surface
reveals the numerous lumps, bumps, and
crevices on the protein surface. Regions of
positive charge are shaded blue; regions of
negative charge are shaded red.

the invariant residues bind a Ca2 ion through ionic bonds.
This motif, also called the EF hand, has been found in more
than 100 calcium-binding proteins. In another common
motif, the zinc finger, three secondary structures—an  helix
and two  strands with an antiparallel orientation—form a
fingerlike bundle held together by a zinc ion (Figure 3-6b).
This motif is most commonly found in proteins that bind
RNA or DNA.
Many proteins, especially fibrous proteins, self-associate
into oligomers by using a third motif, the coiled coil. In these
proteins, each polypeptide chain contains -helical segments
in which the hydrophobic residues, although apparently
randomly arranged, are in a regular pattern—a repeated
heptad sequence. In the heptad, a hydrophobic residue—
sometimes valine, alanine, or methionine—is at position 1
and a leucine residue is at position 4. Because hydrophilic
side chains extend from one side of the helix and hydrophobic side chains extend from the opposite side, the overall helical structure is amphipathic. The amphipathic character of
these  helices permits two, three, or four helices to wind
around each other, forming a coiled coil; hence the name of
this motif (Figure 3-6c).
We will encounter numerous additional motifs in later
discussions of other proteins in this chapter and other chapters. The presence of the same motif in different proteins
with similar functions clearly indicates that these useful

64

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function
(c) Coiled coil motif
N
(a) Helix-loop-helix motif
Ca2+

N

(b) Zinc-finger motif
Leu (4)

Asn

Asp

C

Thr

His

Zn2+

Val (1)

H2O
Glu

Asp

Cys

N

Leu (4)

His

Asn (1)

Cys

Leu (4)
Val (1)
N
Leu (4)
C

Consensus sequence:
F/Y - C - - C - - - - F/Y - - - - - - - - H - - - H C

Consensus sequence:
D/N - D/N - D/N/S - [backbone O] - - - - E/D

▲ FIGURE 3-6 Motifs of protein secondary structure.
(a) Two helices connected by a short loop in a specific
conformation constitute a helix-loop-helix motif. This motif exists
in many calcium-binding and DNA-binding regulatory proteins.
In calcium-binding proteins such as calmodulin, oxygen atoms
from five loop residues and one water molecule form ionic bonds
with a Ca2 ion. (b) The zinc-finger motif is present in many
DNA-binding proteins that help regulate transcription. A Zn2 ion
is held between a pair of  strands (blue) and a single  helix
(red) by a pair of cysteine residues and a pair of histidine
residues. The two invariant cysteine residues are usually at
positions 3 and 6 and the two invariant histidine residues are

combinations of secondary structures have been conserved in
evolution. To date, hundreds of motifs have been cataloged
and proteins are now classified according to their motifs.

Structural and Functional Domains Are Modules
of Tertiary Structure
The tertiary structure of proteins larger than 15,000 MW is
typically subdivided into distinct regions called domains.
Structurally, a domain is a compactly folded region of
polypeptide. For large proteins, domains can be recognized
in structures determined by x-ray crystallography or in images captured by electron microscopy. Although these discrete regions are well distinguished or physically separated
from one another, they are connected by intervening segments of the polypeptide chain. Each of the subunits in
hemagglutinin, for example, contains a globular domain and
a fibrous domain (Figure 3-7a).

C

Heptad repeat:
[V/N/M] - - L - - -

at positions 20 and 24 in this 25-residue motif. (c) The parallel
two-stranded coiled-coil motif found in the transcription factor
Gcn4 is characterized by two  helices wound around one
another. Helix packing is stabilized by interactions between
hydrophobic side chains (red and blue) present at regular
intervals along the surfaces of the intertwined helices. Each 
helix exhibits a characteristic heptad repeat sequence with a
hydrophobic residue at positions 1 and 4. [See A. Lewit-Bentley
and S. Rety, 2000, EF-hand calcium-binding proteins, Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 10:637–643; S. A. Wolfe, L. Nekludova, and C. O. Pabo, 2000,
DNA recognition by Cys2His2 zinc finger proteins, Ann. Rev. Biophys.
Biomol. Struct. 29:183–212.]

A structural domain consists of 100–150 residues in various combinations of motifs. Often a domain is characterized
by some interesting structural feature: an unusual abundance
of a particular amino acid (e.g., a proline-rich domain, an
acidic domain), sequences common to (conserved in) many
proteins (e.g., SH3, or Src homology region 3), or a particular secondary-structure motif (e.g., zinc-finger motif in the
kringle domain).
Domains are sometimes defined in functional terms on
the basis of observations that an activity of a protein is localized to a small region along its length. For instance, a particular region or regions of a protein may be responsible for
its catalytic activity (e.g., a kinase domain) or binding ability
(e.g., a DNA-binding domain, a membrane-binding domain).
Functional domains are often identified experimentally by
whittling down a protein to its smallest active fragment with
the aid of proteases, enzymes that cleave the polypeptide
backbone. Alternatively, the DNA encoding a protein can be

3.1 • Hierarchical Structure of Proteins
(a)

(b)

Sialic acid

PROXIMAL

Globular
domain

Fibrous
domain

N

HA1

N

C

Viral
membrane

subjected to mutagenesis so that segments of the protein’s
backbone are removed or changed. The activity of the truncated or altered protein product synthesized from the mutated gene is then monitored and serves as a source of insight
about which part of a protein is critical to its function.
The organization of large proteins into multiple domains illustrates the principle that complex molecules are
built from simpler components. Like motifs of secondary
structure, domains of tertiary structure are incorporated as
modules into different proteins. In Chapter 10 we consider
the mechanism by which the gene segments that correspond
to domains became shuffled in the course of evolution, resulting in their appearance in many proteins. The modular
approach to protein architecture is particularly easy to recognize in large proteins, which tend to be mosaics of different domains and thus can perform different functions
simultaneously.
The epidermal growth factor (EGF) domain is one example of a module that is present in several proteins (Figure 3-8).
EGF is a small, soluble peptide hormone that binds to cells in
the embryo and in skin and connective tissue in adults, causing them to divide. It is generated by proteolytic cleavage between repeated EGF domains in the EGF precursor protein,
which is anchored in the cell membrane by a membranespanning domain. EGF modules are also present in other
proteins and are liberated by proteolysis; these proteins include tissue plasminogen activator (TPA), a protease that is
used to dissolve blood clots in heart attack victims;

 FIGURE 3-7 Tertiary and quaternary
levels of structure in hemagglutinin (HA),
a surface protein on influenza virus. This
long multimeric molecule has three identical
subunits, each composed of two polypeptide
chains, HA1 and HA2. (a) Tertiary structure of
each HA subunit constitutes the folding of its
helices and strands into a compact structure
that is 13.5 nm long and divided into two
domains. The membrane-distal domain is
folded into a globular conformation. The
membrane-proximal domain has a fibrous,
stemlike conformation owing to the alignment
of two long  helices (cylinders) of HA2 with
 strands in HA1. Short turns and longer
loops, which usually lie at the surface of the
molecule, connect the helices and strands in
a given chain. (b) Quaternary structure of HA
is stabilized by lateral interactions between
the long helices (cylinders) in the fibrous
domains of the three subunits (yellow, blue,
and green), forming a triple-stranded coiledcoil stalk. Each of the distal globular domains
in HA binds sialic acid (red) on the surface of
target cells. Like many membrane proteins,
HA contains several covalently linked
carbohydrate chains (not shown).

HA2

DISTAL

65

Neu protein, which takes part in embryonic differentiation;
and Notch protein, a receptor protein in the plasma membrane that functions in developmentally important signaling
(Chapter 14). Besides the EGF domain, these proteins contain domains found in other proteins. For example, TPA possesses a trypsin domain, a common feature in enzymes that
degrade proteins.

EGF

Neu

EGF
precursor
TPA

▲ FIGURE 3-8 Schematic diagrams of various proteins
illustrating their modular nature. Epidermal growth factor
(EGF) is generated by proteolytic cleavage of a precursor protein
containing multiple EGF domains (green) and a membranespanning domain (blue). The EGF domain is also present in Neu
protein and in tissue plasminogen activator (TPA). These proteins
also contain other widely distributed domains indicated by shape
and color. [Adapted from I. D. Campbell and P. Bork, 1993, Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 3:385.]

66

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

Proteins Associate into Multimeric Structures
and Macromolecular Assemblies
Multimeric proteins consist of two or more polypeptides or
subunits. A fourth level of structural organization, quaternary
structure, describes the number (stoichiometry) and relative
positions of the subunits in multimeric proteins. Hemagglutinin, for example, is a trimer of three identical subunits held
together by noncovalent bonds (Figure 3-7b). Other multimeric proteins can be composed of any number of identical or
different subunits. The multimeric nature of many proteins
is critical to mechanisms for regulating their function. In addition, enzymes in the same pathway may be associated as
subunits of a large multimeric protein within the cell, thereby
increasing the efficiency of pathway operation.
The highest level of protein structure is the association
of proteins into macromolecular assemblies. Typically, such
structures are very large, exceeding 1 mDa in mass, approaching 30–300 nm in size, and containing tens to hundreds of polypeptide chains, as well as nucleic acids in some

TABLE 3-1

cases. Macromolecular assemblies with a structural function
include the capsid that encases the viral genome and bundles
of cytoskeletal filaments that support and give shape to the
plasma membrane. Other macromolecular assemblies act as
molecular machines, carrying out the most complex cellular
processes by integrating individual functions into one coordinated process. For example, the transcriptional machine
that initiates the synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA) consists of RNA polymerase, itself a multimeric protein, and at
least 50 additional components including general transcription factors, promoter-binding proteins, helicase, and other
protein complexes (Figure 3-9). The transcription factors
and promoter-binding proteins correctly position a polymerase molecule at a promoter, the DNA site that determines
where transcription of a specific gene begins. After helicase
unwinds the double-stranded DNA molecule, polymerase simultaneously translocates along the DNA template strand
and synthesizes an mRNA strand. The operational details of
this complex machine and of others listed in Table 3-1 are
discussed elsewhere.

Selected Molecular Machines

Machine*

Main Components

Cellular Location

Function

Replisome (4)

Helicase, primase, DNA polymerase

Nucleus

DNA replication

Transcription initiation
complex (11)

Promoter-binding protein, helicase,
general transcription factors (TFs), RNA
polymerase, large multisubunit mediator
complex

Nucleus

RNA synthesis

Spliceosome (12)

Pre-mRNA, small nuclear RNAs
(snRNAs), protein factors

Nucleus

mRNA splicing

Nuclear pore
complex (12)

Nucleoporins (50–100)

Nuclear membrane

Nuclear import
and export

Ribosome (4)

Ribosomal proteins (50) and four
rRNA molecules (eukaryotes) organized
into large and small subunits; associated
mRNA and protein factors (IFs, EFs)

Cytoplasm/ER membrane

Protein synthesis

Chaperonin (3)

GroEL, GroES (bacteria)

Cytoplasm,
mitochondria,
endoplasmic
reticulum

Protein folding

Proteasome (3)

Core proteins, regulatory (cap) proteins

Cytoplasm

Protein degradation

Photosystem (8)

Light-harvesting complex (multiple
proteins and pigments), reaction center
(multisubunit protein with associated
pigments and electron carriers)

Thylakoid membrane
in plant chloroplasts,
plasma membrane of
photosynthetic bacteria

Photosynthesis
(initial stage)

MAP kinase
cascades (14)

Scaffold protein, multiple different
protein kinases

Cytoplasm

Signal transduction

Sarcomere (19)

Thick (myosin) filaments, thin (actin)
filaments, Z lines, titin/nebulin

Cytoplasm of
muscle cells

Contraction

*

Numbers in parentheses indicate chapters in which various machines are discussed.

3.1 • Hierarchical Structure of Proteins

Members of Protein Families Have a Common
Evolutionary Ancestor

General transcription factors

+

67

+

RNA polymerase
Mediator
complex
DNA
Promoter

Transcription
preinitiation
complex

▲ FIGURE 3-9 The mRNA transcription-initiation machinery.
The core RNA polymerase, general transcription factors, a
mediator complex containing about 20 subunits, and other
protein complexes not depicted here assemble at a promoter in
DNA. The polymerase carries out transcription of DNA; the
associated proteins are required for initial binding of polymerase
to a specific promoter, thereby initiating transcription.

Studies on myoglobin and hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying
proteins in muscle and blood, respectively, provided early evidence that function derives from three-dimensional structure, which in turn is specified by amino acid sequence.
X-ray crystallographic analysis showed that the threedimensional structures of myoglobin and the  and  subunits of hemoglobin are remarkably similar. Subsequent sequencing of myoglobin and the hemoglobin subunits
revealed that many identical or chemically similar residues
are found in identical positions throughout the primary
structures of both proteins.
Similar comparisons between other proteins conclusively
confirmed the relation between the amino acid sequence,
three-dimensional structure, and function of proteins. This
principle is now commonly employed to predict, on the
basis of sequence comparisons with proteins of known
structure and function, the structure and function of proteins that have not been isolated (Chapter 9). This use of
sequence comparisons has expanded substantially in recent
years as the genomes of more and more organisms have
been sequenced.
The molecular revolution in biology during the last
decades of the twentieth century also created a new scheme
α

α

Vertebrate
HEMOGLOBIN

α

β

MYOGLOBIN

Dicot
Monocot
hemoglobin LEGHEMOGLOBIN hemoglobin
Annelid

Insect
Nematode
β

β
Hemoglobin

Protozoan
Algal
Fungal
Bacterial

Ancestral
oxygen-binding
protein

▲ FIGURE 3-10 Evolution of the globin protein family. (Left)
A primitive monomeric oxygen-binding globin is thought to be the
ancestor of modern-day blood hemoglobins, muscle myoglobins,
and plant leghemoglobins. Sequence comparisons have revealed
that evolution of the globin proteins parallels the evolution of
animals and plants. Major junctions occurred with the divergence
of plant globins from animal globins and of myoglobin from
hemoglobin. Later gene duplication gave rise to the  and 

Leghemoglobin

β subunit
of hemoglobin

Myoglobin

subunits of hemoglobin. (Right) Hemoglobin is a tetramer of two
 and two  subunits. The structural similarity of these subunits
with leghemoglobin and myoglobin, both of which are
monomers, is evident. A heme molecule (red) noncovalently
associated with each globin polypeptide is the actual oxygenbinding moiety in these proteins. [(Left) Adapted from R. C.
Hardison, 1996, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:5675.]

68

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

of biological classification based on similarities and differences in the amino acid sequences of proteins. Proteins that
have a common ancestor are referred to as homologs. The
main evidence for homology among proteins, and hence
their common ancestry, is similarity in their sequences or
structures. We can therefore describe homologous proteins
as belonging to a “family” and can trace their lineage from
comparisons of their sequences. The folded three-dimensional structures of homologous proteins are similar even if
parts of their primary structure show little evidence of
homology.
The kinship among homologous proteins is most easily
visualized by a tree diagram based on sequence analyses. For
example, the amino acid sequences of globins from bacteria,
plants, and animals suggest that they evolved from an ancestral monomeric, oxygen-binding protein (Figure 3-10).
With the passage of time, the gene for this ancestral protein
slowly changed, initially diverging into lineages leading to
animal and plant globins. Subsequent changes gave rise to
myoglobin, a monomeric oxygen-storing protein in muscle,
and to the  and  subunits of the tetrameric hemoglobin
molecule (22) of the circulatory system.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 3.1
Hierarchical Structure of Proteins
A protein is a linear polymer of amino acids linked
together by peptide bonds. Various, mostly noncovalent,
interactions between amino acids in the linear sequence
stabilize a specific folded three-dimensional structure (conformation) for each protein.

■

The  helix,  strand and sheet, and turn are the most
prevalent elements of protein secondary structure, which
is stabilized by hydrogen bonds between atoms of the peptide backbone.

■

Certain combinations of secondary structures give rise
to different motifs, which are found in a variety of proteins and are often associated with specific functions (see
Figure 3-6).

■

Protein tertiary structure results from hydrophobic interactions between nonpolar side groups and hydrogen
bonds between polar side groups that stabilize folding of
the secondary structure into a compact overall arrangement, or conformation.

■

■ Large proteins often contain distinct domains, independently folded regions of tertiary structure with characteristic
structural or functional properties or both (see Figure 3-7).

The incorporation of domains as modules in different
proteins in the course of evolution has generated diversity
in protein structure and function.

■

Quaternary structure encompasses the number and organization of subunits in multimeric proteins.

■

Cells contain large macromolecular assemblies in which
all the necessary participants in complex cellular processes
(e.g., DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis; photosynthesis;
signal transduction) are integrated to form molecular machines (see Table 3-1).

■

■ The sequence of a protein determines its three-dimensional
structure, which determines its function. In short, function
derives from structure; structure derives from sequence.

Homologous proteins, which have similar sequences,
structures, and functions, evolved from a common ancestor.

■

3.2 Folding, Modification,
and Degradation of Proteins
A polypeptide chain is synthesized by a complex process called
translation in which the assembly of amino acids in a particular sequence is dictated by messenger RNA (mRNA). The intricacies of translation are considered in Chapter 4. Here, we
describe how the cell promotes the proper folding of a nascent polypeptide chain and, in many cases, modifies residues
or cleaves the polypeptide backbone to generate the final protein. In addition, the cell has error-checking processes that
eliminate incorrectly synthesized or folded proteins. Incorrectly folded proteins usually lack biological activity and, in
some cases, may actually be associated with disease. Protein
misfolding is suppressed by two distinct mechanisms. First,
cells have systems that reduce the chances for misfolded proteins to form. Second, any misfolded proteins that do form,
as well as cytosolic proteins no longer needed by a cell, are degraded by a specialized cellular garbage-disposal system.

The Information for Protein Folding Is Encoded
in the Sequence
Any polypeptide chain containing n residues could, in principle, fold into 8n conformations. This value is based on the
fact that only eight bond angles are stereochemically allowed
in the polypeptide backbone. In general, however, all molecules of any protein species adopt a single conformation,
called the native state; for the vast majority of proteins, the
native state is the most stably folded form of the molecule.
What guides proteins to their native folded state? The answer to this question initially came from in vitro studies on
protein refolding. Thermal energy from heat, extremes of pH
that alter the charges on amino acid side chains, and chemicals such as urea or guanidine hydrochloride at concentrations of 6–8 M can disrupt the weak noncovalent interactions
that stabilize the native conformation of a protein. The
denaturation resulting from such treatment causes a protein
to lose both its native conformation and its biological activity.
Many proteins that are completely unfolded in 8 M urea
and -mercaptoethanol (which reduces disulfide bonds) spontaneously renature (refold) into their native states when the denaturing reagents are removed by dialysis. Because no cofactors

3.2 • Folding, Modification, and Degradation of Proteins

69

class of proteins found in all organisms from bacteria to humans. Chaperones are located in every cellular compartment,
bind a wide range of proteins, and function in the general
protein-folding mechanism of cells. Two general families of
chaperones are reconized:

or other proteins are required, in vitro protein folding is a selfdirected process. In other words, sufficient information must
be contained in the protein’s primary sequence to direct correct refolding. The observed similarity in the folded, threedimensional structures of proteins with similar amino acid
sequences, noted in Section 3.1, provided other evidence that
the primary sequence also determines protein folding in vivo.

■ Molecular chaperones, which bind and stabilize unfolded or partly folded proteins, thereby preventing these
proteins from aggregating and being degraded

Folding of Proteins in Vivo Is Promoted
by Chaperones

■

Although protein folding occurs in vitro, only a minority of
unfolded molecules undergo complete folding into the native
conformation within a few minutes. Clearly, cells require a
faster, more efficient mechanism for folding proteins into
their correct shapes; otherwise, cells would waste much energy in the synthesis of nonfunctional proteins and in the
degradation of misfolded or unfolded proteins. Indeed, more
than 95 percent of the proteins present within cells have been
shown to be in their native conformation, despite high protein concentrations (200–300 mg/ml), which favor the precipitation of proteins in vitro.
The explanation for the cell’s remarkable efficiency in
promoting protein folding probably lies in chaperones, a

Molecular chaperones consist of Hsp70 and its homologs:
Hsp70 in the cytosol and mitochondrial matrix, BiP in the endoplasmic reticulum, and DnaK in bacteria. First identified
by their rapid appearance after a cell has been stressed by heat
shock, Hsp70 and its homologs are the major chaperones in
all organisms. (Hsc70 is a constitutively expressed homolog of
Hsp70.) When bound to ATP, Hsp70-like proteins assume an
open form in which an exposed hydrophobic pocket transiently binds to exposed hydrophobic regions of the unfolded
target protein. Hydrolysis of the bound ATP causes molecular chaperones to assume a closed form in which a target protein can undergo folding. The exchange of ATP for ADP
releases the target protein (Figure 3-11a, top). This cycle is

Chaperonins, which directly facilitate the folding of
proteins

(a)

(b)

Ribosome

Protein

Partially
folded
protein

ATP

Properly
folded
protein
GroEL "tight"
conformation

ADP
+
Pi

Protein

Properly
folded
protein

ATP
GroES
GroEL

▲ FIGURE 3-11 Chaperone- and chaperonin-mediated
protein folding. (a) Many proteins fold into their proper threedimensional structures with the assistance of Hsp70-like proteins
(top). These molecular chaperones transiently bind to a nascent
polypeptide as it emerges from a ribosome. Proper folding of
other proteins (bottom) depends on chaperonins such as the
prokaryotic GroEL, a hollow, barrel-shaped complex of 14
identical 60,000-MW subunits arranged in two stacked rings.

GroEL "relaxed"
conformation

One end of GroEL is transiently blocked by the cochaperonin GroES, an assembly of 10,000-MW subunits.
(b) In the absence of ATP or presence of ADP, GroEL exists
in a “tight” conformational state that binds partly folded or
misfolded proteins. Binding of ATP shifts GroEL to a more
open, “relaxed” state, which releases the folded protein.
See text for details. [Part (b) from A. Roseman et al., 1996, Cell
87:241; courtesy of H. Saibil.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Hsp 70-ATP

ADP

Focus Animation: Chaperone-Mediated Folding

Pi

70

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

speeded by the co-chaperone Hsp40 in eukaryotes. In bacteria,
an additional protein called GrpE also interacts with DnaK,
promoting the exchange of ATP for the bacterial co-chaperone
DnaJ and possibly its dissociation. Molecular chaperones are
thought to bind all nascent polypeptide chains as they are
being synthesized on ribosomes. In bacteria, 85 percent of the
proteins are released from their chaperones and proceed to
fold normally; an even higher percentage of proteins in eukaryotes follow this pathway.
The proper folding of a large variety of newly synthesized
or translocated proteins also requires the assistance of chaperonins. These huge cylindrical macromolecular assemblies are
formed from two rings of oligomers. The eukaryotic chaperonin TriC consists of eight subunits per ring. In the bacterial,
mitochondrial, and chloroplast chaperonin, known as GroEL,
each ring contains seven identical subunits (Figure 3-11b). The
GroEL folding mechanism, which is better understood than
TriC-mediated folding, serves as a general model (Figure
3-11a, bottom). In bacteria, a partly folded or misfolded
polypeptide is inserted into the cavity of GroEL, where it binds
to the inner wall and folds into its native conformation. In an
ATP-dependent step, GroEL undergoes a conformational
change and releases the folded protein, a process assisted by a
co-chaperonin, GroES, which caps the ends of GroEL.

Many Proteins Undergo Chemical Modification
of Amino Acid Residues
Nearly every protein in a cell is chemically modified after its
synthesis on a ribosome. Such modifications, which may
alter the activity, life span, or cellular location of proteins,
entail the linkage of a chemical group to the free –NH2 or
–COOH group at either end of a protein or to a reactive sidechain group in an internal residue. Although cells use the 20
amino acids shown in Figure 2-13 to synthesize proteins,
analysis of cellular proteins reveals that they contain upward
of 100 different amino acids. Chemical modifications after
synthesis account for this difference.
Acetylation, the addition of an acetyl group (CH3CO) to
the amino group of the N-terminal residue, is the most common form of chemical modification, affecting an estimated
80 percent of all proteins:
R

O

N

C

C

H

H

O
CH3

C

O
Acetyl lysine

CH3

C

N

CH2

CH2

CH2

COO

CH

CH2

NH3
O
Phosphoserine

−O

P

CH2

O

CH



COO

NH3

O−

OH
3-Hydroxyproline

H2C

CH

H2C

CH


HC
3-Methylhistidine

H 3C



N

CH2



CH

COO

NH3

N

OOC

 -Carboxyglutamate

CH


NH2

C
C
H

COO

OOC

CH2

CH



COO

NH3

▲ FIGURE 3-12 Common modifications of internal amino
acid residues found in proteins. These modified residues and
numerous others are formed by addition of various chemical
groups (red) to the amino acid side chains after synthesis of a
polypeptide chain.
Acetyl groups and a variety of other chemical groups can
also be added to specific internal residues in proteins (Figure 3-12). An important modification is the phosphorylation
of serine, threonine, tyrosine, and histidine residues. We will
encounter numerous examples of proteins whose activity is
regulated by reversible phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. The side chains of asparagine, serine, and threonine
are sites for glycosylation, the attachment of linear and
branched carbohydrate chains. Many secreted proteins and
membrane proteins contain glycosylated residues; the synthesis of such proteins is described in Chapters 16 and 17.
Other post-translational modifications found in selected proteins include the hydroxylation of proline and lysine residues
in collagen, the methylation of histidine residues in membrane receptors, and the -carboxylation of glutamate in
prothrombin, an essential blood-clotting factor. A special
modification, discussed shortly, marks cytosolic proteins for
degradation.

Acetylated N-terminus

This modification may play an important role in controlling
the life span of proteins within cells because nonacetylated
proteins are rapidly degraded by intracellular proteases.
Residues at or near the termini of some membrane proteins are
chemically modified by the addition of long lipidlike groups.
The attachment of these hydrophobic “tails,” which function
to anchor proteins to the lipid bilayer, constitutes one way that
cells localize certain proteins to membranes (Chapter 5).

Peptide Segments of Some Proteins Are Removed
After Synthesis
After their synthesis, some proteins undergo irreversible
changes that do not entail changes in individual amino acid
residues. This type of post-translational alteration is sometimes called processing. The most common form is enzymatic
cleavage of a backbone peptide bond by proteases, resulting
in the removal of residues from the C- or N-terminus of a

71

3.2 • Folding, Modification, and Degradation of Proteins
(a)

NH2
Ub

AMP
+ PPi

+ ATP

C

O E2

E1

Ub

E1
1

C

Cytosolic
target protein

O

Ub
2

3

E3
E2

O

E1 = Ubiquitin-activating enzyme

NH

E2 = Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme

C

Ub

E3 = Ubiquitin ligase
Ub = Ubiquitin

Steps 1, 2, 3
(n times)

(b)

Ub

Ub

Ub

n

Cap
ATP
4
ADP
Core

Ubiquitin Marks Cytosolic Proteins
for Degradation in Proteasomes
In addition to chemical modifications and processing, the activity of a cellular protein depends on the amount present,
which reflects the balance between its rate of synthesis and
rate of degradation in the cell. The numerous ways that cells
regulate protein synthesis are discussed in later chapters. In
this section, we examine protein degradation, focusing on
the major pathways for degrading cytosolic proteins.
The life span of intracellular proteins varies from as short
as a few minutes for mitotic cyclins, which help regulate passage through mitosis, to as long as the age of an organism for
proteins in the lens of the eye. Eukaryotic cells have several
intracellular proteolytic pathways for degrading misfolded or
denatured proteins, normal proteins whose concentration
must be decreased, and extracellular proteins taken up by the
cell. One major intracellular pathway is degradation by enzymes within lysosomes, membrane-limited organelles whose
acidic interior is filled with hydrolytic enzymes. Lysosomal
degradation is directed primarily toward extracellular proteins taken up by the cell and aged or defective organelles of
the cell (see Figure 5-20).
Distinct from the lysosomal pathway are cytosolic mechanisms for degrading proteins. Chief among these mechanisms
is a pathway that includes the chemical modification of a lysine side chain by the addition of ubiquitin, a 76-residue
polypeptide, followed by degradation of the ubiquitin-tagged
protein by a specialized proteolytic machine. Ubiquitination
is a three-step process (Figure 3-13a):
■ Activation of ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1) by the
addition of a ubitiquin molecule, a reaction that requires
ATP

Transfer of this ubiquitin molecule to a cysteine residue
in ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2)

■

Proteasome
Ub
Cap

Ub
5
Ub
Peptides

▲ FIGURE 3-13 Ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic
pathway. (a) Enzyme E1 is activated by attachment of a
ubiquitin (Ub) molecule (step 1 ) and then transfers this Ub
molecule to E2 (step 2 ). Ubiquitin ligase (E3) transfers the
bound Ub molecule on E2 to the side-chain —NH2 of a lysine
residue in a target protein (step 3 ). Additional Ub molecules
are added to the target protein by repeating steps 1 – 3 ,
forming a polyubiquitin chain that directs the tagged protein
to a proteasome (step 4 ). Within this large complex, the
protein is cleaved into numerous small peptide fragments
(step 5 ). (b) Computer-generated image reveals that a
proteasome has a cylindrical structure with a cap at each end
of a core region. Proteolysis of ubiquitin-tagged proteins
occurs along the inner wall of the core. [Part (b) from
W. Baumeister et al., 1998, Cell 92:357; courtesy of W. Baumeister.]

Formation of a peptide bond between the ubiquitin
molecule bound to E2 and a lysine residue in the target
protein, a reaction catalyzed by ubiquitin ligase (E3)

■

This process is repeated many times, with each subsequent
ubiquitin molecule being added to the preceding one. The resulting polyubiquitin chain is recognized by a proteasome,
another of the cell’s molecular machines (Figure 3-13b). The
numerous proteasomes dispersed throughout the cell cytosol
proteolytically cleave ubiquitin-tagged proteins in an ATPdependent process that yields short (7- to 8-residue) peptides
and intact ubiquitin molecules.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

E2

E1

Overview Animation: Life Cycle of a Protein

polypeptide chain. Proteolytic cleavage is a common mechanism for activating enzymes that function in blood coagulation, digestion, and programmed cell death (Chapter 22).
Proteolysis also generates active peptide hormones, such as
EGF and insulin, from larger precursor polypeptides.
An unusual and rare type of processing, termed protein
self-splicing, takes place in bacteria and some eukaryotes.
This process is analogous to editing film: an internal segment
of a polypeptide is removed and the ends of the polypeptide
are rejoined. Unlike proteolytic processing, protein selfsplicing is an autocatalytic process, which proceeds by itself
without the participation of enzymes. The excised peptide
appears to eliminate itself from the protein by a mechanism
similar to that used in the processing of some RNA molecules (Chapter 12). In vertebrate cells, the processing of some
proteins includes self-cleavage, but the subsequent ligation
step is absent. One such protein is Hedgehog, a membranebound signaling molecule that is critical to a number of developmental processes (Chapter 15).

72

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

Cellular proteins degraded by the ubiquitin-mediated
pathway fall into one of two general categories: (1) native cytosolic proteins whose life spans are tightly controlled and
(2) proteins that become misfolded in the course of their synthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Both contain sequences recognized by the ubiquitinating enzyme complex.
The cyclins, for example, are cytosolic proteins whose
amounts are tightly controlled throughout the cell cycle.
These proteins contain the internal sequence Arg-X-X-LeuGly-X-Ile-Gly-Asp/Asn (X can be any amino acid), which is
recognized by specific ubiquitinating enzyme complexes. At
a specific time in the cell cycle, each cyclin is phosphorylated
by a cyclin kinase. This phosphorylation is thought to cause
a conformational change that exposes the recognition sequence to the ubiquitinating enzymes, leading to degradation
of the tagged cyclin (Chapter 21). Similarly, the misfolding of
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum exposes hydrophobic
sequences normally buried within the folded protein. Such
proteins are transported to the cytosol, where ubiquitinating enzymes recognize the exposed hydrophobic sequences.
The immune system also makes use of the ubiquitinmediated pathway in the response to altered self-cells, particularly virus-infected cells. Viral proteins within the cytosol
of infected cells are ubiquitinated and then degraded in proteasomes specially designed for this role. The resulting antigenic peptides are transported to the endoplasmic reticulum,
where they bind to class I major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules within the ER membrane. Subsequently,
the peptide-MHC complexes move to the cell membrane
where the antigenic peptides can be recognized by cytotoxic
T lymphocytes, which mediate the destruction of the infected
cells.

Alternatively Folded Proteins Are Implicated in
Slowly Developing Diseases
As noted earlier, each protein species normally folds
into a single, energetically favorable conformation
that is specified by its amino acid sequence. Recent
evidence suggests, however, that a protein may fold into an alternative three-dimensional structure as the result of mutations, inappropriate post-translational modification, or other
as-yet-unidentified reasons. Such “misfolding” not only leads
to a loss of the normal function of the protein but also marks
it for proteolytic degradation. The subsequent accumulation
of proteolytic fragments contributes to certain degenerative
diseases characterized by the presence of insoluble protein
plaques in various organs, including the liver and brain. ❚
Some neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s
disease and Parkinson’s disease in humans and transmissible
spongiform encephalopathy (“mad cow” disease) in cows

(b)

(a)

Digestive Proteases Degrade Dietary Proteins
The major extracellular pathway for protein degradation is the
system of digestive proteases that breaks down ingested proteins into peptides and amino acids in the intestinal tract.
Three classes of proteases function in digestion. Endoproteases
attack selected peptide bonds within a polypeptide chain. The
principal endoproteases are pepsin, which preferentially
cleaves the backbone adjacent to phenylalanine and leucine
residues, and trypsin and chymotrypsin, which cleave the
backbone adjacent to basic and aromatic residues. Exopeptidases sequentially remove residues from the N-terminus
(aminopeptidases) or C-terminus (carboxypeptidases) of a
protein. Peptidases split oligopeptides containing as many as
about 20 amino acids into di- and tripeptides and individual
amino acids. These small molecules are then transported
across the intestinal lining into the bloodstream.
To protect a cell from degrading itself, endoproteases and
carboxypeptidases are synthesized and secreted as inactive
forms (zymogens): pepsin by chief cells in the lining of the
stomach; the others by pancreatic cells. Proteolytic cleavage
of the zymogens within the gastic or intestinal lumen yields
the active enzymes. Intestinal epithelial cells produce
aminopeptidases and the di- and tripeptidases.

20 m

100 nm

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-14 Alzheimer’s disease is
characterized by the formation of insoluble plaques
composed of amyloid protein. (a) At low resolution, an amyloid
plaque in the brain of an Alzheimer’s patient appears as a tangle
of filaments. (b) The regular structure of filaments from plaques
is revealed in the atomic force microscope. Proteolysis of the
naturally occurring amyloid precursor protein yields a short
fragment, called -amyloid protein, that for unknown reasons
changes from an -helical to a -sheet conformation. This
alternative structure aggregates into the highly stable filaments
(amyloid) found in plaques. Similar pathologic changes in other
proteins cause other degenerative diseases. [Courtesy of K. Kosik.]

3.3 • Enzymes and the Chemical Work of Cells

and sheep, are marked by the formation of tangled filamentous plaques in a deteriorating brain (Figure 3-14). The amyloid filaments composing these structures derive from
abundant natural proteins such as amyloid precursor protein, which is embedded in the plasma membrane, Tau, a
microtubule-binding protein, and prion protein, an “infectious” protein whose inheritance follows Mendelian genetics.
Influenced by unknown causes, these  helix–containing proteins or their proteolytic fragments fold into alternative 
sheet–containing structures that polymerize into very stable
filaments. Whether the extracellular deposits of these filaments or the soluble alternatively folded proteins are toxic to
the cell is unclear.

73

degree of specificity. For instance, an enzyme must first bind
specifically to its target molecule, which may be a small molecule (e.g., glucose) or a macromolecule, before it can execute
its specific task. Likewise, the many different types of hormone receptors on the surface of cells display a high degree of
sensitivity and discrimination for their ligands. And, as we
will examine in Chapter 11, the binding of certain regulatory
proteins to specific sequences in DNA is a major mechanism
for controlling genes. Ligand binding often causes a change in
the shape of a protein. Ligand-driven conformational changes
are integral to the mechanism of action of many proteins and
are important in regulating protein activity. After considering the general properties of protein–ligand binding, we take
a closer look at how enzymes are designed to function as the
cell’s chemists.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 3.2
Folding, Modification, and Degradation of Proteins
The amino acid sequence of a protein dictates its folding into a specific three-dimensional conformation, the native state.

■

Protein folding in vivo occurs with assistance from molecular chaperones (Hsp70 proteins), which bind to nascent polypeptides emerging from ribosomes and prevent
their misfolding (see Figure 3-11). Chaperonins, large complexes of Hsp60-like proteins, shelter some partly folded
or misfolded proteins in a barrel-like cavity, providing additional time for proper folding.

■

Subsequent to their synthesis, most proteins are modified by the addition of various chemical groups to amino
acid residues. These modifications, which alter protein
structure and function, include acetylation, hydroxylation,
glycosylation, and phosphorylation.

■

The life span of intracellular proteins is largely determined by their susceptibility to proteolytic degradation by
various pathways.

■

Viral proteins produced within infected cells, normal cytosolic proteins, and misfolded proteins are marked for destruction by the covalent addition of a polyubiquitin chain
and then degraded within proteasomes, large cylindrical
complexes with multiple proteases in their interiors (see
Figure 3-13).

■

Some neurodegenerative diseases are caused by aggregates of proteins that are stably folded in an alternative
conformation.

■

3.3 Enzymes and the Chemical Work
of Cells
Proteins are designed to bind every conceivable molecule—
from simple ions and small metabolites (sugars, fatty acids) to
large complex molecules such as other proteins and nucleic
acids. Indeed, the function of nearly all proteins depends on
their ability to bind other molecules, or ligands, with a high

Specificity and Affinity of Protein–Ligand Binding
Depend on Molecular Complementarity
Two properties of a protein characterize its interaction with
ligands. Specificity refers to the ability of a protein to bind
one molecule in preference to other molecules. Affinity
refers to the strength of binding. The Kd for a protein–
ligand complex, which is the inverse of the equilibrium constant Keq for the binding reaction, is the most common
quantitative measure of affinity (Chapter 2). The stronger
the interaction between a protein and ligand, the lower the
value of Kd. Both the specificity and the affinity of a protein
for a ligand depend on the structure of the ligand-binding
site, which is designed to fit its partner like a mold. For
high-affinity and highly specific interactions to take place,
the shape and chemical surface of the binding site must be
complementary to the ligand molecule, a property termed
molecular complementarity.
The ability of proteins to distinguish different molecules
is perhaps most highly developed in the blood proteins called
antibodies, which animals produce in response to antigens,
such as infectious agents (e.g., a bacterium or a virus), and
certain foreign substances (e.g., proteins or polysaccharides
in pollens). The presence of an antigen causes an organism to
make a large quantity of different antibody proteins, each
of which may bind to a slightly different region, or epitope,
of the antigen. Antibodies act as specific sensors for antigens,
forming antibody–antigen complexes that initiate a cascade
of protective reactions in cells of the immune system.
All antibodies are Y-shaped molecules formed from
two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains
(Figure 3-15a). Each arm of an antibody molecule contains
a single light chain linked to a heavy chain by a disulfide
bond. Near the end of each arm are six highly variable loops,
called complementarity-determining regions (CDRs), which
form the antigen-binding sites. The sequences of the six loops
are highly variable among antibodies, making them specific
for different antigens. The interaction between an antibody
and an epitope in an antigen is complementary in all cases;
that is, the surface of the antibody’s antigen-binding site
physically matches the corresponding epitope like a glove

74

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

▲ FIGURE 3-15 Antibody structure and antibody-antigen
interaction. (a) Ribbon model of an antibody. Every antibody
molecule consists of two identical heavy chains (red) and two
identical light chains (blue) covalently linked by disulfide bonds.
(b) The hand-in-glove fit between an antibody and an epitope on
its antigen—in this case, chicken egg-white lysozyme. Regions

(Figure 3-15b). The intimate contact between these two surfaces, stabilized by numerous noncovalent bonds, is responsible for the exquisite binding specificity exhibited by an
antibody.
The specificity of antibodies is so precise that they can
distinguish between the cells of individual members of a
species and in some cases can distinguish between proteins
that differ by only a single amino acid. Because of their specificity and the ease with which they can be produced, antibodies are highly useful reagents in many of the experiments
discussed in subsequent chapters.

Enzymes Are Highly Efficient and Specific
Catalysts
In contrast with antibodies, which bind and simply present
their ligands to other components of the immune system, enzymes promote the chemical alteration of their ligands,
called substrates. Almost every chemical reaction in the cell
is catalyzed by a specific enzyme. Like all catalysts, enzymes
do not affect the extent of a reaction, which is determined by
the change in free energy G between reactants and products
(Chapter 2). For reactions that are energetically favorable
(G), enzymes increase the reaction rate by lowering the
activation energy (Figure 3-16). In the test tube, catalysts
such as charcoal and platinum facilitate reactions but usually
only at high temperatures or pressures, at extremes of high

where the two molecules make contact are shown as surfaces.
The antibody contacts the antigen with residues from all its
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs). In this view, the
complementarity of the antigen and antibody is especially
apparent where “fingers” extending from the antigen surface are
opposed to “clefts” in the antibody surface.

or low pH, or in organic solvents. As the cell’s protein catalysts, however, enzymes must function effectively in aqueous
environment at 37C, 1 atmosphere pressure, and pH
6.5–7.5.
Two striking properties of enzymes enable them to function as catalysts under the mild conditions present in cells:
their enormous catalytic power and their high degree of
specificity. The immense catalytic power of enzymes causes
the rates of enzymatically catalyzed reactions to be 106–1012
times that of the corresponding uncatalyzed reactions under
otherwise similar conditions. The exquisite specificity of
enzymes—their ability to act selectively on one substrate or a
small number of chemically similar substrates —is exemplified by the enzymes that act on amino acids. As noted in
Chapter 2, amino acids can exist as two stereoisomers, designated L and D, although only L isomers are normally found
in biological systems. Not surprisingly, enzyme-catalyzed reactions of L-amino acids take place much more rapidly than
do those of D-amino acids, even though both stereoisomers
of a given amino acid are the same size and possess the same
R groups (see Figure 2-12).
Approximately 3700 different types of enzymes, each of
which catalyzes a single chemical reaction or set of closely related reactions, have been classified in the enzyme database.
Certain enzymes are found in the majority of cells because
they catalyze the synthesis of common cellular products (e.g.,
proteins, nucleic acids, and phospholipids) or take part in the

3.3 • Enzymes and the Chemical Work of Cells
Transition state
(uncatalyzed)

Free energy, G

∆Guncat
Transition state
(catalyzed)
∆Gcat

Reactants
Products
Progress of reaction

▲ FIGURE 3-16 Effect of a catalyst on the activation energy
of a chemical reaction. This hypothetical reaction pathway
depicts the changes in free energy G as a reaction proceeds. A
reaction will take place spontaneously only if the total G of the
products is less than that of the reactants (G). However, all
chemical reactions proceed through one or more high-energy
transition states, and the rate of a reaction is inversely
proportional to the activation energy (G‡), which is the
difference in free energy between the reactants and the highest
point along the pathway. Enzymes and other catalysts accelerate
the rate of a reaction by reducing the free energy of the
transition state and thus G‡.

production of energy by the conversion of glucose and oxygen into carbon dioxide and water. Other enzymes are present only in a particular type of cell because they catalyze
chemical reactions unique to that cell type (e.g., the enzymes
that convert tyrosine into dopamine, a neurotransmitter, in
nerve cells). Although most enzymes are located within cells,
some are secreted and function in extracellular sites such as
the blood, the lumen of the digestive tract, or even outside
the organism.
The catalytic activity of some enzymes is critical to cellular processes other than the synthesis or degradation of molecules. For instance, many regulatory proteins and intracellular
signaling proteins catalyze the phosphorylation of proteins,
and some transport proteins catalyze the hydrolysis of ATP
coupled to the movement of molecules across membranes.

An Enzyme’s Active Site Binds Substrates
and Carries Out Catalysis
Certain amino acid side chains of an enzyme are important
in determining its specificity and catalytic power. In the native conformation of an enzyme, these side chains are
brought into proximity, forming the active site. Active sites
thus consist of two functionally important regions: one that
recognizes and binds the substrate (or substrates) and another that catalyzes the reaction after the substrate has been

75

bound. In some enzymes, the catalytic region is part of the
substrate-binding region; in others, the two regions are structurally as well as functionally distinct.
To illustrate how the active site binds a specific substrate
and then promotes a chemical change in the bound substrate,
we examine the action of cyclic AMP–dependent protein kinase, now generally referred to as protein kinase A (PKA).
This enzyme and other protein kinases, which add a phosphate group to serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues in proteins, are critical for regulating the activity of many cellular
proteins, often in response to external signals. Because the
eukaryotic protein kinases belong to a common superfamily, the structure of the active site and mechanism of phosphorylation are very similar in all of them. Thus protein
kinase A can serve as a general model for this important class
of enzymes.
The active site of protein kinase A is located in the 240residue “kinase core” of the catalytic subunit. The kinase
core, which is largely conserved in all protein kinases, is responsible for the binding of substrates (ATP and a target peptide sequence) and the subsequent transfer of a phosphate
group from ATP to a serine, threonine, or tyrosine residue
in the target sequence. The kinase core consists of a large domain and small one, with an intervening deep cleft; the active
site comprises residues located in both domains.

Substrate Binding by Protein Kinases The structure of the
ATP-binding site in the catalytic kinase core complements the
structure of the nucleotide substrate. The adenine ring of ATP
sits snugly at the base of the cleft between the large and the
small domains. A highly conserved sequence, Gly-X-Gly-XX-Gly-X-Val (X can be any amino acid), dubbed the “glycine
lid,” closes over the adenine ring and holds it in position (Figure 3-17a). Other conserved residues in the binding pocket
stabilize the highly charged phosphate groups.
Although ATP is a common substrate for all protein kinases, the sequence of the target peptide varies among different kinases. The peptide sequence recognized by protein
kinase A is Arg-Arg-X-Ser-Y, where X is any amino acid and
Y is a hydrophobic amino acid. The part of the polypeptide
chain containing the target serine or threonine residue is
bound to a shallow groove in the large domain of the kinase
core. The peptide specificity of protein kinase A is conferred
by several glutamic acid residues in the large domain, which
form salt bridges with the two arginine residues in the target peptide. Different residues determine the specificity of
other protein kinases.
The catalytic core of protein kinase A exists in an “open”
and “closed” conformation (Figure 3-17b). In the open conformation, the large and small domains of the core region are
separated enough that substrate molecules can enter and
bind. When the active site is occupied by substrate, the domains move together into the closed position. This change in
tertiary structure, an example of induced fit, brings the target peptide sequence sufficiently close to accept a phosphate

76

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

(a)

Glycine lid
Small domain

Target
peptide

Nucleotidebinding
pocket

Large domain

(b)

Glycine lid
Small
domain
Active site
Large
domain

the active site. In the open position, ATP can enter and bind
the active site cleft; in the closed position, the glycine lid prevents ATP from leaving the cleft. Subsequent to phosphoryl
transfer from the bound ATP to the bound peptide sequence,
the glycine lid must rotate back to the open position before
ADP can be released. Kinetic measurements show that the rate
of ADP release is 20-fold slower than that of phosphoryl transfer, indicating the influence of the glycine lid on the rate of kinase reactions. Mutations in the glycine lid that inhibit its
flexibility slow catalysis by protein kinase A even further.

Phosphoryl Transfer by Protein Kinases After substrates have
bound and the catalytic core of protein kinase A has assumed
the closed conformation, the phosphorylation of a serine or
threonine residue on the target peptide can take place (Figure
3-18). As with all chemical reactions, phosphoryl transfer catalyzed by protein kinase A proceeds through a transition state
in which the phosphate group to be transferred and the acceptor hydroxyl group are brought into close proximity. Binding and stabilization of the intermediates by protein kinase A
reduce the activation energy of the phosphoryl transfer reaction, permitting it to take place at measurable rates under the
mild conditions present within cells (see Figure 3-16). Formation of the products induces the enzyme to revert to its open
conformational state, allowing ADP and the phosphorylated
target peptide to diffuse from the active site.

Vmax and Km Characterize an Enzymatic Reaction
Open

Closed

▲ FIGURE 3-17 Protein kinase A and conformational
change induced by substrate binding. (a) Model of the
catalytic subunit of protein kinase A with bound substrates; the
conserved kinase core is indicated as a molecular surface. An
overhanging glycine-rich sequence (blue) traps ATP (green) in a
deep cleft between the large and small domains of the core.
Residues in the large domain bind the target peptide (red). The
structure of the kinase core is largely conserved in other
eukaryotic protein kinases. (b) Schematic diagrams of open and
closed conformations of the kinase core. In the absence of
substrate, the kinase core is in the open conformation. Substrate
binding causes a rotation of the large and small domains that
brings the ATP- and peptide-binding sites closer together and
causes the glycine lid to move over the adenine residue of ATP,
thereby trapping the nucleotide in the binding cleft. The model in
part (a) is in the closed conformation.

group from the bound ATP. After the phosphorylation reaction has been completed, the presence of the products causes
the domains to rotate to the open position, from which the
products are released.
The rotation from the open to the closed position also
causes movement of the glycine lid over the ATP-binding cleft.
The glycine lid controls the entry of ATP and release of ADP at

The catalytic action of an enzyme on a given substrate can be
described by two parameters: Vmax, the maximal velocity of
the reaction at saturating substrate concentrations, and Km
(the Michaelis constant), a measure of the affinity of an enzyme for its substrate (Figure 3-19). The Km is defined as the
substrate concentration that yields a half-maximal reaction
1
rate (i.e., 2 Vmax). The smaller the value of Km, the more
avidly an enzyme can bind substrate from a dilute solution
and the smaller the substrate concentration needed to reach
half-maximal velocity.
The concentrations of the various small molecules in a
cell vary widely, as do the Km values for the different enzymes that act on them. Generally, the intracellular concentration of a substrate is approximately the same as or greater
than the Km value of the enzyme to which it binds.

Enzymes in a Common Pathway Are Often
Physically Associated with One Another
Enzymes taking part in a common metabolic process (e.g.,
the degradation of glucose to pyruvate) are generally located
in the same cellular compartment (e.g., in the cytosol, at a
membrane, within a particular organelle). Within a compartment, products from one reaction can move by diffusion
to the next enzyme in the pathway. However, diffusion entails random movement and is a slow, inefficient process for

3.3 • Enzymes and the Chemical Work of Cells
(a)

Asp-184
−

Lys-72
+
−
O

O

O
Pα

ATP

O

P
β

−
+ Mg2+

O
O

O
O

Mg2+ +

Rate of formation of reaction
product (P) (relative units)

Initial state

Asp-166
−

O
P
γ

O H
2−
O

CH2

+
Lys-168

C

O

P

P

ATP

+ Mg

O
O

Mg2+ +

2+

O
P
O

O

CH2

C

O
O

−
O

P

O 2−
P

O
O

O

[E] = 0.25 unit
0

Km

Vmax

0.8

High-affinity
substrate
(S)

0.6

Low-affinity
substrate (S’)

0.4

Km for S’

0.2
0

Km for S
Concentration of substrate ([S] or [S’])

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-19 The Km and Vmax for an
Phosphate transfer

End state

Vmax

0.5

1.0

O
O

1.0

Concentration of substrate [S]

Rate of reaction

O
O

[E] = 1.0 unit

1.5

(b)

Intermediate state
O

Vmax

2.0

Ser or Thr of
target peptide

Formation of
transition state

ADP

77

2−
O

O
P

O

O

CH2

C

Phosphorylated
peptide

▲ FIGURE 3-18 Mechanism of phosphorylation by protein
kinase A. (Top) Initially, ATP and the target peptide bind to the
active site (see Figure 3-17a). Electrons of the phosphate group
are delocalized by interactions with lysine side chains and Mg2.
Colored circles represent the residues in the kinase core critical
to substrate binding and phosphoryl transfer. Note that these
residues are not adjacent to one another in the amino acid
sequence. (Middle) A new bond then forms between the serine
or threonine side-chain oxygen atom and phosphate, yielding a
pentavalent intermediate. (Bottom) The phosphoester bond
between the  and phosphates is broken, yielding the products
ADP and a peptide with a phosphorylated serine or threonine
side chain. The catalytic mechanism of other protein kinases is
similar.

enzyme-catalyzed reaction are determined from plots of the
initial velocity versus substrate concentration. The shape of
these hypothetical kinetic curves is characteristic of a simple
enzyme-catalyzed reaction in which one substrate (S) is
converted into product (P). The initial velocity is measured
immediately after addition of enzyme to substrate before the
substrate concentration changes appreciably. (a) Plots of the
initial velocity at two different concentrations of enzyme [E] as a
function of substrate concentration [S]. The [S] that yields a halfmaximal reaction rate is the Michaelis constant Km, a measure of
the affinity of E for S. Doubling the enzyme concentration causes
a proportional increase in the reaction rate, and so the maximal
velocity Vmax is doubled; the Km, however, is unaltered. (b) Plots
of the initial velocity versus substrate concentration with a
substrate S for which the enzyme has a high affinity and with a
substrate S for which the enzyme has a low affinity. Note that
the Vmax is the same with both substrates but that Km is higher
for S , the low-affinity substrate.

moving molecules between widely dispersed enzymes (Figure
3-20a). To overcome this impediment, cells have evolved
mechanisms for bringing enzymes in a common pathway
into close proximity.
In the simplest such mechanism, polypeptides with different catalytic activities cluster closely together as subunits of
a multimeric enzyme or assemble on a common “scaffold”
(Figure 3-20b). This arrangement allows the products of one
reaction to be channeled directly to the next enzyme in the
pathway. The first approach is illustrated by pyruvate

78

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

(a)

(a)

Reactants

E1
E2

Products

A

E3
C
B

(b)
(b)

Products

Reactants
A

Reactants

B

Pyruvate
OR

C

O

A

B

HSCoA

CH3C
COO−

E1

O

CO2
Scaffold

Products

E2

C

CH3C
SCoA

E3

Acetyl CoA

(c)
Reactants

NAD+

Products
A

B

Net reaction:
Pyruvate + NAD+ + CoA

C

NADH +

H+

CO2 + NADH + acetyl CoA

▲ FIGURE 3-20 Evolution of multifunctional enzyme.
In the hypothetical reaction pathways illustrated here the initial
reactants are converted into final products by the sequential
action of three enzymes: A, B, and C. (a) When the enzymes are
free in solution or even constrained within the same cellular
compartment, the intermediates in the reaction sequence must
diffuse from one enzyme to the next, an inherently slow process.
(b) Diffusion is greatly reduced or eliminated when the enzymes
associate into multisubunit complexes. (c) The closest integration
of different catalytic activities occurs when the enzymes are
fused at the genetic level, becoming domains in a single protein.

▲ FIGURE 3-21 Structure and function of pyruvate
dehydrogenase, a large multimeric enzyme complex that
converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA. (a) The complex consists of
24 copies of pyruvate decarboxylase (E1), 24 copies of lipoamide
transacetylase (E2), and 12 copies of dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase
(E3). The E1 and E3 subunits are bound to the outside of the core
formed by the E2 subunits. (b) The reactions catalyzed by the
complex include several enzyme-bound intermediates (not
shown). The tight structural integration of the three enzymes
increases the rate of the overall reaction and minimizes possible
side reactions.

dehydrogenase, a complex of three distinct enzymes that converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA in mitochondria (Figure 3-21).
The scaffold approach is employed by MAP kinase signaltransduction pathways, discussed in Chapter 14. In yeast,
three protein kinases assembled on the Ste5 scaffold protein
form a kinase cascade that transduces the signal triggered by
the binding of mating factor to the cell surface.
In some cases, separate proteins have been fused together
at the genetic level to create a single multidomain, multifunctional enzyme (Figure 3-20c). For instance, the isomerization of citrate to isocitrate in the citric acid cycle is
catalyzed by aconitase, a single polypeptide that carries out
two separate reactions: (1) the dehydration of citrate to form
cis-aconitate and then (2) the hydration of cis-aconitate to
yield isocitrate (see Figure 8-9).

on proteins and the corresponding ligands are chemically
and topologically complementary.
The affinity of a protein for a particular ligand refers to
the strength of binding; its specificity refers to the preferential binding of one or a few closely related ligands.

■

Enzymes are catalytic proteins that accelerate the rate
of cellular reactions by lowering the activation energy
and stabilizing transition-state intermediates (see Figure
3-16).

■

An enzyme active site comprises two functional parts: a
substrate-binding region and a catalytic region. The amino
acids composing the active site are not necessarily adjacent
in the amino acid sequence but are brought into proximity in the native conformation.

■

From plots of reaction rate versus substrate concentration, two characteristic parameters of an enzyme can
be determined: the Michaelis constant Km, a measure of
the enzyme’s affinity for substrate, and the maximal velocity Vmax, a measure of its catalytic power (see Figure
3-19).
■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 3.3
Enzymes and the Chemical Work of Cells
The function of nearly all proteins depends on their ability to bind other molecules (ligands). Ligand-binding sites

■

3.4 • Molecular Motors and the Mechanical Work of Cells

Enzymes in a common pathway are located within specific cell compartments and may be further associated as
domains of a monomeric protein, subunits of a multimeric
protein, or components of a protein complex assembled on
a common scaffold (see Figure 3-20).

■

3.4 Molecular Motors and
the Mechanical Work of Cells
A common property of all cells is motility, the ability to move
in a specified direction. Many cell processes exhibit some type of
movement at either the molecular or the cellular level; all movements result from the application of a force. In Brownian motion, for instance, thermal energy constantly buffets molecules
and organelles in random directions and for very short distances. On the other hand, materials within a cell are transported in specific directions and for longer distances. This type
of movement results from the mechanical work carried out by
proteins that function as motors. We first briefly describe the
types and general properties of molecular motors and then look
at how one type of motor protein generates force for movement.

Molecular Motors Convert Energy into Motion
At the nanoscale of cells and molecules, movement is effected
by much different forces from those in the macroscopic world.
For example, the high protein concentration (200–300 mg/ml)
of the cytoplasm prevents organelles and vesicles from diffusing faster than 100 m/3 hours. Even a micrometer-sized bacterium experiences a drag force from water that stops its
forward movement within a fraction of a nanometer when it
stops actively swimming. To generate the forces necessary for
many cellular movements, cells depend on specialized enzymes
commonly called motor proteins. These mechanochemical enzymes convert energy released by the hydrolysis of ATP or
from ion gradients into a mechanical force.
Motor proteins generate either linear or rotary motion
(Table 3-2). Some motor proteins are components of macro(a)

molecular assemblies, but those that move along cytoskeletal
fibers are not. This latter group comprises the myosins, kinesins, and dyneins—linear motor proteins that carry attached “cargo” with them as they proceed along either
microfilaments or microtubules (Figure 3-22a). DNA and
RNA polymerases also are linear motor proteins because
they translocate along DNA during replication and transcription. In contrast, rotary motors revolve to cause the beat
of bacterial flagella, to pack DNA into the capsid of a virus,
and to synthesize ATP. The propulsive force for bacterial
swimming, for instance, is generated by a rotary motor protein complex in the bacterial membrane. Ions flow down an
electrochemical gradient through an immobile ring of proteins, the stator, which is located in the membrane. Torque
generated by the stator rotates an inner ring of proteins and
the attached flagellum (Figure 3-22b). Similarly, in the mitochondrial ATP synthase, or F0F1 complex, a flux of ions
across the inner mitochondrial membrane is transduced by
the F0 part into rotation of the subunit, which projects into
a surrounding ring of  and  subunits in the F1 part. Interactions between the subunit and the  subunits directs the
synthesis of ATP (Chapter 8).
From the observed activities of motor proteins, we can
infer three general properties that they possess:
The ability to transduce a source of energy, either ATP
or an ion gradient, into linear or rotary movement

■

The ability to bind and translocate along a cytoskeletal
filament, nucleic acid strand, or protein complex

■

■

Net movement in a given direction

The motor proteins that attach to cytoskeletal fibers also
bind to and carry along cargo as they translocate. The cargo
in muscle cells and eukaryotic flagella consists of thick filaments and B tubules, respectively (see Figure 3-22a). These
motor proteins can also transport cargo chromosomes and
membrane-limited vesicles as they move along microtubules
or microfilaments (Figure 3-23).
(b)
Flagellum

ADP

Myosin
or
dynein

Ions

Actin filament or A tubule
Rotor

▲ FIGURE 3-22 Comparison of linear and rotary molecular
motors. (a) In muscle and eukaryotic flagella, the head domains
of motor proteins (blue) bind to an actin thin filament (muscle) or
the A tubule of a doublet microtubule (flagella). ATP hydrolysis in
the head causes linear movement of the cytoskeletal fiber
(orange) relative to the attached thick filament or B tubule of an

adjacent doublet microtubule. (b) In the rotary motor in
the bacterial membrane, the stator (blue) is immobile in
the membrane. Ion flow through the stator generates a
torque that powers rotation of the rotor (orange) and the
flagellum attached to it.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Stator

Video: Rotary Motor Action:
Flagellum

Thick filament or B tubule
ATP

79

80

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

TABLE 3-2

Selected Molecular Motors

Motor*

Energy
Source

Structure/Components

Cellular Location

Movement Generated

LINEAR MOTORS
DNA polymerase (4)

ATP

Multisubunit polymerase
within replisome

Nucleus

Translocation along DNA
during replication

RNA polymerase (4)

ATP

Multisubunit polymerase
within transcription
elongation complex

Nucleus

Translocation along DNA
during transcription

Ribosome (4)

GTP

Elongation factor 2 (EF2)
bound to ribosome

Cytoplasm/ER
membrane

Translocation along mRNA
during translation

Myosins (3, 19)

ATP

Heavy and light chains;
head domains with ATPase
activity and microfilamentbinding site

Cytoplasm

Transport of cargo
vesicles; contraction

Kinesins (20)

ATP

Heavy and light chains; head
domains with ATPase activity
and microtubule-binding site

Cytoplasm

Transport of cargo
vesicles and chromosomes
during mitosis

Dyneins (20)

ATP

Multiple heavy, intermediate,
and light chains; head domains
with ATPase activity and
microtubule-binding site

Cytoplasm

Transport of cargo
vesicles; beating of cilia
and eukaryotic flagella

Bacterial flagellar
motor

H/Na
gradient

Stator and rotor proteins,
flagellum

Plasma membrane

Rotation of flagellum
attached to rotor

ATP synthase,
F0F1(8)

H
gradient

Multiple subunits forming
F0 and F1 particles

Inner mitochondrial
membrane, thylakoid
membrane, bacterial
plasma membrane

Rotation of subunit
leading to ATP synthesis

Viral capsid motor

ATP

Connector, prohead
RNA, ATPase

Capsid

Rotation of connector
leading to DNA packaging

ROTARY MOTORS

*

Numbers in parentheses indicate chapters in which various motors are discussed.

Cargo
Cargo binding

 FIGURE 3-23 Motor protein-dependent movement of
cargo. The head domains of myosin, dynein, and kinesin motor
proteins bind to a cytoskeletal fiber (microfilaments or
microtubules), and the tail domain attaches to one of various
types of cargo—in this case, a membrane-limited vesicle.
Hydrolysis of ATP in the head domain causes the head domain to
“walk” along the track in one direction by a repeating cycle of
conformational changes.

Tail

Neck

Motor
protein
ATP hydrolysis
Fiber binding

Head
Cytoskeletal fiber

3.4 • Molecular Motors and the Mechanical Work of Cells

81

(b) Head domain

(a) Myosin II
Tail

Head Neck

Nucleotidebinding site

Regulatory
light chain

Essential
light chain

Heavy chains

Regulatory
light chain
Actinbinding
site
Essential
light chain
Heavy chain

▲ FIGURE 3-24 Structure of myosin II. (a) Myosin II is a
dimeric protein composed of two identical heavy chains (white)
and four light chains (blue and green). Each of the head domains
transduces the energy from ATP hydrolysis into movement. Two
light chains are associated with the neck domain of each heavy
chain. The coiled-coil sequence of the tail domain organizes
myosin II into a dimer. (b) Three-dimensional model of a single

head domain shows that it has a curved, elongated shape and is
bisected by a large cleft. The nucleotide-binding pocket lies on
one side of this cleft, and the actin-binding site lies on the other
side near the tip of the head. Wrapped around the shaft of the helical neck are the two light chains. These chains stiffen the
neck so that it can act as a lever arm for the head. Shown here
is the ADP-bound conformation.

All Myosins Have Head, Neck, and Tail Domains
with Distinct Functions

head, wrapped around the neck like C-clamps. In this position, the light chains stiffen the neck region and are therefore
able to regulate the activity of the head domain.

To further illustrate the properties of motor proteins, we consider myosin II, which moves along actin filaments in muscle
cells during contraction. Other types of myosin can transport
vesicles along actin filaments in the cytoskeleton. Myosin II
and other members of the myosin superfamily are composed
of one or two heavy chains and several light chains. The
heavy chains are organized into three structurally and functionally different types of domains (Figure 3-24a).
The two globular head domains are specialized ATPases
that couple the hydrolysis of ATP with motion. A critical feature of the myosin ATPase activity is that it is actin activated.
In the absence of actin, solutions of myosin slowly convert
ATP into ADP and phosphate. However, when myosin is
complexed with actin, the rate of myosin ATPase activity is
four to five times as fast as it is in the absence of actin. The
actin-activation step ensures that the myosin ATPase operates at its maximal rate only when the myosin head domain is bound to actin. Adjacent to the head domain lies the
-helical neck region, which is associated with the light
chains. These light chains are crucial for converting small
conformational changes in the head into large movements
of the molecule and for regulating the activity of the head domain. The rodlike tail domain contains the binding sites that
determine the specific activities of a particular myosin.
The results of studies of myosin fragments produced by
proteolysis helped elucidate the functions of the domains.
X-ray crystallographic analysis of the S1 fragment of myosin
II, which consists of the head and neck domains, revealed its
shape, the positions of the light chains, and the locations of
the ATP-binding and actin-binding sites. The elongated
myosin head is attached at one end to the -helical neck (Figure 3-24b). Two light-chain molecules lie at the base of the

Conformational Changes in the Myosin Head
Couple ATP Hydrolysis to Movement
The results of studies of muscle contraction provided the first
evidence that myosin heads slide or walk along actin filaments. Unraveling the mechanism of muscle contraction
was greatly aided by the development of in vitro motility assays and single-molecule force measurements. On the basis
of information obtained with these techniques and the threedimensional structure of the myosin head, researchers developed a general model for how myosin harnesses the energy
released by ATP hydrolysis to move along an actin filament.
Because all myosins are thought to use the same mechanism
to generate movement, we will ignore whether the myosin
tail is bound to a vesicle or is part of a thick filament as it is
in muscle. One assumption in this model is that the hydrolysis of a single ATP molecule is coupled to each step taken by
a myosin molecule along an actin filament. Evidence supporting this assumption is discussed in Chapter 19.
As shown in Figure 3-25, myosin undergoes a series of
events during each step of movement. In the course of one
cycle, myosin must exist in at least three conformational
states: an ATP state unbound to actin, an ADP-P i state
bound to actin, and a state after the power-generating
stroke has been completed. The major question is how the
nucleotide-binding pocket and the distant actin-binding site
are mutually influenced and how changes at these sites are
converted into force. The results of structural studies of
myosin in the presence of nucleotides and nucleotide
analogs that mimic the various steps in the cycle indicate
that the binding and hydrolysis of a nucleotide cause a

82

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function
Thick filament
ATP-binding
site

Myosin head

Actin thin filament
Nucleotide
binding

1
ATP

Head dissociates
from filament

Hydrolysis

2

 FIGURE 3-25 Operational model for the coupling of ATP
hydrolysis to movement of myosin along an actin filament.
Shown here is the cycle for a myosin II head that is part of a
thick filament in muscle, but other myosins that attach to other
cargo (e.g., the membrane of a vesicle) are thought to operate
according to the same cyclical mechanism. In the absence of
bound nucleotide, a myosin head binds actin tightly in a “rigor”
state. Step 1 : Binding of ATP opens the cleft in the myosin
head, disrupting the actin-binding site and weakening the
interaction with actin. Step 2 : Freed of actin, the myosin head
hydrolyzes ATP, causing a conformational change in the head that
moves it to a new position, closer to the () end of the actin
filament, where it rebinds to the filament. Step 3 : As phosphate
(Pi) dissociates from the ATP-binding pocket, the myosin head
undergoes a second conformational change—the power stroke—
which restores myosin to its rigor conformation. Because myosin
is bound to actin, this conformational change exerts a force that
causes myosin to move the actin filament. Step 4 : Release of
ADP completes the cycle. [Adapted from R. D. Vale and R. A. Milligan,
2002, Science 288:88.]

Head pivots and
binds a new
actin subunit

Focus Animation: Myosin Crossbridge Cycle

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

ADP•Pi

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 3.4
Molecular Motors and the Mechanical Work of Cells

Pi release

Motor proteins are mechanochemical enzymes that convert energy released by ATP hydrolysis into either linear
or rotary movement (see Figure 3-22).

■

3
Pi

ADP

Head pivots and
moves filament
(power stroke)

Linear motor proteins (myosins, kinesins, and dyneins)
move along cytoskeletal fibers carrying bound cargo,
which includes vesicles, chromosomes, thick filaments in
muscle, and microtubules in eukaryotic flagella.

■

Myosin II consists of two heavy chains and several light
chains. Each heavy chain has a head (motor) domain,
which is an actin-activated ATPase; a neck domain, which
is associated with light chains; and a long rodlike tail domain that organizes the dimeric molecule and binds to thick
filaments in muscle cells (see Figure 3-24).

■

ADP release

4
ADP

small conformational change in the head domain that is
amplified into a large movement of the neck region. The
small conformational change in the head domain is localized to a “switch” region consisting of the nucleotide- and
actin-binding sites. A “converter” region at the base of the
head acts like a fulcrum that causes the leverlike neck to
bend and rotate.
Homologous switch, converter, and lever arm structures
in kinesin are responsible for the movement of kinesin motor
proteins along microtubules. The structural basis for dynein
movement is unknown because the three-dimensional structure of dynein has not been determined.

Movement of myosin relative to an actin filament results
from the attachment of the myosin head to an actin filament, rotation of the neck region, and detachment in a
cyclical ATP-dependent process (see Figure 3-25). The same
general mechanism is thought to account for all myosinand kinesin-mediated movement.

■

3.5 Common Mechanisms
for Regulating Protein Function
Most processes in cells do not take place independently of
one another or at a constant rate. Instead, the catalytic activity of enzymes or the assembly of a macromolecular complex is so regulated that the amount of reaction product or
the appearance of the complex is just sufficient to meet the
needs of the cell. As a result, the steady-state concentrations

3.5 • Common Mechanisms for Regulating Protein Function

of substrates and products will vary, depending on cellular
conditions. The flow of material in an enzymatic pathway is
controlled by several mechanisms, some of which also regulate the functions of nonenzymatic proteins.
One of the most important mechanisms for regulating
protein function entails allostery. Broadly speaking, allostery
refers to any change in a protein’s tertiary or quaternary
structure or both induced by the binding of a ligand, which
may be an activator, inhibitor, substrate, or all three. Allosteric regulation is particularly prevalent in multimeric enzymes and other proteins. We first explore several ways in
which allostery influences protein function and then consider
other mechanisms for regulating proteins.

Cooperative Binding Increases a Protein’s
Response to Small Changes in Ligand
Concentration
In many cases, especially when a protein binds several molecules of one ligand, the binding is graded; that is, the binding of one ligand molecule affects the binding of subsequent
ligand molecules. This type of allostery, often called cooper-

% Saturation

100

50

P50 = 26
0

20

40
60
p O2 (torr)

p O2 in capillaries
of active muscles

80

100

p O2 in alveoli
of lungs

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-26 Sequential binding of
oxygen to hemoglobin exhibits positive cooperativity. Each
hemoglobin molecule has four oxygen-binding sites; at saturation
all the sites are loaded with oxygen. The oxygen concentration is
commonly measured as the partial pressure (pO2). P50 is the pO2
at which half the oxygen-binding sites at a given hemoglobin
concentration are occupied; it is equivalent to the Km for an
enzymatic reaction. The large change in the amount of oxygen
bound over a small range of pO2 values permits efficient
unloading of oxygen in peripheral tissues such as muscle. The
sigmoidal shape of a plot of percent saturation versus ligand
concentration is indicative of cooperative binding. In the absence
of cooperative binding, a binding curve is a hyperbola, similar to
the simple kinetic curves in Figure 3-19. [Adapted from L. Stryer,
Biochemistry, 4th ed., 1995, W. H. Freeman and Company.]

83

ativity, permits many multisubunit proteins to respond more
efficiently to small changes in ligand concentration than
would otherwise be possible. In positive cooperativity, sequential binding is enhanced; in negative cooperativity,
sequential binding is inhibited.
Hemoglobin presents a classic example of positive cooperative binding. Each of the four subunits in hemoglobin
contains one heme molecule, which consists of an iron atom
held within a porphyrin ring (see Figure 8-16a). The heme
groups are the oxygen-binding components of hemoglobin
(see Figure 3-10). The binding of oxygen to the heme molecule in one of the four hemoglobin subunits induces a local
conformational change whose effect spreads to the other
subunits, lowering the Km for the binding of additional oxygen molecules and yielding a sigmoidal oxygen-binding curve
(Figure 3-26). Consequently, the sequential binding of oxygen is facilitated, permitting hemoglobin to load more oxygen in peripheral tissues than it otherwise could at normal
oxygen concentrations.

Ligand Binding Can Induce Allosteric Release
of Catalytic Subunits or Transition to a State
with Different Activity
Previously, we looked at protein kinase A to illustrate binding and catalysis by the active site of an enzyme. This enzyme
can exist as an inactive tetrameric protein composed of two
catalytic subunits and two regulatory subunits. Each regulatory subunit contains a pseudosubstrate sequence that binds
to the active site in a catalytic subunit. By blocking substrate
binding, the regulatory subunit inhibits the activity of the
catalytic subunit.
Inactive protein kinase A is turned on by cyclic AMP
(cAMP), a small second-messenger molecule. The binding of
cAMP to the regulatory subunits induces a conformational
change in the pseudosubstrate sequence so that it can no
longer bind the catalytic subunit. Thus, in the presence of
cAMP, the inactive tetramer dissociates into two monomeric
active catalytic subunits and a dimeric regulatory subunit
(Figure 3-27). As discussed in Chapter 13, the binding of various hormones to cell-surface receptors induces a rise in the
intracellular concentration of cAMP, leading to the activation of protein kinase A. When the signaling ceases and the
cAMP level decreases, the activity of protein kinase A is
turned off by reassembly of the inactive tetramer. The binding of cAMP to the regulatory subunits exhibits positive cooperativity; thus small changes in the concentration of this
allosteric molecule produce a large change in the activity of
protein kinase A.
Many multimeric enzymes undergo allosteric transitions
that alter the relation of the subunits to one another but do
not cause dissociation as in protein kinase A. In this type
of allostery, the activity of a protein in the ligand-bound
state differs from that in the unbound state. An example is
the GroEL chaperonin discussed earlier. This barrel-shaped

84

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

(a)

Catalytic site
Nucleotidebinding site

Pseudosubstrate

C

C
+

C

R

R

C

+

Inactive PKA

R

R
Active PKA

cAMP

NH2

(b)

C
N

C

HC

C

N
CH

N
O

CH2
H

O
H

H
O

P


O

N

H
O

OH

cyclic AMP
(cAMP)

▲ FIGURE 3-27 Ligand-induced activation of protein kinase
A (PKA). At low concentrations of cyclic AMP (cAMP), the PKA
is an inactive tetramer. Binding of cAMP to the regulatory (R)
subunits causes a conformational change in these subunits that
permits release of the active, monomeric catalytic (C) subunits.
(b) Cyclic AMP is a derivative of adenosine monophosphate. This
intracellular signaling molecule, whose concentration rises in
response to various extracellular signals, can modulate the
activity of many proteins.

100-fold by the release of Ca2 from ER stores or by its import from the extracellular environment. This rise in cytosolic Ca2 is sensed by Ca2-binding proteins, particularly
those of the EF hand family, all of which contain the helixloop-helix motif discussed earlier (see Figure 3-6a).
The prototype EF hand protein, calmodulin, is found in
all eukaryotic cells and may exist as an individual
monomeric protein or as a subunit of a multimeric protein. A
dumbbell-shaped molecule, calmodulin contains four Ca2binding sites with a KD of ≈106 M. The binding of Ca2 to
calmodulin causes a conformational change that permits
Ca2/calmodulin to bind various target proteins, thereby
switching their activity on or off (Figure 3-28). Calmodulin
and similar EF hand proteins thus function as switch proteins, acting in concert with Ca2 to modulate the activity
of other proteins.

Switching Mediated by Guanine Nucleotide–Binding
Proteins Another group of intracellular switch proteins constitutes the GTPase superfamily. These proteins include
monomeric Ras protein (see Figure 3-5) and the G subunit of
the trimeric G proteins. Both Ras and G are bound to the
plasma membrane, function in cell signaling, and play a key
role in cell proliferation and differentiation. Other members
EF1
EF3

EF2

protein-folding machine comprises two back-to-back multisubunit rings, which can exist in a “tight” peptide-binding
state and a “relaxed” peptide-releasing state (see Figure
3-11). The binding of ATP and the co-chaperonin GroES to
one of the rings in the tight state causes a twofold expansion
of the GroEL cavity, shifting the equilibrium toward the relaxed peptide-folding state.

EF4

Target
peptide

Ca2+

Calcium and GTP Are Widely Used to Modulate
Protein Activity
In the preceding examples, oxygen, cAMP, and ATP cause allosteric changes in the activity of their target proteins (hemoglobin, protein kinase A, and GroEL, respectively). Two
additional allosteric ligands, Ca2 and GTP, act through two
types of ubiquitous proteins to regulate many cellular
processes.

Calmodulin-Mediated Switching The concentration of

Ca2 free in the cytosol is kept very low (≈107 M) by membrane transport proteins that continually pump Ca2 out of
the cell or into the endoplasmic reticulum. As we learn in
Chapter 7, the cytosolic Ca2 level can increase from 10- to

▲ FIGURE 3-28 Switching mediated by Ca2/calmodulin.
Calmodulin is a widely distributed cytosolic protein that contains
four Ca2-binding sites, one in each of its EF hands. Each EF
hand has a helix-loop-helix motif. At cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations
above about 5
107 M, binding of Ca2 to calmodulin changes
the protein’s conformation. The resulting Ca2/calmodulin wraps
around exposed helices of various target proteins, thereby
altering their activity.

3.5 • Common Mechanisms for Regulating Protein Function
Active

Active ("on")

R

GTPase
GDP

GEFs

G
T
P
+

+
+
−

GAPs
RGSs
GDIs

GTPase
G
D
P

OH

Pi

ATP

Protein
phosphatase

Protein
kinase

Inactive ("off ")
GTP

85

O

H2O
R

O

P

ADP
O−

O−
Inactive

▲ FIGURE 3-29 Cycling of GTPase switch proteins between
the active and inactive forms. Conversion of the active into the
inactive form by hydrolysis of the bound GTP is accelerated by
GAPs (GTPase-accelerating proteins) and RGSs (regulators of G
protein–signaling) and inhibited by GDIs (guanine nucleotide
dissociation inhibitors). Reactivation is promoted by GEFs
(guanine nucleotide–exchange factors).

▲ FIGURE 3-30 Regulation of protein activity by
kinase/phosphatase switch. The cyclic phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of a protein is a common cellular mechanism
for regulating protein activity. In this example, the target protein
R is inactive (light orange) when phosphorylated and active (dark
orange) when dephosphorylated; some proteins have the
opposite pattern.

of the GTPase superfamily function in protein synthesis, the
transport of proteins between the nucleus and the cytoplasm,
the formation of coated vesicles and their fusion with target
membranes, and rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton.
All the GTPase switch proteins exist in two forms (Figure
3-29): (1) an active (“on”) form with bound GTP (guanosine
triphosphate) that modulates the activity of specific target
proteins and (2) an inactive (“off”) form with bound GDP
(guanosine diphosphate). The GTPase activity of these
switch proteins hydrolyzes bound GTP to GDP slowly, yielding the inactive form. The subsequent exchange of GDP with
GTP to regenerate the active form occurs even more slowly.
Activation is temporary and is enhanced or depressed by
other proteins acting as allosteric regulators of the switch
protein. We examine the role of various GTPase switch proteins in regulating intracellular signaling and other processes
in several later chapters.

Nearly 3 percent of all yeast proteins are protein kinases or
phosphatases, indicating the importance of phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation reactions even in simple cells. All
classes of proteins—including structural proteins, enzymes,
membrane channels, and signaling molecules—are regulated
by kinase/phosphatase switches. Different protein kinases and
phosphatases are specific for different target proteins and can
thus regulate a variety of cellular pathways, as discussed in
later chapters. Some of these enzymes act on one or a few target proteins, whereas others have multiple targets. The latter
are useful in integrating the activities of proteins that are coordinately controlled by a single kinase/phosphatase switch.
Frequently, another kinase or phosphatase is a target, thus creating a web of interdependent controls.

Cyclic Protein Phosphorylation
and Dephosphorylation Regulate
Many Cellular Functions
As noted earlier, one of the most common mechanisms for
regulating protein activity is phosphorylation, the addition
and removal of phosphate groups from serine, threonine, or
tyrosine residues. Protein kinases catalyze phosphorylation,
and phosphatases catalyze dephosphorylation. Although
both reactions are essentially irreversible, the counteracting
activities of kinases and phosphatases provide cells with a
“switch” that can turn on or turn off the function of various proteins (Figure 3-30). Phosphorylation changes a protein’s charge and generally leads to a conformational change;
these effects can significantly alter ligand binding by a protein, leading to an increase or decrease in its activity.

Proteolytic Cleavage Irreversibly Activates
or Inactivates Some Proteins
The regulatory mechanisms discussed so far act as switches,
reversibly turning proteins on and off. The regulation of
some proteins is by a distinctly different mechanism: the irreversible activation or inactivation of protein function by
proteolytic cleavage. This mechanism is most common in regard to some hormones (e.g., insulin) and digestive proteases. Good examples of such enzymes are trypsin and
chymotrypsin, which are synthesized in the pancreas and secreted into the small intestine as the inactive zymogens
trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen, respectively. Enterokinase, an aminopeptidase secreted from cells lining the small
intestine, converts trypsinogen into trypsin, which in turn
cleaves chymotrypsinogen to form chymotrypsin. The delay
in the activation of these proteases until they reach the intestine prevents them from digesting the pancreatic tissue in
which they are made.

86

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

Higher-Order Regulation Includes Control
of Protein Location and Concentration

activity state into another or to the release of active subunits (see Figure 3-27).

The activities of proteins are extensively regulated in order
that the numerous proteins in a cell can work together harmoniously. For example, all metabolic pathways are closely
controlled at all times. Synthetic reactions take place when
the products of these reactions are needed; degradative reactions take place when molecules must be broken down.
All the regulatory mechanisms heretofore described affect a
protein locally at its site of action, turning its activity on
or off.
Normal functioning of a cell, however, also requires the
segregation of proteins to particular compartments such as
the mitochondria, nucleus, and lysosomes. In regard to enzymes, compartmentation not only provides an opportunity
for controlling the delivery of substrate or the exit of product
but also permits competing reactions to take place simultaneously in different parts of a cell. We describe the mechanisms that cells use to direct various proteins to different
compartments in Chapters 16 and 17.
In addition to compartmentation, cellular processes are
regulated by protein synthesis and degradation. For example,
proteins are often synthesized at low rates when a cell has little or no need for their activities. When the cell faces increased demand (e.g., appearance of substrate in the case of
enzymes, stimulation of B lymphocytes by antigen), the cell
responds by synthesizing new protein molecules. Later, the
protein pool is lowered when levels of substrate decrease or
the cell becomes inactive. Extracellular signals are often instrumental in inducing changes in the rates of protein synthesis and degradation (Chapters 13–15). Such regulated
changes play a key role in the cell cycle (Chapter 21) and in
cell differentiation (Chapter 22).

Two classes of intracellular switch proteins regulate a
variety of cellular processes: (1) calmodulin and related
Ca2-binding proteins in the EF hand family and (2) members of the GTPase superfamily (e.g., Ras and G), which
cycle between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound
forms (see Figure 3-29).

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 3.5
Common Mechanisms for Regulating
Protein Function
In allostery, the binding of one ligand molecule (a substrate, activator, or inhibitor) induces a conformational
change, or allosteric transition, that alters a protein’s activity or affinity for other ligands.

■

In multimeric proteins, such as hemoglobin, that bind
multiple ligand molecules, the binding of one ligand molecule may modulate the binding affinity for subsequent ligand molecules. Enzymes that cooperatively bind substrates
exhibit sigmoidal kinetics similar to the oxygen-binding
curve of hemoglobin (see Figure 3-26).

■

■

The phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of amino
acid side chains by protein kinases and phosphatases provide reversible on/off regulation of numerous proteins.

■

Nonallosteric mechanisms for regulating protein activity include proteolytic cleavage, which irreversibly converts
inactive zymogens into active enzymes, compartmentation
of proteins, and signal-induced modulation of protein synthesis and degradation.

■

3.6 Purifying, Detecting,
and Characterizing Proteins
A protein must be purified before its structure and the
mechanism of its action can be studied. However, because
proteins vary in size, charge, and water solubility, no single
method can be used to isolate all proteins. To isolate one
particular protein from the estimated 10,000 different proteins in a cell is a daunting task that requires methods both
for separating proteins and for detecting the presence of specific proteins.
Any molecule, whether protein, carbohydrate, or nucleic
acid, can be separated, or resolved, from other molecules on
the basis of their differences in one or more physical or
chemical characteristics. The larger and more numerous the
differences between two proteins, the easier and more efficient their separation. The two most widely used characteristics for separating proteins are size, defined as either length
or mass, and binding affinity for specific ligands. In this section, we briefly outline several important techniques for separating proteins; these techniques are also useful for the
separation of nucleic acids and other biomolecules. (Specialized methods for removing membrane proteins from membranes are described in the next chapter after the unique
properties of these proteins are discussed.) We then consider
general methods for detecting, or assaying, specific proteins,
including the use of radioactive compounds for tracking
biological activity. Finally, we consider several techniques
for characterizing a protein’s mass, sequence, and threedimensional structure.

Several allosteric mechanisms act as switches, turning
protein activity on and off in a reversible fashion.

Centrifugation Can Separate Particles and
Molecules That Differ in Mass or Density

The binding of allosteric ligand molecules may lead to
the conversion of a protein from one conformational/

The first step in a typical protein purification scheme is
centrifugation. The principle behind centrifugation is that

■

■

3.6 • Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins

two particles in suspension (cells, organelles, or molecules) with different masses or densities will settle to the
bottom of a tube at different rates. Remember, mass is the
weight of a sample (measured in grams), whereas density
is the ratio of its weight to volume (grams/liter). Proteins
vary greatly in mass but not in density. Unless a protein
has an attached lipid or carbohydrate, its density will not
vary by more than 15 percent from 1.37 g/cm3, the average protein density. Heavier or more dense molecules settle, or sediment, more quickly than lighter or less dense
molecules.
A centrifuge speeds sedimentation by subjecting particles
in suspension to centrifugal forces as great as 1,000,000
times the force of gravity g, which can sediment particles as
small as 10 kDa. Modern ultracentrifuges achieve these
forces by reaching speeds of 150,000 revolutions per minute
(rpm) or greater. However, small particles with masses of
5 kDa or less will not sediment uniformly even at such high
rotor speeds.
Centrifugation is used for two basic purposes: (1) as a
preparative technique to separate one type of material from
others and (2) as an analytical technique to measure physical properties (e.g., molecular weight, density, shape, and
equilibrium binding constants) of macromolecules. The sedimentation constant, s, of a protein is a measure of its sedimentation rate. The sedimentation constant is commonly
expressed in svedbergs (S): 1 S 1013 seconds.

Differential Centrifugation The most common initial step in
protein purification is the separation of soluble proteins from
insoluble cellular material by differential centrifugation. A
starting mixture, commonly a cell homogenate, is poured
into a tube and spun at a rotor speed and for a period of time
that forces cell organelles such as nuclei to collect as a pellet
at the bottom; the soluble proteins remain in the supernatant
(Figure 3-31a). The supernatant fraction then is poured off
and can be subjected to other purification methods to separate the many different proteins that it contains.

Rate-Zonal Centrifugation On the basis of differences in
their masses, proteins can be separated by centrifugation
through a solution of increasing density called a density gradient. A concentrated sucrose solution is commonly used to
form density gradients. When a protein mixture is layered on
top of a sucrose gradient in a tube and subjected to centrifugation, each protein in the mixture migrates down the tube
at a rate controlled by the factors that affect the sedimentation constant. All the proteins start from a thin zone at the
top of the tube and separate into bands, or zones (actually
disks), of proteins of different masses. In this separation technique, called rate-zonal centrifugation, samples are centrifuged just long enough to separate the molecules of
interest into discrete zones (Figure 3-31b). If a sample is centrifuged for too short a time, the different protein molecules
will not separate sufficiently. If a sample is centrifuged much

87

longer than necessary, all the proteins will end up in a pellet
at the bottom of the tube.
Although the sedimentation rate is strongly influenced by
particle mass, rate-zonal centrifugation is seldom effective
in determining precise molecular weights because variations
in shape also affect sedimentation rate. The exact effects of
shape are hard to assess, especially for proteins and singlestranded nucleic acid molecules that can assume many complex shapes. Nevertheless, rate-zonal centrifugation has
proved to be the most practical method for separating many
different types of polymers and particles. A second densitygradient technique, called equilibrium density-gradient centrifugation, is used mainly to separate DNA or organelles
(see Figure 5-37).

Electrophoresis Separates Molecules on the Basis
of Their Charge : Mass Ratio
Electrophoresis is a technique for separating molecules in a
mixture under the influence of an applied electric field. Dissolved molecules in an electric field move, or migrate, at a
speed determined by their charge:mass ratio. For example,
if two molecules have the same mass and shape, the one with
the greater net charge will move faster toward an electrode.

SDS-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis Because many
proteins or nucleic acids that differ in size and shape have
nearly identical charge:mass ratios, electrophoresis of
these macromolecules in solution results in little or no
separation of molecules of different lengths. However,
successful separation of proteins and nucleic acids can be
accomplished by electrophoresis in various gels (semisolid
suspensions in water) rather than in a liquid solution.
Electrophoretic separation of proteins is most commonly
performed in polyacrylamide gels. When a mixture of
proteins is applied to a gel and an electric current is applied, smaller proteins migrate faster through the gel than
do larger proteins.
Gels are cast between a pair of glass plates by polymerizing a solution of acrylamide monomers into polyacrylamide chains and simultaneously cross-linking the chains
into a semisolid matrix. The pore size of a gel can be varied
by adjusting the concentrations of polyacrylamide and the
cross-linking reagent. The rate at which a protein moves
through a gel is influenced by the gel’s pore size and the
strength of the electric field. By suitable adjustment of
these parameters, proteins of widely varying sizes can be
separated.
In the most powerful technique for resolving protein
mixtures, proteins are exposed to the ionic detergent SDS
(sodium dodecylsulfate) before and during gel electrophoresis (Figure 3-32). SDS denatures proteins, causing multimeric proteins to dissociate into their subunits, and
all polypeptide chains are forced into extended conformations with similar charge:mass ratios. SDS treatment thus

88

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function
(a) Differential centrifugation
1 Sample is poured into tube

(b) Rate-zonal centrifugation
1 Sample is layered on top of gradient

Larger particle
More dense particle

Smaller particle

Less dense particle

2

Centrifuge
Particles settle
according to
mass

Sucrose
gradient

2
Centrifugal
force

Centrifuge
Particles settle
according to
mass
Centrifugal force

3
Stop centrifuge
Decant liquid
into container

3

Stop centrifuge
Collect fractions
and do assay

Decreasing mass of particles

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-31 Centrifugation techniques
separate particles that differ in mass or density. (a) In
differential centrifugation, a cell homogenate or other mixture is
spun long enough to sediment the denser particles (e.g., cell
organelles, cells), which collect as a pellet at the bottom of the
tube (step 2 ). The less dense particles (e.g., soluble proteins,
nucleic acids) remain in the liquid supernatant, which can be

transferred to another tube (step 3 ). (b) In rate-zonal
centrifugation, a mixture is spun just long enough to separate
molecules that differ in mass but may be similar in shape and
density (e.g., globular proteins, RNA molecules) into discrete
zones within a density gradient commonly formed by a
concentrated sucrose solution (step 2 ). Fractions are removed
from the bottom of the tube and assayed (step 5 ).

eliminates the effect of differences in shape, and so chain
length, which corresponds to mass, is the sole determinant of
the migration rate of proteins in SDS-polyacrylamide electrophoresis. Even chains that differ in molecular weight by
less than 10 percent can be separated by this technique.
Moreover, the molecular weight of a protein can be estimated by comparing the distance that it migrates through a
gel with the distances that proteins of known molecular
weight migrate.

Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis Electrophoresis of
all cellular proteins through an SDS gel can separate proteins
having relatively large differences in mass but cannot resolve
proteins having similar masses (e.g., a 41-kDa protein from
a 42-kDa protein). To separate proteins of similar masses,
another physical characteristic must be exploited. Most commonly, this characteristic is electric charge, which is determined by the number of acidic and basic residues in a
protein. Two unrelated proteins having similar masses are

3.6 • Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins

1

Denature sample with
sodium dodecylsulfate

Place mixture of proteins on gel,
apply electric field

_
Cross-linked
polyacrylamide
gel

Partially
separated
proteins

Direction of migration

+
3

Stain to visualize
separated bands

Decreasing
size

unlikely to have identical net charges because their sequences, and thus the number of acidic and basic residues,
are different.
In two-dimensional electrophoresis, proteins are separated sequentially, first by their charges and then by their
masses (Figure 3-33a). In the first step, a cell extract is
fully denatured by high concentrations (8 M) of urea and
then layered on a gel strip that contains an continuous pH
gradient. The gradient is formed by ampholytes, a mixture
of polyanionic and polycationic molecules, that are cast
into the gel, with the most acidic ampholyte at one end
and the most basic ampholyte at the opposite end. A
charged protein will migrate through the gradient until it
reaches its isoelectric point (pI), the pH at which the net
charge of the protein is zero. This technique, called iso-

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-32 SDSpolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis separates
proteins solely on the basis of their masses. Initial
treatment with SDS, a negatively charged detergent,
dissociates multimeric proteins and denatures all the
polypeptide chains (step 1 ). During electrophoresis,
the SDS-protein complexes migrate through the
polyacrylamide gel (step 2 ). Small proteins are able
to move through the pores more easily, and faster,
than larger proteins. Thus the proteins separate into
bands according to their sizes as they migrate through
the gel. The separated protein bands are visualized by
staining with a dye (step 3 ).

electric focusing (IEF), can resolve proteins that differ by
only one charge unit. Proteins that have been separated on
an IEF gel can then be separated in a second dimension on
the basis of their molecular weights. To accomplish this
separation, the IEF gel strip is placed lengthwise on a polyacrylamide slab gel, this time saturated with SDS. When an
electric field is imposed, the proteins will migrate from the
IEF gel into the SDS slab gel and then separate according
to their masses.
The sequential resolution of proteins by charge and mass
can achieve excellent separation of cellular proteins (Figure
3-33b). For example, two-dimensional gels have been very
useful in comparing the proteomes in undifferentiated and
differentiated cells or in normal and cancer cells because as
many as 1000 proteins can be resolved simultaneously.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Technique Animation: SDS Gel Electrophoresis

SDS-coated
proteins

2

89

90

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

Separate
in first
dimension
by charge

Isoelectric
focusing (IEF)

pH 10.0
Apply first gel
to top of second

pH 4.0

2

pH 10.0

Molecular weight

103

1

Isoelectric focusing ( 1 )

(b)

pH 4.0

)

Protein
mixture

3

66

SDS electrophoresis (

(a)

43
30

16
Separate
in second
dimension
by size

3

SDS
electrophoresis

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-33 Two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis can separate proteins of similar mass. (a) In
this technique, proteins are first separated on the basis of their
charges by isoelectric focusing (step 1 ). The resulting gel strip is
applied to an SDS-polyacrylamide gel and the proteins are
separated into bands by mass (step 3 ). (b) In this two-

Liquid Chromatography Resolves Proteins
by Mass, Charge, or Binding Affinity
A third common technique for separating mixtures of proteins, as well as other molecules, is based on the principle
that molecules dissolved in a solution will interact (bind and
dissociate) with a solid surface. If the solution is allowed to
flow across the surface, then molecules that interact frequently with the surface will spend more time bound to the
surface and thus move more slowly than molecules that interact infrequently with the surface. In this technique, called
liquid chromatography, the sample is placed on top of a
tightly packed column of spherical beads held within a glass
cylinder. The nature of these beads determines whether the
separation of proteins depends on differences in mass,
charge, or binding affinity.

Gel Filtration Chromatography Proteins that differ in mass
can be separated on a column composed of porous beads
made from polyacrylamide, dextran (a bacterial polysaccharide), or agarose (a seaweed derivative), a technique called gel
filtration chromatography. Although proteins flow around the
spherical beads in gel filtration chromatography, they spend
some time within the large depressions that cover a bead’s surface. Because smaller proteins can penetrate into these depres-

4.2

5.9
pI

7.4

dimensional gel of a protein extract from cultured cells, each
spot represents a single polypeptide. Polypeptides can be
detected by dyes, as here, or by other techniques such as
autoradiography. Each polypeptide is characterized by its
isoelectric point (pI) and molecular weight. [Part (b) courtesy of
J. Celis.]

sions more easily than can larger proteins, they travel through
a gel filtration column more slowly than do larger proteins
(Figure 3-34a). (In contrast, proteins migrate through the
pores in an electrophoretic gel; thus smaller proteins move
faster than larger ones.) The total volume of liquid required
to elute a protein from a gel filtration column depends on its
mass: the smaller the mass, the greater the elution volume. By
use of proteins of known mass, the elution volume can be used
to estimate the mass of a protein in a mixture.

Ion-Exchange Chromatography In a second type of liquid
chromatography, called ion-exchange chromatography, proteins are separated on the basis of differences in their
charges. This technique makes use of specially modified
beads whose surfaces are covered by amino groups or carboxyl groups and thus carry either a positive charge (NH3)
or a negative charge (COO) at neutral pH.
The proteins in a mixture carry various net charges at
any given pH. When a solution of a protein mixture flows
through a column of positively charged beads, only proteins
with a net negative charge (acidic proteins) adhere to the
beads; neutral and positively charged (basic) proteins flow
unimpeded through the column (Figure 3-34b). The acidic
proteins are then eluted selectively by passing a gradient of
increasing concentrations of salt through the column. At low

91

3.6 • Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins
(c) Antibody-affinity chromatography

(a) Gel filtration chromatography

Load in
pH 7 buffer

Large protein
Small protein
Layer
sample
on
column

Add buffer
to wash
proteins
through
column

Polymer gel bead

Collect
fractions

3

2

1

Protein
recognized
by antibody

Elute
with
pH 3
buffer

Wash

Protein not
recognized
by antibody

Antibody
3

2

1

(b) Ion-exchange chromatography
Negatively charged
protein
Positively charged
protein
Layer
sample
on
column

Collect
positively
charged
proteins

Elute negatively
charged protein
with salt solution
(NaCl)

Na+

Positively charged gel bead

Cl−

4

3

2

1

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-34 Three commonly used
liquid chromatographic techniques separate proteins on the
basis of mass, charge, or affinity for a specific ligand. (a) Gel
filtration chromatography separates proteins that differ in size.
A mixture of proteins is carefully layered on the top of a glass
cylinder packed with porous beads. Smaller proteins travel
through the column more slowly than larger proteins. Thus
different proteins have different elution volumes and can be
collected in separate liquid fractions from the bottom. (b) Ionexchange chromatography separates proteins that differ in net
charge in columns packed with special beads that carry either a
positive charge (shown here) or a negative charge. Proteins

having the same net charge as the beads are repelled and flow
through the column, whereas proteins having the opposite
charge bind to the beads. Bound proteins—in this case,
negatively charged—are eluted by passing a salt gradient (usually
of NaCl or KCl) through the column. As the ions bind to the
beads, they desorb the protein. (c) In antibody-affinity
chromatography, a specific antibody is covalently attached to
beads packed in a column. Only protein with high affinity for the
antibody is retained by the column; all the nonbinding proteins
flow through. The bound protein is eluted with an acidic solution,
which disrupts the antigen–antibody complexes.

salt concentrations, protein molecules and beads are attracted by their opposite charges. At higher salt concentrations, negative salt ions bind to the positively charged beads,
displacing the negatively charged proteins. In a gradient of

increasing salt concentration, weakly charged proteins are
eluted first and highly charged proteins are eluted last. Similarly, a negatively charged column can be used to retain and
fractionate basic proteins.

92

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

Affinity Chromatography The ability of proteins to bind
specifically to other molecules is the basis of affinity chromatography. In this technique, ligand molecules that bind to
the protein of interest are covalently attached to the beads
used to form the column. Ligands can be enzyme substrates
or other small molecules that bind to specific proteins. In a
widely used form of this technique, antibody-affinity chromatography, the attached ligand is an antibody specific for
the desired protein (Figure 3-34c).
An affinity column will retain only those proteins that
bind the ligand attached to the beads; the remaining proteins, regardless of their charges or masses, will pass
through the column without binding to it. However, if a retained protein interacts with other molecules, forming a
complex, then the entire complex is retained on the column.
The proteins bound to the affinity column are then eluted by
adding an excess of ligand or by changing the salt concentration or pH. The ability of this technique to separate particular proteins depends on the selection of appropriate
ligands.

Highly Specific Enzyme and Antibody Assays
Can Detect Individual Proteins
The purification of a protein, or any other molecule, requires
a specific assay that can detect the molecule of interest in column fractions or gel bands. An assay capitalizes on some
highly distinctive characteristic of a protein: the ability to
bind a particular ligand, to catalyze a particular reaction, or
to be recognized by a specific antibody. An assay must also

be simple and fast to minimize errors and the possibility that
the protein of interest becomes denatured or degraded while
the assay is performed. The goal of any purification scheme
is to isolate sufficient amounts of a given protein for study;
thus a useful assay must also be sensitive enough that only a
small proportion of the available material is consumed.
Many common protein assays require just from 109 to
1012 g of material.

Chromogenic and Light-Emitting Enzyme Reactions Many
assays are tailored to detect some functional aspect of a protein. For example, enzyme assays are based on the ability to
detect the loss of substrate or the formation of product.
Some enzyme assays utilize chromogenic substrates, which
change color in the course of the reaction. (Some substrates
are naturally chromogenic; if they are not, they can be linked
to a chromogenic molecule.) Because of the specificity of an
enzyme for its substrate, only samples that contain the enzyme will change color in the presence of a chromogenic substrate and other required reaction components; the rate of
the reaction provides a measure of the quantity of enzyme
present.
Such chromogenic enzymes can also be fused or chemically linked to an antibody and used to “report” the presence
or location of the antigen. Alternatively, luciferase, an enzyme present in fireflies and some bacteria, can be linked to
an antibody. In the presence of ATP and luciferin, luciferase
catalyzes a light-emitting reaction. In either case, after the
antibody binds to the protein of interest, substrates of the
linked enzyme are added and the appearance of color or

1 Electrophoresis/transfer

Antibody detection

4 Chromogenic detection

2
3

Technique Animation: Immunoblotting

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Electric
current

SDS-polyacrylamide gel

Membrane

Incubate with
Ab1 ( );
wash excess

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-35 Western blotting
(immunoblotting) combines several techniques to resolve
and detect a specific protein. Step 1 : After a protein
mixture has been electrophoresed through an SDS gel, the
separated bands are transferred (blotted) from the gel onto a
porous membrane. Step 2 : The membrane is flooded with a
solution of antibody (Ab1) specific for the desired protein.
Only the band containing this protein binds the antibody,
forming a layer of antibody molecules (although their position

Incubate with enzymelinked Ab2 ( );
wash excess

React with substrate
for Ab2-linked enzyme

cannot be seen at this point). After sufficient time for binding,
the membrane is washed to remove unbound Ab1. Step 3 :
The membrane is incubated with a second antibody (Ab2) that
binds to the bound Ab1. This second antibody is covalently
linked to alkaline phosphatase, which catalyzes a chromogenic
reaction. Step 4 : Finally, the substrate is added and a deep
purple precipitate forms, marking the band containing the
desired protein.

3.6 • Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins

emitted light is monitored. A variation of this technique, particularly useful in detecting specific proteins within living
cells, makes use of green fluorescent protein (GFP), a naturally fluorescent protein found in jellyfish (see Figure 5-46).

Western Blotting A powerful method for detecting a particular protein in a complex mixture combines the superior
resolving power of gel electrophoresis, the specificity of antibodies, and the sensitivity of enzyme assays. Called Western
blotting, or immunoblotting, this multistep procedure is
commonly used to separate proteins and then identify a specific protein of interest. As shown in Figure 3-35, two different antibodies are used in this method, one specific for the
desired protein and the other linked to a reporter enzyme.

Radioisotopes Are Indispensable Tools
for Detecting Biological Molecules
A sensitive method for tracking a protein or other biological molecule is by detecting the radioactivity emitted from radioisotopes introduced into the molecule. At least one atom
in a radiolabeled molecule is present in a radioactive form,
called a radioisotope.

Radioisotopes Useful in Biological Research Hundreds of
biological compounds (e.g., amino acids, nucleosides, and
numerous metabolic intermediates) labeled with various radioisotopes are commercially available. These preparations
vary considerably in their specific activity, which is the
amount of radioactivity per unit of material, measured in disintegrations per minute (dpm) per millimole. The specific activity of a labeled compound depends on the probability of
decay of the radioisotope, indicated by its half-life, which is
the time required for half the atoms to undergo radioactive
decay. In general, the shorter the half-life of a radioisotope,
the higher its specific activity (Table 3-3).
The specific activity of a labeled compound must be high
enough that sufficient radioactivity is incorporated into cellular molecules to be accurately detected. For example, methionine and cysteine labeled with sulfur-35 (35S) are widely
used to label cellular proteins because preparations of these
`

TABLE 3-3

Radioisotopes Commonly Used
in Biological Research

Isotope

Half-Life

Phosphorus-32

14.3 days

Iodine-125

60.4 days

Sulfur-35

87.5 days

Tritium (hydrogen-3)

12.4 years

Carbon-14

5730.4 years

93

amino acids with high specific activities (>1015 dpm/mmol)
are available. Likewise, commercial preparations of 3Hlabeled nucleic acid precursors have much higher specific
activities than those of the corresponding 14C-labeled preparations. In most experiments, the former are preferable because they allow RNA or DNA to be adequately labeled after
a shorter time of incorporation or require a smaller cell sample. Various phosphate-containing compounds in which
every phosphorus atom is the radioisotope phosphorus-32
are readily available. Because of their high specific activity,
32
P-labeled nucleotides are routinely used to label nucleic
acids in cell-free systems.
Labeled compounds in which a radioisotope replaces
atoms normally present in the molecule have the same chemical properties as the corresponding nonlabeled compounds.
Enzymes, for instance, cannot distinguish between substrates
labeled in this way and their nonlabeled substrates. In contrast, labeling with the radioisotope iodine-125 (125I) requires the covalent addition of 125I to a protein or nucleic
acid. Because this labeling procedure modifies the chemical
structure of a protein or nucleic acid, the biological activity
of the labeled molecule may differ somewhat from that of the
nonlabeled form.

Labeling Experiments and Detection of Radiolabeled
Molecules Whether labeled compounds are detected by autoradiography, a semiquantitative visual assay, or their radioactivity is measured in an appropriate “counter,” a highly
quantitative assay that can determine the concentration of a
radiolabeled compound in a sample, depends on the nature
of the experiment. In some experiments, both types of detection are used.
In one use of autoradiography, a cell or cell constituent
is labeled with a radioactive compound and then overlaid
with a photographic emulsion sensitive to radiation. Development of the emulsion yields small silver grains whose distribution corresponds to that of the radioactive material.
Autoradiographic studies of whole cells were crucial in determining the intracellular sites where various macromolecules are synthesized and the subsequent movements of these
macromolecules within cells. Various techniques employing
fluorescent microscopy, which we describe in the next chapter, have largely supplanted autoradiography for studies of
this type. However, autoradiography is commonly used in
various assays for detecting specific isolated DNA or RNA
sequences (Chapter 9).
Quantitative measurements of the amount of radioactivity in a labeled material are performed with several different
instruments. A Geiger counter measures ions produced in a
gas by the  particles or rays emitted from a radioisotope.
In a scintillation counter, a radiolabeled sample is mixed with
a liquid containing a fluorescent compound that emits a flash
of light when it absorbs the energy of the  particles or rays
released in the decay of the radioisotope; a phototube in the
instrument detects and counts these light flashes. Phosphorimagers are used to detect radiolabeled compounds on a surface, storing digital data on the number of decays in

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

ER

Golgi

Secretory
granule

Pulse
T = 0;
add 3H-leucine

Chase
T = 5 min;
wash out 3H-leucine

T = 10 min

T = 45 min

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-36 Pulse-chase experiments
can track the pathway of protein movement within cells.
To determine the pathway traversed by secreted proteins
subsequent to their synthesis on the rough endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), cells are briefly incubated in a medium containing
a radiolabeled amino acid (e.g., [3H]leucine), the pulse, which will
label any protein synthesized during this period. The cells are
then washed with buffer to remove the pulse and transferred to
medium lacking a radioactive precursor, the chase. Samples
taken periodically are analyzed by autoradiography to determine
the cellular location of labeled protein. At the beginning of the
experiment (t
0), no protein is labeled, as indicated by the
green dotted lines. At the end of the pulse (t
5 minutes), all
the labeled protein (red lines) appears in the ER. At subsequent
times, this newly synthesized labeled protein is visualized first
in the Golgi complex and then in secretory vesicles. Because
any protein synthesized during the chase period is not labeled,
the movement of the labeled protein can be defined quite
precisely.

disintegrations per minute per small pixel of surface area.
These instruments, which can be thought of as a kind of
reusable electronic film, are commonly used to quantitate radioactive molecules separated by gel electrophoresis and are
replacing photographic emulsions for this purpose.
A combination of labeling and biochemical techniques
and of visual and quantitative detection methods is often employed in labeling experiments. For instance, to identify the
major proteins synthesized by a particular cell type, a sample
of the cells is incubated with a radioactive amino acid (e.g.,
[35S]methionine) for a few minutes. The mixture of cellular
proteins is then resolved by gel electrophoresis, and the gel

is subjected to autoradiography or phosphorimager analysis.
The radioactive bands correspond to newly synthesized proteins, which have incorporated the radiolabeled amino acid.
Alternatively, the proteins can be resolved by liquid chromatography, and the radioactivity in the eluted fractions can
be determined quantitatively with a counter.
Pulse-chase experiments are particularly useful for tracing changes in the intracellular location of proteins or the
transformation of a metabolite into others over time. In this
experimental protocol, a cell sample is exposed to a radiolabeled compound—the “pulse”—for a brief period of time,
then washed with buffer to remove the labeled pulse, and finally incubated with a nonlabeled form of the compound—
the “chase” (Figure 3-36). Samples taken periodically are
assayed to determine the location or chemical form of the
radiolabel. A classic use of the pulse-chase technique was in
studies to elucidate the pathway traversed by secreted proteins from their site of synthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum
to the cell surface (Chapter 17).

Mass Spectrometry Measures the Mass
of Proteins and Peptides
A powerful technique for measuring the mass of molecules
such as proteins and peptides is mass spectrometry. This

Laser

Metal
target

1 Ionization
+

+

2 Acceleration
Sample
Intensity

94

+
3
Detection

Lightest ions
arrive at
detector first
Time

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-37 The molecular weight of
proteins and peptides can be determined by time-of-flight
mass spectrometry. In a laser-desorption mass spectrometer,
pulses of light from a laser ionize a protein or peptide mixture
that is absorbed on a metal target ( 1 ). An electric field
accelerates the molecules in the sample toward the detector
( 2 and 3 ). The time to the detector is inversely proportional
to the mass of a molecule. For molecules having the same
charge, the time to the detector is inversely proportional to the
mass. The molecular weight is calculated using the time of flight
of a standard.

3.6 • Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins

technique requires a method for ionizing the sample, usually
a mixture of peptides or proteins, accelerating the molecular ions, and then detecting the ions. In a laser desorption
mass spectrometer, the protein sample is mixed with an organic acid and then dried on a metal target. Energy from a
laser ionizes the proteins, and an electric field accelerates the
ions down a tube to a detector (Figure 3-37). Alternatively, in
an electrospray mass spectrometer, a fine mist containing the
sample is ionized and then introduced into a separation
chamber where the positively charged molecules are accelerated by an electric field. In both instruments, the time of
flight is inversely proportional to a protein’s mass and directly proportional to its charge. As little as 1 1015 mol
(1 femtomole) of a protein as large as 200,000 MW can be
measured with an error of 0.1 percent.

Protein Primary Structure Can Be Determined
by Chemical Methods and from Gene Sequences
The classic method for determining the amino acid sequence
of a protein is Edman degradation. In this procedure, the free
amino group of the N-terminal amino acid of a polypeptide
is labeled, and the labeled amino acid is then cleaved from
the polypeptide and identified by high-pressure liquid chromatography. The polypeptide is left one residue shorter, with
a new amino acid at the N-terminus. The cycle is repeated on
the ever shortening polypeptide until all the residues have
been identified.
Before about 1985, biologists commonly used the Edman
chemical procedure for determining protein sequences. Now,
however, protein sequences are determined primarily by
analysis of genome sequences. The complete genomes of several organisms have already been sequenced, and the database of genome sequences from humans and numerous
model organisms is expanding rapidly. As discussed in Chapter 9, the sequences of proteins can be deduced from DNA
sequences that are predicted to encode proteins.
A powerful approach for determining the primary structure of an isolated protein combines mass spectroscopy and
the use of sequence databases. First, mass spectrometry is
used to determine the peptide mass fingerprint of the protein.
A peptide mass fingerprint is a compilation of the molecular
weights of peptides that are generated by a specific protease.
The molecular weights of the parent protein and its proteolytic fragments are then used to search genome databases
for any similarly sized protein with identical or similar peptide mass maps.

Peptides with a Defined Sequence Can Be
Synthesized Chemically
Synthetic peptides that are identical with peptides synthesized in vivo are useful experimental tools in studies of proteins and cells. For example, short synthetic peptides of
10–15 residues can function as antigens to trigger the production of antibodies in animals. A synthetic peptide, when

95

coupled to a large protein carrier, can trick an animal into
producing antibodies that bind the full-sized, natural protein
antigen. As we’ll see throughout this book, antibodies are extremely versatile reagents for isolating proteins from mixtures by affinity chromatography (see Figure 3-34c), for
separating and detecting proteins by Western blotting (see
Figure 3-35), and for localizing proteins in cells by microscopic techniques described in Chapter 5.
Peptides are routinely synthesized in a test tube from
monomeric amino acids by condensation reactions that form
peptide bonds. Peptides are constructed sequentially by coupling the C-terminus of a monomeric amino acid with the Nterminus of the growing peptide. To prevent unwanted
reactions entailing the amino groups and carboxyl groups
of the side chains during the coupling steps, a protecting
(blocking) group is attached to the side chains. Without these
protecting groups, branched peptides would be generated. In
the last steps of synthesis, the side chain–protecting groups
are removed and the peptide is cleaved from the resin on
which synthesis takes place.

Protein Conformation Is Determined
by Sophisticated Physical Methods
In this chapter, we have emphasized that protein function is
dependent on protein structure. Thus, to figure out how a
protein works, its three-dimensional structure must be
known. Determining a protein’s conformation requires sophisticated physical methods and complex analyses of the experimental data. We briefly describe three methods used to
generate three-dimensional models of proteins.

X-Ray Crystallography The use of x-ray crystallography to
determine the three-dimensional structures of proteins was
pioneered by Max Perutz and John Kendrew in the 1950s. In
this technique, beams of x-rays are passed through a protein
crystal in which millions of protein molecules are precisely
aligned with one another in a rigid array characteristic of the
protein. The wavelengths of x-rays are about 0.1–0.2 nm,
short enough to resolve the atoms in the protein crystal.
Atoms in the crystal scatter the x-rays, which produce a diffraction pattern of discrete spots when they are intercepted
by photographic film (Figure 3-38). Such patterns are extremely complex—composed of as many as 25,000 diffraction spots for a small protein. Elaborate calculations and
modifications of the protein (such as the binding of heavy
metals) must be made to interpret the diffraction pattern and
to solve the structure of the protein. The process is analogous
to reconstructing the precise shape of a rock from the ripples that it creates in a pond. To date, the detailed threedimensional structures of more than 10,000 proteins have
been established by x-ray crystallography.

Cryoelectron Microscopy Although some proteins readily
crystallize, obtaining crystals of others—particularly large
multisubunit proteins—requires a time-consuming trial-and-

96

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

of electrons to prevent radiation-induced damage to the structure. Sophisticated computer programs analyze the images
and reconstruct the protein’s structure in three dimensions.
Recent advances in cryoelectron microscopy permit researchers to generate molecular models that compare with
those derived from x-ray crystallography. The use of cryoelectron microscopy and other types of electron microscopy
for visualizing cell structures are discussed in Chapter 5.

(a)
X-ray
source
X-ray
beam
Crystal

Detector
(e.g., film)

Diffracted
beams

NMR Spectroscopy The three-dimensional structures of
small proteins containing about as many as 200 amino acids
can be studied with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. In this technique, a concentrated protein solution is placed in a magnetic field and the effects of different
radio frequencies on the spin of different atoms are measured. The behavior of any atom is influenced by neighboring atoms in adjacent residues, with closely spaced residues
being more perturbed than distant residues. From the magnitude of the effect, the distances between residues can be
calculated; these distances are then used to generate a model
of the three-dimensional structure of the protein.
Although NMR does not require the crystallization of a
protein, a definite advantage, this technique is limited to proteins smaller than about 20 kDa. However, NMR analysis
can also be applied to protein domains, which tend to be
small enough for this technique and can often be obtained
as stable structures.
KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 3.6
Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins
Proteins can be separated from other cell components
and from one another on the basis of differences in their
physical and chemical properties.

■

Centrifugation separates proteins on the basis of their
rates of sedimentation, which are influenced by their
masses and shapes.

■

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 3-38 X-ray crystallography
provides diffraction data from which the three-dimensional
structure of a protein can be determined. (a) Basic
components of an x-ray crystallographic determination. When a
narrow beam of x-rays strikes a crystal, part of it passes straight
through and the rest is scattered (diffracted) in various directions.
The intensity of the diffracted waves is recorded on an x-ray film
or with a solid-state electronic detector. (b) X-ray diffraction
pattern for a topoisomerase crystal collected on a solid-state
detector. From complex analyses of patterns like this one, the
location of every atom in a protein can be determined. [Part (a)
adapted from L. Stryer, 1995, Biochemistry, 4th ed., W. H. Freeman and
Company, p. 64; part (b) courtesy of J. Berger.]

Gel electrophoresis separates proteins on the basis of
their rates of movement in an applied electric field. SDSpolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis can resolve polypeptide
chains differing in molecular weight by 10 percent or less
(see Figure 3-32).

■

Liquid chromatography separates proteins on the basis
of their rates of movement through a column packed with
spherical beads. Proteins differing in mass are resolved on
gel filtration columns; those differing in charge, on ionexchange columns; and those differing in ligand-binding
properties, on affinity columns (see Figure 3-34).

■

Various assays are used to detect and quantify proteins.
Some assays use a light-producing reaction or radioactivity to generate a signal. Other assays produce an amplified
colored signal with enzymes and chromogenic substrates.

■

error effort to find just the right conditions. The structures
of such difficult-to-crystallize proteins can be obtained by cryoelectron microscopy. In this technique, a protein sample is
rapidly frozen in liquid helium to preserve its structure and
then examined in the frozen, hydrated state in a cryoelectron
microscope. Pictures are recorded on film by using a low dose

Antibodies are powerful reagents used to detect, quantify, and isolate proteins. They are used in affinity chromatography and combined with gel electrophoresis in

■

Review the Concepts

Western blotting, a powerful method for separating and
detecting a protein in a mixture (see Figure 3-35).
Autoradiography is a semiquantitative technique for detecting radioactively labeled molecules in cells, tissues, or
electrophoretic gels.

■

Pulse-chase labeling can determine the intracellular fate
of proteins and other metabolites (see Figure 3-36).

■

Three-dimensional structures of proteins are obtained by
x-ray crystallography, cryoelectron microscopy, and NMR
spectroscopy. X-ray crystallography provides the most detailed structures but requires protein crystallization. Cryoelectron microscopy is most useful for large protein complexes, which are difficult to crystallize. Only relatively
small proteins are amenable to NMR analysis.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
Impressive expansion of the computational power of computers is at the core of advances in determining the threedimensional structures of proteins. For example, vacuum
tube computers running on programs punched on cards
were used to solve the first protein structures on the basis
of x-ray crystallography. In the future, researchers aim to
predict the structures of proteins only on the basis of
amino acid sequences deduced from gene sequences. This
computationally challenging problem requires supercomputers or large clusters of computers working in synchrony. Currently, only the structures of very small
domains containing 100 residues or fewer can be predicted
at a low resolution. However, continued developments in
computing and models of protein folding, combined with
large-scale efforts to solve the structures of all protein motifs by x-ray crystallography, will allow the prediction of
the structures of larger proteins. With an exponentially expanding database of motifs, domains, and proteins, scientists will be able to identify the motifs in an unknown
protein, match the motif to the sequence, and use this head
start in predicting the three-dimensional structure of the
entire protein.
New combined approaches will also help in in determining high-resolution structures of molecular machines such as
those listed in Table 3-1. Although these very large macromolecular assemblies usually are difficult to crystallize and
thus to solve by x-ray crystallography, they can be imaged in
a cryoelectron microscope at liquid helium temperatures and
high electron energies. From millions of individual “particles,” each representing a random view of the protein complex, the three-dimensional structure can be built. Because
subunits of the complex may already be solved by crystallography, a composite structure consisting of the x-ray-derived
subunit structures fitted to the EM-derived model will be generated. An interesting application of this type of study would
be the solution of the structures of amyloid and prion pro-

97

teins, especially in the early stages in the formation of insoluble filaments.
Understanding the operation of protein machines will require the measurement of many new characteristics of proteins. For example, because many machines do nonchemical
work of some type, biologists will have to identify the energy sources (mechanical, electrical, or thermal) and measure the amounts of energy to determine the limits of a
particular machine. Because most activities of machines include movement of one type or another, the force powering
the movement and its relation to biological activity can be
a source of insight into how force generation is coupled to
chemistry. Improved tools such as optical traps and atomic
force microscopes will enable detailed studies of the forces
and chemistry pertinent to the operation of individual protein machines.

KEY TERMS
 helix 61
activation energy 74
active site 75
allostery 83
amyloid filament 73
autoradiography 93
 sheet 61
chaperone 69
conformation 60
cooperativity 83
domain 63
electrophoresis 87
homology 68
Km 76
ligand 73
liquid chromatography 90

molecular machine 59
motif 63
motor protein 79
peptide bond 60
polypeptide 61
primary structure 61
proteasome 71
protein 61
proteome 60
quaternary structure 66
rate-zonal centrifugation 87
secondary structure 61
tertiary structure 62
ubiquitin 71
Vmax 76
x-ray crystallography 95

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. The three-dimensional structure of a protein is determined by its primary, secondary, and tertiary structures.
Define the primary, secondary, and tertiary structures. What
are some of the common secondary structures? What are the
forces that hold together the secondary and tertiary structures? What is the quaternary structure?
2. Proper folding of proteins is essential for biological
activity. Describe the roles of molecular chaperones and
chaperonins in the folding of proteins.
3. Proteins are degraded in cells. What is ubiquitin, and
what role does it play in tagging proteins for degradation?
What is the role of proteasomes in protein degradation?

98

CHAPTER 3 • Protein Structure and Function

4. Enzymes can catalyze chemical reactions. How do enzymes increase the rate of a reaction? What constitutes the
active site of an enzyme? For an enzyme-catalyzed reaction,
what are Km and Vmax? For enzyme X, the Km for substrate
A is 0.4 mM and for substrate B is 0.01 mM. Which substrate has a higher affinity for enzyme X?
5. Motor proteins, such as myosin, convert energy into a
mechanical force. Describe the three general properties characteristic of motor proteins. Describe the biochemical events
that occur during one cycle of movement of myosin relative
to an actin filament.
6. The function of proteins can be regulated in a number of
ways. What is cooperativity, and how does it influence protein function? Describe how protein phosphorylation and
proteolytic cleavage can modulate protein function.
7. A number of techniques can separate proteins on the
basis of their differences in mass. Describe the use of two of
these techniques, centrifugation and gel electrophoresis. The
blood proteins transferrin (MW 76 kDa) and lysozyme (MW
15 kDa) can be separated by rate zonal centrifugation or SDS
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Which of the two proteins will sediment faster during centrifugation? Which will
migrate faster during electrophoresis?
8. Chromatography is an analytical method used to separate proteins. Describe the principles for separating proteins
by gel filtration, ion-exchange, and affinity chromatography.
9. Various methods have been developed for detecting
proteins. Describe how radioisotopes and autoradiography
can be used for labeling and detecting proteins. How does
Western blotting detect proteins?
10. Physical methods are often used to determine protein
conformation. Describe how x-ray crystallography, cryoelectron microscopy, and NMR spectroscopy can be used to
determine the shape of proteins.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Proteomics involves the global analysis of protein expression. In one approach, all the proteins in control cells and
treated cells are extracted and subsequently separated using
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Typically, hundreds or
thousands of protein spots are resolved and the steady-state
levels of each protein are compared between control and
treated cells. In the following example, only a few protein
spots are shown for simplicity. Proteins are separated in the
first dimension on the basis of charge by isoelectric focusing
(pH 4–10) and then separated by size by SDS polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis. Proteins are detected with a stain such
as Coomassie blue and assigned numbers for identification.
a. Cells are treated with a drug (“ Drug”) or left untreated
(“Control”) and then proteins are extracted and separated
by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. The stained gels are

shown below. What do you conclude about the effect of the
drug on the steady-state levels of proteins 1–7?
Control
pH

4
−

1

10

4

+ Drug
pH

10

−

2
3
4

6

5
7

+

+

b. You suspect that the drug may be inducing a protein
kinase and so repeat the experiment in part a in the presence
of 32P-labeled inorganic phosphate. In this experiment the
two-dimensional gels are exposed to x-ray film to detect the
presence of 32P-labeled proteins. The x-ray films are shown
below. What do you conclude from this experiment about
the effect of the drug on proteins 1–7?

4

Control
pH

10

4

−

−

+

+

+ Drug
pH

10

c. To determine the cellular localization of proteins 1–7, the
cells from part a were separated into nuclear and cytoplasmic
fractions by differential centrifugation. Two-dimensional gels
were run and the stained gels are shown below. What do you
conclude about the cellular localization of proteins 1–7?
+

Control
4

Nuclear
pH

10

4

−

−

+

+

Cytoplasmic
pH
10

+ Drug
4

Nuclear
pH

10

4

−

−

+

+

Cytoplasmic
pH
10

References

d. Summarize the overall properties of proteins 1–7, combining the data from parts a, b, and c. Describe how you
could determine the identity of any one of the proteins.

REFERENCES

General References
Berg, J. M., J. L. Tymoczko, and L. Stryer. 2002. Biochemistry,
5th ed. W. H. Freeman and Company, chaps. 2–4, 7–10.
Nelson, D. L., and M. M. Cox. 2000. Lehninger Principles of
Biochemistry, 3d ed. Worth Publishers, chaps. 5–8.

Web Sites
Entry site into the proteins, structures, genomes, and taxonomy:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez/
The protein 3D structure database: http://www.rcsb.org/
Structural classifications of proteins: http://scop.mrclmb.cam.ac.
uk/scop/
Sites containing general information about proteins: http://www.
expasy.ch/; http://www.proweb.org/
Sites for specific protein families: http://www.pkr.sdsc. edu/html/
index.shtml The protein kinase resource; http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.
ac.uk/myosin/myosin.html The myosin home page; http://www.
proweb.org/kinesin// The kinesin home page

Hierarchical Structure of Proteins
Branden, C., and J. Tooze. 1999. Introduction to Protein Structure. Garland.
Creighton, T. E. 1993. Proteins: Structures and Molecular Properties, 2d ed. W. H. Freeman and Company.
Hardison, R. 1998. Hemoglobins from bacteria to man: Evolution of different patterns of gene expression. J. Exp. Biol. 201: 1099.
Lesk, A. M. 2001. Introduction to Protein Architecture. Oxford.
Macromolecular Machines. 1998. Cell 92:291–423. A special review issue on protein machines.
Patthy, L. 1999. Protein Evolution. Blackwell Science.

Folding, Modification, and Degradation of Proteins
Cohen, F. E. 1999. Protein misfolding and prion diseases. J. Mol.
Biol. 293:313–320.
Dobson, C. M. 1999. Protein misfolding, evolution, and disease.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 24:329–332.
Hartl, F. U., and M. Hayer-Hartl. 2002. Molecular chaperones
in the cytosol: From nascent chain to folded protein. Science
295:1852–1858.
Kirschner, M. 1999. Intracellular proteolysis. Trends Cell Biol.
9:M42–M45.
Kornitzer, D., and A. Ciechanover. 2000. Modes of regulation
of ubiqutin-mediated protein degradation. J. Cell Physiol. 182:1–11.
Laney, J. D., and M. Hochstrasser. 1999. Substrate targeting in
the ubiquitin system. Cell 97:427–430.
Rochet, J.-C., and P. T. Landsbury. 2000. Amyloid fibrillogenesis: Themes and variations. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10:60–68.

99

Weissman, A. M. 2001. Themes and variations on ubiquitylation. Nature Cell Biol. 2:169–177.
Zhang, X., F. Beuron, and P. S. Freemont. 2002. Machinery of
protein folding and unfolding. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12:231–238.
Zwickil, P., W. Baumeister, and A. Steven. 2000. Dis-assembly
lines: The proteasome and related ATPase-assisted proteases. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 10:242–250.

Enzymes and the Chemical Work of Cells
Dressler, D. H., and H. Potter. 1991. Discovering Enzymes. Scientific American Library.
Fersht, A. 1999. Enzyme Structure and Mechanism, 3d ed.
W. H. Freeman and Company.
Smith, C. M., et al. 1997. The protein kinase resource. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 22:444–446.
Taylor, S. S., and E. Radzio-Andzelm. 1994. Three protein kinase structures define a common motif. Structure 2:345–355.

Molecular Motors and the Mechanical Work of Cells
Cooke, R. 2001. Motor proteins. Encyclopedia Life Sciences.
Nature Publishing Group.
Spudich, J. A. 2001. The myosin swinging cross-bridge model.
Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:387–392.
Vale, R. D., and R. A. Milligan. 2000. The way things move:
Looking under the hood of molecular motor proteins. Science
288:88–95.

Common Mechanisms for Regulating Protein Function
Ackers, G. K. 1998. Deciphering the molecular code of hemoglobin allostery. Adv. Protein Chem. 51:185–253.
Austin, D. J., G. R. Crabtree, and S. L. Schreiber. 1994. Proximity versus allostery: The role of regulated protein dimerization in
biology. Chem. Biol. 1:131–136.
Burack, W. R., and A. S. Shaw. 2000. Signal transduction: Hanging on a scaffold. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12:211–216.
Cox, S., E. Radzio-Andzelm, and S. S. Taylor. 1994. Domain
movements in protein kinases. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 4:893–901.
Horovitz, A., Y. Fridmann, G. Kafri, and O. Yifrach. 2001. Review: Allostery in chaperonins. J. Struct. Biol. 135:104–114.
Kawasaki, H., S. Nakayama, and R. H. Kretsinger. 1998. Classification and evolution of EF-hand proteins. Biometals 11:277–295.
Lim, W. A. 2002. The modular logic of signaling proteins: Building allosteric switches from simple binding domains. Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 12:61–68.
Ptashne, M., and A. Gann. 1998. Imposing specificity by localization: Mechanism and evolvability. Curr. Biol. 8:R812–R822.
Saibil, H. R., A. L. Horwich, and W. A. Fenton. 2001. Allostery
and protein substrate conformational change during GroEL/GroESmediated protein folding. Adv. Protein Chem. 59:45–72.
Yap, K. L., J. A. B. Ames, M. B. Sindells, and M. Ikura. 1999.
Diversity of conformational states and changes within the EF-hand
protein superfamily. Proteins 37:499–507.

Purifying, Detecting, and Characterizing Proteins
Hames, B. D. A Practical Approach. Oxford University Press. A
methods series that describes protein purification methods and assays.

4
BASIC MOLECULAR
GENETIC
MECHANISMS

Electron micrograph of DNA (green arrow) being transcribed into RNA (red arrow). [O. L. Miller, Jr., and Barbara R.
Beatty, Oak Ridge National Laboratory.]

T

he extraordinary versatility of proteins as molecular
machines and switches, cellular catalysts, and components of cellular structures was described in Chapter
3. In this chapter we consider the nucleic acids. These macromolecules (1) contain the information for determining the
amino acid sequence and hence the structure and function
of all the proteins of a cell, (2) are part of the cellular structures that select and align amino acids in the correct order
as a polypeptide chain is being synthesized, and (3) catalyze
a number of fundamental chemical reactions in cells, including formation of peptide bonds between amino acids during
protein synthesis.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) contains all the information required to build the cells and tissues of an organism. The exact replication of this information in any
species assures its genetic continuity from generation to
generation and is critical to the normal development of an
individual. The information stored in DNA is arranged in
hereditary units, now known as genes, that control identifiable traits of an organism. In the process of transcription, the information stored in DNA is copied into ribonucleic acid (RNA), which has three distinct roles in protein
synthesis.
Messenger RNA (mRNA) carries the instructions from
DNA that specify the correct order of amino acids during
protein synthesis. The remarkably accurate, stepwise assembly of amino acids into proteins occurs by translation of
mRNA. In this process, the information in mRNA is interpreted by a second type of RNA called transfer RNA (tRNA)
with the aid of a third type of RNA, ribosomal RNA

(rRNA), and its associated proteins. As the correct amino
acids are brought into sequence by tRNAs, they are linked by
peptide bonds to make proteins.
Discovery of the structure of DNA in 1953 and subsequent elucidation of how DNA directs synthesis of RNA,
which then directs assembly of proteins—the so-called central
dogma—were monumental achievements marking the early
days of molecular biology. However, the simplified representation of the central dogma as DNAnRNAnprotein does
not reflect the role of proteins in the synthesis of nucleic acids.
Moreover, as discussed in later chapters, proteins are largely
responsible for regulating gene expression, the entire process
whereby the information encoded in DNA is decoded into the
proteins that characterize various cell types.

OUTLINE
4.1 Structure of Nucleic Acids
4.2 Transcription of Protein-Coding Genes
and Formation of Functional mRNA
4.3 Control of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes
4.4 The Three Roles of RNA in Translation
4.5 Stepwise Synthesis of Proteins on Ribosomes
4.6 DNA Replication
4.7 Viruses: Parasites of the Cellular Genetic
System
101

102

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

DNA
virus
dNTPs
Nucleolus

4

RNA
virus

Replication

1 Transcription

DNA

rRNA
rNTPs
pr e-

mR

NA

Nucleus

Cytosol

2 RNA
processing

A

AA

AA

mRNA
Ribosomal
subunits

Protein
Amino acids
AA

AA

Translation
factors

A

tRNA
3 mRNA translation

▲ FIGURE 4-1 Overview of four basic molecular genetic
processes. In this chapter we cover the three processes that
lead to production of proteins ( 1 – 3 ) and the process for
replicating DNA ( 4 ). Because viruses utilize host-cell machinery,
they have been important models for studying these processes.
During transcription of a protein-coding gene by RNA polymerase
( 1 ), the four-base DNA code specifying the amino acid sequence
of a protein is copied into a precursor messenger RNA (premRNA) by the polymerization of ribonucleoside triphosphate
monomers (rNTPs). Removal of extraneous sequences and other
modifications to the pre-mRNA ( 2 ), collectively known as RNA
processing, produce a functional mRNA, which is transported to the

cytoplasm. During translation ( 3 ), the four-base code of the mRNA is
decoded into the 20–amino acid “language” of proteins. Ribosomes,
the macromolecular machines that translate the mRNA code, are
composed of two subunits assembled in the nucleolus from ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and multiple proteins (left). After transport to the
cytoplasm, ribosomal subunits associate with an mRNA and carry
out protein synthesis with the help of transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and
various translation factors. During DNA replication (4 ), which occurs
only in cells preparing to divide, deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate
monomers (dNTPs) are polymerized to yield two identical copies of
each chromosomal DNA molecule. Each daughter cell receives one
of the identical copies.

In this chapter, we first review the basic structures and
properties of DNA and RNA. In the next several sections
we discuss the basic processes summarized in Figure 4-1:
transcription of DNA into RNA precursors, processing of
these precursors to make functional RNA molecules, translation of mRNAs into proteins, and the replication of DNA.
Along the way we compare gene structure in prokaryotes
and eukaryotes and describe how bacteria control transcription, setting the stage for the more complex eukaryotic
transcription-control mechanisms discussed in Chapter 11.
After outlining the individual roles of mRNA, tRNA, and
rRNA in protein synthesis, we present a detailed description
of the components and biochemical steps in translation. We
also consider the molecular problems involved in DNA repli-

cation and the complex cellular machinery for ensuring accurate copying of the genetic material. The final section of
the chapter presents basic information about viruses, which
are important model organisms for studying macromolecular
synthesis and other cellular processes.

4.1 Structure of Nucleic Acids
DNA and RNA are chemically very similar. The primary
structures of both are linear polymers composed of
monomers called nucleotides. Cellular RNAs range in length
from less than one hundred to many thousands of nucleotides. Cellular DNA molecules can be as long as several

4.1 • Structure of Nucleic Acids

hundred million nucleotides. These large DNA units in association with proteins can be stained with dyes and visualized in the light microscope as chromosomes, so named
because of their stainability.

A Nucleic Acid Strand Is a Linear Polymer
with End-to-End Directionality
DNA and RNA each consist of only four different nucleotides.
Recall from Chapter 2 that all nucleotides consist of an
organic base linked to a five-carbon sugar that has a phosphate group attached to carbon 5. In RNA, the sugar is ribose;
in DNA, deoxyribose (see Figure 2-14). The nucleotides used
in synthesis of DNA and RNA contain five different bases.
The bases adenine (A) and guanine (G) are purines, which con-

(a)
5 end

(b)

O


O

O

P

C

O

3

H2C 5

C

O

H

O

OH
5

5

5

H

O


3

H

3

Phosphodiester
bond

3

G

P

H

H

A

P

O

5 C-A-G 3

O
H2C 5
H
H

O

H

3

O

O
H2C 5

G

O

H
3 end

Native DNA Is a Double Helix of Complementary
Antiparallel Strands

H

P

H

tain a pair of fused rings; the bases cytosine (C), thymine (T),
and uracil (U) are pyrimidines, which contain a single ring (see
Figure 2-15). Both DNA and RNA contain three of these
bases—A, G, and C; however, T is found only in DNA, and
U only in RNA. (Note that the single-letter abbreviations for
these bases are also commonly used to denote the entire nucleotides in nucleic acid polymers.)
A single nucleic acid strand has a backbone composed of
repeating pentose-phosphate units from which the purine and
pyrimidine bases extend as side groups. Like a polypeptide, a
nucleic acid strand has an end-to-end chemical orientation: the
5 end has a hydroxyl or phosphate group on the 5 carbon
of its terminal sugar; the 3 end usually has a hydroxyl group
on the 3 carbon of its terminal sugar (Figure 4-2). This directionality, plus the fact that synthesis proceeds 5 to 3, has
given rise to the convention that polynucleotide sequences are
written and read in the 5n3 direction (from left to right); for
example, the sequence AUG is assumed to be (5)AUG(3). As
we will see, the 5n3 directionality of a nucleic acid strand
is an important property of the molecule. The chemical linkage
between adjacent nucleotides, commonly called a phosphodiester bond, actually consists of two phosphoester bonds, one
on the 5 side of the phosphate and another on the 3 side.
The linear sequence of nucleotides linked by phosphodiester bonds constitutes the primary structure of nucleic acids.
Like polypeptides, polynucleotides can twist and fold into
three-dimensional conformations stabilized by noncovalent
bonds. Although the primary structures of DNA and RNA
are generally similar, their three-dimensional conformations
are quite different. These structural differences are critical
to the different functions of the two types of nucleic acids.

H

O
Phosphodiester
bond

A

O

103

H
H

3

OH

H

▲ FIGURE 4-2 Alternative representations of a nucleic acid
strand illustrating its chemical directionality. Shown here is a
single strand of DNA containing only three bases: cytosine (C),
adenine (A), and guanine (G). (a) The chemical structure shows a
hydroxyl group at the 3 end and a phosphate group at the 5
end. Note also that two phosphoester bonds link adjacent
nucleotides; this two-bond linkage commonly is referred to as a
phosphodiester bond. (b) In the “stick” diagram (top), the sugars
are indicated as vertical lines and the phosphodiester bonds as
slanting lines; the bases are denoted by their single-letter abbreviations. In the simplest representation (bottom), only the bases
are indicated. By convention, a polynucleotide sequence is always written in the 5n3 direction (left to right) unless otherwise indicated.

The modern era of molecular biology began in 1953 when
James D. Watson and Francis H. C. Crick proposed that
DNA has a double-helical structure. Their proposal, based
on analysis of x-ray diffraction patterns coupled with careful
model building, proved correct and paved the way for our
modern understanding of how DNA functions as the genetic
material.
DNA consists of two associated polynucleotide strands
that wind together to form a double helix. The two sugarphosphate backbones are on the outside of the double helix,
and the bases project into the interior. The adjoining bases in
each strand stack on top of one another in parallel planes
(Figure 4-3a). The orientation of the two strands is antiparallel; that is, their 5n3 directions are opposite. The strands
are held in precise register by formation of base pairs between the two strands: A is paired with T through two hydrogen bonds; G is paired with C through three hydrogen
bonds (Figure 4-3b). This base-pair complementarity is a
consequence of the size, shape, and chemical composition
of the bases. The presence of thousands of such hydrogen
bonds in a DNA molecule contributes greatly to the stability

104

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
(a)

(b)
3

5

3

CH3

O P
O

H
HN

O

N

T NH N A

O

5
CH2

5

O

O
O

O

CH2
O
O P
O

O

O

G NH

CH2
O

O

O

CH2

Major
groove

O
O

O

N C

NH
H

O

P

H
HN

P OO

O

H
NH O

O P
O
O

O

N
A N H

T

CH2
O

O

O

O

CH2

P

O

H
NH O

O P
O

C N HN
G

O

O

Minor
groove

O
5 CH2

5

3

▲ FIGURE 4-3 The DNA double helix. (a) Space-filling model
of B DNA, the most common form of DNA in cells. The bases
(light shades) project inward from the sugar-phosphate backbones
(dark red and blue) of each strand, but their edges are accessible
through major and minor grooves. Arrows indicate the 5’n3’
direction of each strand. Hydrogen bonds between the bases are
in the center of the structure. The major and minor grooves

of the double helix. Hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions between the stacked adjacent base pairs further stabilize the double-helical structure.
In natural DNA, A always hydrogen bonds with T and
G with C, forming A·T and G·C base pairs as shown in Figure 4-3b. These associations between a larger purine and
smaller pyrimidine are often called Watson-Crick base pairs.
Two polynucleotide strands, or regions thereof, in which all
the nucleotides form such base pairs are said to be complementary. However, in theory and in synthetic DNAs other
base pairs can form. For example, a guanine (a purine) could
theoretically form hydrogen bonds with a thymine (a pyrimidine), causing only a minor distortion in the helix. The space
available in the helix also would allow pairing between the
two pyrimidines cytosine and thymine. Although the nonstandard G·T and C·T base pairs are normally not found in
DNA, G·U base pairs are quite common in double-helical
regions that form within otherwise single-stranded RNA.
Most DNA in cells is a right-handed helix. The x-ray diffraction pattern of DNA indicates that the stacked bases are
regularly spaced 0.36 nm apart along the helix axis. The

HN
H

O
O

O

CH2
O

O
P

5

O
O

3

are lined by potential hydrogen bond donors and acceptors
(highlighted in yellow). (b) Chemical structure of DNA double
helix. This extended schematic shows the two sugar-phosphate
backbones and hydrogen bonding between the Watson-Crick
base pairs, AT and GC. [Part (a) from R. Wing et al., 1980, Nature
287:755; part (b) from R. E. Dickerson, 1983, Sci. Am. 249:94.]

helix makes a complete turn every 3.6 nm; thus there are
about 10.5 pairs per turn. This is referred to as the B form
of DNA, the normal form present in most DNA stretches in
cells. On the outside of B-form DNA, the spaces between the
intertwined strands form two helical grooves of different
widths described as the major groove and the minor groove
(see Figure 4-3a). As a consequence, the atoms on the edges
of each base within these grooves are accessible from outside the helix, forming two types of binding surfaces. DNAbinding proteins can “read” the sequence of bases in duplex
DNA by contacting atoms in either the major or the minor
grooves.
In addition to the major B form, three additional DNA
structures have been described. Two of these are compared
to B DNA in Figure 4-4. In very low humidity, the crystallographic structure of B DNA changes to the A form; RNADNA and RNA-RNA helices exist in this form in cells and in
vitro. Short DNA molecules composed of alternating purinepyrimidine nucleotides (especially Gs and Cs) adopt an alternative left-handed configuration instead of the normal
right-handed helix. This structure is called Z DNA because

4.1 • Structure of Nucleic Acids

the bases seem to zigzag when viewed from the side. Some
evidence suggests that Z DNA may occur in cells, although
its function is unknown. Finally, a triple-stranded DNA
structure is formed when synthetic polymers of poly(A) and

(b) A DNA

(c) Z DNA

3.6 nm

(a) B DNA

▲ FIGURE 4-4 Models of various known DNA structures.
The sugar-phosphate backbones of the two strands, which are
on the outside in all structures, are shown in red and blue; the
bases (lighter shades) are oriented inward. (a) The B form of DNA
has ≈10.5 base pairs per helical turn. Adjacent stacked base pairs
are 0.36 nm apart. (b) The more compact A form of DNA has
11 base pairs per turn and exhibits a large tilt of the base pairs
with respect to the helix axis. (c) Z DNA is a left-handed double
helix.

TATA box–binding protein

▲ FIGURE 4-5 Bending of DNA resulting from protein
binding. The conserved C-terminal domain of the TATA box–
binding protein (TBP) binds to the minor groove of specific DNA
sequences rich in A and T, untwisting and sharply bending the
double helix. Transcription of most eukaryotic genes requires
participation of TBP. [Adapted from D. B. Nikolov and S. K. Burley, 1997,
Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 94:15.]

105

polydeoxy(U) are mixed in the test tube. In addition, homopolymeric stretches of DNA composed of C and T
residues in one strand and A and G residues in the other can
form a triple-stranded structure by binding matching lengths
of synthetic poly(CT). Such structures probably do not
occur naturally in cells but may prove useful as therapeutic
agents.
By far the most important modifications in the structure
of standard B-form DNA come about as a result of protein
binding to specific DNA sequences. Although the multitude
of hydrogen and hydrophobic bonds between the bases provide stability to DNA, the double helix is flexible about its
long axis. Unlike the  helix in proteins (see Figure 3-3),
there are no hydrogen bonds parallel to the axis of the DNA
helix. This property allows DNA to bend when complexed
with a DNA-binding protein (Figure 4-5). Bending of DNA
is critical to the dense packing of DNA in chromatin, the
protein-DNA complex in which nuclear DNA occurs in eukaryotic cells (Chapter 10).

DNA Can Undergo Reversible
Strand Separation
During replication and transcription of DNA, the strands of
the double helix must separate to allow the internal edges of
the bases to pair with the bases of the nucleotides to be polymerized into new polynucleotide chains. In later sections, we
describe the cellular mechanisms that separate and subsequently reassociate DNA strands during replication and
transcription. Here we discuss factors influencing the in vitro
separation and reassociation of DNA strands.
The unwinding and separation of DNA strands, referred
to as denaturation, or “melting,” can be induced experimentally by increasing the temperature of a solution of DNA. As
the thermal energy increases, the resulting increase in molecular motion eventually breaks the hydrogen bonds and
other forces that stabilize the double helix; the strands then
separate, driven apart by the electrostatic repulsion of the
negatively charged deoxyribose-phosphate backbone of each
strand. Near the denaturation temperature, a small increase
in temperature causes a rapid, near simultaneous loss of the
multiple weak interactions holding the strands together
along the entire length of the DNA molecules, leading to an
abrupt change in the absorption of ultraviolet (UV) light
(Figure 4-6a).
The melting temperature Tm at which DNA strands will
separate depends on several factors. Molecules that contain
a greater proportion of G·C pairs require higher temperatures to denature because the three hydrogen bonds in G·C
pairs make these base pairs more stable than A·T pairs,
which have only two hydrogen bonds. Indeed, the percentage
of G·C base pairs in a DNA sample can be estimated from its
Tm (Figure 4-6b). The ion concentration also influences the
Tm because the negatively charged phosphate groups in the

106

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
(a)

(b)
100
Single-stranded
DNA

Percentage of G•C pairs

Absorption of 260-nm light

1.0

0.75
Double-stranded
DNA

80
60
40
20

Tm
0.5
75

80

85

90

Temperature (°C)

0

70

80

90

100

110

Tm (°C)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-6 The temperature at which
DNA denatures increases with the proportion of GC pairs.
(a) Melting of doubled-stranded DNA can be monitored by the
absorption of ultraviolet light at 260 nm. As regions of doublestranded DNA unpair, the absorption of light by those regions
increases almost twofold. The temperature at which half the

bases in a double-stranded DNA sample have denatured is
denoted Tm (for temperature of melting). Light absorption by
single-stranded DNA changes much less as the temperature is
increased. (b) The Tm is a function of the GC content of the
DNA; the higher the G+C percentage, the greater the Tm.

two strands are shielded by positively charged ions. When
the ion concentration is low, this shielding is decreased, thus
increasing the repulsive forces between the strands and reducing the Tm. Agents that destabilize hydrogen bonds, such
as formamide or urea, also lower the Tm. Finally, extremes of
pH denature DNA at low temperature. At low (acid) pH, the
bases become protonated and thus positively charged, repelling each other. At high (alkaline) pH, the bases lose protons and become negatively charged, again repelling each
other because of the similar charge.
The single-stranded DNA molecules that result from denaturation form random coils without an organized structure. Lowering the temperature, increasing the ion
concentration, or neutralizing the pH causes the two complementary strands to reassociate into a perfect double helix.
The extent of such renaturation is dependent on time, the
DNA concentration, and the ionic concentration. Two DNA
strands not related in sequence will remain as random coils
and will not renature; most importantly, they will not inhibit
complementary DNA partner strands from finding each
other and renaturing. Denaturation and renaturation of
DNA are the basis of nucleic acid hybridization, a powerful
technique used to study the relatedness of two DNA samples and to detect and isolate specific DNA molecules in a
mixture containing numerous different DNA sequences (see
Figure 9-16).

cells, and in chloroplasts, which are present in plants and
some unicellular eukaryotes.
Each of the two strands in a circular DNA molecule
forms a closed structure without free ends. Localized unwinding of a circular DNA molecule, which occurs during
DNA replication, induces torsional stress into the remaining portion of the molecule because the ends of the strands
are not free to rotate. As a result, the DNA molecule twists
back on itself, like a twisted rubber band, forming supercoils (Figure 4-7b). In other words, when part of the DNA
helix is underwound, the remainder of the molecule becomes overwound. Bacterial and eukaryotic cells, however,
contain topoisomerase I, which can relieve any torsional
stress that develops in cellular DNA molecules during replication or other processes. This enzyme binds to DNA at
random sites and breaks a phosphodiester bond in one
strand. Such a one-strand break in DNA is called a nick.
The broken end then winds around the uncut strand, leading to loss of supercoils (Figure 4-7a). Finally, the same enzyme joins (ligates) the two ends of the broken strand.
Another type of enzyme, topoisomerase II, makes breaks in
both strands of a double-stranded DNA and then religates
them. As a result, topoisomerase II can both relieve torsional stress and link together two circular DNA molecules
as in the links of a chain.
Although eukaryotic nuclear DNA is linear, long loops of
DNA are fixed in place within chromosomes (Chapter 10).
Thus torsional stress and the consequent formation of supercoils also could occur during replication of nuclear DNA.
As in bacterial cells, abundant topoisomerase I in eukaryotic
nuclei relieves any torsional stress in nuclear DNA that
would develop in the absence of this enzyme.

Many DNA Molecules Are Circular
Many prokaryotic genomic DNAs and many viral DNAs are
circular molecules. Circular DNA molecules also occur in
mitochondria, which are present in almost all eukaryotic

4.1 • Structure of Nucleic Acids
(a) Supercoiled

(b) Relaxed circle

107

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-7 DNA
supercoils can be removed by cleavage
of one strand. (a) Electron micrograph of
SV40 viral DNA. When the circular DNA of
the SV40 virus is isolated and separated from
its associated protein, the DNA duplex is
underwound and assumes the supercoiled
configuration. (b) If a supercoiled DNA is
nicked (i.e., one strand cleaved), the strands
can rewind, leading to loss of a supercoil.
Topoisomerase I catalyzes this reaction and
also reseals the broken ends. All the supercoils
in isolated SV40 DNA can be removed by the
sequential action of this enzyme, producing
the relaxed-circle conformation. For clarity, the
shapes of the molecules at the bottom have
been simplified.

Different Types of RNA Exhibit Various
Conformations Related to Their Functions
As noted earlier, the primary structure of RNA is generally
similar to that of DNA with two exceptions: the sugar component of RNA, ribose, has a hydroxyl group at the 2 position (see Figure 2-14b), and thymine in DNA is replaced by
uracil in RNA. The hydroxyl group on C2 of ribose makes
RNA more chemically labile than DNA and provides a
chemically reactive group that takes part in RNA-mediated
catalysis. As a result of this lability, RNA is cleaved into
mononucleotides by alkaline solution, whereas DNA is not.
Like DNA, RNA is a long polynucleotide that can be doublestranded or single-stranded, linear or circular. It can also participate in a hybrid helix composed of one RNA strand and
one DNA strand. As noted above, RNA-RNA and RNADNA double helices have a compact conformation like the A
form of DNA (see Figure 4-4b).
Unlike DNA, which exists primarily as a very long double helix, most cellular RNAs are single-stranded and exhibit
a variety of conformations (Figure 4-8). Differences in the
sizes and conformations of the various types of RNA permit
them to carry out specific functions in a cell. The simplest
secondary structures in single-stranded RNAs are formed by
pairing of complementary bases. “Hairpins” are formed by
pairing of bases within ≈5–10 nucleotides of each other, and
“stem-loops” by pairing of bases that are separated by >10 to

several hundred nucleotides. These simple folds can cooperate to form more complicated tertiary structures, one of
which is termed a “pseudoknot.”
As discussed in detail later, tRNA molecules adopt a welldefined three-dimensional architecture in solution that is crucial in protein synthesis. Larger rRNA molecules also have
locally well-defined three-dimensional structures, with more
flexible links in between. Secondary and tertiary structures
also have been recognized in mRNA, particularly near the
ends of molecules. Clearly, then, RNA molecules are like
proteins in that they have structured domains connected by
less structured, flexible stretches.
The folded domains of RNA molecules not only are
structurally analogous to the  helices and  strands found in
proteins, but in some cases also have catalytic capacities.
Such catalytic RNAs are called ribozymes. Although ribozymes usually are associated with proteins that stabilize
the ribozyme structure, it is the RNA that acts as a catalyst.
Some ribozymes can catalyze splicing, a remarkable process
in which an internal RNA sequence is cut and removed, and
the two resulting chains then ligated. This process occurs
during formation of the majority of functional mRNA molecules in eukaryotic cells, and also occurs in bacteria and archaea. Remarkably, some RNAs carry out self-splicing, with
the catalytic activity residing in the sequence that is removed.
The mechanisms of splicing and self-splicing are discussed
in detail in Chapter 12. As noted later in this chapter, rRNA

108

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

 FIGURE 4-8 RNA secondary

(a) Secondary structure

and tertiary structures. (a) Stem-loops,
hairpins, and other secondary structures
can form by base pairing between
distant complementary segments of
an RNA molecule. In stem-loops, the
single-stranded loop between the basepaired helical stem may be hundreds
or even thousands of nucleotides long,
whereas in hairpins, the short turn may
contain as few as four nucleotides.
(b) Pseudoknots, one type of RNA
tertiary structure, are formed by
interaction of secondary loops through
base pairing between complementary
bases (green and blue). Only basepaired bases are shown. A secondary
structure diagram is shown at right.
[Part (b) adapted from P. J. A. Michiels et al.,
2001, J. Mol. Biol. 310:1109.]

(b) Tertiary structure

3

Hairpin
3
Loop
1

Stem
1

Double-helical
stem region
5
Stem-loop

plays a catalytic role in the formation of peptide bonds during protein synthesis.
In this chapter, we focus on the functions of mRNA,
tRNA, and rRNA in gene expression. In later chapters we
will encounter other RNAs, often associated with proteins,
that participate in other cell functions.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 4.1
Structure of Nucleic Acids
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the genetic material, carries information to specify the amino acid sequences of
proteins. It is transcribed into several types of ribonucleic
acid (RNA), including messenger RNA (mRNA), transfer
RNA (tRNA), and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), which function in protein synthesis (see Figure 4-1).

■

Both DNA and RNA are long, unbranched polymers of
nucleotides, which consist of a phosphorylated pentose
linked to an organic base, either a purine or pyrimidine.

■

The purines adenine (A) and guanine (G) and the pyrimidine cytosine (C) are present in both DNA and RNA. The
pyrimidine thymine (T) present in DNA is replaced by the
pyrimidine uracil (U) in RNA.

■

Stem
2

Loop
2

5
Pseudoknot

side and the two sugar-phosphate backbones on the outside (see Figure 4-3). Base pairing between the strands and
hydrophobic interactions between adjacent bases in the
same strand stabilize this native structure.
The bases in nucleic acids can interact via hydrogen
bonds. The standard Watson-Crick base pairs are G·C, A·T
(in DNA), and A·U (in RNA). Base pairing stabilizes the
native three-dimensional structures of DNA and RNA.

■

Binding of protein to DNA can deform its helical structure,
causing local bending or unwinding of the DNA molecule.

■

Heat causes the DNA strands to separate (denature).
The melting temperature Tm of DNA increases with the
percentage of G·C base pairs. Under suitable conditions, separated complementary nucleic acid strands will
renature.

■

Circular DNA molecules can be twisted on themselves,
forming supercoils (see Figure 4-7). Enzymes called topoisomerases can relieve torsional stress and remove supercoils from circular DNA molecules.

■

Cellular RNAs are single-stranded polynucleotides, some
of which form well-defined secondary and tertiary structures (see Figure 4-8). Some RNAs, called ribozymes, have
catalytic activity.

■

Adjacent nucleotides in a polynucleotide are linked by
phosphodiester bonds. The entire strand has a chemical directionality: the 5 end with a free hydroxyl or phosphate
group on the 5 carbon of the sugar, and the 3 end with
a free hydroxyl group on the 3 carbon of the sugar (see
Figure 4-2).

4.2 Transcription of Protein-Coding
Genes and Formation of
Functional mRNA

Natural DNA (B DNA) contains two complementary antiparallel polynucleotide strands wound together into a regular right-handed double helix with the bases on the in-

The simplest definition of a gene is a “unit of DNA that contains the information to specify synthesis of a single polypeptide chain or functional RNA (such as a tRNA).” The vast

■

■

109

4.2 • Transcription of Protein-Coding Genes and Formation of Functional mRNA

majority of genes carry information to build protein molecules, and it is the RNA copies of such protein-coding genes
that constitute the mRNA molecules of cells. The DNA
molecules of small viruses contain only a few genes,
whereas the single DNA molecule in each of the chromosomes of higher animals and plants may contain several
thousand genes.
During synthesis of RNA, the four-base language of DNA
containing A, G, C, and T is simply copied, or transcribed,
into the four-base language of RNA, which is identical except
that U replaces T. In contrast, during protein synthesis the
four-base language of DNA and RNA is translated into the
20–amino acid language of proteins. In this section we focus
on formation of functional mRNAs from protein-coding
genes (see Figure 4-1, step 1 ). A similar process yields the
precursors of rRNAs and tRNAs encoded by rRNA and
tRNA genes; these precursors are then further modified to
yield functional rRNAs and tRNAs (Chapter 12).

A Template DNA Strand Is Transcribed into
a Complementary RNA Chain by RNA Polymerase
During transcription of DNA, one DNA strand acts as a template, determining the order in which ribonucleoside triphosphate (rNTP) monomers are polymerized to form a
complementary RNA chain. Bases in the template DNA
strand base-pair with complementary incoming rNTPs,
which then are joined in a polymerization reaction catalyzed
by RNA polymerase. Polymerization involves a nucleophilic
attack by the 3 oxygen in the growing RNA chain on the 
phosphate of the next nucleotide precursor to be added, resulting in formation of a phosphodiester bond and release
of pyrophosphate (PPi). As a consequence of this mechanism,
RNA molecules are always synthesized in the 5n3 direction (Figure 4-9).
The energetics of the polymerization reaction strongly favors addition of ribonucleotides to the growing RNA chain
because the high-energy bond between the  and  phosphate of rNTP monomers is replaced by the lower-energy
phosphodiester bond between nucleotides. The equilibrium
for the reaction is driven further toward chain elongation by
pyrophosphatase, an enzyme that catalyzes cleavage of the
released PPi into two molecules of inorganic phosphate. Like
the two strands in DNA, the template DNA strand and the
growing RNA strand that is base-paired to it have opposite
5n3 directionality.
By convention, the site at which RNA polymerase begins
transcription is numbered 1. Downstream denotes the direction in which a template DNA strand is transcribed (or
mRNA translated); thus a downstream sequence is toward
the 3 end relative to the start site, considering the DNA
strand with the same polarity as the transcribed RNA. Upstream denotes the opposite direction. Nucleotide positions
in the DNA sequence downstream from a start site are indicated by a positive () sign; those upstream, by a negative
() sign.

3
5
3 RNA
strand growth
Base

O

Base
O

5

H

H

OH

O

H

H
−O

Base

s
t
r
a
n
d

O

O

Base
O

D
N
A
t
e
m
p
l
a
t
e

P

H

H

OH

O

H

H
−O

Base

P

O

O

Base
O
H

H

H

3 H
OH

OH

Polymerization
Base

O

Base
O

O
H

H

OH

H
OH

H

P

α

O−

O
O

P

β

O−

O
O

P

γ

O−

O−

Incoming rNTP
Base

Base
5

▲ FIGURE 4-9 Polymerization of ribonucleotides by RNA
polymerase during transcription. The ribonucleotide to be
added at the 3 end of a growing RNA strand is specified by
base pairing between the next base in the template DNA strand
and the complementary incoming ribonucleoside triphosphate
(rNTP). A phosphodiester bond is formed when RNA polymerase
catalyzes a reaction between the 3 O of the growing strand and
the  phosphate of a correctly base-paired rNTP. RNA strands
always are synthesized in the 5n3 direction and are opposite
in polarity to their template DNA strands.

Stages in Transcription To carry out transcription, RNA
polymerase performs several distinct functions, as depicted
in Figure 4-10. During transcription initiation, RNA polymerase recognizes and binds to a specific site, called a promoter, in double-stranded DNA (step 1). Nuclear RNA

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
RNA polymerase
INITIATION
1 Polymerase binds to
promoter sequence
in duplex DNA.
"Closed complex"

Start site
on template
strand



110

 FIGURE 4-10 Three stages in

Stop site
on template
strand

5
3

5
3
Promoter

Focus Animation: Basic Transcriptional Mechanism

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

2 Polymerase melts
duplex DNA near
transcription start site,
forming a transcription
bubble. "Open
complex"
3 Polymerase catalyzes
phosphodiester linkage
of two initial rNTPs.

5
3

5
3
Transcription
bubble

transcription. During initiation of transcription,
RNA polymerase forms a transcription bubble
and begins polymerization of ribonucleotides
(rNTPs) at the start site, which is located
within the promoter region. Once a DNA
region has been transcribed, the separated
strands reassociate into a double helix,
displacing the nascent RNA except at its 3
end. The 5’ end of the RNA strand exits the
RNA polymerase through a channel in the
enzyme. Termination occurs when the
polymerase encounters a specific termination
sequence (stop site). See the text for details.

Initial rNTPs
5
3

5
3

4 Polymerase advances
3
5 down template
strand, melting duplex
DNA and adding rNTPs
to growing RNA.

5
3

5
3

TERMINATION

5
3

ELONGATION

5 At transcription stop site,
polymerase releases
completed RNA and
dissociates from DNA.

Nascent
RNA

DNA-RNA
hybrid region

5

3

5
3

5
Completed
RNA strand

polymerases require various protein factors, called general
transcription factors, to help them locate promoters and initiate transcription. After binding to a promoter, RNA polymerase melts the DNA strands in order to make the bases in
the template strand available for base pairing with the bases
of the ribonucleoside triphosphates that it will polymerize together. Cellular RNA polymerases melt approximately 14
base pairs of DNA around the transcription start site, which
is located on the template strand within the promoter region
(step 2 ). Transcription initiation is considered complete
when the first two ribonucleotides of an RNA chain are
linked by a phosphodiester bond (step 3 ).
After several ribonucleotides have been polymerized,
RNA polymerase dissociates from the promoter DNA and
general transcription factors. During the stage of strand elongation, RNA polymerase moves along the template DNA one
base at a time, opening the double-stranded DNA in front of
its direction of movement and hybridizing the strands behind

it (Figure 4-10, step 4 ). One ribonucleotide at a time is added
to the 3 end of the growing (nascent) RNA chain during
strand elongation by the polymerase. The enzyme maintains
a melted region of approximately 14 base pairs, called the
transcription bubble. Approximately eight nucleotides at the
3 end of the growing RNA strand remain base-paired to the
template DNA strand in the transcription bubble. The elongation complex, comprising RNA polymerase, template
DNA, and the growing (nascent) RNA strand, is extraordinarily stable. For example, RNA polymerase transcribes the
longest known mammalian genes, containing ≈2  106 base
pairs, without dissociating from the DNA template or releasing the nascent RNA. Since RNA synthesis occurs at a rate of
about 1000 nucleotides per minute at 37 C, the elongation
complex must remain intact for more than 24 hours to assure
continuous RNA synthesis.
During transcription termination, the final stage in RNA
synthesis, the completed RNA molecule, or primary transcript,

4.2 • Transcription of Protein-Coding Genes and Formation of Functional mRNA

111

is released from the RNA polymerase and the polymerase
dissociates from the template DNA (Figure 4-10, step 5 ).
Specific sequences in the template DNA signal the bound
RNA polymerase to terminate transcription. Once released,
an RNA polymerase is free to transcribe the same gene again
or another gene.

grams of the transcription process generally show RNA polymerase bound to an unbent DNA molecule, as in Figure
4-10. However, according to a current model of the interaction between bacterial RNA polymerase and promoter DNA,
the DNA bends sharply following its entry into the enzyme
(Figure 4-11).

Structure of RNA Polymerases The RNA polymerases of

Organization of Genes Differs in Prokaryotic
and Eukaryotic DNA

bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotic cells are fundamentally
similar in structure and function. Bacterial RNA polymerases
are composed of two related large subunits ( and ), two
copies of a smaller subunit (), and one copy of a fifth subunit ( ) that is not essential for transcription or cell viability but stabilizes the enzyme and assists in the assembly of
its subunits. Archaeal and eukaryotic RNA polymerases have
several additional small subunits associated with this core
complex, which we describe in Chapter 11. Schematic dia-

ω subunit

−30

β subunit
−20

α subunit
−10

+10

+20

β subunit

▲ FIGURE 4-11 Current model of bacterial RNA
polymerase bound to a promoter. This structure corresponds
to the polymerase molecule as schematically shown in step 2 of
Figure 4-10. The  subunit is in orange;  is in green. Part of
one of the two  subunits can be seen in light blue; the
subunit is in gray. The DNA template and nontemplate strands
are shown, respectively, as gray and pink ribbons. A Mg2 ion
at the active center is shown as a gray sphere. Numbers indicate
positions in the DNA sequence relative to the transcription start
site, with positive () numbers in the direction of transcription
and negative () numbers in the opposite direction. [Courtesy of
R. H. Ebright, Waksman Institute.]

Having outlined the process of transcription, we now briefly
consider the large-scale arrangement of information in DNA
and how this arrangement dictates the requirements for
RNA synthesis so that information transfer goes smoothly. In
recent years, sequencing of the entire genomes from several
organisms has revealed not only large variations in the number of protein-coding genes but also differences in their organization in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
The most common arrangement of protein-coding genes
in all prokaryotes has a powerful and appealing logic: genes
devoted to a single metabolic goal, say, the synthesis of the
amino acid tryptophan, are most often found in a contiguous
array in the DNA. Such an arrangement of genes in a functional group is called an operon, because it operates as a unit
from a single promoter. Transcription of an operon produces
a continuous strand of mRNA that carries the message for a
related series of proteins (Figure 4-12a). Each section of the
mRNA represents the unit (or gene) that encodes one of the
proteins in the series. In prokaryotic DNA the genes are
closely packed with very few noncoding gaps, and the DNA
is transcribed directly into colinear mRNA, which then is
translated into protein.
This economic clustering of genes devoted to a single
metabolic function does not occur in eukaryotes, even simple
ones like yeasts, which can be metabolically similar to bacteria. Rather, eukaryotic genes devoted to a single pathway
are most often physically separated in the DNA; indeed such
genes usually are located on different chromosomes. Each
gene is transcribed from its own promoter, producing one
mRNA, which generally is translated to yield a single polypeptide (Figure 4-12b).
When researchers first compared the nucleotide sequences of eukaryotic mRNAs from multicellular organisms
with the DNA sequences encoding them, they were surprised
to find that the uninterrupted protein-coding sequence of a
given mRNA was broken up (discontinuous) in its corresponding section of DNA. They concluded that the eukaryotic gene existed in pieces of coding sequence, the exons,
separated by non-protein-coding segments, the introns. This
astonishing finding implied that the long initial primary transcript—the RNA copy of the entire transcribed DNA
sequence—had to be clipped apart to remove the introns and
then carefully stitched back together to produce many
eukaryotic mRNAs.
Although introns are common in multicellular eukaryotes, they are extremely rare in bacteria and archaea and

112

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

(a) Prokaryotes

(b) Eukaryotes

E. coli genome

Yeast chromosomes

trp operon
E

D

C

TRP1
B

TRP4

IV

A

kb
1550

TRP2

Start site
for trp mRNA
synthesis

580

V

TRP5
Transcription

trp mRNA

5

910

VII

TRP3

3

680

XI
Start sites for
protein synthesis

Transcription and
RNA processing
Translation

trp
mRNAs

Translation

E
D
Proteins

C

Proteins

B
A

3

2

5

4

1

▲ FIGURE 4-12 Comparison of gene organization,
transcription, and translation in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
(a) The tryptophan (trp) operon is a continuous segment of the
E. coli chromosome, containing five genes (blue) that encode the
enzymes necessary for the stepwise synthesis of tryptophan.
The entire operon is transcribed from one promoter into one
long continuous trp mRNA (red). Translation of this mRNA begins
at five different start sites, yielding five proteins (green). The order

of the genes in the bacterial genome parallels the sequential
function of the encoded proteins in the tryptophan pathway.
(b) The five genes encoding the enzymes required for tryptophan
synthesis in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) are carried on four
different chromosomes. Each gene is transcribed from its own
promoter to yield a primary transcript that is processed into a
functional mRNA encoding a single protein. The lengths of the
yeast chromosomes are given in kilobases (103 bases).

uncommon in many unicellular eukaryotes such as baker’s
yeast. However, introns are present in the DNA of viruses
that infect eukaryotic cells. Indeed, the presence of introns
was first discovered in such viruses, whose DNA is transcribed by host-cell enzymes.

cytoplasm before it can be translated into protein. Thus
transcription and translation cannot occur concurrently in
eukaryotic cells.
All eukaryotic pre-mRNAs initially are modified at the
two ends, and these modifications are retained in mRNAs.
As the 5 end of a nascent RNA chain emerges from the surface of RNA polymerase II, it is immediately acted on by
several enzymes that together synthesize the 5 cap, a
7-methylguanylate that is connected to the terminal nucleotide of the RNA by an unusual 5,5 triphosphate linkage
(Figure 4-13). The cap protects an mRNA from enzymatic
degradation and assists in its export to the cytoplasm. The
cap also is bound by a protein factor required to begin translation in the cytoplasm.
Processing at the 3 end of a pre-mRNA involves cleavage by an endonuclease to yield a free 3-hydroxyl group to
which a string of adenylic acid residues is added one at a time
by an enzyme called poly(A) polymerase. The resulting
poly(A) tail contains 100–250 bases, being shorter in yeasts
and invertebrates than in vertebrates. Poly(A) polymerase is

Eukaryotic Precursor mRNAs Are Processed
to Form Functional mRNAs
In prokaryotic cells, which have no nuclei, translation of an
mRNA into protein can begin from the 5 end of the mRNA
even while the 3 end is still being synthesized by RNA polymerase. In other words, transcription and translation can
occur concurrently in prokaryotes. In eukaryotic cells, however, not only is the nucleus separated from the cytoplasm
where translation occurs, but also the primary transcripts of
protein-coding genes are precursor mRNAs (pre-mRNAs)
that must undergo several modifications, collectively termed
RNA processing, to yield a functional mRNA (see Figure
4-1, step 2 ). This mRNA then must be exported to the

113

4.2 • Transcription of Protein-Coding Genes and Formation of Functional mRNA
1

31

32

105

106

147

Start site for
RNA synthesis

Primary 5
RNA
transcript

Poly(A)
site
3
3 cleavage and
addition of
poly(A) tail

Exon

(A)n
Poly(A)
tail

Intron
UTR

6

HN1
2

3

5
4

O


O

H

O

P
O



O

P

O

N

5
4

7
8
9

7-Methylguanylate

H

β-Globin
mRNA
H

3

2

OH

OH

O


O

O

P
O
5

CH2

4

H

O

Base 1

H

H
O

O


O P
O
CH2
H



O

P

1

H

2

3

CH3

O
O

1

147

(A)n

1

5 linkage

5

Intron excision,
exon ligation

N

O

CH2

(A)n



N

H2N

m7Gppp

CH3

O

▲ FIGURE 4-14 Overview of RNA processing to
produce functional mRNA in eukaryotes. The -globin
gene contains three protein-coding exons (coding region, red)
and two intervening noncoding introns (blue). The introns
interrupt the protein-coding sequence between the codons
for amino acids 31 and 32 and 105 and 106. Transcription of
eukaryotic protein-coding genes starts before the sequence
that encodes the first amino acid and extends beyond the
sequence encoding the last amino acid, resulting in noncoding
regions (gray) at the ends of the primary transcript. These
untranslated regions (UTRs) are retained during processing.
The 5 cap (m7Gppp) is added during formation of the primary
RNA transcript, which extends beyond the poly(A) site. After
cleavage at the poly(A) site and addition of multiple A residues
to the 3 end, splicing removes the introns and joins the
exons. The small numbers refer to positions in the 147–amino
acid sequence of -globin.

Base 2

H

H

O
O

O

H
CH3

▲ FIGURE 4-13 Structure of the 5 methylated cap of
eukaryotic mRNA. The distinguishing chemical features are the
5n5 linkage of 7-methylguanylate to the initial nucleotide of
the mRNA molecule and the methyl group on the 2 hydroxyl
of the ribose of the first nucleotide (base 1). Both these features
occur in all animal cells and in cells of higher plants; yeasts lack
the methyl group on nucleotide 1. The ribose of the second
nucleotide (base 2) also is methylated in vertebrates. [See
A. J. Shatkin, 1976, Cell 9:645.]

untranslated regions (UTRs), at each end. In mammalian
mRNAs, the 5 UTR may be a hundred or more nucleotides
long, and the 3 UTR may be several kilobases in length.
Prokaryotic mRNAs also usually have 5 and 3 UTRs, but
these are much shorter than those in eukaryotic mRNAs,
generally containing fewer than 10 nucleotides.

Alternative RNA Splicing Increases the Number
of Proteins Expressed from a Single
Eukaryotic Gene
In contrast to bacterial and archaeal genes, the vast majority of genes in higher, multicellular eukaryotes contain multiple introns. As noted in Chapter 3, many proteins from

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

β-Globin
genomic
DNA

Overview Animation: Life Cycle of an mRNA

part of a complex of proteins that can locate and cleave a
transcript at a specific site and then add the correct number
of A residues, in a process that does not require a template.
The final step in the processing of many different eukaryotic mRNA molecules is RNA splicing: the internal
cleavage of a transcript to excise the introns, followed by ligation of the coding exons. Figure 4-14 summarizes the basic
steps in eukaryotic mRNA processing, using the -globin
gene as an example. We examine the cellular machinery for
carrying out processing of mRNA, as well as tRNA and
rRNA, in Chapter 12.
The functional eukaryotic mRNAs produced by RNA
processing retain noncoding regions, referred to as 5 and 3

114

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
EIIIB

Fibronectin gene

Fibroblast
fibronectin mRNA

5

Hepatocyte
fibronectin mRNA

5

▲ FIGURE 4-15 Cell type–specific splicing of fibronectin
pre-mRNA in fibroblasts and hepatocytes. The ≈75-kb
fibronectin gene (top) contains multiple exons. The EIIIB and
EIIIA exons (green) encode binding domains for specific proteins
on the surface of fibroblasts. The fibronectin mRNA produced in

higher eukaryotes have a multidomain tertiary structure (see
Figure 3-8). Individual repeated protein domains often are
encoded by one exon or a small number of exons that code
for identical or nearly identical amino acid sequences. Such
repeated exons are thought to have evolved by the accidental
multiple duplication of a length of DNA lying between two
sites in adjacent introns, resulting in insertion of a string of
repeated exons, separated by introns, between the original
two introns. The presence of multiple introns in many eukaryotic genes permits expression of multiple, related proteins from a single gene by means of alternative splicing. In
higher eukaryotes, alternative splicing is an important mechanism for production of different forms of a protein, called
isoforms, by different types of cells.
Fibronectin, a multidomain extracellular adhesive protein found in mammals, provides a good example of alternative splicing (Figure 4-15). The fibronectin gene contains
numerous exons, grouped into several regions corresponding to specific domains of the protein. Fibroblasts produce fibronectin mRNAs that contain exons EIIIA and
EIIIB; these exons encode amino acid sequences that bind
tightly to proteins in the fibroblast plasma membrane.
Consequently, this fibronectin isoform adheres fibroblasts
to the extracellular matrix. Alternative splicing of the fibronectin primary transcript in hepatocytes, the major
type of cell in the liver, yields mRNAs that lack the EIIIA
and EIIIB exons. As a result, the fibronectin secreted by
hepatocytes into the blood does not adhere tightly to fibroblasts or most other cell types, allowing it to circulate.
During formation of blood clots, however, the fibrinbinding domains of hepatocyte fibronectin binds to fibrin,
one of the principal constituents of clots. The bound fibronectin then interacts with integrins on the membranes
of passing, activated platelets, thereby expanding the clot
by addition of platelets.
More than 20 different isoforms of fibronectin have been
identified, each encoded by a different, alternatively spliced
mRNA composed of a unique combination of fibronectin
gene exons. Recent sequencing of large numbers of mRNAs

EIIIA

3

3

fibroblasts includes the EIIIA and EIIIB exons, whereas these
exons are spliced out of fibronectin mRNA in hepatocytes. In
this diagram, introns (black lines) are not drawn to scale; most
of them are much longer than any of the exons.

isolated from various tissues and comparison of their sequences with genomic DNA has revealed that nearly 60 percent of all human genes are expressed as alternatively spliced
mRNAs. Clearly, alternative RNA splicing greatly expands
the number of proteins encoded by the genomes of higher,
multicellular organisms.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 4.2
Transcription of Protein-Coding Genes and Formation
of Functional mRNA
Transcription of DNA is carried out by RNA polymerase, which adds one ribonucleotide at a time to the 3
end of a growing RNA chain (see Figure 4-10). The sequence of the template DNA strand determines the order
in which ribonucleotides are polymerized to form an RNA
chain.

■

During transcription initiation, RNA polymerase binds
to a specific site in DNA (the promoter), locally melts the
double-stranded DNA to reveal the unpaired template
strand, and polymerizes the first two nucleotides.

■

During strand elongation, RNA polymerase moves along
the DNA, melting sequential segments of the DNA and
adding nucleotides to the growing RNA strand.

■

When RNA polymerase reaches a termination sequence
in the DNA, the enzyme stops transcription, leading to release of the completed RNA and dissociation of the enzyme from the template DNA.

■

In prokaryotic DNA, several protein-coding genes commonly are clustered into a functional region, an operon,
which is transcribed from a single promoter into one
mRNA encoding multiple proteins with related functions
(see Figure 4-12a). Translation of a bacterial mRNA can
begin before synthesis of the mRNA is complete.

■

In eukaryotic DNA, each protein-coding gene is transcribed from its own promoter. The initial primary tran-

■

4.3 • Control of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes

script very often contains noncoding regions (introns) interspersed among coding regions (exons).
Eukaryotic primary transcripts must undergo RNA processing to yield functional RNAs. During processing, the
ends of nearly all primary transcripts from protein-coding
genes are modified by addition of a 5 cap and 3 poly(A)
tail. Transcripts from genes containing introns undergo
splicing, the removal of the introns and joining of the exons (see Figure 4-14).
■

The individual domains of multidomain proteins found
in higher eukaryotes are often encoded by individual exons or a small number of exons. Distinct isoforms of such
proteins often are expressed in specific cell types as the result of alternative splicing of exons.

115

scribed from one start site into a single mRNA, all the genes
within an operon are coordinately regulated; that is, they are
all activated or repressed to the same extent.
Transcription of operons, as well as of isolated genes, is
controlled by an interplay between RNA polymerase and
specific repressor and activator proteins. In order to initiate
transcription, however, E. coli RNA polymerase must be associated with one of a small number of (sigma) factors,
which function as initiation factors. The most common one
in bacterial cells is 70.

■

4.3 Control of Gene Expression
in Prokaryotes
Since the structure and function of a cell are determined by
the proteins it contains, the control of gene expression is a
fundamental aspect of molecular cell biology. Most commonly, the “decision” to initiate transcription of the gene encoding a particular protein is the major mechanism for
controlling production of the encoded protein in a cell. By
controlling transcription initiation, a cell can regulate which
proteins it produces and how rapidly. When transcription of
a gene is repressed, the corresponding mRNA and encoded
protein or proteins are synthesized at low rates. Conversely,
when transcription of a gene is activated, both the mRNA
and encoded protein or proteins are produced at much
higher rates.
In most bacteria and other single-celled organisms, gene
expression is highly regulated in order to adjust the cell’s enzymatic machinery and structural components to changes in
the nutritional and physical environment. Thus, at any given
time, a bacterial cell normally synthesizes only those proteins
of its entire proteome required for survival under the particular conditions. In multicellular organisms, control of gene
expression is largely directed toward assuring that the right
gene is expressed in the right cell at the right time during embryological development and tissue differentiation. Here we
describe the basic features of transcription control in bacteria, using the lac operon in E. coli as our primary example.
Many of the same processes, as well as others, are involved
in eukaryotic transcription control, which is discussed in
Chapter 11.
In E. coli, about half the genes are clustered into operons each of which encodes enzymes involved in a particular
metabolic pathway or proteins that interact to form one multisubunit protein. For instance, the trp operon mentioned
earlier encodes five enzymes needed in the biosynthesis of
tryptophan (see Figure 4-12). Similarly, the lac operon encodes three enzymes required for the metabolism of lactose,
a sugar present in milk. Since a bacterial operon is tran-

Initiation of lac Operon Transcription
Can Be Repressed and Activated
When E. coli is in an environment that lacks lactose, synthesis of lac mRNA is repressed, so that cellular energy is
not wasted synthesizing enzymes the cells cannot use. In an
environment containing both lactose and glucose, E. coli
cells preferentially metabolize glucose, the central molecule
of carbohydrate metabolism. Lactose is metabolized at a
high rate only when lactose is present and glucose is largely
depleted from the medium. This metabolic adjustment is
achieved by repressing transcription of the lac operon until
lactose is present, and synthesis of only low levels of lac
mRNA until the cytosolic concentration of glucose falls to
low levels. Transcription of the lac operon under different
conditions is controlled by lac repressor and catabolite activator protein (CAP), each of which binds to a specific
DNA sequence in the lac transcription-control region (Figure 4-16, top).
For transcription of the lac operon to begin, the 70 subunit of the RNA polymerase must bind to the lac promoter,
which lies just upstream of the start site. When no lactose is
present, binding of the lac repressor to a sequence called the
lac operator, which overlaps the transcription start site,
blocks transcription initiation by the polymerase (Figure
4-16a). When lactose is present, it binds to specific binding
sites in each subunit of the tetrameric lac repressor, causing a
conformational change in the protein that makes it dissociate
from the lac operator. As a result, the polymerase can initiate
transcription of the lac operon. However, when glucose also
is present, the rate of transcription initiation (i.e., the number
of times per minute different polymerase molecules initiate
transcription) is very low, resulting in synthesis of only low
levels of lac mRNA and the proteins encoded in the lac
operon (Figure 4-16b).
Once glucose is depleted from the media and the intracellular glucose concentration falls, E. coli cells respond by
synthesizing cyclic AMP, cAMP (see Figure 3-27b). As the
concentration of cAMP increases, it binds to a site in each
subunit of the dimeric CAP protein, causing a conformational change that allows the protein to bind to the CAP site
in the lac transcription-control region. The bound CAPcAMP complex interacts with the polymerase bound to the
promoter, greatly stimulating the rate of transcription initiation. This activation leads to synthesis of high levels of lac

116

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
+1 (transcription start site)
Promoter

lacZ
Operator

CAP site

E. coli lac transcription-control genes

CAP

Pol-σ70

(a)

lac repressor

− lactose

lacZ

+ glucose
(low cAMP)

No mRNA transcription
lactose

(b)
+ lactose

lacZ

+ glucose
(low cAMP)

(c)
+ lactose
− glucose
(high cAMP)

rate of initiation is further reduced by the lac repressor and
substantially increased by the cAMP-CAP activator.

Low transcription

cAMP

lacZ
High transcription

▲ FIGURE 4-16 Regulation of transcription from the
lac operon of E. coli. (Top) The transcription-control region,
composed of ≈100 base pairs, includes three protein-binding
regions: the CAP site, which binds catabolite activator protein;
the lac promoter, which binds the RNA polymerase– 70 complex;
and the lac operator, which binds lac repressor. The lacZ gene,
the first of three genes in the operon, is shown to the right.
(a) In the absence of lactose, very little lac mRNA is produced
because the lac repressor binds to the operator, inhibiting
transcription initiation by RNA polymerase– 70. (b) In the
presence of glucose and lactose, lac repressor binds lactose
and dissociates from the operator, allowing RNA polymerase– 70
to initiate transcription at a low rate. (c) Maximal transcription of
the lac operon occurs in the presence of lactose and absence of
glucose. In this situation, cAMP increases in response to the low
glucose concentration and forms the CAP-cAMP complex, which
binds to the CAP site, where it interacts with RNA polymerase
to stimulate the rate of transcription initiation.

mRNA and subsequently of the enzymes encoded by the lac
operon (Figure 4-16c).
Although the promoters for different E. coli genes exhibit
considerable homology, their exact sequences differ. The promoter sequence determines the intrinsic rate at which an
RNA polymerase– complex initiates transcription of a gene
in the absence of a repressor or activator protein. Promoters
that support a high rate of transcription initiation are called
strong promoters. Those that support a low rate of transcription initiation are called weak promoters. The lac
operon, for instance, has a weak promoter; its low intrinsic

Small Molecules Regulate Expression of Many
Bacterial Genes via DNA-Binding Repressors
Transcription of most E. coli genes is regulated by processes
similar to those described for the lac operon. The general
mechanism involves a specific repressor that binds to the operator region of a gene or operon, thereby blocking transcription initiation. A small molecule (or molecules), called an
inducer, binds to the repressor, controlling its DNA-binding
activity and consequently the rate of transcription as appropriate for the needs of the cell.
For example, when the tryptophan concentration in the
medium and cytosol is high, the cell does not synthesize the
several enzymes encoded in the trp operon. Binding of tryptophan to the trp repressor causes a conformational change
that allows the protein to bind to the trp operator, thereby
repressing expression of the enzymes that synthesize tryptophan. Conversely, when the tryptophan concentration in the
medium and cytosol is low, tryptophan dissociates from the
trp repressor, causing a conformational change in the protein
that causes it to dissociate from the trp operator, allowing
transcription of the trp operon. In the case of the lac operon,
binding of the inducer lactose to the lac repressor reduces
binding of the repressor to the operator, thereby promoting
transcription.
Specific activator proteins, such as CAP in the lac operon,
also control transcription of some but not all bacterial genes.
These activators bind to DNA together with the RNA polymerase, stimulating transcription from a specific promoter.
The DNA-binding activity of an activator is modulated in response to cellular needs by the binding of specific small molecules (e.g., cAMP) that alter the conformation of the
activator.

Transcription by 54-RNA Polymerase
Is Controlled by Activators That Bind Far
from the Promoter
Most E. coli promoters interact with 70-RNA polymerase,
the major form of the bacterial enzyme. Transcription of certain groups of genes, however, is carried out by E. coli RNA
polymerases containing one of several alternative sigma factors that recognize different consensus promoter sequences
than 70 does. All but one of these are related to 70 in sequence. Transcription initiation by RNA polymerases containing these 70-like factors is regulated by repressors and
activators that bind to DNA near the region where the polymerase binds, similar to initiation by 70-RNA polymerase
itself.
The sequence of one E. coli sigma factor, 54, is distinctly
different from that of all the 70-like factors. Transcription
of genes by RNA polymerases containing 54 is regulated

4.3 • Control of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes

solely by activators whose binding sites in DNA, referred to
as enhancers, generally are located 80–160 base pairs upstream from the start site. Even when enhancers are moved
more than a kilobase away from a start site, 54-activators
can activate transcription.
The best-characterized 54-activator—the NtrC protein
(nitrogen regulatory protein C)—stimulates transcription
from the promoter of the glnA gene. This gene encodes the
enzyme glutamine synthetase, which synthesizes the amino
acid glutamine from glutamic acid and ammonia. The 54RNA polymerase binds to the glnA promoter but does not
melt the DNA strands and initiate transcription until it is activated by NtrC, a dimeric protein. NtrC, in turn, is regulated by a protein kinase called NtrB. In response to low
levels of glutamine, NtrB phosphorylates dimeric NtrC,
which then binds to an enhancer upstream of the glnA pro(a)

NtrC

54

polymerase

117

moter. Enhancer-bound phosphorylated NtrC then stimulates the 54-polymerase bound at the promoter to separate
the DNA strands and initiate transcription. Electron microscopy studies have shown that phosphorylated NtrC
bound at enhancers and 54-polymerase bound at the promoter directly interact, forming a loop in the DNA between
the binding sites (Figure 4-17). As discussed in Chapter 11,
this activation mechanism is somewhat similar to the
predominant mechanism of transcriptional activation in
eukaryotes.
NtrC has ATPase activity, and ATP hydrolysis is required
for activation of bound 54-polymerase by phosphorylated
NtrC. Evidence for this is that mutants with an NtrC defective in ATP hydrolysis are invariably defective in stimulating the 54-polymerase to melt the DNA strands at the
transcription start site. It is postulated that ATP hydrolysis
supplies the energy required for melting the DNA strands.
In contrast, the 70-polymerase does not require ATP hydrolysis to separate the strands at a start site.

Many Bacterial Responses Are Controlled
by Two-Component Regulatory Systems

(b)

NtrC

54

polymerase

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-17 DNA looping permits
interaction of bound NtrC and 54-polymerase. (a) Electron
micrograph of DNA restriction fragment with phosphorylated
NtrC dimer binding to the enhancer region near one end and
54
–RNA polymerase bound to the glnA promoter near the other
end. (b) Electron micrograph of the same fragment preparation
showing NtrC dimers and 54-polymerase binding to each other
with the intervening DNA forming a loop between them. [From
W. Su et al., 1990, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 87:5505; courtesy of
S. Kustu.]

As we’ve just seen, control of the E. coli glnA gene depends
on two proteins, NtrC and NtrB. Such two-component regulatory systems control many responses of bacteria to
changes in their environment. Another example involves the
E. coli proteins PhoR and PhoB, which regulate transcription
in response to the concentration of free phosphate. PhoR is a
transmembrane protein, located in the inner (plasma) membrane, whose periplasmic domain binds phosphate with
moderate affinity and whose cytosolic domain has protein
kinase activity; PhoB is a cytosolic protein.
Large protein pores in the E. coli outer membrane allow
ions to diffuse freely between the external environment and
the periplasmic space. Consequently, when the phosphate
concentration in the environment falls, it also falls in the
periplasmic space, causing phosphate to dissociate from the
PhoR periplasmic domain, as depicted in Figure 4-18. This
causes a conformational change in the PhoR cytoplasmic domain that activates its protein kinase activity. The activated
PhoR initially transfers a -phosphate from ATP to a histidine side chain in the PhoR kinase domain itself. The same
phosphate is then transferred to a specific aspartic acid side
chain in PhoB, converting PhoB from an inactive to an active
transcriptional activator. Phosphorylated, active PhoB then
induces transcription from several genes that help the cell
cope with low phosphate conditions.
Many other bacterial responses are regulated by two proteins with homology to PhoR and PhoB. In each of these regulatory systems, one protein, called a sensor, contains a
transmitter domain homologous to the PhoR protein kinase
domain. The transmitter domain of the sensor protein is regulated by a second unique protein domain (e.g., the periplasmic domain of PhoR) that senses environmental changes.
The second protein, called a response regulator, contains a

118

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

 FIGURE 4-18 The PhoR/PhoB
two-component regulatory system in
E. coli. In response to low phosphate
concentrations in the environment and
periplasmic space, a phosphate ion
dissociates from the periplasmic domain of
the inactive sensor protein PhoR. This causes
a conformational change that activates a
protein kinase transmitter domain in the
cytosolic region of PhoR. The activated
transmitter domain transfers an ATP
phosphate to a conserved histidine in the
transmitter domain. This phosphate is then
transferred to an aspartic acid in the receiver
domain of the response regulator PhoB.
Several PhoB proteins can be phosphorylated
by one activated PhoR. Phosphorylated
PhoB proteins then activate transcription
from genes encoding proteins that help the
cell to respond to low phosphate, including
phoA, phoS, phoE, and ugpB.

Porin

Periplasmic space
Cytoplasm

PhoR
sensor (inactive)
H

P

PhoR
sensor (active)

phoA

H

P

P

P

P

A

phoS

P

phoE
D
PhoB response
regulator (active)

ugpB

D
PhoB response
regulator (inactive)
Inner (cytoplasmic) membrane

Outer membrane

receiver domain homologous to the region of PhoB that is
phosphorylated by activated PhoR. The receiver domain of
the response regulator is associated with a second domain
that determines the protein’s function. The activity of this
second functional domain is regulated by phosphorylation of
the receiver domain. Although all transmitter domains are
homologous (as are receiver domains), the transmitter domain of a specific sensor protein will phosphorylate only specific receiver domains of specific response regulators,
allowing specific responses to different environmental
changes. Note that NtrB and NtrC, discussed above, function as sensor and response regulator proteins, respectively,
in the two-component regulatory system that controls transcription of glnA. Similar two-component histidyl-aspartyl
phosphorelay regulatory systems are also found in plants.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 4.3
Control of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes
Gene expression in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes is
regulated primarily by mechanisms that control the initiation of transcription.

■

Binding of the subunit in an RNA polymerase to a
promoter region is the first step in the initiation of transcription in E. coli.

■

The nucleotide sequence of a promoter determines its
strength, that is, how frequently different RNA polymerase
molecules can bind and initiate transcription per minute.

■

Repressors are proteins that bind to operator sequences,
which overlap or lie adjacent to promoters. Binding of a
repressor to an operator inhibits transcription initiation.

■

The DNA-binding activity of most bacterial repressors
is modulated by small effector molecules (inducers). This
allows bacterial cells to regulate transcription of specific
genes in response to changes in the concentration of various nutrients in the environment.

■

The lac operon and some other bacterial genes also are
regulated by activator proteins that bind next to promoters and increase the rate of transcription initiation by RNA
polymerase.

■

The major sigma factor in E. coli is 70, but several other
less abundant sigma factors are also found, each recognizing different consensus promoter sequences.
■

Transcription initiation by all E. coli RNA polymerases,
except those containing 54, can be regulated by repressors and activators that bind near the transcription start
site (see Figure 4-16).
■

Genes transcribed by 54–RNA polymerase are regulated
by activators that bind to enhancers located ≈100 base
■

119

4.4 • The Three Roles of RNA in Translation

pairs upstream from the start site. When the activator and
54
–RNA polymerase interact, the DNA between their
binding sites forms a loop (see Figure 4-17).

aa 1 aa 2
aa 3
Growing
aa 4
polypeptide
chain

In two-component regulatory systems, one protein acts
as a sensor, monitoring the level of nutrients or other components in the environment. Under appropriate conditions,
the -phosphate of an ATP is transferred first to a histidine in the sensor protein and then to an aspartic acid in
a second protein, the response regulator. The phosphorylated response regulator then binds to DNA regulatory sequences, thereby stimulating or repressing transcription of
specific genes (see Figure 4-18).

■

H C

Ribosome

Although DNA stores the information for protein synthesis
and mRNA conveys the instructions encoded in DNA, most
biological activities are carried out by proteins. As we saw
in Chapter 3, the linear order of amino acids in each protein
determines its three-dimensional structure and activity. For
this reason, assembly of amino acids in their correct order,
as encoded in DNA, is critical to production of functional
proteins and hence the proper functioning of cells and
organisms.
Translation is the whole process by which the nucleotide
sequence of an mRNA is used to order and to join the amino
acids in a polypeptide chain (see Figure 4-1, step 3). In eukaryotic cells, protein synthesis occurs in the cytoplasm,
where three types of RNA molecules come together to perform different but cooperative functions (Figure 4-19):
1. Messenger RNA (mRNA) carries the genetic information
transcribed from DNA in the form of a series of threenucleotide sequences, called codons, each of which specifies
a particular amino acid.
2. Transfer RNA (tRNA) is the key to deciphering the
codons in mRNA. Each type of amino acid has its own
subset of tRNAs, which bind the amino acid and carry it
to the growing end of a polypeptide chain if the next codon
in the mRNA calls for it. The correct tRNA with its attached
amino acid is selected at each step because each specific
tRNA molecule contains a three-nucleotide sequence, an
anticodon, that can base-pair with its complementary codon
in the mRNA.
3. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) associates with a set of
proteins to form ribosomes. These complex structures,
which physically move along an mRNA molecule, catalyze
the assembly of amino acids into polypeptide chains. They
also bind tRNAs and various accessory proteins necessary
for protein synthesis. Ribosomes are composed of a large
and a small subunit, each of which contains its own rRNA
molecule or molecules.

H H
N C R6

mRNA

CC

O

C O H C O
O
O

tRNA4
leaving

5

4.4 The Three Roles of RNA
in Translation

R5

aa7-tRNA7
arriving H
H2N C
R7
C O

C AG

C
U U U A G C
G G G A A A U C G G U C

3

Codon Codon Codon Codon Codon Codon Codon
aa1
aa2
aa3
aa4
aa5
aa6
aa7
Movement of ribosome

▲ FIGURE 4-19 The three roles of RNA in protein
synthesis. Messenger RNA (mRNA) is translated into protein
by the joint action of transfer RNA (tRNA) and the ribosome,
which is composed of numerous proteins and two major
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) molecules (not shown). Note the base
pairing between tRNA anticodons and complementary codons
in the mRNA. Formation of a peptide bond between the amino
group N on the incoming aa-tRNA and the carboxyl-terminal C
on the growing protein chain (purple) is catalyzed by one of the
rRNAs. aa
amino acid; R
side group. [Adapted from
A. J. F. Griffiths et al., 1999, Modern Genetic Analysis, W. H. Freeman
and Company.]

These three types of RNA participate in translation in all
cells. Indeed, development of three functionally distinct
RNAs was probably the molecular key to the origin of life.
How the structure of each RNA relates to its specific task is
described in this section; how the three types work together,
along with required protein factors, to synthesize proteins is
detailed in the following section. Since translation is essential
for protein synthesis, the two processes commonly are referred to interchangeably. However, the polypeptide chains
resulting from translation undergo post-translational folding
and often other changes (e.g., chemical modifications, association with other chains) that are required for production of
mature, functional proteins (Chapter 3).

Messenger RNA Carries Information from DNA
in a Three-Letter Genetic Code
As noted above, the genetic code used by cells is a triplet
code, with every three-nucleotide sequence, or codon, being
“read” from a specified starting point in the mRNA. Of the
64 possible codons in the genetic code, 61 specify individual
amino acids and three are stop codons. Table 4-1 shows that
most amino acids are encoded by more than one codon.
Only two—methionine and tryptophan—have a single

120

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

TABLE 4-1 The Genetic Code (RNA to Amino Acids)*
First
Position
(5 end)

Third
Position
(3 end)

Second Position
U

C

A

G

Phe
Phe

Ser
Ser

Tyr
Tyr

Cys
Cys

U
C

Leu
Leu

Ser
Ser

Stop
Stop

Stop
Trp

A
G

Leu
Leu

Pro
Pro

His
His

Arg
Arg

U
C

Leu
Leu (Met)*

Pro
Pro

Gln
Gln

Arg
Arg

A
G

Ile
Ile

Thr
Thr

Asn
Asn

Ser
Ser

U
C

Ile
Met (start)

Thr
Thr

Lys
Lys

Arg
Arg

A
G

Val
Val

Ala
Ala

Asp
Asp

Gly
Gly

U
C

Val
Val (Met)*

Ala
Ala

Glu
Glu

Gly
Gly

A
G

U

C

A

G

*AUG is the most common initiator codon; GUG usually codes for valine, and CUG for leucine, but, rarely,
these codons can also code for methionine to initiate a protein chain.

codon; at the other extreme, leucine, serine, and arginine are
each specified by six different codons. The different codons
for a given amino acid are said to be synonymous. The code
itself is termed degenerate, meaning that more than one
codon can specify the same amino acid.
Synthesis of all polypeptide chains in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells begins with the amino acid methionine. In most
mRNAs, the start (initiator) codon specifying this aminoterminal methionine is AUG. In a few bacterial mRNAs,
GUG is used as the initiator codon, and CUG occasionally
is used as an initiator codon for methionine in eukaryotes.
The three codons UAA, UGA, and UAG do not specify
amino acids but constitute stop (termination) codons that
mark the carboxyl terminus of polypeptide chains in almost
all cells. The sequence of codons that runs from a specific

start codon to a stop codon is called a reading frame. This
precise linear array of ribonucleotides in groups of three in
mRNA specifies the precise linear sequence of amino acids in
a polypeptide chain and also signals where synthesis of the
chain starts and stops.
Because the genetic code is a comma-less, non-overlapping
triplet code, a particular mRNA theoretically could be translated in three different reading frames. Indeed some mRNAs
have been shown to contain overlapping information that can
be translated in different reading frames, yielding different
polypeptides (Figure 4-20). The vast majority of mRNAs,
however, can be read in only one frame because stop codons
encountered in the other two possible reading frames terminate translation before a functional protein is produced. Another unusual coding arrangement occurs because of frame-

4.4 • The Three Roles of RNA in Translation
Frame 1
5

GCU UGU UUA CGA AUU A
Ala

Cys

Leu

Arg

Ile

mRNA
Polypeptide

Frame 2
5

G CUU GUU UAC GAA UUA
Leu

Val

Tyr

Glu

Leu

▲ FIGURE 4-20 Example of how the genetic code—a
non-overlapping, comma-less triplet code—can be read in
different frames. If translation of the mRNA sequence shown
begins at two different upstream start sites (not shown), then
two overlapping reading frames are possible. In this example,
the codons are shifted one base to the right in the lower frame.
As a result, the same nucleotide sequence specifies different
amino acids during translation. Although they are rare, many
instances of such overlaps have been discovered in viral and
cellular genes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It is theoretically
possible for the mRNA to have a third reading frame.
shifting. In this case the protein-synthesizing machinery may
read four nucleotides as one amino acid and then continue
reading triplets, or it may back up one base and read all succeeding triplets in the new frame until termination of the chain
occurs. These frameshifts are not common events, but a few
dozen such instances are known.
The meaning of each codon is the same in most known
organisms—a strong argument that life on earth evolved
only once. However, the genetic code has been found to differ for a few codons in many mitochondria, in ciliated protozoans, and in Acetabularia, a single-celled plant. As shown
in Table 4-2, most of these changes involve reading of normal stop codons as amino acids, not an exchange of one
amino acid for another. These exceptions to the general code
probably were later evolutionary developments; that is, at no
single time was the code immutably fixed, although massive
changes were not tolerated once a general code began to
function early in evolution.

121

The Folded Structure of tRNA Promotes
Its Decoding Functions
Translation, or decoding, of the four-nucleotide language of
DNA and mRNA into the 20–amino acid language of proteins requires tRNAs and enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases. To participate in protein synthesis, a tRNA molecule must become chemically linked to a particular amino
acid via a high-energy bond, forming an aminoacyl-tRNA;
the anticodon in the tRNA then base-pairs with a codon in
mRNA so that the activated amino acid can be added to the
growing polypeptide chain (Figure 4-21).
Some 30–40 different tRNAs have been identified in
bacterial cells and as many as 50–100 in animal and plant
cells. Thus the number of tRNAs in most cells is more
than the number of amino acids used in protein synthesis
(20) and also differs from the number of amino acid
codons in the genetic code (61). Consequently, many
amino acids have more than one tRNA to which they can
attach (explaining how there can be more tRNAs than
amino acids); in addition, many tRNAs can pair with
more than one codon (explaining how there can be more
codons than tRNAs).
The function of tRNA molecules, which are 70–80 nucleotides long, depends on their precise three-dimensional
structures. In solution, all tRNA molecules fold into a similar stem-loop arrangement that resembles a cloverleaf when
drawn in two dimensions (Figure 4-22a). The four stems are
short double helices stabilized by Watson-Crick base pairing;
three of the four stems have loops containing seven or eight
bases at their ends, while the remaining, unlooped stem contains the free 3 and 5 ends of the chain. The three nucleotides composing the anticodon are located at the center
of the middle loop, in an accessible position that facilitates
codon-anticodon base pairing. In all tRNAs, the 3 end of
the unlooped amino acid acceptor stem has the sequence
CCA, which in most cases is added after synthesis and processing of the tRNA are complete. Several bases in most
tRNAs also are modified after synthesis. Viewed in three

TABLE 4-2 Known Deviations from the Universal Genetic Code
Codon

Universal
Code

Unusual
Code*

Occurrence

UGA

Stop

Trp

Mycoplasma, Spiroplasma, mitochondria of many species

CUG

Leu

Thr

Mitochondria in yeasts

UAA, UAG

Stop

Gln

Acetabularia, Tetrahymena, Paramecium, etc.

UGA

Stop

Cys

Euplotes

*“Unusual code” is used in nuclear genes of the listed organisms and in mitochondrial genes as indicated.
SOURCE: S. Osawa et al., 1992, Microbiol. Rev. 56:229.

122

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
Amino acid
(Phe)
H O
H2N

C
CH2

C

High-energy
ester bond
OH

H2N

OH

H

O

C

C

O

H2N

CH2

1

2

O

CH2
Net result:
Phe is selected
by its codon

5

AAA
UUU
mRNA

3

corresponding tRNA. Step 2 : A three-base sequence in the
tRNA (the anticodon) then base-pairs with a codon in the mRNA
specifying the attached amino acid. If an error occurs in either
step, the wrong amino acid may be incorporated into a
polypeptide chain. Phe
phenylalanine.

nucleic acid sequences in mRNA into amino acid sequences
in proteins. Step 1 : An aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase first couples
a specific amino acid, via a high-energy ester bond (yellow), to
either the 2 or 3 hydroxyl of the terminal adenosine in the

amino acid. As noted above, however, many cells contain
fewer than 61 tRNAs. The explanation for the smaller number
lies in the capability of a single tRNA anticodon to recognize
more than one, but not necessarily every, codon corresponding
to a given amino acid. This broader recognition can occur because of nonstandard pairing between bases in the so-called
wobble position: that is, the third (3) base in an mRNA codon
and the corresponding first (5) base in its tRNA anticodon.
The first and second bases of a codon almost always
form standard Watson-Crick base pairs with the third and

dimensions, the folded tRNA molecule has an L shape with
the anticodon loop and acceptor stem forming the ends of
the two arms (Figure 4-22b).

Nonstandard Base Pairing Often Occurs Between
Codons and Anticodons
If perfect Watson-Crick base pairing were demanded between
codons and anticodons, cells would have to contain exactly 61
different tRNA species, one for each codon that specifies an

3

(a)

Science 147:1462; part (b) from J. G. Arnez and
D. Moras, 1997, Trends Biochem. Sci. 22:211.]

C

AAA
Aminoacyl-tRNA

▲ FIGURE 4-21 Two-step decoding process for translating

(a) Although the exact nucleotide sequence
varies among tRNAs, they all fold into four
base-paired stems and three loops. The CCA
sequence at the 3 end also is found in all
tRNAs. Attachment of an amino acid to the 3
A yields an aminoacyl-tRNA. Some of the A,
C, G, and U residues are modified in most
tRNAs (see key). Dihydrouridine (D) is nearly
always present in the D loop; likewise,
ribothymidine (T) and pseudouridine ( ) are
almost always present in the T CG loop.
Yeast alanine tRNA, represented here, also
contains other modified bases. The triplet at
the tip of the anticodon loop base-pairs with
the corresponding codon in mRNA. (b) Threedimensional model of the generalized backbone of all tRNAs. Note the L shape of the
molecule. [Part (a) see R. W. Holly et al., 1965,

C

AMP
+ PPi

AAA
AminoacyltRNA synthetase tRNA specific for
specific for Phe
Phe (tRNAPhe)

 FIGURE 4-22 Structure of tRNAs.

O

tRNAPhe binds
to the UUU codon

Linkage of
Phe to tRNAPhe

ATP

H

D = dihydrouridine
I = inosine
T = ribothymidine
= pseudouridine
m = methyl group

D loop
D

G A

mG

U

U G C G

C
G
G C G C
G D A

m2G

Anticodon loop

C
U
C
C
C
U
U 1
I

A
C
C
5 A
Acceptor
G
C
stem
G
C
G
U
C
G
G
C
T CG
loop
U
U
G
C
U U
A
A G G C C
G
U C C G G
C
T
G
A C
A
G D
G Variable
G
G
loop
G
2

G

ml

3

C

Anticodon

C C G

3

3

2

1

mRNA

5

Codon

(b)
T CG loop

Acceptor stem
C

5

C

D loop
Variable
loop

Anticodon loop

A

3

4.4 • The Three Roles of RNA in Translation

second bases, respectively, of the corresponding anticodon,
but four nonstandard interactions can occur between bases
in the wobble position. Particularly important is the G·U
base pair, which structurally fits almost as well as the standard G·C pair. Thus, a given anticodon in tRNA with G in
the first (wobble) position can base-pair with the two corresponding codons that have either pyrimidine (C or U) in the
third position (Figure 4-23). For example, the phenylalanine
codons UUU and UUC (5n3) are both recognized by the
tRNA that has GAA (5n3) as the anticodon. In fact, any
two codons of the type NNPyr (N
any base; Pyr
pyrimidine) encode a single amino acid and are decoded by
a single tRNA with G in the first (wobble) position of the
anticodon.
Although adenine rarely is found in the anticodon wobble
position, many tRNAs in plants and animals contain inosine
tRNA
3
5
If these bases are in
first, or wobble, position of
anticodon
3 21

C

A

G

U

I

123
5 mRNA 3

G

U

C
U

A
G

C
A
U

5 mRNA 3
123
3 21

then the tRNA may
recognize codons in
mRNA having these
bases in third position

If these bases are in
third, or wobble, position
of codon of an mRNA
C A G U
G
I

U
I

C
U

A
G
I

then the codon may
be recognized by a
tRNA having these
bases in first position
of anticodon

5
3
tRNA

▲ FIGURE 4-23 Nonstandard codon-anticodon base pairing
at the wobble position. The base in the third (or wobble)
position of an mRNA codon often forms a nonstandard base
pair with the base in the first (or wobble) position of a tRNA
anticodon. Wobble pairing allows a tRNA to recognize more than
one mRNA codon (top); conversely, it allows a codon to be
recognized by more than one kind of tRNA (bottom), although
each tRNA will bear the same amino acid. Note that a tRNA
with I (inosine) in the wobble position can “read” (become
paired with) three different codons, and a tRNA with G or U in
the wobble position can read two codons. Although A is
theoretically possible in the wobble position of the anticodon,
it is almost never found in nature.

123

(I), a deaminated product of adenine, at this position. Inosine can form nonstandard base pairs with A, C, and U. A
tRNA with inosine in the wobble position thus can recognize
the corresponding mRNA codons with A, C, or U in the third
(wobble) position (see Figure 4-23). For this reason, inosinecontaining tRNAs are heavily employed in translation of the
synonymous codons that specify a single amino acid. For example, four of the six codons for leucine (CUA, CUC, CUU,
and UUA) are all recognized by the same tRNA with the anticodon 3-GAI-5; the inosine in the wobble position forms
nonstandard base pairs with the third base in the four codons.
In the case of the UUA codon, a nonstandard G·U pair also
forms between position 3 of the anticodon and position 1 of
the codon.

Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases Activate Amino
Acids by Covalently Linking Them to tRNAs
Recognition of the codon or codons specifying a given amino
acid by a particular tRNA is actually the second step in decoding the genetic message. The first step, attachment of the
appropriate amino acid to a tRNA, is catalyzed by a specific
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. Each of the 20 different synthetases recognizes one amino acid and all its compatible, or
cognate, tRNAs. These coupling enzymes link an amino acid
to the free 2 or 3 hydroxyl of the adenosine at the 3 terminus of tRNA molecules by an ATP-requiring reaction. In
this reaction, the amino acid is linked to the tRNA by a highenergy bond and thus is said to be activated. The energy of
this bond subsequently drives formation of the peptide bonds
linking adjacent amino acids in a growing polypeptide chain.
The equilibrium of the aminoacylation reaction is driven further toward activation of the amino acid by hydrolysis of the
high-energy phosphoanhydride bond in the released pyrophosphate (see Figure 4-21).
Because some amino acids are so similar structurally,
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases sometimes make mistakes.
These are corrected, however, by the enzymes themselves,
which have a proofreading activity that checks the fit in their
amino acid–binding pocket. If the wrong amino acid becomes attached to a tRNA, the bound synthetase catalyzes
removal of the amino acid from the tRNA. This crucial function helps guarantee that a tRNA delivers the correct amino
acid to the protein-synthesizing machinery. The overall error
rate for translation in E. coli is very low, approximately 1 per
50,000 codons, evidence of the importance of proofreading
by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases.

Ribosomes Are Protein-Synthesizing Machines
If the many components that participate in translating
mRNA had to interact in free solution, the likelihood of simultaneous collisions occurring would be so low that the
rate of amino acid polymerization would be very slow. The
efficiency of translation is greatly increased by the binding of
the mRNA and the individual aminoacyl-tRNAs to the most

124

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

abundant RNA-protein complex in the cell, the ribosome,
which directs elongation of a polypeptide at a rate of three to
five amino acids added per second. Small proteins of
100–200 amino acids are therefore made in a minute or less.
On the other hand, it takes 2–3 hours to make the largest
known protein, titin, which is found in muscle and contains
about 30,000 amino acid residues. The cellular machine that
accomplishes this task must be precise and persistent.
With the aid of the electron microscope, ribosomes were
first discovered as small, discrete, RNA-rich particles in cells
that secrete large amounts of protein. However, their role in
protein synthesis was not recognized until reasonably pure
ribosome preparations were obtained. In vitro radiolabeling
experiments with such preparations showed that radioactive
amino acids first were incorporated into growing polypeptide chains that were associated with ribosomes before appearing in finished chains.
A ribosome is composed of three (in bacteria) or four (in
eukaryotes) different rRNA molecules and as many as 83
proteins, organized into a large subunit and a small subunit
(Figure 4-24). The ribosomal subunits and the rRNA molecules are commonly designated in Svedberg units (S), a
measure of the sedimentation rate of suspended particles cen-

Proteins

rRNA

trifuged under standard conditions. The small ribosomal
subunit contains a single rRNA molecule, referred to as small
rRNA. The large subunit contains a molecule of large rRNA
and one molecule of 5S rRNA, plus an additional molecule
of 5.8S rRNA in vertebrates. The lengths of the rRNA molecules, the quantity of proteins in each subunit, and consequently the sizes of the subunits differ in bacterial and
eukaryotic cells. The assembled ribosome is 70S in bacteria
and 80S in vertebrates. But more interesting than these differences are the great structural and functional similarities
between ribosomes from all species. This consistency is another reflection of the common evolutionary origin of the
most basic constituents of living cells.
The sequences of the small and large rRNAs from several
thousand organisms are now known. Although the primary
nucleotide sequences of these rRNAs vary considerably, the
same parts of each type of rRNA theoretically can form basepaired stem-loops, which would generate a similar threedimensional structure for each rRNA in all organisms. The
actual three-dimensional structures of bacterial rRNAs from
Thermus thermopolis recently have been determined by xray crystallography of the 70S ribosome. The multiple, much
smaller ribosomal proteins for the most part are associated

Subunits

Assembled
ribosomes

5S
23S
Prokaryotic

+
23S
(2900 rNTs)

Total: 31

5S
(120 rNTs)

50S

+

Total: 21

16S

16S
(1500 rNTs)

70S
30S

Eukaryotic (vertebrate)

5S
28S

+

5.8S

Total: 50
28S

5S
28S : 5.8S
(4800 rNTs, 160 rNTs) (120 rNTs)

5.8S

60S

+

Total: 33

18S
(1900 rNTs)

▲ FIGURE 4-24 The general structure of ribosomes in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In all cells, each ribosome
consists of a large and a small subunit. The two subunits
contain rRNAs (red) of different lengths, as well as a different set
of proteins. All ribosomes contain two major rRNA molecules

18S
40S

80S

(23S and 16S rRNA in bacteria; 28S and 18S rRNA in vertebrates)
and a 5S rRNA. The large subunit of vertebrate ribosomes also
contains a 5.8S rRNA base-paired to the 28S rRNA. The number
of ribonucleotides (rNTs) in each rRNA type is indicated.

4.5 • Stepwise Synthesis of Proteins on Ribosomes

with the surface of the rRNAs. Although the number of protein molecules in ribosomes greatly exceeds the number of
RNA molecules, RNA constitutes about 60 percent of the
mass of a ribosome.
During translation, a ribosome moves along an mRNA
chain, interacting with various protein factors and tRNAs
and very likely undergoing large conformational changes.
Despite the complexity of the ribosome, great progress has
been made in determining the overall structure of bacterial
ribosomes and in identifying various reactive sites. X-ray
crystallographic studies on the T. thermophilus 70S ribosome, for instance, not only have revealed the dimensions
and overall shape of the ribosomal subunits but also have localized the positions of tRNAs bound to the ribosome during
elongation of a growing protein chain. In addition, powerful chemical techniques such as footprinting, which is described in Chapter 11, have been used to identify specific
nucleotide sequences in rRNAs that bind to protein or another RNA. Some 40 years after the initial discovery of ribosomes, their overall structure and functioning during
protein synthesis are finally becoming clear, as we describe in
the next section.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 4.4
The Three Roles of RNA in Translation
Genetic information is transcribed from DNA into
mRNA in the form of a comma-less, overlapping, degenerate triplet code.

■

Each amino acid is encoded by one or more threenucleotide sequences (codons) in mRNA. Each codon specifies one amino acid, but most amino acids are encoded by
multiple codons (see Table 4-1).

■

The AUG codon for methionine is the most common start
codon, specifying the amino acid at the NH2-terminus of a
protein chain. Three codons (UAA, UAG, UGA) function
as stop codons and specify no amino acids.
■

A reading frame, the uninterrupted sequence of codons
in mRNA from a specific start codon to a stop codon, is
translated into the linear sequence of amino acids in a
polypeptide chain.

■

Decoding of the nucleotide sequence in mRNA into the
amino acid sequence of proteins depends on tRNAs and
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases.

■

All tRNAs have a similar three-dimensional structure
that includes an acceptor arm for attachment of a specific
amino acid and a stem-loop with a three-base anticodon
sequence at its ends (see Figure 4-22). The anticodon can
base-pair with its corresponding codon in mRNA.

■

Because of nonstandard interactions, a tRNA may basepair with more than one mRNA codon; conversely, a particular codon may base-pair with multiple tRNAs. In each

■

125

case, however, only the proper amino acid is inserted into
a growing polypeptide chain.
Each of the 20 aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases recognizes
a single amino acid and covalently links it to a cognate
tRNA, forming an aminoacyl-tRNA (see Figure 4-21). This
reaction activates the amino acid, so it can participate in
peptide bond formation.

■

■ Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribosomes—the large
ribonucleoprotein complexes on which translation occurs—
consist of a small and a large subunit (see Figure 4-24). Each
subunit contains numerous different proteins and one major
rRNA molecule (small or large). The large subunit also contains one accessory 5S rRNA in bacteria and two accessory
rRNAs in eukaryotes (5S and 5.8S in vertebrates).

Analogous rRNAs from many different species fold into
quite similar three-dimensional structures containing numerous stem-loops and binding sites for proteins, mRNA,
and tRNAs. Much smaller ribosomal proteins are associated with the periphery of the rRNAs.

■

4.5 Stepwise Synthesis of Proteins
on Ribosomes
The previous sections have introduced the major participants
in protein synthesis—mRNA, aminoacylated tRNAs, and ribosomes containing large and small rRNAs. We now take a
detailed look at how these components are brought together
to carry out the biochemical events leading to formation of
polypeptide chains on ribosomes. Similar to transcription,
the complex process of translation can be divided into three
stages—initiation, elongation, and termination—which we
consider in order. We focus our description on translation in
eukaryotic cells, but the mechanism of translation is fundamentally the same in all cells.

Methionyl-tRNAiMet Recognizes the AUG
Start Codon
As noted earlier, the AUG codon for methionine functions
as the start codon in the vast majority of mRNAs. A critical
aspect of translation initiation is to begin protein synthesis at
the start codon, thereby establishing the correct reading
frame for the entire mRNA. Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes contain two different methionine tRNAs: tRNAiMet can
initiate protein synthesis, and tRNAMet can incorporate methionine only into a growing protein chain. The same
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (MetRS) charges both tRNAs
with methionine. But only Met-tRNAiMet (i.e., activated methionine attached to tRNAiMet) can bind at the appropriate
site on the small ribosomal subunit, the P site, to begin synthesis of a polypeptide chain. The regular Met-tRNAMet and
all other charged tRNAs bind only to another ribosomal site,
the A site, as described later.

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
eIF6

Translation Initiation Usually Occurs Near the
First AUG Closest to the 5 End of an mRNA
During the first stage of translation, a ribosome assembles,
complexed with an mRNA and an activated initiator tRNA,
which is correctly positioned at the start codon. Large and
small ribosomal subunits not actively engaged in translation
are kept apart by binding of two initiation factors, designated eIF3 and eIF6 in eukaryotes. A translation preinitiation complex is formed when the 40S subunit–eIF3 complex
is bound by eIF1A and a ternary complex of the MettRNAiMet, eIF2, and GTP (Figure 4-25, step 1). Cells can regulate protein synthesis by phosphorylating a serine residue
on the eIF2 bound to GDP; the phosphorylated complex is
unable to exchange the bound GDP for GTP and cannot
bind Met-tRNAiMet, thus inhibiting protein synthesis.
During translation initiation, the 5 cap of an mRNA to be
translated is bound by the eIF4E subunit of the eIF4 capbinding complex. The mRNA-eIF4 complex then associates
with the preinitiation complex through an interaction of the
eIF4G subunit and eIF3, forming the initiation complex (Figure 4-25, step 2). The initiation complex then probably slides
along, or scans, the associated mRNA as the helicase activity
of eIF4A uses energy from ATP hydrolysis to unwind
the RNA secondary structure. Scanning stops when the
tRNAiMet anticodon recognizes the start codon, which is the
first AUG downstream from the 5 end in most eukaryotic
mRNAs (step 3). Recognition of the start codon leads to hydrolysis of the GTP associated with eIF2, an irreversible step
that prevents further scanning. Selection of the initiating AUG
is facilitated by specific surrounding nucleotides called the
Kozak sequence, for Marilyn Kozak, who defined it: (5)
ACCAUGG (3). The A preceding the AUG (underlined) and
the G immediately following it are the most important nucleotides affecting translation initiation efficiency. Once the
small ribosomal subunit with its bound Met-tRNAiMet is correctly positioned at the start codon, union with the large (60S)
ribosomal subunit completes formation of an 80S ribosome.
This requires the action of another factor (eIF5) and hydrolysis

and J. D. Richter, 2001, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:521.]

60S

40S

+

60S
6

40S
80S
eIF3

3
40S

3
40S
eIF1A

1

eIF2•GTP + Met-tRNA iMet
(ternary complex)

Met 2 -GTP
3

1A

Preinitiation complex
eIF4 (cap-binding complex)
+ mRNA

2

Met 2 -GTP
3

1A

m7Gppp

4E

4A
4B

AUG

(AAA)n

Initiation complex
2 structure
unwinding,
scanning, and
start site
recognition

ATP
3
ADP + Pi

Met

 FIGURE 4-25 Initiation of translation in eukaryotes.
(Inset) When a ribosome dissociates at the termination of
translation, the 40S and 60S subunits associate with initiation
factors eIF3 and eIF6, forming complexes that can initiate
another round of translation. Steps 1 and 2 : Sequential addition
of the indicated components to the 40S subunit–eIF3 complex
forms the initiation complex. Step 3 : Scanning of the mRNA by
the associated initiation complex leads to positioning of the
small subunit and bound Met-tRNAiMet at the start codon.
Step 4 : Association of the large subunit (60S) forms an 80S
ribosome ready to translate the mRNA. Two initiation factors, eIF2
(step 1 ) and eIF5 (step 4 ) are GTP-binding proteins, whose bound
GTP is hydrolyzed during translation initiation. The precise time
at which particular initiation factors are released is not yet well
characterized. See the text for details. [Adapted from R. Mendez

60S

4G

126

5

eIF1A, eIF3, eIF4 complex,
eIF2•GDP + Pi

(AAA)n 3

AUG

60S subunit-eIF6, eIF5•GTP
4
eIF6, eIF5•GDP + Pi

Met

AUG

P
80S ribosome

(AAA)n

4.5 • Stepwise Synthesis of Proteins on Ribosomes

At the completion of translation initiation, as noted already, Met-tRNAiMet is bound to the P site on the assembled
80S ribosome (Figure 4-26, top). This region of the ribosome
is called the P site because the tRNA chemically linked to the
growing polypeptide chain is located here. The second

Meti

5
E

P

A

Entry of next
aa-tRNA at
A site

EF1α •GTP

1

E

GTP hydrolysis,
ribosome
conformational
change

▲ FIGURE 4-26 Cycle of peptidyl chain elongation

Peptide bond
formation

▲

The correctly positioned eukaryotic 80S ribosome–MettRNAiMet complex is now ready to begin the task of stepwise
addition of amino acids by the in-frame translation of the
mRNA. As is the case with initiation, a set of special proteins,
termed elongation factors (EFs), are required to carry out this
process of chain elongation. The key steps in elongation are
entry of each succeeding aminoacyl-tRNA, formation of a
peptide bond, and the movement, or translocation, of the
ribosome one codon at a time along the mRNA.

2

P

A

2

EF1α •GDP + Pi

1 2

E

P

A

3

1

E

P

2

A
EF2•GTP

Ribosome
translocation

4
EF1α •GTP

EF1α
•
GTP

During Chain Elongation Each Incoming
Aminoacyl-tRNA Moves Through
Three Ribosomal Sites

from K. H. Nierhaus et al., 2000, in R. A. Garrett et al., eds., The
Ribosome: Structure, Function, Antibiotics, and Cellular Interactions,
ASM Press, p. 319.]

EF1α •GTP

2

1

during translation in eukaryotes. Once the 80S ribosome
with Met-tRNAiMet in the ribosome P site is assembled (top), a
ternary complex bearing the second amino acid (aa2) coded
by the mRNA binds to the A site (step 1 ). Following a
conformational change in the ribosome induced by hydrolysis of
GTP in EF1GTP (step 2 ), the large rRNA catalyzes peptide
bond formation between Meti and aa2 (step 3 ). Hydrolysis of
GTP in EF2GTP causes another conformational change in the
ribosome that results in its translocation one codon along the
mRNA and shifts the unacylated tRNAiMet to the E site and the
tRNA with the bound peptide to the P site (step 4 ). The cycle
can begin again with binding of a ternary complex bearing aa3
to the now-open A site. In the second and subsequent
elongation cycles, the tRNA at the E site is ejected during
step 2 as a result of the conformational change induced by
hydrolysis of GTP in EF1GTP. See the text for details. [Adapted

3

80S ribosome

4
EF2•GDP + Pi

1
2

E

P

A

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

1

Focus Animation: Protein Synthesis

of a GTP associated with it (step 4). Coupling the joining
reaction to GTP hydrolysis makes this an irreversible step, so
that the ribosomal subunits do not dissociate until the entire
mRNA is translated and protein synthesis is terminated. As discussed later, during chain elongation, the growing polypeptide
remains attached to the tRNA at this P site in the ribosome.
The eukaryotic protein-synthesizing machinery begins
translation of most cellular mRNAs within about 100 nucleotides of the 5 capped end as just described. However,
some cellular mRNAs contain an internal ribosome entry site
(IRES) located far downstream of the 5 end. In addition,
translation of some viral mRNAs, which lack a 5 cap, is initiated at IRESs by the host-cell machinery of infected eukaryotic cells. Some of the same translation initiation factors
that assist in ribosome scanning from a 5 cap are required
for locating an internal AUG start codon, but exactly how an
IRES is recognized is less clear. Recent results indicate that
some IRESs fold into an RNA structure that binds to a third
site on the ribosome, the E site, thereby positioning a nearby
internal AUG start codon in the P site.

127

128

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

aminoacyl-tRNA is brought into the ribosome as a ternary
complex in association with EF1GTP and becomes bound
to the A site, so named because it is where aminoacylated
tRNAs bind (step 1). If the anticodon of the incoming (second) aminoacyl-tRNA correctly base-pairs with the second
codon of the mRNA, the GTP in the associated EF1GTP is
hydrolyzed. The hydrolysis of GTP promotes a conformational change in the ribosome that leads to tight binding of
the aminoacyl-tRNA in the A site and release of the resulting
EF1GDP complex (step 2 ). This conformational change
also positions the aminoacylated 3 end of the tRNA in the A
site in close proximity to the 3 end of the Met-tRNAiMet in
the P site. GTP hydrolysis, and hence tight binding, does not
occur if the anticodon of the incoming aminoacyl-tRNA cannot base-pair with the codon at the A site. In this case, the
ternary complex diffuses away, leaving an empty A site that
can associate with other aminoacyltRNA–EF1GTP complexes until a correctly base-paired tRNA is bound. This phenomenon contributes to the fidelity with which the correct
aminoacyl-tRNA is loaded into the A site.
With the initiating Met-tRNAiMet at the P site and the
second aminoacyl-tRNA tightly bound at the A site, the 
amino group of the second amino acid reacts with the “activated” (ester-linked) methionine on the initiator tRNA,
forming a peptide bond (Figure 4-26, step 3 ; see Figures
4-19 and 4-21). This peptidyltransferase reaction is catalyzed
by the large rRNA, which precisely orients the interacting
atoms, permitting the reaction to proceed. The catalytic ability of the large rRNA in bacteria has been demonstrated by
carefully removing the vast majority of the protein from
large ribosomal subunits. The nearly pure bacterial 23S
rRNA can catalyze a peptidyltransferase reaction between
analogs of aminoacylated-tRNA and peptidyl-tRNA. Further
support for the catalytic role of large rRNA in protein synthesis comes from crystallographic studies showing that no
proteins lie near the site of peptide bond synthesis in the crystal structure of the bacterial large subunit.
Following peptide bond synthesis, the ribosome is
translocated along the mRNA a distance equal to one
codon. This translocation step is promoted by hydrolysis of the GTP in eukaryotic EF2GTP. As a result of
translocation, tRNAiMet, now without its activated methionine, is moved to the E (exit) site on the ribosome;
concurrently, the second tRNA, now covalently bound to
a dipeptide (a peptidyl-tRNA), is moved to the P site
(Figure 4-26, step 4). Translocation thus returns the ribosome conformation to a state in which the A site is
open and able to accept another aminoacylated tRNA
complexed with EF1GTP, beginning another cycle of
chain elongation.
Repetition of the elongation cycle depicted in Figure 4-26
adds amino acids one at a time to the C-terminus of the
growing polypeptide as directed by the mRNA sequence
until a stop codon is encountered. In subsequent cycles,
the conformational change that occurs in step 2 ejects the

unacylated tRNA from the E site. As the nascent polypeptide
chain becomes longer, it threads through a channel in the
large ribosomal subunit, exiting at a position opposite the
side that interacts with the small subunit (Figure 4-27).
The locations of tRNAs bound at the A, P, and E sites are
visible in the recently determined crystal structure of the bacterial ribosome (Figure 4-28). Base pairing is also apparent
between the tRNAs in the A and P sites with their respective
codons in mRNA (see Figure 4-28, inset). An RNA-RNA
hybrid of only three base pairs is not stable under physio-

(a)
50S

30S

70S

(b)
Polypeptide
50S

E
P
A

30S
5

mRNA
3

▲ FIGURE 4-27 Low-resolution model of E. coli 70S ribosome. (a) Top panels show cryoelectron microscopic images of
E. coli 70S ribosomes and 50S and 30S subunits. Bottom panels
show computer-derived averages of many dozens of images in
the same orientation. (b) Model of a 70S ribosome based on the
computer-derived images and on chemical cross-linking studies.
Three tRNAs are superimposed on the A (pink), P (green), and E
(yellow) sites. The nascent polypeptide chain is buried in a tunnel
in the large ribosomal subunit that begins close to the acceptor
stem of the tRNA in the P site. [See I. S. Gabashvili et al., 2000, Cell
100:537; courtesy of J. Frank.]

4.5 • Stepwise Synthesis of Proteins on Ribosomes
E

P

129

A

(a) 70S

▲ FIGURE 4-28 Structure of T. thermophilus 70S ribosome
as determined by x-ray crystallography. (a) Model of the entire
ribosome viewed from the side diagrammed in Figure 4-26
with large subunit on top and small subunit below. The tRNAs
positioned at the A (blue), P (yellow), and E (green) sites are
visible in the interface between the subunits with their anticodon
loops pointing down into the small subunit. 16S rRNA is cyan;
23S rRNA, purple; 5S rRNA, pink; mRNA, red; small ribosomal
proteins, dark gray; and large ribosomal proteins, light gray. Note
that the ribosomal proteins are located primarily on the surface
of the ribosome and the rRNAs on the inside. (b) View of the
large subunit rotated 90° about the horizontal from the view in
(a) showing the face that interacts with the small subunit. The
tRNA anticodon loops point out of the page. In the intact

logical conditions. However, multiple interactions between
the large and small rRNAs and general domains of tRNAs
(e.g., the D and T CG loops) stabilize the tRNAs in the A
and P sites, while other RNA-RNA interactions sense correct
codon-anticodon base pairing, assuring that the genetic code
is read properly.

Translation Is Terminated by Release Factors
When a Stop Codon Is Reached
The final stage of translation, like initiation and elongation,
requires highly specific molecular signals that decide the fate
of the mRNA–ribosome–tRNA-peptidyl complex. Two types
of specific protein release factors (RFs) have been discovered.
Eukaryotic eRF1, whose shape is similar to that of tRNAs,
apparently acts by binding to the ribosomal A site and recognizing stop codons directly. Like some of the initiation and
elongation factors discussed previously, the second eukaryotic release factor, eRF3, is a GTP-binding protein. The
eRF3GTP acts in concert with eRF1 to promote cleavage of
the peptidyl-tRNA, thus releasing the completed protein

(b) 50S

(c) 30S

ribosome, these extend into the small subunit where the
anticodons of the tRNAs in the A and P sites base-pair with
codons in the mRNA. (c) View of the face of the small subunit
that interacts with the large subunit in (b). Here the tRNA
anticodon loops point into the page. The T CG loops and
acceptor stems extend out of the page and the 3 CCA ends of
the tRNAs in the A and P sites point downward. Note the close
opposition of the acceptor stems of tRNAs in the A and P sites,
which allows the amino group of the acylated tRNA in the A site
to react with the carboxyl-terminal C of the peptidyl-tRNA in the
P site (see Figure 4-19). In the intact ribosome, these are located
at the peptidyltransferase active site of the large subunit. [Adapted
from M. M. Yusupov et al., 2001, Science 292:883.]

chain (Figure 4-29). Bacteria have two release factors (RF1
and RF2) that are functionally analogous to eRF1 and a
GTP-binding factor (RF3) that is analogous to eRF3.
After its release from the ribosome, a newly synthesized
protein folds into its native three-dimensional conformation,
a process facilitated by other proteins called chaperones
(Chapter 3). Additional release factors then promote dissociation of the ribosome, freeing the subunits, mRNA, and terminal tRNA for another round of translation.
We can now see that one or more GTP-binding proteins
participate in each stage of translation. These proteins belong to the GTPase superfamily of switch proteins that cycle
between a GTP-bound active form and GDP-bound inactive
form (see Figure 3-29). Hydrolysis of the bound GTP is
thought to cause conformational changes in the GTPase itself
or other associated proteins that are critical to various complex molecular processes. In translation initiation, for instance, hydrolysis of eIF2GTP to eIF2GDP prevents further
scanning of the mRNA once the start site is encountered and
allows binding of the large ribosomal subunit to the small
subunit (see Figure 4-25, step 3 ). Similarly, hydrolysis of

130

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

5

3

UAA

E

P

A
eRF1 + eRF3•GTP

eRF3 -GTP

eRF1

5

UAA

E

Peptidyl-tRNA
cleavage

P

3

A

eRF1 + eRF3•GDP + Pi

disengage from the 3 end of an mRNA. Simultaneous translation of an mRNA by multiple ribosomes is readily observable in electron micrographs and by sedimentation analysis,
revealing mRNA attached to multiple ribosomes bearing
nascent growing polypeptide chains. These structures, referred to as polyribosomes or polysomes, were seen to be circular in electron micrographs of some tissues. Subsequent
studies with yeast cells explained the circular shape of polyribosomes and suggested the mode by which ribosomes recycle efficiently.
These studies revealed that multiple copies of a cytosolic
protein found in all eukaryotic cells, poly(A)-binding protein
(PABPI), can interact with both an mRNA poly(A) tail and
the 4G subunit of yeast eIF4. Moreover, the 4E subunit of
yeast eIF4 binds to the 5 end of an mRNA. As a result of
these interactions, the two ends of an mRNA molecule can
be bridged by the intervening proteins, forming a “circular”
mRNA (Figure 4-30). Because the two ends of a polysome
are relatively close together, ribosomal subunits that disengage from the 3 end are positioned near the 5 end, facilitating re-initiation by the interaction of the 40S subunit with
eIF4 bound to the 5 cap. The circular pathway depicted in
Figure 4-31, which may operate in many eukaryotic cells,
would enhance ribosome recycling and thus increase the efficiency of protein synthesis.

▲ FIGURE 4-29 Termination of translation in eukaryotes.
When a ribosome bearing a nascent protein chain reaches a
stop codon (UAA, UGA, UAG), release factor eRF1 enters the
ribosomal complex, probably at or near the A site together with
eRF3GTP. Hydrolysis of the bound GTP is accompanied by
cleavage of the peptide chain from the tRNA in the P site and
release of the tRNAs and the two ribosomal subunits.

EF2GTP to EF2GDP during chain elongation leads to
translocation of the ribosome along the mRNA (see Figure
4-26, step 4).

Polysomes and Rapid Ribosome Recycling
Increase the Efficiency of Translation
As noted earlier, translation of a single eukaryotic mRNA
molecule to yield a typical-sized protein takes 30–60 seconds. Two phenomena significantly increase the overall rate
at which cells can synthesize a protein: the simultaneous
translation of a single mRNA molecule by multiple ribosomes and rapid recycling of ribosomal subunits after they

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-30 Eukaryotic mRNA forms
a circular structure owing to interactions of three proteins.
In the presence of purified poly(A)-binding protein I (PABPI),
eIF4E, and eIF4G, eukaryotic mRNAs form circular structures,
visible in this force-field electron micrograph. In these structures,
protein-protein and protein-mRNA interactions form a bridge
between the 5 and 3 ends of the mRNA as diagrammed in
Figure 4-31. [Courtesy of A. Sachs.]

4.6 • DNA Replication

60S

PABPI PABPI

mRNA

AAA A A
A
3 A A

80S

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 4.5
Stepwise Synthesis of Proteins on Ribosomes
Of the two methionine tRNAs found in all cells, only
one (tRNAiMet) functions in initiation of translation.

▲ FIGURE 4-31 Model of protein synthesis on
circular polysomes and recycling of ribosomal
subunits. Multiple individual ribosomes can
simultaneously translate a eukaryotic mRNA, shown
here in circular form stabilized by interactions between
proteins bound at the 3 and 5 ends. When a
ribosome completes translation and dissociates from
the 3 end, the separated subunits can rapidly find the
nearby 5 cap (m7G) and initiate another round of
synthesis.

▲

elF4G

bring the two ends of a polyribosome close together,
thereby promoting the rapid recycling of ribosomal subunits, which further increases the efficiency of protein synthesis (see Figure 4-31).

■

Each stage of translation—initiation, chain elongation,
and termination—requires specific protein factors including GTP-binding proteins that hydrolyze their bound GTP
to GDP when a step has been completed successfully.

■

During initiation, the ribosomal subunits assemble near
the translation start site in an mRNA molecule with the
tRNA carrying the amino-terminal methionine (Met-tRNAiMet)
base-paired with the start codon (Figure 4-25).
■

Chain elongation entails a repetitive four-step cycle: loose
binding of an incoming aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site on
the ribosome; tight binding of the correct aminoacyl-tRNA
to the A site accompanied by release of the previously used
tRNA from the E site; transfer of the growing peptidyl chain
to the incoming amino acid catalyzed by large rRNA; and
translocation of the ribosome to the next codon, thereby
moving the peptidyl-tRNA in the A site to the P site and
the now unacylated tRNA in the P site to the E site (see
Figure 4-26).

■

In each cycle of chain elongation, the ribosome undergoes
two conformational changes monitored by GTP-binding
proteins. The first permits tight binding of the incoming
aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site and ejection of a tRNA from
the E site, and the second leads to translocation.

■

Termination of translation is carried out by two types
of termination factors: those that recognize stop codons
and those that promote hydrolysis of peptidyl-tRNA (see
Figure 4-29).

■

The efficiency of protein synthesis is increased by the simultaneous translation of a single mRNA by multiple ribosomes. In eukaryotic cells, protein-mediated interactions

■

4.6 DNA Replication
Now that we have seen how genetic information encoded in
the nucleotide sequences of DNA is translated into the structures of proteins that perform most cell functions, we can appreciate the necessity of the precise copying of DNA
sequences during DNA replication (see Figure 4-1, step 4).
The regular pairing of bases in the double-helical DNA structure suggested to Watson and Crick that new DNA strands
are synthesized by using the existing (parental) strands as
templates in the formation of new, daughter strands complementary to the parental strands.
This base-pairing template model theoretically could proceed either by a conservative or a semiconservative mechanism. In a conservative mechanism, the two daughter strands
would form a new double-stranded (duplex) DNA molecule
and the parental duplex would remain intact. In a semiconservative mechanism, the parental strands are permanently
separated and each forms a duplex molecule with the daughter strand base-paired to it. Definitive evidence that duplex
DNA is replicated by a semiconservative mechanism came
from a now classic experiment conducted by M. Meselson
and W. F. Stahl, outlined in Figure 4-32.
Copying of a DNA template strand into a complementary strand thus is a common feature of DNA replication and
transcription of DNA into RNA. In both cases, the information in the template is preserved. In some viruses, singlestranded RNA molecules function as templates for synthesis
of complementary RNA or DNA strands. However, the vast
preponderance of RNA and DNA in cells is synthesized from
preexisting duplex DNA.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

5
m7G elF4E

Overview Animation: Life Cycle
of an mRNA

40S

131

132

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
(b) Actual results

(a) Predicted results
Conservative mechanism

Density

Semiconservative mechanism

Density

Generation
0
Parental strands
synthesized in 15N

0.3

H

H

H

0.7

H

1.0
New

New
Old

1.1

After first
doubling in 14N

1.5
1.9
H

H

L

L

H

L

L

H

2.5
3.0
4.1

After second
doubling in 14N

0 and 1.9
mixed
0 and 4.1
mixed
H

H

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-32 The Meselson-Stahl
experiment showed that DNA replicates by a
semiconservative mechanism. In this experiment, E. coli
cells initially were grown in a medium containing ammonium
salts prepared with “heavy” nitrogen (15N) until all the cellular
DNA was labeled. After the cells were transferred to a medium
containing the normal “light” isotope (14N), samples were
removed periodically from the cultures and the DNA in each
sample was analyzed by equilibrium density-gradient
centrifugation (see Figure 5-37). This technique can separate
heavy-heavy (H-H), light-light (L-L), and heavy-light (H-L) duplexes
into distinct bands. (a) Expected composition of daughter duplex
molecules synthesized from 15N-labeled DNA after E. coli cells
are shifted to 14N-containing medium if DNA replication occurs
by a conservative or semiconservative mechanism. Parental
heavy (H) strands are in red; light (L) strands synthesized after
shift to 14N-containing medium are in blue. Note that the
conservative mechanism never generates H-L DNA and that
the semiconservative mechanism never generates H-H DNA
but does generate H-L DNA during the second and subsequent
doublings. With additional replication cycles, the 15N-labeled (H)
strands from the original DNA are diluted, so that the vast bulk
of the DNA would consist of L-L duplexes with either

DNA Polymerases Require a Primer
to Initiate Replication
Analogous to RNA, DNA is synthesized from deoxynucleoside 5-triphosphate precursors (dNTPs). Also like RNA synthesis, DNA synthesis always proceeds in the 5n3

H

L

L

H

L

L

L-L H-L H-H

L-L H-L

H-H

mechanism. (b) Actual banding patterns of DNA subjected
to equilibrium density-gradient centrifugation before and after
shifting 15N-labeled E. coli cells to 14N-containing medium.
DNA bands were visualized under UV light and photographed.
The traces on the left are a measure of the density of the
photographic signal, and hence the DNA concentration, along
the length of the centrifuge cells from left to right. The number
of generations (far left) following the shift to 14N-containing
medium was determined by counting the concentration of
E. coli cells in the culture. This value corresponds to the number
of DNA replication cycles that had occurred at the time each
sample was taken. After one generation of growth, all the
extracted DNA had the density of H-L DNA. After 1.9
generations, approximately half the DNA had the density of H-L
DNA; the other half had the density of L-L DNA. With additional
generations, a larger and larger fraction of the extracted DNA
consisted of L-L duplexes; H-H duplexes never appeared. These
results match the predicted pattern for the semiconservative
replication mechanism depicted in (a). The bottom two centrifuge
cells contained mixtures of H-H DNA and DNA isolated at 1.9
and 4.1 generations in order to clearly show the positions of H-H,
H-L, and L-L DNA in the density gradient. [Part (b) from
M. Meselson and F. W. Stahl, 1958, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 44:671.]

direction because chain growth results from formation of a
phosphoester bond between the 3 oxygen of a growing
strand and the  phosphate of a dNTP (see Figure 4-9). As
discussed earlier, an RNA polymerase can find an appropriate transcription start site on duplex DNA and initiate the

4.6 • DNA Replication

Primer
5

up
le
x
rd

Point of joining

au

gh

te

Lagging strand
Okazaki fragment

3
5

Parental DNA duplex

Short RNA primer

Direction of fork
movement

3

3

5
3

D

synthesis of an RNA complementary to the template DNA
strand (see Figure 4-10). In contrast, DNA polymerases cannot initiate chain synthesis de novo; instead, they require a
short, preexisting RNA or DNA strand, called a primer, to
begin chain growth. With a primer base-paired to the template strand, a DNA polymerase adds deoxynucleotides to
the free hydroxyl group at the 3 end of the primer as directed by the sequence of the template strand:

133

Leading strand

5
Template strand

When RNA is the primer, the daughter strand that is formed
is RNA at the 5 end and DNA at the 3 end.

Duplex DNA Is Unwound, and Daughter Strands
Are Formed at the DNA Replication Fork
In order for duplex DNA to function as a template during
replication, the two intertwined strands must be unwound,
or melted, to make the bases available for base pairing with
the bases of the dNTPs that are polymerized into the newly
synthesized daughter strands. This unwinding of the
parental DNA strands is by specific helicases, beginning at
unique segments in a DNA molecule called replication origins, or simply origins. The nucleotide sequences of origins
from different organisms vary greatly, although they usually
contain AT-rich sequences. Once helicases have unwound
the parental DNA at an origin, a specialized RNA polymerase called primase forms a short RNA primer complementary to the unwound template strands. The primer, still
base-paired to its complementary DNA strand, is then elongated by a DNA polymerase, thereby forming a new daughter strand.
The DNA region at which all these proteins come together to carry out synthesis of daughter strands is called the
replication fork, or growing fork. As replication proceeds,
the growing fork and associated proteins move away from
the origin. As noted earlier, local unwinding of duplex DNA
produces torsional stress, which is relieved by topoisomerase
I. In order for DNA polymerases to move along and copy a
duplex DNA, helicase must sequentially unwind the duplex
and topoisomerase must remove the supercoils that form.
A major complication in the operation of a DNA replication fork arises from two properties: the two strands of the
parental DNA duplex are antiparallel, and DNA polymerases (like RNA polymerases) can add nucleotides to the
growing new strands only in the 5n3 direction. Synthesis
of one daughter strand, called the leading strand, can proceed continuously from a single RNA primer in the 5n3
direction, the same direction as movement of the replication
fork (Figure 4-33). The problem comes in synthesis of the
other daughter strand, called the lagging strand.

5
3

▲ FIGURE 4-33 Schematic diagram of leading-strand
and lagging-strand DNA synthesis at a replication fork.
Nucleotides are added by a DNA polymerase to each growing
daughter strand in the 5n3 direction (indicated by arrowheads).
The leading strand is synthesized continuously from a single
RNA primer (red) at its 5 end. The lagging strand is synthesized
discontinuously from multiple RNA primers that are formed
periodically as each new region of the parental duplex is
unwound. Elongation of these primers initially produces Okazaki
fragments. As each growing fragment approaches the previous
primer, the primer is removed and the fragments are ligated.
Repetition of this process eventually results in synthesis of the
entire lagging strand.

Because growth of the lagging strand must occur in the
5n3 direction, copying of its template strand must somehow occur in the opposite direction from the movement of
the replication fork. A cell accomplishes this feat by synthesizing a new primer every few hundred bases or so on the second parental strand, as more of the strand is exposed by
unwinding. Each of these primers, base-paired to their template strand, is elongated in the 5n3 direction, forming
discontinuous segments called Okazaki fragments after their
discoverer Reiji Okazaki (see Figure 4-33). The RNA primer
of each Okazaki fragment is removed and replaced by DNA
chain growth from the neighboring Okazaki fragment;
finally an enzyme called DNA ligase joins the adjacent
fragments.

Helicase, Primase, DNA Polymerases, and Other
Proteins Participate in DNA Replication
Detailed understanding of the eukaryotic proteins that participate in DNA replication has come largely from studies
with small viral DNAs, particularly SV40 DNA, the circular
genome of a small virus that infects monkeys. Figure 4-34
depicts the multiple proteins that coordinate copying of
SV40 DNA at a replication fork. The assembled proteins at
a replication fork further illustrate the concept of molecular
machines introduced in Chapter 3. These multicomponent

134

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

(a) SV40 DNA replication fork
3
5

1 Large Tantigen

Pol 
4

Lagging strand

Primase

Primer

5 Pol 
Rfc
PCNA
5
3

Di
m rect
ov ion
em o
en f fo
t
rk

(b) PCNA
RPA
2

Pol 
Rfc
3
PCNA

Doublestranded
DNA

Leading strand

(c) RPA

Singlestranded
DNA

3
5

▲ FIGURE 4-34 Model of an SV40 DNA replication fork
and assembled proteins. (a) A hexamer of large T-antigen ( 1 ),
a viral protein, functions as a helicase to unwind the parental
DNA strands. Single-strand regions of the parental template
unwound by large T-antigen are bound by multiple copies of the
heterotrimeric protein RPA ( 2 ). The leading strand is synthesized
by a complex of DNA polymerase  (Pol ), PCNA, and Rfc ( 3 ).
Primers for lagging-strand synthesis (red, RNA; light blue, DNA)
are synthesized by a complex of DNA polymerase  (Pol )
and primase ( 4 ). The 3 end of each primer synthesized by Pol
–primase is then bound by a PCNA-Rfc–Pol  complex, which
proceeds to extend the primer and synthesize most of each
Okazaki fragment ( 5 ). See the text for details. (b) The three
subunits of PCNA, shown in different colors, form a circular

complexes permit the cell to carry out an ordered sequence
of events that accomplish essential cell functions.
In the molecular machine that replicates SV40 DNA, a
hexamer of a viral protein called large T-antigen unwinds the
parental strands at a replication fork. All other proteins involved in SV40 DNA replication are provided by the host
cell. Primers for leading and lagging daughter-strand DNA
are synthesized by a complex of primase, which synthesizes a

structure with a central hole through which double-stranded DNA
passes. A diagram of DNA is shown in the center of a ribbon
model of the PCNA trimer. (c) The large subunit of RPA contains
two domains that bind single-stranded DNA. On the left, the two
DNA-binding domains of RPA are shown perpendicular to the
DNA backbone (white backbone with blue bases). Note that the
single DNA strand is extended with the bases exposed, an optimal conformation for replication by a DNA polymerase. On the
right, the view is down the length of the single DNA strand, revealing how RPA  strands wrap around the DNA. [Part (a) adapted
from S. J. Flint et al., 2000, Virology: Molecular Biology, Pathogenesis,
and Control, ASM Press; part (b) after J. M. Gulbis et al., 1996, Cell
87:297; and part (c) after A. Bochkarev et al., 1997, Nature 385:176.]

short RNA primer, and DNA polymerase  (Pol ), which
extends the RNA primer with deoxynucleotides, forming a
mixed RNA-DNA primer.
The primer is extended into daughter-strand DNA by
DNA polymerase  (Pol ), which is less likely to make
errors during copying of the template strand than is Pol .
Pol  forms a complex with Rfc (replication factor C) and
PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen), which displaces

4.6 • DNA Replication

Origin

EcoRl
restriction
site
EcoRl

Circular viral
chromosome

Replication
bubble
Time of replication

the primase–Pol  complex following primer synthesis. As
illustrated in Figure 4-34b, PCNA is a homotrimeric protein
that has a central hole through which the daughter duplex
DNA passes, thereby preventing the PCNA-Rfc–Pol  complex from dissociating from the template.
After parental DNA is separated into single-stranded
templates at the replication fork, it is bound by multiple
copies of RPA (replication protein A), a heterotrimeric
protein (Figure 4-34c). Binding of RPA maintains the template in a uniform conformation optimal for copying by
DNA polymerases. Bound RPA proteins are dislodged from
the parental strands by Pol  and Pol  as they synthesize
the complementary strands base-paired with the parental
strands.
Several eukaryotic proteins that function in DNA replication are not depicted in Figure 4-34. A topoisomerase associates with the parental DNA ahead of the helicase to
remove torsional stress introduced by the unwinding of the
parental strands. Ribonuclease H and FEN I remove the ribonucleotides at the 5 ends of Okazaki fragments; these are
replaced by deoxynucleotides added by DNA polymerase 
as it extends the upstream Okazaki fragment. Successive
Okazaki fragments are coupled by DNA ligase through standard 5n3 phosphoester bonds.

135

DNA Replication Generally Occurs Bidirectionally
from Each Origin
As indicated in Figures 4-33 and 4-34, both parental
DNA strands that are exposed by local unwinding at a replication fork are copied into a daughter strand. In theory,
DNA replication from a single origin could involve one replication fork that moves in one direction. Alternatively, two
replication forks might assemble at a single origin and then
move in opposite directions, leading to bidirectional growth
of both daughter strands. Several types of experiments, including the one shown in Figure 4-35, provided early evidence in support of bidirectional strand growth.
The general consensus is that all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells employ a bidirectional mechanism of DNA
replication. In the case of SV40 DNA, replication is initiated
by binding of two large T-antigen hexameric helicases to the
single SV40 origin and assembly of other proteins to form
two replication forks. These then move away from the SV40
origin in opposite directions with leading- and lagging-strand
synthesis occurring at both forks. As shown in Figure 4-36,
the left replication fork extends DNA synthesis in the leftward direction; similarly, the right replication fork extends
DNA synthesis in the rightward direction.
Unlike SV40 DNA, eukaryotic chromosomal DNA molecules contain multiple replication origins separated by tens
to hundreds of kilobases. A six-subunit protein called ORC,
for origin recognition complex, binds to each origin and associates with other proteins required to load cellular hexameric helicases composed of six homologous MCM proteins.

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-35 Electron microscopy of
replicating SV40 DNA indicates bidirectional growth of DNA
strands from an origin. The replicating viral DNA from SV40infected cells was cut by the restriction enzyme EcoRI, which
recognizes one site in the circular DNA. Electron micrographs of
treated samples showed a collection of cut molecules with
increasingly longer replication “bubbles,” whose centers are a
constant distance from each end of the cut molecules. This
finding is consistent with chain growth in two directions from a
common origin located at the center of a bubble, as illustrated in
the corresponding diagrams. [See G. C. Fareed et al., 1972, J. Virol.
10:484; photographs courtesy of N. P. Salzman.]

Two opposed MCM helicases separate the parental strands
at an origin, with RPA proteins binding to the resulting single-stranded DNA. Synthesis of primers and subsequent
steps in replication of cellular DNA are thought to be analogous to those in SV40 DNA replication (see Figures 4-34
and 4-36).
Replication of cellular DNA and other events leading to
proliferation of cells are tightly regulated, so that the appropriate numbers of cells constituting each tissue are produced
during development and throughout the life of an organism.
As in transcription of most genes, control of the initiation

136

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

 FIGURE 4-36 Bidirectional mechanism of DNA

Helicases

1

Unwinding

2

Leading-strand primer synthesis

3

Leading-strand extension

4

Unwinding

5

Leading-strand extension

replication. The left replication fork here is comparable to the
replication fork diagrammed in Figure 4-34, which also shows
proteins other than large T-antigen. (Top) Two large T-antigen
hexameric helicases first bind at the replication origin in opposite
orientations. Step 1 : Using energy provided from ATP hydrolysis,
the helicases move in opposite directions, unwinding the parental
DNA and generating single-strand templates that are bound by
RPA proteins. Step 2 : Primase–Pol  complexes synthesize short
primers base-paired to each of the separated parental strands.
Step 3 : PCNA-Rfc–Pol  complexes replace the primase–Pol 
complexes and extend the short primers, generating the leading
strands (dark green) at each replication fork. Step 4 : The
helicases further unwind the parental strands, and RPA proteins
bind to the newly exposed single-strand regions. Step 5 :
PCNA-Rfc–Pol  complexes extend the leading strands further.
Step 6 : Primase–Pol  complexes synthesize primers for
lagging-strand synthesis at each replication fork. Step 7 :
PCNA-Rfc–Pol  complexes displace the primase–Pol 
complexes and extend the lagging-strand Okazaki fragments
(light green), which eventually are ligated to the 5 ends of the
leading strands. The position where ligation occurs is represented
by a circle. Replication continues by further unwinding of the
parental strands and synthesis of leading and lagging strands
as in steps 4 – 7 . Although depicted as individual steps for
clarity, unwinding and synthesis of leading and lagging strands
occur concurrently.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 4.6
DNA Replication
6

Lagging-strand primer synthesis

Each strand in a parental duplex DNA acts as a template for synthesis of a daughter strand and remains basepaired to the new strand, forming a daughter duplex (semiconservative mechanism). New strands are formed in the
5n3 direction.

■

Replication begins at a sequence called an origin. Each
eukaryotic chromosomal DNA molecule contains multiple
replication origins.

■

7

Lagging-strand extension

DNA polymerases, unlike RNA polymerases, cannot unwind the strands of duplex DNA and cannot initiate synthesis of new strands complementary to the template
strands.

■

Strand ligation

At a replication fork, one daughter strand (the leading
strand) is elongated continuously. The other daughter
strand (the lagging strand) is formed as a series of discontinuous Okazaki fragments from primers synthesized every
few hundred nucleotides (Figure 4-33).

■

step is the primary mechanism for regulating cellular DNA
replication. Activation of MCM helicase activity, which is
required to initiate cellular DNA replication, is regulated
by specific protein kinases called S-phase cyclin-dependent
kinases. Other cyclin-dependent kinases regulate additional
aspects of cell proliferation, including the complex process of
mitosis by which a eukaryotic cell divides into two daughter
cells. We discuss the various regulatory mechanisms that determine the rate of cell division in Chapter 21.

■ The ribonucleotides at the 5 end of each Okazaki fragment are removed and replaced by elongation of the 3 end
of the next Okazaki fragment. Finally, adjacent Okazaki
fragments are joined by DNA ligase.

Helicases use energy from ATP hydrolysis to separate
the parental (template) DNA strands. Primase synthesizes

■

4.7 • Viruses: Parasites of the Cellular Genetic System

a short RNA primer, which remains base-paired to the template DNA. This initially is extended at the 3 end by DNA
polymerase  (Pol ), resulting in a short (5)RNA(3)DNA daughter strand.
■ Most of the DNA in eukaryotic cells is synthesized by Pol
, which takes over from Pol  and continues elongation of
the daughter strand in the 5n3 direction. Pol  remains
stably associated with the template by binding to Rfc protein, which in turn binds to PCNA, a trimeric protein that
encircles the daughter duplex DNA (see Figure 4-34).

DNA replication generally occurs by a bidirectional
mechanism in which two replication forks form at an origin and move in opposite directions, with both template
strands being copied at each fork (see Figure 4-36).

■

Synthesis of eukaryotic DNA in vivo is regulated by controlling the activity of the MCM helicases that initiate
DNA replication at multiple origins spaced along chromosomal DNA.

■

4.7 Viruses: Parasites of the Cellular
Genetic System
Viruses cannot reproduce by themselves and must commandeer a host cell’s machinery to synthesize viral proteins and
in some cases to replicate the viral genome. RNA viruses,
which usually replicate in the host-cell cytoplasm, have an
RNA genome, and DNA viruses, which commonly replicate
in the host-cell nucleus, have a DNA genome (see Figure
4-1). Viral genomes may be single- or double-stranded, depending on the specific type of virus. The entire infectious
virus particle, called a virion, consists of the nucleic acid and
an outer shell of protein. The simplest viruses contain only
enough RNA or DNA to encode four proteins; the most
complex can encode 100–200 proteins. In addition to their
obvious importance as causes of disease, viruses are extremely useful as research tools in the study of basic biological processes.

Most Viral Host Ranges Are Narrow
The surface of a virion contains many copies of one type of
protein that binds specifically to multiple copies of a receptor
protein on a host cell. This interaction determines the host
range—the group of cell types that a virus can infect—and
begins the infection process. Most viruses have a rather limited host range.
A virus that infects only bacteria is called a bacteriophage, or simply a phage. Viruses that infect animal or plant
cells are referred to generally as animal viruses or plant
viruses. A few viruses can grow in both plants and the insects
that feed on them. The highly mobile insects serve as vectors
for transferring such viruses between susceptible plant hosts.
Wide host ranges are also characteristic of some strictly ani-

137

mal viruses, such as vesicular stomatitis virus, which grows
in insect vectors and in many different types of mammals.
Most animal viruses, however, do not cross phyla, and some
(e.g., poliovirus) infect only closely related species such as
primates. The host-cell range of some animal viruses is further restricted to a limited number of cell types because only
these cells have appropriate surface receptors to which the
virions can attach.

Viral Capsids Are Regular Arrays of One
or a Few Types of Protein
The nucleic acid of a virion is enclosed within a protein coat,
or capsid, composed of multiple copies of one protein or a
few different proteins, each of which is encoded by a single
viral gene. Because of this structure, a virus is able to encode
all the information for making a relatively large capsid in a
small number of genes. This efficient use of genetic information is important, since only a limited amount of RNA or
DNA, and therefore a limited number of genes, can fit into
a virion capsid. A capsid plus the enclosed nucleic acid is
called a nucleocapsid.
Nature has found two basic ways of arranging the multiple capsid protein subunits and the viral genome into a nucleocapsid. In some viruses, multiple copies of a single coat
protein form a helical structure that encloses and protects the
viral RNA or DNA, which runs in a helical groove within the
protein tube. Viruses with such a helical nucleocapsid, such
as tobacco mosaic virus, have a rodlike shape. The other
major structural type is based on the icosahedron, a solid,
approximately spherical object built of 20 identical faces,
each of which is an equilateral triangle.
The number and arrangement of coat proteins in icosahedral, or quasi-spherical, viruses differ somewhat depending on their size. In small viruses of this type, each of the 20
triangular faces is constructed of three identical capsid protein subunits, making a total of 60 subunits per capsid. All
the protein subunits are in equivalent contact with one another (Figure 4-37a). In large quasi-spherical viruses, each
face of the icosahedron is composed of more than three subunits. As a result, the contacts between subunits not at the
vertices are quasi-equivalent (Figure 4-37b). Models of several quasi-spherical viruses, based on cryoelectron microscopy, are shown in Figure 4-37. In the smaller viruses (e.g.,
poliovirus), clefts that encircle each of the vertices of the
icosahedral structure interact with receptors on the surface
of host cells during infection. In the larger viruses (e.g., adenovirus), long fiberlike proteins extending from the nucleocapsid interact with cell-surface receptors on host cells.
In many DNA bacteriophages, the viral DNA is located
within an icosahedral “head” that is attached to a rodlike
“tail.” During infection, viral proteins at the tip of the tail
bind to host-cell receptors, and then the viral DNA passes
down the tail into the cytoplasm of the host cell.
In some viruses, the symmetrically arranged nucleocapsid is covered by an external membrane, or envelope, which

138

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
(a) Small icosahedral viruses

(b) A large icosahedral virus

2 1
5
3 4
5 1 2
4

3

SV40

10 nm

Poliovirus

CPMV

▲ FIGURE 4-37 Structures of quasi-spherical (icosahedral)
viruses. The actual shape of the protein subunits in these viruses
is not a flat triangle as illustrated in the schematic diagrams, but
the overall effect when the subunits are assembled is of a roughly
spherical structure with triangular faces. The three-dimensional
models are all shown at the same magnification. (a) In the
simplest and smallest quasi-spherical viruses, three identical
capsid protein subunits form each triangular face (red) of the
icosahedron (schematic). The subunits meet in fivefold symmetry
at each vertex. Models of three such viruses are shown: poliovirus,
a human RNA virus; cowpea mosaic virus (CPMV), a plant RNA
virus; and simian virus 40 (SV40), a monkey DNA virus. (b) In some
larger viruses of this type, each triangular face is composed of six
subunits. The subunits at the vertices maintain fivefold symmetry,
but those making up the surfaces in between exhibit sixfold
symmetry. A model of adenovirus, a human DNA virus, illustrates
how much larger it is than the viruses in part (a) and shows the
fibers (green) that bind to receptors on host cells. [See P. L. Stewart

Adenovirus

2
1

3
6

4
5

5 1 2
3

et al., 1997, EMBO J. 16:1189. Models of CPMV, poliovirus, and SV40
courtesy of T. S. Baker; model of adenovirus courtesy of P. L. Stewart.]

consists mainly of a phospholipid bilayer but also contains
one or two types of virus-encoded glycoproteins (Figure
4-38). The phospholipids in the viral envelope are similar to
those in the plasma membrane of an infected host cell. The
viral envelope is, in fact, derived by budding from that membrane, but contains mainly viral glycoproteins, as we discuss
shortly.

Viruses Can Be Cloned and Counted
in Plaque Assays

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-38 Viral protein spikes
protrude from the surface of an influenza virus virion.
Influenza viruses are surrounded by an envelope consisting of a
phospholipid bilayer and embedded viral proteins. The large spikes
seen in this electron micrograph of a negatively stained influenza
virion are composed of neuraminidase, a tetrameric protein, or
hemagglutinin, a trimeric protein (see Figure 3-7). Inside is the
helical nucleocapsid. [Courtesy of A. Helenius and J. White.]

The number of infectious viral particles in a sample can be
quantified by a plaque assay. This assay is performed by culturing a dilute sample of viral particles on a plate covered
with host cells and then counting the number of local lesions, called plaques, that develop (Figure 4-39). A plaque
develops on the plate wherever a single virion initially infects a single cell. The virus replicates in this initial host cell
and then lyses (ruptures) the cell, releasing many progeny
virions that infect the neighboring cells on the plate. After
a few such cycles of infection, enough cells are lysed to pro-

4.7 • Viruses: Parasites of the Cellular Genetic System
(a)

Confluent layer of susceptible host cells
growing on surface of a plate

139

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-39 Plaque assay determines
the number of infectious particles in a viral suspension.
(a) Each lesion, or plaque, which develops where a single virion
initially infected a single cell, constitutes a pure viral clone.
(b) Plate illuminated from behind shows plaques formed by
bacteriophage  plated on E. coli. (c) Plate showing plaques
produced by poliovirus plated on HeLa cells. [Part (b) courtesy of
Barbara Morris; part (c) from S. E. Luria et al., 1978, General Virology,
3d ed., Wiley, p. 26.]

Add dilute suspension containing virus;
after infection, cover layer of cells
with agar; incubate
(b)

Plaque

(c)

Plaque

Plaque

Each plaque represents cell lysis initiated by one viral
particle (agar restricts movement so that virus can
infect only contiguous cells)

duce a visible clear area, or plaque, in the layer of remaining
uninfected cells.
Since all the progeny virions in a plaque are derived from
a single parental virus, they constitute a virus clone. This
type of plaque assay is in standard use for bacterial and animal viruses. Plant viruses can be assayed similarly by counting local lesions on plant leaves inoculated with viruses.
Analysis of viral mutants, which are commonly isolated by
plaque assays, has contributed extensively to current understanding of molecular cellular processes. The plaque assay
also is critical in isolating bacteriophage  clones carrying
segments of cellular DNA, as discussed in Chapter 9.

Lytic Viral Growth Cycles Lead to Death
of Host Cells
Although details vary among different types of viruses, those
that exhibit a lytic cycle of growth proceed through the
following general stages:
1. Adsorption—Virion interacts with a host cell by binding
of multiple copies of capsid protein to specific receptors on
the cell surface.
2. Penetration—Viral genome crosses the plasma membrane.
For animal and plant viruses, viral proteins also enter the
host cell.
3. Replication—Viral mRNAs are produced with the aid
of the host-cell transcription machinery (DNA viruses) or
by viral enzymes (RNA viruses). For both types of viruses,
viral mRNAs are translated by the host-cell translation
machinery. Production of multiple copies of the viral

genome is carried out either by viral proteins alone or
with the help of host-cell proteins.
4. Assembly—Viral proteins and replicated genomes
associate to form progeny virions.
5. Release—Infected cell either ruptures suddenly (lysis),
releasing all the newly formed virions at once, or disintegrates gradually, with slow release of virions.
Figure 4-40 illustrates the lytic cycle for T4 bacteriophage, a nonenveloped DNA virus that infects E. coli. Viral
capsid proteins generally are made in large amounts because
many copies of them are required for the assembly of each
progeny virion. In each infected cell, about 100–200 T4
progeny virions are produced and released by lysis.
The lytic cycle is somewhat more complicated for DNA
viruses that infect eukaryotic cells. In most such viruses, the
DNA genome is transported (with some associated proteins)
into the cell nucleus. Once inside the nucleus, the viral DNA
is transcribed into RNA by the host’s transcription machinery. Processing of the viral RNA primary transcript by hostcell enzymes yields viral mRNA, which is transported to the
cytoplasm and translated into viral proteins by host-cell
ribosomes, tRNA, and translation factors. The viral proteins
are then transported back into the nucleus, where some of
them either replicate the viral DNA directly or direct cellular proteins to replicate the viral DNA, as in the case of SV40
discussed in the last section. Assembly of the capsid proteins
with the newly replicated viral DNA occurs in the nucleus,
yielding hundreds to thousands of progeny virions.
Most plant and animal viruses with an RNA genome do
not require nuclear functions for lytic replication. In some

140

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

 FIGURE 4-40 Lytic replication

Lysis/release

cycle of E. coli bacteriophage T4, a
nonenveloped virus with a doublestranded DNA genome. After viral coat
proteins at the tip of the tail in T4
interact with specific receptor proteins
on the exterior of the host cell, the viral
genome is injected into the host (step 1 ).
Host-cell enzymes then transcribe
viral “early” genes into mRNAs and
subsequently translate these into viral
“early” proteins (step 2 ). The early
proteins replicate the viral DNA and
induce expression of viral “late” proteins
by host-cell enzymes (step 3 ). The viral
late proteins include capsid and assembly proteins and enzymes that degrade
the host-cell DNA, supplying nucleotides
for synthesis of more viral DNA. Progeny
virions are assembled in the cell (step 4 )
and released (step 5 ) when viral proteins
lyse the cell. Newly liberated viruses
initiate another cycle of infection in other
host cells.

Adsorption/injection

5

E. coli
chromosome

1
Free virion

T4 DNA
Expression
2 of viral early
proteins

Assembly 4

Viral
proteins
3
Replication of viral DNA
Expression of viral late proteins

Rabies virus
Nucleocapsid protein

Lipid bilayer

Matrix protein

Genomic RNA

Receptor-binding glycoprotein
Viral RNA polymerase

1 Adsorption
Budding 13
Virus receptor

Fusion 9

12

Association
at membrane

Cytosol
2 Endocytosis

11
Golgi

Progeny capsid
assembly
Endosome

Transport 8

Matrix and
nucleocapsid 10
synthesis

3 Fusion
Viral
mRNA

7
Glycoprotein
synthesis

ER
Nucleus

5 Replication

6
Transcription

Cell membrane

4
Release

4.7 • Viruses: Parasites of the Cellular Genetic System

of these viruses, a virus-encoded enzyme that enters the host
during penetration transcribes the genomic RNA into
mRNAs in the cell cytoplasm. The mRNA is directly translated into viral proteins by the host-cell translation machinery. One or more of these proteins then produces additional
copies of the viral RNA genome. Finally, progeny genomes
are assembled with newly synthesized capsid proteins into
progeny virions in the cytoplasm.
After the synthesis of hundreds to thousands of new virions has been completed, most infected bacterial cells and
some infected plant and animal cells are lysed, releasing all
the virions at once. In many plant and animal viral infections, however, no discrete lytic event occurs; rather, the dead
host cell releases the virions as it gradually disintegrates.
As noted previously, enveloped animal viruses are surrounded by an outer phospholipid layer derived from the
plasma membrane of host cells and containing abundant
viral glycoproteins. The processes of adsorption and release
of enveloped viruses differ substantially from these processes
in nonenveloped viruses. To illustrate lytic replication of
enveloped viruses, we consider the rabies virus, whose nucleocapsid consists of a single-stranded RNA genome surrounded by multiple copies of nucleocapsid protein. Like

 FIGURE 4-41 Lytic replication cycle of rabies virus, an
enveloped virus with a single-stranded RNA genome. The
structural components of this virus are depicted at the top. Note
that the nucleocapsid is helical rather than icosahedral. After a
virion adsorbs to multiple copies of a specific host membrane
protein (step 1 ), the cell engulfs it in an endosome (step 2 ).
A cellular protein in the endosome membrane pumps H ions
from the cytosol into the endosome interior. The resulting
decrease in endosomal pH induces a conformational change in
the viral glycoprotein, leading to fusion of the viral envelope
with the endosomal lipid bilayer membrane and release of the
nucleocapsid into the cytosol (steps 3 and 4 ). Viral RNA
polymerase uses ribonucleoside triphosphates in the cytosol to
replicate the viral RNA genome (step 5 ) and to synthesize viral
mRNAs (step 6 ). One of the viral mRNAs encodes the viral
transmembrane glycoprotein, which is inserted into the
membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as it is synthesized
on ER-bound ribosomes (step 7 ). Carbohydrate is added to the
large folded domain inside the ER lumen and is modified as the
membrane and the associated glycoprotein pass through the
Golgi apparatus (step 8 ). Vesicles with mature glycoprotein fuse
with the host plasma membrane, depositing viral glycoprotein
on the cell surface with the large receptor-binding domain outside the cell (step 9 ). Meanwhile, other viral mRNAs are translated on host-cell ribosomes into nucleocapsid protein, matrix
protein, and viral RNA polymerase (step 10 ). These proteins are
assembled with replicated viral genomic RNA (bright red) into
progeny nucleocapsids (step 11), which then associate with the
cytosolic domain of viral transmembrane glycoproteins in the
plasma membrane (step 12). The plasma membrane is folded
around the nucleocapsid, forming a “bud” that eventually is
released (step 13).

141

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 4-42 Progeny virions of
enveloped viruses are released by budding from infected
cells. In this transmission electron micrograph of a cell infected
with measles virus, virion buds are clearly visible protruding from
the cell surface. Measles virus is an enveloped RNA virus with a
helical nucleocapsid, like rabies virus, and replicates as illustrated
in Figure 4-41. [From A. Levine, 1991, Viruses, Scientific American
Library, p. 22.]

other lytic RNA viruses, rabies virions are replicated in the
cytoplasm and do not require host-cell nuclear enzymes. As
shown in Figure 4-41, a rabies virion is adsorbed by endocytosis, and release of progeny virions occurs by budding
from the host-cell plasma membrane. Budding virions
are clearly visible in electron micrographs of infected cells, as
illustrated in Figure 4-42. Many tens of thousands of progeny virions bud from an infected host cell before it dies.

Viral DNA Is Integrated into the Host-Cell
Genome in Some Nonlytic Viral Growth Cycles
Some bacterial viruses, called temperate phages, can establish
a nonlytic association with their host cells that does not kill
the cell. For example, when  bacteriophage infects E. coli,
the viral DNA may be integrated into the host-cell chromosome rather than being replicated. The integrated viral DNA,
called a prophage, is replicated as part of the cell’s DNA
from one host-cell generation to the next. This phenomenon
is referred to as lysogeny. Under certain conditions, the
prophage DNA is activated, leading to its excision from the
host-cell chromosome, entrance into the lytic cycle, and subsequent production and release of progeny virions.

142

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms
Genomic
ssRNA
Retrovirus
proteins

Reverse
transcriptase

5

1
Fusion

Budding

Host-cell
chromosomal DNA

Nucleocapsid

Reverse
transcription

Overview Animation: Life Cycle of a Retrovirus

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

4 Transcription

2

Provirus
Transport to
nucleus and
integration
3

▲ FIGURE 4-43 Retroviral life cycle. Retroviruses have
a genome of two identical copies of single-stranded RNA
and an outer envelope. Step 1 : After viral glycoproteins in
the envelope interact with a specific host-cell membrane
protein, the retroviral envelope fuses directly with the
plasma membrane, allowing entry of the nucleocapsid
into the cytoplasm of the cell. Step 2 : Viral reverse
transcriptase and other proteins copy the viral ssRNA
genome into a double-stranded DNA. Step 3 : The viral

The genomes of a number of animal viruses also can integrate into the host-cell genome. Probably the most important are the retroviruses, which are enveloped viruses with a
genome consisting of two identical strands of RNA. These
viruses are known as retroviruses because their RNA genome
acts as a template for formation of a DNA molecule—the
opposite flow of genetic information compared with the
more common transcription of DNA into RNA. In the retroviral life cycle (Figure 4-43), a viral enzyme called reverse
transcriptase initially copies the viral RNA genome into singlestranded DNA complementary to the virion RNA; the same
enzyme then catalyzes synthesis of a complementary DNA
strand. (This complex reaction is detailed in Chapter 10
when we consider closely related intracellular parasites called
retrotransposons.) The resulting double-stranded DNA is integrated into the chromosomal DNA of the infected cell. Finally, the integrated DNA, called a provirus, is transcribed
by the cell’s own machinery into RNA, which either is translated into viral proteins or is packaged within virion coat
proteins to form progeny virions that are released by budding from the host-cell membrane. Because most retroviruses
do not kill their host cells, infected cells can replicate, pro-

Viral DNA

dsDNA is transported into the nucleus and integrated into one
of many possible sites in the host-cell chromosomal DNA. For
simplicity, only one host-cell chromosome is depicted. Step 4 :
The integrated viral DNA (provirus) is transcribed by the host-cell
RNA polymerase, generating mRNAs (dark red) and genomic
RNA molecules (bright red). The host-cell machinery translates
the viral mRNAs into glycoproteins and nucleocapsid proteins.
Step 5 : Progeny virions then assemble and are released by
budding as illustrated in Figure 4-41.

ducing daughter cells with integrated proviral DNA. These
daughter cells continue to transcribe the proviral DNA and
bud progeny virions.
Some retroviruses contain cancer-causing genes
(oncogenes), and cells infected by such retroviruses
are oncogenically transformed into tumor cells.
Studies of oncogenic retroviruses (mostly viruses of birds and
mice) have revealed a great deal about the processes that
lead to transformation of a normal cell into a cancer cell
(Chapter 23).
Among the known human retroviruses are human T-cell
lymphotrophic virus (HTLV), which causes a form of
leukemia, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which
causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Both
of these viruses can infect only specific cell types, primarily
certain cells of the immune system and, in the case of HIV,
some central nervous system neurons and glial cells. Only
these cells have cell-surface receptors that interact with viral
envelope proteins, accounting for the host-cell specificity of
these viruses. Unlike most other retroviruses, HIV eventually
kills its host cells. The eventual death of large numbers of

Perspectives for the Future

immune-system cells results in the defective immune response characteristic of AIDS.
Some DNA viruses also can integrate into a host-cell
chromosome. One example is the human papillomaviruses
(HPVs), which most commonly cause warts and other benign skin lesions. The genomes of certain HPV serotypes,
however, occasionally integrate into the chromosomal DNA
of infected cervical epithelial cells, initiating development of
cervical cancer. Routine Pap smears can detect cells in the
early stages of the transformation process initiated by HPV
integration, permitting effective treatment. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 4.7
Viruses: Parasites of the Cellular Genetic System
Viruses are small parasites that can replicate only in host
cells. Viral genomes may be either DNA (DNA viruses) or
RNA (RNA viruses) and either single- or double-stranded.

■

The capsid, which surrounds the viral genome, is composed of multiple copies of one or a small number of virusencoded proteins. Some viruses also have an outer envelope, which is similar to the plasma membrane but contains
viral transmembrane proteins.

■

Most animal and plant DNA viruses require host-cell
nuclear enzymes to carry out transcription of the viral
genome into mRNA and production of progeny genomes.
In contrast, most RNA viruses encode enzymes that can
transcribe the RNA genome into viral mRNA and produce
new copies of the RNA genome.

■

Host-cell ribosomes, tRNAs, and translation factors are
used in the synthesis of all viral proteins in infected cells.

■

■ Lytic viral infection entails adsorption, penetration, synthesis of viral proteins and progeny genomes (replication),
assembly of progeny virions, and release of hundreds to thousands of virions, leading to death of the host cell (see Figure 4-40). Release of enveloped viruses occurs by budding
through the host-cell plasma membrane (see Figure 4-41).

Nonlytic infection occurs when the viral genome is integrated into the host-cell DNA and generally does not lead
to cell death.

■

Retroviruses are enveloped animal viruses containing a
single-stranded RNA genome. After a host cell is penetrated, reverse transcriptase, a viral enzyme carried in the
virion, converts the viral RNA genome into doublestranded DNA, which integrates into chromosomal DNA
(see Figure 4-43).

■

Unlike infection by other retroviruses, HIV infection
eventually kills host cells, causing the defects in the immune response characteristic of AIDS.

■

Tumor viruses, which contain oncogenes, may have an
RNA genome (e.g., human T-cell lymphotrophic virus) or
a DNA genome (e.g., human papillomaviruses). In the case

■

143

of these viruses, integration of the viral genome into a hostcell chromosome can cause transformation of the cell into
a tumor cell.

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
In this chapter we first reviewed the basic structure of DNA
and RNA and then described fundamental aspects of the
transcription of DNA by RNA polymerases. Eukaryotic
RNA polymerases are discussed in greater detail in Chapter
11, along with additional factors required for transcription
initiation in eukaryotic cells and interactions with regulatory
transcription factors that control transcription initiation.
Next, we discussed the genetic code and the participation of
tRNA and the protein-synthesizing machine, the ribosome,
in decoding the information in mRNA to allow accurate assembly of protein chains. Mechanisms that regulate protein
synthesis are considered further in Chapter 12. Finally, we
considered the molecular details underlying the accurate
replication of DNA required for cell division. Chapter 21
covers the mechanisms that regulate when a cell replicates its
DNA and that coordinate DNA replication with the complex
process of mitosis that distributes the daughter DNA molecules equally to each daughter cell.
These basic cellular processes form the foundation of molecular cell biology. Our current understanding of these
processes is grounded in a wealth of experimental results and
is not likely to change. However, the depth of our understanding will continue to increase as additional details of the
structures and interactions of the macromolecular machines
involved are uncovered. The determination in recent years of
the three-dimensional structures of RNA polymerases, ribosomal subunits, and DNA replication proteins has allowed
researchers to design ever more penetrating experimental approaches for revealing how these macromolecules operate at
the molecular level. The detailed level of understanding that
results may allow the design of new and more effective drugs
for treating human illnesses. For example, the recent highresolution structures of ribosomes are providing insights into
the mechanism by which antibiotics inhibit bacterial protein
synthesis without affecting the function of mammalian ribosomes. This new knowledge may allow the design of even
more effective antibiotics. Similarly, detailed understanding
of the mechanisms regulating transcription of specific human
genes may lead to therapeutic strategies that can reduce or
prevent inappropriate immune responses that lead to multiple sclerosis and arthritis, the inappropriate cell division that
is the hallmark of cancer, and other pathological processes.
Much of current biological research is focused on
discovering how molecular interactions endow cells with
decision-making capacity and their special properties. For this
reason several of the following chapters describe current
knowledge about how such interactions regulate transcription and protein synthesis in multicellular organisms and how
such regulation endows cells with the capacity to become

144

CHAPTER 4 • Basic Molecular Genetic Mechanisms

specialized and grow into complicated organs. Other chapters
deal with how protein-protein interactions underlie the construction of specialized organelles in cells, and how they determine cell shape and movement. The rapid advances in
molecular cell biology in recent years hold promise that in the
not too distant future we will understand how the regulation
of specialized cell function, shape, and mobility coupled with
regulated cell replication and cell death (apoptosis) lead to the
growth of complex organisms like trees and human beings.

KEY TERMS
anticodon 119
codons 119
complementary 104
DNA polymerases 133
double helix 103
envelope (viral) 137
exons 111
genetic code 119
introns 111
lagging strand 133
leading strand 133
messenger RNA
(mRNA) 119
Okazaki fragments 133
operon 111
phosphodiester bond 103

plaque assay 138
polyribosomes 130
primary transcript 110
primer 133
promoter 109
reading frame 120
replication fork 133
reverse transcriptase 142
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 119
ribosomes 119
RNA polymerase 109
transcription 101
transfer RNA (tRNA) 119
translation 101
Watson-Crick base pairs 103

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. What are Watson-Crick base pairs? Why are they
important?
2. TATA box–binding protein binds to the minor groove
of DNA, resulting in the bending of the DNA helix (see
Figure 4-5). What property of DNA allows the TATA
box–binding protein to recognize the DNA helix?
3. Preparing plasmid (double-stranded, circular) DNA for
sequencing involves annealing a complementary, short,
single-stranded oligonucleotide DNA primer to one strand of
the plasmid template. This is routinely accomplished by heating the plasmid DNA and primer to 90 C and then slowly
bringing the temperature down to 25 C. Why does this protocol work?
4. What difference between RNA and DNA helps to explain the greater stability of DNA? What implications does
this have for the function of DNA?
5. What are the major differences in the synthesis and
structure of prokaryotic and eukaryotic mRNAs?

6. While investigating the function of a specific growth factor receptor gene from humans, it was found that two types
of proteins are synthesized from this gene. A larger protein
containing a membrane-spanning domain functions to recognize growth factors at the cell surface, stimulating a specific downstream signaling pathway. In contrast, a related,
smaller protein is secreted from the cell and functions to bind
available growth factor circulating in the blood, thus inhibiting the downstream signaling pathway. Speculate on
how the cell synthesizes these disparate proteins.
7. Describe the molecular events that occur at the lac
operon when E. coli cells are shifted from a glucose-containing
medium to a lactose-containing medium.
8. The concentration of free phosphate affects transcription of some E. coli genes. Describe the mechanism for this.
9. Contrast how selection of the translational start site occurs on bacterial, eukaryotic, and poliovirus mRNAs.
10. What is the evidence that the 23S rRNA in the large
rRNA subunit has a peptidyl transferase activity?
11. How would a mutation in the poly(A)-binding protein
I gene affect translation? How would an electron micrograph
of polyribosomes from such a mutant differ from the normal pattern?
12. What characteristic of DNA results in the requirement
that some DNA synthesis is discontinuous? How are
Okazaki fragments and DNA ligase utilized by the cell?
13. What gene is unique to retroviruses? Why is the protein
encoded by this gene absolutely necessary for maintaining
the retroviral life cycle, but not that of other viruses?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
NASA has identified a new microbe present on Mars and requests that you determine the genetic code of this organism.
To accomplish this goal, you isolate an extract from this microbe that contains all the components necessary for protein
synthesis except mRNA. Synthetic mRNAs are added to this
extract and the resulting polypeptides are analyzed:
Synthetic mRNA

Resulting Polypeptides

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA

Lysine-Lysine-Lysine etc.

CACACACACACACACA

Threonine-HistidineThreonine-Histidine etc.

AACAACAACAACAACA

Threonine-ThreonineThreonine etc.
Glutamine-GlutamineGlutamine etc.
Asparagine-AsparagineAsparagine etc.

References

From these data, what specifics can you conclude about the
microbe’s genetic code? What is the sequence of the anticodon
loop of a tRNA carrying a threonine? If you found that this
microbe contained 61 different tRNAs, what could you
speculate about the fidelity of translation in this organism?

REFERENCES

Structure of Nucleic Acids
Dickerson, R. E. 1983. The DNA helix and how it is read. Sci.
Am. 249:94–111.
Doudna, J. A., and T. R. Cech. 2002. The chemical repertoire
of natural ribozymes. Nature 418:222–228.
Kornberg, A., and T. A. Baker. 1992. DNA Replication, 2d ed.
W. H. Freeman and Company, chap. 1. A good summary of the principles of DNA structure.
Wang, J. C. 1980. Superhelical DNA. Trends Biochem. Sci.
5:219–221.

Transcription of Protein-Coding Genes and Formation
of Functional mRNA
Brenner, S., F. Jacob, and M. Meselson. 1961. An unstable intermediate carrying information from genes to ribosomes for protein
synthesis. Nature 190:576–581.
Young, B. A., T. M. Gruber, and C. A. Gross. 2002. Views of
transcription initiation. Cell 109:417–420.

Control of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes
Bell, C. E., and M. Lewis. 2001. The Lac repressor: a second
generation of structural and functional studies. Curr. Opin. Struc.
Biol. 11:19–25.
Busby, S., and R. H. Ebright. 1999. Transcription activation by
catabolite activator protein (CAP). J. Mol. Biol. 293:199–213.
Darst, S. A. 2001. Bacterial RNA polymerase. Curr. Opin. Struc.
Biol. 11:155–162.
Muller-Hill, B. 1998. Some repressors of bacterial transcription.
Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 1:145–151.

The Three Roles of RNA in Translation
Alexander, R. W., and P. Schimmel. 2001. Domain-domain communication in aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res.
Mol. Biol. 69:317–349.
Bjork, G. R., et al. 1987. Transfer RNA modification. Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 56:263–287.
Garrett, R. A., et al., eds. 2000. The Ribosome: Structure, Function, Antibiotics, and Cellular Interactions. ASM Press.
Hatfield, D. L., and V. N. Gladyshev. 2002. How selenium has
altered our understanding of the genetic code. Mol. Cell Biol.
22:3565–3576.
Hoagland, M. B., et al. 1958. A soluble ribonucleic acid intermediate in protein synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 231:241–257.
Holley, R. W., et al. 1965. Structure of a ribonucleic acid. Science 147:1462–1465.

145

Ibba, M., and D. Soll. 2001.The renaissance of aminoacyl-tRNA
synthesis. EMBO Rep. 2:382–387.
Khorana, G. H., et al. 1966. Polynucleotide synthesis and the
genetic code. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 31:39–49.
Maguire, B. A., and R. A. Zimmermann. 2001. The ribosome
in focus. Cell 104:813–816.
Nirenberg, M., et al. 1966. The RNA code in protein synthesis.
Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 31:11–24.
Ramakrishnan, V. 2002. Ribosome structure and the mechanism
of translation. Cell 108:557–572.
Rich, A., and S.-H. Kim. 1978. The three-dimensional structure
of transfer RNA. Sci. Am. 240(1):52–62 (offprint 1377).

Stepwise Synthesis of Proteins on Ribosomes
Gingras, A. C., R. Raught, and N. Sonenberg. 1999. eIF4 initiation factors: effectors of mRNA recruitment to ribosomes and regulators of translation. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 68:913–963.
Green, R. 2000. Ribosomal translocation: EF-G turns the crank.
Curr. Biol. 10:R369–R373.
Hellen, C. U., and P. Sarnow. 2001. Internal ribosome entry sites
in eukaryotic mRNA molecules. Genet. Devel. 15:1593–1612.
Kisselev, L. L., and R. H. Buckingham. 2000. Translational termination comes of age. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25:561–566.
Kozak, M. 1999. Initiation of translation in prokaryotes and
eukaryotes. Gene 234:187–208.
Noller, H. F., et al. 2002. Translocation of tRNA during protein
synthesis. FEBS Lett. 514:11–16.
Pestova, T. V., et al. 2001. Molecular mechanisms of translation
initiation in eukaryotes. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 98:7029–7036.
Poole, E., and W. Tate. 2000. Release factors and their role as
decoding proteins: specificity and fidelity for termination of protein
synthesis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1493:1–11.
Ramakrishnan, V. 2002. Ribosome structure and the mechanism
of translation. Cell 108:557–572.
Sonenberg, N., J. W. B. Hershey, and M. B. Mathews, eds. 2000.
Translational Control of Gene Expression. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DNA Replication
Bullock, P. A. 1997. The initiation of simian virus 40 DNA replication in vitro. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 32:503–568.
Kornberg, A., and T. A. Baker. 1992. DNA Replication, 2d ed.
W. H. Freeman and Company
Waga, S., and B. Stillman. 1998. The DNA replication fork in
eukaryotic cells. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 67:721–751.

Viruses: Parasites of the Cellular Genetic System
Flint, S. J., et al. 2000. Principles of Virology: Molecular Biology, Pathogenesis, and Control. ASM Press.
Hull, R. 2002. Mathews’ Plant Virology. Academic Press.
Knipe, D. M., and P. M. Howley, eds. 2001. Fields Virology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Kornberg, A., and T. A. Baker. 1992. DNA Replication, 2d ed.
W. H. Freeman and Company. Good summary of bacteriophage
molecular biology.

5
BIOMEMBRANES
AND CELL
ARCHITECTURE
Atomic force microscopy reveals sphyingomyelin rafts (orange)
protruding from a dioleoylphosphatidylcholine background
(black) in a mica-supported lipid bilayer. Placental alkaline
phosphatase (yellow peaks), a glycosylphosphatidylinositolanchored protein, is shown to be almost exclusively raft
associated. [From D. E. Saslowsky et al., 2002, J. Biol. Chem.
277:26966–26970.]

P

rokaryotes, which represent the simplest and smallest
cells, about 1–2 m in length, are surrounded by a
plasma membrane but contain no internal membranelimited subcompartments (see Figure 1-2a). Although DNA is
concentrated in the center of these unicellular organisms, most
enzymes and metabolites are thought to diffuse freely within
the single internal aqueous compartment. Certain metabolic
reactions, including protein synthesis and anaerobic glycolysis,
take place there; others, such as the replication of DNA and
the production of ATP, take place at the plasma membrane.
In the larger cells of eukaryotes, however, the rates of
chemical reactions would be limited by the diffusion of small
molecules if a cell were not partitioned into smaller subcompartments termed organelles. Each organelle is surrounded
by one or more biomembranes, and each type of organelle
contains a unique complement of proteins—some embedded
in its membrane(s), others in its aqueous interior space, or
lumen. These proteins enable each organelle to carry out its
characteristic cellular functions. The cytoplasm is the part
of the cell outside the largest organelle, the nucleus. The
cytosol, the aqueous part of the cytoplasm outside all of the
organelles, also contains its own distinctive proteins.
All biomembranes form closed structures, separating the
lumen on the inside from the outside, and are based on a similar bilayer structure. They control the movement of molecules between the inside and the outside of a cell and into
and out of the organelles of eukaryotic cells. In accord with
the importance of internal membranes to cell function, the
total surface area of these membranes is roughly tenfold as
great as that of the plasma membrane (Figure 5-1).

Although the basic architecture of all eukaryotic cells is
constructed from membranes, organelles, and the cytosol,
each type of cell exhibits a distinctive design defined by the
shape of the cell and the location of its organelles. The structural basis of the unique design of each cell type lies in the
cytoskeleton, a dense network of three classes of protein filaments that permeate the cytosol and mechanically support cellular membranes. Cytoskeletal proteins are among the most
abundant proteins in a cell, and the enormous surface area of
the cytoskeleton (see Figure 5-1) constitutes a scaffold to
which particular sets of proteins and membranes are bound.
We begin our examination of cell architecture by considering the basic structure of biomembranes. The lipid components of membranes not only affect their shape and

OUTLINE
5.1 Biomembranes: Lipid Composition
and Structural Organization
5.2 Biomembranes: Protein Components
and Basic Functions
5.3 Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell
5.4 The Cytoskeleton: Components
and Structural Functions
5.5 Purification of Cells and Their Parts
5.6 Visualizing Cell Architecture
147

148

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

Plasma membrane
(700 µm2)
Internal
membranes
(7000 µm2)
Golgi

Cytoskeleton
(94,000 µm2)
Nucleus
ER
Mitochondrion

▲ FIGURE 5-1 Schematic overview of the major
components of eukaryotic cell architecture. The plasma
membrane (red) defines the exterior of the cell and controls the
movement of molecules between the cytosol and the
extracellular medium. Different types of organelles and smaller
vesicles enclosed within their own distinctive membranes (black)
carry out special functions such as gene expression, energy
production, membrane synthesis, and intracellular transport.
function but also play important roles in anchoring proteins
to the membrane, modifying membrane protein activities,
and transducing signals to the cytoplasm. We then consider
the general structure of membrane proteins and how they
can relate to different membranes. The unique function of
each membrane is determined largely by the complement of
proteins within and adjacent to it. The theme of membranelimited compartments is continued with a review of the functions of various organelles. We then introduce the structure
and function of the cytoskeleton, which is intimately associated with all biomembranes; changes in the organization of
this filamentous network affect the structure and function
of the attached membranes. In the remainder of the chapter,
we describe common methods for isolating particular types
of cells and subcellular structures and various microscopic
techniques for studying cell structure and function.

 FIGURE 5-2 The bilayer structure of biomembranes.
(a) Electron micrograph of a thin section through an erythrocyte
membrane stained with osmium tetroxide. The characteristic
“railroad track” appearance of the membrane indicates the
presence of two polar layers, consistent with the bilayer
structure for phospholipid membranes. (b) Schematic
interpretation of the phospholipid bilayer in which polar groups
face outward to shield the hydrophobic fatty acyl tails from
water. The hydrophobic effect and van der Waals interactions
between the fatty acyl tails drive the assembly of the bilayer
(Chapter 2). [Part (a) courtesy of J. D. Robertson.]

Fibers of the cytoskeleton (green) provide structural support for
the cell and its internal compartments. The internal membranes
of organelles and vesicles possess more surface area than that
of the plasma membrane but less area than that of the
cytoskeleton, as schematically represented by the red, black, and
green boxes. The enormous surface area of the cytoskeleton
allows it to function as a scaffold on which cellular reactions can
take place.

(a)

Membrane bilayer

Exterior

Cytosol

(b)

Polar head
groups

Hydrophobic
tails

Polar head
groups

5.1 • Biomembranes: Lipid Composition and Structural Organization

5.1 Biomembranes: Lipid Composition
and Structural Organization
Phospholipids of the composition present in cells spontaneously form sheetlike phospholipid bilayers, which are two
molecules thick. The hydrocarbon chains of the phospholipids in each layer, or leaflet, form a hydrophobic core that
is 3–4 nm thick in most biomembranes. Electron microscopy
of thin membrane sections stained with osmium tetroxide,
which binds strongly to the polar head groups of phospholipids, reveals the bilayer structure (Figure 5-2). A cross section of all single membranes stained with osmium tetroxide
looks like a railroad track: two thin dark lines (the stain–
head group complexes) with a uniform light space of about 2
nm (the hydrophobic tails) between them.
The lipid bilayer has two important properties. First, the
hydrophobic core is an impermeable barrier that prevents the
diffusion of water-soluble (hydrophilic) solutes across the
membrane. Importantly, this simple barrier function is modulated by the presence of membrane proteins that mediate
the transport of specific molecules across this otherwise impermeable bilayer. The second property of the bilayer is its
stability. The bilayer structure is maintained by hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions between the lipid chains.
Even though the exterior aqueous environment can vary
widely in ionic strength and pH, the bilayer has the strength
to retain its characteristic architecture.
Natural membranes from different cell types exhibit a variety of shapes, which complement a cell’s function (Figure
5-3). The smooth flexible surface of the erythrocyte plasma
membrane allows the cell to squeeze through narrow blood
capillaries. Some cells have a long, slender extension of the
plasma membrane, called a cilium or flagellum, which beats
in a whiplike manner. This motion causes fluid to flow across
the surface of an epithelium or a sperm cell to swim through
the medium. The axons of many neurons are encased by
multiple layers of modified plasma membrane called the
myelin sheath. This membranous structure is elaborated by

(a)

10 m

(b)

(c)

AX

 FIGURE 5-3 Variation in biomembranes in different cell

SN

types. (a) A smooth, flexible membrane covers the surface of
the discoid erythrocyte cell. (b) Tufts of cilia (Ci) project from the
ependymal cells that line the brain ventricles. (c) Many nerve
axons are enveloped in a myelin sheath composed of multiple
layers of modified plasma membrane. The individual myelin layers
can be seen in this electron micrograph of a cross section of an
axon (AX). The myelin sheath is formed by an adjacent supportive
(glial) cell (SC). [Parts (a) and (b) from R. G. Kessel and R. H. Kardon,
1979, Tissues and Organs: A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy,
W. H. Freeman and Company. Part (c) from P. C. Cross and K. L. Mercer,
1993, Cell and Tissue Ultrastructure: A Functional Perspective, W. H.
Freeman and Company, p. 137.]

Myelin
sheath

0.3 m

149

150

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

 FIGURE 5-4 The faces of cellular
membranes. The plasma membrane, a
single bilayer membrane, encloses the
cell. In this highly schematic
representation, internal cytosol (green
stipple) and external environment (purple)
define the cytosolic (red) and exoplasmic
(black) faces of the bilayer. Vesicles and
some organelles have a single membrane
and their internal aqueous space (purple)
is topologically equivalent to the outside
of the cell. Three organelles—the nucleus,
mitochondrion, and chloroplast (which is
not shown)—are enclosed by two
membranes separated by a small
intermembrane space. The exoplasmic
faces of the inner and outer membranes
around these organelles border the
intermembrane space between them.
For simplicity, the hydrophobic membrane
interior is not indicated in this diagram.

Mitochondrion
Vesicle
Outer Mitochondrial
Inner membranes

Matrix
Intermembrane space
Exoplasmic
face

Golgi
Lysosome

Cytosolic
face

Endoplasmic reticulum

Plasma membrane
Nucleus
Cytosol

Exterior

Inner Nuclear
Outer
membranes
Intermembrane space

an adjacent supportive cell and facilitates the conduction of
nerve impulses over long distances (Chapter 7). Despite their
diverse shapes and functions, these biomembranes and all
other biomembranes have a common bilayer structure.
Because all cellular membranes enclose an entire cell or
an internal compartment, they have an internal face (the surface oriented toward the interior of the compartment) and an
external face (the surface presented to the environment).
More commonly, the surfaces of a cellular membrane are
designated as the cytosolic face and the exoplasmic face. This
nomenclature is useful in highlighting the topological equivalence of the faces in different membranes, as diagrammed in
Figure 5-4. For example, the exoplasmic face of the plasma
membrane is directed away from the cytosol, toward the extracellular space or external environment, and defines the
outer limit of the cell. For organelles and vesicles surrounded
by a single membrane, however, the face directed away from
the cytosol—the exoplasmic face—is on the inside in contact with an internal aqueous space equivalent to the extracellular space. This equivalence is most easily understood for
vesicles that arise by invagination of the plasma membrane;
this process results in the external face of the plasma membrane becoming the internal face of the vesicle membrane.
Three organelles—the nucleus, mitochondrion, and chloroplast—are surrounded by two membranes; the exoplasmic

surface of each membrane faces the space between the two
membranes.

Three Classes of Lipids Are Found
in Biomembranes
A typical biomembrane is assembled from phosphoglycerides, sphingolipids, and steroids. All three classes of lipids
are amphipathic molecules having a polar (hydrophilic) head
group and hydrophobic tail. The hydrophobic effect and van
der Waals interactions, discussed in Chapter 2, cause the tail
groups to self-associate into a bilayer with the polar head
groups oriented toward water (see Figure 5-2). Although the
common membrane lipids have this amphipathic character in
common, they differ in their chemical structures, abundance,
and functions in the membrane.
Phosphoglycerides, the most abundant class of lipids in
most membranes, are derivatives of glycerol 3-phosphate
(Figure 5-5a). A typical phosphoglyceride molecule consists
of a hydrophobic tail composed of two fatty acyl chains esterified to the two hydroxyl groups in glycerol phosphate
and a polar head group attached to the phosphate group.
The two fatty acyl chains may differ in the number of carbons that they contain (commonly 16 or 18) and their degree
of saturation (0, 1, or 2 double bonds). A phosphogyceride is

5.1 • Biomembranes: Lipid Composition and Structural Organization

in plasmalogens or the subtle differences in their threedimensional structure compared with that of other phosphoglycerides may have as-yet unrecognized physiologic
significance.
A second class of membrane lipid is the sphingolipids.
All of these compounds are derived from sphingosine, an
amino alcohol with a long hydrocarbon chain, and contain a
long-chain fatty acid attached to the sphingosine amino
group. In sphingomyelin, the most abundant sphingolipid,
phosphocholine is attached to the terminal hydroxyl group
of sphingosine (Figure 5-5b). Thus sphingomyelin is a phospholipid, and its overall structure is quite similar to that of
phosphatidylcholine. Other sphingolipids are amphipathic
glycolipids whose polar head groups are sugars. Glucosylcerebroside, the simplest glycosphingolipid, contains a single
glucose unit attached to sphingosine. In the complex glycosphingolipids called gangliosides, one or two branched
sugar chains containing sialic acid groups are attached to

classified according to the nature of its head group. In phosphatidylcholines, the most abundant phospholipids in the
plasma membrane, the head group consists of choline, a positively charged alcohol, esterified to the negatively charged
phosphate. In other phosphoglycerides, an OH-containing
molecule such as ethanolamine, serine, and the sugar derivative inositol is linked to the phosphate group. The negatively charged phosphate group and the positively charged
groups or the hydroxyl groups on the head group interact
strongly with water.
The plasmalogens are a group of phosphoglycerides that
contain one fatty acyl chain, attached to glycerol by an ester
linkage, and one long hydrocarbon chain, attached to glycerol by an ether linkage (COOOC). These molecules constitute about 20 percent of the total phosphoglyceride
content in humans. Their abundance varies among tissues
and species but is especially high in human brain and heart
tissue. The additional chemical stability of the ether linkage

H

1

3
2

O

O

O

H

N+

O

Hydrophobic tail

PE
H

O

CH3

P

N+

O−

O

H
O

H

6

OH
4

5
2

1

NH

PS

O−
OH

HO
O

O

3

O

CH3

P

N+

O−

PC

H

N+
O

OH

CH3
CH3

O

(b) Sphingolipids

 FIGURE 5-5 Three classes of

Head group

(a) Phosphoglycerides

O

O

OH
OH
PI

CH3
CH3
SM

O

OH
O

O

OH

HO
OH

(c) Cholesterol
OH

151

GlcCer

membrane lipids. (a) Most
phosphoglycerides are derivatives of
glycerol 3-phosphate (red) containing two
esterified fatty acyl chains, constituting
the hydrophobic “tail” and a polar “head
group” esterified to the phosphate. The
fatty acids can vary in length and be
saturated (no double bonds) or unsaturated
(one, two, or three double bonds). In
phosphatidylcholine (PC), the head group
is choline. Also shown are the molecules
attached to the phosphate group in three
other common phosphoglycerides:
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS), and phosphatidylinositol
(PI). (b) Sphingolipids are derivatives of
sphingosine (red), an amino alcohol with
a long hydrocarbon chain. Various fatty
acyl chains are connected to sphingosine
by an amide bond. The sphingomyelins
(SM), which contain a phosphocholine
head group, are phospholipids. Other
sphingolipids are glycolipids in which
a single sugar residue or branched
oligosaccharide is attached to the
sphingosine backbone. For instance, the
simple glycolipid glucosylcerebroside
(GlcCer) has a glucose head group.
(c) Like other membrane lipids, the steroid
cholesterol is amphipathic. Its single
hydroxyl group is equivalent to the polar
head group in other lipids; the conjugated
ring and short hydrocarbon chain form the
hydrophobic tail. [See H. Sprong et al., 2001,
Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:504.]

152

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

sphingosine. Glycolipids constitute 2–10 percent of the total
lipid in plasma membranes; they are most abundant in nervous tissue.
Cholesterol and its derivatives constitute the third important class of membrane lipids, the steroids. The basic
structure of steroids is a four-ring hydrocarbon. Cholesterol,
the major steroidal constituent of animal tissues, has a hydroxyl substituent on one ring (Figure 5-5c). Although cholesterol is almost entirely hydrocarbon in composition, it is
amphipathic because its hydroxyl group can interact with
water. Cholesterol is especially abundant in the plasma membranes of mammalian cells but is absent from most prokaryotic cells. As much as 30–50 percent of the lipids in plant
plasma membranes consist of certain steroids unique to
plants.
At neutral pH, some phosphoglycerides (e.g., phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine) carry no net

electric charge, whereas others (e.g., phosphatidylinositol
and phosphatidylserine) carry a single net negative charge.
Nonetheless, the polar head groups in all phospholipids can
pack together into the characteristic bilayer structure. Sphingomyelins are similar in shape to phosphoglycerides and can
form mixed bilayers with them. Cholesterol and other
steroids are too hydrophobic to form a bilayer structure unless they are mixed with phospholipids.

Most Lipids and Many Proteins Are Laterally
Mobile in Biomembranes
In the two-dimensional plane of a bilayer, thermal motion permits lipid molecules to rotate freely around their long axes and
to diffuse laterally within each leaflet. Because such movements are lateral or rotational, the fatty acyl chains remain in
the hydrophobic interior of the bilayer. In both natural and ar-

(a)
Fluorescent reagent

Membrane protein

Cell

Bleached area

Label

Bleach with
laser

Fluorescence
recovery

1

2

3

Fluorescence intensity (arb. units)

(b)

Fluorescence before bleaching
3000
50%
immobile

2000

50%
mobile

1000
Bleach
50

100
Time (s)

150

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-6 Fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments can quantify the
lateral movement of proteins and lipids within the plasma
membrane. (a) Experimental protocol. Step 1 : Cells are first
labeled with a fluorescent reagent that binds uniformly to a
specific membrane lipid or protein. Step 2 : A laser light is then
focused on a small area of the surface, irreversibly bleaching the
bound reagent and thus reducing the fluorescence in the
illuminated area. Step 3 : In time, the fluorescence of the
bleached patch increases as unbleached fluorescent surface
molecules diffuse into it and bleached ones diffuse outward. The
extent of recovery of fluorescence in the bleached patch is

proportional to the fraction of labeled molecules that are mobile
in the membrane. (b) Results of FRAP experiment with human
hepatoma cells treated with a fluorescent antibody specific for
the asialoglycoprotein receptor protein. The finding that 50
percent of the fluorescence returned to the bleached area
indicates that 50 percent of the receptor molecules in the
illuminated membrane patch were mobile and 50 percent were
immobile. Because the rate of fluorescence recovery is
proportional to the rate at which labeled molecules move into the
bleached region, the diffusion coefficient of a protein or lipid in
the membrane can be calculated from such data. [See Y. I. Henis et
al., 1990, J. Cell Biol. 111:1409.]

5.1 • Biomembranes: Lipid Composition and Structural Organization

tificial membranes, a typical lipid molecule exchanges places
with its neighbors in a leaflet about 107 times per second and
diffuses several micrometers per second at 37 C. These diffusion rates indicate that the viscosity of the bilayer is 100 times
as great as that of water—about the same as the viscosity of
olive oil. Even though lipids diffuse more slowly in the bilayer
than in an aqueous solvent, a membrane lipid could diffuse the
length of a typical bacterial cell (1 m) in only 1 second and
the length of an animal cell in about 20 seconds.
The lateral movements of specific plasma-membrane proteins and lipids can be quantified by a technique called fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). With this
method, described in Figure 5-6, the rate at which membrane
lipid or protein molecules move—the diffusion coefficient—
can be determined, as well as the proportion of the molecules
that are laterally mobile.
The results of FRAP studies with fluorescence-labeled
phospholipids have shown that, in fibroblast plasma membranes, all the phospholipids are freely mobile over distances
of about 0.5 m, but most cannot diffuse over much longer
distances. These findings suggest that protein-rich regions of
the plasma membrane, about 1 m in diameter, separate
lipid-rich regions containing the bulk of the membrane
phospholipid. Phospholipids are free to diffuse within such
a region but not from one lipid-rich region to an adjacent
one. Furthermore, the rate of lateral diffusion of lipids in the
plasma membrane is nearly an order of magnitude slower
than in pure phospholipid bilayers: diffusion constants of
108 cm2/s and 107 cm2/s are characteristic of the plasma
membrane and a lipid bilayer, respectively. This difference
suggests that lipids may be tightly but not irreversibly bound
to certain integral proteins in some membranes.

153

Lipid Composition Influences the Physical
Properties of Membranes
A typical cell contains myriad types of membranes, each with
unique properties bestowed by its particular mix of lipids
and proteins. The data in Table 5-1 illustrate the variation
in lipid composition among different biomembranes. Several
phenomena contribute to these differences. For instance, differences between membranes in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and the Golgi are largely explained by the fact that
phospholipids are synthesized in the ER, whereas sphingolipids are synthesized in the Golgi. As a result, the proportion of sphingomyelin as a percentage of total membrane
lipid phosphorus is about six times as high in Golgi membranes as it is in ER membranes. In other cases, the translocation of membranes from one cellular compartment to
another can selectively enrich membranes in certain lipids.
Differences in lipid composition may also correspond to
specialization of membrane function. For example, the
plasma membrane of absorptive epithelial cells lining the intestine exhibits two distinct regions: the apical surface faces
the lumen of the gut and is exposed to widely varying external conditions; the basolateral surface interacts with other
epithelial cells and with underlying extracellular structures
(see Figure 6-5). In these polarized cells, the ratio of sphingolipid to phosphoglyceride to cholesterol in the basolateral
membrane is 0.5:1.5:1, roughly equivalent to that in the
plasma membrane of a typical unpolarized cell subjected to
mild stress. In contrast, the apical membrane of intestinal
cells, which is subjected to considerable stress, exhibits a
1:1:1 ratio of these lipids. The relatively high concentration
of sphingolipid in this membrane may increase its stability

TABLE 5-1 Major Lipid Components of Selected Biomembranes
Composition (mol %)
Source/Location

PC

PE  PS

SM

Cholesterol

Plasma membrane (human erythrocytes)

21

29

21

26

Myelin membrane (human neurons)

16

37

13

34

0

85

0

0

Endoplasmic reticulum membrane (rat)

54

26

5

7

Golgi membrane (rat)

45

20

13

13

Inner mitochondrial membrane (rat)

45

45

2

7

Outer mitochondrial membrane (rat)

34

46

2

11

Primary leaflet location

Exoplasmic

Cytosolic

Plasma membrane (E. coli)

PC  phosphatidylcholine; PE  phosphatidylethanolamine; PS  phosphatidylserine; SM  sphingomyelin.
SOURCE: W. Dowhan and M. Bogdanov, 2002, in D. E. Vance and J. E. Vance, eds., Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins, and Membranes, Elsevier.

Exoplasmic

Both

154

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

because of extensive hydrogen bonding by the free OOH
group in the sphingosine moiety (see Figure 5-5).
The ability of lipids to diffuse laterally in a bilayer indicates
that it can act as a fluid. The degree of bilayer fluidity depends
on the lipid composition, structure of the phospholipid hydrophobic tails, and temperature. As already noted, van der
Waals interactions and the hydrophobic effect cause the nonpolar tails of phospholipids to aggregate. Long, saturated fatty
acyl chains have the greatest tendency to aggregate, packing
tightly together into a gel-like state. Phospholipids with short
fatty acyl chains, which have less surface area for interaction,
form more fluid bilayers. Likewise, the kinks in unsaturated
fatty acyl chains result in their forming less stable van der
Waals interactions with other lipids than do saturated chains
and hence more fluid bilayers. When a highly ordered, gel-like
bilayer is heated, the increased molecular motions of the fatty
acyl tails cause it to undergo a transition to a more fluid, disordered state (Figure 5-7).
At usual physiologic temperatures, the hydrophobic interior of natural membranes generally has a low viscosity
and a fluidlike, rather than gel-like, consistency. Cholesterol is important in maintaining the fluidity of natural
membranes, which appears to be essential for normal cell
growth and reproduction. As noted previously, cholesterol
cannot form a sheetlike bilayer on its own. At concentrations found in natural membranes, cholesterol is interca-

Heat

Gel-like consistency

Fluidlike consistency

(a)

3.5 nm

4.0 nm

PC

(b)

4.6–5.6 nm

PC and
cholesterol

SM

SM and
cholesterol

(c)

PC

PE

▲ FIGURE 5-8 Effect of lipid composition on bilayer
thickness and curvature. (a) A pure sphingomyelin (SM) bilayer
is thicker than one formed from a phosphoglyceride such as
phosphatidylcholine (PC). Cholesterol has a lipid-ordering effect
on phosphoglyceride bilayers that increases their thickness but
does not affect the thickness of the more ordered SM bilayer.
(b) Phospholipids such as PC have a cylindrical shape and form
more or less flat monolayers, whereas those with smaller head
groups such as phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) have a conical
shape. (c) A bilayer enriched with PC in the exoplasmic leaflet
and with PE in the cytosolic face, as in many plasma
membranes, would have a natural curvature. [Adapted from
H. Sprong et al., 2001, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:504.]

▲ FIGURE 5-7 Gel and fluid forms of the phospholipid
bilayer. (Top) Depiction of gel-to-fluid transition. Phospholipids
with long saturated fatty acyl chains tend to assemble into a
highly ordered, gel-like bilayer in which there is little overlap of
the nonpolar tails in the two leaflets. Heat disorders the nonpolar
tails and induces a transition from a gel to a fluid within a
temperature range of only a few degrees. As the chains become
disordered, the bilayer also decreases in thickness. (Bottom)
Molecular models of phospholipid monolayers in gel and fluid
states, as determined by molecular dynamics calculations.
[Bottom based on H. Heller et al., 1993, J. Phys. Chem. 97:8343.]

lated (inserted) among phospholipids. Cholesterol restricts
the random movement of phospholipid head groups at the
outer surfaces of the leaflets, but its effect on the movement
of long phospholipid tails depends on concentration. At the
usual cholesterol concentrations, the interaction of the
steroid ring with the long hydrophobic tails of phospholipids tends to immobilize these lipids and thus decrease
biomembrane fluidity. At lower cholesterol concentrations,
however, the steroid ring separates and disperses phospholipid tails, causing the inner regions of the membrane to become slightly more fluid.
The lipid composition of a bilayer also influences its thickness, which in turn may play a role in localizing proteins to a
particular membrane. The results of studies on artificial membranes demonstrate that sphingomyelin associates into a

5.1 • Biomembranes: Lipid Composition and Structural Organization

more gel-like and thicker bilayer than phospholipids do (Figure 5-8a). Similarly, cholesterol and other molecules that decrease membrane fluidity increase membrane thickness.
Because sphingomyelin tails are already optimally stabilized,
the addition of cholesterol has no effect on the thickness of a
sphingomyelin bilayer.
Another property dependent on the lipid composition
of a bilayer is its local curvature, which depends on the relative sizes of the polar head groups and nonpolar tails of
its constituent phospholipids. Lipids with long tails and
large head groups are cylindrical in shape; those with small
head groups are cone shaped (Figure 5-8b). As a result, bilayers composed of cylindrical lipids are relatively flat,
whereas those containing large amounts of cone-shaped
lipids form curved bilayers (Figure 5-8c). This effect of lipid
composition on bilayer curvature may play a role in the formation of highly curved membrane pits and blebs, internal
membrane vesicles, and specialized membrane structures
such as microvilli.

Membrane Lipids Are Usually Distributed
Unequally in the Exoplasmic
and Cytosolic Leaflets
A characteristic of all membranes is an asymmetry in lipid
composition across the bilayer. Although most phospholipids are present in both membrane leaflets, they are commonly more abundant in one or the other leaflet. For
instance, in plasma membranes from human erythrocytes
and certain canine kidney cells grown in culture, almost all
the sphingomyelin and phosphatidylcholine, both of which
form less fluid bilayers, are found in the exoplasmic leaflet.
In contrast, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine,
and phosphatidylinositol, which form more fluid bilayers,
are preferentially located in the cytosolic leaflet. This segregation of lipids across the bilayer may influence membrane
curvature (see Figure 5-8c). Unlike phospholipids, cholesterol is relatively evenly distributed in both leaflets of cellular membranes.
The relative abundance of a particular phospholipid in
the two leaflets of a plasma membrane can be determined
on the basis of its susceptibility to hydrolysis by phospholipases, enzymes that cleave various bonds in the hydrophilic ends of phospholipids (Figure 5-9). Phospholipids
in the cytosolic leaflet are resistant to hydrolysis by phospholipases added to the external medium because the enzymes cannot penetrate to the cytosolic face of the plasma
membrane.
How the asymmetric distribution of phospholipids in
membrane leaflets arises is still unclear. In pure bilayers,
phospholipids do not spontaneously migrate, or flip-flop,
from one leaflet to the other. Energetically, such flip-flopping
is extremely unfavorable because it entails movement of the
polar phospholipid head group through the hydrophobic interior of the membrane. To a first approximation, the asym-

R

Polar head group

D

O
O

P

O

O
3

CH2

2

CH

1

CH2

C
O
O

O
A1

155

C

C

(CH2)nCH3

A2
O

(CH2)n
CH3

▲ FIGURE 5-9 Specificity of phospholipases. Each type of
phospholipase cleaves one of the susceptible bonds shown in
red. The glycerol carbon atoms are indicated by small numbers.
In intact cells, only phospholipids in the exoplasmic leaflet of the
plasma membrane are cleaved by phospholipases in the
surrounding medium. Phospholipase C, a cytosolic enzyme,
cleaves certain phospholipids in the cytosolic leaflet of the
plasma membrane.

metry in phospholipid distribution results from the vectorial
synthesis of lipids in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi.
Sphingomyelin is synthesized on the luminal (exoplasmic)
face of the Golgi, which becomes the exoplasmic face of the
plasma membrane. In contrast, phosphoglycerides are synthesized on the cytosolic face of the ER membrane, which is
topologically identical with the cytosolic face of the plasma
membrane (see Figure 5-4). Clearly, this explanation does
not account for the preferential location of phosphatidylcholine in the exoplasmic leaflet. Movement of this phosphoglyceride and perhaps others from one leaflet to the other
in some natural membranes is catalyzed by certain ATPpowered transport proteins called flippases discussed in
Chapters 7 and 18.
The preferential location of lipids to one face of the bilayer is necessary for a variety of membrane-based functions.
For example, the head groups of all phosphorylated forms of
phosphatidylinositol face the cytosol. Certain of them are
cleaved by phospholipase C located in the cytosol; this enzyme in turn is activated as a result of cell stimulation by
many hormones. These cleavages generate cytosol-soluble
phosphoinositols and membrane-soluble diacylglycerol. As
we see in later chapters, these molecules participate in intracellular signaling pathways that affect many aspects of cellular metabolism. Phosphatidylserine also is normally most
abundant in the cytosolic leaflet of the plasma membrane.
In the initial stages of platelet stimulation by serum, phosphatidylserine is briefly translocated to the exoplasmic face,
presumably by a flippase enzyme, where it activates enzymes
participating in blood clotting.

156

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture
GM1

PLAP

Raft

(a)

YY

Cholera toxin
Antibodies

Y

Copatch

TfR
Cholera toxin

YY

(b)

Y

Antibodies

Separate patches

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-10 Some membrane lipids
and proteins colocalize in lipid rafts. The results of biochemical
studies suggested that GM1, a glycosphingolipid, and placental
alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), a lipid-anchored membrane protein,
aggregate together into lipid rafts, whereas the transferrin
receptor (TfR), which traverses the entire membrane, does not.
To locate these components in the intact plasma membrane,
cells were treated with fluorescence-labeled cholera toxin
(green), which cross-links closely spaced GM1 molecules, and
with fluorescence-labeled antibodies (red) specific for either
PLAP or TfR. Each antibody can cross-link closely spaced

Cholesterol and Sphingolipids Cluster with
Specific Proteins in Membrane Microdomains
The results of recent studies have challenged the long-held
belief that lipids are randomly mixed in each leaflet of a bilayer. The first hint that lipids may be organized within the
leaflets was the discovery that the residues remaining after
the extraction of plasma membranes with detergents contain
two lipids: cholesterol and sphingomyelin. Because these two
lipids are found in more ordered, less fluid bilayers, researchers hypothesized that they form microdomains, termed
lipid rafts, surrounded by other more fluid phospholipids
that are easily extracted by detergents.
Biochemical and microscopic evidence supports the existence of lipid rafts in natural membranes. For instance, fluorescence microscopy reveals aggregates of lipids and
raft-specific proteins in the membrane (Figure 5-10). The
rafts are heterogeneous in size but are typically 50 nm in
diameter. Rafts can be disrupted by methyl--cyclodextrin,
which depletes the membrane of cholesterol, or by antibiotics, such as filipin, that sequester cholesterol; such findings indicate the importance of cholesterol in maintaining the

molecules of the protein that it recognizes. Cross-linking causes
the proteins or lipids to form larger patches that can be detected
by fluorescence microscopy (see Figure 5-42). (a) Micrograph of a
cell treated with toxin and with anti-PLAP antibody shows GM1
and PLAP colocalized in the same patches (yellow). This
copatching suggests that both GM1 and PLAP are present in lipid
rafts that coalesce in the presence of the cross-linking reagents.
(b) Micrograph of a cell treated with toxin and with anti-TfR
antibody shows that GM1 and TfR reside in separate patches
(i.e., red and green), indicating that TfR is not a raft-resident
protein. [Micrographs from T. Harder et al., 1998, J. Cell Biol. 141:929.]

integrity of these rafts. Besides their enrichment by cholesterol and sphingolipids, lipid rafts are enriched for many
types of cell-surface receptor proteins, as well as many signaling proteins that bind to the receptors and are activated
by them. These lipid–protein complexes can form only in the
two-dimensional environment of a hydrophobic bilayer and,
as discussed in later chapters, they are thought to facilitate
the detection of chemical signals from the external environment and the subsequent activation of cytosolic events.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 5.1
Biomembranes: Lipid Composition
and Structural Organization
The eukaryotic cell is demarcated from the external environment by the plasma membrane and organized into
membrane-limited internal compartments (organelles and
vesicles).

■

The total surface area of internal membranes far exceeds
that of the plasma membrane.

■

5.2 • Biomembranes: Protein Components and Basic Functions

The phospholipid bilayer, the basic structural unit of all
biomembranes, is a two-dimensional lipid sheet with hydrophilic faces and a hydrophobic core, which is impermeable to water-soluble molecules and ions (see Figure 5-2).

■

Certain proteins present in biomembranes make them
selectively permeable to water-soluble molecules and ions.

■

The primary lipid components of biomembranes are phosphoglycerides, sphingolipids, and steroids (see Figure 5-5).

■

Most lipids and many proteins are laterally mobile in
biomembranes.

■

Different cellular membranes vary in lipid composition
(see Table 5-1). Phospholipids and sphingolipids are asymmetrically distributed in the two leaflets of the bilayer,
whereas cholesterol is fairly evenly distributed in both
leaflets.

■

Natural biomembranes generally have a fluidlike consistency. In general, membrane fluidity is decreased by
sphingolipids and cholesterol and increased by phosphoglycerides. The lipid composition of a membrane also influences its thickness and curvature (see Figure 5-8).

■

Lipid rafts are microdomains containing cholesterol,
sphingolipids, and certain membrane proteins that form in
the plane of the bilayer. These aggregates are sites for signaling across the plasma membrane.

■

5.2 Biomembranes: Protein
Components and Basic Functions
Membrane proteins are defined by their location within or at
the surface of a phospholipid bilayer. Although every biological membrane has the same basic bilayer structure, the
proteins associated with a particular membrane are responsible for its distinctive activities. The density and complement of proteins associated with biomembranes vary,
depending on cell type and subcellular location. For example, the inner mitochondrial membrane is 76 percent protein;
the myelin membrane, only 18 percent. The high phospholipid content of myelin allows it to electrically insulate a
nerve cell from its environment. The importance of membrane proteins is suggested from the finding that approximately a third of all yeast genes encode a membrane protein.
The relative abundance of genes for membrane proteins is
even greater in multicellular organisms in which membrane
proteins have additional functions in cell adhesion.
The lipid bilayer presents a unique two-dimensional hydrophobic environment for membrane proteins. Some proteins are buried within the lipid-rich bilayer; other proteins
are associated with the exoplasmic or cytosolic leaflet of the
bilayer. Protein domains on the extracellular surface of the
plasma membrane generally bind to other molecules, including external signaling proteins, ions, and small metabolites
(e.g., glucose, fatty acids), and to adhesion molecules on

157

other cells or in the external environment. Domains within
the plasma membrane, particularly those that form channels
and pores, move molecules in and out of cells. Domains lying
along the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane have a wide
range of functions, from anchoring cytoskeletal proteins to
the membrane to triggering intracellular signaling pathways.
In many cases, the function of a membrane protein and
the topology of its polypeptide chain in the membrane can be
predicted on the basis of its homology with another, wellcharacterized protein. In this section, we examine the characteristic structural features of membrane proteins and some
of their basic functions. More complete characterization of
the structure and function of various types of membrane proteins is presented in several later chapters; the synthesis and
processing of this large, diverse group of proteins are discussed in Chapters 16 and 17.

Proteins Interact with Membranes
in Three Different Ways
Membrane proteins can be classified into three categories—
integral, lipid-anchored, and peripheral—on the basis of the
nature of the membrane–protein interactions (Figure 5-11).
Integral membrane proteins, also called transmembrane
proteins, span a phospholipid bilayer and are built of three
segments. The cytosolic and exoplasmic domains have hydrophilic exterior surfaces that interact with the aqueous
solutions on the cytosolic and exoplasmic faces of the membrane. These domains resemble other water-soluble proteins
in their amino acid composition and structure. In contrast,
the 3-nm-thick membrane-spanning domain contains many
hydrophobic amino acids whose side chains protrude outward and interact with the hydrocarbon core of the phospholipid bilayer. In all transmembrane proteins examined to
date, the membrane-spanning domains consist of one or more
 helices or of multiple  strands. In addition, most transmembrane proteins are glycosylated with a complex branched
sugar group attached to one or several amino acid side chains.
Invariably these sugar chains are localized to the exoplasmic
domains.
Lipid-anchored membrane proteins are bound covalently
to one or more lipid molecules. The hydrophobic carbon
chain of the attached lipid is embedded in one leaflet of the
membrane and anchors the protein to the membrane. The
polypeptide chain itself does not enter the phospholipid
bilayer.
Peripheral membrane proteins do not interact with the
hydrophobic core of the phospholipid bilayer. Instead they
are usually bound to the membrane indirectly by interactions
with integral membrane proteins or directly by interactions
with lipid head groups. Peripheral proteins are localized to
either the cytosolic or the exoplasmic face of the plasma
membrane.
In addition to these proteins, which are closely associated
with the bilayer, cytoskeletal filaments are more loosely associated with the cytosolic face, usually through one or more

158

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

 FIGURE 5-11 Diagram of how various
classes of proteins associate with the lipid
bilayer. Integral (transmembrane) proteins
span the bilayer. Lipid-anchored proteins are
tethered to one leaflet by a long covalently
attached hydrocarbon chain. Peripheral
proteins associate with the membrane
primarily by specific noncovalent interactions
with integral proteins or membrane lipids.
Farther from the membrane are membraneassociated proteins including the
cytoskeleton, extracellular matrix in animal
cells, and cell wall in plant and bacterial
cells (not depicted). Carbohydrate chains are
attached to many extracellular proteins and
to the exoplasmic domains of many
transmembrane proteins.

Extracellular matrix
Peripheral

Lipid
anchored

Exterior

Integral

Integral
Cytosol

peripheral (adapter) proteins (see Figure 5-11). Such associations with the cytoskeleton provide support for various cellular membranes (see Section 5.4); they also play a role in the
two-way communication between the cell interior and the
cell exterior, as we learn in Chapter 6. Finally, peripheral
proteins on the outer surface of the plasma membrane and
the exoplasmic domains of integral membrane proteins are
often attached to components of the extracellular matrix or
to the cell wall surrounding bacterial and plant cells.

Membrane-Embedded  Helices Are
the Primary Secondary Structures
in Most Transmembrane Proteins
Soluble proteins exhibit hundreds of distinct localized folded
structures, or motifs (see Figure 3-6). In comparison, the
repertoire of folded structures in integral membrane proteins
is quite limited, with the hydrophobic  helix predominating.
Integral proteins containing membrane-spanning -helical
domains are embedded in membranes by hydrophobic interactions with specific lipids and probably also by ionic interactions with the polar head groups of the phospholipids.
Glycophorin A, the major protein in the erythrocyte
plasma membrane, is a representative single-pass transmembrane protein, which contains only one membrane-spanning
 helix (Figure 5-12). Typically, a membrane-embedded 
helix is composed of 20–25 hydrophobic (uncharged) amino
acids (see Figure 2-13). The predicted length of such a helix
(3.75 nm) is just sufficient to span the hydrocarbon core of
a phospholipid bilayer. The hydrophobic side chains protrude outward from the helix and form van der Waals interactions with the fatty acyl chains in the bilayer. In contrast, the carbonyl (CUO) and imino (NH) groups taking
part in the formation of backbone peptide bonds through

Peripheral

Peripheral
Cytoskeleton

hydrogen bonding are in the interior of the  helix (see
Figure 3-3); thus these polar groups are shielded from the
hydrophobic interior of the membrane. The transmembrane helix of one glycophorin A molecule associates with
the helix in another to form a coiled-coil dimer (see Figure
5-12b). Such interaction of membrane-spanning helices is a
common mechanism for creating dimeric membrane proteins. Many cell-surface receptors, for instance, are activated
by dimerization.
A large and important family of integral proteins is defined by the presence of seven membrane-spanning  helices. Among the more than 150 such “seven spanning”
multipass proteins that have been identified are the G protein–coupled receptors described in Chapter 13. The structure of bacteriorhodopsin, a protein found in the membrane
of certain photosynthetic bacteria, illustrates the general
structure of all these proteins (Figure 5-13). Absorption of
light by the retinal group covalently attached to bacteriorhodopsin causes a conformational change in the protein
that results in the pumping of protons from the cytosol
across the bacterial membrane to the extracellular space.
The proton concentration gradient thus generated across the
membrane is used to synthesize ATP (Chapter 8). In the
high-resolution structure of bacteriorhodopsin now available, the positions of all the individual amino acids, retinal,
and the surrounding lipids are determined. As might be expected, virtually all of the amino acids on the exterior of
the membrane-spanning segments of bacteriorhodopsin are
hydrophobic and interact with the hydrocarbon core of the
surrounding lipid bilayer.
Ion channels compose a second large and important family of multipass transmembrane proteins. As revealed by the
crystal structure of a resting K channel, ion channels are
typically tetrameric proteins. Each of the four subunits has
a pair of membrane-spanning helices that bundle with helices

5.2 • Biomembranes: Protein Components and Basic Functions
(a)

159

(b)

Extracellular
domain

N

N

73

Membranespanning
helices
96

C

C

Cytosolic
domain

▲ FIGURE 5-12 Structure of glycophorin A, a typical singlepass transmembrane protein. (a) Diagram of dimeric
glycophorin showing major sequence features and its relation to
the membrane. The single 23-residue membrane-spanning  helix
in each monomer is composed of amino acids with hydrophobic
(uncharged) side chains (red spheres). By binding negatively
charged phospholipid head groups, the positively charged
arginine and lysine residues (blue spheres) near the cytosolic
side of the helix help anchor glycophorin in the membrane. Both
the extracellular and the cytosolic domains are rich in charged

Exterior

residues and polar uncharged residues; the extracellular domain
is heavily glycosylated, with the carbohydrate side chains (green
diamonds) attached to specific serine, threonine, and asparagine
residues. (b) Molecular model of the transmembrane domain of
dimeric glycophorin corresponding to residues 73–96. The side
chains of the  helix in one monomer are shown in red; those in
the other monomer, in gray. Residues depicted as space-filling
structures participate in intermonomer van der Waals interactions
that stabilize the coiled-coil dimer. [Part (b) adapted from K. R.
MacKenzie et al., 1997, Science 276:131.]

of other subunits, forming a central channel (see Figure
7-15). Polar and hydrophobic residues lining the center of
the bundle form a channel in the membrane, but as with bacteriorhodopsin virtually all of the amino acids on the exterior
of the membrane-spanning domain are hydrophobic. In
many ion channels, external factors (e.g., a ligand, voltage,
or mechanical strain) regulate ion flow across the bilayer by
reorienting the helices. Details of ion channels and their
structures are discussed in Chapter 7.

 FIGURE 5-13 Structural model of bacteriorhodopsin, a

Cytosol

multipass transmembrane protein that functions as a
photoreceptor in certain bacteria. The seven hydrophobic 
helices in bacteriorhodopsin traverse the lipid bilayer. A retinal
molecule (red) covalently attached to one helix absorbs light. The
large class of G protein–coupled receptors in eukaryotic cells also
has seven membrane-spanning  helices; their three-dimensional
structure is similar to that of bacteriorhodopsin. [After H. Luecke et
al., 1999, J. Mol. Biol. 291:899.]

160

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

Multiple  Strands in Porins Form
Membrane-Spanning “Barrels”
The porins are a class of transmembrane proteins whose
structure differs radically from that of other integral proteins. Several types of porin are found in the outer membrane
of gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli and in the outer
membranes of mitochondria and chloroplasts. The outer
membrane protects an intestinal bacterium from harmful
agents (e.g., antibiotics, bile salts, and proteases) but permits the uptake and disposal of small hydrophilic molecules
including nutrients and waste products. The porins in the
outer membrane of an E. coli cell provide channels for the
passage of disaccharides and other small molecules as well as
phosphate.
The amino acid sequences of porins are predominantly
polar and contain no long hydrophobic segments typical of
integral proteins with -helical membrane-spanning domains. X-ray crystallography has revealed that porins are
trimers of identical subunits. In each subunit, 16  strands
form a barrel-shaped structure with a pore in the center (Fig-

Exterior

Periplasm

▲ FIGURE 5-14 Structural model of one subunit of OmpX,
a porin found in the E. coli outer membrane. All porins are
trimeric transmembrane proteins. Each subunit is barrel shaped,
with  strands forming the wall and a transmembrane pore in the
center. A band of aliphatic (noncyclic) side chains (yellow) and a
border of aromatic (ring-containing) side chains (red) position the
protein in the bilayer. [After G. E. Schulz, 2000, Curr. Opin. Struc. Biol.
10:443.]

ure 5-14). Unlike a typical water-soluble globular protein, a
porin has a hydrophilic inside and a hydrophobic exterior; in
this sense, porins are inside-out. In a porin monomer, the
outward-facing side groups on each of the  strands are hydrophobic and form a nonpolar ribbonlike band that encircles the outside of the barrel. This hydrophobic band
interacts with the fatty acyl groups of the membrane lipids or
with other porin monomers. The side groups facing the inside of a porin monomer are predominantly hydrophilic;
they line the pore through which small water-soluble molecules cross the membrane.
As discussed in Chapter 7, the plasma membranes of animal cells contain a water channel called aquaporin. Like most
other integral proteins, aquaporin contains multiple transmembrane  helices. Thus, despite its name, aquaporin differs
structurally from the porins as well as functionally in that it
mediates transport of a single molecule—namely, water.

Covalently Attached Hydrocarbon Chains Anchor
Some Proteins to Membranes
In eukaryotic cells, several types of covalently attached lipids
anchor some proteins to one or the other leaflet of the
plasma membrane and certain other cellular membranes. In
these lipid-anchored proteins, the lipid hydrocarbon chains
are embedded in the bilayer, but the protein itself does not
enter the bilayer.
A group of cytosolic proteins are anchored to the cytosolic face of a membrane by a fatty acyl group (e.g., myristate
or palmitate) attached to the N-terminal glycine residue (Figure 5-15a). Retention of such proteins at the membrane by
the N-terminal acyl anchor may play an important role in a
membrane-associated function. For example, v-Src, a mutant
form of a cellular tyrosine kinase, is oncogenic and can transform cells only when it has a myristylated N-terminus.
A second group of cytosolic proteins are anchored to
membranes by an unsaturated fatty acyl group attached to
a cysteine residue at or near the C-terminus (Figure 5-15b).
In these proteins, a farnesyl or geranylgeranyl group is bound
through a thioether bond to the OSH group of a C-terminal
cysteine residue. These prenyl anchors are built from isoprene
units (C5), which are also used in the synthesis of cholesterol
(Chapter 18). In some cases, a second geranylgeranyl group
or a palmitate group is linked to a nearby cysteine residue.
The additional anchor is thought to reinforce the attachment
of the protein to the membrane. Ras, a GTPase superfamily
protein that functions in intracellular signaling, is localized to
the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane by such a double
anchor. Rab proteins, which also belong to the GTPase superfamily, are similarly bound to the cytosolic surface of intracellular vesicles by prenyl-type anchors; these proteins are
required for the fusion of vesicles with their target membranes
(Chapter 17).
Some cell-surface proteins and heavily glycosylated proteoglycans of the extracellular matrix are bound to the exo-

5.2 • Biomembranes: Protein Components and Basic Functions
+H N
3

(c) GPI anchor

161

As already discussed, PLAP is concentrated in lipid rafts,
the more ordered bilayer microdomains that are enriched in
sphingolipids and cholesterol (see Figure 5-10). Although
PLAP and other GPI-anchored proteins lie in the opposite
membrane leaflet from acyl-anchored proteins, both types of
membrane proteins are concentrated in lipid rafts. In contrast, prenylated proteins are not found in lipid rafts.

Exterior

All Transmembrane Proteins and Glycolipids
Are Asymmetrically Oriented in the Bilayer

Cytosol

Gly

Cys

NH3+

COO−
(a) Acylation

(b) Prenylation

▲ FIGURE 5-15 Anchoring of plasma-membrane proteins to
the bilayer by covalently linked hydrocarbon groups.
(a) Cytosolic proteins such as v-Src are associated with the
plasma membrane through a single fatty acyl chain attached to
the N-terminal glycine (Gly) residue of the polypeptide. Myristate
(C14) and palmitate (C16) are common acyl anchors. (b) Other
cytosolic proteins (e.g., Ras and Rab proteins) are anchored to
the membrane by prenylation of one or two cysteine (Cys)
residues, at or near the C-terminus. The anchors are farnesyl
(C15) and geranylgeranyl (C20) groups, both of which are
unsaturated. (c) The lipid anchor on the exoplasmic surface of the
plasma membrane is glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI). The
phosphatidylinositol part (red) of this anchor contains two fatty
acyl chains that extend into the bilayer. The phosphoethanolamine
unit (purple) in the anchor links it to the protein. The two green
hexagons represent sugar units, which vary in number and
arrangement in different GPI anchors. The complete structure of a
yeast GPI anchor is shown in Figure 16-14. [Adapted from H. Sprong
et al., 2001, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:504.]

plasmic face of the plasma membrane by a third type of anchor group, glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI). The exact
structures of GPI anchors vary greatly in different cell types,
but they always contain phosphatidylinositol (PI), whose two
fatty acyl chains extend into the lipid bilayer; phosphoethanolamine, which covalently links the anchor to the
C-terminus of a protein; and several sugar residues (Figure
5-15c). Various experiments have shown that the GPI anchor
is both necessary and sufficient for binding proteins to the
membrane. For instance, the enzyme phospholipase C cleaves
the phosphate–glycerol bond in phospholipids and in GPI anchors (see Figure 5-9). Treatment of cells with phospholipase
C releases GPI-anchored proteins such as Thy-1 and placental
alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) from the cell surface.

Lipid-anchored proteins are just one example of membrane
proteins that are asymmetrically located with respect to the
faces of cellular membranes. Each type of transmembrane
protein also has a specific orientation with respect to the
membrane faces. In particular, the same part(s) of a particular protein always faces the cytosol, whereas other parts face
the exoplasmic space. This asymmetry in protein orientation
confers different properties on the two membrane faces. (We
describe how the orientation of different types of transmembrane proteins is established during their synthesis in Chapter 16.) Membrane proteins have never been observed to
flip-flop across a membrane; such movement, requiring a
transient movement of hydrophilic amino acid residues
through the hydrophobic interior of the membrane, would
be energetically unfavorable. Accordingly, the asymmetry of
a transmembrane protein, which is established during its
biosynthesis and insertion into a membrane, is maintained
throughout the protein’s lifetime.
Many transmembrane proteins contain carbohydrate
chains covalently linked to serine, threonine, or asparagine
side chains of the polypeptide. Such transmembrane glycoproteins are always oriented so that the carbohydrate chains
are in the exoplasmic domain (see Figures 5-11 and 5-12).
Likewise, glycolipids, in which a carbohydrate chain is attached to the glycerol or sphingosine backbone, are always
located in the exoplasmic leaflet with the carbohydrate chain
protruding from the membrane surface. Both glycoproteins
and glycolipids are especially abundant in the plasma membranes of eukaryotic cells; they are absent from the inner mitochondrial membrane, chloroplast lamellae, and several
other intracellular membranes. Because the carbohydrate
chains of glycoproteins and glycolipids in the plasma membrane extend into the extracellular space, they are available
to interact with components of the extracellular matrix as
well as lectins, growth factors, and antibodies.
One important consequence of such interactions
is illustrated by the A, B, and O blood-group
antigens. These three structurally related oligosaccharide components of certain glycoproteins and glycolipids are expressed on the surfaces of human erythrocytes
and many other cell types (Figure 5-16). All humans have
the enzymes for synthesizing O antigen. Persons with type
A blood also have a glycosyltransferase that adds an extra

162

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

Lipid or
protein

Glc

Gal

GlcNAc

Glc

Gal

GlcNAc

Glc

Gal

A antigen

O antigen

Gal

Fuc

Gal
transferase
Lipid or
protein

GalNAc

Fuc

GalNAc
transferase
Lipid or
protein

Gal

GlcNAc

Glc = Glucose
Gal = Galactose
GlcNAc = N -Acetylglucosamine
GalNAc = N -Acetylgalactosamine
Fuc = Fucose

Gal

Gal

B antigen

Fuc

▲ FIGURE 5-16 Human ABO blood-group antigens. These
antigens are oligosaccharide chains covalently attached to
glycolipids or glycoproteins in the plasma membrane. The
terminal oligosaccharide sugars distinguish the three antigens.
The presence or absence of the glycosyltransferases that add
galactose (Gal) or N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to O antigen
determine a person’s blood type.

N-acetylgalactosamine to O antigen to form A antigen.
Those with type B blood have a different transferase that
adds an extra galactose to O antigen to form B antigen. People with both transferases produce both A and B antigen
(AB blood type); those who lack these transferases produce
O antigen only (O blood type).
Persons whose erythrocytes lack the A antigen, B antigen, or both on their surface normally have antibodies
against the missing antigen(s) in their serum. Thus if a type

A or O person receives a transfusion of type B blood, antibodies against the B epitope will bind to the introduced red
cells and trigger their destruction. To prevent such harmful
reactions, blood-group typing and appropriate matching of
blood donors and recipients are required in all transfusions
(Table 5-2). ❚

Interactions with the Cytoskeleton Impede
the Mobility of Integral Membrane Proteins
The results of experiments like the one depicted in Figure
5-6 and other types of studies have shown that many transmembrane proteins and lipid-anchored proteins, like phospholipids, float quite freely within the plane of a natural
membrane. From 30 to 90 percent of all integral proteins
in the plasma membrane are freely mobile, depending on the
cell type. The lateral diffusion rate of a mobile protein in a
pure phospholipid bilayer or isolated plasma membrane is
similar to that of lipids. However, the diffusion rate of a
protein in the plasma membrane of intact cells is generally
10–30 times lower than that of the same protein embedded
in synthetic spherical bilayer structures (liposomes). These
findings suggest that the mobility of integral proteins in the
plasma membrane of living cells is restricted by interactions
with the rigid submembrane cytoskeleton. Some integral
proteins are permanently linked to the underlying cytoskeleton; these proteins are completely immobile in the
membrane. In regard to mobile proteins, such interactions
are broken and remade as the proteins diffuse laterally in
the plasma membrane, slowing down their rate of diffusion.
We consider the nature and functional consequences of linkages between integral membrane proteins and the cytoskeleton in Chapter 6.

Lipid-Binding Motifs Help Target Peripheral
Proteins to the Membrane
Until the past decade or so, the interaction of peripheral
proteins with integral proteins was thought to be the major

TABLE 5-2 ABO Blood Groups
Blood-Group
Type

Antigens on
RBCs*

Serum Antibodies

Can Receive
Blood Types

A

A

Anti-A

A and O

B

B

Anti-B

B and O

AB

A and B

None

All

O

O

Anti-A and anti-B

O

*

See Figure 5-16 for antigen structures.

5.2 • Biomembranes: Protein Components and Basic Functions

163

TABLE 5-3 Selected Lipid-Binding Motifs
Motif

Ligand*

Selected Proteins with Motif

PH

PIP2, PIP3

Phospholipase C1, protein kinase B, pleckstrin

C2

Acidic phospholipids

Protein kinase C, PI-3 kinase, phospholipase, PTEN
phosphatase

Ankyrin repeat

PS

Ankyrin†

FERM

PIP2

Band 4.1 protein; ezrin, radixin, moesin (ERM)†

*
PIP2, PIP3, and PI-3P  phosphatidylinositol derivatives with additional phosphate groups on the inositol ring (see Figure 14-26); PH 
pleckstrin homology; PS  phosphatidylserine;.
†
These proteins have roles in linking the actin cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane.

(a)

NH3
CH2
CH2
O

Active
site

O

P

O−. . Ca2+

O

...

mechanism by which peripheral proteins were bound to
membranes. The results of more recent research indicate
that protein–lipid interactions are equally important in
localizing peripheral proteins to cellular membranes (see
Figure 5-11).
Analyses of genome sequences have revealed several
widely distributed lipid-binding motifs in proteins (Table
5-3). For instance, the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain,
which binds two types of phosphorylated phosphatidylinositols, is the eleventh most common protein domain encoded in the human genome. This domain was initially
recognized in pleckstrin, a protein found in platelets. The
high frequency of the PH domain indicates that proteins
localized to membrane surfaces carry out many important
functions. Other common lipid-binding motifs include the
C2 domain, the ankyrin-repeat domain, and the FERM
domain. Originally discovered in protein kinase C, the C2
domain is a membrane-targeting domain for various kinases,
phosphatases, and phospholipases.
The phospholipases are representative of those watersoluble enzymes that associate with the polar head groups of
membrane phospholipids to carry out their catalytic functions. As noted earlier, phospholipases hydrolyze various
bonds in the head groups of phospholipids (see Figure 5-9).
These enzymes have an important role in the degradation
of damaged or aged cell membranes and are active molecules in many snake venoms. The mechanism of action of
phospholipase A2 illustrates how such water-soluble enzymes can reversibly interact with membranes and catalyze
reactions at the interface of an aqueous solution and lipid
surface. When this enzyme is in aqueous solution, its Ca2containing active site is buried in a channel lined with hydrophobic amino acids. The enzyme binds with greatest
affinity to bilayers composed of negatively charged phospholipids (e.g., phosphotidylethanolamine). This finding
suggests that a rim of positively charged lysine and arginine
residues around the entrance catalytic channel is particularly
important in interfacial binding (Figure 5-17a). Binding

O

CH2

(b)

Ca2+

CH

O

C

CH2
O
C

O

R1
R2

▲ FIGURE 5-17 Interfacial binding surface and mechanism
of action of phospholipase A2. (a) A structural model of the
enzyme showing the surface that interacts with a membrane.
This interfacial binding surface contains a rim of positively
charged arginine and lysine residues shown in blue surrounding
the cavity of the catalytic active site in which a substrate lipid
(red stick structure) is bound. (b) Diagram of catalysis by
phospholipase A2. When docked on a model lipid membrane,
positively charged residues of the interfacial binding site bind to
negatively charged polar groups at the membrane surface. This
binding triggers a small conformational change, opening a
channel lined with hydrophobic amino acids that leads from the
bilayer to the catalytic site. As a phospholipid moves into the
channel, an enzyme-bound Ca2+ ion (green) binds to the head
group, positioning the ester bond to be cleaved next to the
catalytic site. [Part (a) adapted from M. H. Gelb et al., 1999, Curr. Opin.
Struc. Biol. 9:428. Part (b), see D. Blow, 1991, Nature 351:444.]

164

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

induces a small conformational change in phospholipase A2
that fixes the protein to the phospholipid heads and opens
the hydrophobic channel. As a phospholipid molecule diffuses from the bilayer into the channel, the enzyme-bound
Ca2 binds to the phosphate in the head group, thereby positioning the ester bond to be cleaved next to the catalytic site
(Figure 5-17b).

The Plasma Membrane Has Many Common
Functions in All Cells
Although the lipid composition of a membrane largely determines its physical characteristics, its complement of proteins is primarily responsible for a membrane’s functional
properties. We have alluded to many functions of the plasma
membrane in the preceding discussion and briefly consider
its major functions here.
In all cells, the plasma membrane acts as a permeability
barrier that prevents the entry of unwanted materials from
the extracellular milieu and the exit of needed metabolites.
Specific membrane transport proteins in the plasma membrane permit the passage of nutrients into the cell and metabolic wastes out of it; others function to maintain the proper
ionic composition and pH (≈7.2) of the cytosol. The structure and function of proteins that make the plasma membrane selectively permeable to different molecules are
discussed in Chapter 7.
The plasma membrane is highly permeable to water but
poorly permeable to salts and small molecules such as sugars and amino acids. Owing to osmosis, water moves across
such a semipermeable membrane from a solution of low
solute (high water) concentration to one of high solute (low
water) concentration until the total solute concentrations
and thus the water concentrations on both sides are equal.
Figure 5-18 illustrates the effect on animal cells of different
external ion concentrations. When most animal cells are
placed in an isotonic solution (i.e., one with total concentration of solutes equal to that of the cell interior), there is
no net movement of water into or out of cells. However,
when cells are placed in a hypotonic solution (i.e., one with
a lower solute concentration than that of the cell interior),
water flows into the cells, causing them to swell. Conversely,
in a hypertonic solution (i.e., one with a higher solute concentration than that of the cell interior), water flows out of
cells, causing them to shrink. Under normal in vivo conditions, ion channels in the plasma membrane control
the movement of ions into and out of cells so that there is
no net movement of water and the usual cell volume is
maintained.
Unlike animal cells, bacterial, fungal, and plant cells
are surrounded by a rigid cell wall and lack the extracellular matrix found in animal tissues. The plasma membrane
is intimately engaged in the assembly of cell walls, which
in plants are built primarily of cellulose. The cell wall
prevents the swelling or shrinking of a cell that would otherwise occur when it is placed in a hypotonic or hyper-

(a) Isotonic medium

0.15 M KCl
0.15 M NaCl

(b) Hypotonic medium

0.15 M KCl
0.075 M NaCl

(c) Hypertonic medium

0.15 M KCl

0.30 M NaCl

▲ FIGURE 5-18 Effect of external ion concentration on
water flow across the plasma membrane of an animal cell.
Sodium, potassium, and chloride ions do not move freely across
the plasma membrane, but water channels (aquaporins) in the
membrane permit the flow of water in the direction dictated by
the ion concentration of the surrounding medium. (a) When the
medium is isotonic, there is no net flux of water into or out of
the cell. (b) When the medium is hypotonic, water flows into the
cell (red arrow) until the ion concentration inside and outside the
cell is the same. Because of the influx of water, the cell volume
increases. (c) When the medium is hypertonic, water flows out
of the cell until the ion concentration inside and outside the cell
is the same. Because water is lost, the cell volume decreases.

tonic medium, respectively. For this reason, cells surrounded
by a wall can grow in media having an osmotic strength
much less than that of the cytosol. The properties, function, and formation of the plant cell wall are covered in
Chapter 6.
In addition to these universal functions, the plasma
membrane has other crucial roles in multicellular organisms. Few of the cells in multicellular plants and animals
exist as isolated entities; rather, groups of cells with related
specializations combine to form tissues. In animal cells, specialized areas of the plasma membrane contain proteins and
glycolipids that form specific junctions between cells to
strengthen tissues and to allow the exchange of metabolites

5.3 • Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell

between cells. Certain plasma-membrane proteins anchor
cells to components of the extracellular matrix, the mixture
of fibrous proteins and polysaccharides that provides a bedding on which most sheets of epithelial cells or small glands
lie. We examine both of these membrane functions in Chapter 6. Still other proteins in the plasma membrane act as anchoring points for many of the cytoskeletal fibers that
permeate the cytosol, imparting shape and strength to cells
(see Section 5.4).
The plasma membranes of many types of eukaryotic cells
also contain receptor proteins that bind specific signaling
molecules (e.g., hormones, growth factors, neurotransmitters), leading to various cellular responses. These proteins,
which are critical for cell development and functioning, are
described in several later chapters. Finally, peripheral cytosolic proteins that are recruited to the membrane surface
function as enzymes, intracellular signal transducers, and
structural proteins for stabilizing the membrane.
Like the plasma membrane, the membrane surrounding each organelle in eukaryotic cells contains a unique set
of proteins essential for its proper functioning. In the next
section, we provide a brief overview of the main eukaryotic
organelles.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 5.2
Biomembranes: Protein Components
and Basic Functions
■ Biological membranes usually contain both integral (transmembrane) and peripheral membrane proteins, which do not
enter the hydrophobic core of the bilayer (see Figure 5-11).

Most integral membrane proteins contain one or more
membrane-spanning hydrophobic  helices and hydrophilic domains that extend from the cytosolic and exoplasmic faces of the membrane (see Figure 5-12).

■

The porins, unlike other integral proteins, contain membranespanning  sheets that form a barrel-like channel through the
bilayer.

■

Long-chain lipids attached to certain amino acids anchor some proteins to one or the other membrane leaflet
(see Figure 5-15).

■

Some peripheral proteins associate with the membrane
by interactions with integral proteins. Lipid-binding motifs in other peripheral proteins interact with the polar head
groups of membrane phospholipids (see Table 5-3).

■

The binding of a water-soluble enzyme (e.g., a phospholipase, kinase, or phosphatase) to a membrane surface
brings the enzyme close to its substrate and in some cases
activates it. Such interfacial binding is due to the attraction between positive charges on basic residues in the protein and negative charges on phospholipid head groups in
the bilayer.

■

165

5.3 Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell
The cell is in a dynamic flux. In the light microscope, a live
cell exhibits myriad movements ranging from the translocation of chromosomes and vesicles to the changes in shape associated with cell crawling and swimming. Investigation of
intracellular structures begins with micrographs of fixed, sectioned cells in which all cell movements are frozen. Such
static pictures of the cell reveal the organization of the cytoplasm into compartments and the stereotypic location of
each type of organelle within the cell. In this section, we describe the basic structures and functions of the major organelles in animal and plant cells (Figure 5-19). Plant and
fungal cells contain most of the organelles found in an animal cell but lack lysosomes. Instead, they contain a large central vacuole that subserves many of the functions of a
lysosome. A plant cell also contains chloroplasts, and its
membrane is strengthened by a rigid cell wall. Unique proteins in the interior and membranes of each type of organelle
largely determine its specific functional characteristics, which
are examined in more detail in later chapters. Those
organelles bounded by a single membrane are covered first,
followed by the three types that have a double membrane—
the nucleus, mitochondrion, and chloroplast.

Endosomes Take Up Soluble Macromolecules
from the Cell Exterior
Although transport proteins in the plasma membrane mediate the movement of ions and small molecules across the
lipid bilayer, proteins and some other soluble macromolecules in the extracellular milieu are internalized by endocytosis. In this process, a segment of the plasma membrane
invaginates into a “coated pit,” whose cytosolic face is lined
by a specific set of proteins including clathrin. The pit
pinches from the membrane into a small membrane-bounded
vesicle that contains extracellular material and is delivered to
an early endosome, a sorting station of membrane-limited
tubules and vesicles (Figure 5-20a, b). From this compartment,
some membrane proteins are recycled back to the plasma
membrane; other membrane proteins are transported to a
late endosome where further sorting takes place. The endocytic pathway ends when a late endosome delivers its membrane and internal contents to lysosomes for degradation.
The entire endocytic pathway is described in some detail in
Chapter 17.

Lysosomes Are Acidic Organelles That Contain
a Battery of Degradative Enzymes
Lysosomes provide an excellent example of the ability of intracellular membranes to form closed compartments in
which the composition of the lumen (the aqueous interior
of the compartment) differs substantially from that of the
surrounding cytosol. Found exclusively in animal cells,

1

2

3

7 8
14

4

5

6

15

9 10

11 12 13

16

1

Plasma membrane controls movement of molecules in and
out of the cell and functions in cell-cell signaling and cell
adhesion.

9

2

Mitochondria, which are surrounded by a double membrane,
generate ATP by oxidation of glucose and fatty acids.

10 Secretory vesicles store secreted proteins and fuse with the
plasma membrane to release their contents.

3

Lysosomes, which have an acidic lumen, degrade material
internalized by the cell and worn-out cellular membranes and
organelles.

11 Peroxisomes detoxify various molecules and also break down
fatty acids to produce acetyl groups for biosynthesis.

4

Nuclear envelope, a double membrane, encloses the contents
of the nucleus; the outer nuclear membrane is continuous
with the rough ER.

5

Nucleolus is a nuclear subcompartment where most of the
cell's rRNA is synthesized.

6

Nucleus is filled with chromatin composed of DNA and
proteins; in dividing cells is site of mRNA and tRNA synthesis.

7

Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER) synthesizes lipids and
detoxifies certain hydrophobic compounds.

8

Rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) functions in the synthesis,
processing, and sorting of secreted proteins, lysosomal
proteins, and certain membrane.

▲ FIGURE 5-19 Schematic overview of a “typical” animal
cell and plant cell and their major substructures. Not every
cell will contain all the organelles, granules, and fibrous

166

Golgi complex processes and sorts secreted proteins,
lysosomal proteins, and membrane proteins synthesized on
the rough ER.

12 Cytoskeletal fibers form networks and bundles that support
cellular membranes, help organize organelles, and participate
in cell movement.
13 Microvilli increase surface area for absorption of nutrients
from surrounding medium.
14 Cell wall, composed largely of cellulose, helps maintain the
cell's shape and provides protection against mechanical
stress.
15 Vacuole stores water, ions, and nutrients, degrades
macromolecules, and functions in cell elongation during
growth.
16 Chloroplasts, which carry out photosynthesis, are surrounded
by a double membrane and contain a network of internal
membrane-bounded sacs.

structures shown here, and other substructures can be present
in some. Cells also differ considerably in shape and in the
prominence of various organelles and substructures.

5.3 • Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell
(a)

167

(b)
Phagosome

Plasma
membrane

Bacterium
Primary
lysosome

2 Phagocytosis
1
Endocytosis

Primary lysosome
0.1 µm

Secondary
lysosome
(c)
Early
endosome

Late
endosome
Primary
lysosome

Mitochondrion
ER

Autophagosome
3
Autophagy

M
P
SL

1 µm

▲ FIGURE 5-20 Cellular structures that participate in
delivering materials to lysosomes. (a) Schematic overview of
three pathways by which materials are moved to lysosomes.
Soluble macromolecules are taken into the cell by invagination of
coated pits in the plasma membrane and delivered to lysosomes
through the endocytic pathway ( 1 ). Whole cells and other large,
insoluble particles move from the cell surface to lysosomes
through the phagocytic pathway ( 2 ). Worn-out organelles and
bulk cytoplasm are delivered to lysosomes through the
autophagic pathway ( 3 ). Within the acidic lumen of lysosomes,

hydrolytic enzymes degrade proteins, nucleic acids, and other
large molecules. (b) An electron micrograph of a section of a
cultured mammalian cell that had taken up small gold particles
coated with the egg protein ovalbumin. Gold-labeled ovalbumin
(black spots) is found in early endosomes (EE) and late
endosomes (LE), but very little is present in autophagosomes
(AV). (c) Electron micrograph of a section of a rat liver cell
showing a secondary lysosome containing fragments of a
mitochondrion (M) and a peroxisome (P). [Part (b) from T. E. Tjelle

lysosomes are responsible for degrading certain components
that have become obsolete for the cell or organism. The
process by which an aged organelle is degraded in a lysosome
is called autophagy (“eating oneself”). Materials taken into a
cell by endocytosis or phagocytosis also may be degraded in
lysosomes (see Figure 5-20a). In phagocytosis, large, insoluble particles (e.g., bacteria) are enveloped by the plasma
membrane and internalized.
Lysosomes contain a group of enzymes that degrade
polymers into their monomeric subunits. For example, nucleases degrade RNA and DNA into their mononucleotide
building blocks; proteases degrade a variety of proteins and
peptides; phosphatases remove phosphate groups from
mononucleotides, phospholipids, and other compounds; still
other enzymes degrade complex polysaccharides and glycolipids into smaller units. All the lysosomal enzymes work
most efficiently at acid pH values and collectively are termed
acid hydrolases. Two types of transport proteins in the lysosomal membrane work together to pump H and Cl ions
(HCl) from the cytosol across the membrane, thereby acidifying the lumen (see Figure 7-10b). The acid pH helps to denature proteins, making them accessible to the action of the
lysosomal hydrolases, which themselves are resistant to acid
denaturation. Lysosomal enzymes are poorly active at the
neutral pH of cells and most extracellular fluids. Thus, if a

lysosome releases its enzymes into the cytosol, where the pH
is between 7.0 and 7.3, they cause little degradation of cytosolic components. Cytosolic and nuclear proteins generally
are not degraded in lysosomes but rather in proteasomes,
large multiprotein complexes in the cytosol (see Figure 3-13).
Lysosomes vary in size and shape, and several hundred
may be present in a typical animal cell. In effect, they function as sites where various materials to be degraded collect.
Primary lysosomes are roughly spherical and do not contain
obvious particulate or membrane debris. Secondary lysosomes, which are larger and irregularly shaped, appear to result from the fusion of primary lysosomes with other
membrane-bounded organelles and vesicles. They contain
particles or membranes in the process of being digested
(Figure 5-20c).

et al., 1996, J. Cell Sci. 109:2905. Part (c) courtesy of D. Friend.]

Tay-Sachs disease is caused by a defect in one enzyme catalyzing a step in the lysosomal breakdown
of gangliosides. The resulting accumulation of
these glycolipids, especially in nerve cells, has devastating
consequences. The symptoms of this inherited disease are
usually evident before the age of 1. Affected children commonly become demented and blind by age 2 and die before
their third birthday. Nerve cells from such children are
greatly enlarged with swollen lipid-filled lysosomes. ❚

168

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

P

ports into peroxisomes an enzyme required for the oxidation
of these fatty acids. Persons with the severe form of ADL are
unaffected until midchildhood, when severe neurological disorders appear, followed by death within a few years. ❚

M

Plant seeds contain glyoxisomes, small organelles
that oxidize stored lipids as a source of carbon and
energy for growth. They are similar to peroxisomes and contain many of the same types of enzymes as
well as additional ones used to convert fatty acids into glucose precursors. ❚

Smooth ER

Rough ER

P

The Endoplasmic Reticulum Is a Network
of Interconnected Internal Membranes

M
1 m

▲ FIGURE 5-21 Electron micrograph showing various
organelles in a rat liver cell. Two peroxisomes (P) lie in close
proximity to mitochondria (M) and the rough and smooth
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Also visible are accumulations of
glycogen, a polysaccharide that is the primary glucose-storage
molecule in animals. [Courtesy of P. Lazarow.]

Generally, the largest membrane in a eukaryotic cell encloses
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)—an extensive network of
closed, flattened membrane-bounded sacs called cisternae
(see Figure 5-19). The endoplasmic reticulum has a number
of functions in the cell but is particularly important in the
synthesis of lipids, membrane proteins, and secreted proteins. The smooth endoplasmic reticulum is smooth because
it lacks ribosomes. In contrast, the cytosolic face of the rough
endoplasmic reticulum is studded with ribosomes.

Peroxisomes Degrade Fatty Acids
and Toxic Compounds

The Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum The synthesis of fatty

Glycogen

All animal cells (except erythrocytes) and many plant cells
contain peroxisomes, a class of roughly spherical organelles,
0.2–1.0 m in diameter (Figure 5-21). Peroxisomes contain
several oxidases—enzymes that use molecular oxygen to oxidize organic substances, in the process forming hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2), a corrosive substance. Peroxisomes also
contain copious amounts of the enzyme catalase, which degrades hydrogen peroxide to yield water and oxygen:
2 H2O2

Catalase
_____

→ 2 H2O + O2

In contrast with the oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria, which produces CO2 and is coupled to the generation of ATP, peroxisomal oxidation of fatty acids yields
acetyl groups and is not linked to ATP formation (see Figure 8-11). The energy released during peroxisomal oxidation
is converted into heat, and the acetyl groups are transported
into the cytosol, where they are used in the synthesis of cholesterol and other metabolites. In most eukaryotic cells, the
peroxisome is the principal organelle in which fatty acids are
oxidized, thereby generating precursors for important
biosynthetic pathways. Particularly in liver and kidney cells,
various toxic molecules that enter the bloodstream also are
degraded in peroxisomes, producing harmless products.
In the human genetic disease X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ADL), peroxisomal oxidation of
very long chain fatty acids is defective. The ADL
gene encodes the peroxisomal membrane protein that trans-

acids and phospholipids takes place in the smooth ER. Although many cells have very little smooth ER, this organelle
is abundant in hepatocytes. Enzymes in the smooth ER of the
liver also modify or detoxify hydrophobic chemicals such as
pesticides and carcinogens by chemically converting them
into more water-soluble, conjugated products that can be excreted from the body. High doses of such compounds result
in a large proliferation of the smooth ER in liver cells.

The Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum Ribosomes bound to the
rough ER synthesize certain membrane and organelle proteins
and virtually all proteins to be secreted from the cell (Chapter
16). A ribosome that fabricates such a protein is bound to the
rough ER by the nascent polypeptide chain of the protein. As
the growing polypeptide emerges from the ribosome, it passes
through the rough ER membrane, with the help of specific
proteins in the membrane. Newly made membrane proteins
remain associated with the rough ER membrane, and proteins
to be secreted accumulate in the lumen of the organelle.
All eukaryotic cells contain a discernible amount of
rough ER because it is needed for the synthesis of plasmamembrane proteins and proteins of the extracellular matrix.
Rough ER is particularly abundant in specialized cells that
produce an abundance of specific proteins to be secreted. For
example, plasma cells produce antibodies, pancreatic acinar
cells synthesize digestive enzymes, and cells in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans produce the polypeptide hormones
insulin and glucagon. In these secretory cells and others, a
large part of the cytosol is filled with rough ER and secretory
vesicles (Figure 5-22).

5.3 • Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell

169

4

Overview Animation: Protein Secretion

(a)
Mitochondrion

Nucleus

Nuclear
membrane

Secretory
vesicle

(b)
Secreted protein

3
2

Secretory vesicle
Golgi vesicles

1
Nucleus
Rough ER

Golgi
vesicles

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Plasma
membrane

Intercellular
space

▲ FIGURE 5-22 Charateristic features of cells specialized to
secrete large amounts of particular proteins (e.g., hormones,
antibodies). (a) Electron micrograph of a thin section of a
hormone-secreting cell from the rat pituitary. One end of the cell
(top) is filled with abundant rough ER and Golgi sacs, where
polypeptide hormones are synthesized and packaged. At the
opposite end of the cell (bottom) are numerous secretory
vesicles, which contain recently made hormones eventually to be
secreted. (b) Diagram of a typical secretory cell tracing the
pathway followed by a protein (small red dots) to be secreted.
Immediately after their synthesis on ribosomes (blue dots) of the

rough ER, secreted proteins are found in the lumen of the
rough ER. Transport vesicles bud off and carry these proteins
to the Golgi complex ( 1 ), where the proteins are
concentrated and packaged into immature secretory vesicles
( 2 ). These vesicles then coalesce to form larger mature
secretory vesicles that lose water to the cytosol, leaving an
almost crystalline mixture of secreted proteins in the lumen
( 3 ). After these vesicles accumulate under the apical surface,
they fuse with the plasma membrane and release their
contents (exocytosis) in response to appropriate hormonal or
nerve stimulation ( 4 ). [Part (a) courtesy of Biophoto Associates.]

The Golgi Complex Processes and Sorts Secreted
and Membrane Proteins

fined regions—the cis, the medial, and the trans. Transport
vesicles from the rough ER fuse with the cis region of the
Golgi complex, where they deposit their protein contents. As
detailed in Chapter 17, these proteins then progress from the
cis to the medial to the trans region. Within each region are
different enzymes that modify proteins to be secreted and
membrane proteins differently, depending on their structures
and their final destinations.
After proteins to be secreted and membrane proteins are
modified in the Golgi complex, they are transported out of
the complex by a second set of vesicles, which seem to bud
from the trans side of the Golgi complex. Some vesicles carry
membrane proteins destined for the plasma membrane or
soluble proteins to be released from the cell surface; others

Several minutes after proteins are synthesized in the rough
ER, most of them leave the organelle within small membranebounded transport vesicles. These vesicles, which bud from
regions of the rough ER not coated with ribosomes, carry the
proteins to another membrane-limited organelle, the Golgi
complex (see Figure 5-22).
Three-dimensional reconstructions from serial sections of
a Golgi complex reveal this organelle to be a series of flattened membrane vesicles or sacs (cisternae), surrounded by
a number of more or less spherical membrane-limited vesicles (Figure 5-23). The stack of Golgi cisternae has three de-

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

2 µm

Video: Three-Dimensional Model of a Golgi Complex

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

170

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

function similar to that of lysosomes in animal cells. Similar
storage vacuoles are found in green algae and many microorganisms such as fungi.
Like most cellular membranes, the vacuolar membrane is
permeable to water but is poorly permeable to the small molecules stored within it. Because the solute concentration is
much higher in the vacuole lumen than in the cytosol or extracellular fluids, water tends to move by osmotic flow into
vacuoles, just as it moves into cells placed in a hypotonic
medium (see Figure 5-18). This influx of water causes both
the vacuole to expand and water to move into the cell, creating hydrostatic pressure, or turgor, inside the cell. This
pressure is balanced by the mechanical resistance of the
cellulose-containing cell walls that surround plant cells. Most
plant cells have a turgor of 5–20 atmospheres (atm); their cell
walls must be strong enough to react to this pressure in a
controlled way. Unlike animal cells, plant cells can elongate
extremely rapidly, at rates of 20–75 m/h. This elongation,

▲ FIGURE 5-23 Model of the Golgi complex based on
three-dimensional reconstruction of electron
microscopy images. Transport vesicles (white spheres)
that have budded off the rough ER fuse with the cis
membranes (light blue) of the Golgi complex. By
mechanisms described in Chapter 17, proteins move from
the cis region to the medial region and finally to the trans
region of the Golgi complex. Eventually, vesicles bud off
the trans-Golgi membranes (orange and red); some move
to the cell surface and others move to lysosomes. The
Golgi complex, like the rough endoplasmic reticulum, is
especially prominent in secretory cells. [From B. J. Marsh

(a)

Vacuole

et al., 2001, Proc Nat’l. Acad. Sci USA 98:2399.]

Chloroplast

carry soluble or membrane proteins to lysosomes or other organelles. How intracellular transport vesicles “know” with
which membranes to fuse and where to deliver their contents
is also discussed in Chapter 17.

Plant Vacuoles Store Small Molecules and
Enable a Cell to Elongate Rapidly
Most plant cells contain at least one membranelimited internal vacuole. The number and size of
vacuoles depend on both the type of cell and its
stage of development; a single vacuole may occupy as much
as 80 percent of a mature plant cell (Figure 5-24). A variety
of transport proteins in the vacuolar membrane allow plant
cells to accumulate and store water, ions, and nutrients (e.g.,
sucrose, amino acids) within vacuoles (Chapter 7). Like a
lysosome, the lumen of a vacuole contains a battery of
degradative enzymes and has an acidic pH, which is maintained by similar transport proteins in the vacuolar membrane. Thus plant vacuoles may also have a degradative

Granum

Cell wall

2 m

▲ FIGURE 5-24 Electron micrograph of a thin section of a
leaf cell. In this cell, a single large vacuole occupies much of the
cell volume. Parts of five chloroplasts and the cell wall also are
visible. Note the internal subcompartments in the chloroplasts.
[Courtesy of Biophoto Associates/Myron C. Ledbetter/Brookhaven National
Laboratory.]

5.3 • Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell

which usually accompanies plant growth, occurs when a segment of the somewhat elastic cell wall stretches under the
pressure created by water taken into the vacuole. ❚

The Nucleus Contains the DNA Genome, RNA
Synthetic Apparatus, and a Fibrous Matrix
The nucleus, the largest organelle in animal cells, is surrounded by two membranes, each one a phospholipid bilayer
containing many different types of proteins. The inner nuclear membrane defines the nucleus itself. In most cells, the
outer nuclear membrane is continuous with the rough endoplasmic reticulum, and the space between the inner and outer
nuclear membranes is continuous with the lumen of the
rough endoplasmic reticulum (see Figure 5-19). The two nuclear membranes appear to fuse at nuclear pores, the ringlike
complexes composed of specific membrane proteins through
which material moves between the nucleus and the cytosol.
The structure of nuclear pores and the regulated transport
of material through them are detailed in Chapter 12.
In a growing or differentiating cell, the nucleus is metabolically active, replicating DNA and synthesizing rRNA,

N

171

tRNA, and mRNA. Within the nucleus mRNA binds to specific proteins, forming ribonucleoprotein particles. Most of
the cell’s ribosomal RNA is synthesized in the nucleolus, a
subcompartment of the nucleus that is not bounded by a
phospholipid membrane (Figure 5-25). Some ribosomal proteins are added to ribosomal RNAs within the nucleolus as
well. The finished or partly finished ribosomal subunits, as
well as tRNAs and mRNA-containing particles, pass through
a nuclear pore into the cytosol for use in protein synthesis
(Chapter 4). In mature erythrocytes from nonmammalian
vertebrates and other types of “resting” cells, the nucleus is
inactive or dormant and minimal synthesis of DNA and
RNA takes place.
How nuclear DNA is packaged into chromosomes is described in Chapter 10. In a nucleus that is not dividing, the
chromosomes are dispersed and not dense enough to be observed in the light microscope. Only during cell division are
individual chromosomes visible by light microscopy. In the
electron microscope, the nonnucleolar regions of the nucleus,
called the nucleoplasm, can be seen to have dark- and lightstaining areas. The dark areas, which are often closely associated with the nuclear membrane, contain condensed
concentrated DNA, called heterochromatin (see Figure
5-25). Fibrous proteins called lamins form a two-dimensional
network along the inner surface of the inner membrane, giving it shape and apparently binding DNA to it. The breakdown of this network occurs early in cell division, as we
detail in Chapter 21.

Mitochondria Are the Principal Sites of ATP
Production in Aerobic Cells

n

Heterochromatin

1 m

▲ FIGURE 5-25 Electron micrograph of a thin section of a
bone marrow stem cell. The nucleolus (n) is a subcompartment
of the nucleus (N) and is not surrounded by a membrane. Most
ribosomal RNA is produced in the nucleolus. Darkly staining
areas in the nucleus outside the nucleolus are regions of
heterochromatin. [From P. C. Cross and K. L. Mercer, 1993, Cell and
Tissue Ultrastructure, W. H. Freeman and Company, p. 165.]

Most eukaryotic cells contain many mitochondria, which occupy up to 25 percent of the volume of the cytoplasm. These
complex organelles, the main sites of ATP production during
aerobic metabolism, are generally exceeded in size only by
the nucleus, vacuoles, and chloroplasts.
The two membranes that bound a mitochondrion differ
in composition and function. The outer membrane, composed of about half lipid and half protein, contains porins
(see Figure 5-14) that render the membrane permeable to
molecules having molecular weights as high as 10,000. In
this respect, the outer membrane is similar to the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria. The inner membrane,
which is much less permeable, is about 20 percent lipid and
80 percent protein—a higher proportion of protein than exists in other cellular membranes. The surface area of the
inner membrane is greatly increased by a large number of
infoldings, or cristae, that protrude into the matrix, or central space (Figure 5-26).
In nonphotosynthetic cells, the principal fuels for ATP
synthesis are fatty acids and glucose. The complete aerobic
degradation of glucose to CO2 and H2O is coupled to the
synthesis of as many as 30 molecules of ATP. In eukaryotic
cells, the initial stages of glucose degradation take place in

172

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

Inner membrane

Cristae

Outer
membrane

Video: Three-Dimensional Model of a Mitochondrion

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Plasma membrane

Grana
Thylakoid
membrane
Stroma
Chloroplast
membranes
(outer and inner)

Starch
granule

Intermembrane
space

Matrix
granules

Matrix
1 m

▲ FIGURE 5-26 Electron micrograph of a
mitochondrion. Most ATP production in nonphotosynthetic
cells takes place in mitochondria. The inner membrane,
which surrounds the matrix space, has many infoldings,
called cristae. Small calcium-containing matrix granules also
are evident. [From D. W. Fawcett, 1981, The Cell, 2d ed.,

▲ FIGURE 5-27 Electron micrograph of a plant chloroplast.
The internal membrane vesicles (thylakoids) are fused into stacks
(grana), which reside in a matrix (the stroma). All the chlorophyll in
the cell is contained in the thylakoid membranes, where the lightinduced production of ATP takes place during photosynthesis.

Saunders, p. 421.]

[Courtesy of Biophoto Associates/M. C. Ledbetter/Brookhaven National
Laboratory.]

the cytosol, where 2 ATP molecules per glucose molecule are
generated. The terminal stages of oxidation and the coupled
synthesis of ATP are carried out by enzymes in the mitochondrial matrix and inner membrane (Chapter 8). As many
as 28 ATP molecules per glucose molecule are generated in
mitochondria. Similarly, virtually all the ATP formed in the
oxidation of fatty acids to CO2 is generated in mitochondria.
Thus mitochondria can be regarded as the “power plants” of
the cell.

Chloroplasts Contain Internal Compartments
in Which Photosynthesis Takes Place
Except for vacuoles, chloroplasts are the largest and
the most characteristic organelles in the cells of
plants and green algae. They can be as long as
10 m and are typically 0.5–2 m thick, but they vary in size
and shape in different cells, especially among the algae. In addition to the double membrane that bounds a chloroplast, this
organelle also contains an extensive internal system of interconnected membrane-limited sacs called thylakoids, which
are flattened to form disks (Figure 5-27). Thylakoids often
form stacks called grana and are embedded in a matrix, the
stroma. The thylakoid membranes contain green pigments

(chlorophylls) and other pigments that absorb light, as well as
enzymes that generate ATP during photosynthesis. Some of
the ATP is used to convert CO2 into three-carbon intermediates by enzymes located in the stroma; the intermediates are
then exported to the cytosol and converted into sugars. ❚
The molecular mechanisms by which ATP is formed in
mitochondria and chloroplasts are very similar, as explained
in Chapter 8. Chloroplasts and mitochondria have other features in common: both often migrate from place to place
within cells, and they contain their own DNA, which encodes some of the key organellar proteins (Chapter 10). The
proteins encoded by mitochondrial or chloroplast DNA are
synthesized on ribosomes within the organelles. However,
most of the proteins in each organelle are encoded in nuclear
DNA and are synthesized in the cytosol; these proteins are
then incorporated into the organelles by processes described
in Chapter 16.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 5.3
Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell
All eukaryotic cells contain a nucleus and numerous
other organelles in their cytosols (see Figure 5-19).

■

5.4 • The Cytoskeleton: Components and Structural Functions

The nucleus, mitochondrion, and chloroplast are
bounded by two bilayer membranes separated by an intermembrane space. All other organelles are surrounded by
a single membrane.

■

Endosomes internalize plasma-membrane proteins and
soluble materials from the extracellular medium, and they
sort them back to the membranes or to lysosomes for
degradation.

■

Lysosomes have an acidic interior and contain various
hydrolases that degrade worn-out or unneeded cellular
components and some ingested materials (see Figure 5-20).

■

173

tigators believe that the cytosol is highly organized, with
most soluble proteins either bound to filaments or otherwise
localized in specific regions. In an electron micrograph of a
typical animal cell, soluble proteins packing the cell interior
conceal much of the internal structure. If a cell is pretreated
with a nonionic detergent (e.g., Triton X-100), which permeabilizes the membrane, soluble cytosolic proteins diffuse
away. In micrographs of detergent-extracted animal cells,
two types of structures stand out—membrane-limited organelles and the filaments of the cytoskeleton, which fill the
cytosol (Figure 5-28).

Peroxisomes are small organelles containing enzymes
that oxidize various organic compounds without the production of ATP. By-products of oxidation are used in
biosynthetic reactions.

■

Secreted proteins and membrane proteins are synthesized
on the rough endoplasmic reticulum, a network of flattened membrane-bounded sacs studded with ribosomes.

■

Proteins synthesized on the rough ER first move to the
Golgi complex, where they are processed and sorted for transport to the cell surface or other destination (see Figure 5-22).

Membranemicrofilament
linkages

Plant cells contain one or more large vacuoles, which
are storage sites for ions and nutrients. Osmotic flow of
water into vacuoles generates turgor pressure that pushes
the plasma membrane against the cell wall.

Core actin
filaments

■

■

The nucleus houses the genome of a cell. The inner and
outer nuclear membranes are fused at numerous nuclear
pores, through which materials pass between the nucleus
and the cytosol. The outer nuclear membrane is continuous with that of the rough endoplasmic reticulum.

■

Mitochondria have a highly permeable outer membrane
and a protein-enriched inner membrane that is extensively
folded. Enzymes in the inner mitochondrial membrane and
central matrix carry out the terminal stages of sugar and
lipid oxidation coupled to ATP synthesis.

■

Chloroplasts contain a complex system of thylakoid
membranes in their interiors. These membranes contain the
pigments and enzymes that absorb light and produce ATP
during photosynthesis.

Actin filaments
(rootlets)
Spectrin
connecting
fibers

Keratin intermediate
filaments

■

5.4 The Cytoskeleton: Components
and Structural Functions
The cytosol is a major site of cellular metabolism and contains a large number of different enzymes. Proteins constitute
about 20–30 percent of the cytosol by weight, and from a
quarter to half of the total protein within cells is in the cytosol. Estimates of the protein concentration in the cytosol
range from 200 to 400 mg/ml. Because of the high concentration of cytosolic proteins, complexes of proteins can form
even if the energy that stabilizes them is weak. Many inves-

▲ FIGURE 5-28 Electron micrograph of the apical part of a
detergent-extracted intestinal epithelial cell. Microvilli,
fingerlike projections of the plasma membrane, cover the apical
surface of an intestinal epithelial cell. A bundle of microfilaments
in the core of each microvillus stabilizes the structure. The
plasma membrane surrounding a microvillus is attached to the
sides of the bundle by evenly spaced membrane–microfilament
linkages (yellow). The bundle continues into the cell as a short
rootlet. The rootlets of multiple microvilli are cross-braced by
connecting fibers (red) composed of an intestinal isoform of
spectrin. This fibrous actin-binding protein is found in a narrow
band just below the plasma membrane in many animal cells. The
bases of the rootlets are attached to keratin intermediate
filaments. These numerous connections anchor the rootlets in a
meshwork of filaments and thereby support the upright
orientation of the microvilli. [Courtesy of N. Hirokawa.]

174

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

In this section, we introduce the protein filaments that
compose the cytoskeleton and then describe how they support the plasma and nuclear membranes and organize the
contents of the cell. Later chapters will deal with the dynamic
properties of the cytoskeleton—its assembly and disassembly
and its role in cellular movements.

Three Types of Filaments Compose
the Cytoskeleton
The cytosol of a eukaryotic cell contains three types of filaments that can be distinguished on the bases of their diameter,
type of subunit, and subunit arrangment (Figure 5-29). Actin
filaments, also called microfilaments, are 8–9 nm in diameter and have a twisted two-stranded structure. Microtubules
are hollow tubelike structures, 24 nm in diameter, whose
walls are formed by adjacent protofilaments. Intermediate
filaments (IFs) have the structure of a 10-nm-diameter rope.
Each type of cytoskeletal filament is a polymer of protein subunits (Table 5-4). Monomeric actin subunits assemble into microfilaments; dimeric subunits composed of
- and -tubulin polymerize into microtubules. Unlike microfilaments and microtubules, which are assembled from
one or two proteins, intermediate filaments are assembled
from a large diverse family of proteins. The most common
intermediate filaments, found in the nucleus, are composed
of lamins. Intermediate filaments constructed from other
proteins are expressed preferentially in certain tissues: for example, keratin-containing filaments in epithelial cells,
desmin-containing filaments in muscle cells, and vimentincontaining filaments in mesenchymal cells.

 FIGURE 5-29 Comparison of the three types of
filaments that form the cytoskeleton. (a) Diagram of the basic
structures of an actin filament (AF), intermediate filament (IF),
and microtubule (MT). The beadlike structure of an actin filament
shows the packing of actin subunits. Intermediate filament
subunits pack to form ropes in which the individual subunits are
difficult to distinguish. The walls of microtubules are formed from
protofilaments of tubulin subunits. (b) Micrograph of a mixture of
actin filaments, microtubules, and vimentin intermediate
filaments showing the differences in their shape, size, and
flexibility. Purified preparations of actin, tubulin, and vimentin
subunits were separately polymerized in a test tube to form the
corresponding filaments. A mixture of the filaments was applied
to a carbon film on a microscope grid and then rinsed with a
dilute solution of uranyl acetate (UC), which surrounds but does
not penetrate the protein (c). Because uranyl acetate is a heavy
metal that easily scatters electrons, areas of the microscope grid
occupied by protein produce a “negative” image in metal film
when projected onto a photographic plate, as seen in part (b).
[Part (b) courtesy of G. Waller and P. Matsudaira.]

Most eukaryotic cells contain all three types of cytoskeletal filaments, often concentrated in distinct locations. For example, in the absorptive epithelial cells that
line the lumen of the intestine, actin microfilaments are
abundant in the apical region, where they are associated
with cell–cell junctions and support a dense carpet of microvilli (Figure 5-30a). Actin filaments are also present in
a narrow zone adjacent to the plasma membrane in the lateral regions of these cells. Keratin intermediate filaments,

TABLE 5-4 Protein Subunits in Cytoskeletal Filaments
Protein Subunits

MW

Expression

Function

Actin

42,000

Fungi, plant, animal

Structural support, motility

MreB

36,000

Rod-shaped bacteria

Width control

Tubulin ( and )

58,000

Fungi, plant, animal

Structural support, motility, cell polarity

FtsZ

58,000

Bacteria

Cell division

Lamins

Various

Plant, animal

Support for nuclear membrane

Desmin, keratin, vimentin, others

Various

Animal

Cell adhesion

50,000

Nematode sperm

Motility

MICROFILAMENTS

MICROTUBULES

INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS

OTHER
MSP

5.4 • The Cytoskeleton: Components and Structural Functions
(a)

AF

IF

MT

(b)

175

conservation is explained by the variety of critical functions
that depend on the cytoskeleton. A mutation in a cytoskeleton protein subunit could disrupt the assembly of filaments and their binding to other proteins. Analyses of
gene sequences and protein structures have identified bacterial homologs of actin and tubulin. The absence of IF-like
proteins in bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes is evidence
that intermediate filaments appeared later in the evolution
of the cytoskeletal system. The first IF protein to arise was
most likely a nuclear lamin from which cytosolic IF proteins later evolved.
The simple bacterial cytoskeleton controls cell length,
width, and the site of cell division. The FtsZ protein, a bacterial homolog of tubulin, is localized around the neck of dividing bacterial cells, suggesting that FtsZ participates in cell
division (Figure 5-30b). The results of biochemical experiments with purified FtsZ demonstrate that it can polymerize into protofilaments, but these protofilaments do not
assemble into intact microtubules. Another bacterial protein,
MreB, has been found to be similar to actin in atomic structure and filament structure—strong evidence that actin
evolved from MreB. Clues to the function of MreB include
its localization in a filament that girdles rod-shaped bacterial
cells, its absence from spherical bacteria, and the finding that
mutant cells lacking MreB become wider but not longer.
These observations suggest MreB controls the width of rodshaped bacteria.
(a)

Actin

MTs

IFs

(b)
(c)

MT
AF

IF

Carbon film

forming a meshwork, connect microvilli and are tethered to
junctions between cells. Lamin intermediate filaments support the inner nuclear membrane. Finally, microtubules,
aligned with the long axis of the cell, are in close proximity to major cell organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi complex, and vesicles.
The cytoskeleton has been highly conserved in evolution. A comparison of gene sequences shows only a small
percentage of differences in sequence between yeast actin
and tubulin and human actin and tubulin. This structural

MreB

FtsZ

MreB

▲ FIGURE 5-30 Schematic depiction of the distribution of
cytoskeletal filaments in eukaryotic cells and bacterial cells.
(a) In absorptive epithelial cells, actin filaments (red) are
concentrated in the apical region and in a narrow band in the
basolateral region. Microtubules (blue) are oriented with the long
axis of the cell, and intermediate filaments (green) are
concentrated along the cell periphery especially at specialized
junctions with neighboring cells and lining the nuclear
membrane. (b) In a rod-shaped bacterial cell, filaments of MreB,
the bacterial actin homolog, ring the cell and constrict its width.
The bacterial tubulin homolog, FtsZ, forms filaments at the site
of cell division.

176

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

We will consider various cytoskeletal cross-linking proteins
and their functions in Chapters 19 and 20.

Cytoskeletal Filaments Are Organized
into Bundles and Networks
On first looking at micrographs of a cell, one is struck by
the dense, seemingly disorganized mat of filaments present in
the cytosol. However, a keen eye will start to pick out
areas—generally where the membrane protrudes from the
cell surface or where a cell adheres to the surface or another
cell—in which the filaments are concentrated into bundles.
From these bundles, the filaments continue into the cell interior, where they fan out and become part of a network of
filaments. These two structures, bundles and networks, are
the most common arrangements of cytoskeletal filaments in
a cell.
Structurally, bundles differ from networks mainly in the
organization of the filaments. In bundles, the filaments are
closely packed in parallel arrays. In a network, the filaments crisscross, often at right angles, and are loosely
packed. Networks can be further subdivided. One type, associated with the nuclear and plasma membranes, is planar (two-dimensional), like a net or a web; the other type,
present within the cell, is three-dimensional, giving the
cytosol gel-like properties. In all bundles and networks, the
filaments are held together by various cross-linking proteins.

(a)

(b)

Microfilaments and Membrane-Binding
Proteins Form a Skeleton Underlying
the Plasma Membrane
The distinctive shape of a cell depends on the organization of
actin filaments and proteins that connect microfilaments to the
membrane. These proteins, called membrane–microfilament
binding proteins, act as spot welds that tack the actin
cytoskeleton framework to the overlying membrane. When
attached to a bundle of filaments, the membrane acquires the
fingerlike shape of a microvillus or similar projection (see Figure 5-28). When attached to a planar network of filaments, the
membrane is held flat like the red blood cell membrane. The
simplest membrane–cytoskeleton connections entail the binding of integral membrane proteins directly to actin filaments.
More common are complex linkages that connect actin filaments to integral membrane proteins through peripheral membrane proteins that function as adapter proteins. Such linkages
between the cytoskeleton and certain plasma-membrane proteins are considered in Chapter 6.

Plasma membrane

Glycophorin
Band 3 dimer

Ankyrin
Spectrin
tetramer

Band 4.1

Actin
Tropomyosin
0.1 µm

Band 4.1
Adducin
Tropomodulin

▲ FIGURE 5-31 Cortical cytoskeleton supporting the
plasma membrane in human erythrocytes. (a) Electron
micrograph of the erythrocyte membrane showing the spokeand-hub organization of the cytoskeleton. The long spokes are
composed mainly of spectrin and can be seen to intersect at the
hubs, or membrane-attachment sites. The darker spots along the
spokes are ankyrin molecules, which cross-link spectrin to

integral membrane proteins. (b) Diagram of the erythrocyte
cytoskeleton showing the various components. See text for
discussion. [Part (a) from T. J. Byers and D. Branton, 1985, Proc. Nat’l.
Acad. Sci. USA 82:6153. Courtesy of D. Branton. Part (b) adapted from
S. E. Lux, 1979, Nature 281:426, and E. J. Luna and A. L. Hitt, 1992,
Science 258:955.]

5.4 • The Cytoskeleton: Components and Structural Functions

The richest area of actin filaments in many cells lies in the
cortex, a narrow zone just beneath the plasma membrane.
In this region, most actin filaments are arranged in a network
that excludes most organelles from the cortical cytoplasm.
Perhaps the simplest cytoskeleton is the two-dimensional
network of actin filaments adjacent to the erythrocyte
plasma membrane. In more complicated cortical cytoskeletons, such as those in platelets, epithelial cells, and muscle,
actin filaments are part of a three-dimensional network that
fills the cytosol and anchors the cell to the substratum.
A red blood cell must squeeze through narrow blood capillaries without rupturing its membrane. The strength and
flexibility of the erythrocyte plasma membrane depend on a
dense cytoskeletal network that underlies the entire membrane and is attached to it at many points. The primary component of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton is spectrin, a
200-nm-long fibrous protein. The entire cytoskeleton is
arranged in a spoke-and-hub network (Figure 5-31a). Each
spoke is composed of a single spectrin molecule, which extends from two hubs and cross-links them. Each hub comprises a short (14-subunit) actin filament plus adducin,
tropomyosin, and tropomodulin (Figure 5-31b, inset). The
last two proteins strengthen the network by preventing the
actin filament from depolymerizing. Six or seven spokes radiate from each hub, suggesting that six or seven spectrin
molecules are bound to the same actin filament.
To ensure that the erythrocyte retains its characteristic
shape, the spectrin-actin cytoskeleton is firmly attached to
the overlying erythrocyte plasma membrane by two peripheral membrane proteins, each of which binds to a specific
integral membrane protein and to membrane phospholipids.
Ankyrin connects the center of spectrin to band 3 protein, an
anion-transport protein in the membrane. Band 4.1 protein,
a component of the hub, binds to the integral membrane protein glycophorin, whose structure was discussed previously
(see Figure 5-12). Both ankyrin and band 4.1 protein also
contain lipid-binding motifs, which help bind them to the
membrane (see Table 5-3). The dual binding by ankyrin and
band 4.1 ensures that the membrane is connected to both the
spokes and the hubs of the spectrin-actin cytoskeleton (see
Figure 5-31b).

Intermediate Filaments Support the Nuclear
Membrane and Help Connect Cells into Tissues
Intermediate filaments typically crisscross the cytosol, forming an internal framework that stretches from the nuclear envelope to the plasma membrane (Figure 5-32). A network of
intermediate filaments is located adjacent to some cellular
membranes, where it provides mechanical support. For example, lamin A and lamin C filaments form an orthogonal
lattice that is associated with lamin B. The entire supporting
structure, called the nuclear lamina, is anchored to the inner
nuclear membrane by prenyl anchors on lamin B.
At the plasma membrane, intermediate filaments are attached by adapter proteins to specialized cell junctions called

177

▲ FIGURE 5-32 Fluorescence micrograph of a PtK2
fibroblast cell stained to reveal keratin intermediate
filaments. A network of filaments crisscrosses the cell from the
nucleus to the plasma membrane. At the plasma membrane, the
filaments are linked by adapter proteins to two types of
anchoring junctions: desmosomes between adjacent cells and
hemidesmosomes between the cell and the matrix. [Courtesy of
R. D. Goldman.]

desmosomes and hemidesmosomes, which mediate cell–cell
adhesion and cell–matrix adhesion, respectively, particularly
in epithelial tissues. In this way, intermediate filaments in one
cell are indirectly connected to intermediate filaments in a
neighboring cell or to the extracellular matrix. Because of the
important role of cell junctions in cell adhesion and the stability of tissues, we consider their structure and relation to
cytoskeletal filaments in detail in Chapter 6.

Microtubules Radiate from Centrosomes
and Organize Certain Subcellular Structures
Like microfilaments and intermediate filaments, microtubules are not randomly distributed in cells. Rather, microtubules radiate from the centrosome, which is the primary
microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) in animal cells (Figure 5-33). As detailed in Chapter 20, the two ends of a microtubule differ in their dynamic properties and are
commonly designated as the () and () ends. For this reason, microtubles can have two distinct orientations relative
to one another and to other cell structures. In many nondividing animal cells, the MTOC is located at the center of the
cell near the nucleus, and the radiating microtubules are all
oriented with their () ends directed toward the cell periphery. Although most interphase animal cells contain a single
perinuclear MTOC, epithelial cells and plant cells contain
hundreds of MTOCs. Both of these cell types exhibit distinct

178

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

Microfilaments are assembled from monomeric actin
subunits; microtubules, from ,-tubulin subunits; and intermediate filaments, from lamin subunits and other tissuespecific proteins.
■

In all animal and plant cells, the cytoskeleton provides
structural stability for the cell and contributes to cell movement. Some bacteria have a primitive cytoskeleton.

■

Actin bundles form the core of microvilli and other fingerlike projections of the plasma membrane.

■

Cortical spectrin-actin networks are attached to the cell
membrane by bivalent membrane–microfilament binding
proteins such as ankyrin and band 4.1 (see Figure 5-31).

■

Intermediate filaments are assembled into networks and
bundles by various intermediate filament–binding proteins,
which also cross-link intermediate filaments to the plasma
and nuclear membranes, microtubules, and microfilaments.

■

In some animal cells, microtubules radiate out from a
single microtubule-organizing center lying at the cell center (see Figure 5-33). Intact microtubules appear to be necessary for endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi membranes to
form into organized structures.

■

▲ FIGURE 5-33 Fluorescence micrograph of a Chinese
hamster ovary cell stained to reveal microtubles and the
MTOC. The microtubules (green), detected with an antibody to
tubulin, are seen to radiate from a central point, the microtubuleorganizing center (MTOC), near the nucleus. The MTOC (yellow)
is detected with an antibody to a protein localized to the
centrosome. [Courtesy of R. Kuriyame.]

functional or structural properties or both in different regions of the cell. The functional and structural polarity of
these cells is linked to the orientation of microtubules within
them.
Findings from studies discussed in Chapter 20 show that
the association of microtubules with the endoplasmic reticulum and other membrane-bounded organelles may be critical to the location and organization of these organelles
within the cell. For instance, if microtubules are destroyed by
drugs such as nocodazole or colcemid, the ER loses its networklike organization. Microtubules are also critical to the
formation of the mitotic apparatus—the elaborate, transient
structure that captures and subsequently separates replicated
chromosomes in cell division.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 5.4
The Cytoskeleton: Components and Structural
Functions
The cytosol is the internal aqueous medium of a cell exclusive of all organelles and the cytoskeleton. It contains
numerous soluble enzymes responsible for much of the
cell’s metabolic activity.

■

Three major types of protein filaments—actin filaments,
microtubules, and intermediate filaments—make up the cytoskeleton (see Figure 5-29).

■

5.5 Purification of Cells
and Their Parts
Many studies on cell structure and function require samples
of a particular type of cell or subcellular organelle. Most animal and plant tissues, however, contain a mixture of cell
types; likewise, most cells are filled with a variety of organelles. In this section, we describe several commonly used
techniques for separating different cell types and organelles.
The purification of membrane proteins presents some unique
problems also considered here.

Flow Cytometry Separates Different Cell Types
Some cell types differ sufficiently in density that they can be
separated on the basis of this physical property. White blood
cells (leukocytes) and red blood cells (erythrocytes), for instance, have very different densities because erythrocytes
have no nucleus; thus these cells can be separated by equilibrium density centrifugation (described shortly). Because
most cell types cannot be differentiated so easily, other techniques such as flow cytometry must be used to separate
them.
A flow cytometer identifies different cells by measuring
the light that they scatter and the fluorescence that they emit
as they flow through a laser beam; thus it can sort out cells of
a particular type from a mixture. Indeed, a fluorescenceactivated cell sorter (FACS), an instrument based on flow cytometry, can select one cell from thousands of other cells
(Figure 5-34). For example, if an antibody specific to a certain cell-surface molecule is linked to a fluorescent dye, any

5.5 • Purification of Cells and Their Parts
Cell suspension
Sheath fluid

Filter
Condenser
Fluorescent
light
detector

1

2

Scattered
light
detector

2

3

1
Laser beam

−
−
=
=
−

−

+
Drops with
no charge

4
Drops with
lesser charge
Fluorescent cells

Drops with
greater charge

Nonfluorescent cell
Sorted charged
droplets containing
fluorescent cells

Fluorescent cell droplets
Nonfluorescent cell droplet

cell bearing this molecule will bind the antibody and will
then be separated from other cells when it fluoresces in the
FACS. Having been sorted from other cells, the selected cells
can be grown in culture.
The FACS procedure is commonly used to purify the different types of white blood cells, each of which bears on its
surface one or more distinctive proteins and will thus bind
monoclonal antibodies specific for that protein. Only the T
104

Green fluorescence
Thy1.2

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-34
Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS)
separates cells that are labeled
differentially with a fluorescent reagent.
Step 1 : A concentrated suspension of
labeled cells is mixed with a buffer (the
sheath fluid) so that the cells pass single-file
through a laser light beam. Step 2 : Both the
fluorescent light emitted and the light
scattered by each cell are measured; from
measurements of the scattered light, the size
and shape of the cell can be determined.
Step 3 : The suspension is then forced
through a nozzle, which forms tiny droplets
containing at most a single cell. At the time
of formation, each droplet is given a negative
electric charge proportional to the amount of
fluorescence of its cell. Step 4 : Droplets
with no charge and those with different
electric charges are separated by an electric
field and collected. It takes only milliseconds
to sort each droplet, and so as many as 10
million cells per hour can pass through the
machine. In this way, cells that have desired
properties can be separated and then grown.
[Adapted from D. R. Parks and L. A. Herzenberg,
1982, Meth. Cell Biol. 26:283.]

cells of the immune system, for instance, have both CD3 and
Thy1.2 proteins on their surfaces. The presence of these surface proteins allows T cells to be separated easily from other
types of blood cells or spleen cells (Figure 5-35). In a variation of the use of monoclonal antibodies for separating cells,
small magnetic beads are coated with a monoclonal antibody
specific for a surface protein such as CD3 or Thy1.2. Only
cells with these proteins will stick to the beads and can be

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-35 T cells bound to
fluorescence-tagged antibodies to two cell-surface proteins
are separated from other white blood cells by FACS. Spleen
cells from a mouse reacted with a fluorescence-tagged
monoclonal antibody (green) specific for the CD3 cell-surface
protein and with a fluorescence-tagged monoclonal antibody (red)
specific for a second cell-surface protein, Thy1.2. As cells were
passed through a FACS machine, the intensity of the green and
red fluorescence emitted by each cell was recorded. This plot of
the red fluorescence (vertical axis) versus green fluorescence
(horizontal axis) for thousands of cells shows that about half of
the cells—the T cells—express both CD3 and Thy1.2 proteins on
their surfaces (upper-right quadrant). The remaining cells, which
exhibit low fluorescence (lower-left quadrant), express only
background levels of these proteins and are other types of white
blood cells. Note the logarithmic scale on both axes. [Courtesy of

T cells

103

102

101

100
100

179

Non-T cells

101

102
CD3
Red fluorescence

103

104

Chengcheng Zhang.]

180

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

ers in which the cells are forced through a very narrow space
between the plunger and the vessel wall. As noted earlier,
water flows into cells when they are placed in a hypotonic
solution (see Figure 5-18). This osmotic flow causes cells to
swell, weakening the plasma membrane and facilitating its
rupture. Generally, the cell solution is kept at 0 C to best
preserve enzymes and other constituents after their release
from the stabilizing forces of the cell.
Disrupting the cell produces a mix of suspended cellular
components, the homogenate, from which the desired organelles can be retrieved. Homogenization of the cell and dilution of the cytosol cause the depolymerization of actin
microfilaments and microtubules, releasing their monomeric
subunits, and shear intermediate filaments into short fragments. Thus other procedures, described in Chapters 19 and
20, are used to study these important constituents. Because rat
liver contains an abundance of a single cell type, this tissue has
been used in many classic studies of cell organelles. However,
the same isolation principles apply to virtually all cells and tissues, and modifications of these cell-fractionation techniques
can be used to separate and purify any desired components.

recovered from the preparation by adhesion to a small magnet on the side of the test tube.
Other uses of flow cytometry include the measurement of
a cell’s DNA and RNA content and the determination of its
general shape and size. The FACS can make simultaneous
measurements of the size of a cell (from the amount of scattered light) and the amount of DNA that it contains (from the
amount of fluorescence emitted from a DNA-binding dye).

Disruption of Cells Releases Their Organelles
and Other Contents
The initial step in purifying subcellular structures is to rupture the plasma membrane and the cell wall, if present. First,
the cells are suspended in a solution of appropriate pH and
salt content, usually isotonic sucrose (0.25 M) or a combination of salts similar in composition to those in the cell’s
interior. Many cells can then be broken by stirring the cell
suspension in a high-speed blender or by exposing it to
ultrahigh-frequency sound (sonication). Plasma membranes
can also be sheared by special pressurized tissue homogenizFilter
homogenate
to remove
clumps of
unbroken
cells,
connective
tissue, etc.

Centrifuge

600g ×
10 min

Filtered
Nuclei
homogenate

Pour out:
15,000g ×
5 min

Pour out:
100,000g ×
60 min

Mitochondria,
chloroplasts,
lysosomes,
and
peroxisomes

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-36 Differential centrifugation
is a common first step in fractionating a cell homogenate.
The homogenate resulting from disrupting cells is usually filtered
to remove unbroken cells and then centrifuged at a fairly low
speed to selectively pellet the nucleus—the largest organelle.
The undeposited material (the supernatant) is next centrifuged at
a higher speed to sediment the mitochondria, chloroplasts,
lysosomes, and peroxisomes. Subsequent centrifugation in the

Pour out:
300,000g ×
2h

Plasma
membrane,
microsomal
fraction
(fragments of
endoplasmic
reticulum),
and large
polyribosomes

Pour out

Ribosomal
subunits,
small
polyribosomes

Soluble
part of
cytoplasm
(cytosol)

ultracentrifuge at 100,000g for 60 minutes results in deposition
of the plasma membrane, fragments of the endoplasmic
reticulum, and large polyribosomes. The recovery of ribosomal
subunits, small polyribosomes, and particles such as complexes
of enzymes requires additional centrifugation at still higher
speeds. Only the cytosol—the soluble aqueous part of the
cytoplasm—remains in the supernatant after centrifugation at
300,000g for 2 hours.

5.5 • Purification of Cells and Their Parts

Centrifugation Can Separate Many Types
of Organelles

Increasing density of
sucrose (g/cm3)

In Chapter 3, we considered the principles of centrifugation
and the uses of centrifugation techniques for separating proteins and nucleic acids. Similar approaches are used for separating and purifying the various organelles, which differ in
both size and density and thus undergo sedimentation at different rates.
Most cell-fractionation procedures begin with differential centrifugation of a filtered cell homogenate at increasingly higher speeds (Figure 5-36). After centrifugation at
each speed for an appropriate time, the supernatant is
poured off and centrifuged at higher speed. The pelleted
fractions obtained by differential centrifugation generally
contain a mixture of organelles, although nuclei and viral
particles can sometimes be purified completely by this procedure. An impure organelle fraction obtained by differential centrifugation can be further purified by equilibrium
density-gradient centrifugation, which separates cellular
components according to their density. After the fraction
is resuspended, it is layered on top of a solution that con-

Organelle
fraction
1.09
1.11
1.15
1.19
1.22
1.25
Before
centrifugation

Lysosomes
(1.12 g/cm3)
Mitochondria
(1.18 g/cm3)
Peroxisomes
(1.23 g/cm3)
After
centrifugation

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-37 A mixed organelle
fraction can be further separated by equilibrium densitygradient centrifugation. In this example, material in the pellet
from centrifugation at 15,000g (see Figure 5-36) is resuspended
and layered on a gradient of increasingly more dense sucrose
solutions in a centrifuge tube. During centrifugation for several
hours, each organelle migrates to its appropriate equilibrium
density and remains there. To obtain a good separation of
lysosomes from mitochondria, the liver is perfused with a
solution containing a small amount of detergent before the tissue
is disrupted. During this perfusion period, detergent is taken into
the cells by endocytosis and transferred to the lysosomes,
making them less dense than they would normally be and
permitting a “clean” separation of lysosomes from mitochondria.

181

tains a gradient of a dense nonionic substance (e.g., sucrose
or glycerol). The tube is centrifuged at a high speed (about
40,000 rpm) for several hours, allowing each particle to migrate to an equilibrium position where the density of the
surrounding liquid is equal to the density of the particle
(Figure 5-37).
Because each organelle has unique morphological features, the purity of organelle preparations can be assessed
by examination in an electron microscope. Alternatively,
organelle-specific marker molecules can be quantified. For
example, the protein cytochrome c is present only in mitochondria; so the presence of this protein in a fraction of
lysosomes would indicate its contamination by mitochondria. Similarly, catalase is present only in peroxisomes; acid
phosphatase, only in lysosomes; and ribosomes, only in the
rough endoplasmic reticulum or the cytosol.

Organelle-Specific Antibodies Are Useful
in Preparing Highly Purified Organelles
Cell fractions remaining after differential and equilibrium
density-gradient centrifugation may still contain more than
one type of organelle. Monoclonal antibodies for various
organelle-specific membrane proteins are a powerful tool
for further purifying such fractions. One example is the purification of coated vesicles whose outer surface is covered
with clathrin (Figure 5-38). An antibody to clathrin, bound
to a bacterial carrier, can selectively bind these vesicles in a
crude preparation of membranes, and the whole antibody
complex can then be isolated by low-speed centrifugation.
A related technique uses tiny metallic beads coated with specific antibodies. Organelles that bind to the antibodies, and
are thus linked to the metallic beads, are recovered from the
preparation by adhesion to a small magnet on the side of the
test tube.
All cells contain a dozen or more different types of
small membrane-limited vesicles of about the same size
(50–100 nm in diameter) and density. Because of their similar size and density, these vesicles are difficult to separate
from one another by centrifugation techniques. Immunological techniques are particularly useful for purifying specific classes of such vesicles. Fat and muscle cells, for
instance, contain a particular glucose transporter (GLUT4)
that is localized to the membrane of a specific kind of vesicle. When insulin is added to the cells, these vesicles fuse
with the cell-surface membrane and increase the number
of glucose transporters able to take up glucose from the
blood. As will be seen in Chapter 15, this process is critical to maintaining the appropriate concentration of sugar
in the blood. The GLUT4-containing vesicles can be purified by using an antibody that binds to a segment of the
GLUT4 protein that faces the cytosol. Likewise, the various
transport vesicles discussed in Chapter 17 are characterized
by unique surface proteins that permit their separation with
the aid of specific antibodies.

182

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

(a)

(b)
Clathrin

Bacterial cell

Coated
vesicles

Antibody to clathrin
Protein A

Coated vesicle

0.1 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-38 Small vesicles can be
purified by binding of antibody specific for a vesicle surface
protein and linkage to bacterial cells. In this example, a
suspension of membranes from rat liver is incubated with an
antibody specific for clathrin, a protein that coats the outer
surface of certain cytosolic vesicles. To this mixture is added a
suspension of Staphylococcus aureus bacteria whose surface
membrane contains protein A, which binds to the Fc constant

region of antibodies. (a) Interaction of protein A with antibodies
bound to clathrin-coated vesicles links the vesicles to the
bacterial cells. The vesicle–bacteria complexes can then be
recovered by low-speed centrifugation. (b) A thin-section electron
micrograph reveals clathrin-coated vesicles bound to an S. aureus
cell. [See E. Merisko et al., 1982, J. Cell Biol. 93:846. Micrograph

Proteins Can Be Removed from Membranes
by Detergents or High-Salt Solutions

Ionic detergents bind to the exposed hydrophobic regions
of membrane proteins as well as to the hydrophobic cores
of water-soluble proteins. Because of their charge, these detergents also disrupt ionic and hydrogen bonds. At high concentrations, for example, sodium dodecylsulfate completely
denatures proteins by binding to every side chain, a property that is exploited in SDS gel electrophoresis (see Figure
3-32). Nonionic detergents do not denature proteins and are
thus useful in extracting proteins from membranes before
purifying them. These detergents act in different ways at different concentrations. At high concentrations (above the
CMC), they solubilize biological membranes by forming
mixed micelles of detergent, phospholipid, and integral
membrane proteins (Figure 5-40). At low concentrations
(below the CMC), these detergents bind to the hydrophobic
regions of most integral membrane proteins, making them
soluble in aqueous solution.
Treatment of cultured cells with a buffered salt solution
containing a nonionic detergent such as Triton X-100 extracts
water-soluble proteins as well as integral membrane proteins.
As noted earlier, the exoplasmic and cytosolic domains of integral membrane proteins are generally hydrophilic and sol-

Detergents are amphipathic molecules that disrupt membranes by intercalating into phospholipid bilayers and solubilizing lipids and proteins. The hydrophobic part of a
detergent molecule is attracted to hydrocarbons and mingles
with them readily; the hydrophilic part is strongly attracted to
water. Some detergents are natural products, but most are
synthetic molecules developed for cleaning and for dispersing mixtures of oil and water (Figure 5-39). Ionic detergents,
such as sodium deoxycholate and sodium dodecylsulfate
(SDS), contain a charged group; nonionic detergents, such as
Triton X-100 and octylglucoside, lack a charged group. At
very low concentrations, detergents dissolve in pure water as
isolated molecules. As the concentration increases, the molecules begin to form micelles—small, spherical aggregates in
which hydrophilic parts of the molecules face outward and
the hydrophobic parts cluster in the center (see Figure 2-20).
The critical micelle concentration (CMC) at which micelles
form is characteristic of each detergent and is a function of
the structures of its hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts.

courtesy of G. Palade.]

5.5 • Purification of Cells and Their Parts

183

IONIC DETERGENTS
O

H3C
HC

CH2

CH2

COONa

H3C

(CH2)11

O

OH
CH3

ONa

O
Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS)

Sodium deoxycholate

CH3

S

HO
NONIONIC DETERGENTS

HOCH2
O

H3C
H3C

C
H3C

CH3
CH2

C
CH3

O

(CH2

CH2

O)9.5

(Average)

Triton X-100
(polyoxyethylene(9.5)p-t-octylphenol)

H

O

(CH2)7

CH3

OH
HO
OH
Octylglucoside
(octyl--D-glucopyranoside)

▲ FIGURE 5-39 Structures of four common detergents. The
hydrophobic part of each molecule is shown in yellow; the
hydrophilic part, in blue. The bile salt sodium deoxycholate is a
natural product; the others are synthetic. Although ionic

detergents commonly cause denaturation of proteins, nonionic
detergents do not and are thus useful in solubilizing integral
membrane proteins.

uble in water. The membrane-spanning domains, however,
are rich in hydrophobic and uncharged residues (see Figure
5-12). When separated from membranes, these exposed hydrophobic segments tend to interact with one another, causing the protein molecules to aggregate and precipitate from
aqueous solutions. The hydrophobic parts of nonionic detergent molecules preferentially bind to the hydrophobic seg-

ments of transmembrane proteins, preventing protein aggregation and allowing the proteins to remain in the aqueous solution. Detergent-solubilized transmembrane proteins can
then be purified by affinity chromatography and other techniques used in purifying water-soluble proteins (Chapter 3).
As discussed previously, most peripheral proteins are
bound to specific transmembrane proteins or membrane

Micelles
Concentration
above CMC

Detergent

Concentration
below CMC

▲ FIGURE 5-40 Solubilization of integral membrane
proteins by nonionic detergents. At a concentration higher than
its critical micelle concentration (CMC), a detergent solubilizes
lipids and integral membrane proteins, forming mixed micelles
containing detergent, protein, and lipid molecules. At

Dissolved
but not
forming
micelles

concentrations below the CMC, nonionic detergents (e.g.,
octylglucoside, Triton X-100) can dissolve membrane proteins
without forming micelles by coating the membrane-spanning
regions.

184

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

phospholipids by ionic or other weak interactions. Generally,
peripheral proteins can be removed from the membrane by
solutions of high ionic strength (high salt concentrations),
which disrupt ionic bonds, or by chemicals that bind divalent
cations such as Mg2. Unlike integral proteins, most peripheral proteins are soluble in aqueous solution and need not
be solubilized by nonionic detergents.

Conventional light microscopy
Fluorescence microscopy
Proteins

Atoms

Organelles

Cells

1 µm

1 nm

1 mm

Transmission electron microscopy

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 5.5
Purification of Cells and Their Parts
Flow cytometry can identify different cells on the basis of
the light that they scatter and the fluorescence that they emit.
The fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) is useful in separating different types of cells (see Figures 5-34 and 5-35).

■

Scanning electron microscopy

▲ FIGURE 5-41 The range in sizes of objects imaged by
different microscopy techniques. The smallest object that can
be imaged by a particular technique is limited by the resolving
power of the equipment and other factors.

Disruption of cells by vigorous homogenization, sonication, or other techniques releases their organelles. Swelling
of cells in a hypotonic solution weakens the plasma membrane, making it easier to rupture.

can provide microscopic images of improved quality but
also permit three-dimensional reconstructions of cell components from two-dimensional images.

Sequential differential centrifugation of a cell homogenate yields fractions of partly purified organelles that
differ in mass and density (see Figure 5-36).

A Microscope Detects, Magnifies, and Resolves
Small Objects

■

■

Equilibrium density-gradient centrifugation, which separates cellular components according to their densities,
can further purify cell fractions obtained by differential
centrifugation.

■

■ Immunological techniques, using antibodies against
organelle-specific membrane proteins, are particularly useful in purifying organelles and vesicles of similar sizes and
densities.

Transmembrane proteins are selectively solubilized and
purified with the use of nonionic detergents.

■

5.6 Visualizing Cell Architecture
In the 1830s, Matthias Schleiden and Theodore Schwann
proposed that individual cells constitute the fundamental
unit of life. This first formulation of the cell theory was
based on observations made with rather primitive light microscopes. Modern cell biologists have many more-powerful
tools for revealing cell architecture. For example, variations
of standard light microscopy permit scientists to view objects that were undetectable several decades ago. Electron
microscopy, which can reveal extremely small objects, has
yielded much information about subcellular particles and
the organization of plant and animal tissues. Each technique
is most suitable for detecting and imaging particular structural features of the cell (Figure 5-41). Digital recording systems and appropriate computer algorithms represent
another advance in visualizing cell architecture that has
spread widely in the past decade. Digital systems not only

All microscopes produce a magnified image of a small object,
but the nature of the images depends on the type of microscope employed and on the way in which the specimen is prepared. The compound microscope, used in conventional
bright-field light microscopy, contains several lenses that
magnify the image of a specimen under study (Figure
5-42a, b). The total magnification is a product of the magnification of the individual lenses: if the objective lens magnifies 100-fold (a 100 lens, the maximum usually employed)
and the projection lens, or eyepiece, magnifies 10-fold, the
final magnification recorded by the human eye or on film
will be 1000-fold.
However, the most important property of any microscope is not its magnification but its resolving power, or
resolution—the ability to distinguish between two very
closely positioned objects. Merely enlarging the image of a
specimen accomplishes nothing if the image is blurred. The
resolution of a microscope lens is numerically equivalent to
D, the minimum distance between two distinguishable objects. The smaller the value of D, the better the resolution.
The value of D is given by the equation
D

0.61
N sin

(5-1)

where  is the angular aperture, or half-angle, of the cone
of light entering the objective lens from the specimen; N is
the refractive index of the medium between the specimen and
the objective lens (i.e., the relative velocity of light in the
medium compared with the velocity in air); and  is the
wavelength of the incident light. Resolution is improved by
using shorter wavelengths of light (decreasing the value of

5.6 • Visualizing Cell Architecture
(a) Optical microscope

(b) Bright-field light path

185

(c) Epifluorescence light path

Detector

Projection
lens

Excitation
filter
Lamp

Dichroic
mirror
Objective

Specimen
stage
Condenser

Collector
lens
Lamp

Mirror

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-42 Optical microscopes are
commonly configured for both bright-field (transmitted) and
epifluorescence microscopy. (a) In a typical light microscope,
the specimen is usually mounted on a transparent glass slide and
positioned on the movable specimen stage. The two imaging
methods require separate illumination systems but use the same
light gathering and detection systems. (b) In bright-field light
microscopy, light from a tungsten lamp is focused on the

specimen by a condenser lens below the stage; the light travels
the pathway shown. (c) In epifluorescence microscopy, ultraviolet
light from a mercury lamp positioned above the stage is focused
on the specimen by the objective lens. Filters in the light path
select a particular wavelength of ultraviolet light for illumination
and are matched to capture the wavelength of the emitted light
by the specimen.

) or gathering more light (increasing either N or ). Note
that the magnification is not part of this equation.
Owing to limitations on the values of , , and N, the
limit of resolution of a light microscope using visible light
is about 0.2 m (200 nm). No matter how many times the
image is magnified, the microscope can never resolve objects that are less than ≈0.2 m apart or reveal details
smaller than ≈0.2 m in size. Despite this limit on resolution, the light microscope can be used to track the location
of a small bead of known size to a precision of only a few
nanometers. If we know the precise size and shape of an
object—say, a 5-nm sphere of gold—and if we use a video
camera to record the microscopic image as a digital image,
then a computer can calculate the position of the center of
the object to within a few nanometers. This technique has
been used to measure nanometer-size steps as molecules
and vesicles move along cytoskeletal filaments (see Figures
19-17, 19-18, and 20-18).

Samples for Microscopy Must Be Fixed,
Sectioned, and Stained to Image
Subcellular Details
Live cells and tissues lack compounds that absorb light and
are thus nearly invisible in a light microscope. Although such
specimens can be visualized by special techniques to be discussed shortly, these methods do not reveal the fine details of
structure and require cells to be housed in special glass-faced
chambers, called culture chambers, that can be mounted on
a microscope stage. For these reasons, cells are often fixed,
sectioned, and stained to reveal subcellular structures.
Specimens for light and electron microscopy are commonly fixed with a solution containing chemicals that crosslink most proteins and nucleic acids. Formaldehyde, a
common fixative, cross-links amino groups on adjacent molecules; these covalent bonds stabilize protein–protein and
protein–nucleic acid interactions and render the molecules

186

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture
Specimen
holder

Specimen
block

Block

Specimen
Knife

Knife

Cut
section

Sections

Microscope slide

Copper
mesh
grid

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-43 Tissues for microscopy
are commonly fixed, embedded in a solid medium, and cut
into thin sections. A fixed tissue is dehydrated by soaking in a
series of alcohol-water solutions, ending with an organic solvent
compatible with the embedding medium. To embed the tissue
for sectioning, the tissue is placed in liquid paraffin for light
microscopy or in liquid plastic for electron microscopy; after the

block containing the specimen has hardened, it is mounted on
the arm of a microtome and slices are cut with a knive. Typical
sections cut for electron microscopy 50–100 nm thick; sections
cut for light microscopy are 0.5–50 m thick. The sections are
collected either on microscope slides (light microscopy) or
copper mesh grids (electron microscopy) and stained with an
appropriate agent.

insoluble and stable for subsequent procedures. After fixation, a sample is usually embedded in paraffin or plastic and
cut into sections 0.5–50 m thick (Figure 5-43). Alternatively, the sample can be frozen without prior fixation and
then sectioned; such treatment preserves the activity of enzymes for later detection by cytochemical reagents.
A final step in preparing a specimen for light microscopy
is to stain it so as to visualize the main structural features of
the cell or tissue. Many chemical stains bind to molecules
that have specific features. For example, hematoxylin binds
to basic amino acids (lysine and arginine) on many different
kinds of proteins, whereas eosin binds to acidic molecules
(such as DNA and side chains of aspartate and glutamate).
Because of their different binding properties, these dyes stain
various cell types sufficiently differently that they are distinguishable visually. If an enzyme catalyzes a reaction that produces a colored or otherwise visible precipitate from a
colorless precursor, the enzyme may be detected in cell sections by their colored reaction products. Such staining techniques, although once quite common, have been largely
replaced by other techniques for visualizing particular proteins or structures as discussed next.

in the refractive index and thickness of cellular materials.
These methods, called phase-contrast microscopy and differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy (or
Nomarski interference microscopy), produce images that
differ in appearance and reveal different features of cell architecture. Figure 5-44 compares images of live, cultured
cells obtained with these two methods and standard brightfield microscopy.
In phase-contrast images, the entire object and subcellular
structures are highlighted by interference rings—concentric
halos of dark and light bands. This artifact is inherent in the
method, which generates contrast by interference between
diffracted and undiffracted light by the specimen. Because the
interference rings around an object obscure many details, this
technique is suitable for observing only single cells or thin cell
layers but not thick tissues. It is particularly useful for examining the location and movement of larger organelles in live
cells.
DIC microscopy is based on interference between polarized light and is the method of choice for visualizing extremely
small details and thick objects. Contrast is generated by differences in the index of refraction of the object and its surrounding medium. In DIC images, objects appear to cast a
shadow to one side. The “shadow” primarily represents a difference in the refractive index of a specimen rather than its topography. DIC microscopy easily defines the outlines of large
organelles, such as the nucleus and vacuole. In addition to having a “relief”-like appearance, a DIC image is a thin optical
section, or slice, through the object. Thus details of the nucleus

Phase-Contrast and Differential Interference
Contrast Microscopy Visualize
Unstained Living Cells
Two common methods for imaging live cells and unstained
tissues generate contrast by taking advantage of differences

5.6 • Visualizing Cell Architecture

187

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-44 Live cells can be
visualized by microscopy techniques that generate contrast
by interference. These micrographs show live, cultured
macrophage cells viewed by bright-field microscopy (left), phasecontrast microscopy (middle), and differential interference
contrast (DIC) microscopy (right). In a phase-contrast image, cells

are surrounded by alternating dark and light bands; in-focus and
out-of-focus details are simultaneously imaged in a phasecontrast microscope. In a DIC image, cells appear in
pseudorelief. Because only a narrow in-focus region is imaged, a
DIC image is an optical slice through the object. [Courtesy of

in thick specimens (e.g., an intact Caenorhabditis elegans
roundworm) can be observed in a series of such optical sections, and the three-dimensional structure of the object can be
reconstructed by combining the individual DIC images.

light up when illuminated by the exciting wavelength, a technique called immunfluorescence microscopy (Figure 5-45).
Staining a specimen with two or three dyes that fluoresce at
different wavelengths allows multiple proteins to be localized
within a cell (see Figure 5-33).

N. Watson and J. Evans.]

Fluorescence Microscopy Can Localize
and Quantify Specific Molecules
in Fixed and Live Cells

Lamina
propia

Lateral
membrane
Brush
border

Perhaps the most versatile and powerful technique for localizing proteins within a cell by light microscopy is fluorescent
staining of cells and observation by fluorescence microscopy.
A chemical is said to be fluorescent if it absorbs light at one
wavelength (the excitation wavelength) and emits light (fluoresces) at a specific and longer wavelength. Most fluorescent
dyes, or flurochromes, emit visible light, but some (such as
Cy5 and Cy7) emit infrared light. In modern fluorescence microscopes, only fluorescent light emitted by the sample is
used to form an image; light of the exciting wavelength induces the fluorescence but is then not allowed to pass the filters placed between the objective lens and the eye or camera
(see Figure 5-42a, c).

20 m

Immunological Detection of Specific Proteins in Fixed Cells
The common chemical dyes just mentioned stain nucleic
acids or broad classes of proteins. However, investigators
often want to detect the presence and location of specific
proteins. A widely used method for this purpose employs
specific antibodies covalently linked to flurochromes. Commonly used flurochromes include rhodamine and Texas red,
which emit red light; Cy3, which emits orange light; and fluorescein, which emits green light. These flurochromes can be
chemically coupled to purified antibodies specific for almost
any desired macromolecule. When a flurochrome–antibody
complex is added to a permeabilized cell or tissue section, the
complex will bind to the corresponding antigens, which then

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-45 One or more specific
proteins can be localized in fixed tissue sections by
immunofluorescence microscopy. A section of the rat intestinal
wall was stained with Evans blue, which generates a nonspecific
red fluorescence, and with a yellow green–fluorescing antibody
specific for GLUT2, a glucose transport protein. As evident from
this fluorescence micrograph, GLUT2 is present in the basal and
lateral sides of the intestinal cells but is absent from the brush
border, composed of closely packed microvilli on the apical
surface facing the intestinal lumen. Capillaries run through the
lamina propria, a loose connective tissue beneath the epithelial
layer. [See B. Thorens et al., 1990, Am. J. Physio. 259:C279; courtesy of
B. Thorens.]

188

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

used to visualize the expression and distribution of specific
proteins that mediate cell–cell adhesion (see Figure 6-8).
In some cases, a purified protein chemically linked to a
fluorescent dye can be microinjected into cells and followed
by fluorescence microscopy. For example, findings from
careful biochemical studies have established that purified
actin “tagged” with a flurochrome is indistinguishable in
function from its normal counterpart. When the tagged protein is microinjected into a cultured cell, the endogenous cellular and injected tagged actin monomers copolymerize into
normal long actin fibers. This technique can also be used to
study individual microtubules within a cell.

Determination of Intracellular Ca2 and H Levels with
Ion-Sensitive Fluoresent Dyes Flurochromes whose fluo-

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-46 Expression of fluorescent
proteins in early and late mouse embryos is detected by
emitted blue and yellow light. The genes encoding blue
fluorescent protein (ECFP) and yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP)
were introduced into mouse embryonic stem cells, which then
were grown into early-stage embryos (top) and late-stage
embryos (bottom). These bright-field (left) and fluorescence (right)
micrographs reveal that all but four of the early-stage embryos
display a blue or yellow fluorescence, indicating expression of
the introduced ECFP and EYFP genes. Of the two late-stage
embryos shown, one expressed the ECFP gene (left) and one
expressed the EYFP gene (right). [From A.-K. Hadjantonakis et al.,

rescence depends on the concentration of Ca2 or H have
proved useful in measuring the concentration of these ions
within live cells. As discussed in later chapters, intracellular
Ca2 and H concentrations have pronounced effects on
many cellular processes. For instance, many hormones or
other stimuli cause a rise in cytosolic Ca2 from the resting
level of about 107 M to 106 M, which induces various cellular responses including the contraction of muscle.
The fluorescent dye fura-2, which is sensitive to Ca2,
contains five carboxylate groups that form ester linkages
with ethanol. The resulting fura-2 ester is lipophilic and can

2002, BMC Biotechnol. 2:11.]

Expression of Fluorescent Proteins in Live Cells A naturally fluorescent protein found in the jellyfish Aequorea victoria can be exploited to visualize live cells and specific
proteins within them. This 238-residue protein, called green
fluorescent protein (GFP), contains a serine, tyrosine, and
glycine sequence whose side chains have spontaneously
cyclized to form a green-fluorescing chromophore. With the
use of recombinant DNA techniques discussed in Chapter 9,
the GFP gene can be introduced into living cultured cells or
into specific cells of an entire animal. Cells containing the introduced gene will express GFP and thus emit a green fluorescence when irradiated; this GFP fluorescence can be used
to localize the cells within a tissue. Figure 5-46 illustrates the
results of this approach, in which a variant of GFP that emits
blue fluorescence was used.
In a particularly useful application of GFP, a cellular protein of interest is “tagged” with GFP to localize it. In this technique, the gene for GFP is fused to the gene for a particular
cellular protein, producing a recombinant DNA encoding one
long chimeric protein that contains the entirety of both proteins. Cells in which this recombinant DNA has been introduced will synthesize the chimeric protein whose green
fluorescence reveals the subcellular location of the protein of
interest. This GFP-tagging technique, for example, has been

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-47 Fura-2, a Ca2+-sensitive
flurochrome, can be used to monitor the relative cytosolic
Ca2+ concentrations in different regions of live cells. (Left) In a
moving leukocyte, a Ca2+ gradient is established. The highest
levels (green) are at the rear of the cell, where cortical
contractions take place, and the lowest levels (blue) are at the
cell front, where actin undergoes polymerization. (Right) When a
pipette filled with chemotactic molecules placed to the side of
the cell induces the cell to turn, the Ca2+ concentration
momentarily increases throughout the cytoplasm and a new
gradient is established. The gradient is oriented such that the
region of lowest Ca2+ (blue) lies in the direction that the cell will
turn, whereas a region of high Ca2+ (yellow) always forms at the
site that will become the rear of the cell. [From R. A. Brundage et
al., 1991, Science 254:703; courtesy of F. Fay.]

5.6 • Visualizing Cell Architecture

diffuse from the medium across the plasma membrane into
cells. Within the cytosol, esterases hydrolyze fura-2 ester,
yielding fura-2, whose free carboxylate groups render the
molecule nonlipophilic, and so it cannot cross cellular membranes and remains in the cytosol. Inside cells, each fura-2
molecule can bind a single Ca2 ion but no other cellular
cation. This binding, which is proportional to the cytosolic
Ca2 concentration over a certain range, increases the fluorescence of fura-2 at one particular wavelength. At a second
wavelength, the fluorescence of fura-2 is the same whether or
not Ca2 is bound and provides a measure of the total
amount of fura-2 in a region of the cell. By examining cells
continuously in the fluorescence microscope and measuring
rapid changes in the ratio of fura-2 fluorescence at these two
wavelengths, one can quantify rapid changes in the fraction
of fura-2 that has a bound Ca2 ion and thus in the concentration of cytosolic Ca2 (Figure 5-47).
Similarly to fura-2, fluorescent dyes (e.g., SNARF-1) that
are sensitive to the H concentration can be used to monitor the cytosolic pH of living cells.

Confocal Scanning and Deconvolution
Microscopy Provide Sharp Images
of Three-Dimensional Objects
Conventional fluorescence microscopy has two major limitations. First, the physical process of cutting a section destroys material, and so in consecutive (serial) sectioning a

(a) Conventional fluorescence microscopy

189

small part of a cell’s structure is lost. Second, the fluorescent
light emitted by a sample comes from molecules above and
below the plane of focus; thus the observer sees a blurred
image caused by the superposition of fluorescent images
from molecules at many depths in the cell. The blurring effect
makes it difficult to determine the actual three-dimensional
molecular arrangement (Figure 5-48a). Two powerful refinements of fluorescence microscopy produce much sharper images by reducing the image-degrading effects of out-of-focus
light.
In confocal scanning microscopy, exciting light from a focused laser beam illuminates only a single small part of a
sample for an instant and then rapidly moves to different
spots in the sample focal plane. The emitted fluorescent light
passes through a pinhole that rejects out-of-focus light,
thereby producing a sharp image. Because light in focus with
the image is collected by the pinhole, the scanned area is an
optical section through the specimen. The intensity of light
from these in-focus areas is recorded by a photomultiplier
tube, and the image is stored in a computer (Figure 5-48b).
Deconvolution microscopy achieves the same imagesharpening effect as confocal scanning microscopy but
through a different process. In this method, images from consecutive focal planes of the specimen are collected. A separate focal series of images from a test slide of subresolution
size (i.e., 0.2 m diameter) bead are also collected. Each bead
represents a pinpoint of light that becomes an object blurred
by the imperfect optics of the microscope. Deconvolution

(b) Confocal fluorescence microscopy

40 m
Focal plane

Imaged
volume

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-48 Confocal microscopy
produces an in-focus optical section through thick cells. A
mitotic fertilized egg from a sea urchin (Psammechinus) was
lysed with a detergent, exposed to an anti-tubulin antibody, and
then exposed to a fluorescein-tagged antibody that binds to the
first antibody. (a) When viewed by conventional fluorescence
microscopy, the mitotic spindle is blurred. This blurring occurs

Focal plane

Imaged
volume

because background fluorescence is detected from tubulin above
and below the focal plane as depicted in the sketch. (b) The
confocal microscopic image is sharp, particularly in the center of
the mitotic spindle. In this case, fluorescence is detected only
from molecules in the focal plane, generating a very thin optical
section. [Micrographs from J. G. White et al., 1987, J. Cell Biol. 104:41.]

190

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-49 Deconvolution
fluorescence microscopy yields high-resolution optical
sections that can be reconstructed into one threedimensional image. A macrophage cell was stained with
fluorochrome-labeled reagents specific for DNA (blue),
microtubules (green), and actin microfilaments (red). The series of
fluorescent images obtained at consecutive focal planes (optical

sections) through the cell were recombined in three dimensions.
(a) In this three-dimensional reconstruction of the raw images,
the DNA, microtubules, and actin appear as diffuse zones in the
cell. (b) After application of the deconvolution algorithm to the
images, the fibrillar organization of microtubules and the
localization of actin to adhesions become readily visible in the
reconstruction. [Courtesy of J. Evans.]

reverses the degradation of the image by using the blurred
beads as a reference object. The out-of-focus light is mathematically reassigned with the aid of deconvolution algorithms. Images restored by deconvolution display impressive
detail without any blurring (Figure 5-49). Astronomers use
deconvolution algorithms to sharpen images of distant stars.

oretically 0.005 nm (less than the diameter of a single atom),
or 40,000 times better than the resolution of the light
microscope and 2 million times better than that of the unaided human eye. However, the effective resolution of the
transmission electron microscope in the study of biological
systems is considerably less than this ideal. Under optimal
conditions, a resolution of 0.10 nm can be obtained with
transmission electron microscopes, about 2000 times better
than the best resolution of light microscopes. Several examples of cells and subcellular structures imaged by TEM are
included in Section 5.3.
Because TEM requires very thin, fixed sections (about
50 nm), only a small part of a cell can be observed in any one
section. Sectioned specimens are prepared in a manner similar to that for light microscopy, by using a knife capable of
producing sections 50–100 nm in thickness (see Figure
5-43). The generation of the image depends on differential
scattering of the incident electrons by molecules in the preparation. Without staining, the beam of electrons passes
through a specimen uniformly, and so the entire sample appears uniformly bright with little differentiation of components. To obtain useful images by TEM, sections are
commonly stained with heavy metals such as gold or osmium. Metal-stained areas appear dark on a micrograph because the metals scatter (diffract) most of the incident

Resolution of Transmission Electron Microscopy
Is Vastly Greater Than That of Light Microscopy
The fundamental principles of electron microscopy are similar to those of light microscopy; the major difference is that
electromagnetic lenses, rather than optical lenses, focus a
high-velocity electron beam instead of visible light. In the
transmission electron microscope (TEM), electrons are emitted from a filament and accelerated in an electric field. A
condenser lens focuses the electron beam onto the sample;
objective and projector lenses focus the electrons that pass
through the specimen and project them onto a viewing
screen or other detector (Figure 5-50, left). Because electrons
are absorbed by atoms in air, the entire tube between the
electron source and the detector is maintained under an
ultrahigh vacuum.
The short wavelength of electrons means that the limit
of resolution for the transmission electron microscope is the-

5.6 • Visualizing Cell Architecture
TEM

SEM
Tungsten filament
(cathode)
Anode

Condenser lens

Beam of electrons
Scanning
coils

191

natured and nonfunctional. However, the technique of cryoelectron microscopy allows examination of hydrated, unfixed, and unstained biological specimens directly in a
transmission electron microscope. In this technique, an
aqueous suspension of a sample is applied in an extremely
thin film to a grid. After it has been frozen in liquid nitrogen and maintained in this state by means of a special mount,
the sample is observed in the electron microscope. The very
low temperature (196 C) keeps water from evaporating,
even in a vacuum, and the sample can be observed in detail
in its native, hydrated state without fixing or heavy metal

Specimen
(a)

Electromagnetic
objective lens

Antibody Protein A

Gold
Antigen
(catalase)

Projector lens

Fc domain

(b)

Detector

Peroxisomes

Specimen

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-50 In electron microscopy,
images are formed from electrons that pass through a
specimen or are released from a metal-coated specimen. In a
transmission electron microscope (TEM), electrons are extracted
from a heated filament, accelerated by an electric field, and
focused on the specimen by a magnetic condenser lens.
Electrons that pass through the specimen are focused by a
series of magnetic objective and projector lenses to form a
magnified image of the specimen on a detector, which may be a
fluorescent viewing screen, photographic film, or a chargedcouple-device (CCD) camera. In a scanning electron microscope
(SEM), electrons are focused by condensor and objective lenses
on a metal-coated specimen. Scanning coils move the beam
across the specimen, and electrons from the metal are collected
by a photomultiplier tube detector. In both types of microscopes,
because electrons are easily scattered by air molecules, the
entire column is maintained at a very high vacuum.
electrons; scattered electrons are not focused by the electromagnetic lenses and do not contribute to the image. Areas
that take up less stain appear lighter. Osmium tetroxide preferentially stains certain cellular components, such as membranes (see Figure 5-2a). Specific proteins can be detected in
thin sections by the use of electron-dense gold particles
coated with protein A, a bacterial protein that binds antibody molecules nonspecifically (Figure 5-51).
Standard electron microscopy cannot be used to study
live cells because they are generally too vulnerable to the required conditions and preparatory techniques. In particular,
the absence of water causes macromolecules to become de-

0.5 µm

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-51 Gold particles coated
with protein A are used to detect an antibody-bound protein
by transmission electron microscopy. (a) First antibodies are
allowed to interact with their specific antigen (e.g., catalase) in a
section of fixed tissue. Then the section is treated with a
complex of protein A from the bacterium S. aureus and electrondense gold particles. Binding of this complex to the Fc domains
of the antibody molecules makes the location of the target
protein, catalase in this case, visible in the electron microscope.
(b) A slice of liver tissue was fixed with glutaraldehyde,
sectioned, and then treated as described in part (a) to localize
catalase. The gold particles (black dots) indicating the presence of
catalase are located exclusively in peroxisomes. [From H. J. Geuze
et al., 1981, J. Cell Biol. 89:653. Reproduced from the Journal of Cell
Biology by copyright permission of The Rockefeller University Press.]

192

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

staining. By computer-based averaging of hundreds of images, a three-dimensional model almost to atomic resolution
can be generated. For example, this method has been used
to generate models of ribosomes (see Figure 4-27), the muscle calcium pump discussed in Chapter 7, and other large
proteins that are difficult to crystallize.

Absorptive
epithelial
cells

Electron Microscopy of Metal-Coated
Specimens Can Reveal Surface Features
of Cells and Their Components

Basal
lamina

Transmission electron microscopy is also used to obtain information about the shapes of purified viruses, fibers, enzymes, and other subcellular particles by using a technique,
called metal shadowing, in which a thin layer of metal, such
Sample

Mica surface

1
Evaporated platinum
Metal replica

Microvilli

5 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-53 Scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) produces a three-dimensional image of
the surface of an unsectioned specimen. Shown here is an
SEM image of the epithelium lining the lumen of the intestine.
Abundant fingerlike microvilli extend from the lumen-facing
surface of each cell. The basal lamina beneath the epithelium
helps support and anchor it to the underlying connective tissue
(Chapter 6). Compare this image of intestinal cells with those in
Figure 5-28, a transmission electron micrograph, and in Figure
5-45, a fluorescence micrograph. [From R. Kessel and R. Kardon,
1979, Tissues and Organs, A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy,
W. H. Freeman and Company, p. 176.]

2
Evaporated carbon
Carbon film
3
Acid

4

Metal replica ready
for visualization
5

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 5-52 Metal shadowing makes
surface details on very small particles visible by transmission
electron microscopy. The sample is spread on a mica surface
and then dried in a vacuum evaporator ( 1 ). A filament of a heavy
metal, such as platinum or gold, is heated electrically so that the
metal evaporates and some of it falls over the sample grid in a
very thin film ( 2 ). To stabilize the replica, the specimen is then
coated with a carbon film evaporated from an overhead electrode
( 3 ). The biological material is then dissolved by acid ( 4 ), leaving
a metal replica of the sample ( 5 ), which is viewed in a TEM. In
electron micrographs of such preparations, the carbon-coated
areas appear light—the reverse of micrographs of simple metalstained preparations in which the areas of heaviest metal
staining appear the darkest.

as platinum, is evaporated on a fixed and sectioned or rapidly frozen biological sample (Figure 5-52). Acid treatment
dissolves away the cell, leaving a metal replica that is viewed
in a transmission electron microscope.
Alternatively, the scanning electron microscope allows investigators to view the surfaces of unsectioned metal-coated
specimens. An intense electron beam inside the microscope
scans rapidly over the sample. Molecules in the coating are
excited and release secondary electrons that are focused onto
a scintillation detector; the resulting signal is displayed on a
cathode-ray tube (see Figure 5-50, right). Because the number of secondary electrons produced by any one point on the
sample depends on the angle of the electron beam in relation to the surface, the scanning electron micrograph has a
three-dimensional appearance (Figure 5-53). The resolving
power of scanning electron microscopes, which is limited by
the thickness of the metal coating, is only about 10 nm,
much less than that of transmission instruments.

Three-Dimensional Models Can Be Constructed
from Microscopy Images
In the past decade, digital cameras have largely replaced optical cameras to record microscopy images. Digital images
can be stored in a computer and manipulated by conventional photographic software as well as specialized algorithms. As mentioned earlier, the deconvolution algorithm

Key Terms

can sharpen an image by restoring out-of-focus photons to
their origin—an example of a computational method that
improves the quality of the image. The details in stored digital images also can be quantified, and objects in images can
be reconstructed in three dimensions. For example, the threedimensional model of an object can be calculated by tomographic methods from a collection of images that cover
different views of the object. In light microscopy, a stack of
optical sections collected with either a confocal or a deconvolution microscope can be recombined into one threedimensional image (see Figure 5-49). If a TEM specimen is
tilted through various degrees, the resulting images also can
be recombined to generate a three-dimensional view of the
object (see Figure 5-23).

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 5.6
Visualizing Cell Architecture
The limit of resolution of a light microscope is about
200 nm; of a scanning electron microscope, about 10 nm;
and of a transmission electron microscope, about 0.1 nm.

■

Because cells and tissues are almost transparent, various
types of stains and optical techniques are used to generate
sufficient contrast for imaging.

■

Phase-contrast and differential interference contrast
(DIC) microscopy are used to view the details of live, unstained cells and to monitor cell movement.

■

In immunofluorescence microscopy, specific proteins
and organelles in fixed cells are stained with fluorescencelabeled monoclonal antibodies. Multiple proteins can be
localized in the same sample by staining with antibodies
labeled with different fluorochromes.

■

When proteins tagged with naturally occurring green fluorescent protein (GFP) or its variants are expressed in live
cells, they can be visualized in a fluorescence microscope.

■

With the use of dyes whose fluorescence is proportional
to the concentration of Ca2 or H ions, fluorescence microscopy can measure the local concentration of Ca2 ions
and intracellular pH in living cells.
■

Confocal microscopy and deconvolution microscopy use
different methods to optically section a specimen, thereby
reducing the blurring due to out-of-focus fluorescence
light. Both methods provide much sharper images, particularly of thick specimens, than does standard fluorescence
microscopy.

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
Advances in bioengineering will make major contributions
not only to our understanding of cell and tissue function but
also to the quality of human health. In a glass slide consisting
of microfabricated wells and channels, for example, reagents
can be introduced and exposed to selected parts of individual
cells; the responses of the cells can then be detected by light
microscopy and analyzed by powerful image-processing software. These types of studies will lead to discovery of new
drugs, detection of subtle phenotypes of mutant cells (e.g.,
tumor cells), and development of comprehensive models of
cellular processes. Bioengineers also are fabricating artificial
tissues based on a synthetic three-dimensional architecture
incorporating layers of different cells. Eventually such artificial tissues will provide replacements for defective tissues in
sick, injured, or aging individuals.
Microscopy will continue to be a major tool in cell biology, providing images that relate to both the chemistry(i.e.,
interactions among proteins) and the mechanics (i.e., movements) involved in various cell processes. The forces causing
molecular and cellular movements will be directly detected
by fluorescent sensors in cells and the extracellular matrix.
Improvements to high-resolution imaging methods will permit studies of single molecules in live cells, something that
is currently possible only in vitro. Finally, cells will be studied in more natural contexts, not on glass coverslips but in
3D gels of extracellular matrix molecules. To aid in the imaging, the use of more fluorescent labels and tags will allow
visualization of five or six different types of molecules simultaneously. With more labeled proteins, the complex interactions among proteins and organelles will become better
understood.
Finally, the electron microscope will become the dominant instrument for studying protein machines in vitro and in
situ. Tomographic methods applied to single cells and molecules combined with automated reconstruction methods will
generate models of protein-based structures that cannot be
determined by x-ray crystallography. High resolution threedimensional models of molecules in cells will help explain the
intricate biochemical interactions among proteins.

■

Specimens for electron microscopy generally must be
fixed, sectioned, dehydrated, and then stained with electrondense heavy metals.

■

Surface details of objects can be revealed by transmission
electron microscopy of metal-coated specimens. Scanning
electron microscopy of metal-coated unsectioned cells or tissues produces images that appear to be three-dimensional.

■

193

KEY TERMS
actin filaments 174
apical 153
basolateral 153
chloroplast 172
cytoskeleton 147
cytosol 147
cytosolic face 150
endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) 168

endosome 165
exoplasmic face 150
fluorescent
staining 187
glycolipid 151
Golgi complex 169
GPI anchor 161
immunofluorescence
microscopy 187

194

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

integral membrane
protein 157
intermediate
filament 174
lipid raft 156
lumen 147
lysosome 165
microfilament 174
microtubule 174
mitochondrion 171
nuclear lamina 177
nucleolus 171

peripheral membrane
protein 157
peroxisome 168
phosphoglyceride 150
phospholipid bilayer 149
pleckstrin homology (PH)
domain 163
porin 160
prenyl anchor 160
resolution 184
sphingolipid 151

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. When viewed by electron microscopy, the lipid bilayer is
often described as looking like a railroad track. Explain how
the structure of the bilayer creates this image.
2. Biomembranes contain many different types of lipid
molecules. What are the three main types of lipid molecules
found in biomembranes? How are the three types similar,
and how are they different?

use to isolate cells and organelles from complex mixtures,
and how do these techniques work?
10. Isolation of some membrane proteins requires the use
of detergents; isolation of others can be accomplished with
the use of high-salt solutions. What types of membrane proteins require detergents as part of the isolation procedure?
What types of membrane proteins may be isolated with highsalt solutions? Describe how the chemical properties of
detergents and high salt facilitate the isolation process of
each type of membrane protein.
11. Three systems of cytoskeletal filaments exist in most
eukaryotic cells. Compare them in terms of composition,
function, and structure.
12. Individual cytoskeletal filaments are typically organized
into more complex structures within the cytosol. What two
general types of structures do individual filaments combine
to form in the cytosol? How are these structures created and
maintained?
13. Both light and electron microscopy are commonly used
to visualize cells, cell structures, and the location of specific
molecules. Explain why a scientist may choose one or the
other microscopy technique for use in research.

3. Lipid bilayers are considered to be two-dimensional fluids; what does this mean? What drives the movement of lipid
molecules and proteins within the bilayer? How can such
movement be measured? What factors affect the degree of
membrane fluidity?

14. Why are chemical stains required for visualizing cells
and tissues with the basic light microscope? What advantage
does fluorescent microscopy provide in comparison to the
chemical dyes used to stain specimens for light microscopy?
What advantages do confocal scanning microscopy and
deconvolution microscopy provide in comparison to conventional fluorescence microscopy?

4. Explain the following statement: The structure of all
biomembranes depends on the chemical properties of phospholipids, whereas the function of each specific biomembrane depends on the specific proteins associated with that
membrane.

15. In certain electron microscopy methods, the specimen
is not directly imaged. How do these methods provide information about cellular structure, and what types of structures
do they visualize?

5. Name the three groups into which membrane-associated
proteins may be classified. Explain the mechanism by which
each group associates with a biomembrane.
6. Although both faces of a biomembrane are composed of
the same general types of macromolecules, principally lipids
and proteins, the two faces of the bilayer are not identical.
What accounts for the asymmetry between the two faces?
7. One of the defining features of eukaryotic cells is the
presence of organelles. What are the major organelles of eukaryotic cells, and what is the function of each? What is the
cytosol? What cellular processes occur within the cytosol?
8. Cell organelles such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, and
the Golgi apparatus each have unique structures. How is the
structure of each organelle related to its function?
9. Much of what we know about cellular function depends
on experiments utilizing specific cells and specific parts (e.g.,
organelles) of cells. What techniques do scientists commonly

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Mouse liver cells were homogenized and the homogenate
subjected to equilibrium density-gradient centrifugation with
sucrose gradients. Fractions obtained from these gradients
were assayed for marker molecules (i.e., molecules that are
limited to specific organelles). The results of these assays are
shown in the figure. The marker molecules have the following functions: Cytochrome oxidase is an enzyme involved in
the process by which ATP is formed in the complete aerobic
degradation of glucose or fatty acids; ribosomal RNA forms
part of the protein-synthesizing ribosomes; catalase catalyzes
decomposition of hydrogen peroxide; acid phosphatase
hydrolyzes monophosphoric esters at acid pH; cytidylyl
transferase is involved in phospholipid biosynthesis; and
amino acid permease aids in transport of amino acids across
membranes.

References
A

100

B

C

D E

Sprong, H., P. van der Sluijs, and G. van Meer. 2001. How proteins move lipids and lipids move proteins. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 2:504–513.
Tamm, L. K., V. K. Kiessling, and M. L. Wagner. 2001. Membrane dynamics. Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. Nature Publishing
Group.
Vance, D. E., and J. E. Vance. 2002. Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins, and Membranes, 4th ed. Elsevier.
Yeager, P. L. 2001. Lipids. Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. Nature Publishing Group.

F

% of maximum

80

60

Biomembranes: Protein Components
and Basic Functions

40

20

0

195

0

5

10
Fraction number

50%
Curve A = cytochrome oxidase
Curve B = ribosomal RNA
Curve C = catalase

15

20
Sucrose 0%

Curve D = acid phosphatase
Curve E = cytidylyl transferase
Curve F = amino acid permease

a. Name the marker molecule and give the number of
the fraction that is most enriched for each of the following: lysosomes; peroxisomes; mitochondria; plasma membrane; rough endoplasmic reticulum; smooth endoplasmic
reticulum.
b. Is the rough endoplasmic reticulum more or less dense
than the smooth endoplasmic reticulum? Why?
c. Describe an alternative approach by which you could
identify which fraction was enriched for which organelle.
d. How would addition of a detergent to the homogenate
affect the equilibrium density-gradient results?

REFERENCES

General Histology Texts and Atlases
Cross, P. A., and K. L. Mercer. 1993. Cell and Tissue Ultrastructure: A Functional Perspective. W. H. Freeman and Company.
Fawcett, D. W. 1993. Bloom and Fawcett: A Textbook of Histology, 12th ed. Chapman & Hall.
Kessel, R., and R. Kardon. 1979. Tissues and Organs: A TextAtlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy. W. H. Freeeman and
Company.

Biomembranes: Lipid Composition
and Structural Organization
Simons, K., and D. Toomre. 2000. Lipid rafts and signal transduction. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1:31–41.

Cullen, P. J., G. E. Cozier, G. Banting, and H. Mellor. 2001.
Modular phosphoinositide-binding domains: their role in signalling
and membrane trafficking. Curr. Biol. 11:R882–R893.
Lanyi, J. K., and H. Luecke. 2001. Bacteriorhodopsin. Curr.
Opin. Struc. Biol. 11:415–519.
MacKenzie, K. R., J. H. Prestegard, and D. M. Engelman. 1997.
A transmembrane helix dimer: structure and implications. Science
276:131–133.
Minor, D. L. 2001. Potassium channels: life in the post-structural
world. Curr. Opin. Struc. Biol. 11:408–414.
Schulz, G. E. 2000. -Barrel membrane proteins. Curr. Opin.
Struc. Biol. 10:443–447.

Organelles of the Eukaryotic Cell
Bainton, D. 1981. The discovery of lysosomes. J. Cell Biol.
91:66s–76s.
Cuervo, A. M., and J. F. Dice. 1998. Lysosomes: a meeting point
of proteins, chaperones, and proteases. J. Mol. Med. 76:6–12.
de Duve, C. 1996. The peroxisome in retrospect. Ann. NY Acad.
Sci. 804:1–10.
Holtzman, E. 1989. Lysosomes. Plenum Press.
Lamond, A., and W. Earnshaw. 1998. Structure and function in
the nucleus. Science 280:547–553.
Masters, C., and D. Crane. 1996. Recent developments in peroxisome biology. Endeavour 20:68–73.
Palade, G. 1975. Intracellular aspects of the process of protein
synthesis. Science 189:347–358. The Nobel Prize lecture of a pioneer
in the study of cellular organelles. (See also de Duve, 1996.)
Subramani, S. 1998. Components involved in peroxisome import, biogenesis, proliferation, turnover, and movement. Physiol. Rev.
78:171–188.

The Cytoskeleton: Components and Structural Functions
Bray, D. 2001. Cell Movements: From Molecules to Motility.
Garland. Excellent overview of the cytoskeleton and motility.
Various authors. Curr. Topics Cell Biol. February issue is always
devoted to the cytoskeleton.

Purification of Cells and Their Parts
Battye, F. L., and K. Shortman. 1991. Flow cytometry and cellseparation procedures. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 3:238–241.
de Duve, C. 1975. Exploring cells with a centrifuge. Science
189:186–194. The Nobel Prize lecture of a pioneer in the study of
cellular organelles.
de Duve, C., and H. Beaufay. 1981. A short history of tissue
fractionation. J. Cell Biol. 91:293s–299s.
Howell, K. E., E. Devaney, and J. Gruenberg. 1989. Subcellular
fractionation of tissue culture cells. Trends Biochem. Sci. 14:44–48.

196

CHAPTER 5 • Biomembranes and Cell Architecture

Ormerod, M. G., ed. 1990. Flow Cytometry: A Practical Approach. IRL Press.
Rickwood, D. 1992. Preparative Centrifugation: A Practical Approach. IRL Press.

Visualizing Cell Architecture
Bastiaens, P. I. H., and R. Pepperkok. 2000. Observing proteins
in their natural habitat: the living cell. Trends Biochem. Sci.
25:631–637.
Baumeister, W., and A. C. Steven. 2000. Macromolecular electron microscopy in the era of structural genomics. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 25:624–630.
Bozzola, J. J., and L. D. Russell. 1992. Electron Microscopy.
Jones and Bartlett.
Dykstra, M. J. 1992. Biological Electron Microscopy: Theory,
Techniques, and Troubleshooting. Plenum Press.

Gilroy, S. 1997. Fluorescence microscopy of living plant cells.
Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 48:165–190.
Inoué, S., and K. Spring. 1997. Video Microscopy, 2d ed. Plenum
Press.
Lippincott-Schwartz, J., and C. L Smith. 1997. Insights into secretory and endocytic membrane traffic using green fluorescent protein chimeras. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7:631–639.
Mason, W. T. 1999. Fluorescent and Luminescent Probes for
Biological Activity, 2d ed. Academic Press.
Matsumoto, B., ed. 2002. Methods in Cell Biology, Vol. 70: Cell
Biological Applications of Confocal Microscopy. Academic Press.
Misteli, T., and D. L. Spector. 1997. Applications of the green
fluorescent protein in cell biology and biotechnology. Nature Biotech.
15:961–964.
Sluder, G., and D. Wolf, eds. 1998. Methods in Cell Biology, Vol.
56: Video Microscopy. Academic Press.

5.1 • Last A Head

197

6
INTEGRATING CELLS
INTO TISSUES
Model of inflammatory bowel disease in which
cultured flat colonic smooth muscle cells were induced
to secrete cables of hyaluronan (green) that bind to
spheroidal mononuclear leukocytes via their CD44
receptors (red). Nuclei are stained blue. [Courtesy of
C. de la Motte et al., Lerner Research Institute.]

I

n the development of complex multicellular organisms
such as plants and animals, progenitor cells differentiate
into distinct “types” that have characteristic compositions, structures, and functions. Cells of a given type often
aggregate into a tissue to cooperatively perform a common
function: muscle contracts; nervous tissues conduct electrical
impulses; xylem tissue in plants transports water. Different
tissues can be organized into an organ, again to perform one
or more specific functions. For instance, the muscles, valves,
and blood vessels of a heart work together to pump blood
through the body. The coordinated functioning of many
types of cells within tissues, as well as of multiple specialized tissues, permits the organism as a whole to move, metabolize, reproduce, and carry out other essential activities.
The adult form of the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans
contains a mere 959 cells, yet these cells fall into 12 different
general cell types and many distinct subtypes. Vertebrates
have hundreds of different cell types, including leukocytes
(white blood cells), erythrocytes, and macrophages in the
blood; photoreceptors in the retina; adipocytes that store fat;
secretory  and  cells in the pancreas; fibroblasts in connective tissue; and hundreds of different subtypes of neurons in
the human brain. Despite their diverse forms and functions,
all animal cells can be classified as being components of just
five main classes of tissue: epithelial tissue, connective tissue,
muscular tissue, nervous tissue, and blood. Various cell types
are arranged in precise patterns of staggering complexity to
generate the different tissues and organs. The costs of such
complexity include increased requirements for information,

material, energy, and time during the development of an individual organism. Although the physiological costs of complex tissues and organs are high, they provide organisms
with the ability to thrive in varied and variable environments, a major evolutionary advantage.
The complex and diverse morphologies of plants and
animals are examples of the whole being greater than the
sum of the individual parts, more technically described as the
emergent properties of a complex system. For example, the
root-stem-leaf organization of plants permits them to simultaneously obtain energy (sunlight) and carbon (CO2) from

OUTLINE
6.1 Cell–Cell and Cell–Matrix Adhesion:
An Overview
6.2 Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues: Junctions
and Adhesion Molecules
6.3 The Extracellular Matrix of Epithelial Sheets
6.4 The Extracellular Matrix of Nonepithelial
Tissues
6.5 Adhesive Interactions and Nonepithelial Cells
6.6 Plant Tissues
6.7 Growth and Use of Cultured Cells
197

198

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

the atmosphere and water and nutrients (e.g., minerals) from
the soil. The distinct mechanical properties of rigid bones,
flexible joints, and contracting muscles permit vertebrates
to move efficiently and achieve substantial size. Sheets of
tightly attached epithelial cells can act as regulatable, selective permeability barriers, which permit the generation of
chemically and functionally distinct compartments in an organism (e.g., stomach, bloodstream). As a result, distinct and
sometimes opposite functions (e.g., digestion and synthesis)
can efficiently proceed simultaneously within an organism.
Such compartmentalization also permits more sophisticated
regulation of diverse biological functions. In many ways, the

roles of complex tissues and organs in an organism are analogous to those of organelles and membranes in individual
cells.
The assembly of distinct tissues and their organization
into organs are determined by molecular interactions at the
cellular level and would not be possible without the temporally and spatially regulated expression of a wide array of adhesive molecules. Cells in tissues can adhere directly to one
another (cell–cell adhesion) through specialized integral
membrane proteins called cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs)
that often cluster into specialized cell junctions (Figure 6-1).
Cells in animal tissues also adhere indirectly (cell–matrix

Adapters

Tight junction

Cell adhesion
molecules (CAMs)

Apical surface

CELL

1

CELL
4
CELL-CELL ADHESIONS

6
Adapter

Gap junction

Intermediate
filament

8 Adherens junction
7

9 Desmosome

Hemidesmosome

2
10
Connexon

Actin

Basal
surface

▲ FIGURE 6-1 Schematic overview of major adhesive
interactions that bind cells to each other and to the
extracellular matrix. Schematic cutaway drawing of a typical
epithelial tissue, such as the intestines. The apical (upper) surface
of these cells is packed with fingerlike microvilli 1 that project
into the intestinal lumen, and the basal (bottom) surface 2 rests
on extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM associated with epithelial
cells is usually organized into various interconnected layers (e.g.,
the basal lamina, connecting fibers, connective tissue), in which
large, interdigitating ECM macromolecules bind to one another
and to the cells 3 . Cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs) bind to
CAMs on other cells, mediating cell–cell adhesions 4 , and
adhesion receptors bind to various components of the ECM,
mediating cell–matrix adhesions 5 . Both types of cell-surface
adhesion molecules are usually integral membrane proteins
whose cytosolic domains often bind to multiple intracellular
adapter proteins. These adapters, directly or indirectly, link the
CAM to the cytoskeleton (actin or intermediate filaments) and to

CELL

5
CELL-MATRIX
ADHESIONS

Adhesion
receptors

Basal lamina
3
Extracellular
matrix (ECM)

ECM

intracellular signaling pathways. As a consequence, information
can be transferred by CAMs and the macromolecules to which
they bind from the cell exterior into the intracellular environment,
and vice versa. In some cases, a complex aggregate of CAMs,
adapters, and associated proteins is assembled. Specific localized
aggregates of CAMs or adhesion receptors form various types of
cell junctions that play important roles in holding tissues together
and facilitating communication between cells and their
environment. Tight junctions 6 , lying just under the microvilli,
prevent the diffusion of many substances through the
extracellular spaces between the cells. Gap junctions 7 allow
the movement through connexon channels of small molecules and
ions between the cytosols of adjacent cells. The remaining three
types of junctions, adherens junctions 8 , spot desmosomes
9 , and hemidesmosomes 10 , link the cytoskeleton of a cell to
other cells or the ECM. [See V. Vasioukhin and E. Fuchs, 2001, Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 13:76.]

6.1 • Cell–Cell and Cell–Matrix Adhesion: An Overview

adhesion) through the binding of adhesion receptors in the
plasma membrane to components of the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM), a complex interdigitating meshwork
of proteins and polysaccharides secreted by cells into the
spaces between them. These two basic types of interactions
not only allow cells to aggregate into distinct tissues but also
provide a means for the bidirectional transfer of information between the exterior and the interior of cells.
In this chapter, we examine the various types of adhesive
molecules and how they interact. The evolution of plants and
animals is thought to have diverged before multicellular
organisms arose. Thus multicellularity and the molecular
means for assembling tissues and organs must have arisen independently in animal and plant lineages. Not surprisingly,
then, animals and plants exhibit many differences in the organization and development of tissues. For this reason, we
first consider the organization of epithelial and nonepithelial tissues in animals and then deal separately with plant tissues. Although most cells in living organisms exist within
tissues, our understanding about cells depends greatly on the
study of isolated cells. Hence, we present some general fea-

tures of working with populations of cells removed from tissues and organisms in the last section of this chapter.

6.1 Cell–Cell and Cell–Matrix
Adhesion: An Overview
We begin with a brief orientation to the various types of adhesive molecules, their major functions in organisms, and
their evolutionary origin. In subsequent sections, we examine
in detail the unique structures and properties of the various participants in cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions in
animals.

Cell-Adhesion Molecules Bind to One Another
and to Intracellular Proteins
A large number of CAMs fall into four major families: the
cadherins, immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily, integrins, and
selectins. As the schematic structures in Figure 6-2 illustrate,
many CAMs are mosaics of multiple distinct domains, many

Homophilic interactions
Cadherins
(E-cadherin)

199

Heterophilic interactions

lg-superfamily
CAMs (NCAM)

Selectins
(P-selectin)

Integrins
(αvβ3)

Calciumbinding
sites





Fibronectin

Sugars

Cadherin
domain

Ig domain

Type III
fibronectin
repeat

▲ FIGURE 6-2 Major families of cell-adhesion molecules
(CAMs) and adhesion receptors. Dimeric E-cadherins most
commonly form homophilic (self) cross-bridges with E-cadherins
on adjacent cells. Members of the immunoglobulin (Ig)
superfamily of CAMs can form both homophilic linkages (shown
here) and heterophilic (nonself) linkages. Selectins, shown as
dimers, contain a carbohydrate-binding lectin domain that
recognizes specialized sugar structures on glycoproteins (shown
here) and glycolipids on adjacent cells. Heterodimeric integrins
(for example, v and 3 chains) function as CAMs or as adhesion

Glycoprotein
Lectin
domain

receptors (shown here) that bind to very large, multiadhesive
matrix proteins such as fibronectin, only a small part of which is
shown here (see also Figure 6-25). Note that CAMs often form
higher-order oligomers within the plane of the plasma membrane.
Many adhesive molecules contain multiple distinct domains,
some of which are found in more than one kind of CAM. The
cytoplasmic domains of these proteins are often associated with
adapter proteins that link them to the cytoskeleton or to signaling
pathways. [See R. O. Hynes, 1999, Trends Cell Biol. 9(12):M33, and
R. O. Hynes, 2002, Cell 110:673–687.]

200

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

of which can be found in more than one kind of CAM. They
are called “repeats” when they exist multiple times in the
same molecule. Some of these domains confer the binding
specificity that characterizes a particular protein. Some other
membrane proteins, whose structures do not belong to any
of the major classes of CAMs, also participate in cell–cell adhesion in various tissues.
CAMs mediate, through their extracellular domains, adhesive interactions between cells of the same type (homotypic
adhesion) or between cells of different types (heterotypic
adhesion). A CAM on one cell can directly bind to the same
kind of CAM on an adjacent cell (homophilic binding) or to
a different class of CAM (heterophilic binding). CAMs can
be broadly distributed along the regions of plasma membranes that contact other cells or clustered in discrete patches
or spots called cell junctions. Cell–cell adhesions can be tight
and long lasting or relatively weak and transient. The associations between nerve cells in the spinal cord or the metabolic cells in the liver exhibit tight adhesion. In contrast,
immune-system cells in the blood can exhibit only weak,
short-lasting interactions, allowing them to roll along and
pass through a blood vessel wall on their way to fight an infection within a tissue.
The cytosol-facing domains of CAMs recruit sets of multifunctional adapter proteins (see Figure 6-1). These adapters
act as linkers that directly or indirectly connect CAMs to elements of the cytoskeleton (Chapter 5); they can also recruit
intracellular molecules that function in signaling pathways to
control protein activity and gene expression (Chapters 13
and 14). In some cases, a complex aggregate of CAMs,
adapter proteins, and other associated proteins is assembled
at the inner surface of the plasma membrane. Because
cell–cell adhesions are intrinsically associated with the cytoskeleton and signaling pathways, a cell’s surroundings
influence its shape and functional properties (“outside-in”

effects); likewise, cellular shape and function influence a
cell’s surroundings (“inside-out” effects). Thus connectivity
and communication are intimately related properties of cells
in tissues.
The formation of many cell–cell adhesions entails two
types of molecular interactions (Figure 6-3). First, CAMs
on one cell associate laterally through their extracellular
domains or cytosolic domains or both into homodimers
or higher-order oligomers in the plane of the cell’s plasma
membrane; these interactions are called intracellular, lateral, or cis interactions. Second, CAM oligomers on one
cell bind to the same or different CAMs on an adjacent
cell; these interactions are called intercellular or trans interactions. Trans interactions sometimes induce additional
cis interactions and, as a consequence, yet even more trans
interactions.
Adhesive interactions between cells vary considerably,
depending on the particular CAMs participating and the tissue. Just like Velcro, very tight adhesion can be generated
when many weak interactions are combined together in a
small, well-defined area. Furthermore, the association of intracellular molecules with the cytosolic domains of CAMs
can dramatically influence the intermolecular interactions of
CAMs by promoting their cis association (clustering) or by
altering their conformation. Among the many variables that
determine the nature of adhesion between two cells are the
binding affinity of the interacting molecules (thermodynamic
properties); the overall “on” and “off” rates of association
and dissociation for each interacting molecule (kinetic properties); the spatial distribution (clustering, high or low density) of adhesion molecules (geometric properties); the active
versus inactive states of CAMs with respect to adhesion (biochemical properties); and external forces such as the laminar and turbulent flow of cells in the circulatory system
(mechanical properties).

CELL 1
Cis + trans
+

Cis
(lateral)

Trans

+
Cis
(lateral)

Trans
Cis + trans

CELL 2

▲ FIGURE 6-3 Schematic model for the generation of
cell–cell adhesions. Lateral interactions between cell-adhesion
molecules (CAMs) within the plasma membrane of a cell form
dimers and larger oligomers. The parts of the molecules that
participate in these cis interactions vary among the different

CAMs. Subsequent trans interactions between distal domains of
CAMs on adjacent cells generate a zipperlike strong adhesion
between the cells. [Adapted from M. S. Steinberg and P. M. McNutt,
1999, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11:554.]

6.2 • Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues: Junctions and Adhesion Molecules

The Extracellular Matrix Participates
in Adhesion and Other Functions
Certain cell-surface receptors, including some integrins, can
bind components of the extracellular matrix (ECM), thereby
indirectly adhering cells to each other through their interactions with the matrix. Three abundant ECM components are
proteoglycans, a unique type of glycoprotein; collagens, proteins that often form fibers; and soluble multiadhesive matrix
proteins (e.g., fibronectin). The relative volumes of cells versus matrix vary greatly among different animal tissues and
organs. Some connective tissue, for instance, is mostly matrix, whereas many organs are composed of very densely
packed cells with relatively little matrix.
Although the extracellular matrix generally provides mechanical support to tissues, it serves several other functions
as well. Different combinations of ECM components tailor
the extracellular matrix for specific purposes: strength in a
tendon, tooth, or bone; cushioning in cartilage; and adhesion
in most tissues. In addition, the composition of the matrix,
which can vary, depending on the anatomical site and physiological status of a tissue, can let a cell know where it is and
what it should do (environmental cues). Changes in ECM
components, which are constantly being remodeled, degraded, and resynthesized locally, can modulate the interactions of a cell with its environment. The matrix also serves as
a reservoir for many extracellular signaling molecules that
control cell growth and differentiation. In addition, the matrix provides a lattice through or on which cells can move,
particularly in the early stages of tissue assembly. Morphogenesis—the later stage of embryonic development in which
tissues, organs, and body parts are formed by cell movements
and rearrangements—also is critically dependent on cell–
matrix adhesion as well as cell–cell adhesion.

Diversity of Animal Tissues Depends
on Evolution of Adhesion Molecules
with Various Properties
Cell–cell adhesions and cell–matrix adhesions are responsible
for the formation, composition, architecture, and function of
animal tissues. Not surprisingly, adhesion molecules of animals are evolutionarily ancient and are some of the most
highly conserved proteins among multicellular (metazoan)
organisms. Sponges, the most primitive metazoans, express
certain CAMs and multiadhesive ECM molecules whose
structures are strikingly similar to those of the corresponding
human proteins. The evolution of organisms with complex
tissues and organs has depended on the evolution of diverse
CAMs, adhesion receptors, and ECM molecules with novel
properties and functions, whose levels of expression differ
in different types of cells.
The diversity of adhesive molecules arises in large part
from two phenomena that can generate numerous closely related proteins, called isoforms, that constitute a protein fam-

201

ily. In some cases, the different members of a protein family
are encoded by multiple genes that arose from a common ancestor by gene duplication and divergent evolution (Chapter
9). Analyses of gene and cDNA sequences can provide evidence for the existence of such a set of related genes, or gene
family. In other cases, a single gene produces an RNA transcript that can undergo alternative splicing to yield multiple
mRNAs, each encoding a distinct isoform (Chapter 4). Alternative splicing thus increases the number of proteins that
can be expressed from one gene. Both of these phenomena
contribute to the diversity of some protein families such as
the cadherins. Particular isoforms of an adhesive protein are
often expressed in some cell types but not others, accounting for their differential distribution in various tissues.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 6.1
Cell–Cell and Cell–Matrix Adhesion: An Overview
Cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs) mediate direct cell–cell
adhesions (homotypic and heterotypic), and cell-surface adhesion receptors mediate cell–matrix adhesions (see Figure
6-1). These interactions bind cells into tissues and facilitate
communication between cells and their environments.

■

The cytosolic domains of CAMs and adhesion receptors
bind multifunctional adapter proteins that mediate interaction with cytoskeletal fibers and intracellular signaling
proteins.

■

The major families of cell-surface adhesion molecules are
the cadherins, selectins, Ig-superfamily CAMs, and integrins (see Figure 6-2).

■

Tight cell–cell adhesions entail both cis (lateral or intracellular) oligomerization of CAMs and trans (intercellular) interaction of like (homophilic) or different (heterophilic) CAMs (see Figure 6-3).

■

The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex meshwork
of proteins and polysaccharides that contributes to the
structure and function of a tissue.

■

The evolution of CAMs, adhesion receptors, and ECM
molecules with specialized structures and functions permits
cells to assemble into diverse classes of tissues with varying functions.

■

6.2 Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues:
Junctions and Adhesion Molecules
In general, the external and internal surfaces of organs are
covered by a sheetlike layer of epithelial tissue called an epithelium. Cells that form epithelial tissues are said to be polarized because their plasma membranes are organized into
at least two discrete regions. Typically, the distinct surfaces
of a polarized epithelial cell are called the apical (top), basal

202

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues
(a) Simple columnar

Apical surface
Lateral
surface

Basal
surface
Connective
tissue

Basal
lamina
(b) Simple squamous

(c) Transitional

(d) Stratified squamous (nonkeratinized)

▲ FIGURE 6-4 Principal types of epithelium. The apical and
basolateral surfaces of epithelial cells exhibit distinctive
characteristics. (a) Simple columnar epithelia consist of elongated
cells, including mucus-secreting cells (in the lining of the
stomach and cervical tract) and absorptive cells (in the lining of
the small intestine). (b) Simple squamous epithelia, composed of
thin cells, line the blood vessels (endothelial cells/endothelium)
and many body cavities. (c) Transitional epithelia, composed of
several layers of cells with different shapes, line certain cavities
subject to expansion and contraction (e.g., the urinary bladder).
(d) Stratified squamous (nonkeratinized) epithelia line surfaces
such as the mouth and vagina; these linings resist abrasion and
generally do not participate in the absorption or secretion of
materials into or out of the cavity. The basal lamina, a thin fibrous
network of collagen and other ECM components, supports all
epithelia and connects them to the underlying connective tissue.
(base or bottom), and lateral (side) surfaces (Figure 6-4). The
basal surface usually contacts an underlying extracellular
matrix called the basal lamina, whose composition and function are discussed in Section 6.3. Often the basal and lateral
surfaces are similar in composition and together are called

the basolateral surface. The basolateral surfaces of most epithelia are usually on the side of the cell closest to the blood
vessels. In animals with closed circulatory systems, blood
flows through vessels whose inner lining is composed of flattened epithelial cells called endothelial cells. The apical side
of endothelial cells, which faces the blood, is usually called
the luminal surface, and the opposite basal side, the abluminal surface.
Epithelia in different body locations have characteristic
morphologies and functions (see Figure 6-4). Stratified (multilayered) epithelia commonly serve as barriers and protective surfaces (e.g., the skin), whereas simple (single-layer)
epithelia often selectively move ions and small molecules
from one side of the layer to the other. For instance, the simple columnar epithelium lining the stomach secretes hydrochloric acid into the stomach lumen; a similar epithelium
lining the small intestine transports products of digestion
(e.g., glucose and amino acids) from the lumen of the intestine across the basolateral surface into the blood (Chapter 7).
The simple columnar epithelium lining the small intestine has
numerous fingerlike projections (100 nm in diameter) called
microvilli (singular, microvillus) that extend from the luminal
(apical) surface (see Figure 5-45). The upright orientation of
a microvillus is maintained by numerous connections between the surrounding plasma membrane and a central bundle of actin microfilaments, which extend into the cell and
interact with keratin intermediate filaments (see Figure
5-28). Microvilli greatly increase the area of the apical surface and thus the number of proteins that it can contain, enhancing the absorptive capacity of the intestinal epithelium.
Here we describe the various cell junctions and CAMs
that play key roles in the assembly and functioning of epithelial sheets. In Section 6.3, we consider the components of the
extracellular matrix intimately associated with epithelia.

Specialized Junctions Help Define the Structure
and Function of Epithelial Cells
All epithelial cells in a sheet are connected to one another and
the extracellular matrix by specialized cell junctions consisting of dense clusters of CAMs. Although hundreds of individual CAM-mediated interactions are sufficient to cause cells
to adhere, junctions play special roles in imparting strength
and rigidity to a tissue, transmitting information between the
extracellular and the intracellular space, controlling the passage of ions and molecules across cell layers, and serving as
conduits for the movement of ions and molecules from the cytoplasm of one cell to that of its immediate neighbor.
Three major classes of animal cell junctions are prominent features of the intestinal epithelium (Figure 6-5; see also
Figure 6-1). Anchoring junctions and tight junctions perform
the key task of holding cells together into tissues. These junctions are organized into three parts: adhesive proteins in the
plasma membrane that connect one cell to another cell
(CAMs) or to the extracellular matrix (adhesion receptors);
adapter proteins, which connect the CAMs or adhesion re-

6.2 • Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues: Junctions and Adhesion Molecules

203

(b)

(a)

Apical
surface

Microvillus

Microvillus

Tight junction
Adherens junction
Actin and myosin
filaments

Tight junction

Lateral
surface

Adherens junction
Gap junction
Intermediate
filaments
Desmosome

Desmosome
Basal
surface

Hemidesmosome
Basal lamina

Gap junction

Connective tissue

▲ FIGURE 6-5 The principal types of cell junctions that

between cells. Gap junctions allow the movement of small
molecules and ions between the cytosols of adjacent cells.
The remaining three types of junctions—adherens junctions,
spot desmosomes, and hemidesmosomes—are critical to
cell–cell and cell–matrix adhesion and signaling. (b) Electron
micrograph of a thin section of intestinal epithelial cells, showing
relative locations of the different junctions. [Part (b) C. Jacobson

connect the columnar epithelial cells lining the small
intestine. (a) Schematic cutaway drawing of intestinal epithelial
cells. The basal surface of the cells rests on a basal lamina, and
the apical surface is packed with fingerlike microvilli that project
into the intestinal lumen. Tight junctions, lying just under the
microvilli, prevent the diffusion of many substances between the
intestinal lumen and the blood through the extracellular space

et al., 2001, Journal Cell Biol. 152:435–450.]

ceptors to cytoskeletal filaments and signaling molecules;
and the cytoskeletal filaments themselves. Tight junctions
also control the flow of solutes between the cells forming an
epithelial sheet. Gap junctions permit the rapid diffusion of
small, water-soluble molecules between the cytoplasm of adjacent cells. Although present in epithelia, gap junctions are
also abundant in nonepithelial tissues and structurally are
very different from anchoring junctions and tight junctions;
they also bear some resemblance to an important cell–cell
junction in plants. For these reasons, we wait to consider gap
junctions at the end of Section 6.5.
Of the three types of anchoring junctions present in epithelial cells, two participate in cell–cell adhesion, whereas
the third participates in cell–matrix adhesion. Adherens junctions, which connect the lateral membranes of adjacent epithelial cells, are usually located near the apical surface, just
below the tight junctions (see Figures 6-1 and 6-5). A circumferential belt of actin and myosin filaments in a complex
with the adherens junction functions as a tension cable that
can internally brace the cell and thereby control its shape.

Epithelial and some other types of cells, such as smooth muscle, are also bound tightly together by desmosomes, buttonlike points of contact sometimes called spot desmosomes.
Hemidesmosomes, found mainly on the basal surface of epithelial cells, anchor an epithelium to components of the underlying extracellular matrix, much like nails holding down
a carpet. Bundles of intermediate filaments, running parallel
to the cell surface or through the cell, rather than actin filaments, interconnect spot desmosomes and hemidesmosomes,
imparting shape and rigidity to the cell.
Desmosomes and hemidesmosomes also transmit shear
forces from one region of a cell layer to the epithelium as a
whole, providing strength and rigidity to the entire epithelial cell layer. These junctions are especially important in
maintaining the integrity of skin epithelia. For instance, mutations that interfere with hemidesmosomal anchoring in the
skin can lead to blistering in which the epithelium becomes
detached from its matrix foundation and extracellular fluid
accumulates at the basolateral surface, forcing the skin to
balloon outward.

204

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

Ca2-Dependent Homophilic Cell–Cell Adhesion
in Adherens Junctions and Desmosomes
Is Mediated by Cadherins
The primary CAMs in adherens junctions and desmosomes
belong to the cadherin family. In vertebrates and invertebrates, this protein family of more than 100 members can
be grouped into at least six subfamilies. The diversity of cadherins arises from the presence of multiple cadherin genes
and alternative RNA splicing, which generates multiple
mRNAs from one gene.
Cadherins are key molecules in cell–cell adhesion and cell
signaling, and they play a critical role during tissue differentiation. The “classical” E-, P-, and N-cadherins are the most
widely expressed, particularly during early differentiation.
Sheets of polarized epithelial cells, such as those that line
the small intestine or kidney tubules, contain abundant
E-cadherin along their lateral surfaces. Although E-cadherin
is concentrated in adherens junctions, it is present throughout the lateral surfaces where it is thought to link adjacent
cell membranes. The brain expresses the largest number of
different cadherins, presumably owing to the necessity of
forming many very specific cell–cell contacts to help establish
its complex wiring diagram.

Classical Cadherins The results of experiments with L cells, a
line of cultured mouse fibroblasts grown in the laboratory,
demonstrated that E-cadherin and P-cadherin preferentially
mediate homophilic interactions. L cells express no cadherins
and adhere poorly to themselves or to other types of cultured
cells. When genes encoding either E-cadherin or P-cadherin
were introduced into L cells with the use of techniques described in Chapter 9, the resulting engineered L cells expressed
the encoded cadherin. These cadherin-expressing L cells were
found to adhere preferentially to cells expressing the same type

Apical surface
Culture dish

Apical medium

Basal medium
Basal
lamina

Porous
filter

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-6 Madin-Darby canine
kidney (MDCK) cells grown in specialized containers provide
a useful experimental system for studying epithelial cells.
MDCK cells form a polarized epithelium when grown on a porous
membrane filter coated on one side with collagen and other
components of the basal lamina. With the use of the special
culture dish shown here, the medium on each side of the filter
(apical and basal sides of the monolayer) can be experimentally
manipulated and the movement of molecules across the layer
monitored. Anchoring junctions and tight junctions form only if
the growth medium contains sufficient Ca2.
of cadherin molecules; that is, they mediate homophilic interactions. The L cells expressing E-cadherin also exhibited the
polarized distribution of a membrane protein similar to that in
epithelial cells, and they formed epithelial-like aggregates with
one another and with epithelial cells isolated from lungs.
The adhesiveness of cadherins depends on the presence of
extracellular Ca2, the property that gave rise to their name
(calcium adhering). For example, the adhesion of engineered
L cells expressing E-cadherin is prevented when the cells are
bathed in a solution (growth medium) that is low in Ca2.
The role of E-cadherin in adhesion can also be demonstrated
Vinculin

-Catenin
-Catenin

Monolayer
of MDCK cells

VASP

E-cadherin

F-actin
-Actinin
ZO1

p120-catenin

Cytosol
Cell 1

Plasma
membrane

Extracellular
space

▲ FIGURE 6-7 Protein constitutents of typical adherens
junctions. The exoplasmic domains of E-cadherin dimers
clustered at adherens junctions on adjacent cells (1 and 2) form
Ca2-dependent homophilic interactions. The cytosolic domains
of the E-cadherins bind directly or indirectly to multiple adapter
proteins that connect the junctions to actin filaments (F-actin) of

Cytosol
Plasma
membrane

Cell 2

the cytoskeleton and participate in intracellular signaling
pathways (e.g., -catenin). Somewhat different sets of adapter
proteins are illustrated in the two cells shown to emphasize
that a variety of adapters can interact with adherens junctions,
which can thereby participate in diverse activities. [Adapted from
V. Vasioukhin and E. Fuchs, 2001, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.13:76.]

6.2 • Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues: Junctions and Adhesion Molecules

in experiments with cultured cells called Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. When grown in specialized containers, these cells form a continuous one-cell-thick sheet
(monolayer) of polarized kidneylike epithelial cells (Figure
6-6). In this experimental system, the addition of an antibody
that binds to E-cadherin, preventing its homophilic interactions, blocks the Ca2-dependent attachment of suspended
MDCK cells to a substrate and the subsequent formation of
intercellular adherens junctions.
Each classical cadherin contains a single transmembrane
domain, a relatively short C-terminal cytosolic domain, and
five extracellular “cadherin” domains (see Figure 6-2). The
extracellular domains are necessary for Ca2 binding and
cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion. Cadherin-mediated adhesion entails both lateral (intracellular) and trans (intercellular) molecular interactions as described previously (see
Figure 6-3). The Ca2-binding sites, located between the
cadherin repeats, serve to rigidify the cadherin oligomers.
The cadherin oligomers subsequently form intercellular complexes to generate cell–cell adhesion and then additional lateral contacts, resulting in a “zippering up” of cadherins into
clusters. In this way, multiple low-affinity interactions sum to
produce a very tight intercellular adhesion.
The results of domain swap experiments, in which an extracellular domain of one kind of cadherin is replaced with
the corresponding domain of a different cadherin, have indicated that the specificity of binding resides, at least in part,
in the most distal extracellular domain, the N-terminal domain. In the past, cadherin-mediated adhesion was commonly thought to require only head-to-head interactions
between the N-terminal domains of cadherin oligomers on
adjacent cells, as depicted in Figure 6-3. However, the results
of some experiments suggest that under some experimental
conditions at least three cadherin domains from each molecule, not just the N-terminal domains, participate by interdigitation in trans associations.
The C-terminal cytosolic domain of classical cadherins is
linked to the actin cytoskeleton by a number of cytosolic
adapter proteins (Figure 6-7). These linkages are essential for
strong adhesion, apparently owing primarily to their contributing to increased lateral associations. For example, disruption of the interactions between classical cadherins and - or
-catenin—two common adapter proteins that link these cadherins to actin filaments—dramatically reduces cadherinmediated cell–cell adhesion. This disruption occurs spontaneously in tumor cells, which sometimes fail to express catenin, and can be induced experimentally by depleting the
cytosolic pool of accessible -catenin. The cytosolic domains of
cadherins also interact with intracellular signaling molecules
such as -catenin and p120-catenin. Interestingly, -catenin not
only mediates cytoskeletal attachment but can also translocate
to the nucleus and alter gene transcription (see Figure 15-32).
Although E-cadherins exhibit primarily homophilic binding, some cadherins mediate heterophilic interactions. Importantly, each classical cadherin has a characteristic tissue
distribution. In the course of differentiation, the amount or
nature of the cell-surface cadherins changes, affecting many

205

aspects of cell–cell adhesion and cell migration. For instance,
the reorganization of tissues during morphogenesis is often
accompanied by the conversion of nonmotile epithelial cells
into motile precursor cells for other tissues (mesenchymal
cells). Such epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions are associated with a reduction in the expression of E-cadherin. The
conversion of epithelial cells into cancerous melanoma cells
also is marked by a loss of E-cadherin activity. The resulting
decrease in cell–cell adhesion permits melanoma cells to invade the underlying tissue and spread throughout the body.

Desmosomal Cadherins Desmosomes (Figure 6-8) contain two specialized cadherin proteins, desmoglein and
(a)
Plasma
membrane
Intercellular
space

Intermediate
filaments

Desmoglein and
desmocollin
(cadherins)

(b)

Intermediate filaments

Cytoplasmic plaque
(plakoglobin‚
desmoplakins)

Cytoplasmic plaques

Plasma membranes

0.2 µm

▲ FIGURE 6-8 Desmosomes. (a) Schematic model showing
components of a desmosome between epithelial cells and
attachments to the sides of keratin intermediate filaments, which
crisscross the interior of cells. The transmembrane CAMs,
desmoglein and desmocollin, belong to the cadherin family.
(b) Electron micrograph of a thin section of a desmosome
connecting two cultured differentiated human keratinocytes.
Bundles of intermediate filaments radiate from the two darkly
staining cytoplasmic plaques that line the inner surface of the
adjacent plasma membranes. [Part (a) see B. M. Gumbiner, 1993,
Neuron 11:551, and D. R. Garrod, 1993, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 5:30.
Part (b) courtesy of R. van Buskirk.]

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

The cadherin desmoglein was first identified by an
unusual, but revealing, skin disease called pemphigus vulgaris, an autoimmune disease. Patients with
autoimmune disorders synthesize antibodies that bind to a
normal body protein. In this case, the autoantibodies disrupt
adhesion between epithelial cells, causing blisters of the skin
and mucous membranes. The predominant autoantibody
was shown to be specific for desmoglein; indeed, the addition
of such antibodies to normal skin induces the formation of
blisters and disruption of cell adhesion.❚

(a)
Microvilli

desmocollin, whose cytosolic domains are distinct from
those in the classical cadherins. The cytosolic domains of
desmosomal cadherins interact with plakoglobin (similar in
structure to -catenin) and the plakophilins. These adapter
proteins, which form the thick cytoplasmic plaques characteristic of desmosomes, in turn interact with intermediate filaments. Thus desmosomes and adherens junctions are linked
to different cytoskeletal fibers.

Tight junction

206

(b)

Microvilli

Tight Junctions Seal Off Body Cavities
and Restrict Diffusion of Membrane Components
For polarized epithelial cells to carry out their functions as
barriers and mediators of selective transport, extracellular
fluids surrounding their apical and basolateral membranes
must be kept separate. The tight junctions between adjacent
epithelial cells are usually located just below the apical surface and help establish and maintain cell polarity (see Figures
6-1 and 6-5). These specialized regions of the plasma membrane form a barrier that seals off body cavities such as
the intestine, the stomach lumen, the blood (e.g., the
blood–brain barrier), and the bile duct in the liver.

Tight
junction
Intercellular
space
Linkage of protein
particles in adjacent
cells

 FIGURE 6-9 Tight junctions. (a) Freeze-fracture preparation
of tight junction zone between two intestinal epithelial cells. The
fracture plane passes through the plasma membrane of one of
the two adjacent cells. A honeycomb-like network of ridges and
grooves below the microvilli constitutes the tight junction zone.
(b) Schematic drawing shows how a tight junction might be
formed by the linkage of rows of protein particles in adjacent
cells. In the inset micrograph of an ultrathin sectional view of a
tight junction, the adjacent cells can be seen in close contact
where the rows of proteins interact. (c) As shown in these
schematic drawings of the major proteins in tight junctions,
both occludin and claudin-1 contain four transmembrane helices,
whereas the junction adhesion molecule (JAM) has a single
transmembrane domain and a large extracellular region. See text
for discussion. [Part (a) courtesy of L. A. Staehelin. Drawing in part (b)
adapted from L. A. Staehelin and B. E. Hull, 1978, Sci. Am. 238(5):140,
and D. Goodenough, 1999, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 96:319. Photograph
in part (b) courtesy of S. Tsukita et al., 2001, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
2:285. Drawing in part (c) adapted from S. Tsukita et al., 2001, Nature
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:285.]

Rows of
protein
particles

50 nm

N
JAM

(c)

Occludin

Claudin-1

N
C
N
C

C

6.2 • Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues: Junctions and Adhesion Molecules

Tight junctions prevent the diffusion of macromolecules
and to varying degrees impede the diffusion of small watersoluble molecules and ions across an epithelial sheet in the
spaces between cells. They also maintain the polarity of epithelial cells by preventing the diffusion of membrane proteins and glycolipids (lipids with covalently attached sugars)
between the apical and the basolateral regions of the plasma
membrane, ensuring that these regions contain different
membrane components. As a consequence, movement of
many nutrients across the intestinal epithelium is in large
part through the transcellular pathway. In this pathway, specific transport proteins in the apical membrane import small
molecules from the intestinal lumen into cells; other transport proteins located in the basolateral membrane then export these molecules into the extracellular space. Such
transcellular transport is covered in detail in Chapter 7.
Tight junctions are composed of thin bands of plasmamembrane proteins that completely encircle a polarized cell
and are in contact with similar thin bands on adjacent cells.
When thin sections of cells are viewed in an electron microscope, the lateral surfaces of adjacent cells appear to touch
each other at intervals and even to fuse in the zone just below
the apical surface (see Figure 6-5b). In freeze-fracture preparations, tight junctions appear as an interlocking network of
ridges in the plasma membrane (Figure 6-9a). More specifically, there appear to be ridges on the cytosolic face of the
plasma membrane of each of the two contacting cells. Corresponding grooves are found on the exoplasmic face.
Very high magnification reveals that rows of protein particles 3–4 nm in diameter form the ridges seen in freezefracture micrographs of tight junctions. In the model shown
in Figure 6-9b, the tight junction is formed by a double row
of these particles, one row donated by each cell. The two
principal integral-membrane proteins found in tight junctions are occludin and claudin. Initially, investigators
thought that occludin was the only essential protein component of tight junctions. However, when investigators engineered mice with mutations inactivating the occludin gene,
the mice still had morphologically distinct tight junctions.
(This technique, called gene knockout, is described in Chapter 9.) Further analysis led to the discovery of claudin. Each
of these proteins has four membrane-spanning  helices (Figure 6-9c). The claudin multigene family encodes numerous
homologous proteins (isoforms) that exhibit distinct tissuespecific patterns of expression. Recently, a group of junction
adhesion molecules (JAMs) have been found to contribute
to homophilic adhesion and other functions of tight junctions. These molecules, which contain a single transmembrane  helix, belong to the Ig superfamily of CAMs. The
extracellular domains of rows of occludin, claudin, and JAM
proteins in the plasma membrane of one cell apparently form
extremely tight links with similar rows of the same proteins
in an adjacent cell, creating a tight seal. Treatment of an epithelium with the protease trypsin destroys the tight junctions, supporting the proposal that proteins are essential
structural components of these junctions.

207

The long C-terminal cytosolic segment of occludin binds
to PDZ domains in certain large cytosolic adapter proteins.
These domains are found in various cytosolic proteins and
mediate binding to the C-termini of particular plasmamembrane proteins. PDZ-containing adapter proteins associated with occludin are bound, in turn, to other cytoskeletal and signaling proteins and to actin fibers. These
interactions appear to stabilize the linkage between occludin
and claudin molecules that is essential for maintaining the integrity of tight junctions.
A simple experiment demonstrates the impermeability of
certain tight junctions to many water-soluble substances. In
this experiment, lanthanum hydroxide (an electron-dense
colloid of high molecular weight) is injected into the pancreatic blood vessel of an experimental animal; a few minutes
later, the pancreatic acinar cells, which are specialized epithelial cells, are fixed and prepared for microscopy. As
shown in Figure 6-10, the lanthanum hydroxide diffuses
from the blood into the space that separates the lateral surfaces of adjacent acinar cells, but cannot penetrate past the
tight junction.
The importance of Ca2 to the formation and integrity of
tight junctions has been demonstrated in studies with MDCK
cells in the experimental system described previously (see
Figure 6-7). If the growth medium in the chamber contains
very low concentrations of Ca2, MDCK cells form a monolayer in which the cells are not connected by tight junctions.
As a result, fluids and salts flow freely across the cell layer.
When sufficient Ca2 is added to the medium, tight junctions
form within an hour, and the cell layer becomes impermeable
Apical surface
of left cell

Apical surface
of right cell

Tight junction

Lateral
surface
of left cell

Lateral
surface
of right cell

Lanthanum hydroxide
(between cells)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-10 Tight junctions prevent
passage of large molecules through extracellular space
between epithelial cells. This experiment, described in the text,
demonstrates the impermeability of tight junctions in the
pancreas to the large water-soluble colloid lanthanum hydroxide.
[Courtesy of D. Friend.]

208

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

to fluids and salts. Thus Ca2 is required for the formation
of tight junctions as well as for cell–cell adhesion mediated
by cadherins.
Plasma-membrane proteins cannot diffuse in the plane of
the membrane past tight junctions. These junctions also restrict the lateral movement of lipids in the exoplasmic leaflet
of the plasma membrane in the apical and basolateral regions
of epithelial cells. Indeed, the lipid compositions of the exoplasmic leaflet in these two regions are distinct. Essentially
all glycolipids are present in the exoplasmic face of the apical
membrane, as are all proteins linked to the membrane by a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor (see Figure 5-15).
In contrast, lipids in the cytosolic leaflet in the apical and basolateral regions of epithelial cells have the same composition and can apparently diffuse laterally from one region of
the membrane to the other.

Differences in Permeability of Tight Junctions
Can Control Passage of Small Molecules
Across Epithelia
The barrier to diffusion provided by tight junctions is not absolute. Owing at least in part to the varying properties of the
different isoforms of claudin located in different tight junctions, their permeability to ions, small molecules, and water
varies enormously among different epithelial tissues. In epithelia with “leaky” tight junctions, small molecules can
move from one side of the cell layer to the other through the
paracellular pathway in addition to the transcellular pathway (Figure 6-11).
The leakiness of tight junctions can be altered by intracellular signaling pathways, especially G protein–coupled
pathways entailing cyclic AMP and protein kinase C (Chapter 13). The regulation of tight junction permeability is often
Tight
junction

Paracellular Transcellular
pathway
pathway

Apical
membrane

Basolateral
membrane

▲ FIGURE 6-11 Transcellular and paracellular pathways of
transepithelial transport. Transcellular transport requires the
cellular uptake of molecules on one side and subsequent release
on the opposite side by mechanisms discussed in Chapters 7
and 17. In paracellular transport, molecules move extracellularly
through parts of tight junctions, whose permeability to small
molecules and ions depends on the composition of the junctional
components and the physiologic state of the epithelial cells.
[Adapted from S. Tsukita et al., 2001, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:285.]

studied by measuring ion flux (electrical resistance) or the
movement of radioactive or fluorescent molecules across
monolayers of MDCK cells.
The importance of paracellular transport is illustrated in several human diseases. In hereditary hypomagnesemia, defects in the claudin16 gene
prevent the normal paracellular flow of magnesium through
tight junctions in the kidney. This results in an abnormally
low blood level of magnesium, which can lead to convulsions. Furthermore, a mutation in the claudin14 gene causes
hereditary deafness, apparently by altering transport around
hair cells in the cochlea of the inner ear.
Toxins produced by Vibrio cholerae, which causes
cholera, and several other enteric (gastrointestinal tract)
bacteria alter the permeability barrier of the intestinal epithelium by altering the composition or activity of tight junctions. Other bacterial toxins can affect the ion-pumping
activity of membrane transport proteins in intestinal epithelial cells. Toxin-induced changes in tight junction permeability (increased paracellular transport) and in protein-mediated
ion-pumping proteins (increased transcellular transport) can
result in massive loss of internal body ions and water into the
gastrointestinal tract, which in turn leads to diarrhea and potentially lethal dehydration.❚

Many Cell–Matrix and Some Cell–Cell
Interactions Are Mediated by Integrins
The integrin family comprises heterodimeric integral membrane proteins that function as adhesion receptors, mediating many cell–matrix interactions (see Figure 6-2). In
vertebrates, at least 24 integrin heterodimers, composed of
18 types of  subunits and 8 types of  subunits in various
combinations, are known. A single  chain can interact with
any one of multiple  chains, forming integrins that bind different ligands. This phenomenon of combinatorial diversity,
which is found throughout the biological world, allows a relatively small number of components to serve a large number of distinct functions.
In epithelial cells, integrin 64 is concentrated in
hemidesmosomes and plays a major role in adhering cells to
matrix in the underlying basal lamina, as discussed in detail
in Section 6.3. Some integrins, particularly those expressed
by certain blood cells, participate in heterophilic cell–cell
interactions. The members of this large family play important roles in adhesion and signaling in both epithelial and
nonepithelial tissues.
Integrins typically exhibit low affinities for their ligands
with dissociation constants KD between 106 and 108 mol/L.
However, the multiple weak interactions generated by the
binding of hundreds or thousands of integrin molecules to
their ligands on cells or in the extracellular matrix allow a cell
to remain firmly anchored to its ligand-expressing target.
Moreover, the weakness of individual integrin-mediated interactions facilitates cell migration.

6.3 • The Extracellular Matrix of Epithelial Sheets

Parts of both the  and the  subunits of an integrin
molecule contribute to the primary extracellular ligandbinding site (see Figure 6-2). Ligand binding to integrins
also requires the simultaneous binding of divalent cations
(positively charged ions). Like other cell-surface adhesive
molecules, the cytosolic region of integrins interacts with
adapter proteins that in turn bind to the cytoskeleton and
intracellular signaling molecules. Although most integrins
are linked to the actin cytoskeleton, the cytosolic domain
of the 4 chain in the 64 integrin in hemidesmosomes,
which is much longer than those of other  integrins,
binds to specialized adapter proteins (e.g., plectin) that in
turn interact with keratin-based intermediate filaments.
In addition to their adhesion function, integrins can mediate outside-in and inside-out transfer of information (signaling). In outside-in signaling, the engagement of integrins
with their extracellular ligands can, through adapter proteins
bound to the integrin cytosolic region, influence the cytoskeleton and intracellular signaling pathways. Conversely,
in inside-out signaling, intracellular signaling pathways can
alter, from the cytoplasm, the structure of integrins and consequently their abilities to adhere to their extracellular ligands and mediate cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions.
Integrin-mediated signaling pathways influence processes as
diverse as cell survival, cell proliferation, and programmed
cell death (Chapter 22). Many cells express several different
integrins that bind the same ligand. By selectively regulating
the activity of each type of integrin, these cells can fine-tune
their cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions and the associated
signaling processes.
We will consider various integrins and the regulation of
their activity in detail in Section 6.5.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 6.2
Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues: Junctions
and Adhesion Molecules
Polarized epithelial cells have distinct apical, basal, and
lateral surfaces. Microvilli projecting from the apical surfaces of many epithelial cells considerably expand their surface areas.

■

Three major classes of cell junctions—anchoring junctions, tight junctions, and gap junctions—assemble epithelial cells into sheets and mediate communication between them (see Figures 6-1 and 6-5).

■

209

epithelial and other tissues. They promote strong cell–
cell adhesion by mediating both lateral and intercellular
interactions.
Adapter proteins that bind to the cytosolic domain
of cadherins and other CAMs mediate the association
of cytoskeletal and signaling molecules with the plasma
membrane (see Figure 6-9). Strong cell–cell adhesion
depends on the linkage of the interacting CAMs to the
cytoskeleton.

■

Tight junctions block the diffusion of proteins and some
lipids in the plane of the plasma membrane, contributing
to the polarity of epithelial cells. They also limit and regulate the extracellular (paracellular) flow of water and
solutes from one side of the epithelium to the other (see
Figure 6-11).

■

Integrins are a large family of  heterodimeric cellsurface proteins that mediate both cell–cell and cell–
matrix adhesions and inside-out and outside-in signaling
in numerous tissues.

■

6.3 The Extracellular Matrix
of Epithelial Sheets
In animals, the extracellular matrix helps organize cells
into tissues and coordinates their cellular functions by activating intracellular signaling pathways that control cell
growth, proliferation, and gene expression. Many functions of the matrix require transmembrane adhesion receptors that bind directly to ECM components and that
also interact, through adapter proteins, with the cytoskeleton. The principal class of adhesion receptors that
mediate cell–matrix adhesion are integrins, which were introduced in Section 6.2. However, other types of molecules
also function as important adhesion receptors in some
nonepithelial tissues.
Three types of molecules are abundant in the extracellular matrix of all tissues.
Highly viscous proteoglycans, a group of glycoproteins
that cushion cells and bind a wide variety of extracellular
molecules

■

■ Collagen fibers, which provide mechanical strength and
resilience

■

■ Soluble multiadhesive matrix proteins, which bind to
and cross-link cell-surface adhesion receptors and other
ECM components

Cadherins are cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs) responsible for Ca2-dependent interactions between cells in

We begin our description of the structures and functions of
these major ECM components in this section, focusing on
the molecular components and organization of the basal
lamina—the specialized extracellular matrix that helps determine the overall architecture of an epithelial tissue. In Section 6.4, we extend our discussion to specific ECM molecules
that are commonly present in nonepithelial tissues.

Adherens junctions and desmosomes are cadherincontaining anchoring junctions that bind the membranes
of adjacent cells, giving strength and rigidity to the entire
tissue. Hemidesmosomes are integrin-containing anchoring
junctions that attach cells to elements of the underlying extracellular matrix.

■

210

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

(a)

(b)
Cytosol

Basal surface

Plasma
membrane

Basal
lamina

Connective
tissue

Basal lamina

Cell-surface
receptor proteins

Collagen fibers

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-12 The basal lamina
separates epithelial cells and some other cells from
connective tissue. (a) Transmission electron micrograph of a thin
section of cells (top) and underlying connective tissue (bottom).
The electron-dense layer of the basal lamina can be seen to
follow the undulation of the basal surface of the cells.
(b) Electron micrograph of a quick-freeze deep-etch preparation of

skeletal muscle showing the relation of the plasma membrane,
basal lamina, and surrounding connective tissue. In this
preparation, the basal lamina is revealed as a meshwork of
filamentous proteins that associate with the plasma membrane
and the thicker collagen fibers of the connective tissue. [Part (a)

The Basal Lamina Provides a Foundation
for Epithelial Sheets

6-4). The basal lamina is structured differently in different
tissues. In columnar and other epithelia (e.g., intestinal
lining, skin), it is a foundation on which only one surface
of the cells rests. In other tissues, such as muscle or fat,
the basal lamina surrounds each cell. Basal laminae play important roles in regeneration after tissue damage and in embryonic development. For instance, the basal lamina helps

In animals, epithelia and most organized groups of cells are
underlain or surrounded by the basal lamina, a sheetlike
meshwork of ECM components usually no more than
60–120 nm thick (Figure 6-12; see also Figures 6-1 and

courtesy of P. FitzGerald. Part (b) from D. W. Fawcett, 1981, The Cell,
2d ed., Saunders/Photo Researchers; courtesy of John Heuser.]

 FIGURE 6-13 Major components of
the basal lamina. Schematic model of basal
lamina showing the organization of the
major protein components. Type IV collagen
and laminin each form two-dimensional
networks, which are cross-linked by entactin
and perlecan molecules. [Adapted from
B. Alberts et al., 1994, Molecular Biology of the
Cell, 3d ed., Garland, p. 991.]

Type IV collagen

Laminin

Entactin

Perlecan

6.3 • The Extracellular Matrix of Epithelial Sheets

four- and eight-celled embryos adhere together in a ball. In
the development of the nervous system, neurons migrate
along ECM pathways that contain basal lamina components.
Thus the basal lamina is important not only for organizing
cells into tissues but also for tissue repair and for guiding migrating cells during tissue formation.
Most of the ECM components in the basal lamina are
synthesized by the cells that rest on it. Four ubiquitous protein components are found in basal laminae (Figure 6-13):

211

(a)

(b)

Type IV collagen, trimeric molecules with both rodlike
and globular domains that form a two-dimensional
network

■

Laminins, a family of multiadhesive proteins that form
a fibrous two-dimensional network with type IV collagen
and that also bind to integrins

■

Entactin (also called nidogen), a rodlike molecule that
cross-links type IV collagen and laminin and helps
incorporate other components into the ECM

■

Perlecan, a large multidomain proteoglycan that
binds to and cross-links many ECM components and
cell-surface molecules

■

As depicted in Figure 6-1, one side of the basal lamina is
linked to cells by adhesion receptors, including 64 integrin
that binds to laminin in the basal lamina. The other side of
the basal lamina is anchored to the adjacent connective tissue
by a layer of fibers of collagen embedded in a proteoglycanrich matrix. In stratified squamous epithelia (e.g., skin), this
linkage is mediated by anchoring fibrils of type VII collagen.
Together, the basal lamina and this collagen-containing layer
(see the micrograph on page 197) form the structure called
the basement membrane.

Sheet-Forming Type IV Collagen Is a Major
Structural Component in Basal Laminae
Type IV collagen, the principal component of all basal lamina, is one of more than 20 types of collagen that participate
in the formation of the extracellular matrix in various tissues. Although they differ in certain structural features and
tissue distribution, all collagens are trimeric proteins made
from three polypeptides called collagen  chains. All three 
chains can be identical (homotrimeric) or different (heterotrimeric). A trimeric collagen molecule contains one or
more three-stranded segments, each with a similar triplehelical structure (Figure 6-14a). Each strand contributed by
one of the  chains is twisted into a left-handed helix, and
three such strands from the three  chains wrap around each
other to form a right-handed triple helix.
The collagen triple helix can form because of an unusual abundance of three amino acids: glycine, proline,
and a modified form of proline called hydroxyproline
(see Figure 3-12). They make up the characteristic repeating motif Gly-X-Y, where X and Y can be any amino

▲ FIGURE 6-14 The collagen triple helix. (a) (Left ) Side view
of the crystal structure of a polypeptide fragment whose
sequence is based on repeating sets of three amino acids, Gly-XY, characteristic of collagen  chains. (Center ) Each chain is
twisted into a left-handed helix, and three chains wrap around
each other to form a right-handed triple helix. The schematic
model (right) clearly illustrates the triple helical nature of the
structure. (b) View down the axis of the triple helix. The proton
side chains of the glycine residues (orange) point into the very
narrow space between the polypeptide chains in the center of
the triple helix. In mutations in collagen in which other amino
acids replace glycine, the proton in glycine is replaced by larger
groups that disrupt the packing of the chains and destablize the
triple-helical structure. [Adapted from R. Z. Kramer et al., 2001, J. Mol.
Biol. 311(1):131.]

acid but are often proline and hydroxyproline and less
often lysine and hydroxylysine. Glycine is essential because its small side chain, a hydrogen atom, is the only
one that can fit into the crowded center of the threestranded helix (Figure 6-14b). Hydrogen bonds help hold
the three chains together. Although the rigid peptidylproline and peptidyl-hydroxyproline linkages are not
compatible with formation of a classic single-stranded 
helix, they stabilize the distinctive three-stranded collagen helix. The hydroxyl group in hydroxyproline helps
hold its ring in a conformation that stabilizes the threestranded helix.
The unique properties of each type of collagen are due
mainly to differences in (1) the number and lengths of the
collagenous, triple-helical segments; (2) the segments that
flank or interrupt the triple-helical segments and that fold
into other kinds of three-dimensional structures; and (3) the
covalent modification of the  chains (e.g., hydroxylation,
glycosylation, oxidation, cross-linking). For example, the
chains in type IV collagen, which is unique to basal laminae,
are designated IV chains. Mammals express six homologous IV chains, which assemble into a series of type IV

212

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

(a)
Nonhelical

Triple helical

N-terminal
globular
domain

C-terminal
globular
domain

Collagen IV monomer

Association

collagens with distinct properties. All subtypes of type IV
collagen, however, form a 400-nm-long triple helix that is interrupted about 24 times with nonhelical segments and
flanked by large globular domains at the C-termini of the
chains and smaller globular domains at the N-termini. The
nonhelical regions introduce flexibility into the molecule.
Through both lateral associations and interactions entailing
the globular N- and C-termini, type IV collagen molecules
assemble into a branching, irregular two-dimensional fibrous
network that forms the lattice on which the basal lamina is
built (Figure 6-15).
In the kidney, a double basal lamina, the glomerular basement membrane, separates the epithelium
that lines the urinary space from the endothelium
that lines the surrounding blood-filled capillaries. Defects in
this structure, which is responsible for ultrafiltration of the
blood and initial urine formation, can lead to renal failure.
For instance, mutations that alter the C-terminal globular
domain of certain IV chains are associated with progressive renal failure as well as sensorineural hearing loss and
ocular abnormalities, a condition known as Alport’s
syndrome. In Goodpasture’s syndrome, a relatively rare
autoimmune disease, self-attacking, or “auto,” antibodies
bind to the 3 chains of type IV collagen found in the
glomerular basement membrane and lungs. This binding
sets off an immune response that causes cellular damage
resulting in progressive renal failure and pulmonary
hemorrhage.❚

Dimer

Tetramer

(b) Type IV network

Laminin, a Multiadhesive Matrix Protein, Helps
Cross-link Components of the Basal Lamina

250 nm

▲ FIGURE 6-15 Structure and assembly of type IV collagen.
(a) Schematic representation of type IV collagen. This 400-nmlong molecule has a small noncollagenous globular domain at the
N-terminus and a large globular domain at the C-terminus. The
triple helix is interrupted by nonhelical segments that introduce
flexible kinks in the molecule. Lateral interactions between triple
helical segments, as well as head-to-head and tail-to-tail
interactions between the globular domains, form dimers,
tetramers, and higher-order complexes, yielding a sheetlike
network. (b) Electron micrograph of type IV collagen network
formed in vitro. The lacy appearance results from the flexibility of
the molecule, the side-to-side binding between triple-helical
segments (thin arrows), and the interactions between C-terminal
globular domains (thick arrows). [Part (a) adapted from A. Boutaud,
2000, J. Biol. Chem. 275:30716. Part (b) courtesy of P. Yurchenco; see
P. Yurchenco and G. C. Ruben, 1987, J. Cell Biol. 105:2559.]

Multiadhesive matrix proteins are long, flexible molecules
that contain multiple domains responsible for binding various types of collagen, other matrix proteins, polysaccharides,
cell-surface adhesion receptors, and extracellular signaling
molecules (e.g., growth factors and hormones). These proteins are important for organizing the other components of
the extracellular matrix and for regulating cell–matrix adhesion, cell migration, and cell shape in both epithelial and
nonepithelial tissues.
Laminin, the principal multiadhesive matrix protein in
basal laminae, is a heterotrimeric, cross-shaped protein with
a total molecular weight of 820,000 (Figure 6-16). Many
laminin isoforms, containing slightly different polypeptide
chains, have been identified. Globular LG domains at the Cterminus of the laminin  subunit mediate Ca2-dependent
binding to specific carbohydrates on certain cell-surface
molecules such as syndecan and dystroglycan. LG domains
are found in a wide variety of proteins and can mediate
binding to steroids and proteins as well as carbohydrates.
For example, LG domains in the  chain of laminin can mediate binding to certain integrins, including 64 integrin
on epithelial cells.

6.3 • The Extracellular Matrix of Epithelial Sheets
α Chain (400,000 MW)

(a)

(a) Hyaluronan (n <
∼ 25,000)

β Chain
(215,000 MW)

Binds type IV
collagen

CH2OH
O
5

β(1→3)

O

O

O
Binds sulfated
lipids

6

COO−

γ Chain
(205,000 MW)

OH

Binds collagen,
sulfated lipids

4

HO
OH

α-Helical coiled coil

25 nm

LG domains,
bind
carbohydrates
and integrins

1
3

O
n

2

(b) Chondroitin (or dermatan) sulfate (n <
∼ 250)
(SO3−)
COO−
CH2OH
(SO3−)
O
O
HO
O
O
OH

β(1→4)

O
n

α/β(1→3)

OH
D-Glucuronic acid
(or L-iduronic acid)

(b)

NHCOCH3
N -AcetylD-galactosamine

(c) Heparin/Heparan sulfate (n = 200)
COO−
O
O
50 nm

β(1→4)

NHCOCH3
N -AcetylD-glucosamine

D-Glucuronic acid

Binds neurites

213

matrix protein found in all basal laminae. (a) Schematic model
showing the general shape, location of globular domains, and
coiled-coil region in which laminin’s three chains are covalently
linked by several disulfide bonds. Different regions of laminin
bind to cell-surface receptors and various matrix components.
(b) Electron micrographs of intact laminin molecule, showing its
characteristic cross appearance (left) and the carbohydratebinding LG domains near the C-terminus (right). [Part (a) adapted
from G. R. Martin and R. Timpl, 1987, Ann. Rev. Cell Biol. 3:57, and
K. Yamada, 1991, J. Biol. Chem. 266:12809. Part (b) from R. Timpl et al.,
2000, Matrix Biol. 19:309; photograph at right courtesy of Jürgen Engel.]

Secreted and Cell-Surface Proteoglycans
Are Expressed by Many Cell Types
Proteoglycans are a subset of glycoproteins containing covalently linked specialized polysaccharide chains called
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), which are long linear polymers
of specific repeating disaccharides. Usually one sugar is either a uronic acid (D-glucuronic acid or L-iduronic acid) or
D-galactose; the other sugar is N-acetylglucosamine or
N-acetylgalactosamine (Figure 6-17). One or both of the sugars contain at least one anionic group (carboxylate or sulfate). Thus each GAG chain bears many negative charges.

O

OH

10 nm

▲ FIGURE 6-16 Laminin, a heterotrimeric multiadhesive

α/β(1→4)

OH
(SO3−)
D-Glucuronic or
L-iduronic acid

(d) Keratan sulfate (n = 20–40)
(SO3−)
CH2OH
β(1→4)
O
HO
O

(SO3−)
CH2OH
O
OH

α(1→4)

O
n

NHSO3−
(COCH3)
N -Acetyl- or N -sulfoD-glucosamine

(SO3−)
CH2OH
O
OH

β(1→3)

O
n

O
OH
D-Galactose

NHCOCH3
N -AcetylD-glucosamine

▲ FIGURE 6-17 The repeating disaccharides of
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), the polysaccharide components
of proteoglycans. Each of the four classes of GAGs is formed by
polymerization of monomer units into repeats of a particular
disaccharide and subsequent modifications, including addition of
sulfate groups and inversion (epimerization) of the carboxyl group
on carbon 5 of D-glucuronic acid to yield L-iduronic acid. Heparin
is generated by hypersulfation of heparan sulfate, whereas
hyaluronan is unsulfated. The number (n) of disaccharides
typically found in each glycosaminoglycan chain is given. The
squiggly lines represent covalent bonds that are oriented either
above (D-glucuronic acid) or below (L-iduronic acid) the ring.

214

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

GAGs are classified into several major types based on the nature of the repeating disaccharide unit: heparan sulfate,
chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate, and
hyaluronan. A hypersulfated form of heparan sulfate called
heparin, produced mostly by mast cells, plays a key role in
allergic reactions. It is also used medically as an anticlotting
drug because of its ability to activate a natural clotting inhibitor called antithrombin III.
As we will see in later chapters, complex signaling pathways direct the emergence of various cell types in the proper
position and at the proper time in normal embryonic development. Laboratory generation and analysis of mutants with defects in proteoglycan production in Drosophila melanogaster
(fruit fly), C. elegans (roundworm), and mice have clearly
shown that proteoglycans play critical roles in development,
most likely as modulators of various signaling pathways.

Biosynthesis of Proteoglycans With the exception of
hyaluronan, which is discussed in the next section, all the
major GAGs occur naturally as components of proteoglycans. Like other secreted and transmembrane glycoproteins,
proteoglycan core proteins are synthesized on the endoplasmic reticulum (Chapter 16). The GAG chains are assembled
on these cores in the Golgi complex. To generate heparan or
chondroitin sulfate chains, a three-sugar “linker” is first attached to the hydroxyl side chains of certain serine residues
in a core protein (Figure 6-18). In contrast, the linkers for the
addition of keratan sulfate chains are oligosaccharide chains
attached to asparagine residues; such N-linked oligosaccharides are present in most glycoproteins, although only a subset carry GAG chains. All GAG chains are elongated by the
alternating addition of sugar monomers to form the disaccharide repeats characteristic of a particular GAG; the chains
are often modified subsequently by the covalent linkage of
small molecules such as sulfate. The mechanisms responsible for determining which proteins are modified with GAGs,
the sequence of disaccharides to be added, the sites to be sulCore
protein

SO4
(GlcUA

GalNAc)n

GlcUA

Gal

Chondroitin sulfate
repeats
Gal = galactose
GalNAc = N -acetylgalactosamine

Gal

Xyl

Ser

Linking sugars
GlcUA = glucuronic acid
Xyl = xylose

▲ FIGURE 6-18 Biosynthesis of heparan and chondroitin
sulfate chains in proteoglycans. Synthesis of a chondroitin
sulfate chain (shown here) is initiated by transfer of a xylose
residue to a serine residue in the core protein, most likely in the
Golgi complex, followed by sequential addition of two galactose
residues. Glucuronic acid and N-acetylgalactosamine residues are
then added sequentially to these linking sugars, forming the
chondroitin sulfate chain. Heparan sulfate chains are connected to
core proteins by the same three-sugar linker.

fated, and the lengths of the GAG chains are unknown. The
ratio of polysaccharide to protein in all proteoglycans is
much higher than that in most other glycoproteins.

Diversity of Proteoglycans The proteoglycans constitute a
remarkably diverse group of molecules that are abundant in
the extracellular matrix of all animal tissues and are also expressed on the cell surface. For example, of the five major
classes of heparan sulfate proteoglycans, three are located
in the extracellular matrix (perlecan, agrin, and type XVIII
collagen) and two are cell-surface proteins. The latter include
integral membrane proteins (syndecans) and GPI-anchored
proteins (glypicans); the GAG chains in both types of cellsurface proteoglycans extend into the extracellular space.
The sequences and lengths of proteoglycan core proteins
vary considerably, and the number of attached GAG chains
ranges from just a few to more than 100. Moreover, a core
protein is often linked to two different types of GAG chains
(e.g., heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate), generating a
“hybrid” proteoglycan. Thus, the molecular weight and
charge density of a population of proteoglycans can be expressed only as an average; the composition and sequence
of individual molecules can differ considerably.
Perlecan, the major secreted proteoglycan in basal laminae, consists of a large multidomain core protein (≈400 kDa)
with three or four specialized GAG chains. Both the protein
and the GAG components of perlecan contribute to its ability to incorporate into and define the structure and function
of basal laminae. Because of its multiple domains with distinctive binding properties, perlecan can cross-link not only
ECM components to one another but also certain cellsurface molecules to ECM components.
Syndecans are expressed by epithelial cells and many other
cell types. These cell-surface proteoglycans bind to collagens
and multiadhesive matrix proteins such as the fibronectins,
which are discussed in Section 6.4. In this way, cell-surface
proteoglycans can anchor cells to the extracellular matrix.
Like that of many integral membrane proteins, the cytosolic
domain of syndecan interacts with the actin cytoskeleton and
in some cases with intracellular regulatory molecules. In addition, cell-surface proteoglycans bind many protein growth
factors and other external signaling molecules, thereby helping
to regulate cellular metabolism and function. For instance,
syndecans in the hypothalamic region of the brain modulate
feeding behavior in response to food deprivation (fasted state).
They do so by participating in the binding of antisatiety peptides to cell-surface receptors that help control feeding behavior. In the fed state, the syndecan extracellular domain
decorated with heparan sulfate chains is released from the surface by proteolysis, thus suppressing the activity of the antisatiety peptides and feeding behavior. In mice engineered to
overexpress the syndecan-1 gene in the hypothalamic region of
the brain and other tissues, normal control of feeding by antisatiety peptides is disrupted and the animals overeat and become obese. Other examples of proteoglycans interacting with
external signaling molecules are described in Chapter 14.

6.3 • The Extracellular Matrix of Epithelial Sheets
OSO3
HO
HO

O

RHN
R = Ac or SO3

OSO3



OOC

O
HO

O

O

O
OH





O3SO

OOC



O3SHN

O

OH

OSO3

O


O3SO

O
HO

O


O3SHN

OH

215

 FIGURE 6-19 Pentasaccharide
GAG sequence that regulates the
activity of antithrombin III (ATIII).
Sets of modified five-residue
sequences in heparin with the
composition shown here bind to ATIII
and activate it, thereby inhibiting blood
clotting. The sulfate groups in red type
are essential for this heparin function;
the modifications in blue type may be
present but are not essential. Other
sets of modified GAG sequences are
thought to regulate the activity of
other target proteins. [Courtesy of Robert
Rosenberg and Balagurunathan Kuberan.]

Modifications in Glycosaminoglycan (GAG)
Chains Can Determine Proteoglycan Functions
As is the case with the sequence of amino acids in proteins,
the arrangement of the sugar residues in GAG chains and the
modification of specific sugars (e.g., addition of sulfate) in
the chains can determine their function and that of the proteoglycans containing them. For example, groupings of certain modified sugars in the GAG chains of heparin sulfate
proteoglycans can control the binding of growth factors
to certain receptors, the activities of proteins in the bloodclotting cascade, and the activity of lipoprotein lipase, a
membrane-associated enzyme that hydrolyzes triglycerides to
fatty acids (Chapter 18).
For years, the chemical and structural complexity of
proteoglycans posed a daunting barrier to an analysis of
their structures and an understanding of their many diverse
functions. In recent years, investigators employing classical and new state-of-the-art biochemical techniques (e.g.,
capillary high-pressure liquid chromatography), mass spectrometry, and genetics have begun to elucidate the detailed
structures and functions of these ubiquitous ECM molecules. The results of ongoing studies suggest that sets of
sugar-residue sequences containing some modifications in
common, rather than single unique sequences, are responsible for specifying distinct GAG functions. A case in point
is a set of five-residue (pentasaccharide) sequences found in
a subset of heparin GAGs that control the activity of
antithrombin III (ATIII), an inhibitor of the key bloodclotting protease thrombin. When these pentasaccharide sequences in heparin are sulfated at two specific positions,
heparin can activate ATIII, thereby inhibiting clot formation (Figure 6-19). Several other sulfates can be present in
the active pentasaccharide in various combinations, but
they are not essential for the anticlotting activity of heparin. The rationale for generating sets of similar active
sequences rather than a single unique sequence and the
mechanisms that control GAG biosynthetic pathways, permitting the generation of such active sequences, are not
well understood.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 6.3
The Extracellular Matrix of Epithelial Sheets
The basal lamina, a thin meshwork of extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules, separates most epithelia and other
organized groups of cells from adjacent connective tissue.
Together, the basal lamina and collagenous reticular lamina form a structure called the basement membrane.

■

Four ECM proteins are found in all basal laminae (see Figure 6-13): type IV collagen, laminin (a multiadhesive matrix
protein), entactin (nidogen), and perlecan (a proteoglycan).

■

■ Cell-surface adhesion receptors (e.g., 64 integrin in
hemidesmosomes) anchor cells to the basal lamina, which in
turn is connected to other ECM components (see Figure 6-1).

Repeating sequences of Gly-X-Y give rise to the collagen triple-helical structure (see Figure 6-14). Different collagens are distinguished by the length and chemical modifications of their  chains and by the segments that
interrupt or flank their triple-helical regions.

■

The large, flexible molecules of type IV collagen interact end to end and laterally to form a meshlike scaffold to
which other ECM components and adhesion receptors can
bind (see Figure 6-15).

■

Laminin and other multiadhesive matrix proteins are
multidomain molecules that bind multiple adhesion receptors and ECM components.

■

Proteoglycans consist of membrane-associated or secreted core proteins covalently linked to one or more glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains, which are linear polymers
of sulfated disaccharides.

■

Perlecan, a large secreted proteoglycan present primarily
in the basal lamina, binds many ECM components and adhesion receptors.

■

Cell-surface proteoglycans such as the syndecans facilitate cell–matrix interactions and help present certain external signaling molecules to their cell-surface receptors.

■

216

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

6.4 The Extracellular Matrix
of Nonepithelial Tissues
We have seen how diverse CAMs and adhesion receptors
participate in the assembly of animal cells into epithelial
sheets that rest on and adhere to a well-defined ECM structure, the basal lamina. The same or similar molecules mediate and control cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions in

connective, muscle, and neural tissues and between blood
cells and the surrounding vessels. In this section, we consider some of the ECM molecules characteristic of these
nonepithelial tissues. We also describe the synthesis of fibrillar collagens, which are the most abundant proteins in
animals. The interactions entailing CAMs and adhesion
receptors expressed by various nonepithelial cells, which
serve a wide variety of distinctive functions, are covered in
Section 6.5.

TABLE 6-1 Selected Collagens
Molecule
Composition

Structural Features

Representative Tissues

I

[1(I)]2[2(I)]

300-nm-long fibrils

Skin, tendon, bone, ligaments, dentin, interstitial
tissues

II

[1(II)]3

300-nm-long fibrils

Cartilage, vitreous humor

III

[1(III)]3

300-nm-long fibrils; often with type I

Skin, muscle, blood
vessels

V

[1(V)2 2(V)],
[1(V)3]

390-nm-long fibrils with globular
N-terminal extension; often with type I

Cornea, teeth, bone,
placenta, skin, smooth
muscle

Type

FIBRILLAR COLLAGENS

FIBRIL-ASSOCIATED COLLAGENS
VI

[1(VI)][2(VI)]

Lateral association with type I; periodic
globular domains

Most interstitial tissues

IX

[1(IX)][2(IX)][3(IX)]

Lateral association with type II;
N-terminal globular domain; bound GAG

Cartilage, vitreous humor

SHEET-FORMING AND ANCHORING COLLAGENS
IV

[1(IV)]2[2(IV)]

Two-dimensional network

All basal laminae

VII

[1(VII)]3

Long fibrils

Below basal lamina of
the skin

XV

[1(XV)]3

Core protein of chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycan

Widespread; near basal
lamina in muscle

TRANSMEMBRANE COLLAGENS
XIII

[1(XIII)]3

Integral membrane protein

Hemidesmosomes in skin

XVII

[1(XVII)]3

Integral membrane protein

Hemidesmosomes in skin

Collectins

Oligomers of triple helix; lectin domains

Blood, alveolar space

C1q

Oligomers of triple helix

Blood (complement)

Class A scavenger
receptors

Homotrimeric membrane proteins

Macrophages

HOST DEFENSE COLLAGENS

SOURCES:

K. Kuhn, 1987, in R. Mayne and R. Burgeson, eds., Structure and Function of Collagen Types,
Academic Press, p. 2; and M. van der Rest and R. Garrone, 1991, FASEB J. 5:2814.

6.4 • The Extracellular Matrix of Nonepithelial Tissues

Fibrillar Collagens Are the Major Fibrous Proteins
in the Extracellular Matrix of Connective Tissues
Connective tissue, such as tendon and cartilage, differs from
other solid tissues in that most of its volume is made up of
extracellular matrix rather than cells. This matrix is packed
with insoluble protein fibers and contains proteoglycans,
various multiadhesive proteins, and hyaluronan, a very large,
nonsulfated GAG. The most abundant fibrous protein in
connective tissue is collagen. Rubberlike elastin fibers, which
can be stretched and relaxed, also are present in deformable
sites (e.g., skin, tendons, heart). As discussed later, the
fibronectins, a family of multiadhesive matrix proteins, form
their own distinct fibrils in the matrix of some connective tissues. Although several types of cells are found in connective
tissues, the various ECM components are produced largely
by cells called fibroblasts.
About 80–90 percent of the collagen in the body consists
of types I, II, and III collagens, located primarily in connective tissues. Because of its abundance in tendon-rich tissue
such as rat tail, type I collagen is easy to isolate and was the
first collagen to be characterized. Its fundamental structural
unit is a long (300-nm), thin (1.5-nm-diameter) triple helix
consisting of two 1(I) chains and one 2(I) chain, each precisely 1050 amino acids in length (see Figure 6-14). The
triple-stranded molecules associate into higher-order poly-

mers called collagen fibrils, which in turn often aggregate
into larger bundles called collagen fibers.
The minor classes of collagen include fibril-associated collagens, which link the fibrillar collagens to one another or to
other ECM components; sheet-forming and anchoring collagens, which form two-dimensional networks in basal laminae
(type IV) and connect the basal lamina in skin to the underlying connective tissue (type VII); transmembrane collagens,
which function as adhesion receptors; and host defense
collagens, which help the body recognize and eliminate
pathogens. Table 6-1 lists specific examples in the various
classes of collagens. Interestingly, several collagens (e.g., types
XVIII and XV) function as core proteins in proteoglycans.

Formation of Collagen Fibrils Begins
in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
and Is Completed Outside the Cell
Collagen biosynthesis and secretion follow the normal pathway
for a secreted protein, which is described in detail in Chapters
16 and 17. The collagen  chains are synthesized as longer
precursors, called pro- chains, by ribosomes attached to the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The pro- chains undergo a series
of covalent modifications and fold into triple-helical procollagen molecules before their release from cells (Figure 6-20).

 FIGURE 6-20 Major events in biosynthesis

1
Rough ER

N
OH
N OH
N

OH

O

α1

OH
S−S

α1
α2

O
OH

2

OH

N

N

Propeptide

N

Hsp47

3
Procollagen

5 Lateral association
4
Golgi
complex

Cytosol

6

7 Propeptide

Extracellular space

cleavage

Collagen molecule

8 Fibril assembly and crosslinking

Collagen fibril
250
nm

Cross-striations
(67 nm)

217

67 nm

of fibrillar collagens. Step 1 : Procollagen 
chains are synthesized on ribosomes associated
with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane,
and asparagine-linked oligosaccharides are added
to the C-terminal propeptide. Step 2 : Propeptides
associate to form trimers and are covalently linked
by disulfide bonds, and selected residues in the
Gly- X - Y triplet repeats are covalently modified
[certain prolines and lysines are hydroxylated,
galactose (Gal) or galactose-glucose (hexagons) is
attached to some hydroxylysines, prolines are cis
→ trans isomerized]. Step 3 : The modifications
facilitate zipperlike formation, stabilization of triple
helices, and binding by the chaperone protein
Hsp47 (Chapter 16), which may stabilize the
helices or prevent premature aggregation of the
trimers or both. Steps 4 and 5 : The folded
procollagens are transported to and through the
Golgi apparatus, where some lateral association
into small bundles takes place. The chains are
then secreted (step 6 ),the N- and C- terminal
propeptides are removed (step 7 ), and the
trimers assemble into fibrils and are covalently
cross-linked (step 8 ). The 67-nm staggering of
the trimers gives the fibrils a striated appearance
in electron micrographs (inset). [Adapted from
A. V. Persikov and B. Brodsky, 2002, Proc. Nat’l.
Acad. Sci. USA 99(3):1101–1103.]

218

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

After the secretion of procollagen from the cell, extracellular peptidases (e.g., bone morphogenetic protein-1) remove
the N-terminal and C-terminal propeptides. In regard to fibrillar collagens, the resulting molecules, which consist almost
entirely of a triple-stranded helix, associate laterally to generate fibrils with a diameter of 50–200 nm. In fibrils, adjacent collagen molecules are displaced from one another by
67 nm, about one-quarter of their length. This staggered
array produces a striated effect that can be seen in electron
micrographs of collagen fibrils (see Figure 6-20, inset). The
unique properties of the fibrous collagens (e.g., types I, II, III)
are mainly due to the formation of fibrils.
Short non-triple-helical segments at either end of the collagen  chains are of particular importance in the formation of
collagen fibrils. Lysine and hydroxylysine side chains in these
segments are covalently modified by extracellular lysyl oxidases
to form aldehydes in place of the amine group at the end of the
side chain. These reactive aldehyde groups form covalent crosslinks with lysine, hydroxylysine, and histidine residues in adjacent molecules. These cross-links stabilize the side-by-side
packing of collagen molecules and generate a strong fibril. The
removal of the propeptides and covalent cross-linking take
place in the extracellular space to prevent the potentially catastrophic assembly of fibrils within the cell.

I collagen fibers have great tensile strength, tendons can be
stretched without being broken. Indeed, gram for gram, type
I collagen is stronger than steel. Two quantitatively minor
fibrillar collagens, type V and type XI, coassemble into fibers
with type I collagen, thereby regulating the structures and
properties of the fibers. Incorporation of type V collagen, for
example, results in smaller-diameter fibers.
Type I collagen fibrils are also used as the reinforcing
rods in the construction of bone. Bones and teeth are hard
and strong because they contain large amounts of dahllite, a
crystalline calcium- and phosphate-containing mineral. Most
bones are about 70 percent mineral and 30 percent protein,
the vast majority of which is type I collagen. Bones form
when certain cells (chondrocytes and osteoblasts) secrete collagen fibrils that are then mineralized by deposition of small
dahllite crystals.
In many connective tissues, type VI collagen and proteoglycans are noncovalently bound to the sides of type I fibrils
and may bind the fibrils together to form thicker collagen
fibers (Figure 6-21a). Type VI collagen is unusual in that the
molecule consists of a relatively short triple helix with glob-

(b)

(a)

The post-translational modifications of pro-
chains are crucial for the formation of mature collagen molecules and their assembly into fibrils. Defects in these modifications have serious consequences, as
ancient mariners frequently experienced. For example, ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is an essential cofactor for the hydroxylases responsible for adding hydroxyl groups to proline and
lysine residues in pro- chains. In cells deprived of ascorbate,
as in the disease scurvy, the pro- chains are not hydroxylated sufficiently to form stable triple-helical procollagen at
normal body temperature, and the procollagen that forms
cannot assemble into normal fibrils. Without the structural
support of collagen, blood vessels, tendons, and skin become
fragile. Because fresh fruit in the diet can supply sufficient vitamin C to support the formation of normal collagen, early
British sailors were provided with limes to prevent scurvy,
leading to their being called “limeys.”
Rare mutations in lysyl hydroxylase genes cause Bruck
syndrome and one form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Both
disorders are marked by connective-tissue defects, although
their clinical symptoms differ. ❚

Type I and II Collagens Form Diverse
Structures and Associate with Different
Nonfibrillar Collagens
Collagens differ in their ability to form fibers and to organize the fibers into networks. In tendons, for instance, long
type I collagen fibrils are packed side by side in parallel bundles, forming thick collagen fibers. Tendons connect muscles
to bones and must withstand enormous forces. Because type

Type-I collagen fibrils

Type-II collagen fibril

Chondroitin
sulfate

Kink

Type-VI
collagen
Type-IX
collagen

Proteoglycan

▲ FIGURE 6-21 Interactions of fibrous collagens with
nonfibrous fibril-associated collagens. (a) In tendons, type I
fibrils are all oriented in the direction of the stress applied to the
tendon. Proteoglycans and type VI collagen bind noncovalently to
fibrils, coating the surface. The microfibrils of type VI collagen,
which contain globular and triple-helical segments, bind to type I
fibrils and link them together into thicker fibers. (b) In cartilage,
type IX collagen molecules are covalently bound at regular
intervals along type II fibrils. A chondroitin sulfate chain,
covalently linked to the 2(IX) chain at the flexible kink, projects
outward from the fibril, as does the globular N-terminal region.
[Part (a), see R. R. Bruns et al., 1986, J. Cell Biol. 103:393. Part (b), see
L. M. Shaw and B. Olson, 1991, Trends Biochem. Sci. 18:191.]

6.4 • The Extracellular Matrix of Nonepithelial Tissues

ular domains at both ends. The lateral association of two
type VI monomers generates an “antiparallel” dimer. The
end-to-end association of these dimers through their globular domains forms type VI “microfibrils.” These microfibrils have a beads-on-a-string appearance, with about 60nm-long triple-helical regions separated by 40-nm-long globular domains.
The fibrils of type II collagen, the major collagen in cartilage, are smaller in diameter than type I fibrils and are oriented randomly in a viscous proteoglycan matrix. The rigid
collagen fibrils impart a strength and compressibility to the
matrix and allow it to resist large deformations in shape.
This property allows joints to absorb shocks. Type II fibrils
are cross-linked to matrix proteoglycans by type IX collagen,
another fibril-associated collagen. Type IX collagen and several related types have two or three triple-helical segments
connected by flexible kinks and an N-terminal globular segment (Figure 6-22b). The globular N-terminal segment of
type IX collagen extends from the fibrils at the end of one
of its helical segments, as does a GAG chain that is sometimes linked to one of the type IX chains. These protruding
nonhelical structures are thought to anchor the type II fibril
to proteoglycans and other components of the matrix. The
interrupted triple-helical structure of type IX and related collagens prevents them from assembling into fibrils, although
they can associate with fibrils formed from other collagen
types and form covalent cross-links to them.
Certain mutations in the genes encoding collagen
1(I) or 2(I) chains, which form type I collagen,
lead to osteogenesis imperfecta, or brittle-bone disease. Because every third position in a collagen  chain must
be a glycine for the triple helix to form (see Figure 6-14), mutations of glycine to almost any other amino acid are deleterious, resulting in poorly formed and unstable helices. Only
one defective  chain of the three in a collagen molecule can
disrupt the whole molecule’s triple-helical structure and function. A mutation in a single copy (allele) of either the 1(I)
gene or the 2(I) gene, which are located on nonsex chromosomes (autosomes), can cause this disorder. Thus it normally shows autosomal dominant inheritance (Chapter 9). ❚

Hyaluronan Resists Compression and Facilitates
Cell Migration
Hyaluronan, also called hyaluronic acid (HA) or hyaluronate, is a nonsulfated GAG formed as a disaccharide repeat composed of glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine
(see Figure 6-17a) by a plasma-membrane-bound enzyme
(HA synthase) and is directly secreted into the extracellular
space. It is a major component of the extracellular matrix
that surrounds migrating and proliferating cells, particularly
in embryonic tissues. In addition, as will be described shortly,
hyaluronan forms the backbone of complex proteoglycan aggregates found in many extracellular matrices, particularly
cartilage. Because of its remarkable physical properties,
hyaluronan imparts stiffness and resilience as well as a lu-

219

bricating quality to many types of connective tissue such as
joints.
Hyaluronan molecules range in length from a few disaccharide repeats to ≈25,000. The typical hyaluronan in joints
such as the elbow has 10,000 repeats for a total mass of
4  106 Da and length of 10 µm (about the diameter of a
small cell). Individual segments of a hyaluronan molecule
fold into a rodlike conformation because of the  glycosidic
linkages between the sugars and extensive intrachain hydrogen bonding. Mutual repulsion between negatively charged
carboxylate groups that protrude outward at regular intervals also contributes to these local rigid structures. Overall,
however, hyaluronan is not a long, rigid rod as is fibrillar collagen; rather, in solution it is very flexible, bending and twisting into many conformations, forming a random coil.
Because of the large number of anionic residues on its
surface, the typical hyaluronan molecule binds a large
amount of water and behaves as if it were a large hydrated
sphere with a diameter of ≈500 nm. As the concentration of
hyaluronan increases, the long chains begin to entangle,
forming a viscous gel. Even at low concentrations, hyaluronan forms a hydrated gel; when placed in a confining space,
such as in a matrix between two cells, the long hyaluronan
molecules will tend to push outward. This outward pushing
creates a swelling, or turgor pressure, within the extracellular space. In addition, the binding of cations by COO
groups on the surface of hyaluronan increases the concentration of ions and thus the osmotic pressure in the gel. As a
result, large amounts of water are taken up into the matrix,
contributing to the turgor pressure. These swelling forces
give connective tissues their ability to resist compression
forces, in contrast with collagen fibers, which are able to resist stretching forces.
Hyaluronan is bound to the surface of many migrating
cells by a number of adhesion receptors (e.g., one called
CD44) containing HA-binding domains, each with a similar
three-dimensional conformation. Because of its loose, hydrated, porous nature, the hyaluronan “coat” bound to cells
appears to keep cells apart from one another, giving them
the freedom to move about and proliferate. The cessation of
cell movement and the initiation of cell–cell attachments are
frequently correlated with a decrease in hyaluronan, a decrease in HA-binding cell-surface molecules, and an increase
in the extracellular enzyme hyaluronidase, which degrades
hyaluronan in the matrix. These functions of hyaluronan
are particularly important during the many cell migrations
that facilitate differentiation and in the release of a
mammalian egg cell (oocyte) from its surrounding cells after
ovulation.

Association of Hyaluronan and Proteoglycans
Forms Large, Complex Aggregates
The predominant proteoglycan in cartilage, called aggrecan,
assembles with hyaluronan into very large aggregates, illustrative of the complex structures that proteoglycans sometimes form. The backbone of the cartilage proteoglycan

220

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

aggregate is a long molecule of hyaluronan to which multiple
aggrecan molecules are bound tightly but noncovalently (Figure 6-22a). A single aggrecan aggregate, one of the largest
macromolecular complexes known, can be more than 4 mm
long and have a volume larger than that of a bacterial cell.

Hyaluronan molecule

(a)

Aggrecan
(b)

300 nm

Hyaluronan molecule
Link protein
Keratan
sulfate

N-terminal
Hyaluronan-binding
domain

Chondroitin
sulfate

Linking
sugars
Aggrecan core protein

▲ FIGURE 6-22 Structure of proteoglycan aggregate from
cartilage. (a) Electron micrograph of an aggrecan aggregate from
fetal bovine epiphyseal cartilage. Aggrecan core proteins are
bound at ≈40-nm intervals to a molecule of hyaluronan.
(b) Schematic representation of an aggrecan monomer bound to
hyaluronan. In aggrecan, both keratan sulfate and chondroitin
sulfate chains are attached to the core protein. The N-terminal
domain of the core protein binds noncovalently to a hyaluronan
molecule. Binding is facilitated by a link protein, which binds to
both the hyaluronan molecule and the aggrecan core protein.
Each aggrecan core protein has 127 Ser-Gly sequences at which
GAG chains can be added. The molecular weight of an aggrecan
monomer averages 2  106. The entire aggregate, which may
contain upward of 100 aggrecan monomers, has a molecular
weight in excess of 2  108. [Part (a) from J. A. Buckwalter and
L. Rosenberg, 1983, Coll. Rel. Res. 3:489; courtesy of L. Rosenberg.]

These aggregates give cartilage its unique gel-like properties
and its resistance to deformation, essential for distributing
the load in weight-bearing joints.
The aggrecan core protein (≈250,000 MW) has one Nterminal globular domain that binds with high affinity to a
specific decasaccharide sequence within hyaluronan. This
specific sequence is generated by covalent modification of
some of the repeating disaccharides in the hyaluronan chain.
The interaction between aggrecan and hyaluronan is facilitated by a link protein that binds to both the aggrecan core
protein and hyaluronan (Figure 6-22b). Aggrecan and the
link protein have in common a “link” domain, ≈100 amino
acids long, that is found in numerous matrix and cellsurface hyaluronan-binding proteins in both cartilaginous
and noncartilaginous tissues. Almost certainly these proteins
arose in the course of evolution from a single ancestral gene
that encoded just this domain.
The importance of the GAG chains that are part of
various matrix proteoglycans is illustrated by the
rare humans who have a genetic defect in one of
the enzymes required for synthesis of the GAG dermatan sulfate. These persons have many defects in their bones, joints,
and muscles; do not grow to normal height; and have wrinkled skin, giving them a prematurely aged appearance. ❚

Fibronectins Connect Many Cells to Fibrous
Collagens and Other Matrix Components
Many different cell types synthesize fibronectin, an abundant
multiadhesive matrix protein found in all vertebrates. The
discovery that fibronectin functions as an adhesive molecule
stemmed from observations that it is present on the surfaces
of normal fibroblastic cells, which adhere tightly to petri
dishes in laboratory experiments, but is absent from the surfaces of tumorigenic cells, which adhere weakly. The 20 or so
isoforms of fibronectin are generated by alternative splicing
of the RNA transcript produced from a single gene (see Figure 4-15). Fibronectins are essential for the migration and
differentiation of many cell types in embryogenesis. These
proteins are also important for wound healing because they
promote blood clotting and facilitate the migration of
macrophages and other immune cells into the affected area.
Fibronectins help attach cells to the extracellular matrix
by binding to other ECM components, particularly fibrous
collagens and heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and to cellsurface adhesion receptors such as integrins (see Figure 6-2).
Through their interactions with adhesion receptors (e.g.,
51 integrin), fibronectins influence the shape and movement of cells and the organization of the cytoskeleton. Conversely, by regulating their receptor-mediated attachments
to fibronectin and other ECM components, cells can sculpt
the immediate ECM environment to suit their needs.
Fibronectins are dimers of two similar polypeptides
linked at their C-termini by two disulfide bonds; each chain
is about 60–70 nm long and 2–3 nm thick. Partial digestion

221

6.4 • The Extracellular Matrix of Nonepithelial Tissues
Fibrin,
heparan
sulfate–
binding
repeats

Collagenbinding
repeats

Heparan
sulfate–
binding
repeat

Integrinbinding
repeats

Fibrinbinding
repeats
COOH

NH2
EIIIB

Repeating amino acid sequences:
Type I

Type II

EIIIA

IIICS

Type III

▲ FIGURE 6-23 Organization of fibronectin chains. Only one
of the two chains present in the dimeric fibronectin molecule is
shown; both chains have very similar sequences. Each chain
contains about 2446 amino acids and is composed of three types
of repeating amino acid sequences. Circulating fibronectin lacks
one or both of the type III repeats designated EIIIA and EIIIB
owing to alternative mRNA splicing (see Figure 4-15). At least
five different sequences may be present in the IIICS region as a

of fibronectin with low amounts of proteases and analysis
of the fragments showed that each chain comprises six functional regions with different ligand-binding specificities (Figure 6-23). Each region, in turn, contains multiple copies of
certain sequences that can be classified into one of three
types. These classifications are designated fibronectin type I,
II, and III repeats, on the basis of similarities in amino acid
sequence, although the sequences of any two repeats of a
given type are not always identical. These linked repeats give
the molecule the appearance of beads on a string. The combination of different repeats composing the regions, another
example of combinatorial diversity, confers on fibronectin its
ability to bind multiple ligands.

S S
S S
COOH

result of alternative splicing. Each chain contains six domains (tan
boxes), some of which contain specific binding sites for heparan
sulfate, fibrin (a major constituent of blood clots), collagen, and
cell-surface integrins. The integrin-binding domain is also known
as the cell-binding domain. [Adapted from G. Paolella, M. Barone,
and F. Baralle, 1993, in M. Zern and L. Reid, eds., Extracellular Matrix,
Marcel Dekker, pp. 3–24.]

One of the type III repeats in the cell-binding region of fibronectin mediates binding to certain integrins. The results
of studies with synthetic peptides corresponding to parts of
this repeat identified the tripeptide sequence Arg-Gly-Asp,
usually called the RGD sequence, as the minimal sequence
within this repeat required for recognition by those integrins.
In one study, heptapeptides containing the RGD sequence or
a variation of this sequence were tested for their ability to
mediate the adhesion of rat kidney cells to a culture dish. The
results showed that heptapeptides containing the RGD
sequence mimicked intact fibronectin’s ability to stimulate
integrin-mediated adhesion, whereas variant heptapeptides
lacking this sequence were ineffective (Figure 6-24).

Relative amounts of bound cells (stain intensity)

1.4

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-24 A specific tripeptide
GRGDSPC

1.2

GRGDAPC
PRGDVDC

1.0

YKPGEGKRGDACEGDSG
0.8

0.6

0.4

GRADSPC
GRGESPC
GKGDSPC
DREDSRC

0.2

1

10
100
1000
Peptide concentration (nmol/ml)

sequence (RGD) in the cell-binding region of fibronectin is
required for adhesion of cells. The cell-binding region of
fibronectin contains an integrin-binding heptapeptide sequence,
GRDSPC in the single-letter amino acid code (see Figure 2-13).
This heptapeptide and several variants were synthesized
chemically. Different concentrations of each synthetic peptide
were added to polystyrene dishes that had the protein
immunoglobulin G (IgG) firmly attached to their surfaces; the
peptides were then chemically cross-linked to the IgG.
Subsequently, cultured normal rat kidney cells were added to the
dishes and incubated for 30 minutes to allow adhesion. After the
nonbound cells were washed away, the relative amounts of cells
that had adhered firmly were determined by staining the bound
cells with a dye and measuring the intensity of the staining with
a spectrophotometer. The plots shown here indicate that cell
adhesion increased above the background level with increasing
peptide concentration for those peptides containing the RGD
sequence but not for the variants lacking this sequence
(modification underlined). [From M. D. Pierschbacher and E. Ruoslahti,
1984, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 81:5985.]

222

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

(a)
Fibrin,
heparan
sulfate
binding

(b)
Collagen
binding

EIIIB

EIIIA

IIICS

RGD
SS

NH2

COOH
Heparan
sulfate
binding

Type I repeat

Fibrin
binding

Synergy
region
RGD
sequence

Type II repeat
Type III repeat

Integrin

▲ FIGURE 6-25 Model of fibronectin binding to integrin
through its RGD-containing type III repeat. (a) Scale model
of fibronectin is shown docked by two type III repeats to the
extracellular domains of integrin. Structures of fibronectin’s
domains were determined from fragments of the molecule.
The EIIIA, EIIIB, and IIICS domains (not shown; see Figure 6-23)
are variably spliced into the structure at locations indicated by
A three-dimensional model of fibronectin binding to
integrin based on structures of parts of both fibronectin
and integrin has been assembled (Figure 6-25a). In a highresolution structure of the integrin-binding fibronectin type
III repeat and its neighboring type III domain, the RGD sequence is at the apex of a loop that protrudes outward from
the molecule, in a position facilitating binding to integrins
(Figure 6-25a, b). Although the RGD sequence is required
for binding to several integrins, its affinity for integrins is
substantially less than that of intact fibronectin or of the entire cell-binding region in fibronectin. Thus structural features near to the RGD sequence in fibronectins (e.g., parts
of adjacent repeats, such as the synergy region; see Figure

arrows. (b) A high-resolution structure shows that the RGD
binding sequence (red) extends outward in a loop from its
compact type III domain on the same side of fibronectin as the
synergy region (blue), which also contributes to high-affinity
binding to integrins. [Adapted from D. J. Leahy et al., 1996, Cell
84:161.]

6-25b) and in other RGD-containing proteins enhance their
binding to certain integrins. Moreover, the simple soluble
dimeric forms of fibronectin produced by the liver or fibroblasts are initially in a nonfunctional closed conformation
that binds poorly to integrins because the RGD sequence is
not readily accessible. The adsorption of fibronectin to a col(a)

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-26 Integrins mediate linkage
between fibronectin in the extracellular matrix and the
cytoskeleton. (a) Immunofluorescent micrograph of a fixed
cultured fibroblast showing colocalization of the 51 integrin
and actin-containing stress fibers. The cell was incubated with
two types of monoclonal antibody: an integrin-specific antibody
linked to a green fluorescing dye and an actin-specific antibody
linked to a red fluorescing dye. Stress fibers are long bundles of
actin microfilaments that radiate inward from points where the
cell contacts a substratum. At the distal end of these fibers, near
the plasma membrane, the coincidence of actin (red) and
fibronectin-binding integrin (green) produces a yellow
fluorescence. (b) Electron micrograph of the junction of
fibronectin and actin fibers in a cultured fibroblast. Individual
actin-containing 7-nm microfilaments, components of a stress
fiber, end at the obliquely sectioned cell membrane. The
microfilaments appear in close proximity to the thicker, densely
stained fibronectin fibrils on the outside of the cell. [Part (a) from
J. Duband et al., 1988, J. Cell Biol. 107:1385. Part (b) from I. J. Singer,
1979, Cell 16:675; courtesy of I. J. Singer; copyright 1979, MIT.]

(b)

Fibronectin
fibrils

Cell
exterior

Plasma
membrane

Actin-containing
microfilaments

Cell interior

0.5 m

6.5 • Adhesive Interactions and Nonepithelial Cells

lagen matrix or the basal lamina or, experimentally, to a plastic tissue-culture dish results in a conformational change that
enhances its ability to bind to cells. Most likely, this conformational change increases the accessibility of the RGD sequence for integrin binding.
Microscopy and other experimental approaches (e.g., biochemical binding experiments) have demonstrated the role of
integrins in cross-linking fibronectin and other ECM components to the cytoskeleton. For example, the colocalization of
cytoskeletal actin filaments and integrins within cells can be
visualized by fluorescence microscopy (Figure 6-26a). The
binding of cell-surface integrins to fibronectin in the matrix
induces the actin cytoskeleton–dependent movement of some
integrin molecules in the plane of the membrane. The ensuing mechanical tension due to the relative movement of different integrins bound to a single fibronectin dimer stretches
the fibronectin. This stretching promotes self-association of
the fibronectin into multimeric fibrils.
The force needed to unfold and expose functional selfassociation sites in fibronectin is much less than that
needed to disrupt fibronectin–integrin binding. Thus fibronectin molecules remain bound to integrin while cellgenerated mechanical forces induce fibril formation. In effect, the integrins through adapter proteins transmit the intracellular forces generated by the actin cytoskeleton to
extracellular fibronectin. Gradually, the initially formed
fibronectin fibrils mature into highly stable matrix components by covalent cross-linking. In some electron micrographic images, exterior fibronectin fibrils appear to be
aligned in a seemingly continuous line with bundles of actin
fibers within the cell (Figure 6-26b). These observations and
the results from other studies provided the first example of
a molecularly well defined adhesion receptor (i.e., an integrin) forming a bridge between the intracellular cytoskeleton
and the extracellular matrix components—a phenomenon
now known to be widespread.

223

Hyaluronan, a highly hydrated GAG, is a major component of the ECM of migrating and proliferating cells.
Certain cell-surface adhesion receptors bind hyaluronan to
cells.

■

Large proteoglycan aggregates containing a central
hyaluronan molecule noncovalently bound to the core protein of multiple proteoglycan molecules (e.g., aggrecan)
contribute to the distinctive mechanical properties of the
matrix (see Figure 6-22).

■

Fibronectins are abundant multiadhesive matrix proteins
that play a key role in migration and cellular differentiation. They contain binding sites for integrins and ECM
components (collagens, proteoglycans) and can thus attach
cells to the matrix (see Figure 6-23).

■

The tripeptide RGD sequence (Arg-Gly-Asp), found in
fibronectins and some other matrix proteins, is recognized
by several integrins.

■

6.5 Adhesive Interactions
and Nonepithelial Cells
After adhesive interactions in epithelia form during differentiation, they often are very stable and can last throughout the
life span of epithelial cells or until the cells undergo differentiation into loosely associated nonpolarized mesenchymal
cells, the epithelial–mesenchymal transition. Although such
long-lasting (nonmotile) adhesion also exists in nonepithelial
tissues, some nonepithelial cells must be able to crawl across
or through a layer of extracellular matrix or other cells. In
this section, we describe various cell-surface structures in
nonepithelial cells that mediate long-lasting adhesion and
transient adhesive interactions that are especially adapted for
the movement of cells. The detailed intracellular mechanisms
used to generate the mechanical forces that propel cells and
modify their shapes are covered in Chapter 19.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 6.4
The Extracellular Matrix of Nonepithelial Tissues
Connective tissue, such as tendon and cartilage, differs
from other solid tissues in that most of its volume is made
up of extracellular matrix (ECM) rather than cells.

■

The synthesis of fibrillar collagen (e.g., types I, II, and
III) begins inside the cell with the chemical modification
of newly made  chains and their assembly into triplehelical procollagen within the endoplasmic reticulum. After secretion, procollagen molecules are cleaved, associate
laterally, and are covalently cross-linked into bundles called
fibrils, which can form larger assemblies called fibers (see
Figure 6-20).

■

The various collagens are distinguished by the ability of
their helical and nonhelical regions to associate into fibrils, to form sheets, or to cross-link other collagen types
(see Table 6-1).

■

Integrin-Containing Adhesive Structures
Physically and Functionally Connect the ECM
and Cytoskeleton in Nonepithelial Cells
As already discussed in regard to epithelia, integrin-containing
hemidesmosomes connect epithelial cells to the basal lamina
and, through adapter proteins, to intermediate filaments of the
cytoskeleton (see Figure 6-1). In nonepithelial cells, integrins in
the plasma membrane also are clustered with other molecules
in various adhesive structures called focal adhesions, focal
contacts, focal complexes, 3D adhesions, and fibrillar adhesions and in circular adhesions called podosomes (Chapter
14). These structures are readily observed by fluorescence microscopy with the use of antibodies that recognize integrins
or other coclustered molecules (Figure 6-27). Like cell–matrix
anchoring junctions in epithelial cells, the various adhesive
structures attach nonepithelial cells to the extracellular matrix;

224

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-27

(a) Focal adhesion

(b) 3D adhesion

Integrins cluster into adhesive structures
with various morphologies in
nonepithelial cells. Immunofluorescence
methods were used to detect adhesive
structures (green) on cultured cells.
Shown here are focal adhesions (a) and 3D
adhesions (b) on the surfaces of human
fibroblasts. Cells were grown directly on
the flat surface of a culture dish (a) or
on a three-dimensional matrix of ECM
components (b). The shape, distribution, and
composition of the integrin-based adhesions
formed by cells vary, depending on culture
conditions. [Part (a) from B. Geiger et al., 2001,
Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:793. Part (b) courtesy
of K. Yamada and E. Cukierman; see E. Cukierman
et al., 2001, Science 294:1708–12.]

they also contain dozens of intracellular adapter and associated proteins that mediate attachment to cytoskeletal actin filaments and activate adhesion-dependent signals for cell
growth and cell motility.
Although found in many nonepithelial cells, integrincontaining adhesive structures have been studied most frequently in fibroblasts grown in cell culture on flat glass or
plastic surfaces (substrata). These conditions only poorly approximate the three-dimensional ECM environment that normally surrounds such cells in vivo. When fibroblasts are
cultured in three-dimensional ECM matrices derived from
cells or tissues, they form adhesions to the three-dimensional
ECM substratum, called 3D adhesions. These structures dif-

fer somewhat in composition, shape, distribution, and activity from the focal or fibrillar adhesions seen in cells growing
on the flat substratum typically used in cell-culture experiments (see Figure 6-27). Cultured fibroblasts with these
“more natural” anchoring junctions display greater adhesion
and mobility, increased rates of cell proliferation, and spindleshaped morphologies more like those of fibroblasts in tissues
than do cells cultured on flat surfaces. These observations indicate that the topological, compositional, and mechanical
(e.g., flexibility) properties of the extracellular matrix all play
a role in controlling the shape and activity of a cell. Tissuespecific differences in these matrix characteristics probably
contribute to the tissue-specific properties of cells.

TABLE 6-2 Selected Vertebrate Integrins*
Subunit
Composition

Primary Cellular
Distribution

Ligands

11

Many types

Mainly collagens; also laminins

21

Many types

Mainly collagens; also laminins

41

Hematopoietic cells

Fibronectin; VCAM-1

51

Fibroblasts

Fibronectin

L2

T lymphocytes

ICAM-1, ICAM-2

M2

Monocytes

Serum proteins (e.g., C3b, fibrinogen,
factor X); ICAM-1

IIb3

Platelets

Serum proteins (e.g., fibrinogen, von
Willebrand factor, vitronectin); fibronectin

64

Epithelial cells

Laminin

*The integrins are grouped into subfamilies having a common  subunit. Ligands shown in red are CAMs; all others are
ECM or serum proteins. Some subunits can have multiply spliced isoforms with different cytosolic domains.
SOURCE:

R. O. Hynes, 1992, Cell 69:11.

6.5 • Adhesive Interactions and Nonepithelial Cells

225

blood vessel formation, leukocyte function, the response to
infection (inflammation), bone remodeling, and hemostasis.

Diversity of Ligand–Integrin Interactions
Contributes to Numerous Biological Processes
Although most cells express several distinct integrins that
bind the same ligand or different ligands, many integrins are
expressed predominantly in certain types of cells. Table 6-2
lists a few of the numerous integrin-mediated interactions
with ECM components or CAMs or both. Not only do many
integrins bind more than one ligand, but several of their ligands bind to multiple integrins.
All integrins appear to have evolved from two ancient
general subgroups: those that bind RGD-containing molecules (e.g., fibronectin) and those that bind laminin. For example, 51 integrin binds fibronectin, whereas the widely
expressed 11 and 21 integrins, as well as the 64 integrin expressed by epithelial cells, bind laminin. The 1, 2,
and several other integrin  subunits contain a distinctive inserted domain, the I-domain. The I-domain in some integrins
(e.g., 11 and 21) mediates binding to various collagens.
Other integrins containing  subunits with I-domains are expressed exclusively on leukocytes and hematopoietic cells;
these integrins recognize cell-adhesion molecules on other
cells, including members of the Ig superfamily (e.g., ICAMs,
VCAMs), and thus participate in cell–cell adhesion.
The diversity of integrins and their ECM ligands enables
integrins to participate in a wide array of key biological
processes, including the migration of cells to their correct
locations in the formation the body plan of an embryo
(morphogenesis) and in the inflammatory response. The
importance of integrins in diverse processes is highlighted
by the defects exhibited by knockout mice engineered to have
mutations in each of almost all of the integrin subunit genes.
These defects include major abnormalities in development,

Cell–Matrix Adhesion Is Modulated by Changes
in the Binding Activity and Numbers of Integrins
Cells can exquisitely control the strength of integrinmediated cell–matrix interactions by regulating the ligandbinding activity of integrins or their expression or both. Such
regulation is critical to the role of these interactions in cell
migration and other functions.
Many, if not all, integrins can exist in two conformations:
a low-affinity (inactive) form and a high-affinity (active)
form (Figure 6-28). The results of structural studies and experiments investigating the binding of ligands by integrins
have provided a model of the changes that take place when
integrins are activated. In the inactive state, the  heterodimer is bent, the conformation of the ligand-binding site
at the tip of the molecule allows only low-affinity ligand
binding, and the cytoplasmic C-terminal tails of the two subunits are closely bound together. In the “straight,” active
state, alterations in the conformation of the domains that
form the binding site permit tighter (high-affinity) ligand
binding, and the cytoplasmic tails separate.
These structural models also provide an attractive explanation for the ability of integrins to mediate outside-in and
inside-out signaling. The binding of certain ECM molecules
or CAMs on other cells to the bent, low-affinity structure
would force the molecule to straighten and consequently
separate the cytoplasmic tails. Intracellular adapters could
“sense” the separation of the tails and, as a result, either bind
or dissociate from the tails. The changes in these adapters

 FIGURE 6-28 Model for integrin

β propeller
β propeller βA domain

βA domain

Activation

Ligand
α

β

activation. (Left ) The molecular model is
based on the x-ray crystal structure of the
extracellular region of v3 integrin in its
inactive, low-affinity (“bent”) form, with
the  subunit in shades of blue and the 
subunit in shades of red. The major ligandbinding sites are at the tip of the molecule
where the  propeller domain (dark blue)
and A domain (dark red) interact. An RGD
peptide ligand is shown in yellow.
(Right ) Activation of integrins is thought to
be due to conformational changes that
include straightening of the molecule, key
movements near the  propeller and A
domains, which increases the affinity for
ligands, and separation of the cytoplasmic
domains, resulting in altered interactions
with adapter proteins. See text for further
discussion. [Adapted from M. Arnaout et al.,
2002, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:641, and
R. O. Hynes, 2002, Cell 110:673.]

226

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

could then alter the cytoskeleton and activate or inhibit intracellular signaling pathways. Conversely, changes in the
metabolic state of the cells (e.g., changes in the platelet cytoskeleton that accompany platelet activation; see Figure
19-5) could cause intracellular adapters to bind to the tails or
to dissociate from them and thus force the tails to either separate or associate. As a consequence, the integrin would either bend (inactivate) or straighten (activate), thereby
altering its interaction with the ECM or other cells.
Platelet function provides a good example of how
cell–matrix interactions are modulated by controlling integrin binding activity. In its basal state, the IIb3 integrin
present on the plasma membranes of platelets normally
cannot bind tightly to its protein ligands (e.g., fibrinogen,
fibronectin), all of which participate in the formation of a
blood clot, because it is in the inactive (bent) conformation.
The binding of a platelet to collagen or thrombin in a forming clot induces from the cytoplasm an activating conformational change in IIb3 integrin that permits it to tightly
bind clotting proteins and participate in clot formation. Persons with genetic defects in the 3 integrin subunit are prone
to excessive bleeding, attesting to the role of this integrin in
the formation of blood clots.
The attachment of cells to ECM components can also be
modulated by altering the number of integrin molecules exposed on the cell surface. The 41 integrin, which is found
on many hematopoietic cells (precursors of red and white
blood cells), offers an example of this regulatory mechanism.
For these hematopoietic cells to proliferate and differentiate, they must be attached to fibronectin synthesized by supportive (“stromal”) cells in the bone marrow. The 41
integrin on hematopoietic cells binds to a Glu-Ile-Leu-AspVal (EILDV) sequence in fibronectin, thereby anchoring the
cells to the matrix. This integrin also binds to a sequence in a
CAM called vascular CAM-1 (VCAM-1), which is present
on stromal cells of the bone marrow. Thus hematopoietic
cells directly contact the stromal cells, as well as attach to the
matrix. Late in their differentiation, hematopoietic cells decrease their expression of 41 integrin; the resulting reduction in the number of 41 integrin molecules on the cell
surface is thought to allow mature blood cells to detach from
the matrix and stromal cells in the bone marrow and subsequently enter the circulation.

Molecular Connections Between the ECM
and Cytoskeleton Are Defective
in Muscular Dystrophy
The importance of the adhesion receptor–mediated
linkage between ECM components and the cytoskeleton is highlighted by a set of hereditary
muscle-wasting diseases, collectively called muscular dystrophies. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), the most common type, is a sex-linked disorder, affecting 1 in 3300 boys,

that results in cardiac or respiratory failure in the late teens
or early twenties. The first clue to understanding the molecular basis of this disease came from the discovery that persons with DMD carry mutations in the gene encoding a
protein named dystrophin. This very large protein was found
to be a cytosolic adapter protein, binding to actin filaments
and to an adhesion receptor called dystroglycan. ❚
Dystroglycan is synthesized as a large glycoprotein precursor that is proteolytically cleaved into two subunits. The
 subunit is a peripheral membrane protein, and the  subunit is a transmembrane protein whose extracellular domain
associates with the  subunit (Figure 6-29). Multiple Olinked oligosaccharides are attached covalently to side-chain
hydroxyl groups of serine and threonine residues in the 
subunit. These O-linked oligosaccharides bind to various
basal lamina components, including the multiadhesive matrix protein laminin and the proteoglycans perlecan and

Agrin

Neurexin

Laminin

Perlecan

Basal lamina

α,β-Dystroglycan
α

O-linked sugar

Sarcoglycan complex

N-linked sugar

Sarcospan
γ

α β δ

β
GRB2

Cytosol

in

roph

Dyst

Syntrophins
NOS
Actin

α-Dystrobrevin

▲ FIGURE 6-29 Schematic model of the dystrophin
glycoprotein complex (DGC) in skeletal muscle cells. The
DGC comprises three subcomplexes: the , dystroglycan
subcomplex; the sarcoglycan/sarcospan subcomplex of integral
membrane proteins; and the cytosolic adapter subcomplex
comprising dystrophin, other adapter proteins, and signaling
molecules. Through its O-linked sugars, -dystroglycan binds to
components of the basal lamina, such as laminin. Dystrophin—
the protein defective in Duchenne muscular dystrophy—links
-dystroglycan to the actin cytoskeleton, and -dystrobrevin
links dystrophin to the sarcoglycan/sarcospan subcomplex. Nitric
oxide synthase (NOS) produces nitric oxide, a gaseous signaling
molecule, and GRB2 is a component of signaling pathways
activated by certain cell-surface receptors (Chapter 14). See text
for further discussion. [Adapted from S. J. Winder, 2001, Trends
Biochem. Sci. 26:118, and D. E. Michele and K. P. Campbell, 2003, J. Biol.
Chem.]

6.5 • Adhesive Interactions and Nonepithelial Cells

agrin. The neurexins, a family of adhesion molecules expressed by neurons, also are bound by the  subunit.
The transmembrane segment of the dystroglycan  subunit associates with a complex of integral membrane proteins; its cytosolic domain binds dystrophin and other
adapter proteins, as well as various intracellular signaling
proteins. The resulting large, heterogeneous assemblage, the
dystrophin glycoprotein complex (DGC), links the extracellular matrix to the cytoskeleton and signaling pathways
within muscle cells (see Figure 6-29). For instance, the signaling enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS) is associated
through syntrophin with the cytosolic dystrophin subcomplex in skeletal muscle. The rise in intracellular Ca2 during
muscle contraction activates NOS to produce nitric oxide
(NO), which diffuses into smooth muscle cells surrounding
nearby blood vessels. By a signaling pathway described in
Chapter 13, NO promotes smooth muscle relaxation, leading to a local rise in the flow of blood supplying nutrients
and oxygen to the skeletal muscle.
Mutations in dystrophin, other DGC components,
laminin, or enzymes that add the O-linked sugars to dystroglycan disrupt the DGC-mediated link between the exterior
and the interior of muscle cells and cause muscular dystrophies. In addition, dystroglycan mutations have been shown
to greatly reduce the clustering of acetylcholine receptors on
muscle cells at the neuromuscular junctions (Chapter 7),
which also is dependent on the basal lamina proteins laminin
and agrin. These and possibly other effects of DGC defects
apparently lead to a cumulative weakening of the mechanical
stability of muscle cells as they undergo contraction and relaxation, resulting in deterioration of the cells and muscular
dystrophy.

Ca2-Independent Cell–Cell Adhesion in Neuronal
and Other Tissues Is Mediated by CAMs
in the Immunoglobulin Superfamily
Numerous transmembrane proteins characterized by the
presence of multiple immunoglobulin domains (repeats) in
their extracellular regions constitute the Ig superfamily of
CAMs, or IgCAMs. The Ig domain is a common protein
motif, containing 70–110 residues, that was first identified in
antibodies, the antigen-binding immunoglobulins. The
human, D. melanogaster, and C. elegans genomes include
about 765, 150, and 64 genes, respectively, that encode proteins containing Ig domains. Immunoglobin domains are
found in a wide variety of cell-surface proteins including Tcell receptors produced by lymphocytes and many proteins
that take part in adhesive interactions. Among the IgCAMs
are neural CAMs; intercellular CAMs (ICAMs), which function in the movement of leukocytes into tissues; and junction adhesion molecules (JAMs), which are present in tight
junctions.
As their name implies, neural CAMs are of particular importance in neural tissues. One type, the NCAMs, primarily

227

mediate homophilic interactions. First expressed during morphogenesis, NCAMs play an important role in the differentiation of muscle, glial, and nerve cells. Their role in cell
adhesion has been directly demonstrated by the inhibition
of adhesion with anti-NCAM antibodies. Numerous NCAM
isoforms, encoded by a single gene, are generated by alternative mRNA splicing and by differences in glycosylation.
Other neural CAMs (e.g., L1-CAM) are encoded by different
genes. In humans, mutations in different parts of the
L1-CAM gene cause various neuropathologies (e.g., mental
retardation, congenital hydrocephalus, and spasticity).
An NCAM comprises an extracellular region with five Ig
repeats and two fibronectin type III repeats, a single membrane-spanning segment, and a cytosolic segment that interacts with the cytoskeleton (see Figure 6-2). In contrast, the
extracellular region of L1-CAM has six Ig repeats and four fibronectin type III repeats. As with cadherins, cis (intracellular)
interactions and trans (intercellular) interactions probably play
key roles in IgCAM-mediated adhesion (see Figure 6-3).
The covalent attachment of multiple chains of sialic acid,
a negatively charged sugar derivative, to NCAMs alters their
adhesive properties. In embryonic tissues such as brain, polysialic acid constitutes as much as 25 percent of the mass of
NCAMs. Possibly because of repulsion between the many
negatively charged sugars in these NCAMs, cell–cell contacts
are fairly transient, being made and then broken, a property
necessary for the development of the nervous system. In contrast, NCAMs from adult tissues contain only one-third as
much sialic acid, permitting more stable adhesions.

Movement of Leukocytes into Tissues Depends
on a Precise Sequence of Combinatorially Diverse
Sets of Adhesive Interactions
In adult organisms, several types of white blood cells (leukocytes) participate in the defense against infection caused by
foreign invaders (e.g., bacteria and viruses) and tissue damage due to trauma or inflammation. To fight infection and
clear away damaged tissue, these cells must move rapidly
from the blood, where they circulate as unattached, relatively
quiescent cells, into the underlying tissue at sites of infection,
inflammation, or damage. We know a great deal about the
movement into tissue, termed extravasation, of four types
of leukocytes: neutrophils, which release several antibacterial proteins; monocytes, the precursors of macrophages,
which can engulf and destroy foreign particles; and T and B
lymphocytes, the antigen-recognizing cells of the immune
system.
Extravasation requires the successive formation and
breakage of cell–cell contacts between leukocytes in the
blood and endothelial cells lining the vessels. Some of these
contacts are mediated by selectins, a family of CAMs that
mediate leukocyte–vascular cell interactions. A key player
in these interactions is P-selectin, which is localized to the
blood-facing surface of endothelial cells. All selectins contain

228

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

a Ca2-dependent lectin domain, which is located at the
distal end of the extracellular region of the molecule and
recognizes oligosaccharides in glycoproteins or glycolipids (see Figure 6-2). For example, the primary ligand
for P- and E-selectins is an oligosaccharide called the
sialyl Lewis-x antigen, a part of longer oligosaccharides
present in abundance on leukocyte glycoproteins and
glycolipids.
Figure 6-30 illustrates the basic sequence of cell–cell interactions leading to the extravasation of leukocytes. Various
inflammatory signals released in areas of infection or inflammation first cause activation of the endothelium.
P-selectin exposed on the surface of activated endothelial
cells mediates the weak adhesion of passing leukocytes. Because of the force of the blood flow and the rapid “on” and
“off” rates of P-selectin binding to its ligands, these
“trapped” leukocytes are slowed but not stopped and literally roll along the surface of the endothelium. Among the

2

3

Endothelial activation and
leukocyte attachment and rolling

Leukocyte activation
(PAF activates integrin)

1
Leukocyte
(resting state)
Selectin ligand
(specific
carbohydrate)

Focus Animation: Cell–Cell Adhesion in Leukocyte Extravasation

αLβ2
integrin
P-selectin

PAF
receptor

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

signals that promote activation of the endothelium are
chemokines, a group of small secreted proteins (8–12 kDa)
produced by a wide variety of cells, including endothelial
cells and leukocytes.
For tight adhesion to occur between activated endothelial
cells and leukocytes, 2-containing integrins on the surfaces
of leukocytes also must be activated by chemokines or other
local activation signals such as platelet-activating factor
(PAF). Platelet-activating factor is unusual in that it is a
phospholipid, rather than a protein; it is exposed on the surface of activated endothelial cells at the same time that
P-selectin is exposed. The binding of PAF or other activators
to their receptors on leukocytes leads to activation of the
leukocyte integrins to their high-affinity form (see Figure
6-28). (Most of the receptors for chemokines and PAF are
members of the G protein–coupled receptor superfamily discussed in Chapter 13.) Activated integrins on leukocytes then
bind to each of two distinct IgCAMs on the surface of en-

ICAM-2

Endothelial
cell

ICAM-1

Vesicle containing
P-selectin

Extravasation
5

PAF

Firm adhesion via
integrin/ICAM binding
4

▲ FIGURE 6-30 Sequence of cell–cell interactions
leading to tight binding of leukocytes to activated
endothelial cells and subsequent extravasation. Step 1 :
In the absence of inflammation or infection, leukocytes and
endothelial cells lining blood vessels are in a resting state.
Step 2 : Inflammatory signals released only in areas of
inflammation or infection or both activate resting endothelial
cells to move vesicle-sequestered selectins to the cell
surface. The exposed selectins mediate loose binding of
leukocytes by interacting with carbohydrate ligands on
leukocytes. Activation of the endothelium also causes

synthesis of platelet-activating factor (PAF) and ICAM-1, both
expressed on the cell surface. PAF and other usually
secreted activators, including chemokines, then induce
changes in the shapes of the leukocytes and activation of
leukocyte integrins such as L2, which is expressed by
T lymphocytes ( 3 ). The subsequent tight binding between
activated integrins on leukocytes and CAMs on the
endothelium (e.g., ICAM-2 and ICAM-1) results in firm
adhesion ( 4 ) and subsequent movement (extravasation) into
the underlying tissue ( 5 ).See text for further discussion.
[Adapted from R. O. Hynes and A. Lander, 1992, Cell 68:303.]

6.5 • Adhesive Interactions and Nonepithelial Cells

dothelial cells: ICAM-2, which is expressed constitutively,
and ICAM-1. ICAM-1, whose synthesis along with that of
E-selectin and P-selectin is induced by activation, does not
usually contribute substantially to leukocyte endothelial cell
adhesion immediately after activation, but rather participates
at later times in cases of chronic inflammation. The resulting
tight adhesion mediated by the Ca2-independent integrin–
ICAM interactions leads to the cessation of rolling and to the
spreading of leukocytes on the surface of the endothelium;
soon the adhered cells move between adjacent endothelial
cells and into the underlying tissue.
The selective adhesion of leukocytes to the endothelium
near sites of infection or inflammation thus depends on the
sequential appearance and activation of several different
CAMs on the surfaces of the interacting cells. Different types
of leukocytes express specific integrins containing the 2
subunit: for example, L2 by T lymphocytes and M2 by
monocytes, the circulating precursors of tissue macrophages.
Nonetheless, all leukocytes move into tissues by the same
general mechanism depicted in Figure 6-30.
Many of the CAMs used to direct leukocyte adhesion are
shared among different types of leukocytes and target tissues.
Yet often only a particular type of leukocyte is directed to a
particular tissue. A three-step model has been proposed to
account for the cell-type specificity of such leukocyte–
endothelial cell interactions. First, endothelium activation
promotes initial relatively weak, transient, and reversible
binding (e.g., the interaction of selectins and their carbohydrate ligands). Without additional local activation signals,
the leukocyte will quickly move on. Second, cells in the immediate vicinity of the site of infection or inflammation release or express on their surfaces chemical signals (e.g.,
chemokines, PAF) that activate only special subsets of the
transiently attached leukocytes. Third, additional activationdependent CAMs (e.g., integrins) engage their binding partners, leading to strong sustained adhesion. Only if the proper
combination of CAMs, binding partners, and activation signals are engaged in the right order at a specific site will a
given leukocyte adhere strongly. This additional example of
combinatorial diversity and cross talk allows parsimonious
exploitation of a small set of CAMs for diverse functions
throughout the body.
Leukocyte-adhesion deficiency is caused by a genetic defect in the synthesis of the integrin 2 subunit. Persons with this disorder are susceptible to
repeated bacterial infections because their leukocytes cannot extravasate properly and thus fight the infection within
the tissue.
Some pathogenic viruses have evolved mechanisms to exploit for their own purposes cell-surface proteins that participate in the normal response to inflammation. For
example, many of the RNA viruses that cause the common
cold (rhinoviruses) bind to and enter cells through ICAM-1,
and chemokine receptors can be important entry sites for
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the cause of AIDS. ❚

229

Gap Junctions Composed of Connexins Allow
Small Molecules to Pass Between Adjacent Cells
Early electron micrographs of virtually all animal cells that
were in contact revealed sites of cell–cell contact with a characteristic intercellular gap (Figure 6-31a). This feature
prompted early morphologists to call these regions gap junctions. In retrospect, the most important feature of these junctions is not the gap itself but a well-defined set of cylindrical
particles that cross the gap and compose pores connecting
the cytoplasms of adjacent cells—hence their alternate name
of intercytoplasmic junctions. In epithelia, gap junctions are
distributed along the lateral surfaces of adjacent cells (see
Figures 6-1 and 6-5).
In many tissues (e.g., the liver), large numbers of individual cylindrical particles cluster together in patches. This property has enabled researchers to separate gap junctions from
other components of the plasma membrane. When the
plasma membrane is purified and then sheared into small
fragments, some pieces mainly containing patches of gap
junctions are generated. Owing to their relatively high protein content, these fragments have a higher density than that
of the bulk of the plasma membrane and can be purified on
an equilibrium density gradient (see Figure 5-37). When these

(a)

(b)

Gap
junction
50 nm

50 nm

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-31 Gap junctions have a
characteristic appearance in electron micrographs. (a) In this
thin section through a gap junction connecting two mouse liver
cells, the two plasma membranes are closely associated for a
distance of several hundred nanometers, separated by a “gap”
of 2–3 nm. (b) Numerous roughly hexagonal particles are visible
in this perpendicular view of the cytosolic face of a region of
plasma membrane enriched in gap junctions. Each particle aligns
with a similar particle on an adjacent cell, forming a channel
connecting the two cells. [Part (a) courtesy of D. Goodenough. Part (b)
courtesy of N. Gilula.]

230

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

preparations are viewed in cross section, the gap junctions
appear as arrays of hexagonal particles that enclose waterfilled channels (Figure 6-31b). Such pure preparations of gap
junctions have permitted the detailed biophysical and functional analysis of these structures.
The effective pore size of gap junctions can be measured
by injecting a cell with a fluorescent dye covalently linked
to molecules of various sizes and observing with a fluorescence microscope whether the dye passes into neighboring
cells. Gap junctions between mammalian cells permit the
passage of molecules as large as 1.2 nm in diameter. In insects, these junctions are permeable to molecules as large as
2 nm in diameter. Generally speaking, molecules smaller than
1200 Da pass freely, and those larger than 2000 Da do not
pass; the passage of intermediate-sized molecules is variable
and limited. Thus ions, many low-molecular-weight precursors of cellular macromolecules, products of intermediary
metabolism, and small intracellular signaling molecules can
pass from cell to cell through gap junctions.
In nervous tissue, some neurons are connected by gap
junctions through which ions pass rapidly, thereby allowing very rapid transmission of electrical signals. Impulse
transmission through these connections, called electrical
synapses, is almost a thousandfold as rapid as at chemical
synapses (Chapter 7). Gap junctions are also present in
many non-neuronal tissues where they help to integrate the

 FIGURE 6-32 Molecular structure of
gap junctions. (a) Schematic model of a
gap junction, which comprises a cluster of
channels between two plasma membranes
separated by a gap of about 2–3 nm. Both
membranes contain connexon
hemichannels, cylinders of six dumbbellshaped connexin molecules. Two
connexons join in the gap between the
cells to form a gap-junction channel,
1.5–2.0 nm in diameter, that connects the
cytosols of the two cells. (b) Electron
density of a recombinant gap-junction
channel determined by electron
crystallography. Shown here are side views
of the complete structure (top) and the
same structure with several chains
removed to show the channel’s interior
(center); on the bottom are perpendicular
cross sections through the gap junction
within and between the membrane
bilayers. There appear to be 24
transmembrane  helices per connexon
hemichannel, consistent with each of the
six connexin subunits having four  helices.
The narrowest part of the channel is ≈1.5 nm
in diameter. M  membrane bilayer; E 
extracellular gap; C  cytosol. [Part (b) from
V. M. Unger et al., 1999, Science 283:1176.]

electrical and metabolic activities of many cells. In the heart,
for instance, gap junctions rapidly pass ionic signals among
muscle cells and thus contribute to the electrically stimulated coordinate contraction of cardiac muscle cells during a
beat. As discussed in Chapter 13, some extracellular hormonal signals induce the production or release of small intracellular signaling molecules called second messengers
(e.g., cyclic AMP and Ca2) that regulate cellular metabolism. Because second messengers can be transferred between
cells through gap junctions, hormonal stimulation of one
cell can trigger a coordinated response by that same cell and
many of its neighbors. Such gap junction–mediated signaling plays an important role, for example, in the secretion
of digestive enzymes by the pancreas and in the coordinated
muscular contractile waves (peristalsis) in the intestine. Another vivid example of gap junction–mediated transport is
the phenomenon of metabolic coupling, or metabolic cooperation, in which a cell transfers nutrients or intermediary
metabolites to a neighboring cell that is itself unable to synthesize them. Gap junctions play critical roles in the development of egg cells in the ovary by mediating the movement
of both metabolites and signaling molecules between an
oocyte and its surrounding granulosa cells as well as between neighboring granulosa cells.
A current model of the structure of the gap junction is
shown in Figure 6-32. Vertebrate gap junctions are composed

(a)

(b)
C

M

E

M

C

Connexon
hemichannel

Gapjunction
channel
2 nm

Cytosol
Intercellular gap

6.6 • Plant Tissues

of connexins, a family of structurally related transmembrane
proteins with molecular weights between 26,000 and 60,000.
A completely different family of proteins, the innexins, forms
the gap junctions in invertebrates. Each vertebrate hexagonal particle consists of 12 connexin molecules: 6 of the molecules are arranged in a connexon hemichannel—a hexagonal
cylinder in one plasma membrane—and joined to a connexon
hemichannel in the adjacent cell membrane, forming the continuous aqueous channel between the cells. Each connexin
molecule spans the plasma membrane four times; one conserved transmembrane  helix from each subunit apparently
lines the aqueous channel.
There are probably more than 20 different connexin
genes in vertebrates, and different sets of connexins are expressed in different cell types. Some cells express a single connexin; consequently their gap-junction channels are
homotypic, consisting of identical connexons. Most cells,
however, express at least two connexins; these different proteins assemble into hetero-oligomeric connexons, which in
turn form heterotypic gap-junction channels. This diversity
in channel composition leads to differences in the permeability of channels to various molecules. For example, channels
made from a 43-kDa connexin isoform, Cx43, are more than
a hundredfold as permeable to ADP and ATP as those made
from Cx32 (32 kDa). Moreover, the permeability of gap
junctions can be altered by changes in the intracellular pH
and Ca2 concentration, as well as by the phosphorylation
of connexin, providing numerous mechanisms for regulating transport through them.
The generation of mutant mice with inactivating mutations in connexin genes has highlighted the importance of
connexins in a wide variety of cellular systems. For instance,
Cx43-defective mice exhibit numerous defects including defective oocyte maturation due to decreased gap-junctional
communication between granulosa cells in the ovary.
Mutations in several connexin genes are related to
human diseases, including neurosensory deafness
(Cx26 and Cx31), cataract or heart malformations
(Cx43, Cx46, and Cx50), and the X-linked form of CharcotMarie-Tooth disease (Cx32), which is marked by progressive
degeneration of peripheral nerves. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 6.5
Adhesive Interactions and Nonepithelial Cells
Many nonepithelial cells have integrin-containing aggregates (e.g., focal adhesions, 3D adhesions, podosomes) that
physically and functionally connect cells to the extracellular matrix and facilitate inside-out and outside-in signaling.

■

Integrins exist in two conformations that differ in the
affinity for ligands and interactions with cytosolic adapter
proteins (see Figure 6-28).

■

231

Dystroglycan, an adhesion receptor expressed by muscle
cells, forms a large complex with dystrophin, other adapter
proteins, and signaling molecules (see Figure 6-29). This
complex links the actin cytoskeleton to the surrounding matrix, providing mechanical stability to muscle. Mutations in
various components of this complex cause different types
of muscular dystrophy.

■

Neural cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs), which belong
to the immunoglobulin (Ig) family of CAMs, mediate
Ca2-independent cell–cell adhesion, predominantly in
neural tissue and muscle.

■

The combinatorial and sequential interaction of several
types of CAMs (e.g., selectins, integrins, and ICAMs) is critical for the specific and tight adhesion of different types of
leukocytes to endothelial cells in response to local signals
induced by infection or inflammation (see Figure 6-30).

■

Gap junctions are constructed of multiple copies of connexin proteins, assembled into a transmembrane channel
that interconnects the cytoplasm of two adjacent cells (see
Figure 6-32). Small molecules and ions can pass through
gap junctions, permitting metabolic and electrical coupling
of adjacent cells.

■

6.6 Plant Tissues
We turn now to the assembly of plant cells into tissues. The overall structural organization of plants
is generally simpler than that of animals. For instance, plants have only four broad types of cells, which in
mature plants form four basic classes of tissue: dermal tissue interacts with the environment; vascular tissue transports
water and dissolved substances (e.g., sugars, ions); spacefilling ground tissue constitutes the major sites of
metabolism; and sporogenous tissue forms the reproductive
organs. Plant tissues are organized into just four main organ
systems: stems have support and transport functions; roots
provide anchorage and absorb and store nutrients; leaves are
the sites of photosynthesis; and flowers enclose the reproductive structures. Thus at the cell, tissue, and organ levels,
plants are generally less complex than most animals.
Moreover, unlike animals, plants do not replace or repair
old or damaged cells or tissues; they simply grow new organs. Most importantly for this chapter and in contrast with
animals, few cells in plants directly contact one another
through molecules incorporated into their plasma membranes. Instead, plant cells are typically surrounded by a
rigid cell wall that contacts the cell walls of adjacent cells
(Figure 6-33). Also in contrast with animal cells, a plant cell
rarely changes its position in the organism relative to other
cells. These features of plants and their organization have determined the distinctive molecular mechanisms by which
their cells are incorporated into tissues. ❚

232

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

Primary
wall

Pectin
Cellulose
microfibril
50 nm

Hemicellulose
Plasma membrane

▲ FIGURE 6-33 Schematic representation of the cell wall
of an onion. Cellulose and hemicellulose are arranged into
at least three layers in a matrix of pectin polymers. The size of
the polymers and their separations are drawn to scale. To
simplify the diagram, most of the hemicellulose cross-links
and other matrix constituents (e.g., extensin, lignin) are not
shown. [Adapted from M. McCann and K. R. Roberts, 1991, in C. Lloyd,
ed., The Cytoskeletal Basis of Plant Growth and Form, Academic Press,
p. 126.]

The Plant Cell Wall Is a Laminate of Cellulose
Fibrils in a Matrix of Glycoproteins
The plant cell wall is ≈0.2 m thick and completely coats the
outside of the plant cell’s plasma membrane. This structure
serves some of the same functions as those of the extracellular matrix produced by animal cells, even though the two
structures are composed of entirely different macromolecules
and have a different organization. Like the extracellular matrix, the plant cell wall connects cells into tissues, signals a
plant cell to grow and divide, and controls the shape of plant
organs. Just as the extracellular matrix helps define the
shapes of animal cells, the cell wall defines the shapes of
plant cells. When the cell wall is digested away from plant
cells by hydrolytic enzymes, spherical cells enclosed by a
plasma membrane are left. In the past, the plant cell wall was
viewed as an inanimate rigid box, but it is now recognized as
a dynamic structure that plays important roles in controlling the differentiation of plant cells during embryogenesis
and growth.
Because a major function of a plant cell wall is to withstand the osmotic turgor pressure of the cell, the cell wall is
built for lateral strength. It is arranged into layers of cellulose
microfibrils—bundles of long, linear, extensively hydrogenbonded polymers of glucose in  glycosidic linkages. The cellulose microfibrils are embedded in a matrix composed of
pectin, a polymer of D-galacturonic acid and other monosaccharides, and hemicellulose, a short, highly branched

polymer of several five- and six-carbon monosaccharides.
The mechanical strength of the cell wall depends on crosslinking of the microfibrils by hemicellulose chains (see Figure
6-33). The layers of microfibrils prevent the cell wall from
stretching laterally. Cellulose microfibrils are synthesized on
the exoplasmic face of the plasma membrane from UDPglucose and ADP-glucose formed in the cytosol. The polymerizing enzyme, called cellulose synthase, moves within the plane
of the plasma membrane as cellulose is formed, in directions
determined by the underlying microtubule cytoskeleton.
Unlike cellulose, pectin and hemicellulose are synthesized
in the Golgi apparatus and transported to the cell surface
where they form an interlinked network that helps bind the
walls of adjacent cells to one another and cushions them.
When purified, pectin binds water and forms a gel in the
presence of Ca2 and borate ions—hence the use of pectins
in many processed foods. As much as 15 percent of the cell
wall may be composed of extensin, a glycoprotein that contains abundant hydroxyproline and serine. Most of the hydroxyproline residues are linked to short chains of arabinose
(a five-carbon monosaccharide), and the serine residues are
linked to galactose. Carbohydrate accounts for about 65 percent of extensin by weight, and its protein backbone forms
an extended rodlike helix with the hydroxyl or O-linked carbohydrates protruding outward. Lignin—a complex, insoluble polymer of phenolic residues—associates with cellulose
and is a strengthening material. Like cartilage proteoglycans,
lignin resists compression forces on the matrix.
The cell wall is a selective filter whose permeability is
controlled largely by pectins in the wall matrix. Whereas
water and ions diffuse freely across cell walls, the diffusion of
large molecules, including proteins larger than 20 kDa, is
limited. This limitation may account for why many plant
hormones are small, water-soluble molecules, which can diffuse across the cell wall and interact with receptors in the
plasma membrane of plant cells.

Loosening of the Cell Wall Permits Elongation
of Plant Cells
Because the cell wall surrounding a plant cell prevents the
cell from expanding, its structure must be loosened when the
cell grows. The amount, type, and direction of plant cell
growth are regulated by small-molecule hormones (e.g., indoleacetic acid) called auxins. The auxin-induced weakening
of the cell wall permits the expansion of the intracellular
vacuole by uptake of water, leading to elongation of the cell.
We can grasp the magnitude of this phenomenon by considering that, if all cells in a redwood tree were reduced to the
size of a typical liver cell, the tree would have a maximum
height of only 1 meter.
The cell wall undergoes its greatest changes at the meristem of a root or shoot tip. These sites are where cells divide
and expand. Young meristematic cells are connected by thin
primary cell walls, which can be loosened and stretched to

6.6 • Plant Tissues

allow subsequent cell elongation. After cell elongation
ceases, the cell wall is generally thickened, either by the secretion of additional macromolecules into the primary wall
or, more usually, by the formation of a secondary cell wall
composed of several layers. Most of the cell eventually degenerates, leaving only the cell wall in mature tissues such
as the xylem—the tubes that conduct salts and water from
the roots through the stems to the leaves (see Figure 8-45).
The unique properties of wood and of plant fibers such as
cotton are due to the molecular properties of the cell walls
in the tissues of origin.

Plasmodesmata Directly Connect the Cytosols
of Adjacent Cells in Higher Plants
Plant cells can communicate directly through specialized
cell–cell junctions called plasmodesmata, which extend
through the cell wall. Like gap junctions, plasmodesmata are
open channels that connect the cytosol of a cell with that of
an adjacent cell. The diameter of the cytosol-filled channel
is about 30–60 nm, and plasmodesmata can traverse cell
walls as much as 90 nm thick. The density of plasmodesmata
varies depending on the plant and cell type, and even the
smallest meristematic cells have more than 1000 interconnections with their neighbors.

Molecules smaller than about 1000 Da, including a variety of metabolic and signaling compounds, generally can
diffuse through plasmodesmata. However, the size of the
channel through which molecules pass is highly regulated.
In some circumstances, the channel is clamped shut; in others, it is dilated sufficiently to permit the passage of molecules larger than 10,000 Da. Among the factors that affect
the permeability of plasmodesmata is the cytosolic Ca2
concentration, with an increase in cytosolic Ca2 reversibly
inhibiting movement of molecules through these structures.
Although plasmodesmata and gap junctions resemble
each other functionally, their structures differ in two
significant ways (Figure 6-34). The plasma membranes
of the adjacent plant cells merge to form a continuous
channel, the annulus, at each plasmodesma, whereas the
membranes of cells at a gap junction are not continuous
with each other. In addition, an extension of the endoplasmic reticulum called a desmotubule passes through the
annulus, which connects the cytosols of adjacent plant
cells. Many types of molecules spread from cell to cell
through plasmodesmata, including proteins, nucleic acids,
metabolic products, and plant viruses. Soluble molecules
pass through the cytosolic annulus, whereas membranebound molecules can pass from cell to cell through the
desmotubule.

(b)
(a)

233

Plasmodesmata

Plasma membrane

Cell wall

Endoplasmic reticulum

Cell 1
Plasma
membrane

Cell 2

Cell wall

ER
Annulus
Plasmodesma

ER

Desmotubule

▲ FIGURE 6-34 Structure of a plasmodesma.
(a) Schematic model of a plasmodesma showing the
desmotubule, an extension of the endoplasmic reticulum, and
the annulus, a plasma membrane–lined channel filled with
cytosol that interconnects the cytosols of adjacent cells. Not

shown is a gating complex that fills the channel and controls the
transport of materials through the plasmodesma.
(b) Electron micrograph of thin section of plant cell and cell wall
containing multiple plasmodesmata. [E. H. Newcomb and W. P.
Wergin/Biological Photo Service.]

234

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

Only a Few Adhesive Molecules Have Been
Identified in Plants
Systematic analysis of the Arabidopsis genome and biochemical analysis of other plant species provide no evidence for the
existence of plant homologs of most animal CAMs, adhesion
receptors, and ECM components. This finding is not surprising, given the dramatically different nature of cell–cell and
cell–matrix/wall interactions in animals and plants.
Among the adhesive-type proteins apparently unique to
plants are five wall-associated kinases (WAKs) and WAK-like
proteins expressed in the plasma membrane of Arabidopsis
cells. The extracellular regions in all these proteins contain
multiple epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeats, which may

directly participate in binding to other molecules. Some
WAKs have been shown to bind to glycine-rich proteins in
the cell wall, thereby mediating membrane–wall contacts.
These Arabidopsis proteins have a single transmembrane domain and an intracellular cytosolic tyrosine kinase domain,
which may participate in signaling pathways somewhat like
the receptor tyrosine kinases discussed in Chapter 14.
The results of in vitro binding assays combined with in
vivo studies and analyses of plant mutants have identified
several macromolecules in the ECM that are important for
adhesion. For example, normal adhesion of pollen, which
contains sperm cells, to the stigma or style in the female reproductive organ of the Easter lily requires a cysteine-rich
protein called stigma/stylar cysteine-rich adhesin (SCA) and
a specialized pectin that can bind to SCA (Figure 6-35).
Disruption of the gene encoding glucuronyltransferase 1,
a key enzyme in pectin biosynthesis, has provided a striking
illustration of the importance of pectins in intercellular adhesion in plant meristems. Normally, specialized pectin molecules help hold the cells in meristems tightly together. When
grown in culture as a cluster of relatively undifferentiated cells,
called a callus, normal meristematic cells adhere tightly and
can differentiate into chlorophyll-producing cells, giving the
callus a green color. Eventually the callus will generate shoots.
In contrast, mutant cells with an inactivated glucuronyltransferase 1 gene are large, associate loosely with each other, and
do not differentiate normally, forming a yellow callus. The introduction of a normal glucuronyltransferase 1 gene into the
mutant cells by methods discussed in Chapter 9 restores their
ability to adhere and differentiate normally.
The paucity of plant adhesive molecules identified to
date, in contrast with the many well-defined animal adhesive
molecules, may be due to the technical difficulties in working
with the ECM/cell wall of plants. Adhesive interactions are
often likely to play different roles in plant and animal biology, at least in part because of their differences in development and physiology.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 6.6
Plant Tissues
The integration of cells into tissues in plants is fundamentally different from the assembly of animal tissues, primarily because each plant cell is surrounded by a relatively
rigid cell wall.

■

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-35 An in vitro assay used to
identify molecules required for adherence of pollen tubes to
the stylar matrix. In this assay, extracellular stylar matrix
collected from lily styles (SE) or an artificial matrix is dried onto
nitrocellulose membranes (NC). Pollen tubes containing sperm
are then added and their binding to the dried matrix is assessed.
In this scanning electron micrograph, the tips of pollen tubes
(arrows) can be seen binding to dried stylar matrix. This type of
assay has shown that pollen adherence depends on stigma/stylar
cysteine-rich adhesin (SCA) and a pectin that binds to SCA. [From
G. Y. Jauh et al., 1997, Sex Plant Reprod. 10:173.]

The plant cell wall comprises layers of cellulose microfibrils embedded within a matrix of hemicellulose,
pectin, extensin, and other less abundant molecules.

■

Cellulose, a large, linear glucose polymer, assembles
spontaneously into microfibrils stabilized by hydrogen
bonding.

■

The cell wall defines the shapes of plant cells and restricts their elongation. Auxin-induced loosening of the cell
wall permits elongation.

■

6.7 • Growth and Use of Cultured Cells

Adjacent plant cells can communicate through plasmodesmata, which allow small molecules to pass between
the cells (see Figure 6-34).

■

Plants do not produce homologs of the common adhesive molecules found in animals. Only a few adhesive molecules unique to plants have been well documented to date.

■

6.7 Growth and Use of Cultured Cells
Many technical constraints hamper studies on specific cells or
subsets of cells in intact animals and plants. One alternative is
the use of intact organs that are removed from animals and
perfused with an appropriately buffered solution to maintain
their physiologic integrity and function. Such organ perfusion
systems have been widely used by physiologists. However, the
organization of organs, even isolated ones, is sufficiently complex to pose numerous problems for research on many fundamental aspects of cell biology. Thus molecular cell
biologists often conduct experimental studies on cells isolated
from an organism and maintained in conditions that permit
their survival and growth, a procedure known as culturing.
Cultured cells have several advantages over intact organisms for cell biology research. First, most animal and plant
tissues consist of a variety of different types of cells, whereas
cells of a single specific type with homogeneous properties
can be grown in culture. Second, experimental conditions
(e.g., composition of the extracellular environment) can be
controlled far better in culture than in an intact organism.
Third, in many cases a single cell can be readily grown into
a colony of many identical cells, a process called cell cloning,
or simply cloning (Figure 6-36). The resulting strain of cells,
which is genetically homogeneous, is called a clone. This simple technique, which is commonly used with many bacteria,
yeasts, and mammalian cell types, makes it easy to isolate genetically distinct clones of cells.
(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 6-36 Cultured mammalian cells viewed at three
magnifications. (a) A single mouse cell attached to a plastic petri
dish, viewed through a scanning electron microscope. (b) A
single colony of human HeLa cells about 1 mm in diameter,
produced from a single cell after growth for 2 weeks. (c) After

235

A major disadvantage of cultured cells is that they are
not in their normal environment and hence their activities
are not regulated by the other cells and tissues as they are
in an intact organism. For example, insulin produced by the
pancreas has an enormous effect on liver glucose metabolism; however, this normal regulatory mechanism does not
operate in a purified population of liver cells (called hepatocytes) grown in culture. In addition, as already described,
the three-dimensional distribution of cells and extracellular
matrix around a cell influences its shape and behavior. Because the immediate environment of cultured cells differs
radically from this “normal” environment, their properties
may be affected in various ways. Thus care must always be
exercised in drawing conclusions about the normal properties of cells in complex tissues and organisms only on the
basis of experiments with isolated, cultured cells.

Culture of Animal Cells Requires Nutrient-Rich
Media and Special Solid Surfaces
In contrast with most bacterial cells, which can be cultured
quite easily, animal cells require many specialized nutrients
and often specially coated dishes for successful culturing. To
permit the survival and normal function of cultured tissues or
cells, the temperature (37 °C for mammalian cells), pH, ionic
strength, and access to essential nutrients must simulate as
closely as possible the conditions within an intact organism.
Isolated animal cells are typically placed in a nutrient-rich liquid, the culture medium, within specially treated plastic dishes
or flasks. The cultures are kept in incubators in which the temperature, atmosphere, and humidity can be controlled. To
reduce the chances of bacterial or fungal contamination, antibiotics are often added to the culture medium. To further
guard against contamination, investigators usually transfer
cells between dishes, add reagents to the culture medium, and
otherwise manipulate the specimens within special cabinets
(c)

cells initially introduced into a 6-cm-diameter petri dish have
grown for several days and then been stained, individual colonies
can easily be seen and counted. All the cells in a colony are
progeny of a single precursor cell and thus genetically identical.
[Part (a) courtesy of N. K. Weller. Parts (b) and (c) courtesy of T. T. Puck.]

236

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

containing circulating air that is filtered to remove microorganisms and other airborne contaminants.
Media for culturing animal cells must supply histidine,
isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine; no cells in adult vertebrate animals can synthesize these nine essential amino acids. In
addition, most cultured cells require three other amino acids
(cysteine, glutamine, and tyrosine) that are synthesized only
by specialized cells in intact animals. The other necessary
components of a medium for culturing animal cells are vitamins, various salts, fatty acids, glucose, and serum—the fluid
remaining after the noncellular part of blood (plasma) has
been allowed to clot. Serum contains various protein factors
that are needed for the proliferation of mammalian cells in
culture. These factors include the polypeptide hormone insulin; transferrin, which supplies iron in a bioaccessible
form; and numerous growth factors. In addition, certain cell
types require specialized protein growth factors not present
in serum. For instance, hematopoietic cells require erythropoietin, and T lymphocytes require interleukin 2 (Chapter
14). A few mammalian cell types can be grown in a chemically defined, serum-free medium containing amino acids,
glucose, vitamins, and salts plus certain trace minerals, specific protein growth factors, and other components.
Unlike bacterial and yeast cells, which can be grown in
suspension, most animal cells will grow only on a solid surface. This highlights the importance of cell adhesion molecules. Many types of cells can grow on glass or on specially
treated plastics with negatively charged groups on the surface (e.g., SO32). The cells secrete ECM components, which
adhere to these surfaces, and then attach and grow on the secreted matrix. A single cell cultured on a glass or a plastic
dish proliferates to form a visible mass, or colony, containing
thousands of genetically identical cells in 4–14 days, depending on the growth rate (see Figure 6-36c). Some specialized blood cells and tumor cells can be maintained or grown
in suspension as single cells.

Primary Cell Cultures and Cell Strains Have
a Finite Life Span
Normal animal tissues (e.g., skin, kidney, liver) or whole embryos are commonly used to establish primary cell cultures.
To prepare tissue cells for a primary culture, the cell–cell and
cell–matrix interactions must be broken. To do so, tissue
fragments are treated with a combination of a protease (e.g.,
trypsin or the collagen-hydrolyzing enzyme collagenase or
both) and a divalent cation chelator (e.g., EDTA) that depletes the medium of usable Ca2 or Mg2. The released
cells are then placed in dishes in a nutrient-rich, serumsupplemented medium, where they can adhere to the surface
and one another. The same protease/chelator solution is used
to remove adherent cells from a culture dish for biochemical studies or subculturing (transfer to another dish).
Often connective tissue fibroblasts divide in culture more
rapidly than other cells in a tissue, eventually becoming the

predominant type of cells in the primary culture, unless special precautions are taken to remove them when isolating
other types of cells. Certain cells from blood, spleen, or bone
marrow adhere poorly, if at all, to a culture dish but nonetheless grow well. In the body, such nonadherent cells are held
in suspension (in the blood) or they are loosely adherent (in
the bone marrow and spleen). Because these cells often come
from immature stages in the development of differentiated
blood cells, they are very useful for studying normal blood
cell differentiation and the abnormal development of
leukemias.
When cells removed from an embryo or an adult animal
are cultured, most of the adherent ones will divide a finite
number of times and then cease growing (cell senescence,
Figure 6-38a). For instance, human fetal fibroblasts divide
about 50 times before they cease growth. Starting with 106
cells, 50 doublings can produce 106  250, or more than
1020 cells, which is equivalent to the weight of about 105
people. Normally, only a very small fraction of these cells are
used in any one experiment. Thus, even though its lifetime
is limited, a single culture, if carefully maintained, can be
studied through many generations. Such a lineage of cells
originating from one initial primary culture is called a cell
strain.
Cell strains can be frozen in a state of suspended animation and stored for extended periods at liquid nitrogen temperature, provided that a preservative that prevents the
formation of damaging ice crystals is used. Although some
cells do not survive thawing, many do survive and resume
growth. Research with cell strains is simplified by the ability to freeze and successfully thaw them at a later time for experimental analysis.

Transformed Cells Can Grow Indefinitely
in Culture
To be able to clone individual cells, modify cell behavior, or
select mutants, biologists often want to maintain cell cultures
for many more than 100 doublings. Such prolonged growth
is exhibited by cells derived from some tumors. In addition,
rare cells in a population of primary cells that undergo certain spontaneous genetic changes, called oncogenic transformation, are able to grow indefinitely. These cells are said to
be oncogenically transformed or simply transformed. A culture of cells with an indefinite life span is considered immortal and is called a cell line.
The HeLa cell line, the first human cell line, was originally obtained in 1952 from a malignant tumor (carcinoma) of the uterine cervix. Although primary cell cultures
of normal human cells rarely undergo transformation into
a cell line, rodent cells commonly do. After rodent cells
are grown in culture for several generations, the culture
goes into senescence (Figure 6-37b). During this period,
most of the cells stop growing, but often a rapidly dividing transformed cell arises spontaneously and takes over, or
overgrows, the culture. A cell line derived from such a

6.7 • Growth and Use of Cultured Cells

transformed variant will grow indefinitely if provided with
the necessary nutrients.
Regardless of the source, cells in immortalized lines often
have chromosomes with abnormal structures. In addition,
the number of chromosomes in such cells is usually greater
than that in the normal cell from which they arose, and the
chromosome number expands and contracts as the cells continue to divide in culture. A noteworthy exception is the
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) line and its derivatives, which
have fewer chromosomes than their hamster progenitors.
Cells with an abnormal number of chromosomes are said to
be aneuploid.
(a) Human cells
Phase
I

Phase
III

Phase II
Cell strain

Growth
rate of
culture
Cell
senescence
1

25
Cell generations

50

(b) Mouse cells
Initial loss
of growth
potential
Growth
rate of
culture

Emergence of
immortal
variant
(cell line)

Senescence

30
60
Days after initiation of culture

▲ FIGURE 6-37 Stages in the establishment of a cell
culture. (a) When cells isolated from human tissue are initially
cultured, some cells die and others (mainly fibroblasts) start to
grow; overall, the growth rate increases (phase I). If the
remaining cells are harvested, diluted, and replated into dishes
again and again, the cell strain continues to divide at a constant
rate for about 50 cell generations (phase II), after which the
growth rate falls rapidly. In the ensuing period (phase III), all
the cells in the culture stop growing (senescence). (b) In a
culture prepared from mouse or other rodent cells, initial cell
death (not shown) is coupled with the emergence of healthy
growing cells. As these dividing cells are diluted and allowed to
continue growth, they soon begin to lose growth potential, and
most stop growing (i.e., the culture goes into senescence). Very
rare cells survive and continue dividing until their progeny
overgrow the culture. These cells constitute a cell line, which will
grow indefinitely if it is appropriately diluted and fed with
nutrients: such cells are said to be immortal.

237

Most cell lines have lost some or many of the functions
characteristic of the differentiated cells from which they were
derived. Such relatively undifferentiated cells are poor models for investigating the normal functions of specific cell
types. Better in this regard are several more-differentiated cell
lines that exhibit many properties of normal nontransformed
cells. These lines include the liver tumor (hepatoma) HepG2
line, which synthesizes most of the serum proteins made by
normal liver cells (hepatocytes). Another example consists of
cells from a certain cultured fibroblast line, which under certain experimental conditions behave as muscle precursor
cells, or myoblasts. These cells can be induced to fuse to form
myotubes, which resemble differentiated multinucleated
muscle cells and synthesize many of the specialized proteins
associated with contraction. The results of studies with this
cell line have provided valuable information about the differentiation of muscle (Chapter 22). Finally, as discussed previously, the MDCK cell line retains many properties of highly
differentiated epithelial cells and forms well-defined epithelial sheets in culture (see Figure 6-6).

Hybrid Cells Called Hybridomas Produce
Abundant Monoclonal Antibodies
In addition to serving as research models for studies on cell
function, cultured cells can be converted into “factories”
for producing specific proteins. In Chapter 9, we describe
how it is done by introducing genes encoding insulin,
growth factors, and other therapeutically useful proteins
into bacterial or eukaryotic cells. Here we consider the use
of special cultured cells to generate monoclonal antibodies,
which are widely used experimental tools and increasingly
are being used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes in
medicine.
To understand the challenge of generating monoclonal
antibodies, we need to briefly review how antibodies are
produced by mammals. Each normal B lymphocyte in a
mammal is capable of producing a single type of antibody
directed against (can bind to) a specific chemical structure
(called a determinant or epitope) on an antigen molecule. If
an animal is injected with an antigen, B lymphocytes that
make antibodies recognizing the antigen are stimulated to
grow and secrete the antibodies. Each antigen-activated
B lymphocyte forms a clone of cells in the spleen or lymph
nodes, with each cell of the clone producing the identical
antibody—that is, a monoclonal antibody. Because most
natural antigens contain multiple epitopes, exposure of an
animal to an antigen usually stimulates the formation of
multiple different B-lymphocyte clones, each producing a
different antibody. The resulting mixture of antibodies that
recognize different epitopes on the same antigen is said to
be polyclonal. Such polyclonal antibodies circulate in the
blood and can be isolated as a group and used for a variety of experiments. However, monoclonal antibodies are
required for many types of experiments or medical applications. Unfortunately, the biochemical purification of any

238

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues
Inject mouse
with antigen X

Mutant mouse
myeloma cells
unable to grow
in HAT medium

Mouse spleen cells;
some cells (red) make
antibody to antigen X

1
Mix and
fuse cells

2

Transfer to
HAT medium
Unfused cells
(
) die
Fused cells
(
) grow

Technique Animation: Preparing Monoclonal Antibodies

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

3

Culture single cells
in separate wells

Test each well for antibody to antigen X

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 6-38 Use of cell fusion
and selection to obtain hybridomas producing
monoclonal antibody to a specific protein. Step 1 :
Immortal myeloma cells that lack HGPRT, an enzyme
required for growth on HAT selection medium, are fused
with normal antibody-producing spleen cells from an animal
that was immunized with antigen X. The spleen cells can
make HGPRT. Step 2 : When plated in HAT medium, the
unfused cells do not grow; neither do the mutant myeloma
cells, because they cannot make purines through an HGPRTdependent metabolic “salvage” pathway (see Figure 6-41),
and the spleen cells, because they have a limited life span in
culture. Thus only fused cells formed from a myeloma cell
and a spleen cell survive on HAT medium, proliferating into
clones called hybridomas. Each hybridoma produces a single
antibody. Step 3 : Testing of individual clones identifies those
that recognize antigen X. After a hybridoma that produces a
desired antibody has been identified, the clone can be
cultured to yield large amounts of that antibody.

one type of monoclonal antibody from blood is not feasible, in part because the concentration of any given antibody
is quite low.
Because of their limited life span, primary cultures of
normal B lymphocytes are of limited usefulness for the production of monoclonal antibody. Thus the first step in producing a monoclonal antibody is to generate immortal,
antibody-producing cells. This immortality is achieved by
fusing normal B lymphocytes from an immunized animal
with transformed, immortal lymphocytes called myeloma
cells. During cell fusion, the plasma membranes of two cells
fuse together, allowing their cytosols and organelles to intermingle. Treatment with certain viral glycoproteins or the
chemical polyethylene glycol promotes cell fusion. Some of
the fused cells can undergo division and their nuclei eventually coalesce, producing viable hybrid cells with a single
nucleus that contains chromosomes from both “parents.”
The fusion of two cells that are genetically different can
yield a hybrid cell with novel characteristics. For instance,
the fusion of a myeloma cell with a normal antibodyproducing cell from a rat or mouse spleen yields a hybrid
that proliferates into a clone called a hybridoma. Like
myeloma cells, hybridoma cells grow rapidly and are immortal. Each hybridoma produces the monoclonal antibody
encoded by its B-lymphocyte parent.
The second step in this procedure for producing monoclonal antibody is to separate, or select, the hybridoma cells
from the unfused parental cells and the self-fused cells generated by the fusion reaction. This selection is usually performed by incubating the mixture of cells in a special
culture medium, called selection medium, that permits the
growth of only the hybridoma cells because of their novel
characteristics. Such a selection is readily performed if the
myeloma cells used for the fusion carry a mutation that
blocks a metabolic pathway and renders them, but not their
lymphocyte fusion partners that do not have the mutation,
sensitive to killing by the selection medium. In the immortal hybrid cells, the functional gene from the lymphocyte
can supply the gene product missing because of the mutation in the myeloma cell, and thus the hybridoma cells but
not the myeloma cells, will be able to grow in the selection
medium. Because the lymphocytes used in the fusion are
not immortalized and do not divide rapidly, only the hybridoma cells will proliferate rapidly in the selection
medium and can thus be readily isolated from the initial
mixture of cells.
Figure 6-38 depicts the general procedure for generating and selecting hybridomas. In this case, normal B lymphocytes are fused with myeloma cells that cannot grow
in HAT medium, the most common selection medium used
in the production of hybridomas. Only the myelomalymphocyte hybrids can survive and grow for an extended
period in HAT medium for reasons described shortly.
Thus, this selection medium permits the separation of hybridoma cells from both types of parental cells and any

6.7 • Growth and Use of Cultured Cells

self-fused cells. Finally, each selected hybridoma is then
tested for the production of the desired antibody; any
clone producing that antibody is then grown in large cultures, from which a substantial quantity of pure monoclonal antibody can be obtained.

Monoclonal antibodies are commonly employed
in affinity chromatography to isolate and purify
proteins from complex mixtures (see Figure 3-34c).
They can also be used to label and thus locate a particular
protein in specific cells of an organ and within cultured
cells with the use of immunofluorescence microscopy techniques (see Figures 6-26a and 6-27) or in specific cell fractions with the use of immunoblotting (see Figure 3-35).
Monoclonal antibodies also have become important diagnostic and therapeutic tools in medicine. For example,
monoclonal antibodies that bind to and inactivate toxic
proteins (toxins) secreted by bacterial pathogens are used
to treat diseases caused by these pathogens. Other monoclonal antibodies are specific for cell-surface proteins expressed by certain types of tumor cells; chemical complexes
of such monoclonal antibodies with toxic drugs or simply
the antibodies themselves have been developed for cancer
chemotherapy. ❚

239

HAT Medium Is Commonly Used to Isolate
Hybrid Cells
The principles underlying HAT selection are important not
only for understanding how hybridoma cells are isolated but
also for understanding several other frequently used selection
methods, including selection of the ES cells used in generating knockout mice (Chapter 9). HAT medium contains hypoxanthine (a purine), aminopterin, and thymidine. Most
animal cells can synthesize the purine and pyrimidine nucleotides from simpler carbon and nitrogen compounds (Figure 6-39, top). The folic acid antagonists amethopterin and
aminopterin interfere with the donation of methyl and
formyl groups by tetrahydrofolic acid in the early stages of
the synthesis of glycine, purine nucleoside monophosphates,
and thymidine monophosphate. These drugs are called antifolates because they block reactions of tetrahydrofolate, an
active form of folic acid.
Many cells, however, are resistant to antifolates because
they contain enzymes that can synthesize the necessary nucleotides from purine bases and thymidine (Figure 6-39, bottom). Two key enzymes in these nucleotide salvage pathways
are thymidine kinase (TK) and hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT). Cells that produce
these enzymes can grow on HAT medium, which supplies a

De novo
synthesis of
purine nucleotides
PRPP (5-Phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate)
Blocked by antifolates

De novo
synthesis of
TMP
Deoxyuridylate (dUMP)

CHO from tetrahydrofolate

Blocked by antifolates

Blocked by antifolates

CHO from tetrahydrofolate
Nucleic
acids

Guanylate (GMP)

PRPP

Inosinate (IMP)

HGPRT
(hypoxanthineguanine
phosphoribosyl
transferase)

Guanine

Adenylate (AMP)

Nucleic
acids

APRT
(adenine
phosphoribosyl
transferase)
PRPP

HGPRT
PRPP

Hypoxanthine

Adenine

CH3 from
tetrahydrofolate
Thymidylate (TMP)

TK
(thymidine kinase)

Thymidine

Salvage pathways

▲ FIGURE 6-39 De novo and salvage pathways for
nucleotide synthesis. Animal cells can synthesize purine
nucleotides (AMP, GMP, IMP) and thymidylate (TMP) from
simpler compounds by de novo pathways (blue). They require the
transfer of a methyl or formyl (“CHO”) group from an activated
form of tetrahydrofolate (e.g., N 5,N 10-methylenetetrahydrofolate),
as shown in the upper part of the diagram. Antifolates, such
as aminopterin and amethopterin, block the reactivation of

tetrahydrofolate, preventing purine and thymidylate synthesis.
Many animal cells can also use salvage pathways (red) to
incorporate purine bases or nucleosides and thymidine. If these
precursors are present in the medium, normal cells will grow
even in the presence of antifolates. Cultured cells lacking one of
the enzymes—HGPRT, APRT, or TK—of the salvage pathways
will not survive in media containing antifolates.

240

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues

salvageable purine and thymidine, whereas those lacking one
of them cannot.
Cells with a TK mutation that prevents the production
of the functional TK enzyme can be isolated because such
cells are resistant to the otherwise toxic thymidine analog
5-bromodeoxyuridine. Cells containing TK convert this
compound into 5-bromodeoxyuridine monophosphate,
which is then converted into a nucleoside triphosphate by
other enzymes. The triphosphate analog is incorporated by
DNA polymerase into DNA, where it exerts its toxic effects.
This pathway is blocked in TK mutants, and thus they are
resistant to the toxic effects of 5-bromodeoxyuridine. Similarly, cells lacking the HGPRT enzyme, such as the HGPRT
myeloma cell lines used in producing hybridomas, can be isolated because they are resistant to the otherwise toxic guanine analog 6-thioguanine.
Normal cells can grow in HAT medium because even
though the aminopterin in the medium blocks de novo synthesis of purines and TMP, the thymidine in the medium is
transported into the cell and converted into TMP by TK and
the hypoxanthine is transported and converted into usable
purines by HGPRT. On the other hand, neither TK nor
HGPRT cells can grow in HAT medium because each lacks
an enzyme of the salvage pathway. However, hybrids formed
by the fusion of these two mutants will carry a normal TK
gene from the HGPRT parent and a normal HGPRT gene
from the TK parent. The hybrids will thus produce both
functional salvage-pathway enzymes and will grow on HAT
medium.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 6.7
Growth and Use of Cultured Cells
Growth of vertebrate cells in culture requires rich media containing essential amino acids, vitamins, fatty acids,
and peptide or protein growth factors; the last are frequently provided by serum.

■

Most cultured vertebrate cells will grow only when attached to a negatively charged substratum that is coated
with components of the extracellular matrix.

■

Primary cells, which are derived directly from animal tissue, have limited growth potential in culture and may give
rise to a cell strain. Transformed cells, which are derived
from animal tumors or arise spontaneously from primary
cells, grow indefinitely in culture, forming cell lines (see
Figure 6-37).

■

The fusion of an immortal myeloma cell and a single
B lymphocyte yields a hybrid cell that can proliferate
indefinitely, forming a clone called a hybridoma (see
Figure 6-38). Because each individual B lymphocyte
produces antibodies specific for one antigenic determinant (epitope), a hybridoma produces only the mono-

■

clonal antibody synthesized by its original B-lymphocyte
parental cell.
HAT medium is commonly used to isolated hybridoma
cells and other types of hybrid cells.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
A deeper understanding of the integration of cells into tissues
in complex organisms will draw on insights and techniques
from virtually all subdisciplines of molecular cell biology: biochemistry, biophysics, microscopy, genetics, genomics, proteomics, and developmental biology. An important set of
questions for the future deals with the mechanisms by which
cells detect mechanical forces on them and the extracellular
matrix, as well as the influence of their three-dimensional
arrangements and interactions. A related question is how this
information is used to control cell and tissue structure and
function. Shear stresses can induce distinct patterns of gene expression and cell growth and can greatly alter cell metabolism
and responses to extracellular stimuli. Future research should
give us a far more sophisticated understanding of the roles of
the three-dimensional organization of cells and ECM components in controlling the structures and activities of tissues.
Numerous questions relate to intracellular signaling from
CAMs and adhesion receptors. Such signaling must be integrated with other cellular signaling pathways that are activated by various external signals (e.g., growth factors) so
that the cell responds appropriately and in a single coordinated fashion to many different simultaneous internal and
external stimuli. How are the logic circuits constructed that
allow cross-talk between diverse signaling pathways? How
do these circuits integrate the information from these pathways? How is the combination of outside-in and inside-out
signaling mediated by CAMs and adhesion receptors merged
into such circuits?
The importance of specialized GAG sequences in controlling cellular activities, especially interactions between
some growth factors and their receptors, is now clear. With
the identification of the biosynthetic mechanisms by which
these complex structures are generated and the development
of tools to manipulate GAG structures and test their functions in cultured systems and intact animals, we can expect
a dramatic increase in our understanding of the cell biology
of GAGs in the next several years.
A structural hallmark of CAMs, adhesion receptors,
and ECM proteins is the presence of multiple domains that
impart diverse functions to a single polypeptide chain. It
is generally agreed that such multidomain proteins arose
evolutionarily by the assembly of distinct DNA sequences
encoding the distinct domains. Genes encoding multiple
domains provide opportunities to generate enormous sequence and functional diversity by alternative splicing and
the use of alternate promoters within a gene. Thus, even

Analyze the Data

though the number of independent genes in the human
genome seems surprisingly small in comparison with other
organisms, far more distinct protein molecules can be produced than predicted from the number of genes. Such diversity seems especially well suited to the generation of
proteins that take part in specifying adhesive connections
in the nervous system, especially the brain. Indeed, several
groups of proteins expressed by neurons appear to have
just such combinatorial diversity of structure. They include
the protocadherins, a family of cadherins with as many as
70 proteins encoded per gene; the neurexins, which comprise more than 1000 proteins encoded by three genes; and
the Dscams, members of the IgCAM superfamily encoded
by a Drosophila gene that has the potential to express
38,016 distinct proteins owing to alternative splicing. A
continuing goal for future work will be to describe and understand the molecular basis of functional cell–cell and
cell–matrix attachments—the “wiring”—in the nervous
system and how that wiring ultimately permits complex
neuronal control and, indeed, the intellect required to understand molecular cell biology.

2. Cadherins are known to mediate homophilic interactions between cells. What is a homophilic interaction, and
how can it be demonstrated experimentally for E-cadherins?
3. What is the normal function of tight junctions? What
can happen to tissues when tight junctions do not function
properly?
4. What is collagen, and how is it synthesized? How do we
know that collagen is required for tissue integrity?
5. You have synthesized an oligopeptide containing an
RGD sequence surrounded by other amino acids. What is the
effect of this peptide when added to a fibroblast cell culture
grown on a layer of fibronectin absorbed to the tissue culture
dish? Why does this happen?
6. Blood clotting is a crucial function for mammalian survival. How do the multiadhesive properties of fibronectin
lead to the recruitment of platelets to blood clots?
7. Using structural models, explain how integrins mediate
outside-in and inside-out signaling.
8. How do changes in molecular connections between the
extracellular matrix (ECM) and cytoskeleton give rise to
Duchenne muscular dystrophy?

KEY TERMS
adhesion receptor 199
anchoring junction 202
basal lamina 202
cadherin 199
cell-adhesion
molecule (CAM) 198
cell line 236
cell strain 236
cell wall 231
connexin 231
dystrophin glycoprotein
complex (DGC) 227
epithelium 201
extracellular matrix
(ECM) 199
fibril-associated
collagen 217
fibrillar collagen 217
fibronectin 220
glycosaminoglycan
(GAG) 213

241

HAT medium 238
hyaluronan 217
hybridoma 238
immunoglobulin
cell-adhesion molecule
(IgCAM) 227
integrin 199
laminin 211
monoclonal antibody 237
multiadhesive matrix
protein 209
paracellular pathway 208
plasmodesma 233
proteoglycan 209
RGD sequence 221
selectin 199
syndecan 214
tight junction 202

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Using specific examples, describe the two phenomena
that give rise to the diversity of adhesive molecules.

9. What is the difference between a cell strain, a cell line,
and a clone?
10. Explain why the process of cell fusion is necessary to
produce monoclonal antibodies used for research.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Researchers have isolated two E-cadherin mutant isoforms
that are hypothesized to function differently from that of the
wild-type E-cadherin. An E-cadherin negative mammary carcinoma cell line was transfected with the mutant E-cadherin
genes A (part a in the figure) and B (part b) (diamonds) and
the wild-type E-cadherin gene (black circles) and compared
to untransfected cells (open circles) in an aggregation assay.
In this assay, cells are first dissociated by trypsin treatment
and then allowed to aggregate in solution over a period of
minutes. Aggregating cells from mutants A and B are
presented in panels a and b respectively. To demonstrate that
the observed adhesion was cadherin-mediated, the cells
were pretreated with a nonspecific antibody (left panel) or a
function-blocking anti-E-cadherin monoclonal antibody
(right panel).
a. Why do cells transfected with the wild-type E-cadherin
gene have greater aggregation than control, nontransfected
cells?
b. From these data, what can be said about the function of
mutants A and B?

242

CHAPTER 6 • Integrating Cells into Tissues
Nonspecific

Aggregation (%)

(a)

Anti-E-cadherin

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

−20

0

20

40

60

−20

0

Time (min)

20

40

60

Time (min)

Aggregation (%)

(b)
80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

−20

0

20

40

60

Time (min)

c. Why does the addition of the anti-E-cadherin monoclonal antibody, but not the nonspecific antibody, block
aggregation?
d. What would happen to the aggregation ability of the cells
transfected with the wild-type E-cadherin gene if the assay
were performed in media low in Ca2?

REFERENCES

Cell–Cell and Cell–Matrix Adhesion:
An Overview
Gumbiner, B. M. 1996. Cell adhesion: the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis. Cell 84:345–357.
Hynes, R. O. 1999. Cell adhesion: old and new questions. Trends
Cell Biol. 9(12):M33–M337. Millennium issue.
Hynes, R. O. 2002. Integrins: bidirectional, allosteric signaling
machines. Cell 110:673–687.
Jamora, C., and E. Fuchs. 2002. Intercellular adhesion, signalling
and the cytoskeleton. Nature Cell Biol. 4(4):E101–E108.
Juliano, R. L. 2002. Signal transduction by cell adhesion receptors and the cytoskeleton: functions of integrins, cadherins, selectins,
and immunoglobulin-superfamily members. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol.
Toxicol. 42:283–323.

−20

0

20

40

60

Time (min)

Leahy, D. J. 1997. Implications of atomic resolution structures
for cell adhesion. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 13:363–393.

Sheetlike Epithelial Tissues: Junctions and Cell-Adhesion
Molecules
Boggon, T. J., et al. 2002. C-cadherin ectodomain structure and
implications for cell adhesion mechanisms. Science 296:1308–1313.
Clandinin, T. R., and S. L. Zipursky. 2002. Making connections
in the fly visual system. Neuron 35:827–841.
Conacci-Sorrell, M., J. Zhurinsky, and A. Ben-Ze’ev. 2002. The
cadherin-catenin adhesion system in signaling and cancer. J. Clin.
Invest. 109:987–991.
Fuchs, E., and S. Raghavan. 2002. Getting under the skin of epidermal morphogenesis. Nature Rev. Genet. 3(3):199–209.
Leckband, D. 2002. The structure of the C-cadherin ectodomain
resolved. Structure (Camb). 10:739–740.
Pierschbacher, M. D., and E. Ruoslahti. 1984. Cell attachment
activity of fibronectin can be duplicated by small synthetic fragments
of the molecule. Nature 309(5963):30–33.
Schöck, F., and N. Perrimon. 2002. Molecular mechanisms of
epithelial morphogenesis. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 18:463–493.
Shimaoka, M., J. Takagi, and T. A. Springer. 2002. Conformational regulation of integrin structure and function. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struc. 31:485–516.
Tsukita, S., M. Furuse, and M. Itoh. 2001. Multifunctional
strands in tight junctions. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:285–293.

References
Xiong, J. P., et al. 2001. Crystal structure of the extracellular
segment of integrin V3. Science 294:339–345.

The Extracellular Matrix of Epithelial Sheets
Boutaud, A., et al. 2000. Type IV collagen of the glomerular
basement membrane: evidence that the chain specificity of network
assembly is encoded by the noncollagenous NC1 domains. J. Biol.
Chem. 275:30716–30724.
Esko, J. D., and U. Lindahl. 2001. Molecular diversity of heparan sulfate. J. Clin. Invest. 108:169–173.
Hohenester, E., and J. Engel. 2002. Domain structure and organisation in extracellular matrix proteins. Matrix Biol. 21(2):
115–128.
Nakato, H., and K. Kimata. 2002. Heparan sulfate fine structure and specificity of proteoglycan functions. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1573:312–318.
Perrimon, N., and M. Bernfield. 2001. Cellular functions of proteoglycans: an overview. Semin. Cell Devel. Biol. 12(2):65–67.
Rosenberg, R. D., et al. 1997. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans of
the cardiovascular system: specific structures emerge but how is synthesis regulated? J. Clin. Invest. 99:2062–2070.

The Extracellular Matrix of Nonepithelial Tissues
Kramer, R. Z., J. Bella, B. Brodsky, and H. M. Berman. 2001.
The crystal and molecular structure of a collagen-like peptide with
a biologically relevant sequence. J. Mol. Biol. 311:131–147.
Mao, J. R., and J. Bristow. 2001. The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome:
on beyond collagens. J. Clin. Invest. 107:1063–1069.
Shaw, L. M., and B. R. Olsen. 1991. FACIT collagens: diverse
molecular bridges in extracellular matrices. Trends Biochem. Sci.
16(5):191–194.
Weiner, S., W. Traub, and H. D. Wagner. 1999. Lamellar bone:
structure–function relations. J. Struc. Biol. 126:241–255.

Adhesive Interactions Involving Nonepithelial Cells
Bartsch, U. 2003. Neural CAMs and their role in the
development and organization of myelin sheaths. Front. Biosci.
8:D477–D490.
Brummendorf, T., and V. Lemmon. 2001. Immunoglobulin superfamily receptors: cis-interactions, intracellular adapters and alternative splicing regulate adhesion. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:611–618.
Cukierman, E., R. Pankov, and K. M. Yamada. 2002. Cell interactions with three-dimensional matrices. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
14:633–639.
Durbeej, M., and K. P. Campbell. 2002. Muscular dystrophies
involving the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex: an overview of current mouse models. Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 12:349–361.
Geiger, B., A. Bershadsky, R. Pankov, and K. M. Yamada. 2001.
Transmembrane crosstalk between the extracellular matrix and the
cytoskeleton. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:793–805.
Hobbie, L., et al. 1987. Restoration of LDL receptor activity in
mutant cells by intercellular junctional communication. Science
235:69–73.

243

Lawrence, M. B., and T. A. Springer. 1991. Leukocytes roll on
a selectin at physiologic flow rates: distinction from and prerequisite
for adhesion through integrins. Cell 65:859–873.
Lo, C. Gap junctions in development and disease. Ann. Rev. Cell.
Devel. Biol. 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.19.111301.144309. (Expected
to be published in 2003.)
Reizes, O., et al. 2001. Transgenic expression of syndecan-1 uncovers a physiological control of feeding behavior by syndecan-3.
Cell 106:105–116.
Somers, W. S., J. Tang, G. D. Shaw, and R. T. Camphausen.
2000. Insights into the molecular basis of leukocyte tethering and
rolling revealed by structures of P- and E-selectin bound to SLe(X)
and PSGL-1. Cell 103:467–479.
Stein, E., and M. Tessier-Lavigne. 2001. Hierarchical organization of guidance receptors: silencing of netrin attraction by Slit
through a Robo/DCC receptor complex. Science 291:1928–1938.

Plant Tissues
Delmer, D. P., and C. H. Haigler. 2002. The regulation of metabolic flux to cellulose, a major sink for carbon in plants. Metab. Eng.
4:22–28.
Iwai, H., N. Masaoka, T. Ishii, and S. Satoh. 2000. A pectin glucuronyltransferase gene is essential for intercellular attachment in the
plant meristem. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 99:16319–16324.
Lord, E. M. 2003. Adhesion and guidance in compatible pollination. J. Exp. Bot. 54(380):47–54.
Lord, E. M., and J. C. Mollet. 2002. Plant cell adhesion: a bioassay facilitates discovery of the first pectin biosynthetic gene. Proc.
Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 99:15843–15845.
Lord, E. M., and S. D. Russell. 2002. The mechanisms of pollination and fertilization in plants. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol.
18:81–105.
Pennell, R. 1998. Cell walls: structures and signals. Curr. Opin.
Plant Biol. 1:504–510.
Ross, W. Whetten, J. J. MacKay, and R. R. Sederoff. 1998. Recent advances in understanding lignin biosynthesis. Ann. Rev. Plant
Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 49:585–609.
Zambryski, P., and K. Crawford. 2000. Plasmodesmata: gatekeepers for cell-to-cell transport of developmental signals in plants.
Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 16:393–421.

Growth and Use of Cultured Cells
Davis, J. M., ed. 1994. Basic Cell Culture: A Practical Approach.
IRL Press.
Goding, J. W. 1996. Monoclonal Antibodies: Principles and Practice. Production and Application of Monoclonal Antibodies in Cell
Biology, Biochemistry, and Immunology, 3d ed. Academic Press.
Kohler, G., and C. Milstein. 1975. Continuous cultures of fused
cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity. Nature
256:495–497.
Shaw, A. J., ed. 1996. Epithelial Cell Culture. IRL Press.
Tyson, C. A., and J. A. Frazier, eds. 1993. Methods in Toxicology. Vol. I (Part A): In Vitro Biological Systems. Academic Press. Describes methods for growing many types of primary cells in culture.

7
TRANSPORT OF
IONS AND SMALL
MOLECULES ACROSS
CELL MEMBRANES
Aquaporin, the water channel, consists of four identical transmembrane polypeptides.

T

he plasma membrane is a selectively permeable barrier between the cell and the extracellular environment. Its permeability properties ensure that
essential molecules such as ions, glucose, amino acids, and
lipids readily enter the cell, metabolic intermediates remain in the cell, and waste compounds leave the cell. In
short, the selective permeability of the plasma membrane
allows the cell to maintain a constant internal environment. In Chapter 5, we learned about the components and
structural organization of cell membranes. Movement of
virtually all molecules and ions across cellular membranes
is mediated by selective membrane transport proteins embedded in the phospholipid bilayer. Because different cell
types require different mixtures of low-molecular-weight
compounds, the plasma membrane of each cell type contains a specific set of transport proteins that allow only
certain ions and molecules to cross. Similarly, organelles
within the cell often have a different internal environment
from that of the surrounding cytosol, and organelle membranes contain specific transport proteins that maintain
this difference.
We begin our discussion by reviewing some general principles of transport across membranes and distinguishing
three major classes of transport proteins. In subsequent sections, we describe the structure and operation of specific examples of each class and show how members of families of
homologous transport proteins have different properties that
enable different cell types to function appropriately. We also
explain how specific combinations of transport proteins in
different subcellular membranes enable cells to carry out essential physiological processes, including the maintenance
of cytosolic pH, the accumulation of sucrose and salts in

plant cell vacuoles, and the directed flow of water in both
plants and animals. Epithelial cells, such as those lining the
small intestine, transport ions, sugars and other small molecules, and water from one side to the other. We shall see how,
in order to do this, their plasma membranes are organized
into at least two discrete regions, each with its own set of
transport proteins. The last two sections of the chapter focus
on the panoply of transport proteins that allow nerve cells to
generate and conduct the type of electric signal called an
action potential along their entire length and to transmit
these signals to other cells, inducing a change in the electrical
properties of the receiving cells.

OUTLINE
7.1 Overview of Membrane Transport
7.2 ATP-Powered Pumps and the Intracellular Ionic
Environment
7.3 Nongated Ion Channels and the Resting
Membrane Potential
7.4 Cotransport by Symporters and Antiporters
7.5 Movement of Water
7.6 Transepithelial Transport
7.7 Voltage-Gated Ion Channels and the
Propagation of Action Potentials in Nerve Cells
7.8 Neurotransmitters and Receptor and Transport
Proteins in Signal Transmission at Synapses
245

246

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

7.1

Overview of Membrane Transport

The phospholipid bilayer, the basic structural unit of biomembranes, is essentially impermeable to most watersoluble molecules, ions, and water itself. After describing the
factors that influence the permeability of lipid membranes,
we briefly compare the three major classes of membrane
proteins that increase the permeability of biomembranes. We
then examine operation of the simplest type of transport
protein to illustrate basic features of protein-mediated transport. Finally, two common experimental systems used in
studying the functional properties of transport proteins are
described.

Few Molecules Cross Membranes
by Passive Diffusion
Gases, such as O2 and CO2, and small, uncharged polar molecules, such as urea and ethanol, can readily move by passive
(simple) diffusion across an artificial membrane composed of
pure phospholipid or of phospholipid and cholesterol (Figure
7-1). Such molecules also can diffuse across cellular membranes without the aid of transport proteins. No metabolic
energy is expended because movement is from a high to a
low concentration of the molecule, down its chemical con-

Gases

CO2, N2, O2
Small
uncharged
polar
molecules

Ethanol
O
NH2

Large
uncharged
polar
molecules

C NH2
Urea

Permeable

Permeable

H2 O
Water

Slightly
permeable

Glucose, fructose
Impermeable

Ions

K +, Mg2 +, Ca2 +, Cl −,
HCO3−, HPO42 −
Impermeable

Charged
polar
molecules

Amino acids, ATP,
glucose 6-phosphate,
proteins, nucleic acids

centration gradient. As noted in Chapter 2, such transport
reactions are spontaneous because they have a positive S
value (increase in entropy) and thus a negative G (decrease
in free energy).
The relative diffusion rate of any substance across a pure
phospholipid bilayer is proportional to its concentration gradient across the layer and to its hydrophobicity and size;
charged molecules are also affected by any electric potential
across the membrane (see below). When a phospholipid bilayer separates two aqueous compartments, membrane permeability can be easily determined by adding a small amount
of radioactive material to one compartment and measuring
its rate of appearance in the other compartment. The greater
the concentration gradient of the substance, the faster its rate
of diffusion across a bilayer.
The hydrophobicity of a substance is measured by its
partition coefficient K, the equilibrium constant for its
partition between oil and water. The higher a substance’s
partition coefficient, the more lipid-soluble it is. The first
and rate-limiting step in transport by passive diffusion is
movement of a molecule from the aqueous solution into
the hydrophobic interior of the phospholipid bilayer,
which resembles oil in its chemical properties. This is the
reason that the more hydrophobic a molecule is, the faster
it diffuses across a pure phospholipid bilayer. For example, diethylurea, with an ethyl group (CH3CH2O) attached to each nitrogen atom of urea, has a K of 0.01,
whereas urea has a K of 0.0002 (see Figure 7-1). Diethylurea, which is 50 times (0.01/0.0002) more hydrophobic
than urea, will diffuse through phospholipid bilayer membranes about 50 times faster than urea. Diethylurea also
enters cells about 50 times faster than urea. Similarly,
fatty acids with longer hydrocarbon chains are more hydrophobic than those with shorter chains and will diffuse
more rapidly across a pure phospholipid bilayer at all
concentrations.
If a transported substance carries a net charge, its movement is influenced by both its concentration gradient and the
membrane potential, the electric potential (voltage) across
the membrane. The combination of these two forces, called
the electrochemical gradient, determines the energetically favorable direction of transport of a charged molecule across
a membrane. The electric potential that exists across most
cellular membranes results from a small imbalance in the
concentration of positively and negatively charged ions on
the two sides of the membrane. We discuss how this ionic imbalance, and resulting potential, arise and are maintained in
Sections 7.2 and 7.3.

Impermeable

▲ FIGURE 7-1 Relative permeability of a pure phospholipid
bilayer to various molecules. A bilayer is permeable to small
hydrophobic molecules and small uncharged polar molecules,
slightly permeable to water and urea, and essentially
impermeable to ions and to large polar molecules.

Membrane Proteins Mediate Transport of Most
Molecules and All Ions Across Biomembranes
As is evident from Figure 7-1, very few molecules and no
ions can cross a pure phospholipid bilayer at appreciable
rates by passive diffusion. Thus transport of most molecules

7.1 • Overview of Membrane Transport
1

2

3

ATP-powered pumps
(100−103 ions/s)

Ion channels
(107−108 ions/s)

Transporters
(102−104 molecules/s)

247

Exterior

Cytosol

Closed
ATP ADP + Pi

Open

▲ FIGURE 7-2 Overview of membrane transport proteins.

Uniporter

Symporter

Antiporter

A

B

C

Gradients are indicated by triangles with the tip pointing toward
lower concentration, electrical potential, or both. 1 Pumps utilize
the energy released by ATP hydrolysis to power movement of
specific ions (red circles) or small molecules against their
electrochemical gradient. 2 Channels permit movement of
specific ions (or water) down their electrochemical gradient.
Transporters, which fall into three groups, facilitate movement

of specific small molecules or ions. Uniporters transport a single
type of molecule down its concentration gradient 3A.
Cotransport proteins (symporters, 3B , and antiporters, 3C )
catalyze the movement of one molecule against its concentration
gradient (black circles), driven by movement of one or more ions
down an electrochemical gradient (red circles). Differences in
the mechanisms of transport by these three major classes of
proteins account for their varying rates of solute movement.

into and out of cells requires the assistance of specialized
membrane proteins. Even transport of molecules with a relatively large partition coefficient (e.g., water and urea) is frequently accelerated by specific proteins because their
transport by passive diffusion usually is not sufficiently rapid
to meet cellular needs.
All transport proteins are transmembrane proteins containing multiple membrane-spanning segments that generally
are  helices. By forming a protein-lined pathway across the
membrane, transport proteins are thought to allow movement of hydrophilic substances without their coming into
contact with the hydrophobic interior of the membrane.
Here we introduce the various types of transport proteins
covered in this chapter (Figure 7-2).
ATP-powered pumps (or simply pumps) are ATPases
that use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to move ions or small
molecules across a membrane against a chemical concentration gradient or electric potential or both. This process, referred to as active transport, is an example of a coupled
chemical reaction (Chapter 2). In this case, transport of ions
or small molecules “uphill” against an electrochemical gradient, which requires energy, is coupled to the hydrolysis of
ATP, which releases energy. The overall reaction—ATP
hydrolysis and the “uphill” movement of ions or small molecules—is energetically favorable.
Channel proteins transport water or specific types of ions
and hydrophilic small molecules down their concentration or
electric potential gradients. Such protein-assisted transport
sometimes is referred to as facilitated diffusion. Channel proteins form a hydrophilic passageway across the membrane
through which multiple water molecules or ions move simultaneously, single file at a very rapid rate. Some ion chan-

nels are open much of the time; these are referred to as nongated channels. Most ion channels, however, open only in response to specific chemical or electrical signals; these are
referred to as gated channels.
Transporters (also called carriers) move a wide variety
of ions and molecules across cell membranes. Three types of
transporters have been identified. Uniporters transport a single type of molecule down its concentration gradient via facilitated diffusion. Glucose and amino acids cross the plasma
membrane into most mammalian cells with the aid of uniporters. In contrast, antiporters and symporters couple the
movement of one type of ion or molecule against its concentration gradient with the movement of one or more different ions down its concentration gradient. These proteins
often are called cotransporters, referring to their ability to
transport two different solutes simultaneously.
Like ATP pumps, cotransporters mediate coupled reactions in which an energetically unfavorable reaction
(i.e., uphill movement of molecules) is coupled to an energetically favorable reaction. Note, however, that the nature
of the energy-supplying reaction driving active transport
by these two classes of proteins differs. ATP pumps use energy from hydrolysis of ATP, whereas cotransporters use
the energy stored in an electrochemical gradient. This latter process sometimes is referred to as secondary active
transport.
Table 7-1 summarizes the four mechanisms by which
small molecules and ions are transported across cellular
membranes. In this chapter, we focus on the properties and
operation of the membrane proteins that mediate the three
protein-dependent transport mechanisms. Conformational
changes are essential to the function of all transport proteins.

248

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

TABLE 7-1

Mechanisms for Transporting Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
Transport Mechanism

Property

Passive Diffusion

Facilitated Diffusion

Active Transport

Cotransport*

Requires specific
protein









Solute transported
against its gradient









Coupled to ATP
hydrolysis









Driven by movement of
a cotransported ion
down its gradient









Examples of molecules
transported

O2, CO2, steroid
hormones, many drugs

Glucose and amino
acids (uniporters); ions
and water (channels)

Ions, small hydrophilic
molecules, lipids (ATPpowered pumps)

Glucose and amino
acids (symporters);
various ions and
sucrose (antiporters)

*

Also called secondary active transport.

ATP-powered pumps and transporters undergo a cycle of
conformational change exposing a binding site (or sites) to
one side of the membrane in one conformation and to the
other side in a second conformation. Because each such cycle
results in movement of only one (or a few) substrate molecules, these proteins are characterized by relatively slow rates
of transport ranging from 100 to 104 ions or molecules per
second (see Figure 7-2). Ion channels shuttle between a
closed state and an open state, but many ions can pass
through an open channel without any further conformational change. For this reason, channels are characterized by
very fast rates of transport, up to 108 ions per second.

Several Features Distinguish Uniport
Transport from Passive Diffusion
The protein-mediated movement of glucose and other small
hydrophilic molecules across a membrane, known as uniport
transport, exhibits the following distinguishing properties:
1. The rate of facilitated diffusion by uniporters is far higher
than passive diffusion through a pure phospholipid bilayer.
2. Because the transported molecules never enter the hydrophobic core of the phospholipid bilayer, the partition
coefficient K is irrelevant.
3. Transport occurs via a limited number of uniporter
molecules, rather than throughout the phospholipid bilayer.
Consequently, there is a maximum transport rate Vmax that
is achieved when the concentration gradient across the

membrane is very large and each uniporter is working at
its maximal rate.
4. Transport is specific. Each uniporter transports only
a single species of molecule or a single group of closely
related molecules. A measure of the affinity of a transporter
for its substrate is Km, which is the concentration of
substrate at which transport is half-maximal.
These properties also apply to transport mediated by the
other classes of proteins depicted in Figure 7-2.
One of the best-understood uniporters is the glucose
transporter GLUT1 found in the plasma membrane of
erythrocytes. The properties of GLUT1 and many other
transport proteins from mature erythrocytes have been extensively studied. These cells, which have no nucleus or other
internal organelles, are essentially “bags” of hemoglobin
containing relatively few other intracellular proteins and a
single membrane, the plasma membrane (see Figure 5-3a).
Because the erythrocyte plasma membrane can be isolated
in high purity, isolating and purifying a transport protein
from mature erythrocytes is a straightforward procedure.
Figure 7-3 shows that glucose uptake by erythrocytes and
liver cells exhibits kinetics characteristic of a simple enzymecatalyzed reaction involving a single substrate. The kinetics
of transport reactions mediated by other types of proteins are
more complicated than for uniporters. Nonetheless, all
protein-assisted transport reactions occur faster than allowed
by passive diffusion, are substrate-specific as reflected in
lower Km values for some substrates than others, and exhibit
a maximal rate (Vmax).

7.1 • Overview of Membrane Transport
Vmax

Initial rate of glucose uptake, V0

500

GLUT1 (erythrocytes)

1/2V

250

max

GLUT2 (liver cells)

Passive diffusion
0

1

2

3

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
External concentration of glucose (mM)

Km

GLUT1 Uniporter Transports Glucose
into Most Mammalian Cells
Most mammalian cells use blood glucose as the major source
of cellular energy and express GLUT1. Since the glucose concentration usually is higher in the extracellular medium
(blood in the case of erythrocytes) than in the cell, GLUT1
generally catalyzes the net import of glucose from the extracellular medium into the cell. Under this condition, Vmax is
achieved at high external glucose concentrations.
Like other uniporters, GLUT1 alternates between two
conformational states: in one, a glucose-binding site faces the
outside of the membrane; in the other, a glucose-binding site
faces the inside. Figure 7-4 depicts the sequence of events occurring during the unidirectional transport of glucose from
the cell exterior inward to the cytosol. GLUT1 also can catalyze the net export of glucose from the cytosol to the extra-

Exterior

GLUT1

249

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-3 Cellular uptake of glucose
mediated by GLUT proteins exhibits simple enzyme kinetics
and greatly exceeds the calculated rate of glucose entry
solely by passive diffusion. The initial rate of glucose uptake
(measured as micromoles per milliliter of cells per hour) in the
first few seconds is plotted against increasing glucose
concentration in the extracellular medium. In this experiment, the
initial concentration of glucose in the cells is always zero. Both
GLUT1, expressed by erythrocytes, and GLUT2, expressed by
liver cells, greatly increase the rate of glucose uptake (red and
orange curves) compared with that associated with passive
diffusion (blue curve) at all external concentrations. Like enzymecatalyzed reactions, GLUT-facilitated uptake of glucose exhibits a
maximum rate (Vmax). The Km is the concentration at which the
rate of glucose uptake is half maximal. GLUT2, with a Km of
about 20 mM, has a much lower affinity for glucose than GLUT1,
with a Km of about 1.5 mM.

cellular medium exterior when the glucose concentration is
higher inside the cell than outside.
The kinetics of the unidirectional transport of glucose
from the outside of a cell inward via GLUT1 can be described by the same type of equation used to describe a
simple enzyme-catalyzed chemical reaction. For simplicity,
let’s assume that the substrate glucose, S, is present initially only on the outside of the membrane. In this case, we
can write:

Sout  GLUT1

Km

Sout  GLUT1

Vmax

Sin  GLUT1

where Sout  GLUT1 represents GLUT1 in the outwardfacing conformation with a bound glucose. By a similar
derivation used to arrive at the Michaelis-Menten equation

Glucose

Glucose
1

Cytosol

2

Outward-facing
conformation

▲ FIGURE 7-4 Model of uniport transport by GLUT1. In
one conformation, the glucose-binding site faces outward; in the
other, the binding site faces inward. Binding of glucose to the
outward-facing site (step 1 ) triggers a conformational change
in the transporter that results in the binding site’s facing inward
toward the cytosol (step 2 ). Glucose then is released to the
inside of the cell (step 3 ). Finally, the transporter undergoes the

3

Inward-facing
conformation

4

Outward-facing
conformation

reverse conformational change, regenerating the outward-facing
binding site (step 4 ). If the concentration of glucose is higher
inside the cell than outside, the cycle will work in reverse
(step 4 n step 1 ), resulting in net movement of glucose from
inside to out. The actual conformational changes are probably
smaller than those depicted here.

250

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

in Chapter 3, we can derive the following expression for ,
the initial transport rate for S into the cell catalyzed by
GLUT1:



Vmax
Km
1
C

(7-1)

where C is the concentration of Sout (initially, the concentration of Sin  0). Vmax, the rate of transport when all molecules of GLUT1 contain a bound S, occurs at an infinitely
high Sout concentration. The lower the value of Km, the more
tightly the substrate binds to the transporter, and the greater
the transport rate at a fixed concentration of substrate.
Equation 7-1 describes the curve for glucose uptake by erythrocytes shown in Figure 7-3 as well as similar curves for
other uniporters.
For GLUT1 in the erythrocyte membrane, the Km for
glucose transport is 1.5 millimolar (mM); at this concentration roughly half the transporters with outward-facing binding sites would have a bound glucose and transport would
occur at 50 percent of the maximal rate. Since blood glucose
is normally 5 mM, the erythrocyte glucose transporter usually is functioning at 77 percent of the maximal rate, as can
be seen from Figure 7-3. GLUT1 and the very similar
GLUT3 are expressed by erythrocytes and other cells that
need to take up glucose from the blood continuously at high
rates; the rate of glucose uptake by such cells will remain
high regardless of small changes in the concentration of
blood glucose.
In addition to glucose, the isomeric sugars D-mannose
and D-galactose, which differ from D-glucose in the configuration at only one carbon atom, are transported by GLUT1
at measurable rates. However, the Km for glucose (1.5 mM)
is much lower than the Km for D-mannose (20 mM) or
D-galactose (30 mM). Thus GLUT1 is quite specific, having
a much higher affinity (indicated by a lower Km) for the normal substrate D-glucose than for other substrates.
GLUT1 accounts for 2 percent of the protein in the
plasma membrane of erythrocytes. After glucose is transported into the erythrocyte, it is rapidly phosphorylated,
forming glucose 6-phosphate, which cannot leave the cell.
Because this reaction, the first step in the metabolism of glucose (see Figure 8-4), is rapid, the intracellular concentration of glucose does not increase as glucose is taken up by the
cell. Consequently, the glucose concentration gradient across
the membrane is maintained, as is the rate of glucose entry
into the cell.

The Human Genome Encodes a Family
of Sugar-Transporting GLUT Proteins
The human genome encodes 12 proteins, GLUT1–GLUT12,
that are highly homologous in sequence, and all are thought
to contain 12 membrane-spanning  helices. Detailed studies

on GLUT1 have shown that the amino acid residues in the
transmembrane  helices are predominantly hydrophobic;
several helices, however, bear amino acid residues (e.g., serine, threonine, asparagine, and glutamine) whose side chains
can form hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl groups on glucose. These residues are thought to form the inward-facing
and outward-facing glucose-binding sites in the interior of
the protein (see Figure 7-4).
The structures of all GLUT isoforms are quite similar,
and all transport sugars. Nonetheless, their differential
expression in various cell types and isoform-specific functional properties enable different body cells to regulate glucose metabolism independently and at the same time
maintain a constant concentration of glucose in the blood.
For instance, GLUT2, expressed in liver and the insulinsecreting  cells of the pancreas, has a Km of ≈20 mM, about
13 times higher than the Km of GLUT1. As a result, when
blood glucose rises from its basal level of 5 mM to 10 mM or
so after a meal, the rate of glucose influx will almost double
in GLUT2-expressing cells, whereas it will increase only
slightly in GLUT1-expressing cells (see Figure 7-3). In liver,
the “excess” glucose brought into the cell is stored as the
polymer glycogen. In islet  cells, the rise in glucose triggers
secretion of the hormone insulin, which in turn lowers blood
glucose by increasing glucose uptake and metabolism in muscle and by inhibiting glucose production in liver.
Another GLUT isoform, GLUT4, is expressed only in fat
and muscle cells, the cells that respond to insulin by increasing their uptake of glucose, thereby removing glucose from
the blood. In the absence of insulin, GLUT4 is found in intracellular membranes, not on the plasma membrane, and
obviously is unable to facilitate glucose uptake. By a process
detailed in Chapter 15, insulin causes these GLUT4-rich internal membranes to fuse with the plasma membrane,
increasing the number of GLUT4 molecules on the cell surface and thus the rate of glucose uptake. Defects in this
process, one principal mechanism by which insulin lowers
blood glucose, lead to diabetes, a disease marked by continuously high blood glucose.
In contrast to GLUT1–GLUT4, which all transport glucose at physiological concentrations, GLUT5 transports fructose. The properties of other members of the GLUT family
have not yet been studied in detail.

Transport Proteins Can Be Enriched Within
Artificial Membranes and Cells
Although transport proteins can be isolated from membranes
and purified, the functional properties of these proteins can
be studied only when they are associated with a membrane.
Most cellular membranes contain many different types of
transport proteins but a relatively low concentration of any
particular one, making functional studies of a single protein
difficult. To facilitate such studies, researchers use two ap-

7.1 • Overview of Membrane Transport
Other
transport protein

GLUT1

Intact
erythrocyte
membrane

Disrupt membrane
Solubilize protein with
detergents
Detergent
molecules

251

a cell type that normally does not express it. The difference
in transport of a substance by the transfected and by control
nontransfected cells will be due to the expressed transport
protein. In these systems, the functional properties of the
various membrane proteins can be examined without
ambiguity.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.1
Overview of Membrane Transport
The plasma membrane regulates the traffic of molecules
into and out of the cell.

■

With the exception of gases (e.g., O2 and CO2) and small
hydrophobic molecules, most molecules cannot diffuse
across the phospholipid bilayer at rates sufficient to meet
cellular needs.

■

Phospholipids

Three classes of transmembrane proteins mediate transport of ions, sugars, amino acids, and other metabolites
across cell membranes: ATP-powered pumps, channels,
and transporters (see Figure 7-2).

■

Mix with phospholipids

Dialyze or dilute
to remove detergent
Glucose

In active transport, a transport protein couples movement of a substrate against its concentration gradient to
ATP hydrolysis.

■

In facilitated diffusion, a transport protein assists in the
movement of a specific substrate (molecule or ion) down
its concentration gradient.

■

In secondary active transport, or cotransport, a transport protein couples movement of a substrate against
its concentration gradient to the movement of a second
substrate down its concentration gradient (see Table 7-1).

■

Protein-catalyzed transport of a solute across a membrane occurs much faster than passive diffusion, exhibits
a Vmax when the limited number of transporter molecules
are saturated with substrate, and is highly specific for substrate (see Figure 7-3).
■

Liposome with
glucose transport protein

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-5 Liposomes containing
a single type of transport protein are very useful in
studying functional properties of transport proteins.
Here, all the integral proteins of the erythrocyte membrane
are solubilized by a nonionic detergent, such as octylglucoside.
The glucose uniporter GLUT1 can be purified by chromatography
on a column containing a specific monoclonal antibody and then
incorporated into liposomes made of pure phospholipids.

proaches for enriching a transport protein of interest so that
it predominates in the membrane.
In one common approach, a specific transport protein
is extracted and purified; the purified protein then is reincorporated into pure phospholipid bilayer membranes, such
as liposomes (Figure 7-5). Alternatively, the gene encoding a
specific transport protein can be expressed at high levels in

Uniport proteins, such as the glucose transporters
(GLUTs), are thought to shuttle between two conformational states, one in which the substrate-binding site faces
outward and one in which the binding site faces inward
(see Figure 7-4).

■

All members of the GLUT protein family transport sugars and have similar structures. Differences in their Km values, expression in different cell types, and substrate specificities are important for proper sugar metabolism in the
body.
■

Two common experimental systems for studying the
functions of transport proteins are liposomes containing
a purified transport protein (see Figure 7-5) and cells
transfected with the gene encoding a particular transport
protein.

■

252

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

Different Classes of Pumps Exhibit Characteristic
Structural and Functional Properties

7.2 ATP-Powered Pumps and
the Intracellular Ionic Environment
We turn now to the ATP-powered pumps, which transport ions and various small molecules against their concentration gradients. All ATP-powered pumps are
transmembrane proteins with one or more binding sites
for ATP located on the cytosolic face of the membrane.
Although these proteins commonly are called ATPases,
they normally do not hydrolyze ATP into ADP and Pi unless ions or other molecules are simultaneously transported. Because of this tight coupling between ATP
hydrolysis and transport, the energy stored in the phosphoanhydride bond is not dissipated but rather used to
move ions or other molecules uphill against an electrochemical gradient.

The general structures of the four classes of ATP-powered
pumps are depicted in Figure 7-6, with specific examples in
each class listed below. Note that the members of three
classes (P, F, and V) transport ions only, whereas members
of the ABC superfamily primarily transport small molecules.
All P-class ion pumps possess two identical catalytic 
subunits that contain an ATP-binding site. Most also have
two smaller  subunits that usually have regulatory functions. During the transport process, at least one of the  subunits is phosphorylated (hence the name “P” class), and the
transported ions are thought to move through the phosphorylated subunit. The sequence around the phosphorylated
residue is homologous in different pumps. This class includes
the Na/K ATPase in the plasma membrane, which main-

2H+

Exoplasmic
face

4H+

α
β

c c c

a

a

V0

ccccc

E

P
ATP

ADP

G2

2H+

D b

H
A
B

B

V1

C
ATP

b

A
A

T

ε

F
Cytosolic
face

F0

ADP + Pi

b

α
β

δ
ADP + Pi

4H+

γ

T

A

A

α
α

β

F1

ATP

ADP + Pi

ATP

P-class pumps

V-class proton pumps

F-class proton pumps

ABC superfamily

Plasma membrane of plants, fungi,
bacteria (H+ pump)

Vacuolar membranes in
plants, yeast, other fungi

Bacterial plasma
membrane

Plasma membrane of higher
eukaryotes (Na+/K+ pump)

Endosomal and lysosmal
membranes in animal
cells

Inner mitochondrial
membrane

Bacterial plasma
membranes (amino acid,
sugar, and peptide
transporters)

Apical plasma membrane of
mammalian stomach (H+/K+ pump)
Plasma membrane of all eukaryotic
cells (Ca2+ pump)

Plasma membrane of
osteoclasts and some
kidney tubule cells

Thylakoid membrane
of chloroplast

Mammalian plasma
membranes (transporters
of phospholipids, small
lipophilic drugs, cholesterol,
other small molecules)

Sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane
in muscle cells (Ca2+ pump)

▲ FIGURE 7-6 The four classes of ATP-powered transport
proteins. The location of specific pumps are indicated below
each class. P-class pumps are composed of a catalytic  subunit,
which becomes phosphorylated as part of the transport cycle.
A  subunit, present in some of these pumps, may regulate
transport. F-class and V-class pumps do not form phosphoprotein
intermediates and transport only protons. Their structures are
similar and contain similar proteins, but none of their subunits
are related to those of P-class pumps. V-class pumps couple
ATP hydrolysis to transport of protons against a concentration
gradient, whereas F-class pumps normally operate in the reverse

direction to utilize energy in a proton concentration or electrochemical gradient to synthesize ATP. All members of the large
ABC superfamily of proteins contain two transmembrane (T)
domains and two cytosolic ATP-binding (A) domains, which
couple ATP hydrolysis to solute movement. These core domains
are present as separate subunits in some ABC proteins (depicted
here), but are fused into a single polypeptide in other ABC
proteins. [See T. Nishi and M. Forgac, 2002, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
3:94; G. Chang and C. Roth, 2001, Science 293:1793; C. Toyoshima et al.,
2000, Nature 405:647; D. McIntosh, 2000, Nature Struc. Biol. 7:532; and
T. Elston, H. Wang, and G. Oster, 1998, Nature 391:510.]

253

7.2 • ATP-Powered Pumps and the Intracellular lonic Environment

tains the low cytosolic Na and high cytosolic K concentrations typical of animal cells. Certain Ca2 ATPases pump
Ca2 ions out of the cytosol into the external medium; others pump Ca2 from the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum or into the specialized ER called the sarcoplasmic
reticulum, which is found in muscle cells. Another member
of the P class, found in acid-secreting cells of the mammalian
stomach, transports protons (H ions) out of and K ions
into the cell. The H pump that generates and maintains the
membrane electric potential in plant, fungal, and bacterial
cells also belongs to this class.
The structures of F-class and V-class ion pumps are similar to one another but unrelated to and more complicated
than P-class pumps. F- and V-class pumps contain several
different transmembrane and cytosolic subunits. All known
V and F pumps transport only protons, in a process that does
not involve a phosphoprotein intermediate. V-class pumps
generally function to maintain the low pH of plant vacuoles
and of lysosomes and other acidic vesicles in animal cells by
pumping protons from the cytosolic to the exoplasmic face
of the membrane against a proton electrochemical gradient.
F-class pumps are found in bacterial plasma membranes and
in mitochondria and chloroplasts. In contrast to V pumps,
they generally function to power the synthesis of ATP from
ADP and Pi by movement of protons from the exoplasmic
to the cytosolic face of the membrane down the proton electrochemical gradient. Because of their importance in ATP
synthesis in chloroplasts and mitochondria, F-class proton
pumps, commonly called ATP synthases, are treated separately in Chapter 8.
The final class of ATP-powered pumps contains more
members and is more diverse than the other classes. Referred
to as the ABC (ATP-binding cassette) superfamily, this class
includes several hundred different transport proteins found
in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans. Each ABC
protein is specific for a single substrate or group of related
substrates, which may be ions, sugars, amino acids, phospholipids, peptides, polysaccharides, or even proteins. All
ABC transport proteins share a structural organization consisting of four “core” domains: two transmembrane (T)
domains, forming the passageway through which transported molecules cross the membrane, and two cytosolic
ATP-binding (A) domains. In some ABC proteins, mostly in
bacteria, the core domains are present in four separate
polypeptides; in others, the core domains are fused into one
or two multidomain polypeptides.

ATP-Powered Ion Pumps Generate and Maintain
Ionic Gradients Across Cellular Membranes
The specific ionic composition of the cytosol usually differs
greatly from that of the surrounding extracellular fluid. In
virtually all cells—including microbial, plant, and animal
cells—the cytosolic pH is kept near 7.2 regardless of the extracellular pH. Also, the cytosolic concentration of K is

much higher than that of Na. In addition, in both invertebrates and vertebrates, the concentration of K is 20–40
times higher in cells than in the blood, while the concentration of Na is 8–12 times lower in cells than in the
blood (Table 7-2). Some Ca2 in the cytosol is bound to the
negatively charged groups in ATP and other molecules, but
it is the concentration of free, unbound Ca2 that is critical to its functions in signaling pathways and muscle contraction. The concentration of free Ca2 in the cytosol is
generally less than 0.2 micromolar (2  107 M), a thousand or more times lower than that in the blood. Plant cells
and many microorganisms maintain similarly high cytosolic concentrations of K and low concentrations of Ca2
and Na even if the cells are cultured in very dilute salt
solutions.
The ion pumps discussed in this section are largely responsible for establishing and maintaining the usual ionic
gradients across the plasma and intracellular membranes. In
carrying out this task, cells expend considerable energy. For

TABLE 7-2

Typical Intracellular and Extracellular
Ion Concentrations

Ion

Cell (mM)

Blood (mM)

SQUID AXON
(INVERTEBRATE)*
K

400

20

Na

50

440

Cl

40–150

560

Ca2

0.0003

10

X†

300–400



5–10

MAMMALIAN CELL
(VERTEBRATE)
K

139

4

Na

12

145

4

116

HCO3

12

29

X

138

9

Mg2

0.8

1.5

Cl



2

Ca
*

0.0002

1.8

The large nerve axon of the squid has been widely used in studies of
the mechanism of conduction of electric impulses.
† 
X represents proteins, which have a net negative charge at the neutral pH of blood and cells.

254

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

example, up to 25 percent of the ATP produced by nerve and
kidney cells is used for ion transport, and human erythrocytes consume up to 50 percent of their available ATP for
this purpose; in both cases, most of this ATP is used to power
the Na/K pump.
In cells treated with poisons that inhibit the aerobic production of ATP (e.g., 2,4-dinitrophenol in aerobic cells), the
ion concentrations inside the cell gradually approach those
of the exterior environment as ions move through channels
in the plasma membrane down their electrochemical gradients. Eventually treated cells die: partly because protein synthesis requires a high concentration of K ions and partly
because in the absence of a Na gradient across the cell
membrane, a cell cannot import certain nutrients such as
amino acids. Studies on the effects of such poisons provided
early evidence for the existence of ion pumps.

Muscle Ca2 ATPase Pumps Ca2 Ions from
the Cytosol into the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum
In skeletal muscle cells, Ca2 ions are concentrated and
stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR); release of stored
Ca2 ions from the SR lumen into the cytosol causes con-

SR lumen

Ca2+ binding
sites

E1

Ca2+

traction, as discussed in Chapter 19. A P-class Ca2 ATPase
located in the SR membrane of skeletal muscle pumps Ca2
from the cytosol into the lumen of the SR, thereby inducing muscle relaxation. Because this muscle calcium pump
constitutes more than 80 percent of the integral protein in
SR membranes, it is easily purified and has been studied
extensively.
In the cytosol of muscle cells, the free Ca2 concentration
ranges from 107 M (resting cells) to more than 106 M
(contracting cells), whereas the total Ca2 concentration in
the SR lumen can be as high as 102 M. However, two soluble proteins in the lumen of SR vesicles bind Ca2 and serve
as a reservoir for intracellular Ca2, thereby reducing the
concentration of free Ca2 ions in the SR vesicles and consequently the energy needed to pump Ca2 ions into them from
the cytosol. The activity of the muscle Ca2 ATPase increases
as the free Ca2 concentration in the cytosol rises. Thus in
skeletal muscle cells, the calcium pump in the SR membrane
can supplement the activity of a similar Ca2 pump located in
the plasma membrane to assure that the cytosolic concentration of free Ca2 in resting muscle remains below 1 M.
The current model for the mechanism of action of the
Ca2 ATPase in the SR membrane involves two conformational states of the protein termed E1 and E2. Coupling of

E1

E1

Calcium and
ATP binding

Phosphorylation
of aspartate

1

2

Cytosol
ATP
Phosphorylated
aspartate

P

Ca2+
ATP
binding
site

6

ATP
Conformational
change

ADP
3

Dephosphorylation

Calcium
release

5

4

Pi
E2

▲ FIGURE 7-7 Operational model of the Ca2 ATPase in the
SR membrane of skeletal muscle cells. Only one of the two
catalytic  subunits of this P-class pump is depicted. E1 and E2
are alternative conformations of the protein in which the Ca2binding sites are accessible to the cytosolic and exoplasmic
faces, respectively. An ordered sequence of steps ( 1 – 6), as
diagrammed here, is essential for coupling ATP hydrolysis and
the transport of Ca2 ions across the membrane. In the figure,

P

P

E2

E2

Conformational
change

~P indicates a high-energy acyl phosphate bond; –P indicates a
low-energy phosphoester bond. Because the affinity of Ca2 for
the cytosolic-facing binding sites in E1 is a thousandfold greater
than the affinity of Ca2 for the exoplasmic-facing sites in E2,
this pump transports Ca2 unidirectionally from the cytosol to
the SR lumen. See the text and Figure 7-8 for more details. [See
C. Toyoshima et al., 2000, Nature 405:647; P. Zhang et al., 1998, Nature
392:835; and W. P. Jencks, 1989, J. Biol. Chem. 264:18855.]

7.2 • ATP-Powered Pumps and the Intracellular lonic Environment
(a) E1 state

255

(b) E2 state
Ca2+

SR lumen

Membrane

Cytosol

COO−

NH3+

Phosphorylation
site

Actuator
domain
Phosphorylation
domain

ATP site

Nucleotidebinding domain

▲ FIGURE 7-8 Structure of the catalytic  subunit of the
muscle Ca2 ATPase. (a) Three-dimensional models of the protein
in the E1 state based on the structure determined by x-ray
crystallography. There are 10 transmembrane  helices, four of
which (green) contain residues that site-specific mutagenesis
studies have identified as participating in Ca2 binding. The cytosolic
segment forms three domains: the nucleotide-binding domain
(orange), the phosphorylation domain (yellow), and the actuator
domain (pink) that connects two of the membrane-spanning helices.
(b) Hypothetical model of the pump in the E2 state, based on a

lower-resolution structure determined by electron microscopy of
frozen crystals of the pure protein. Note the differences between
the E1 and E2 states in the conformations of the nucleotidebinding and actuator domains; these changes probably power the
conformational changes of the membrane-spanning  helices (green)
that constitute the Ca2-binding sites, converting them from one in
which the Ca2-binding sites are accessible to the cytosolic face
(E1 state) to one in which they are accessible to the exoplasmic
face (E2 state). [Adapted from C. Xu, 2002, J. Mol. Biol. 316:201, and

ATP hydrolysis with ion pumping involves several steps that
must occur in a defined order, as shown in Figure 7-7. When
the protein is in the E1 conformation, two Ca2 ions bind
to two high-affinity binding sites accessible from the cytosolic side and an ATP binds to a site on the cytosolic surface
(step 1). The bound ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP in a reaction
that requires Mg2, and the liberated phosphate is transferred to a specific aspartate residue in the protein, forming
the high-energy acyl phosphate bond denoted by E1 ~ P (step
2). The protein then undergoes a conformational change that
generates E2, which has two low-affinity Ca2-binding sites
accessible to the SR lumen (step 3). The free energy of hydrolysis of the aspartyl-phosphate bond in E1 ~ P is greater
than that in E2P, and this reduction in free energy of the
aspartyl-phosphate bond can be said to power the E1 n E2
conformational change. The Ca2 ions spontaneously dissociate from the low-affinity sites to enter the SR lumen (step
4), following which the aspartyl-phosphate bond is hydrolyzed (step 5). Dephosphorylation powers the E2 n E1
conformational change (step 6), and E1 is ready to transport
two more Ca2 ions.

Much evidence supports the model depicted in Figure
7-7. For instance, the muscle calcium pump has been isolated
with phosphate linked to an aspartate residue, and spectroscopic studies have detected slight alterations in protein conformation during the E1 n E2 conversion. The 10
membrane-spanning  helices in the catalytic subunit are
thought to form the passageway through which Ca2 ions
move, and mutagenesis studies have identified amino acids
in four of these helices that are thought to form the two
Ca2-binding sites (Figure 7-8). Cryoelectron microscopy
and x-ray crystallography of the protein in different conformational states also revealed that the bulk of the catalytic
subunit consists of cytosolic globular domains that are involved in ATP binding, phosphorylation of aspartate, and
transduction of the energy released by hydrolysis of the aspartyl phosphate into conformational changes in the protein.
These domains are connected by a “stalk” to the membraneembedded domain.
All P-class ion pumps, regardless of which ion they transport, are phosphorylated on a highly conserved aspartate
residue during the transport process. Thus the operational

D. McIntosh, 2000, Nature Struc. Biol. 7:532.]

256

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

model in Figure 7-7 is generally applicable to all these ATPpowered ion pumps. In addition, the catalytic  subunits of
all the P pumps examined to date have a similar molecular
weight and, as deduced from their amino acid sequences derived from cDNA clones, have a similar arrangement of
transmembrane  helices (see Figure 7-8). These findings
strongly suggest that all these proteins evolved from a common precursor, although they now transport different ions.

The activity of plasma-membrane Ca2 ATPases is regulated by calmodulin, a cytosolic Ca2-binding protein (see
Figure 3-28). A rise in cytosolic Ca2 induces the binding of
Ca2 ions to calmodulin, which triggers allosteric activation
of the Ca2 ATPase. As a result, the export of Ca2 ions
from the cell accelerates, quickly restoring the low concentration of free cytosolic Ca2 characteristic of the resting
cell.

Calmodulin-Mediated Activation
of Plasma-Membrane Ca2 ATPase
Leads to Rapid Ca2 Export

Na/K ATPase Maintains the Intracellular
Na and K Concentrations in Animal Cells
A second important P-class ion pump present in the plasma
membrane of all animal cells is the Na/K ATPase. This
ion pump is a tetramer of subunit composition 22. (Classic
Experiment 7.1 describes the discovery of this enzyme.) The
small, glycosylated  polypeptide helps newly synthesized 
subunits to fold properly in the endoplasmic reticulum but
apparently is not involved directly in ion pumping. The
amino acid sequence and predicted secondary structure of
the catalytic  subunit are very similar to those of the muscle SR Ca2 ATPase (see Figure 7-8). In particular, the
Na/K ATPase has a stalk on the cytosolic face that links

As we explain in Chapter 13, small increases in the concentration of free Ca2 ions in the cytosol trigger a variety of
cellular responses. In order for Ca2 to function in intracellular signaling, the concentration of Ca2 ions free in the cytosol usually must be kept below 0.1 – 0.2 M. Animal,
yeast, and probably plant cells express plasma-membrane
Ca2 ATPases that transport Ca2 out of the cell against its
electrochemical gradient. The catalytic  subunit of these Pclass pumps is similar in structure and sequence to the  subunit of the muscle SR Ca2 pump.

E1
α

Exterior
Na+

Overview Animation: Biological Energy Interconversions

β

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

E1

Na+ and
ATP binding

Phosphorylation
of aspartate

E1

Conformational
change

2 K+

3

2

1

E2

K+
Cytosol
ATP
3 Na+

P

P

ATP

ADP
Na+ release
K+ binding

7
K+ release

Dephosphorylation
and conformational
change

6

5

P

Pi
E1

▲ FIGURE 7-9 Operational model of the Na/K
ATPase in the plasma membrane. Only one of the two
catalytic  subunits of this P-class pump is depicted. It is
not known whether just one or both subunits in a single
ATPase molecule transport ions. Ion pumping by the
Na/K ATPase involves phosphorylation, dephosphorylation,
and conformational changes similar to those in the muscle

4

E1

E2

Ca2 ATPase (see Figure 7-7). In this case, hydrolysis of the E2–P
intermediate powers the E2 n E1 conformational change and
concomitant transport of two ions (K) inward. Na ions are
indicated by red circles; K ions, by purple squares; high-energy
acyl phosphate bond, by ~P; low-energy phosphoester bond, by
–P. [See K. Sweadner and C. Donnet, 2001, Biochem. J. 356:6875, for
details of the structure of the  subunit.]

7.2 • ATP-Powered Pumps and the Intracellular lonic Environment

domains containing the ATP-binding site and the phosphorylated aspartate to the membrane-embedded domain. The
overall transport process moves three Na ions out of and
two K ions into the cell per ATP molecule hydrolyzed.
The mechanism of action of the Na/K ATPase, outlined in Figure 7-9, is similar to that of the muscle calcium
pump, except that ions are pumped in both directions
across the membrane. In its E1 conformation, the Na/K
ATPase has three high-affinity Na-binding sites and two
low-affinity K-binding sites accessible to the cytosolic surface of the protein. The Km for binding of Na to these cytosolic sites is 0.6 mM, a value considerably lower than the
intracellular Na concentration of ≈12 mM; as a result,
Na ions normally will fully occupy these sites. Conversely,
the affinity of the cytosolic K-binding sites is low enough
that K ions, transported inward through the protein, dissociate from E1 into the cytosol despite the high intracellular K concentration. During the E1 n E2 transition, the
three bound Na ions become accessible to the exoplasmic
face, and simultaneously the affinity of the three Nabinding sites becomes reduced. The three Na ions,
transported outward through the protein and now bound
to the low-affinity Na sites exposed to the exoplasmic
face, dissociate one at a time into the extracellular medium
despite the high extracellular Na concentration. Transition
to the E2 conformation also generates two high-affinity K
sites accessible to the exoplasmic face. Because the Km for K
binding to these sites (0.2 mM) is lower than the extracellular K concentration (4 mM), these sites will fill with K
ions. Similarly, during the E2 n E1 transition, the two
bound K ions are transported inward and then released into
the cytosol.
Certain drugs (e.g., ouabain and digoxin) bind to the exoplasmic domain of the plasma-membrane Na/K ATPase
and specifically inhibit its ATPase activity. The resulting disruption in the Na/K balance of cells is strong evidence for
the critical role of this ion pump in maintaining the normal
K and Na ion concentration gradients.

V-Class H ATPases Pump Protons Across
Lysosomal and Vacuolar Membranes
All V-class ATPases transport only H ions. These proton
pumps, present in the membranes of lysosomes, endosomes,
and plant vacuoles, function to acidify the lumen of these organelles. The pH of the lysosomal lumen can be measured
precisely in living cells by use of particles labeled with a pHsensitive fluorescent dye. After these particles are phagocytosed by cells and transferred to lysosomes, the lysosomal pH
can be calculated from the spectrum of the fluorescence emitted. Maintenance of the 100-fold or more proton gradient
between the lysosomal lumen (pH ≈4.5–5.0) and the cytosol
(pH ≈7.0) depends on ATP production by the cell.
The ATP-powered proton pumps in lysosomal and vacuolar membranes have been isolated, purified, and incor-

257

porated into liposomes. As illustrated in Figure 7-6 (center), these V-class proton pumps contain two discrete domains: a cytosolic hydrophilic domain (V1) and a
transmembrane domain (V0) with multiple subunits in
each domain. Binding and hydrolysis of ATP by the B subunits in V1 provide the energy for pumping of H ions
through the proton-conducting channel formed by the c
and a subunits in V0. Unlike P-class ion pumps, V-class
proton pumps are not phosphorylated and dephosphorylated during proton transport. The structurally similar Fclass proton pumps, which we describe in the next chapter,
normally operate in the “reverse” direction to generate
ATP rather than pump protons and their mechanism of action is understood in great detail.
Pumping of relatively few protons is required to acidify
an intracellular vesicle. To understand why, recall that a solution of pH 4 has a H ion concentration of 104 moles per
liter, or 107 moles of H ions per milliliter. Since there are
6.02  1023 molecules per mole (Avogadro’s number), then
a milliliter of a pH 4 solution contains 6.02  1016 H ions.
Thus at pH 4, a primary spherical lysosome with a volume of
4.18  1015 ml (diameter of 0.2 m) will contain just 252
protons.
By themselves ATP-powered proton pumps cannot acidify the lumen of an organelle (or the extracellular space) because these pumps are electrogenic; that is, a net movement
of electric charge occurs during transport. Pumping of just a
few protons causes a buildup of positively charged H ions
on the exoplasmic (inside) face of the organelle membrane.
For each H pumped across, a negative ion (e.g., OH or
Cl) will be “left behind” on the cytosolic face, causing a
buildup of negatively charged ions there. These oppositely
charged ions attract each other on opposite faces of the
membrane, generating a charge separation, or electric potential, across the membrane. As more and more protons are
pumped, the excess of positive charges on the exoplasmic
face repels other H ions, soon preventing pumping of additional protons long before a significant transmembrane H
concentration gradient had been established (Figure 7-10a).
In fact, this is the way that P-class H pumps generate a
cytosol-negative potential across plant and yeast plasma
membranes.
In order for an organelle lumen or an extracellular space
(e.g., the lumen of the stomach) to become acidic, movement
of protons must be accompanied either by (1) movement of
an equal number of anions (e.g., Cl) in the same direction
or by (2) movement of equal numbers of a different cation
in the opposite direction. The first process occurs in lysosomes and plant vacuoles whose membranes contain V-class
H ATPases and anion channels through which accompanying Cl ions move (Figure 7-10b). The second process occurs in the lining of the stomach, which contains a P-class
H/K ATPase that is not electrogenic and pumps one H
outward and one K inward. Operation of this pump is discussed later in the chapter.

258

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
ATP ADP + Pi

(a)

Cl− H+
Cytosol

Lumen
H+

+

Neutral pH

+
+ + _ _
+
+
_ _
_

(b)

−

Electric
potential

ATP ADP + Pi
Cl−

H+

Cl−

−
H+ Cl
Acidic pH

H+
H+

Cl−
H+

No electric
potential

Cl−

▲ FIGURE 7-10 Effect of proton pumping by V-class ion
pumps on H concentration gradients and electric potential
gradients across cellular membranes. (a) If an intracellular
organelle contains only V-class pumps, proton pumping
generates an electric potential across the membrane, luminal-side
positive, but no significant change in the intraluminal pH. (b) If the
organelle membrane also contains Cl channels, anions
passively follow the pumped protons, resulting in an accumulation
of H ions (low luminal pH) but no electric potential across the
membrane.

Bacterial Permeases Are ABC Proteins
That Import a Variety of Nutrients
from the Environment
As noted earlier, all members of the very large and diverse
ABC superfamily of transport proteins contain two transmembrane (T) domains and two cytosolic ATP-binding (A)
domains (see Figure 7-6). The T domains, each built of six
membrane-spanning  helices, form the pathway through
which the transported substance (substrate) crosses the membrane and determine the substrate specificity of each ABC
protein. The sequences of the A domains are ≈30–40 percent
homologous in all members of this superfamily, indicating a
common evolutionary origin. Some ABC proteins also contain an additional exoplasmic substrate-binding subunit or
regulatory subunit.
The plasma membrane of many bacteria contains numerous permeases that belong to the ABC superfamily. These
proteins use the energy released by hydrolysis of ATP to
transport specific amino acids, sugars, vitamins, or even peptides into the cell. Since bacteria frequently grow in soil or
pond water where the concentration of nutrients is low, these

ABC transport proteins enable the cells to import nutrients
against substantial concentration gradients. Bacterial permeases generally are inducible; that is, the quantity of a
transport protein in the cell membrane is regulated by both
the concentration of the nutrient in the medium and the
metabolic needs of the cell.
In E. coli histidine permease, a typical bacterial ABC protein, the two transmembrane domains and two cytosolic
ATP-binding domains are formed by four separate subunits.
In gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli, the outer membrane contains porins that render them highly permeable to
most small molecules (see Figure 5-14). A soluble histidinebinding protein is located in the periplasmic space between
the outer membrane and plasma membrane. This soluble
protein binds histidine tightly and directs it to the T subunits
of the permease, through which histidine crosses the plasma
membrane powered by ATP hydrolysis. Mutant E. coli cells
that are defective in any of the histidine permease subunits or
the soluble binding protein are unable to transport histidine
into the cell, but are able to transport other amino acids
whose uptake is facilitated by other transport proteins. Such
genetic analyses provide strong evidence that histidine permease and similar ABC proteins function to transport various solutes into bacterial cells.

About 50 ABC Small-Molecule Pumps
Are Known in Mammals
Discovery of the first eukaryotic ABC protein to be recognized came from studies on tumor cells and cultured cells that
exhibited resistance to several drugs with unrelated chemical
structures. Such cells eventually were shown to express elevated levels of a multidrug-resistance (MDR) transport protein known as MDR1. This protein uses the energy derived
from ATP hydrolysis to export a large variety of drugs from
the cytosol to the extracellular medium. The Mdr1 gene is
frequently amplified in multidrug-resistant cells, resulting in a
large overproduction of the MDR1 protein.
Most drugs transported by MDR1 are small hydrophobic
molecules that diffuse from the medium across the plasma
membrane, unaided by transport proteins, into the cell cytosol, where they block various cellular functions. Two
such drugs are colchicine and vinblastine, which block assembly of microtubules. ATP-powered export of such drugs
by MDR1 reduces their concentration in the cytosol. As a result, a much higher extracellular drug concentration is required to kill cells that express MDR1 than those that do
not. That MDR1 is an ATP-powered small-molecule pump
has been demonstrated with liposomes containing the purified protein (see Figure 7-5). The ATPase activity of these
liposomes is enhanced by different drugs in a dose-dependent
manner corresponding to their ability to be transported by
MDR1.
About 50 different mammalian ABC transport proteins
are now recognized (see Table 18-2). These are expressed in

7.2 • ATP-Powered Pumps and the Intracellular lonic Environment

abundance in the liver, intestines, and kidney—sites where
natural toxic and waste products are removed from the
body. Substrates for these ABC proteins include sugars,
amino acids, cholesterol, peptides, proteins, toxins, and
xenobiotics. Thus the normal function of MDR1 most
likely is to transport various natural and metabolic toxins
into the bile, intestinal lumen, or forming urine. During the
course of its evolution, MDR1 appears to have acquired the
ability to transport drugs whose structures are similar to
those of these endogenous toxins. Tumors derived from
MDR-expressing cell types, such as hepatomas (liver cancers), frequently are resistant to virtually all chemotherapeutic agents and thus difficult to treat, presumably because the tumors exhibit increased expression of the MDR1
or the related MDR2.
Several human genetic diseases are associated with
defective ABC proteins. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), for instance, is characterized by a
defective ABC transport protein (ABCD1) that is localized to
peroxisomal membranes. This protein normally regulates
import of very long chain fatty acids into peroxisomes,
where they undergo oxidation; in its absence these fatty
acids accumulate in the cytosol and cause cellular damage.
Tangiers disease is marked by a deficiency of the plasmamembrane ABC protein (ABCA1) that transports phospholipids and possibly cholesterol (Chapter 18).
A final example is cystic fibrosis (CF), which is caused
by a mutation in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane regulator (CFTR). This Cl transport protein is expressed in the apical plasma membranes of epithelial cells in the lung, sweat glands, pancreas, and other
tissues. For instance, CFTR protein is important for resorption of Cl into cells of sweat glands, and babies with
cystic fibrosis, if licked, often taste “salty.” An increase in
cyclic AMP (cAMP), a small intracellular signaling molecule, causes phosphorylation of CFTR and stimulates Cl
transport by such cells from normal individuals, but not
from CF individuals who have a defective CFTR protein.
(The role of cAMP in numerous signaling pathways is covered in Chapter 13.) The sequence and predicted structure
of the CFTR protein, based on analysis of the cloned gene,
are very similar to those of MDR1 protein except for the
presence of an additional domain, the regulatory (R) domain, on the cytosolic face. Moreover, the Cl-transport
activity of CFTR protein is enhanced by the binding of
ATP. Given its similarity to other ABC proteins, CFTR
may also function as an ATP-powered pump of some still
unidentified molecule. ❚

ABC Proteins That Transport Lipid-Soluble
Substrates May Operate by a Flippase Mechanism
The substrates of mammalian MDR1 are primarily planar,
lipid-soluble molecules with one or more positive charges;

259

Chamber
Exterior
Exoplasmic
leaflet

Membrane
Cytosolic
leaflet

NH3+

Cytosol

COO−
ATP-binding domain
ATP-binding domain

▲ FIGURE 7-11 Structural model of E. coli lipid flippase,
an ABC protein homologous to mammalian MDR1. The
V-shaped protein encloses a “chamber” within the bilayer where
it is hypothesized that bound substrates are flipped across the
membrane, as depicted in Figure 7-12. Each identical subunit in
this homodimeric protein has one transmembrane domain,
comprising six  helices, and one cytosolic domain where ATP
binding occurs. [Adapted from G. Chang and C. Roth, 2001, Science
293:1793.]

they all compete with one another for transport by MDR1,
suggesting that they bind to the same site or sites on the protein. In contrast to bacterial ABC proteins, all four domains
of MDR1 are fused into a single 170,000-MW protein. The
recently determined three-dimensional structure of a homologous E. coli lipid-transport protein reveals that the molecule is V shaped, with the apex in the membrane and the
arms containing the ATP-binding sites protruding into the
cytosol (Figure 7-11).
Although the mechanism of transport by MDR1 and
similar ABC proteins has not been definitively demonstrated,
a likely candidate is the flippase model depicted in Figure
7-12. According to this model, MDR1 “flips” a charged substrate molecule from the cytosolic to the exoplasmic leaflet,
an energetically unfavorable reaction powered by the coupled ATPase activity of the protein. Support for the flippase
model of transport by MDR1 comes from MDR2, a homologous protein present in the region of the liver cell plasma
membrane that faces the bile duct. As detailed in Chapter 18,
MDR2 has been shown to flip phospholipids from the
cytosolic-facing leaflet of the plasma membrane to the exoplasmic leaflet, thereby generating an excess of phospholipids in the exoplasmic leaflet; these phospholipids then
peel off into the bile duct and form an essential part of the
bile.

260

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

Exterior
5
4

 FIGURE 7-12 Flippase model of transport by MDR1
and similar ABC proteins. Step 1 : The hydrophobic portion (black)
of a substrate molecule moves spontaneously from the cytosol
into the cytosolic-facing leaflet of the lipid bilayer, while the
charged end (red) remains in the cytosol. Step 2 : The substrate
diffuses laterally until encountering and binding to a site on the
MDR1 protein within the bilayer. Step 3 : The protein then “flips”
the charged substrate molecule into the exoplasmic leaflet, an
energetically unfavorable reaction powered by the coupled
hydrolysis of ATP by the cytosolic domain. Steps 4 and 5 : Once
in the exoplasmic face, the substrate again can diffuse laterally in
the membrane and ultimately moves into the aqueous phase
on the outside of the cell. [Adapted from P. Borst, N. Zelcer, and

3
2
1
Hydrophobic end

Charged end

ATP
Cytosol
ADP + Pi

A. van Helvoort, 2000, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1486:128.]

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.2
ATP-Powered Pumps and the Intracellular Ionic
Environment
■ Four classes of transmembrane proteins couple the energyreleasing hydrolysis of ATP with the energy-requiring transport of substances against their concentration gradient: P-,
V-, and F-class pumps and ABC proteins (see Figure 7-6).

The combined action of P-class Na/K ATPases in the
plasma membrane and homologous Ca2 ATPases in the
plasma membrane or sarcoplasmic reticulum creates the
usual ion milieu of animal cells: high K, low Ca2, and
low Na in the cytosol; low K, high Ca2, and high Na
in the extracellular fluid.
■

In P-class pumps, phosphorylation of the  (catalytic)
subunit and a change in conformational states are essential for coupling ATP hydrolysis to transport of H, Na,
K, or Ca2 ions (see Figures 7-7 and 7-9).

■

V- and F-class ATPases, which transport protons exclusively, are large, multisubunit complexes with a protonconducting channel in the transmembrane domain and
ATP-binding sites in the cytosolic domain.

■

V-class H pumps in animal lysosomal and endosomal
membranes and plant vacuole membranes are responsible
for maintaining a lower pH inside the organelles than in
the surrounding cytosol (see Figure 7-10b).
■

All members of the large and diverse ABC superfamily
of transport proteins contain four core domains: two transmembrane domains, which form a pathway for solute
movement and determine substrate specificity, and two cytosolic ATP-binding domains (see Figure 7-11).

■

■ The ABC superfamily includes bacterial amino acid and
sugar permeases and about 50 mammalian proteins (e.g.,

MDR1, ABCA1) that transport a wide array of substrates including toxins, drugs, phospholipids, peptides, and proteins.
According to the flippase model of MDR activity, a substrate molecule diffuses into the cytosolic leaflet of the
plasma membrane, then is flipped to the exoplasmic leaflet
in an ATP-powered process, and finally diffuses from the
membrane into the extracellular space (see Figure 7-12).

■

7.3 Nongated Ion Channels and
the Resting Membrane Potential
In addition to ATP-powered ion pumps, which transport
ions against their concentration gradients, the plasma membrane contains channel proteins that allow the principal cellular ions (Na, K, Ca2, and Cl) to move through them
at different rates down their concentration gradients. Ion
concentration gradients generated by pumps and selective
movements of ions through channels constitute the principal mechanism by which a difference in voltage, or electric
potential, is generated across the plasma membrane. The
magnitude of this electric potential generally is ≈70 millivolts
(mV) with the inside of the cell always negative with respect
to the outside. This value does not seem like much until we
consider the thickness of the plasma membrane (3.5 nm).
Thus the voltage gradient across the plasma membrane is
0.07 V per 3.5  107 cm, or 200,000 volts per centimeter!
(To appreciate what this means, consider that high-voltage
transmission lines for electricity utilize gradients of about
200,000 volts per kilometer.)
The ionic gradients and electric potential across the
plasma membrane play a role in many biological processes.
As noted previously, a rise in the cytosolic Ca2 concentration is an important regulatory signal, initiating contraction
in muscle cells and triggering secretion of digestive enzymes

7.3 • Nongated Ion Channels and the Resting Membrane Potential

in the exocrine pancreatic cells. In many animal cells, the
combined force of the Na concentration gradient and membrane electric potential drives the uptake of amino acids and
other molecules against their concentration gradient by ionlinked symport and antiport proteins (see Section 7.4). And
the conduction of action potentials by nerve cells depends on
the opening and closing of ion channels in response to
changes in the membrane potential (see Section 7.7).
Here we discuss the origin of the membrane electric potential in resting cells, how ion channels mediate the selective
movement of ions across a membrane, and useful experimental techniques for characterizing the functional properties of channel proteins.

261

(a) Membrane impermeable to Na+, K +, and Cl −
0
Potentiometer

+60

− 60

Cell cytosol

Membrane electric
potential = 0

Extracellular
medium

15 mM
Na+ Cl −
150 mM
K + Cl −

150 mM
Na+ Cl −
15 mM
K + Cl −

Selective Movement of Ions Creates
a Transmembrane Electric Potential Difference
To help explain how an electric potential across the plasma
membrane can arise, we first consider a set of simplified
experimental systems in which a membrane separates a
150 mM NaCl/15 mM KCl solution on the right from a
15 mM NaCl/150 mM KCl solution on the left. A potentiometer (voltmeter) is connected to both solutions to measure any difference in electric potential across the membrane.
If the membrane is impermeable to all ions, no ions will flow
across it and no electric potential will be generated, as shown
in Figure 7-13a.
Now suppose that the membrane contains Na-channel
proteins that accommodate Na ions but exclude K and
Cl ions (Figure 7-13b). Na ions then tend to move down
their concentration gradient from the right side to the left,
leaving an excess of negative Cl ions compared with Na
ions on the right side and generating an excess of positive
Na ions compared with Cl ions on the left side. The excess
Na on the left and Cl on the right remain near the respective surfaces of the membrane because the excess positive
charges on one side of the membrane are attracted to the excess negative charges on the other side. The resulting separation of charge across the membrane constitutes an electric

(b) Membrane permeable only to Na+
0

Membrane electric
potential = −59 mV;
+60 extracellular medium negative
with respect to cytosol

− 60

+
+
+

–
–
–
Na+
Na+
Na+

Na+ channel
+
+
+
+
+
+

–
–
–
–
–
–

Charge separation across membrane

(c) Membrane permeable only to K +
0

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-13 Generation of a transmembrane electric potential (voltage) depends on the selective
movement of ions across a semipermeable membrane. In this
experimental system, a membrane separates a 15 mM NaCl/150
mM KCl solution (left) from a 150 mM NaCl/15 mM KCl solution
(right); these ion concentrations are similar to those in cytosol
and blood, respectively. If the membrane separating the two
solutions is impermeable to all ions (a), no ions can move across
the membrane and no difference in electric potential is registered
on the potentiometer connecting the two solutions. If the
membrane is selectively permeable only to Na (b) or to K (c),
then diffusion of ions through their respective channels leads to a
separation of charge across the membrane. At equilibrium, the
membrane potential caused by the charge separation becomes
equal to the Nernst potential ENa or EK registered on the
potentiometer. See the text for further explanation.

+60

− 60

–
–
–

+
+
+

–
–
–
–
–
–

+
+
+
+
+
+

Membrane electric
potential = +59 mV;
extracellular medium positive
with respect to cytosol

K+
K+
K+

K + channel

Charge separation across membrane

262

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

potential, or voltage, with the right side of the membrane
having excess negative charge with respect to the left.
As more and more Na ions move through channels
across the membrane, the magnitude of this charge difference
(i.e., voltage) increases. However, continued right-to-left
movement of the Na ions eventually is inhibited by the mutual repulsion between the excess positive (Na) charges accumulated on the left side of the membrane and by the
attraction of Na ions to the excess negative charges built up
on the right side. The system soon reaches an equilibrium
point at which the two opposing factors that determine the
movement of Na ions—the membrane electric potential
and the ion concentration gradient—balance each other out.
At equilibrium, no net movement of Na ions occurs across
the membrane. Thus this semipermeable membrane, like all
biological membranes, acts like a capacitor—a device consisting of a thin sheet of nonconducting material (the hydrophobic interior) surrounded on both sides by electrically
conducting material (the polar phospholipid head groups
and the ions in the surrounding aqueous solution)—that can
store positive charges on one side and negative charges on
the other.
If a membrane is permeable only to Na ions, then at
equilibrium the measured electric potential across the membrane equals the sodium equilibrium potential in volts, ENa.
The magnitude of ENa is given by the Nernst equation, which
is derived from basic principles of physical chemistry:
ENa 

[Na1]
RT
ln
ZF
[Nar]

ENa  0.059log10

[Nar]

[Kl]
RT
ln
ZF
[Kr]

−40

Potentiometer
−80

Microelectrode
filled with
conducting
salt solution

0

+40
+80

Reference electrode
in contact with
bathing medium

Bathing medium

(7-3)

If [Nal]/[Nar]  0.1, a tenfold ratio of concentrations as in
Figure 7-13b, then ENa  0.059 V (or 59 mV), with the
right side negative with respect to the left.
If the membrane is permeable only to K ions and not to

Na or Cl ions, then a similar equation describes the potassium equilibrium potential EK:
EK 

The plasma membranes of animal cells contain many open
K channels but few open Na, Cl, or Ca2 channels. As
a result, the major ionic movement across the plasma membrane is that of K from the inside outward, powered by the
K concentration gradient, leaving an excess of negative
charge on the inside and creating an excess of positive charge
on the outside, similar to the experimental system shown in
Figure 7-13c. Thus the outward flow of K ions through
these channels, called resting K channels, is the major determinant of the inside-negative membrane potential. Like all
channels, these alternate between an open and a closed state,
but since their opening and closing are not affected by the
membrane potential or by small signaling molecules, these
channels are called nongated. The various gated channels
discussed in later sections open only in response to specific
ligands or to changes in membrane potential.
Quantitatively, the usual resting membrane potential of
70 mV is close to but lower in magnitude than that of the
potassium equilibrium potential calculated from the Nernst
equation because of the presence of a few open Na channels. These open Na channels allow the net inward flow of
Na ions, making the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane
more positive, that is, less negative, than predicted by the

(7-2)

where R (the gas constant)  1.987 cal/(degree mol), or
8.28 joules/(degree mol); T (the absolute temperature in degrees Kelvin)  293 K at 20 ºC; Z (the charge, also called the
valency) here equal to 1; F (the Faraday constant) 23,062
cal/(mol V), or 96,000 coulombs/(mol V); and [Nal] and
[Nar] are the Na concentrations on the left and right sides,
respectively, at equilibrium. At 20 ºC, Equation 7-2 reduces
to
[Nal]

The Membrane Potential in Animal Cells
Depends Largely on Resting K Channels

(7-4)

The magnitude of the membrane electric potential is the
same (59 mV for a tenfold difference in ion concentrations),
except that the right side is now positive with respect to the
left (Figure 7-13c), opposite to the polarity obtained across
a membrane selectively permeable to Na ions.

+ + + + +
+ + + +
− − − − −
− − − −
Cytosol

+

+ + + + + +
− − − − − − −

+ +

−

−

Plasma membrane

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-14 The electric potential
across the plasma membrane of living cells can be measured.
A microelectrode, constructed by filling a glass tube of extremely
small diameter with a conducting fluid such as a KCl solution, is
inserted into a cell in such a way that the surface membrane
seals itself around the tip of the electrode. A reference electrode
is placed in the bathing medium. A potentiometer connecting the
two electrodes registers the potential, in this case 60 mV. A
potential difference is registered only when the microelectrode
is inserted into the cell; no potential is registered if the
microelectrode is in the bathing fluid.

7.3 • Nongated Ion Channels and the Resting Membrane Potential

Nernst equation for K. The K concentration gradient that
drives the flow of ions through resting K channels is generated by the Na/K ATPase described previously (see Figure
7-9). In the absence of this pump, or when it is inhibited,
the K concentration gradient cannot be maintained and
eventually the magnitude of the membrane potential falls to
zero.
Although resting K channels play the dominant role in
generating the electric potential across the plasma membrane of animal cells, this is not the case in plant and fungal cells. The inside-negative membrane potential in these
cells is generated by transport of H ions out of the cell by
P-class proton pumps (see Figure 7-10a).
The potential across the plasma membrane of large cells
can be measured with a microelectrode inserted inside the cell
and a reference electrode placed in the extracellular fluid. The
two are connected to a potentiometer capable of measuring
small potential differences (Figure 7-14). In virtually all cells
the inside (cytosolic face) of the cell membrane is negative relative to the outside; typical membrane potentials range between 30 and 70 mV. The potential across the surface
membrane of most animal cells generally does not vary with
time. In contrast, neurons and muscle cells—the principal
types of electrically active cells—undergo controlled changes
in their membrane potential that we discuss later.

(a) Single subunit

263

Ion Channels Contain a Selectivity Filter
Formed from Conserved Transmembrane
 Helices and P Segments
All ion channels exhibit specificity for particular ions: K
channels allow K but not closely related Na ions to enter,
whereas Na channels admit Na but not K. Determination of the three-dimensional structure of a bacterial K
channel first revealed how this exquisite ion selectivity is
achieved. As the sequences of other K, Na, and Ca2
channels subsequently were determined, it became apparent
that all such proteins share a common structure and probably evolved from a single type of channel protein.
Like all other K channels, bacterial K channels are
built of four identical subunits symmetrically arranged
around a central pore (Figure 7-15). Each subunit contains
two membrane-spanning  helices (S5 and S6) and a short P
(pore domain) segment that partly penetrates the membrane
bilayer. In the tetrameric K channel, the eight transmembrane  helices (two from each subunit) form an “inverted
teepee,” generating a water-filled cavity called the vestibule
in the central portion of the channel. Four extended loops
that are part of the P segments form the actual ion-selectivity
filter in the narrow part of the pore near the exoplasmic surface above the vestibule.

(b) Tetrameric channel
K+ ion

P segment
Selectivity
filter

Exterior

Membrane
Inner
helix
(S6)

Outer
helix
(S5)

Vestibule
Cytosol

NH3+
COO−

▲ Figure 7-15 Structure of resting K+ channel from the
bacterium Streptomyces lividans. All K channel proteins are
tetramers comprising four identical subunits each containing two
conserved membrane-spanning  helices, called by convention S5
and S6 (yellow), and a shorter P, or pore segment (pink). (a) One
of the subunits, viewed from the side, with key structural features
indicated. (b) The complete tetrameric channel viewed from the
side (left) and the top, or extracellular, end (right ). The P segments
are located near the exoplasmic surface and connect the S5 and

S6  helices; they consist of a nonhelical "turret," which lines
the upper part of the pore; a short  helix; and an extended loop
that protrudes into the narrowest part of the pore and forms the
ion-selectivity filter. This filter allows K (purple spheres) but not
other ions to pass. Below the filter is the central cavity or
vestibule lined by the inner, or S6 , helixes. The subunits in
gated K channels, which open and close in response to specific
stimuli, contain additional transmembrane helices not shown here.
[See Y. Zhou et al., 2001, Nature 414:43.]

264

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

Several types of evidence support the role of P segments
in ion selection. First, the amino acid sequence of the P segment is highly homologous in all known K channels and
different from that in other ion channels. Second, mutation
of amino acids in this segment alters the ability of a K channel to distinguish Na from K. Finally, replacing the P segment of a bacterial K channel with the homologous
segment from a mammalian K channel yields a chimeric
protein that exhibits normal selectivity for K over other
ions. Thus all K channels are thought to use the same
mechanism to distinguish K over other ions.
The ability of the ion-selectivity filter in K channels to
select K over Na is due mainly to backbone carbonyl oxygens on glycine residues located in a Gly-Tyr-Gly sequence
that is found in an analogous position in the P segment in
every known K channel. As a K ion enters the narrow selectivity filter, it loses its water of hydration but becomes
bound to eight backbone carbonyl oxygens, two from the extended loop in each P segment lining the channel (Figure
7-16a, left). As a result, a relatively low activation energy is
required for passage of K ions through the channel. Because
a dehydrated Na ion is too small to bind to all eight carbonyl oxygens that line the selectivity filter, the activation
energy for passage of Na ions is relatively high (Figure
7-16a, right). This difference in activation energies favors

 Figure 7-16 Mechanism of ion selectivity and transport in

resting K+ channels. (a) Schematic diagrams of K and Na
ions hydrated in solution and in the pore of a K channel. As K
ions pass through the selectivity filter, they lose their bound water
molecules and become coordinated instead to eight backbone
carbonyl oxygens, four of which are shown, that are part of the
conserved amino acids in the channel-lining loop of each P
segment. The smaller Na ions cannot perfectly coordinate with
these oxygens and therefore pass through the channel only rarely.
(b) High-resolution electron-density map obtained from x-ray
crystallography showing K ions (purple spheres) passing through
the selectivity filter. Only two of the diagonally opposed channel
subunits are shown. Within the selectivity filter each unhydrated
K ion interacts with eight carbonyl oxygen atoms (red sticks)
lining the channel, two from each of the four subunits, as if to
mimic the eight waters of hydration. (c) Interpretation of the
electron-density map showing the two alternating states by which
K ions move through the channel. In State 1, moving from the
exoplasmic side of the channel inward one sees a hydrated K ion
with its eight bound water molecules, K ions at positions 1 and 3
within the selectivity filter, and a fully hydrated K ion within the
vestibule. During K movement each ion in State 1 moves one
step inward, forming State 2. Thus in State 2 the K ion on the
exoplasmic side of the channel has lost four of its eight waters,
the ion at position 1 in State 1 has moved to position 2, and the
ion at position 3 in State 1 has moved to position 4. In going from
State 2 to State 1 the K at position 4 moves into the vestibule
and picks up eight water molecules, while another hydrated K ion
moves into the channel opening and the other K ions move down
one step. [Part (a) adapted from C. Armstrong, 1998, Science 280:56.
Parts (b) and (c) adapted from Y. Zhou et al., 2001, Nature 414:43.]

(a) K+ and Na+ ions in the pore of a K+ channel (top view)
K+ in water

Na+ in water
H

O

O

Na+

K+
O

O

O

K+ in K pore
O

O

Na+ in K pore

O

O

O
Na+

K+
O

O

O

O

O

O

(b) K+ ions in the pore of a K+ channel (side view)

Exoplasmic
face
1
2

Carbonyl
oxygens

3
4

Water
Vestibule

K+

(c) Ion movement through selectivity filter

1
2
3
4

State 1

State 2

H

7.3 • Nongated Ion Channels and the Resting Membrane Potential

passage of K ions over Na by a factor of thousand. Calcium ions are too large to pass through a K channel with or
without their bound water.
Recent x-ray crystallographic studies reveal that the channel contains K ions within the selectivity filter even when it is
closed; without these ions the channel probably would collapse.
These ions are thought to be present either at positions 1 and
3 or at 2 and 4, each boxed by eight carbonyl oxygen atoms
(Figure 7-16b and c). K ions move simultaneously through
the channel such that when the ion on the exoplasmic face that
has been partially stripped of its water of hydration moves into
position 1, the ion at position 2 jumps to position 3 and the
one at position 4 exits the channel (Figure 7-16c).
Although the amino acid sequences of the P segment in
Na and K channels differ somewhat, they are similar
enough to suggest that the general structure of the ionselectivity filters are comparable in both types of channels.
Presumably the diameter of the filter in Na channels is
small enough that it permits dehydrated Na ions to bind
to the backbone carbonyl oxygens but excludes the larger K
ions from entering.

Patch Clamps Permit Measurement of Ion
Movements Through Single Channels
The technique of patch clamping enables workers to investigate the opening, closing, regulation, and ion conductance of
a single ion channel. In this technique, the inward or outward movement of ions across a patch of membrane is quantified from the amount of electric current needed to maintain
the membrane potential at a particular “clamped” value
(Figure 7-17a, b). To preserve electroneutrality and to keep
the membrane potential constant, the entry of each positive
ion (e.g., a Na ion) into the cell through a channel in the
patch of membrane is balanced by the addition of an electron

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-17 Current flow through
individual ion channels can be measured by patch-clamping
technique. (a) Basic experimental arrangement for measuring
current flow through individual ion channels in the plasma
membrane of a living cell. The patch electrode, filled with a currentconducting saline solution, is applied, with a slight suction, to the
plasma membrane. The 0.5- m-diameter tip covers a region that
contains only one or a few ion channels. The second electrode is
inserted through the membrane into the cytosol. A recording device
measures current flow only through the channels in the patch of
plasma membrane. (b) Photomicrograph of the cell body of a
cultured neuron and the tip of a patch pipette touching the cell
membrane. (c) Different patch-clamping configurations. Isolated,
detached patches are the best configurations for studying the
effects on channels of different ion concentrations and solutes such
as extracellular hormones and intracellular second messengers
(e.g., cAMP). [Part (b) from B. Sakmann, 1992, Neuron 8:613 (Nobel
lecture); also published in E. Neher and B. Sakmann, 1992, Sci. Am.
266(3):44. Part (c) adapted from B. Hille, 1992, Ion Channels of Excitable
Membranes, 2d ed., Sinauer Associates, p. 89.]

265

into the cytosol through a microelectrode inserted into the
cytosol; an electronic device measures the numbers of electrons (current) required to counterbalance the inflow of ions
through the membrane channels. Conversely, the exit of each
positive ion from the cell (e.g., a K ion) is balanced by the
withdrawal of an electron from the cytosol. The patchclamping technique can be employed on whole cells or isolated membrane patches to measure the effects of different
substances and ion concentrations on ion flow (Figure
7-17c).

(a)

Device to maintain constant
voltage across membrane and
to measure current flow across
membrane at tip of patch
electrode

Intracellular
electrode

Patch electrode filled
with conducting salt
solution
Ion channels

Cytosol

Intact cell

(b)

(c)

Tip of micropipette
Ion channel

On-cell patch measures indirect effect of extracellular solutes
on channels within membrane patch on intact cell
Cytosolic
face

Exoplasmic
face

Inside-out patch
measures effects of intracellular solutes on channels
within isolated patch

Outside-out patch
measures effects of extracellular solutes on channels
within isolated patch

266

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
Open

Closed

10 ms

5.0 pA

1

Microinject mRNA
encoding channel
protein of interest

mRNA
Plasma
membrane

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-18 Ion flux through individual
Na channels can be calculated from patch-clamp tracings.
Two inside-out patches of muscle plasma membrane were
clamped at a potential of slightly less than that of the resting
membrane potential. The patch electrode contained NaCl. The
transient pulses of electric current in picoamperes (pA), recorded
as large downward deviations (blue arrows), indicate the opening
of a Na channel and movement of Na ions inward across
the membrane. The smaller deviations in current represent
background noise. The average current through an open channel is
1.6 pA, or 1.6  1012 amperes. Since 1 ampere  1 coulomb (C)
of charge per second, this current is equivalent to the movement
of about 9900 Na ions per channel per millisecond:
(1.6  1012 C/s)(103 s /ms)(6  1023 molecules/mol)
96,500
C/mol. [See F. J. Sigworth and E. Neher, 1980, Nature 287:447.]

The patch-clamp tracings in Figure 7-18 illustrate the use
of this technique to study the properties of voltage-gated
Na channels in the plasma membrane of muscle cells. As we
discuss later, these channels normally are closed in resting
muscle cells and open following nervous stimulation. Patches
of muscle membrane, each containing one Na channel,
were clamped at a voltage slightly less than the resting membrane potential. Under these circumstances, transient pulses
of current cross the membrane as individual Na channels
open and then close. Each channel is either fully open or
completely closed. From such tracings, it is possible to determine the time that a channel is open and the ion flux
through it. For the channels measured in Figure 7-18, the
flux is about 10 million Na ions per channel per second, a
typical value for ion channels. Replacement of the NaCl
within the patch pipette (corresponding to the outside of the
cell) with KCl or choline chloride abolishes current through
the channels, confirming that they conduct only Na ions.

Novel Ion Channels Can Be Characterized
by a Combination of Oocyte Expression
and Patch Clamping
Cloning of human disease-causing genes and sequencing of
the human genome have identified many genes encoding putative channel proteins, including 67 putative K channel
proteins. One way of characterizing the function of these
proteins is to transcribe a cloned cDNA in a cell-free system
to produce the corresponding mRNA. Injection of this
mRNA into frog oocytes and patch-clamp measurements on
the newly synthesized channel protein can often reveal its
function (Figure 7-19). This experimental approach is especially useful because frog oocytes normally do not express
any channel proteins, so only the channel under study is

2

Incubate 24–48 h for
synthesis and
movement of channel
protein to plasma
membrane

3

Measure channelprotein activity by
patch-clamping
technique

Newly
synthesized
channel
protein

Patch electrode

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-19 Oocyte expression assay
is useful in comparing the function of normal and mutant
forms of a channel protein. A follicular frog oocyte is first
treated with collagenase to remove the surrounding follicle cells,
leaving a denuded oocyte, which is microinjected with mRNA
encoding the channel protein under study. [Adapted from T. P. Smith,
1988, Trends Neurosci. 11:250.]

present in the membrane. In addition, because of the large
size of frog oocytes, patch-clamping studies are technically
easier to perform on them than on smaller cells.
This approach has provided insight into the underlying defect in polycystic kidney disease, the most
common single-gene disorder leading to kidney failure. Mutations in either of two proteins, PKD1 or PKD2, produce the clinical symptoms of polycystic kidney disease in
which fluid-filled cysts accumulate throughout the organ. The
amino acid sequence of PDK2 is consistent with its being an
ion-channel protein, and it contains a conserved P segment.
When expressed in oocytes, PDK2 mediates transport of
Na, K, and Ca2 ions. In contrast, the sequence of PKD1
differs substantially from that of channel proteins, and it has
a long extracellular domain that probably binds to a component of the extracellular matrix. Coexpression of PKD1 with
PKD2 in frog oocyte eggs modifies the cation-transporting activity of PDK2. These findings provided the first, albeit partial, molecular understanding of cyst formation characteristic
of polycystic kidney disease and also suggest that some channel proteins may be regulated in complex ways. Indeed, most
Na and K channel proteins are associated with other transmembrane or cytosolic proteins that are thought to regulate
their opening, closing, or ion conductivity. ❚

7.3 • Nongated Ion Channels and the Resting Membrane Potential
Ion concentration
gradient

Gc  RT ln

[Nain]
[Naout]

Outside
145 mM

Na+

Inside
–
–

Na+

Outside
+
+
−70 mV

∆Gc = −1.45 kcal/mol

∆Gm = −1.61 kcal/mol

Free-energy change during transport
of Na+ from outside to inside
Inside

Outside
Na+

(7-6)

where F is the Faraday constant and E is the membrane electric potential. If E  70 mV, then Gm, the free-energy
change due to the membrane potential, is 1.61 kcal for
transport of 1 mol of Na ions from outside to inside the
cell, assuming there is no Na concentration gradient. Since
both forces do in fact act on Na ions, the total G is the
sum of the two partial values:
G  Gc  Gm  (1.45)  (1.61)  3.06 kcal/mol
In this example, the Na concentration gradient and the
membrane electric potential contribute almost equally to the
total G for transport of Na ions. Since G is 0, the inward movement of Na ions is thermodynamically favored.
As discussed in the next section, certain cotransport proteins
use the inward movement of Na to power the uphill movement of other ions and several types of small molecules into or
out of animal cells. The rapid, energetically favorable movement of Na ions through gated Na channels also is critical
in generating action potentials in nerve and muscle cells.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.3
Nongated Ion Channels and the Resting Membrane
Potential
An inside-negative electric potential (voltage) of 50–70 mV
exists across the plasma membrane of all cells.

■

In animal cells, the membrane potential is generated primarily by movement of cytosolic K ions through resting

■

12 mM

Na+

(7-5)

At the concentrations of Nain and Naout shown in Figure
7-20, which are typical for many mammalian cells, Gc, the
change in free energy due to the concentration gradient, is
1.45 kcal for transport of 1 mol of Na ions from outside
to inside the cell, assuming there is no membrane electric potential. The free-energy change generated from the membrane electric potential is given by
Gm  FE

Inside

−70 mV

∆G = ∆Gc + ∆Gm = − 3.06 kcal/mol

▲ FIGURE 7-20 Transmembrane forces acting on Na
ions. As with all ions, the movement of Na ions across the
plasma membrane is governed by the sum of two separate
forces—the ion concentration gradient and the membrane
electric potential. At the internal and external Na concentrations typical of mammalian cells, these forces usually act in
the same direction, making the inward movement of Na
ions energetically favorable.

K channels to the external medium. Unlike the more common gated ion channels, which open only in response to various signals, these nongated K channels are usually open.
In plants and fungi, the membrane potential is maintained by the ATP-driven pumping of protons from the cytosol to the exterior of the cell.

■

K channels are assembled from four identical subunits,
each of which has at least two conserved membranespanning  helices and a nonhelical P segment that lines
the ion pore (see Figure 7-15).

■

The ion specificity of K channel proteins is due mainly
to coordination of the selected ion with the carbonyl oxygen atoms of specific amino acids in the P segments, thus
lowering the activation energy for passage of the selected
K compared with other ions (see Figure 7-16).
■

Patch-clamping techniques, which permit measurement
of ion movements through single channels, are used to determine the ion conductivity of a channel and the effect of
various signals on its activity (see Figure 7-17).

■

Recombinant DNA techniques and patch clamping allow the expression and functional characterization of channel proteins in frog oocytes (see Figure 7-19).

■

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

As mentioned earlier, two forces govern the movement of
ions across selectively permeable membranes: the voltage
and the ion concentration gradient across the membrane.
The sum of these forces, which may act in the same direction or in opposite directions, constitutes the electrochemical
gradient. To calculate the free-energy change G corresponding to the transport of any ion across a membrane, we need
to consider the independent contributions from each of the
forces to the electrochemical gradient.
For example, when Na moves from outside to inside the
cell, the free-energy change generated from the Na concentration gradient is given by

Membrane electric
potential

Overview Animation: Biological Energy Interconversions

Na Entry into Mammalian Cells Has
a Negative Change in Free Energy (G)

267

268

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

The electrochemical gradient across a semipermeable
membrane determines the direction of ion movement
through channel proteins. The two forces constituting the
electrochemical gradient, the membrane electric potential
and the ion concentration gradient, may act in the same
or opposite directions (see Figure 7-20).

■

facilitate this transport. However, certain cells, such as those
lining the small intestine and the kidney tubules, need to import glucose from the intestinal lumen or forming urine
against a very large concentration gradient. Such cells utilize
a two-Na/one-glucose symporter, a protein that couples import of one glucose molecule to the import of two Na ions:
2 Naout  glucoseout

7.4 Cotransport by Symporters
and Antiporters
Besides ATP-powered pumps, cells have a second, discrete
class of proteins that transport ions and small molecules,
such as glucose and amino acids, against a concentration gradient. As noted previously, cotransporters use the energy
stored in the electrochemical gradient of Na or H ions to
power the uphill movement of another substance, which may
be a small organic molecule or a different ion. For instance,
the energetically favored movement of a Na ion (the cotransported ion) into a cell across the plasma membrane,
driven both by its concentration gradient and by the transmembrane voltage gradient, can be coupled to movement of
the transported molecule (e.g., glucose) against its concentration gradient. An important feature of such cotransport
is that neither molecule can move alone; movement of both
molecules together is obligatory, or coupled.
Cotransporters share some features with uniporters such
as the GLUT proteins. The two types of transporters exhibit
certain structural similarities, operate at equivalent rates, and
undergo cyclical conformational changes during transport of
their substrates. They differ in that uniporters can only accelerate thermodynamically favorable transport down a concentration gradient, whereas cotransporters can harness the
energy of a coupled favorable reaction to actively transport
molecules against a concentration gradient.
When the transported molecule and cotransported ion
move in the same direction, the process is called symport;
when they move in opposite directions, the process is called
antiport (see Figure 7-2). Some cotransporters transport only
positive ions (cations), while others transport only negative
ions (anions). An important example of a cation cotransporter
is the Na/H antiporter, which exports H from cells coupled to the energetically favorable import of Na. An example
of an anion cotransporter is the AE1 anion antiporter protein,
which catalyzes the one-for-one exchange of Cl and HCO3
across the plasma membrane. Yet other cotransporters mediate movement of both cations and anions together. In this section, we describe the operation and physiological role of
several widely distributed symporters and antiporters.

Na-Linked Symporters Import Amino
Acids and Glucose into Animal
Cells Against High Concentration Gradients
Most body cells import glucose from the blood down its concentration gradient, utilizing one or another GLUT protein to

2 Nain  glucosein

Quantitatively, the free-energy change for the symport
transport of two Na ions and one glucose molecule can be
written
G  RT ln

[glucosein]
[glucoseout]

 2RT ln

[Nain]
[Naout]

 2FE (7-7)

Thus the G for the overall reaction is the sum of the freeenergy changes generated by the glucose concentration gradient
(1 molecule transported), the Na concentration gradient
(2 Na ions transported), and the membrane potential (2 Na
ions transported). At equilibrium G  0. As illustrated in
Figure 7-20, the free energy released by movement of Na into
mammalian cells down its electrochemical gradient has a freeenergy change G of about 3 kcal per mole of Na transported. Thus the G for transport of two moles of Na
inward is about 6 kcal. By substituting this value into Equation 7-7 and setting G  0, we see that
0  RT ln

[glucosein]
[glucoseout]

6 kcal

and we can calculate that at equilibrium the ratio glucosein/
glucoseout  ≈30,000. Thus the inward flow of two moles of
Na can generate an intracellular glucose concentration that
is ≈30,000 times greater than the exterior concentration. If
only one Na ion were imported (G of 3 kcal/mol) per
glucose molecule, then the available energy could generate a
glucose concentration gradient (inside
outside) of only
about 170-fold. Thus by coupling the transport of two Na
ions to the transport of one glucose, the two-Na/one-glucose
symporter permits cells to accumulate a very high concentration of glucose relative to the external concentration.
The two-Na/glucose symporter is thought to contain 14
transmembrane  helices with both its N- and C-termini extending into the cytosol. A truncated recombinant protein
consisting of only the five C-terminal transmembrane  helices can transport glucose independently of Na across the
plasma membrane, down its concentration gradient. This
portion of the molecule thus functions as a glucose uniporter.
The N-terminal portion of the protein, including helices 1–9,
is required to couple Na binding and influx to the transport
of glucose against a concentration gradient.
Figure 7-21 depicts the current model of transport by
Na/glucose symporters. This model entails conformational
changes in the protein analogous to those that occur in uniport transporters, such as GLUT1, which do not require a
cotransported ion (see Figure 7-4). Binding of all substrates
to their sites on the extracellular domain is required before

7.4 • Cotransport by Symporters and Antiporters
2 Na+

Glucose

Glucose
Cytosol

2

Outward-facing
conformation

3

4

Inward-facing
conformation

Outward-facing
conformation

▲ FIGURE 7-21 Operational model for the two-Na/oneglucose symporter. Simultaneous binding of Na and glucose to
the conformation with outward-facing binding sites (step 1 )
generates a second conformation with inward-facing sites
(step 2 ). Dissociation of the bound Na and glucose into the

cytosol (step 3 ) allows the protein to revert to its
original outward-facing conformation (step 4 ), ready to
transport additional substrate. [See M. Panayotova-

the protein undergoes the conformational change that
changes the substrate-binding sites from outward- to inwardfacing; this ensures that inward transport of glucose and
Na ions are coupled.

Several Cotransporters Regulate
Cytosolic pH

Na-Linked Antiporter Exports
Ca2 from Cardiac Muscle Cells
In cardiac muscle cells a three-Na/one-Ca2 antiporter,
rather than the plasma membrane Ca2 ATPase discussed
earlier, plays the principal role in maintaining a low concentration of Ca2 in the cytosol. The transport reaction mediated by this cation antiporter can be written
3 Naout  Ca2in

3Nain  Ca2out

Note that the movement of three Na ions is required to
power the export of one Ca2 ion from the cytosol with a
[Ca2] of ≈2  107 M to the extracellular medium with a
[Ca2] of 2  103 M, a gradient of some 10,000-fold. As in
other muscle cells, a rise in the cytosolic Ca2 concentration
in cardiac muscle triggers contraction. By lowering cytosolic
Ca2, operation of the Na/Ca2 antiporter reduces the
strength of heart muscle contraction.
The Na/K ATPase in the plasma membrane of
cardiac cells, as in other body cells, creates the Na
concentration gradient necessary for export of
Ca2 by the Na-linked Ca2 antiporter. As mentioned earlier, inhibition of the Na/K ATPase by the drugs ouabain
and digoxin lowers the cytosolic K concentration and, more
important, increases cytosolic Na. The resulting reduced
Na electrochemical gradient across the membrane causes the
Na-linked Ca2 antiporter to function less efficiently. As a
result, fewer Ca2 ions are exported and the cytosolic Ca2
concentration increases, causing the muscle to contract more
strongly. Because of their ability to increase the force of heart
muscle contractions, inhibitors of the Na/K ATPase are
widely used in the treatment of congestive heart failure. ❚

Heiermann et al., 1997, J. Biol. Chem. 272:20324, for details
on the structure and function of this and related transporters.]

The anaerobic metabolism of glucose yields lactic acid,
and aerobic metabolism yields CO2, which adds water to
form carbonic acid (H2CO3). These weak acids dissociate,
yielding H ions (protons); if these excess protons were not
removed from cells, the cytosolic pH would drop precipitously, endangering cellular functions. Two types of cotransport proteins help remove some of the “excess” protons
generated during metabolism in animal cells. One is a
NaHCO3/Cl antiporter, which imports one Na ion
down its concentration gradient, together with one HCO3,
in exchange for export of one Cl ion against its concentration gradient. The cytosolic enzyme carbonic anhydrase catalyzes dissociation of the imported HCO3 ions into CO2
and an OH (hydroxyl) ion:
HCO3

CO2  OH

The CO2 diffuses out of the cell, and the OH ions combine
with intracellular protons, forming water. Thus the overall
action of this transporter is to consume cytosolic H ions,
thereby raising the cytosolic pH. Also important in raising
cytosolic pH is a Na/H antiporter, which couples entry of
one Na ion into the cell down its concentration gradient to
the export of one H ion.
Under certain circumstances the cytosolic pH can rise beyond the normal range of 7.2–7.5. To cope with the excess
OH ions associated with elevated pH, many animal cells
utilize an anion antiporter that catalyzes the one-for-one
exchange of HCO3 and Cl across the plasma membrane.
At high pH, this Cl/HCO3 antiporter exports HCO3
(which can be viewed as a “complex” of OH and CO2) in
exchange for Cl, thus lowering the cytosolic pH. The import of Cl down its concentration gradient (Clmedium
Clcytosol) powers the reaction.
The activity of all three of these antiport proteins depends on pH, providing cells with a fine-tuned mechanism

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

1

Overview Animation: Biological
Energy Interconversions

Exterior
Na+

269

270

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
H+
Na+

Percent maximal rate
of ion transport

100

Cl−
Na+
HCO3−

Na+/H+
Na+HCO3−/Cl−
antiporter
antiporter

HCO3−
Cl−

Cl−/HCO3−
antiporter

50

6.8
7.2
7.0
Intracellular pH

7.4

7.6

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-22 The activity of
membrane transport proteins that regulate the cytosolic
pH of mammalian cells changes with pH. Direction of ion
transport is indicated above the curve for each protein. See the
text for discussion. [See S. L. Alper et al., 2001, J. Pancreas 2:171,
and S. L. Alper, 1991, Ann. Rev. Physiol. 53:549.]

stored in the vacuole; during the night the stored sucrose
moves into the cytoplasm and is metabolized to CO2 and H2O
with concomitant generation of ATP from ADP and Pi. A proton/sucrose antiporter in the vacuolar membrane operates to
accumulate sucrose in plant vacuoles. The inward movement
of sucrose is powered by the outward movement of H, which
is favored by its concentration gradient (lumen cytosol) and
by the cytosolic-negative potential across the vacuolar membrane (see Figure 7-23). Uptake of Ca2 and Na into the vacuole from the cytosol against their concentration gradients is
similarly mediated by proton antiporters. ❚
Understanding of the transport proteins in plant
vacuolar membranes has the potential for increasing agricultural production in high-salt (NaCl)
soils, which are found throughout the world. Because most
agriculturally useful crops cannot grow in such saline soils,
agricultural scientists have long sought to develop salttolerant plants by traditional breeding methods. With the
availability of the cloned gene encoding the vacuolar
Na/H antiporter, researchers can now produce transgenic
plants that overexpress this transport protein, leading to in-

for controlling the cytosolic pH (Figure 7-22). The two antiporters that operate to increase cytosolic pH are activated
when the pH of the cytosol falls. Similarly, a rise in pH above
7.2 stimulates the Cl/HCO3 antiporter, leading to a more
rapid export of HCO3 and decrease in the cytosolic pH. In
this manner the cytosolic pH of growing cells is maintained
very close to pH 7.4.

Numerous Transport Proteins Enable Plant
Vacuoles to Accumulate Metabolites and Ions
The lumen of plant vacuoles is much more acidic
(pH 3 to 6) than is the cytosol (pH 7.5). The acidity of vacuoles is maintained by a V-class ATPpowered proton pump (see Figure 7-6) and by a PPi-powered
pump that is unique to plants. Both of these pumps, located
in the vacuolar membrane, import H ions into the vacuolar lumen against a concentration gradient. The vacuolar
membrane also contains Cl and NO3 channels that transport these anions from the cytosol into the vacuole. Entry of
these anions against their concentration gradients is driven
by the inside-positive potential generated by the H pumps.
The combined operation of these proton pumps and anion
channels produces an inside-positive electric potential of
about 20 mV across the vacuolar membrane and also a substantial pH gradient (Figure 7-23).
The proton electrochemical gradient across the plant vacuole membrane is used in much the same way as the Na electrochemical gradient across the animal-cell plasma membrane:
to power the selective uptake or extrusion of ions and small
molecules by various antiporters. In the leaf, for example, excess sucrose generated during photosynthesis in the day is

H+-pumping proteins
ADP + Pi

ATP

2 Pi

PPi

2 H+
Ion
channel
proteins

Cl −
NO3−

H+

20
mV

Plant vacuole lumen
(pH = 3 −6)
Na+

H+

Ca 2 +

H+

Sucrose

H+

+
+
+

–
–
–
H+

Cytosol
(pH = 7.5)

Proton antiport proteins

▲ FIGURE 7-23 Concentration of ions and sucrose by the
plant vacuole. The vacuolar membrane contains two types of
proton pumps (orange): a V-class H ATPase (left) and a
pyrophosphate-hydrolyzing proton pump (right) that differs from
all other ion-transport proteins and probably is unique to plants.
These pumps generate a low luminal pH as well as an insidepositive electric potential across the vacuolar membrane owing
to the inward pumping of H ions. The inside-positive potential
powers the movement of Cl and NO
3 from the cytosol through
separate channel proteins (purple). Proton antiporters (green),
powered by the H gradient, accumulate Na, Ca2, and sucrose
inside the vacuole. [After P. Rea and D. Sanders, 1987, Physiol. Plant
71:131; J. M. Maathuis and D. Sanders, 1992, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 4:661;
P. A. Rea et al., 1992, Trends Biochem. Sci. 17:348.]

7.5 • Movement of Water

creased sequestration of Na in the vacuole. For instance,
transgenic tomato plants that overexpress the vacuolar
Na/H antiporter have been shown to grow, flower, and
produce fruit in the presence of soil NaCl concentrations that
kill wild-type plants. Interestingly, although the leaves of
these transgenic tomato plants accumulate large amounts of
salt, the fruit has a very low salt content. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.4
Cotransport by Symporters and Antiporters
Cotransporters use the energy released by movement of
an ion (usually H or Na) down its electrochemical gradient to power the import or export of a small molecule
or different ion against its concentration gradient.
■

The cells lining the small intestine and kidney tubules
express symport proteins that couple the energetically
favorable entry of Na to the import of glucose and
amino acids against their concentration gradients (see Figure 7-21).
■

In cardiac muscle cells, the export of Ca2 is coupled to and
powered by the import of Na by a cation antiporter, which
transports 3 Na ions inward for each Ca2 ion exported.
■

Two cotransporters that are activated at low pH help
maintain the cytosolic pH in animal cells very close to 7.4
despite metabolic production of carbonic and lactic acids.
One, a Na/H antiporter, exports excess protons. The
other, a NaHCO3/Cl cotransporter, imports HCO3,
which dissociates in the cytosol to yield pH-raising OH
ions.
■

A Cl/HCO3 antiporter that is activated at high pH
functions to export HCO3 when the cytosolic pH rises
above normal, and causes a decrease in pH.

Osmotic Pressure Causes Water to Move
Across Membranes
Water tends to move across a semipermeable membrane
from a solution of low solute concentration to one of high
concentration, a process termed osmosis, or osmotic flow.
In other words, since solutions with a high concentration of
dissolved solute have a lower concentration of water, water
will spontaneously move from a solution of high water concentration to one of lower. In effect, osmosis is equivalent to
“diffusion” of water. Osmotic pressure is defined as the hydrostatic pressure required to stop the net flow of water
across a membrane separating solutions of different compositions (Figure 7-24). In this context, the “membrane” may
be a layer of cells or a plasma membrane that is permeable to
water but not to the solutes. The osmotic pressure is directly
proportional to the difference in the concentration of the
total number of solute molecules on each side of the membrane. For example, a 0.5 M NaCl solution is actually 0.5 M
Na ions and 0.5 M Cl ions and has the same osmotic pressure as a 1 M solution of glucose or sucrose.
Pure phospholipid bilayers are essentially impermeable to
water, but most cellular membranes contain water-channel
proteins that facilitate the rapid movement of water in and
out of cells. Such movement of water across the epithelial
layer lining the kidney tubules of vertebrates is responsible
for concentrating the urine. If this did not happen, one
would excrete several liters of urine a day! In higher plants,
water and minerals are absorbed from the soil by the roots
and move up the plant through conducting tubes (the
xylem); water loss from the plant, mainly by evaporation

■

Uptake of sucrose, Na, Ca2, and other substances into
plant vacuoles is carried out by proton antiporters in the
vacuolar membrane. Ion channels and proton pumps in the
membrane are critical in generating a large enough proton
concentration gradient to power accumulation of ions and
metabolites in vacuoles by these proton antiporters (see
Figure 7-23).

271

Water-permeable
membrane

Hydrostatic pressure
required to prevent
net water flow

■

Solution A
CA

Solution B
CB

Water flow if C B > CA

7.5

Movement of Water

In this section, we describe the factors that influence the
movement of water in and out of cells, an important feature
of the life of both plants and animals. The following section
discusses other transport phenomena that are critical to essential physiological processes, focusing on the asymmetrical
distribution of certain transport proteins in epithelial cells.
We will see how this permits absorption of nutrients from the
intestinal lumen and acidification of the stomach lumen.

▲ FIGURE 7-24 Osmotic pressure. Solutions A and B are
separated by a membrane that is permeable to water but
impermeable to all solutes. If CB (the total concentration of
solutes in solution B) is greater than CA, water will tend to flow
across the membrane from solution A to solution B. The osmotic
pressure  between the solutions is the hydrostatic pressure
that would have to be applied to solution B to prevent this water
flow. From the van’t Hoff equation, osmotic pressure is given by
  RT(CBCA), where R is the gas constant and T is the
absolute temperature.

272

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

from the leaves, drives these movements of water. The movement of water across the plasma membrane also determines
the volume of individual cells, which must be regulated to
avoid damage to the cell. In all cases, osmotic pressure is the
force powering the movement of water in biological systems.

Different Cells Have Various Mechanisms
for Controlling Cell Volume
When placed in a hypotonic solution (i.e., one in which the
concentration of solutes is lower than in the cytosol), animal
cells swell owing to the osmotic flow of water inward. Conversely, when placed in a hypertonic solution (i.e., one in which
the concentration of solutes is higher than in the cytosol), animal cells shrink as cytosolic water leaves the cell by osmotic
flow. Consequently, cultured animal cells must be maintained
in an isotonic medium, which has a solute concentration identical with that of the cell cytosol (see Figure 5-18).
Even in an isotonic environment, however, animal cells
face a problem in maintaining their cell volume within a limited range, thereby avoiding lysis. Not only do cells contain
a large number of charged macromolecules and small
metabolites, which attract oppositely charge ions from the exterior, but there also is a slow inward leakage of extracellular ions, particularly Na and Cl, down their concentration
gradients. In the absence of some countervailing mechanism,
the osmolarity of the cytosol would increase beyond that of
the surrounding fluid, causing an osmotic influx of water and
eventual cell lysis. To prevent this, animal cells actively export
inorganic ions. The net export of cations by the ATP-powered
Na/K pump (3 Na out for 2 K in) plays the major role

Video: Frog Oocyte Expressing Aquaporin Bursts
in Hypotonic Solution

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

0.5 min

1.5 min

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-25 Expression of
aquaporin by frog oocytes increases their permeability
to water. Frog oocytes, which normally do not express
aquaporin, were microinjected with mRNA encoding
aquaporin. These photographs show control oocytes
(bottom cell in each panel) and microinjected oocytes
(top cell in each panel) at the indicated times after

in this mechanism for preventing cell swelling. If cultured cells
are treated with an inhibitor that prevents production of ATP,
they swell and eventually burst, demonstrating the importance of active transport in maintaining cell volume.
Unlike animal cells, plant, algal, fungal, and bacterial cells are surrounded by a rigid cell wall. Because of the cell wall, the osmotic influx of water
that occurs when such cells are placed in a hypotonic solution (even pure water) leads to an increase in intracellular
pressure but not in cell volume. In plant cells, the concentration of solutes (e.g., sugars and salts) usually is higher in
the vacuole than in the cytosol, which in turn has a higher
solute concentration than the extracellular space. The osmotic pressure, called turgor pressure, generated from the
entry of water into the cytosol and then into the vacuole
pushes the cytosol and the plasma membrane against the resistant cell wall. Cell elongation during growth occurs by a
hormone-induced localized loosening of a region of the cell
wall, followed by influx of water into the vacuole, increasing
its size. ❚
Although most protozoans (like animal cells) do not have
a rigid cell wall, many contain a contractile vacuole that permits them to avoid osmotic lysis. A contractile vacuole takes
up water from the cytosol and, unlike a plant vacuole, periodically discharges its contents through fusion with the
plasma membrane. Thus, even though water continuously
enters the protozoan cell by osmotic flow, the contractile vacuole prevents too much water from accumulating in the cell
and swelling it to the bursting point.

2.5 min

3.5 min

transfer from an isotonic salt solution (0.1 mM) to a hypotonic salt
solution (0.035 M). The volume of the control oocytes remained
unchanged because they are poorly permeable to water. In
contrast, the microinjected oocytes expressing aquaporin swelled
because of an osmotic influx of water, indicating that aquaporin is
a water-channel protein. [Courtesy of Gregory M. Preston and Peter
Agre, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.]

7.5 • Movement of Water

Aquaporins Increase the Water Permeability
of Cell Membranes
As just noted, small changes in extracellular osmotic
strength cause most animal cells to swell or shrink rapidly.
In contrast, frog oocytes and eggs do not swell when
placed in pond water of very low osmotic strength even
though their internal salt (mainly KCl) concentration is
comparable to that of other cells (≈150 mM KCl). These
observations first led investigators to suspect that the
plasma membranes of erythrocytes and other cell types,
but not frog oocytes, contain water-channel proteins that
accelerate the osmotic flow of water. The experimental results shown in Figure 7-25 demonstrate that the erythrocyte cell-surface protein known as aquaporin functions as
a water channel.

(a)

273

In its functional form, aquaporin is a tetramer of identical
28-kDa subunits (Figure 7-26a). Each subunit contains six
membrane-spanning  helices that form a central pore through
which water moves (Figure 7-26b, c). At its center the ≈2-nmlong water-selective gate, or pore, is only 0.28 nm in diameter, which is only slightly larger than the diameter of a water
molecule. The molecular sieving properties of the constriction
are determined by several conserved hydrophilic amino acid
residues whose side-chain and carbonyl groups extend into the
middle of the channel. Several water molecules move simultaneously through the channel, each of which sequentially forms
specific hydrogen bonds and displaces another water molecule
downstream. The formation of hydrogen bonds between the
oxygen atom of water and the amino groups of the side chains
ensures that only water passes through the channel; even protons cannot pass through.

(c)
Extracellular
vestibule

Water
(b)
Exterior
A

B

N

COO−
C

A'

B'

N

C'

Cytosol
NH3 +

COO−

▲ FIGURE 7-26 Structure of the water-channel protein
aquaporin. (a) Structural model of the tetrameric protein
comprising four identical subunits. Each subunit forms a water
channel, as seen in this end-on view from the exoplasmic
surface. One of the monomers is shown with a molecular
surface in which the pore entrance can be seen. (b) Schematic
diagram of the topology of a single aquaporin subunit in relation
to the membrane. Three pairs of homologous transmembrane 
helices (A and A', B and B', and C and C') are oriented in the
opposite direction with respect to the membrane and are
connected by two hydrophilic loops containing short nonmembrane-spanning helices and conserved asparagine (N)
residues. The loops bend into the cavity formed by the six
transmembrane helices, meeting in the middle to form part of

NH3+
Cytosolic
vestibule

the water-selective gate. (c) Side view of the pore in a single
aquaporin subunit in which several water molecules (red oxygens
and white hydrogens) are seen within the 2-nm-long waterselective gate that separates the water filled cytosolic and
extracellular vestibules. The gate contains highly conserved
arginine and histidine residues, as well as the two asparagine
residues (blue) whose side chains form hydrogen bonds with
transported waters. (Key gate residues are highlighted in blue.)
Transported waters also form hydrogen bonds to the main-chain
carbonyl group of a cysteine residue. The arrangement of these
hydrogen bonds and the narrow pore diameter of 0.28 nm
prevent passage of protons (i.e., H3O+) or other ions. [After H. Sui
et al., 2001, Nature 414:872. See also T. Zeuthen, 2001, Trends Biochem.
Sci. 26:77, and K. Murata et al., 2000, Nature 407:599.]

274

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

As is the case for glucose transporters, mammals
express a family of aquaporins. Aquaporin 1 is
expressed in abundance in erythrocytes; the homologous aquaporin 2 is found in the kidney epithelial cells
that resorb water from the urine. Inactivating mutations in
both alleles of the aquaporin 2 gene cause diabetes insipidus,
a disease marked by excretion of large volumes of dilute
urine. This finding establishes the etiology of the disease and
demonstrates that the level of aquaporin 2 is rate-limiting for
water transport by the kidney. Other members of the aquaporin family transport hydroxyl-containing molecules such
as glycerol rather than water. ❚

facing (serosal) side, a two-stage process called transcellular transport.
An intestinal epithelial cell, like all epithelial cells, is
said to be polarized because the apical and basolateral domains of the plasma membrane contain different sets of
proteins. These two plasma-membrane domains are separated by the tight junctions between cells. The apical portion of the plasma membrane, which faces the intestinal
lumen, is specialized for absorption of sugars, amino
acids, and other molecules that are produced from food
by various digestive enzymes. Numerous fingerlike projections (100 nm in diameter) called microvilli greatly increase the area of the apical surface and thus the number
of transport proteins it can contain, enhancing the cell’s
absorptive capacity.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.5
Movement of Water
Most biological membranes are semipermeable, more permeable to water than to ions or most other solutes. Water
moves by osmosis across membranes from a solution of lower
solute concentration to one of higher solute concentration.

■

Animal cells swell or shrink when placed in hypotonic
or hypertonic solutions, respectively. By maintaining the
normal osmotic balance inside and outside cells, the
Na/K ATPase and other ion-transporting proteins in the
plasma membrane control cell volume.

■

Multiple Transport Proteins Are Needed to Move
Glucose and Amino Acids Across Epithelia
Figure 7-27 depicts the proteins that mediate absorption of
glucose from the intestinal lumen into the blood. In the first
stage of this process, a two-Na/one-glucose symporter located in microvillar membranes imports glucose, against its
concentration gradient, from the intestinal lumen across the
apical surface of the epithelial cells. As noted above, this
symporter couples the energetically unfavorable inward

The rigid cell wall surrounding plant cells prevents their
swelling and leads to generation of turgor pressure in response to the osmotic influx of water.

■

In response to the entry of water, protozoans maintain
their normal cell volume by extruding water from contractile vacuoles.

■

Aquaporins are water-channel proteins that specifically
increase the permeability of biomembranes for water (see
Figure 7-26). Aquaporin 2 in the plasma membrane of
certain kidney cells is essential for resorption of water
from the forming urine; its absence leads to a form of
diabetes.

■

Glucose

Glucose

Na+
Na+/K +
ATPase

K+
Basolateral
membrane
Blood
High Na+
Low K +

7.6

2 Na+/glucose
symporter

GLUT2

Na+
ATP
K+

2 Na+

Glucose
2 Na+

ADP + Pi
Apical
membrane

Tight junction
Cytosol
Low Na+
High K +

Intestinal lumen
Dietary glucose
High dietary Na+Cl−

Transepithelial Transport

We saw in Chapter 6 that several types of specialized regions
of the plasma membrane, called cell junctions, connect epithelial cells forming the sheetlike lining of the intestines and
other body surfaces (see Figure 6-5). Of concern to us here
are tight junctions, which prevent water-soluble materials
on one side of an epithelium from moving across to the
other side through the extracellular space between cells. For
this reason, absorption of nutrients from the intestinal
lumen occurs by the import of molecules on the luminal side
of intestinal epithelial cells and their export on the blood-

▲ FIGURE 7-27 Transcellular transport of glucose from
the intestinal lumen into the blood. The Na/K ATPase in
the basolateral surface membrane generates Na and K
concentration gradients. The outward movement of K ions
through nongated K channels (not shown) generates an insidenegative membrane potential. Both the Na concentration
gradient and the membrane potential are used to drive the
uptake of glucose from the intestinal lumen by the two-Na/oneglucose symporter located in the apical surface membrane.
Glucose leaves the cell via facilitated diffusion catalyzed by
GLUT2, a glucose uniporter located in the basolateral membrane.

7.6 • Transepithelial Transport

movement of one glucose molecule to the energetically favorable inward transport of two Na ions (see Figure 7-21).
In the steady state, all the Na ions transported from the intestinal lumen into the cell during Na/glucose symport, or
the similar process of Na/amino acid symport, are pumped
out across the basolateral membrane, which faces the underlying tissue. Thus the low intracellular Na concentration is
maintained. The Na/K ATPase that accomplishes this is
found exclusively in the basolateral membrane of intestinal
epithelial cells. The coordinated operation of these two
transport proteins allows uphill movement of glucose and
amino acids from the intestine into the cell. This first stage in
transcellular transport ultimately is powered by ATP hydrolysis by the Na/K ATPase.
In the second stage, glucose and amino acids concentrated inside intestinal cells by symporters are exported
down their concentration gradients into the blood via uniport proteins in the basolateral membrane. In the case of glucose, this movement is mediated by GLUT2 (see Figure
7-27). As noted earlier, this GLUT isoform has a relatively
low affinity for glucose but increases its rate of transport
substantially when the glucose gradient across the membrane
rises (see Figure 7-3).
The net result of this two-stage process is movement of
Na ions, glucose, and amino acids from the intestinal
lumen across the intestinal epithelium into the extracellular
medium that surrounds the basolateral surface of intestinal
epithelial cells. Tight junctions between the epithelial cells
prevent these molecules from diffusing back into the intestinal lumen, and eventually they move into the blood. The increased osmotic pressure created by transcellular transport
of salt, glucose, and amino acids across the intestinal epithelium draws water from the intestinal lumen into the extracellular medium that surrounds the basolateral surface. In a
sense, salts, glucose, and amino acids “carry” the water
along with them.

Simple Rehydration Therapy Depends
on the Osmotic Gradient Created
by Absorption of Glucose and Na
An understanding of osmosis and the intestinal
absorption of salt and glucose forms the basis for
a simple therapy that saves millions of lives each
year, particularly in less-developed countries. In these countries, cholera and other intestinal pathogens are major
causes of death of young children. A toxin released by the
bacteria activates chloride secretion by the intestinal epithelial cells into the lumen; water follows osmotically, and
the resultant massive loss of water causes diarrhea, dehydration, and ultimately death. A cure demands not only
killing the bacteria with antibiotics, but also rehydration—
replacement of the water that is lost from the blood and
other tissues.

275

Simply drinking water does not help, because it is excreted from the gastrointestinal tract almost as soon as it enters. However, as we have just learned, the coordinated
transport of glucose and Na across the intestinal epithelium
creates a transepithelial osmotic gradient, forcing movement
of water from the intestinal lumen across the cell layer. Thus,
giving affected children a solution of sugar and salt to drink
(but not sugar or salt alone) causes the osmotic flow of water
into the blood from the intestinal lumen and leads to rehydration. Similar sugar/salt solutions are the basis of popular
drinks used by athletes to get sugar as well as water into the
body quickly and efficiently. ❚

Parietal Cells Acidify the Stomach Contents
While Maintaining a Neutral Cytosolic pH
The mammalian stomach contains a 0.1 M solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl). This strongly acidic medium kills
many ingested pathogens and denatures many ingested proteins before they are degraded by proteolytic enzymes (e.g.,
pepsin) that function at acidic pH. Hydrochloric acid is secreted into the stomach by specialized epithelial cells called
parietal cells (also known as oxyntic cells) in the gastric lining. These cells contain a H/K ATPase in their apical
membrane, which faces the stomach lumen and generates a
millionfold H concentration gradient: pH  1.0 in the
stomach lumen versus pH  7.0 in the cell cytosol. This
transport protein is a P-class ATP-powered ion pump similar in structure and function to the plasma-membrane
Na/K ATPase discussed earlier. The numerous mitochondria in parietal cells produce abundant ATP for use by the
H/K ATPase.
If parietal cells simply exported H ions in exchange for

K ions, the loss of protons would lead to a rise in the concentration of OH ions in the cytosol and thus a marked increase in cytosolic pH. (Recall that [H]  [OH] always is
a constant, 1014 M2.) Parietal cells avoid this rise in cytosolic pH in conjunction with acidification of the stomach
lumen by using Cl/HCO3  antiporters in the basolateral
membrane to export the “excess” OH ions in the cytosol
into the blood. As noted earlier, this anion antiporter is activated at high cytosolic pH (see Figure 7-22).
The overall process by which parietal cells acidify the
stomach lumen is illustrated in Figure 7-28. In a reaction catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase the “excess” cytosolic OH
combines with CO2 that diffuses in from the blood, forming
HCO3  . Catalyzed by the basolateral anion antiporter, this
bicarbonate ion is exported across the basolateral membrane
(and ultimately into the blood) in exchange for a Cl ion.
The Cl ions then exit through Cl channels in the apical
membrane, entering the stomach lumen. To preserve electroneutrality, each Cl ion that moves into the stomach
lumen across the apical membrane is accompanied by a K
ion that moves outward through a separate K channel. In
this way, the excess K ions pumped inward by the H/K

276

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

Cl−/HCO3−
antiporter

Cl −
HCO3−

Cl − channel

Cl −

Cl −

K+ channel

HCO3−

K+
K+

K+

Carbonic
anhydrase

ATP

H+/K +
ATPase

ADP + Pi
CO2
Basolateral
membrane
Blood
pH 7.2

CO2 + OH−

H2O

Tight junction
Cytosol
pH 7.2

H+

H+
Apical
membrane
Stomach lumen
pH 1.0

▲ FIGURE 7-28 Acidification of the stomach lumen by
parietal cells in the gastric lining. The apical membrane of
parietal cells contains an H/K ATPase (a P-class pump) as well
as Cl and K channel proteins. Note the cyclic K transport
across the apical membrane: K ions are pumped inward by the
H/K ATPase and exit via a K channel. The basolateral
membrane contains an anion antiporter that exchanges HCO
3
and Cl ions. The combined operation of these four different
transport proteins and carbonic anhydrase acidifies the stomach
lumen while maintaining the neutral pH and electroneutrality of
the cytosol. See the text for more details.

ATPase are returned to the stomach lumen, thus maintaining
the normal intracellular K concentration. The net result is
secretion of equal amounts of H and Cl ions (i.e., HCl)
into the stomach lumen, while the pH of the cytosol remains
neutral and the excess OH ions, as HCO3, are transported
into the blood.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.6
Transepithelial Transport
The apical and basolateral plasma membrane domains
of epithelial cells contain different transport proteins and
carry out quite different transport processes.

■

In the intestinal epithelial cell, the coordinated operation
of Na-linked symporters in the apical membrane with
Na/K ATPases and uniporters in the basolateral membrane
mediates transcellular transport of amino acids and glucose
from the intestinal lumen to the blood (see Figure 7-27).
■

■ The combined action of carbonic anhydrase and
four different transport proteins permits parietal cells in the
stomach lining to secrete HCl into the lumen while maintaining their cytosolic pH near neutrality (see Figure 7-28).

7.7 Voltage-Gated Ion Channels
and the Propagation of Action
Potentials in Nerve Cells
In the previous section, we examined how different transport
proteins work together to absorb nutrients across the intestinal epithelium and to acidify the stomach. The nervous system, however, provides the most striking example of the
interplay of various ion channels, transporters, and ion
pumps in carrying out physiological functions. Neurons
(nerve cells) and certain muscle cells are specialized to generate and conduct a particular type of electric impulse, the
action potential. This alteration of the electric potential
across the cell membrane is caused by the opening and closing of certain voltage-gated ion channels.
In this section, we first introduce some of the key properties of neurons and action potentials, which move down
the axon very rapidly. We then describe how the voltagegated channels responsible for propagating action potentials
in neurons operate. In the following section, we examine
how arrival of an action potential at the axon terminus
causes secretion of chemicals called neurotransmitters. These
chemicals, in turn, bind to receptors on adjacent cells and
cause changes in the membrane potential of these cells. Thus
electric signals carry information within a nerve cell, while
chemical signals transmit information from one neuron to
another or from a neuron to a muscle or other target cell.

Specialized Regions of Neurons
Carry Out Different Functions
Although the morphology of various types of neurons differs
in some respects, they all contain four distinct regions with
differing functions: the cell body, the axon, the axon terminals, and the dendrites (Figure 7-29).
The cell body contains the nucleus and is the site of synthesis of virtually all neuronal proteins and membranes.
Some proteins are synthesized in dendrites, but none are
made in axons or axon terminals. Special transport processes
involving microtubules move proteins and membranes from
their sites of synthesis in the cell body down the length of
the axon to the terminals (Chapter 20).
Axons, whose diameter varies from a micrometer in certain nerves of the human brain to a millimeter in the giant
fiber of the squid, are specialized for conduction of action potentials. An action potential is a series of sudden changes in
the voltage, or equivalently the electric potential, across the
plasma membrane. When a neuron is in the resting (nonstimulated) state, the electric potential across the axonal membrane is approximately 60 mV (the inside negative relative
to the outside); this resting potential is similar to that of the
membrane potential in most non-neuronal cells. At the peak
of an action potential, the membrane potential can be as
much as 50 mV (inside positive), a net change of ≈110 mV.

7.7 • Voltage-Gated Ion Channels

277

(a) Multipolar interneuron
Dendrite

Axon
terminal
Cell body
Axon
Direction of action potential

Axon
hillock

Muscle

(b) Motor neuron
Cell body

Axon

Axon
hillock

Nodes
of Ranvier

Myelin
sheath

Direction of action potential

Dendrite

This depolarization of the membrane is followed by a rapid
repolarization, returning the membrane potential to the resting value (Figure 7-30).
An action potential originates at the axon hillock, the
junction of the axon and cell body, and is actively conducted
down the axon to the axon terminals, small branches of the
axon that form the synapses, or connections, with other cells.

Action potentials

Repolarization

Depolarization

Membrane potential

+50 mV

Resting membrane
potential

−60 mV
4 ms

Hyperpolarization
Time

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-30 Recording of an axonal
membrane potential over time reveals the amplitude and
frequency of action potentials. An action potential is a sudden,
transient depolarization of the membrane, followed by repolarization
to the resting potential of about 60 mV. The axonal membrane
potential can be measured with a small electrode placed into it
(see Figure 7-14). This recording of the axonal membrane potential
in this neuron shows that it is generating one action potential
about every 4 milliseconds.

Axon
terminal

 FIGURE 7-29 Typical morphology
of two types of mammalian neurons.
Action potentials arise in the axon hillock
and are conducted toward the axon
terminus. (a) A multipolar interneuron has
profusely branched dendrites, which
receive signals at synapses with several
hundred other neurons. A single long axon
that branches laterally at its terminus
transmits signals to other neurons. (b) A
motor neuron innervating a muscle cell
typically has a single long axon extending
from the cell body to the effector cell. In
mammalian motor neurons, an insulating
sheath of myelin usually covers all parts of
the axon except at the nodes of Ranvier
and the axon terminals.

Action potentials move at speeds up to 100 meters per second. In humans, for instance, axons may be more than a
meter long, yet it takes only a few milliseconds for an action
potential to move along their length. Arrival of an action potential at an axon terminal leads to opening of voltagesensitive Ca2 channels and an influx of Ca2, causing a localized rise in the cytosolic Ca2 concentration in the axon
terminus. The rise in Ca2 in turn triggers fusion of small
vesicles containing neurotransmitters with the plasma membrane, releasing neurotransmitters from this presynaptic cell
into the synaptic cleft, the narrow space separating it from
postsynaptic cells (Figure 7-31).
It takes about 0.5 millisecond (ms) for neurotransmitters
to diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to a receptor on
the postsynaptic cells. Binding of neurotransmitter triggers
opening or closing of specific ion channels in the plasma
membrane of postsynaptic cells, leading to changes in the
membrane potential at this point. A single axon in the central nervous system can synapse with many neurons and induce responses in all of them simultaneously.
Most neurons have multiple dendrites, which extend
outward from the cell body and are specialized to receive
chemical signals from the axon termini of other neurons.
Dendrites convert these signals into small electric impulses
and conduct them toward the cell body. Neuronal cell bodies can also form synapses and thus receive signals. Particularly in the central nervous system, neurons have
extremely long dendrites with complex branches. This allows them to form synapses with and receive signals from a
large number of other neurons, perhaps up to a thousand
(see Figure 7-29a). Membrane depolarizations or hyperpolarizations generated in the dendrites or cell body spread
to the axon hillock. If the membrane depolarization at that

278

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

Magnitude of the Action Potential Is Close to ENa

Axon of
presynaptic cell

(a)

Synaptic
vesicle

Axon
terminal

Exocytosis of
neurotransmitter

Synaptic cleft
Postsynaptic
cell
Receptors for
neurotransmitter

Direction of
signaling

(b)

Axon terminal
of presynaptic
cell
Synaptic vesicles
Direction of
signaling

Synaptic cleft
Dendrite of
postsynaptic
cell

Earlier in this chapter we saw how operation of the Na/K
pump generates a high concentration of K and a low concentration of Na in the cytosol, relative to those in the extracellular medium. The subsequent outward movement of
K ions through nongated K channels is driven by the K
concentration gradient (cytosol medium), generating the
resting membrane potential. The entry of Na ions into the
cytosol from the medium also is thermodynamically favored,
driven by the Na concentration gradient (medium
cytosol) and the inside-negative membrane potential (see
Figure 7-20). However, most Na channels in the plasma
membrane are closed in resting cells, so little inward movement of Na ions can occur (Figure 7-32a).
If enough Na channels open, the resulting influx of Na
ions will overwhelm the efflux of K ions though open resting K channels. The result would be a net inward movement of cations, generating an excess of positive charges on
the cytosolic face and a corresponding excess of negative
charges (due to the Cl ions “left behind” in the extracellular medium after influx of Na ions) on the extracellular face
(Figure 7-32b). In other words, the plasma membrane is
depolarized to such an extent that the inside face becomes
positive.
The magnitude of the membrane potential at the peak of
depolarization in an action potential is very close to the Na

(a) Resting state (cytosolic face negative)
Exterior

0.5 m

150 mM

K+
4 mM

Na+

▲ FIGURE 7-31 A chemical synapse. (a) A narrow region—the
synaptic cleft—separates the plasma membranes of the
presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. Arrival of action potentials at a
synapse causes release of neurotransmitters (red circles) by the
presynaptic cell, their diffusion across the synaptic cleft, and their
binding by specific receptors on the plasma membrane of the
postsynaptic cell. Generally these signals depolarize the postsynaptic
membrane (making the potential inside less negative), tending to
induce an action potential in it. (b) Electron micrograph shows a
dendrite synapsing with an axon terminal filled with synaptic
vesicles. In the synaptic region, the plasma membrane of the
presynaptic cell is specialized for vesicle exocytosis; synaptic
vesicles containing a neurotransmitter are clustered in these regions.
The opposing membrane of the postsynaptic cell (in this case, a
neuron) contains receptors for the neurotransmitter. [Part (b) from
C. Raine et al., eds., 1981, Basic Neurochemistry, 3d ed., Little, Brown, p. 32.]

point is great enough, an action potential will originate and
will be actively conducted down the axon.
Thus neurons use changes in the membrane potential, the
action potentials, to conduct signals along their length, and
small molecules, the neurotransmitters, to send signals from
cell to cell.

K+
12 mM

140 mM

+ +

+ + +

+ + +

+ + +

+

− −

− − −

− − −

− − −

−

+

Na+ channels

K channel
(open)

Cytosol

(closed)

(b) Depolarized state (cytosolic face positive)
Exterior
150 mM

Na+
K+
12 mM

Cytosol

K+

4 mM

+ +

+ − −

− −

− + +

140 mM

− − −

+ + +
Na+

K+ channel
(open)

− − −

−

+ + +
Na+

+
Na+

Na+ channels
(open)

▲ FIGURE 7-32 Depolarization of the plasma membrane
due to opening of gated Na channels. (a) In resting neurons,
nongated K channels are open, but the more numerous gated
Na channels are closed. The movement of K ions outward
establishes the inside-negative membrane potential characteristic
of most cells. (b) Opening of gated Na channels permits an
influx of sufficient Na ions to cause a reversal of the membrane
potential. See text for details.

7.7 • Voltage-Gated Ion Channels

equilibrium potential ENa given by the Nernst equation
(Equation 7-2), as would be expected if opening of voltagegated Na channels is responsible for generating action potentials. For example, the measured peak value of the action
potential for the squid giant axon is 35 mV, which is close
to the calculated value of ENa (55 mV) based on Na concentrations of 440 mM outside and 50 mM inside. The relationship between the magnitude of the action potential and
the concentration of Na ions inside and outside the cell has
been confirmed experimentally. For instance, if the concentration of Na ions in the solution bathing the squid axon is
reduced to one-third of normal, the magnitude of the depolarization is reduced by 40 mV, nearly as predicted.

Sequential Opening and Closing of Voltage-Gated
Na and K Channels Generate Action Potentials
The cycle of membrane depolarization, hyperpolarization,
and return to the resting value that constitutes an action potential lasts 1–2 milliseconds and can occur hundreds of
times a second in a typical neuron (see Figure 7-30). These
cyclical changes in the membrane potential result from the
sequential opening and closing first of voltage-gated Na
channels and then of voltage-gated K channels. The role of
these channels in the generation of action potentials was elucidated in classic studies done on the giant axon of the squid,
in which multiple microelectrodes can be inserted without
causing damage to the integrity of the plasma membrane.
However, the same basic mechanism is used by all neurons.

Voltage-Gated Na Channels As just discussed, voltage-

gated Na channels are closed in resting neurons. A small
depolarization of the membrane causes a conformational
change in these channel proteins that opens a gate on the cytosolic surface of the pore, permitting Na ions to pass
through the pore into the cell. The greater the initial membrane depolarization, the more voltage-gated Na channels
that open and the more Na ions enter.
As Na ions flow inward through opened channels, the
excess positive charges on the cytosolic face and negative
charges on the exoplasmic face diffuse a short distance away
from the initial site of depolarization. This passive spread of
positive and negative charges depolarizes (makes the inside
less negative) adjacent segments of the plasma membrane,
causing opening of additional voltage-gated Na channels in
these segments and an increase in Na influx. As more Na
ions enter the cell, the inside of the cell membrane becomes
more depolarized, causing the opening of yet more voltagegated Na channels and even more membrane depolarization, setting into motion an explosive entry of Na ions. For
a fraction of a millisecond, the permeability of this region of
the membrane to Na becomes vastly greater than that for
K, and the membrane potential approaches ENa, the equilibrium potential for a membrane permeable only to Na
ions. As the membrane potential approaches ENa, however,
further net inward movement of Na ions ceases, since the

279

concentration gradient of Na ions (outside inside) is now
offset by the inside-positive membrane potential ENa. The action potential is at its peak, close to the value of ENa.
Figure 7-33 schematically depicts the critical structural
features of voltage-gated Na channels and the conformational changes that cause their opening and closing. In the
resting state, a segment of the protein on the cytosolic face—
the “gate”—obstructs the central pore, preventing passage of
ions. A small depolarization of the membrane triggers movement of positively charged voltage-sensing  helices toward
the exoplasmic surface, causing a conformational change in
the gate that opens the channel and allows ion flow. After
about 1 millisecond, further Na influx is prevented by
movement of the cytosol-facing channel-inactivating segment
into the open channel. As long as the membrane remains depolarized, the channel-inactivating segment remains in the
channel opening; during this refractory period, the channel is
inactivated and cannot be reopened. A few milliseconds after
the inside-negative resting potential is reestablished, the
channel-inactivating segment swings away from the pore and
the channel returns to the closed resting state, once again
able to be opened by depolarization.

Voltage-Gated K Channels The repolarization of the membrane that occurs during the refractory period is due largely
to opening of voltage-gated K channels. The subsequent increased efflux of K from the cytosol removes the excess
positive charges from the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane (i.e., makes it more negative), thereby restoring the
inside-negative resting potential. Actually, for a brief instant
the membrane becomes hyperpolarized, with the potential
approaching EK, which is more negative than the resting potential (see Figure 7-30).
Opening of the voltage-gated K channels is induced
by the large depolarization of the action potential. Unlike
voltage-gated Na channels, most types of voltage-gated K
channels remain open as long as the membrane is depolarized, and close only when the membrane potential has returned to an inside-negative value. Because the voltage-gated
K channels open slightly after the initial depolarization, at
the height of the action potential, they sometimes are called
delayed K channels. Eventually all the voltage-gated K and
a channels return to their closed resting state. The only
open channels in this baseline condition are the nongated K
channels that generate the resting membrane potential, which
soon returns to its usual value (see Figure 7-32a).
The patch-clamp tracings in Figure 7-34 reveal the essential properties of voltage-gated K channels. In this experiment, small segments of a neuronal plasma membrane were
held “clamped” at different potentials, and the flux of electric charges through the patch due to flow of K ions
through open K channels was measured. At the depolarizing voltage of 10 mV, the channels in the membrane patch
open infrequently and remain open for only a few milliseconds, as judged, respectively, by the number and width of the
“upward blips” on the tracings. Further, the ion flux through

280

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
4
Repolarization of membrane, displacement of channelinactivating segment, and closure of gate (slow, several ms)
Ion-selective
pore
Exterior
+++++

+++++

−−−

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

−−−

Outer
vestibule
−−−−−

Na+
Depolarized
membrane

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

−−−−−

+++

+++

−−−−−

−−−−−
+
+
+
+

+++

+
+
+
+

+++

Cytosol
Gate
Channel-inactivating
segment

Voltagesensing
α helix

Inner
vestibule

Na+

Closed Na+ channel

Open Na+ channel

Inactive Na+ channel
(refractory period)

1

2

3

Initial depolarization, movement
of voltage-sensing α helices,
opening of channel
(<0.1 ms)

Return of voltage-sensing
α helices to resting position,
inactivation of channel
(0.5–1.0 ms )

▲ FIGURE 7-33 Operational model of the voltage-gated
Na channel. Four transmembrane domains in the protein
contribute to the central pore through which ions move. The critical components that control movement of Na ions are shown
here in the cutaway views depicting three of the four transmembrane domains. 1 In the closed, resting state, the
voltage-sensing  helices, which have positively charged side
chains every third residue, are attracted to the negative charges
on the cytosolic side of the resting membrane. This keeps the
gate segment in a position that blocks the channel, preventing
entry of Na ions. 2 In response to a small depolarization, the

voltage-sensing helices rotate in a screwlike manner toward the
outer membrane surface, causing an immediate conformational
change in the gate segment that opens the channel. 3 The
voltage-sensing helices rapidly return to the resting position and
the channel-inactivating segment moves into the open channel,
preventing passage of further ions. 4 Once the membrane is
repolarized, the channel-inactivating segment is displaced from
the channel opening and the gate closes; the protein reverts to
the closed, resting state and can be opened again by
depolarization. [See W. A. Catterall, 2001, Nature 409:988; M. Zhou et al.,

them is rather small, as measured by the electric current passing through each open channel (the height of the blips). Depolarizing the membrane further to 20 mV causes these
channels to open about twice as frequently. Also, more K
ions move through each open channel (the height of the blips
is greater) because the force driving cytosolic K ions out-

ward is greater at a membrane potential of 20 mV than at
10 mV. Depolarizing the membrane further to 50 mV, the
value at the peak of an action potential, causes opening of
more K channels and also increases the flux of K through
them. Thus, by opening during the peak of the action potential, these K channels permit the outward movement of K

2001, Nature 411:657; and B. A. Yi and L. Y. Jan, 2000, Neuron 27:423.]

Two channels open
simultaneously
Closed Open
10 pA

Membrane
potential
50 mv
20 mv
10 mv

200 ms

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-34 Probability of channel
opening and current flux through individual voltage-gated
K channels increases with the extent of membrane
depolarization. These patch-clamp tracings were obtained from
patches of neuronal plasma membrane clamped at three different
potentials, 50, 20, and 10 mV. The upward deviations in the
current indicate the opening of K channels and movement of K

ions outward (cytosolic to exoplasmic face) across the membrane.
Increasing the membrane depolarization (i.e., the clamping
voltage) from 10 mV to 50 mV increases the probability a
channel will open, the time it stays open, and the amount of
electric current (numbers of ions) that pass through it. [From
B. Pallota et al., 1981, Nature 293:471, as modified by B. Hille, 1992, Ion
Channels of Excitable Membranes, 2d ed., Sinauer Associates, p. 122.]

7.7 • Voltage-Gated Ion Channels

ions and repolarization of the membrane potential while the
voltage-gated Na channels are closed and inactivated.
More than 100 voltage-gated K channel proteins have
been isolated from humans and other vertebrates. As we discuss later, all these channel proteins have a similar overall
structure, but they exhibit different voltage dependencies,
conductivities, channel kinetics, and other functional properties. However, many open only at strongly depolarizing
voltages, a property required for generation of the maximal
depolarization characteristic of the action potential before
repolarization of the membrane begins.

Action Potentials Are Propagated Unidirectionally
Without Diminution
The generation of an action potential just described relates to
the changes that occur in a small patch of the neuronal

Axon

Membrane
potential (mV)

Time: 0

+
−

+
−

−
+

−
+

Na+
–– ––
++ ++
++ ++
–– ––
Na+

Closed and
inactivated
(refractory
period)

+50
0

plasma membrane. At the peak of the action potential, passive spread of the membrane depolarization is sufficient to
depolarize a neighboring segment of membrane. This causes
a few voltage-gated Na channels in this region to open,
thereby increasing the extent of depolarization in this region
and causing an explosive opening of more a channels and
generation of an action potential. This depolarization soon
triggers opening of voltage-gated K channels and restoration of the resting potential. The action potential thus
spreads as a traveling wave away from its initial site without diminution.
As noted earlier, during the refractory period voltagegated Na channels are inactivated for several milliseconds.
Such previously opened channels cannot open during this period even if the membrane is depolarized due to passive
spread. As illustrated in Figure 7-35, the inability of Na
channels to reopen during the refractory period ensures that

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

Open

281

Closed
Depolarization

−50
1

0

2
3
4
Distance along axon (mm)

5

6

Na+

Time: 1 ms

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

––
++

––
++

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

++ ++
–– ––
Na+

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

Closed and
inactivated

Open

Membrane
potential (mV)

Closed
+50
0

 FIGURE 7-35 Unidirectional conduc-

Closed

Hyperpolarization

−50
1

0

2
3
4
Distance along axon (mm)

5

6

Na+

Time: 2 ms

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

+
−

––
++

––
++

+
−

+
−

+
−

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

−
+

++ ++
–– ––
Na+

−
+

−
+

−
+

Membrane
potential (mV)

Closed

Closed and
inactivated

+50

Open

Closed

Resting potential

0
−50
0

1

2

3

4

Distance along axon (mm)

5

6

tion of an action potential due to transient
inactivation of voltage-gated Na channels.
At time 0, an action potential (red) is at the
2-mm position on the axon; the Na channels
at this position are open and Na ions are
flowing inward. The excess Na ions diffuse
in both directions along the inside of the
membrane, passively spreading the depolarization. Because the Na channels at the 1mm position are still inactivated (green), they
cannot yet be reopened by the small depolarization caused by passive spread; the Na
channels at the 3-mm position, in contrast,
begin to open. Each region of the membrane
is refractory (inactive) for a few milliseconds
after an action potential has passed. Thus, the
depolarization at the 2-mm site at time 0 triggers action potentials downstream only; at 1
ms an action potential is passing the 3-mm
position, and at 2 ms, an action potential is
passing the 4-mm position.

282

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

action potentials are propagated only in one direction, from
the axon hillock where they originate to the axon terminus.
This property of the Na channels also limits the number of
action potentials per second that a neuron can conduct. Reopening of Na channels “upstream” of an action potential
(i.e., closer to the cell body) also is delayed by the membrane
hyperpolarization that results from opening of voltage-gated
K channels.

All Voltage-Gated Ion Channels
Have Similar Structures
Having explained how the action potential is dependent on
regulated opening and closing of voltage-gated channels, we
turn to a molecular dissection of these remarkable proteins.
After describing the basic structure of these channels, we
focus on three questions:
How do these proteins sense changes in membrane
potential?

■

How is this change transduced into opening of the
channel?

Nerve Cells Can Conduct Many Action
Potentials in the Absence of ATP

■

It is important to note that the depolarization of the membrane characteristic of an action potential results from movement of just a small number of Na ions into a neuron and
does not significantly affect the intracellular Na concentration gradient. A typical nerve cell has about 10 voltage-gated
Na channels per square micrometer ( m2) of plasma membrane. Since each channel passes ≈5000–10,000 ions during
the millisecond it is open (see Figure 7-18), a maximum of
105 ions per m2 of plasma membrane will move inward
during each action potential.
To assess the effect of this ion flux on the cytosolic Na
concentration of 10 mM (0.01 mol/L), typical of a resting
axon, we focus on a segment of axon 1 micrometer ( m)
long and 10 m in diameter. The volume of this segment is
78 m3 or 7.8  10–14 liters, and it contains 4.7  108 Na
ions: (102 mol/L) (7.8  10–14 L) (6  1023 Na/mol). The
surface area of this segment of the axon is 31 m2, and during passage of one action potential, 105 Na ions will enter
per m2 of membrane. Thus this Na influx increases the
number of Na ions in this segment by only one part in
about 150: (4.7  108) (3.1  106). Likewise, the repolarization of the membrane due to the efflux of K ions
through voltage-gated K channels does not significantly
change the intracellular K concentration.
Because so few Na and K ions move across the
plasma membrane during each action potential, the
Na/K pump that maintains the usual ion gradients plays
no direct role in impulse conduction. When this pump is
experimentally inhibited by dinitrophenol or another inhibitor of ATP production, the concentrations of Na and
K gradually become the same inside and outside the cell,
and the membrane potential falls to zero. This elimination
of the usual Na and K electrochemical gradients occurs
extremely slowly in large squid neurons but takes about 5
minutes in smaller mammalian neurons. In either case, the
electrochemical gradients are essentially independent of
the supply of ATP over the short time spans required for
nerve cells to generate and conduct action potentials. Since
the ion movements during each action potential involve
only a minute fraction of the cell’s K and Na ions, a
nerve cell can fire hundreds or even thousands of times in
the absence of ATP.

■

What causes these channels to become inactivated
shortly after opening?

The initial breakthrough in understanding voltage-gated
ion channels came from analysis of fruit flies (Drosophila
melanogaster) carrying the shaker mutation. These flies
shake vigorously under ether anesthesia, reflecting a loss of
motor control and a defect in certain motor neurons that
have an abnormally prolonged action potential. This phenotype suggested that the shaker mutation causes a defect in
voltage-gated K channels that prevents them from opening
normally immediately upon depolarization. To show that the
wild-type shaker gene encoded a K channel, cloned wildtype shaker cDNA was used as a template to produce shaker
mRNA in a cell-free system. Expression of this mRNA in
frog oocytes and patch-clamp measurements on the newly
synthesized channel protein showed that its functional properties were identical to those of the voltage-gated K channel
in the neuronal membrane, demonstrating conclusively that
the shaker gene encodes this K-channel protein.
The Shaker K channel and most other voltage-gated K
channels that have been identified are tetrameric proteins
composed of four identical subunits arranged in the membrane around a central pore. Each subunit is constructed of
six membrane-spanning  helixes, designated S1–S6, and a
P segment (Figure 7-36a). The S5 and S6 helices and the P
segment are structurally and functionally homologous to
those in the nongated resting K channel discussed earlier
(see Figure 7-15). The S4 helix, which contains numerous
positively charged lysine and arginine residues, acts as a voltage sensor; the N-terminal “ball” extending into the cytosol
from S1 is the channel-inactivating segment.
Voltage-gated Na channels and Ca2 channels are
monomeric proteins organized into four homologous domains, I–IV (Figure 7-36b). Each of these domains is similar to
a subunit of a voltage-gated K channel. However, in contrast
to voltage-gated K channels, which have four channelinactivating segments, the monomeric voltage-gated channels
have a single channel-inactivating segment. Except for this
minor structural difference and their varying ion permeabilities,
all voltage-gated ion channels are thought to function in a similar manner and to have evolved from a monomeric ancestral
channel protein that contained six transmembrane  helices.

7.7 • Voltage-Gated Ion Channels
(a) Voltage-gated K + channel (tetramer)
Exterior
+
12345 6
+

+
12345 6
+

+
12345 6
+

+
12345 6
+

III

IV

+
12345 6
+

+
12345 6
+

Cytosol
Voltage+H N sensing
3
helix

Pore
COO−

(b) Voltage-gated Na+ channel (monomer)

I

II

Exterior
+
12345 6
+

+
12345 6
+

Cytosol

+

H3N

H
Voltagesensing
helix

Pore

Inactivation
segment

COO−

283

 FIGURE 7-36 Schematic depictions of the
secondary structures of voltage-gated K and
Na channels. (a) Voltage-gated K channels
are composed of four identical subunits, each
containing 600–700 amino acids, and six
membrane-spanning  helices, S1–S6. The
N-terminus of each subunit, located in the cytosol,
forms a globular domain (orange ball) essential for
inactivation of the open channel. The S5 and S6
helices (green) and the P segment (blue) are
homologous to those in nongated resting K
channels, but each subunit contains four additional
transmembrane  helices. One of these, S4 (red),
is the voltage-sensing  helix. (b) Voltage-gated
Na channels are monomers containing
1800–2000 amino acids organized into four transmembrane domains (I–IV) that are similar to the
subunits in voltage-gated K channels. The single
channel-inactivating segment, located in the
cytosol between domains III and IV, contains a
conserved hydrophobic motif (H). Voltage-gated
Ca2 channels have a similar overall structure.
Most voltage-gated ion channels also contain
regulatory () subunits that are not depicted here.
[Part (a) adapted from C. Miller, 1992, Curr. Biol. 2:573,
and H. Larsson et al., 1996, Neuron 16:387. Part (b)
adapted from W. A. Catterall, 2001, Nature 409:988.]

Voltage-Sensing S4  Helices Move in Response
to Membrane Depolarization
Sensitive electric measurements suggest that the opening of a
voltage-gated Na or K channel is accompanied by the
movement of 10 to 12 protein-bound positive charges from
the cytosolic to the exoplasmic surface of the membrane; alternatively, a larger number of charges may move a shorter distance across the membrane. The movement of these gating
charges (or voltage sensors) under the force of the electric field
triggers a conformational change in the protein that opens the
channel. The four voltage-sensing S4 transmembrane  helices, often called gating helices, are present in all voltage-gated
channels and generally have a positively charged lysine or
arginine every third or fourth residue. In the closed resting
state, the C-terminal half of each S4 helix is exposed to the
cytosol; when the membrane is depolarized, these amino acids
move outward, probably rotate 180°, and become exposed to
the exoplasmic surface of the channel (see Figure 7-33).
Studies with mutant Shaker K channels support this
model for operation of the S4 helix in voltage sensing. When
one or more arginine or lysine residues in the S4 helix of the
Shaker K channel were replaced with neutral or acidic
residues, fewer positive charges than normal moved across
the membrane in response to a membrane depolarization, indicating that arginine and lysine residues in the S4 helix do
indeed move across the membrane. In other studies, mutant

Shaker proteins in which various S4 residues were converted
to cysteine were tested for their reactivity with a watersoluble cysteine-modifying chemical agent that cannot cross
the membrane. On the basis of whether the cysteines reacted
with the agent added to one side or other of the membrane,
the results indicated that in the resting state amino acids near
the C-terminus of the S4 helix face the cytosol; after the
membrane is depolarized, some of these same amino acids
become exposed to the exoplasmic surface of the channel.
These experiments directly demonstrate movement of the S4
helix across the membrane, as schematically depicted in Figure 7-33 for voltage-gated Na channels.
The gate itself is thought to comprise the cytosolic facing N-termini of the four S5 helixes and the C-termini of the
four S6 helices (see Figure 7-36). By analogy to the bacterial
K channel, the ends of these helices most likely come together just below the actual ion-selectivity filter, thereby
blocking the pore in the closed state (see Figure 7-15). X-ray
crystallographic studies of bacterial channels indicate that
in the open state, the ends of these helices have moved outward, leaving a hole in the middle sufficient for ions to move
through. Thus the gates probably are composed of the
cytosol-facing ends of the S5 and S6 helixes. However, since
the molecular structure of no voltage-gated channel has been
determined to date, we do not yet know how this putative
conformational change is induced by movements of the
voltage-sensing S4 helices.

284

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
Mutant Shaker K+ channel

Movement of the Channel-Inactivating Segment
into the Open Pore Blocks Ion Flow

Ion-selective
pore
Exterior
α

α

Membrane

Lateral
window
Cytosol
β

β
β

Ball and chain

▲ FIGURE 7-37 Ball-and-chain model for inactivation of
voltage-gated K channels. Three-dimensional cutaway view of
the channel in the inactive state. The globular domain (green ball)
at the terminus of one subunit has moved through a lateral
window to block the central pore. In addition to the four 
subunits (orange) that form the channel, these channel proteins
also have four regulatory  subunits (blue). See text for
discussion. [Adapted from R. Aldrich, 2001, Nature 411:643, and
M. Zhou et al., 2001, Nature 411:657.]

Mutant K+ channel +
synthetic peptide

0

20

40
60
Time (ms)

80

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-38 Experiments with a
mutant K channel lacking the N-terminal globular domains
support the ball-and-chain inactivation model. The wild-type
Shaker K channel and a mutant form lacking the amino acids
composing the N-terminal ball were expressed in Xenopus
oocytes. The activity of the channels then was monitored by the
patch-clamp technique. When patches were depolarized from
0 to 30 mV, the wild-type channel opened for ≈5 ms and then
closed (red curve), whereas the mutant channel opened normally,
but could not close (green curve). When a chemically synthesized
ball peptide was added to the cytosolic face of the patch, the
mutant channel opened normally and then closed (blue curve).
This demonstrated that the added peptide inactivated the channel
after it opened and that the ball does not have to be tethered to
the protein in order to function. [From W. N. Zagotta et al., 1990,
Science 250:568.]

Central
cavity

α

Wild-type Shaker K+ channel

K+ current

An important characteristic of most voltage-gated channels is
inactivation; that is, soon after opening they close spontaneously, forming an inactive channel that will not reopen until
the membrane is repolarized. In the resting state, the positively
charged globular balls at the N-termini of the four subunits in
a voltage-gated K channel are free in the cytosol. Several milliseconds after the channel is opened by depolarization, one ball
moves through an opening (“lateral window”) between two
of the subunits and binds in a hydrophobic pocket in the pore’s
central cavity, blocking the flow of K ions (Figure 7-37). After
a few milliseconds, the ball is displaced from the pore, and the
protein reverts to the closed, resting state. The ball-and-chain
domains in K channels are functionally equivalent to the
channel-inactivating segment in Na channels.
The experimental results shown in Figure 7-38 demonstrate that inactivation of K channels depends on the ball
domains, occurs after channel opening, and does not require
the ball domains to be covalently linked to the channel protein. In other experiments, mutant K channels lacking portions of the ≈40-residue chain connecting the ball to the S1
helix were expressed in frog oocytes. Patch-clamp measurements of channel activity showed that the shorter the chain,

the more rapid the inactivation, as if a ball attached to a
shorter chain can move into the open channel more readily.
Conversely, addition of random amino acids to lengthen the
normal chain slows channel inactivation.
The single channel-inactivating segment in voltage-gated
Na channels contains a conserved hydrophobic motif composed of isoleucine, phenylalanine, methionine, and threonine (see Figure 7-36b). Like the longer ball-and-chain
domain in K channels, this segment folds into and blocks
the Na-conducting pore until the membrane is repolarized
(see Figure 7-33).

Myelination Increases the Velocity
of Impulse Conduction
As we have seen, action potentials can move down an axon
without diminution at speeds up to 1 meter per second. But
even such fast speeds are insufficient to permit the complex
movements typical of animals. In humans, for instance, the
cell bodies of motor neurons innervating leg muscles are located in the spinal cord, and the axons are about a meter in
length. The coordinated muscle contractions required for
walking, running, and similar movements would be impossible if it took one second for an action potential to move from
the spinal cord down the axon of a motor neuron to a leg
muscle. The presence of a myelin sheath around an axon increases the velocity of impulse conduction to 10–100 meters

7.7 • Voltage-Gated Ion Channels

human brain were not myelinated, their axonal diameters
would have to increase about 10,000-fold to achieve the
same conduction velocities as myelinated neurons. Thus vertebrate brains, with their densely packed neurons, never
could have evolved without myelin.
The myelin sheath is a stack of specialized plasma membrane sheets produced by a glial cell that wraps itself around
the axon (Figure 7-39). In the peripheral nervous system,

per second. As a result, in a typical human motor neuron, an
action potential can travel the length of a 1-meter-long axon
and stimulate a muscle to contract within 0.01 seconds.
In nonmyelinated neurons, the conduction velocity of an
action potential is roughly proportional to the diameter of
the axon, because a thicker axon will have a greater number of ions that can diffuse. The human brain is packed with
relatively small, myelinated neurons. If the neurons in the

(a)

285

(b)

PMP22

(d)

MBP

Plasma membrane
Cytosol

Cytosolic
apposition

(c)
Exoplasmic
apposition

Nucleus

Axon
Schwann
cell

▲ FIGURE 7-39 Formation and structure of a myelin sheath
in the peripheral nervous system. Myelinated axons are
surrounded by an insulating layer of compressed membranes.
(a) Electron micrograph of a cross section through an axon (Ax)
surrounded by a myelin sheath (MS) and Schwann cell (SN).
(b) At higher magnification this specialized spiral membrane appears as a series of layers, or lamellae, of phospholipid bilayers.
In this image, the termini of both the outer and innermost wraps
are evident (arrows). (c) As a Schwann cell repeatedly wraps
around an axon, all the spaces between its plasma membranes,
both cytosolic and exoplasmic, are reduced. Eventually all the cytosol is forced out and a structure of compact stacked plasma
membranes, the myelin sheath, is formed. (d) The two most
abundant membrane proteins, P0 and PMP22, in peripheral
myelin are expressed only by Schwann cells. The exoplasmic

P0 exoplasmic
domain
P0 transmembrane
domain
P0 cytosolic
domain

domain of a P0 protein, which has an immunoglobulin fold,
associates with similar domains emanating from P0 proteins in
the opposite membrane surface, thereby “zippering” together
the exoplasmic membrane surfaces in close apposition. These
interactions are stabilized by binding of a tryptophan residue on
the tip of the exoplasmic domain to lipids in the opposite
membrane. Close apposition of the cytosolic faces of the
membrane may result from binding of the cytosolic tail of each
P0 protein to phospholipids in the opposite membrane. PMP22
may also contribute to membrane compaction. Myelin basic
protein (MBP), a cytosolic protein, remains between the closely
apposed membranes as the cytosol is squeezed out. [Parts (a) and
(b) courtesy Grahame Kidd, Lerner Research Institute. Part (d) adapted
from L. Shapiro et al., 1996, Neuron 17:435, and E. J. Arroyo and S. S.
Scherer, 2000, Histochem. Cell Biol. 113:1.]

286

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

these glial cells are called Schwann cells. In the central nervous system, they are called oligodendrocytes. In both vertebrates and some invertebrates, glial cells accompany axons
along their length, but specialization of these glial cells to
form myelin occurs predominantly in vertebrates. Vertebrate
glial cells that will later form myelin have on their surface a
myelin-associated glycoprotein and other proteins that bind
to adjacent axons and trigger the formation of myelin.
Figure 7-39d illustrates the formation and basic structure
of a myelin sheath, which contains both membrane and cytosolic components. A myelin membrane, like all biomembranes, has a basic phospholipid bilayer structure, but it
contains far fewer types of proteins than found in most other
membranes. Two proteins predominate in the myelin membrane around peripheral axons: P0, which causes adjacent
plasma membranes to stack tightly together, and PMP22.
Gene knockout studies in mice have recently identified
PMP22 as essential for myelination. In the central nervous
system, a different membrane protein and a proteolipid together function similarly to P0. The major cytosolic protein
in all myelin sheaths is myelin basic protein (MBP). Mice
that contain the shiverer mutation in the MBP gene exhibit
severe neurological problems, evidence for the importance of
myelination in the normal functioning of the nervous system.

Action Potentials “Jump” from Node to Node
in Myelinated Axons
The myelin sheath surrounding an axon is formed from
many glial cells. Each region of myelin formed by an individual glial cell is separated from the next region by an unmyelinated area of axonal membrane about 1 m in length
called the node of Ranvier (or simply, node). The axonal
membrane is in direct contact with the extracellular fluid
only at the nodes. Moreover, all the voltage-gated Na channels and all the Na/K pumps, which maintain the ionic
gradients in the axon, are located in the nodes.
As a consequence of this localization, the inward movement of Na ions that generates the action potential can
occur only at the myelin-free nodes (Figure 7-40). The excess cytosolic positive ions generated at a node during the
membrane depolarization associated with an action potential
spread passively through the axonal cytosol to the next node
with very little loss or attenuation, since they cannot cross the
myelinated axonal membrane. This causes a depolarization
at one node to spread rapidly to the next node, permitting, in
effect, the action potential to “jump” from node to node.
This phenomenon explains why the conduction velocity of
myelinated neurons is about the same as that of much larger
diameter unmyelinated neurons. For instance, a 12- mdiameter myelinated vertebrate axon and a 600- m-diameter
unmyelinated squid axon both conduct impulses at 12 m/s.
Several factors contribute to the clustering of voltagegated Na channels and Na/K pumps at the nodes of

Action potential
(depolarized region
of membrane) Na+

Node of
Ranvier

Myelin
sheath
Axon

1

2

3

Na+

Excess positive
charge

Na+

Na+

▲ FIGURE 7-40 Conduction of action potentials in
myelinated axons. Because voltage-gated Na channels are
localized to the axonal membrane at the nodes of Ranvier, the
influx of Na ions associated with an action potential can occur
only at nodes. When an action potential is generated at one node
(step 1 ), the excess positive ions in the cytosol, which cannot
move outward across the sheath, diffuse rapidly down the axon,
causing sufficient depolarization at the next node (step 2 ) to
induce an action potential at that node (step 3 ). By this
mechanism the action potential jumps from node to node along
the axon.
Ranvier. Both of these transport proteins interact with two
cytoskeletal proteins, ankyrin and spectrin, similar to those
in the erythrocyte membrane (see Figure 5-31). The extracellular domain of the 1 subunit of the Na channel also
binds to the extracellular domain of Nr-CAM, a type of adhesive protein that is localized to the node. As a result of
these multiple protein-protein interactions, the concentration
of Na channels is roughly a hundredfold higher in the nodal
membrane of myelinated axons than in the axonal membrane of nonmyelinated neurons. In addition, glial cells secrete protein hormones that somehow trigger the clustering
of these nerve membrane proteins at the nodes. Finally, tight
junctions between the axon and the glial cell plasma membrane in the paranodal junctions immediately adjacent to the
nodes may prevent diffusion of Na channels and Na/K
pumps away from the nodes.
One prevalent neurological disease among human
adults is multiple sclerosis (MS), usually characterized by spasms and weakness in one or more limbs,
bladder dysfunction, local sensory losses, and visual disturbances. This disorder—the prototype demyelinating
disease—is caused by patchy loss of myelin in areas of the
brain and spinal cord. In MS patients, conduction of action
potentials by the demyelinated neurons is slowed, and the

7.8 • Neurotransmitters and Receptor and Transport Proteins

Na channels spread outward from the nodes, lowering their
nodal concentration. The cause of the disease is not known
but appears to involve either the body’s production of autoantibodies (antibodies that bind to normal body proteins)
that react with myelin basic protein or the secretion of proteases that destroy myelin proteins. ❚

287

nels result from movement of a cytosolic segment into the
open pore (see Figure 7-37).
Myelination, which increases the rate of impulse conduction up to a hundredfold, permits the close packing of
neurons characteristic of vertebrate brains.

■

In myelinated neurons, voltage-gated Na channels are
concentrated at the nodes of Ranvier. Depolarization at
one node spreads rapidly with little attenuation to the next
node, so that the action potential “jumps” from node to
node (see Figure 7-40).

■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.7
Voltage-Gated Ion Channels and the Propagation
of Action Potentials in Nerve Cells
Action potentials are sudden membrane depolarizations
followed by a rapid repolarization. They originate at the
axon hillock and move down the axon toward the axon
terminals, where the electric impulse is transmitted to other
cells via a synapse (see Figures 7-29 and 7-31).

■

An action potential results from the sequential opening
and closing of voltage-gated Na and K channels in the
plasma membrane of neurons and muscle cells.
■

Opening of voltage-gated Na channels permits influx of
Na ions for about 1 ms, causing a sudden large depolarization of a segment of the membrane. The channels then
close and become unable to open (refractory) for several
milliseconds, preventing further Na flow (see Figure 7-33).
■

As the action potential reaches its peak, opening of
voltage-gated K channels permits efflux of K ions, which
repolarizes and then hyperpolarizes the membrane. As
these channels close, the membrane returns to its resting
potential (see Figure 7-30).
■

The excess cytosolic cations associated with an action
potential generated at one point on an axon spread passively to the adjacent segment, triggering opening of
voltage-gated Na channels and movement of the action
potential along the axon.

■

Because of the absolute refractory period of the voltagegated Na channels and the brief hyperpolarization resulting from K efflux, the action potential is propagated
in one direction only, toward the axon terminus.
■

Voltage-gated Na and Ca2 channels are monomeric
proteins containing four domains that are structurally and
functionally similar to each of the subunits in the tetrameric
voltage-gated K channels.
■

Each domain or subunit in voltage-gated cation channels contains six transmembrane  helices and a nonhelical P segment that forms the ion-selectivity pore (see Figure 7-36).

■

Opening of voltage-gated channels results from outward
movement of the positively charged S4  helices in response
to a depolarization of sufficient magnitude.

■

■

Closing and inactivation of voltage-gated cation chan-

7.8 Neurotransmitters and Receptor
and Transport Proteins in Signal
Transmission at Synapses
As noted earlier, synapses are the junctions where neurons release a chemical neurotransmitter that acts on a postsynaptic
target cell, which can be another neuron or a muscle or gland
cell (see Figure 7-31). In this section, we focus on several key
issues related to impulse transmission:
How neurotransmitters are packaged in membranebounded synaptic vesicles in the axon terminus

■

How arrival of an action potential at axon termini in
presynaptic cells triggers secretion of neurotransmitters

■

How binding of neurotransmitters by receptors on postsynaptic cells leads to changes in their membrane potential

■

How neurotransmitters are removed from the synaptic
cleft after stimulating postsynaptic cells

■

Neurotransmitter receptors fall into two broad classes:
ligand-gated ion channels, which open immediately upon
neurotransmitter binding, and G protein–coupled receptors.
Neurotransmitter binding to a G protein–coupled receptor
induces the opening or closing of a separate ion channel protein over a period of seconds to minutes. These “slow” neurotransmitter receptors are discussed in Chapter 13 along
with G protein–coupled receptors that bind different types of
ligands and modulate the activity of cytosolic proteins other
than ion channels. Here we examine the structure and operation of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor found at many
nerve-muscle synapses. The first ligand-gated ion channel to
be purified, cloned, and characterized at the molecular level,
this receptor provides a paradigm for other neurotransmittergated ion channels.

Neurotransmitters Are Transported into Synaptic
Vesicles by H-Linked Antiport Proteins
Numerous small molecules function as neurotransmitters at
various synapses. With the exception of acetylcholine, the

288

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
O
CH3

C

CH2

O

N+

CH2

(CH3)3

Acetylcholine
O
H3

N+

CH2

O−

C

Glycine
O−
C
H3

N+

O

O

CH

CH2

CH2

O−

C

Glutamate
HO
CH2

HO

NH3+

CH2

Dopamine
(derived from tyrosine)

neurotransmitters shown in Figure 7-41 are amino acids or
derivatives of amino acids. Nucleotides such as ATP and the
corresponding nucleosides, which lack phosphate groups,
also function as neurotransmitters. Each neuron generally
produces just one type of neurotransmitter.
All the “classic” neurotransmitters are synthesized in the
cytosol and imported into membrane-bound synaptic vesicles within axon terminals, where they are stored. These vesicles are 40–50 nm in diameter, and their lumen has a low
pH, generated by operation of a V-class proton pump in the
vesicle membrane. Similar to the accumulation of metabolites in plant vacuoles (see Figure 7-23), this proton concentration gradient (vesicle lumen
cytosol) powers neurotransmitter import by ligand-specific H-linked antiporters
in the vesicle membrane.
For example, acetylcholine is synthesized from acetyl
coenzyme A (acetyl CoA), an intermediate in the degradation
of glucose and fatty acids, and choline in a reaction catalyzed
by choline acetyltransferase:

CH3

CH

HO

CH3

Norepinephrine
(derived from tyrosine)

S

CoA + HO

CH

HO

NH2+

CH2

CH3

OH
Epinephrine
(derived from tyrosine)
HO

CH2

CH2

NH3+

H
Serotonin, or 5-hydroxytryptamine
(derived from tryptophan)
CH2

CH2

choline
acetyltransferase

CH3

CH3

CH3
O

CH2

CH2

N+

CH3 + CoA

SH

CH3

Synaptic vesicles take up and concentrate acetylcholine from
the cytosol against a steep concentration gradient, using an
H/acetylcholine antiporter in the vesicle membrane. Curiously, the gene encoding this antiporter is contained entirely
within the first intron of the gene encoding choline acetyltransferase, a mechanism conserved throughout evolution
for ensuring coordinate expression of these two proteins.
Different H/neurotransmitter antiport proteins are used for
import of other neurotransmitters into synaptic vesicles.

Influx of Ca2 Through Voltage-Gated Ca2
Channels Triggers Release of Neurotransmitters

N

CH2

C

CH2

Choline

Acetylcholine

HO

NH3+

NH

N

C

N+

O

NH3+

CH2

OH

C

CH3

Acetyl CoA

HO

HC

O

CH

Neurotransmitters are released by exocytosis, a process in
which neurotransmitter-filled synaptic vesicles fuse with the
axonal membrane, releasing their contents into the synaptic
cleft. The exocytosis of neurotransmitters from synaptic vesicles involves vesicle-targeting and fusion events similar to
those that occur during the intracellular transport of secreted
and plasma-membrane proteins (Chapter 17). Two features

Histamine
(derived from histidine)

 FIGURE 7-41 Structures of several small molecules that
O
H3N+

CH2

CH2

CH2

C

O−

γ-Aminobutyric acid, or GABA
(derived from glutamate)

function as neurotransmitters. Except for acetylcholine, all
these are amino acids (glycine and glutamate) or derived from
the indicated amino acids. The three transmitters synthesized
from tyrosine, which contain the catechol moiety (blue highlight),
are referred to as catecholamines.

7.8 • Neurotransmitters and Receptor and Transport Proteins

critical to synapse function differ from other secretory pathways: (a) secretion is tightly coupled to arrival of an action
potential at the axon terminus, and (b) synaptic vesicles are
recycled locally to the axon terminus after fusion with the
plasma membrane. Figure 7-42 shows the entire cycle
whereby synaptic vesicles are filled with neurotransmitter, release their contents, and are recycled.
Depolarization of the plasma membrane cannot, by itself,
cause synaptic vesicles to fuse with the plasma membrane.
In order to trigger vesicle fusion, an action potential must be
converted into a chemical signal—namely, a localized rise in
the cytosolic Ca2 concentration. The transducers of the
electric signals are voltage-gated Ca2 channels localized to
the region of the plasma membrane adjacent to the synaptic
vesicles. The membrane depolarization due to arrival of an
action potential opens these channels, permitting an influx

H+-linked
antiporter
V-class H+
pump

289

of Ca2 ions from the extracellular medium into the
axon terminal. This ion flux raises the local cytosolic Ca2
concentration near the synaptic vesicles from 0.1 M,
characteristic of the resting state, to 1–100 M. Binding of
Ca2 ions to proteins that connect the synaptic vesicle with
the plasma membrane induces membrane fusion and thus exocytosis of the neurotransmitter. The subsequent export of
extra Ca2 ions by ATP-powered Ca2 pumps in the plasma
membrane rapidly lowers the cytosolic Ca2 level to that of
the resting state, enabling the axon terminus to respond to
the arrival of another action potential.
A simple experiment demonstrates the importance of
voltage-gated Ca2 channels in release of neurotransmitters.
A preparation of neurons in a Ca2-containing medium
is treated with tetrodotoxin, a drug that blocks voltagegated Na channels and thus prevents conduction of action

Docking and
Ca2+-sensing
proteins
Voltage-gated
Ca2+ channel

Na+-neurotransmitter
symport protein

1 Import of neurotransmitter
H+
H+

H+

ATP
H+

2

ADP + Pi

Movement to
active zone
Uncoated
vesicle

3

Cytosol of
presynaptic
cell

Vesicle docking at
plasma membrane

Recovery of synaptic
vesicles via endocytosis

Clathrincoated
vesicle

Ca2+

6

Clathrin
Na+
Plasma
membra

Synaptic cleft

4
Exocytosis of neurotransmitter
triggered by influx of Ca2+

▲ FIGURE 7-42 Cycling of neurotransmitters and of
synaptic vesicles in axon terminals. The entire cycle depicted
here typically takes about 60 seconds. Note that several transport
proteins participate in the filling of synaptic vesicles with
neurotransmitter (red circles), its release by exocytosis, and
subsequent reuptake from the synaptic cleft. Once synapticvesicle membrane proteins (e.g., pumps, antiporters, and fusion

5
Reuptake of neurotransmitter

proteins needed for exocytosis) are specifically recovered by
endocytosis in clathrin-coated vesicles, the clathrin coat is
depolymerized, yielding vesicles that can be filled with
neurotransmitter. Unlike most neurotransmitters, acetylcholine is
not recycled. See text for details. [See T. Südhof and R. Jahn, 1991,
Neuron 6:665; K. Takei et al., 1996, J. Cell. Biol. 133:1237; and V. Murthy
and C. Stevens, 1998, Nature 392:497.]

290

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

potentials. As expected, no neurotransmitters are secreted
into the culture medium. If the axonal membrane then is artificially depolarized by making the medium ≈100 mM KCl,
neurotransmitters are released from the cells because of the
influx of Ca2 through open voltage-gated Ca2 channels.
Indeed, patch-clamping experiments show that voltage-gated
Ca2channels, like voltage-gated Na channels, open transiently upon depolarization of the membrane.
Two pools of neurotransmitter-filled synaptic vesicles are
present in axon terminals: those “docked” at the plasma
membrane, which can be readily exocytosed, and those in reserve in the active zone near the plasma membrane. Each rise
in Ca2 triggers exocytosis of about 10 percent of the
docked vesicles. Membrane proteins unique to synaptic vesicles then are specifically internalized by endocytosis, usually
via the same types of clathrin-coated vesicles used to recover
other plasma-membrane proteins by other types of cells.
After the endocytosed vesicles lose their clathrin coat, they
are rapidly refilled with neurotransmitter. The ability of
many neurons to fire 50 times a second is clear evidence
that the recycling of vesicle membrane proteins occurs quite
rapidly.

Signaling at Synapses Usually Is Terminated
by Degradation or Reuptake of Neurotransmitters
Following their release from a presynaptic cell, neurotransmitters must be removed or destroyed to prevent continued
stimulation of the postsynaptic cell. Signaling can be terminated by diffusion of a transmitter away from the synaptic
cleft, but this is a slow process. Instead, one of two more
rapid mechanisms terminates the action of neurotransmitters
at most synapses.
Signaling by acetylcholine is terminated when it is hydrolyzed to acetate and choline by acetylcholinesterase, an
enzyme localized to the synaptic cleft. Choline released in
this reaction is transported back into the presynaptic axon
terminal by a Na/choline symporter and used in synthesis
of more acetylcholine. The operation of this transporter is
similar to that of the Na-linked symporters used to transport glucose into cells against a concentration gradient (see
Figure 7-21).
With the exception of acetylcholine, all the neurotransmitters shown in Figure 7-41 are removed from the synaptic
cleft by transport into the axon terminals that released them.
Thus these transmitters are recycled intact, as depicted in
Figure 7-42 (step 5 ). Transporters for GABA, norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin were the first to be cloned and
studied. These four transport proteins are all Na-linked
symporters. They are 60–70 percent identical in their amino
acid sequences, and each is thought to contain 12 transmembrane  helices. As with other Na symporters, the
movement of Na into the cell down its electrochemical gradient provides the energy for uptake of the neurotransmitter. To maintain electroneutrality, Cl often is transported
via an ion channel along with the Na and neurotransmitter.

Cocaine inhibits the transporters for norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine. Binding of cocaine
to the dopamine transporter inhibits reuptake of
dopamine, thus prolonging signaling at key brain synapses;
indeed, the dopamine transporter is the principal brain “cocaine receptor.” Therapeutic agents such as the antidepressant drugs fluoxetine (Prozac) and imipramine block
serotonin uptake, and the tricyclic antidepressant desipramine
blocks norepinephrine uptake. ❚

Opening of Acetylcholine-Gated Cation Channels
Leads to Muscle Contraction
Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter at synapses between
motor neurons and muscle cells, often called neuromuscular
junctions. A single axon terminus of a frog motor neuron
may contain a million or more synaptic vesicles, each containing 1000–10,000 molecules of acetylcholine; these vesicles often accumulate in rows in the active zone (Figure
7-43). Such a neuron can form synapses with a single skeletal muscle cell at several hundred points.

Schwann
cell

Axon
terminal
Synaptic
vesicles
Basal lamina
in synaptic
cleft
Muscle
plasma
membrane
Muscle
cell

Muscle
contractile
proteins

0.1 m

▲ FIGURE 7-43 Synaptic vesicles in the axon terminal
near the region where neurotransmitter is released. In this
longitudinal section through a neuromuscular junction, the basal
lamina lies in the synaptic cleft separating the neuron from the
muscle membrane, which is extensively folded. Acetylcholine
receptors are concentrated in the postsynaptic muscle
membrane at the top and part way down the sides of the folds
in the membrane. A Schwann cell surrounds the axon terminal.
[From J. E. Heuser and T. Reese, 1977, in E. R. Kandel, ed., The Nervous
System, vol. 1, Handbook of Physiology, Williams & Wilkins, p. 266.]

7.8 • Neurotransmitters and Receptor and Transport Proteins
Motor
neuron

Voltage-gated
Ca2+ channel
1

Acetylcholine
Voltage-gated
Na+ channel

Ca2+

Voltage-gated
Ca2+ channel

Nicotinic
acetylcholine
receptor
2
Na+
Muscle cell

T tubule

3

Ca2+

Na+
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum

4

Ca2+ release
channel

▲ FIGURE 7-44 Sequential activation of gated ion channels
at a neuromuscular junction. Arrival of an action potential at
the terminus of a presynaptic motor neuron induces opening of
voltage-gated Ca2 channels (step 1 ) and subsequent release of
acetylcholine, which triggers opening of the ligand-gated
acetylcholine receptors in the muscle plasma membrane (step 2 ).
The resulting influx of Na produces a localized depolarization of
the membrane, leading to opening of voltage-gated Na channels
and generation of an action potential (step 3 ). When the
spreading depolarization reaches T tubules, it is sensed by voltagegated Ca2 channels in the plasma membrane. This leads to
opening of Ca2-release channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum
membrane, releasing stored Ca2 into the cytosol (step 4 ). The
resulting rise in cytosolic Ca2 causes muscle contraction by
mechanisms discussed in Chapter 19.
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, which is expressed in
muscle cells, is a ligand-gated channel that admits both K
and Na. The effect of acetylcholine on this receptor can be
determined by patch-clamping studies on isolated outside-out
patches of muscle plasma membranes (see Figure 7-17c). Such
measurements have shown that acetylcholine causes opening
of a cation channel in the receptor capable of transmitting
15,000–30,000 Na or K ions per millisecond. However,
since the resting potential of the muscle plasma membrane is
near EK, the potassium equilibrium potential, opening of
acetylcholine receptor channels causes little increase in the
efflux of K ions; Na ions, on the other hand, flow into the
muscle cell driven by the Na electrochemical gradient.
The simultaneous increase in permeability to Na and

K ions following binding of acetylcholine produces a net
depolarization to about 15 mV from the muscle resting potential of 85 to 90 mV. As shown in Figure 7-44, this localized depolarization of the muscle plasma membrane
triggers opening of voltage-gated Na channels, leading to
generation and conduction of an action potential in the muscle cell surface membrane by the same mechanisms described

291

previously for neurons. When the membrane depolarization
reaches T tubules, specialized invaginations of the plasma
membrane, it affects Ca2 channels in the plasma membrane
apparently without causing them to open. Somehow this
causes opening of adjacent Ca2-release channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane. The subsequent flow of
stored Ca2 ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the
cytosol raises the cytosolic Ca2 concentration sufficiently to
induce muscle contraction.
Careful monitoring of the membrane potential of the
muscle membrane at a synapse with a cholinergic motor neuron has demonstrated spontaneous, intermittent, and random ≈2-ms depolarizations of about 0.5–1.0 mV in the
absence of stimulation of the motor neuron. Each of these
depolarizations is caused by the spontaneous release of
acetylcholine from a single synaptic vesicle. Indeed, demonstration of such spontaneous small depolarizations led to the
notion of the quantal release of acetylcholine (later applied
to other neurotransmitters) and thereby led to the hypothesis
of vesicle exocytosis at synapses. The release of one acetylcholine-containing synaptic vesicle results in the opening of
about 3000 ion channels in the postsynaptic membrane, far
short of the number needed to reach the threshold depolarization that induces an action potential. Clearly, stimulation
of muscle contraction by a motor neuron requires the nearly
simultaneous release of acetylcholine from numerous synaptic vesicles.

All Five Subunits in the Nicotinic Acetylcholine
Receptor Contribute to the Ion Channel
The acetylcholine receptor from skeletal muscle is a pentameric protein with a subunit composition of 2. The ,
, , and  subunits have considerable sequence homology;
on average, about 35–40 percent of the residues in any two
subunits are similar. The complete receptor has fivefold symmetry, and the actual cation channel is a tapered central pore
lined by homologous segments from each of the five subunits
(Figure 7-45).
The channel opens when the receptor cooperatively binds
two acetylcholine molecules to sites located at the interfaces
of the  and  subunits. Once acetylcholine is bound to a
receptor, the channel is opened within a few microseconds.
Studies measuring the permeability of different small cations
suggest that the open ion channel is, at its narrowest, about
0.65–0.80 nm in diameter, in agreement with estimates from
electron micrographs. This would be sufficient to allow passage of both Na and K ions with their shell of bound
water molecules. Thus the acetylcholine receptor probably
transports hydrated ions, unlike Na and K channels, both
of which allow passage only of nonhydrated ions (see Figure 7-16).
Although the structure of the central ion channel is not
known in molecular detail, much evidence indicates that it
is lined by five homologous transmembrane M2  helices,
one from each of the five subunits. The M2 helices are

292

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes
Acetylcholine
binding site

(b)

(a)
α

δ

γ

α

α

γ

δ

6 nm

Synaptic
space

−

−

−

M2
α helix

−

α
β
9 nm

Gate
3 nm

2 nm

Cytosol

−

−

−

−

2 nm

▲ FIGURE 7-45 Three-dimensional structure of the nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor. (a) Schematic cutaway model of the
pentameric receptor in the membrane; for clarity, the  subunit is
not shown. Each subunit contains an M2  helix (red) that faces
the central pore. Aspartate and glutamate side chains at both
ends of the M2 helices form two rings of negative charges that
help exclude anions from and attract cations to the channel. The
gate, which is opened by binding of acetylcholine, lies within the
pore. (b) Top: Cross section of the exoplasmic face of the

receptor showing the arrangement of subunits around the central
pore. The two acetylcholine binding sites are located about 3 nm
from the membrane surface. Bottom: Top-down view looking into
the synaptic entrance of the channel. The tunnel-like entrance
narrows abruptly after a distance of about 6 nm. These models
are based on amino acid sequence data, computer-generated
averaging of high-resolution electron micrographs, and
information from site-specific mutations. [Part (b) from N. Unwin,

composed largely of hydrophobic or uncharged polar amino
acids, but negatively charged aspartate or glutamate residues
are located at each end, near the membrane faces, and several serine or threonine residues are near the middle. Mutant acetylcholine receptors in which a single negatively
charged glutamate or aspartate in one M2 helix is replaced
by a positively charged lysine have been expressed in frog
oocytes. Patch-clamping measurements indicate that such altered proteins can function as channels, but the number of
ions that pass through during the open state is reduced. The
greater the number of glutamate or aspartate residues mutated (in one or multiple M2 helices), the greater the reduction in ion conductivity. These findings suggest that aspartate
and glutamate residues form a ring of negative charges on

the external surface of the pore that help to screen out anions
and attract Na or K ions as they enter the channel. A similar ring of negative charges lining the cytosolic pore surface
also helps select cations for passage (see Figure 7-45).
The two acetylcholine binding sites in the extracellular
domain of the receptor lie ≈4 to 5 nm from the center of the
pore. Binding of acetylcholine thus must trigger conformational changes in the receptor subunits that can cause channel opening at some distance from the binding sites.
Receptors in isolated postsynaptic membranes can be
trapped in the open or closed state by rapid freezing in liquid
nitrogen. Images of such preparations suggest that the five
M2 helices rotate relative to the vertical axis of the channel
during opening and closing (Figure 7-46).

▲

▲ FIGURE 7-46 Schematic models of the
pore-lining M2 helices in the closed and
opened states. In the closed state, the kink
in the center of each M2 helix points inward,
constricting the passageway, whose perimeter
is indicated by the blue spheres. In the open
state, the kinks rotate to one side, so that the
helices are farther apart. The green spheres
denote the hydroxyl groups of serine (S) and
threonine (T) residues in the center of the M2
helices; in the open state these are parallel to
the channel axis and allow ions to flow.

1993, Cell 72, and Neuron, 10 (suppl.), p. 31.]

[Adapted from N. Unwin, 1995, Nature 373:37.]

M2 helix

S
S
S
T

Closed

S
T

Open

7.8 • Neurotransmitters and Receptor and Transport Proteins

293

Nerve Cells Make an All-or-None Decision
to Generate an Action Potential
At the neuromuscular junction, virtually every action potential
in the presynaptic motor neuron triggers an action potential in
the postsynaptic muscle cell. The situation at synapses between
neurons, especially those in the brain, is much more complex
because the postsynaptic neuron commonly receives signals
from many presynaptic neurons (Figure 7-47). The neurotransmitters released from presynaptic neurons may bind to an
excitatory receptor on the postsynaptic neuron, thereby opening a channel that admits Na ions or both Na and K ions.
The acetylcholine receptor just discussed is one of many excitatory receptors, and opening of such ion channels leads to depolarization of the postsynaptic plasma membrane, promoting
generation of an action potential. In contrast, binding of a
neurotransmitter to an inhibitory receptor on the postsynaptic
cell causes opening of K or Cl channels, leading to an efflux
of additional K ions from the cytosol or an influx of Cl
ions. In either case, the ion flow tends to hyperpolarize the
plasma membrane, which inhibits generation of an action potential in the postsynaptic cell.
A single neuron can be affected simultaneously by signals
received at multiple excitatory and inhibitory synapses. The
neuron continuously integrates these signals and determines
whether or not to generate an action potential. In this
process, the various small depolarizations and hyperpolarizations generated at synapses move along the plasma membrane from the dendrites to the cell body and then to the
axon hillock, where they are summed together. An action potential is generated whenever the membrane at the axon
hillock becomes depolarized to a certain voltage called the
threshold potential (Figure 7-48). Thus an action potential

Dendrite

P. deCamilli.]

is generated in an all-or-nothing fashion: Depolarization to
the threshold always leads to an action potential, whereas
any depolarization that does not reach the threshold potential never induces it.

Cell body

Axon hillock

Presynaptic cell

Postsynaptic
cell

Electrode to measure
electric potential

Membrane potential in the postsynaptic cell
Threshold
potential

−40 mV

−60 mV
10 ms

Action
potential

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-48
Incoming signals must reach the threshold
potential to trigger an action potential in
a postsynaptic cell. In this example, the
presynaptic neuron is generating about one
action potential every 4 milliseconds. Arrival of
each action potential at the synapse causes a
small change in the membrane potential at
the axon hillock of the postsynaptic cell, in
this example a depolarization of ≈5 mV. When
multiple stimuli cause the membrane of this
postsynaptic cell to become depolarized to
the threshold potential, here approximately
40 mV, an action potential is induced in it.

▲

Direction of
action potential

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 7-47 A fluorescent micrograph
of two interneurons reveals that many other neurons
synapse with them. These cells, from the hippocampal region
of the brain, were stained with two fluorescent antibodies: one
specific for the microtubule-associated protein MAP2 (green),
which is found only in dendrites and cell bodies, and the other
specific for synaptotagmin (orange-red), a protein found in
presynaptic axon terminals. The numerous orange-red dots,
which represent presynaptic axon terminals from neurons that
are not visible in this field, indicate that these interneurons
receive signals from many other cells. [Courtesy of O. Mundigl and

294

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

Whether a neuron generates an action potential in the
axon hillock depends on the balance of the timing, amplitude, and localization of all the various inputs it receives; this
signal computation differs for each type of neuron. In a
sense, each neuron is a tiny computer that averages all the receptor activations and electric disturbances on its membrane
and makes a decision whether to trigger an action potential
and conduct it down the axon. An action potential will always have the same magnitude in any particular neuron. The
frequency with which action potentials are generated in a
particular neuron is the important parameter in its ability to
signal other cells.

The Nervous System Uses Signaling Circuits
Composed of Multiple Neurons
In complex multicellular animals, such as insects and mammals, various types of neurons form signaling circuits. In the
simple type of circuit, called a reflex arc, interneurons connect multiple sensory and motor neurons, allowing one sensory neuron to affect multiple motor neurons and one motor
neuron to be affected by multiple sensory neurons; in this

Quadriceps muscle
(extensor)

way interneurons integrate and enhance reflexes. For example, the knee-jerk reflex in humans involves a complex reflex arc in which one muscle is stimulated to contract while
another is inhibited from contracting (Figure 7-49). Such circuits allow an organism to respond to a sensory input by the
coordinated action of sets of muscles that together achieve a
single purpose.
These simple signaling circuits, however, do not directly
explain higher-order brain functions such as reasoning, computation, and memory development. Typical neurons in the
brain receive signals from up to a thousand other neurons
and, in turn, can direct chemical signals to many other neurons. The output of the nervous system depends on its circuit
properties, that is, the wiring, or interconnections, between
neurons and the strength of these interconnections. Complex
aspects of the nervous system, such as vision and consciousness, cannot be understood at the single-cell level, but only at
the level of networks of nerve cells that can be studied by
techniques of systems analysis. The nervous system is constantly changing; alterations in the number and nature of the
interconnections between individual neurons occur, for example, in the development of new memories.

Sensory neuron
cell body

Sensory
neuron

Spinal cord

Ending of sensory
neuron

Dorsal-root
ganglion
Motor neuron

Biceps
muscle
(flexor)
Motor neuron
axon terminal

Knee cap
Motor neuron

Motor neuron
cell body

▲ FIGURE 7-49 The knee-jerk reflex arc in the human.
Positioning and movement of the knee joint are accomplished by
two muscles that have opposite actions: Contraction of the
quadriceps muscle straightens the leg, whereas contraction of
the biceps muscle bends the leg. The knee-jerk response, a
sudden extension of the leg, is stimulated by a blow just below
the kneecap. The blow directly stimulates sensory neurons (blue)
located in the tendon of the quadriceps muscle. The axon of each
sensory neuron extends from the tendon to its cell body in a
dorsal root ganglion. The sensory axon then continues to the

Inhibitory
interneuron

spinal cord, where it branches and synapses with two neurons:
(1) a motor neuron (red) that innervates the quadriceps muscle
and (2) an inhibitory interneuron (black) that synapses with a
motor neuron (green) innervating the biceps muscle. Stimulation
of the sensory neuron causes a contraction of the quadriceps
and, via the inhibitory neuron, a simultaneous inhibition of
contraction of the biceps muscle. The net result is an extension
of the leg at the knee joint. Each cell illustrated here actually
represents a nerve, that is, a population of neurons.

Perspectives for the Future

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 7.8
Neurotransmitters and Receptor and Transport
Proteins in Signal Transmission at Synapses
Neurotransmitter receptors fall into two classes: ligandgated ion channels, which permit ion passage when open,
and G protein–coupled receptors, which are linked to a
separate ion channel.

■

At synapses impulses are transmitted by neurotransmitters released from the axon terminal of the presynaptic cell
and subsequently bound to specific receptors on the postsynaptic cell (see Figure 7-31).

■

Low-molecular-weight neurotransmitters (e.g., acetylcholine, dopamine, epinephrine) are imported from the cytosol into synaptic vesicles by H-linked antiporters. Vclass proton pumps maintain the low intravesicular pH that
drives neurotransmitter import against a concentration
gradient.

■

Arrival of an action potential at a presynaptic axon terminal opens voltage-gated Ca2 channels, leading to a localized rise in the cytosolic Ca2 level that triggers exocytosis of synaptic vesicles. Following neurotransmitter
release, vesicles are formed by endocytosis and recycled
(see Figure 7-42).
■

Coordinated operation of four gated ion channels at the
synapse of a motor neuron and striated muscle cell leads
to release of acetylcholine from the axon terminal, depolarization of the muscle membrane, generation of an action potential, and then contraction (see Figure 7-44).

■

The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, a ligand-gated
cation channel, contains five subunits, each of which has
a transmembrane  helix (M2) that lines the channel (see
Figure 7-45).

■

A postsynaptic neuron generates an action potential only
when the plasma membrane at the axon hillock is depolarized to the threshold potential by the summation of
small depolarizations and hyperpolarizations caused by activation of multiple neuronal receptors (see Figure 7-48).

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
In this chapter, we have explained certain aspects of human
physiology in terms of the action of specific membrane transport proteins. Such a molecular physiology approach has
many medical applications. Even today, specific inhibitors or
activators of channels, pumps, and transporters constitute
the largest single class of drugs. For instance, an inhibitor of
the gastric H/K ATPase that acidifies the stomach is the
most widely used drug for treating stomach ulcers. Inhibitors
of channel proteins in the kidney are widely used to control

295

hypertension (high blood pressure). By blocking resorption
of water from the forming urine into the blood, these drugs
reduce blood volume and thus blood pressure. Calciumchannel blockers are widely employed to control the intensity of contraction of the heart. And the Na-linked symport
proteins that are used by nerve cells for reuptake of neurotransmitters are specifically inhibited by many drugs of abuse
(e.g., cocaine) and antidepression medications (e.g., Prozac).
With the completion of the human genome project, we
are positioned to learn the sequences of all human membrane
transport proteins. Already we know that mutations in many
of them cause disease. For example, mutation in a voltagegated Na channel that is expressed in the heart causes ventricular fibrillation and heart attacks. Mutations in other
Na channels, expressed mainly in the brain, cause epilepsy
and febrile seizures. In some cases the molecular mechanisms
are known. One type of missense mutation in a Na channel that causes epilepsy affects the voltage dependence of
channel opening and closing; another slows inactivation of
the channel at depolarizing potentials, prolonging the influx
of Na ions. Studies in mice expressing mutant forms of
these and many other membrane transport proteins are continuing to provide clues to their role in human physiology
and disease.
This exploding basic knowledge will enable researchers
to identify new types of compounds that inhibit or activate
just one of these membrane transport proteins and not its homologs. An important challenge, however is to understand
the role of an individual transport protein in each of the several tissues in which it is expressed. As an example, a drug
that inhibits a particular ion channel in sensory neurons
might be useful in treatment of chronic pain, but if this
channel also is expressed in certain areas of the brain, its inhibition may have serious undesired actions (“side effects”).
A real understanding of the function of nerve cells requires knowledge of the three-dimensional structures of
many different channels, neurotransmitter receptors, and
other membrane proteins. Determination of the structure of
the first voltage-gated K channel should illuminate the
mechanisms of channel gating, opening, and inactivation
that may also apply to other voltage-gated channels. Similarly, the nicotinic acetylcholine, glutamate, GABA, and
glycine receptors are all ligand-gated ion channels, but it is
disputed whether they all have the same overall structures
in the membrane. Resolving this issue will also require
knowledge of their three-dimensional structures, which, in
addition, should tell us in detail how neurotransmitter binding leads to channel opening.
How does a neuron achieve its very long, branching
structure? Why does one part of a neuron become a dendrite
and another an axon? Why are certain key membrane proteins clustered at particular points—neurotransmitter receptors in postsynaptic densities in dendrites, Ca2 channels in
axon termini, and Na channels in myelinated neurons at
the nodes of Ranvier? Such questions of cell shape and

296

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

protein targeting also apply to other types of cells, but the
morphological diversity of different types of neurons makes
these particularly intriguing questions in the nervous system.
Development of pure cultures of specific types of neurons
that maintain their normal properties would enable many of
these problems to be studied by techniques of molecular cell
biology. Perhaps the most difficult questions concern the formation of specific synapses within the nervous system; that
is, how does a neuron “know” to synapse with one type of
cell and not another? Ongoing research on the development
of the nervous system, which we briefly discuss in Chapter
15, is beginning to provide more complete answers about the
complex wiring among neurons and how this relates to brain
function.

KEY TERMS
ABC superfamily 239
action potential 231
active transport 233
antiport 254
cotransport 254
depolarization 263
electrochemical
gradient 232
facilitated diffusion 233
gated channel 233
hypertonic 258
hypotonic 258
isotonic 258

membrane potential 232
myelin sheath 270
Na/K ATPase 242
neurotransmitter 262
passive diffusion 232
patch clamping 251
resting K channels 248
symport 254
synapses 263
tight junctions 260
transcellular transport
260
uniport 234

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. The basic structural unit of biomembranes is the phospholipid bilayer. Acetic acid and ethanol are composed each
of two carbons, hydrogen and oxygen, and both enter cells
by passive diffusion. At pH 7, one is much more membrane
permeant than the other. Which is the more permeable, and
why? Predict how the permeability of each is altered when
pH is reduced to 1.0, a value typical of the stomach.

transport process has two terms. What are these two terms,
and why does the second not apply to glucose? Why are
cotransporters often referred to as examples of secondary active transport?
4. GLUT1, found in the plasma membrane of erythrocytes,
is a classic example of a uniporter. Design a set of experiments to prove that GLUT1 is indeed a glucose-specific uniporter rather than a galactose- or mannose-specific uniporter.
Glucose is a 6-carbon sugar while ribose is a 5-carbon sugar.
Despite this smaller size, ribose is not efficiently transported
by GLUT1. How can this be explained?
5. Name the four classes of ATP-powered pumps that produce active transport of ions and molecules. Indicate which
of these classes transport ions only and which transport primarily small molecules. In the case of one class of these ATPpowered pumps, the initial discovery of the class came from
studying not the transport of a natural substrate but rather
artificial substrates used as cancer chemotherapy drugs.
What do investigators now think are common examples of
the natural substrates of this particular class of ATP-powered
pumps?
6. Genome sequencing projects continue, and for an increasing number of organisms the complete genome sequence
of that organism is known. How does this information allow
us to state the total number of transporters or pumps of a
given type in either mice or humans? Many of the sequenceidentified transporters or pumps are “orphan” proteins, in
the sense that their natural substrate or physiological role is
not known. How can this be, and how might one establish
the physiological role of an orphan protein?
7. As cited in the section Perspectives for the Future, specific inhibitors or activators of channels, pumps, and transporters constitute the largest single class of drugs produced
by the pharmaceutical industry. Skeletal muscle contraction
is caused by elevation of Ca2 concentration in the cytosol.
What is the expected effect on muscle contraction of selective
drug inhibition of sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) P-class Ca2
ATPase?
8. The membrane potential in animal cells, but not in
plants, depends largely on resting K channels. How do
these channels contribute to the resting potential? Why are
these channels considered to be nongated channels? How do
these channels achieve selectivity for K versus Na?

2. Uniporters and ion channels support facilitated diffusion
across biomembranes. Although both are examples of facilitated diffusion, the rates of ion movement via a channel are
roughly 104- to 105-fold faster than that of molecules via a
uniporter. What key mechanistic difference results in this
large difference in transport rate?

9. Patch clamping can be used to measure the conductance
properties of individual ion channels. Describe how patch
clamping can be used to determine whether or not the gene
coding for a putative K channel actually codes for a K or
Na channel.

3. Name the three classes of transporters. Explain which of
these classes is able to move glucose or bicarbonate
(HCO3), for example, against an electrochemical gradient.
In the case of bicarbonate, but not glucose, the G of the

10. Plants use the proton electrochemical gradient across the
vacuole membrane to power the accumulation of salts and
sugars in the organelle. This creates a hypertonic situation.
Why does this not result in the plant cell bursting? How does

Analyze the Data

12. Name the three phases of an action potential. Describe for each the underlying molecular basis and the ion
involved. Why is the term voltage-gated channel applied
to Na channels involved in the generation of an action
potential?
13. Myelination increases the velocity of action potential
propagation along an axon. What is myelination? Myelination causes clustering of voltage-gated Na channels and
Na/K pumps at nodes of Ranvier along the axon. Predict
the consequences to action potential propagation of increasing the spacing between nodes of Ranvier by a factor of 10.
14. Compare the role of H-linked antiporters in the accumulation of neurotransmitters in synaptic vesicles and sucrose
in the plant vacuole. Acetylcholine is a common neurotransmitter released at the synapse. Predict the consequences for
muscle activation of decreased acetylcholine esterase activity
at nerve-muscle synapses.
15. Neurons, particularly those in the brain, receive multiple
excitatory and inhibitory signals. What is the name of the extension of the neuron at which such signals are received?
How does the neuron integrate these signals to determine
whether or not to generate an action potential?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Imagine that you are evaluating candidates for the glutamate
transporter resident in the membrane of synaptic vesicles of
the brain. Glutamate is a major neurotransmitter. You conduct a thorough search of protein databases and literature
and find that the Caenorhabditis elegans protein EAT-4 has
many of the properties expected of a brain glutamate transporter. The protein is presynaptic in C. elegans and mutations in it are associated with glutamatergic defects. By
sequence comparison, the mammalian homolog is BNP1. Related type I transporters are known to transport organic
anions.
a. To determine whether BNP1 mediates the transport of
glutamate into synaptic vesicles, you transfect BNP1 cDNA
into PC12 cells, which lack detectable endogenous BNP1
protein. You then prepare a synaptic vesicle–like microvesicle population from transfected and untransfected cells. The
glutamate transport properties of the isolated vesicles are
shown in the figure at the right. How do these results indi-

(a)
125
Transfected
Relative Glu transport

11. Movement of glucose from one side to the other side of
the intestinal epithelium is a major example of transcellular
transport. How does the Na/K ATPase power the process?
Why are tight junctions essential for the process? Rehydration supplements such as sport drinks include a sugar and a
salt. Why are both important to rehydration?

cate transporter-dependent uptake of glutamate in transfected versus nontransfected, wild-type PC12 cell vesicles?
What is the apparent Km of the glutamate transporter? The
literature reports Km values of 10–100 M for plasma
membrane excitatory amino acid transporters. Is the Km observed consistent with BNP1 being a plasma membrane
amino acid transporter?

100
75
50
Wild type
25
0

0

2

4
6
Time (m)

8

10

(b)
100
Transfected
Relative Glu transport

the plasma membrane Na/K ATPase allow animal cells to
avoid osmotic lysis even under isotonic conditions?

297

75

50

25

0

0

5

10
[Glu, mM]

15

Effect of BNP1 transfection on glutamate uptake by PC12 cell
vesicles.

b. You next decide to test the specificity of BNP1 for individual amino acids and whether or not glutamate uptake is
dependent on the electrical gradient as predicted. For these
experiments, you set up a series of incubation mixes with
various amino acids as competitors and separately a mix
with valinomycin (V) and nigericin (N) to dissipate selectively the electrical gradient. Based on the data shown in the
following figure, does BNP1-dependent transport display the
expected properties? Why are the chosen amino acids the
logical choices for potential competitors?

298

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

ATP-Powered Pumps and the Intracellular Ionic
Environment

Relative Glu transport

150

100

50

0

L-glu D-glu Asp

Gln

V+N

Inhibitor

Effect of amino acid competitors and valinomycin plus nigericin
(V  N) on BNP1 transport.

Relative Glu transport

c. As a final test, you determine the dependence of BNP1
transport on chloride concentration. Vesicular glutamate
transport is known to exhibit a biphasic dependence on chloride concentration. The results of your experiment are shown
in the figure below. Do these data indicate a biphasic chloride dependence? How may such a chloride dependence be
explained?
100

Transfected

50
Wild type

0

0

5

10 15 20 25
[Chloride, mM]

140

Chloride dependence of transport by BNP1.

d. You conclude on the basis of the data that BNP1 is the
synaptic vesicle glutamate transporter. How could you test in
PC12 cells whether mutations modeled on the C. elegans
EAT-4 protein were important in the mammalian protein?

REFERENCES

Overview of Membrane Transport
Hruz, P. W., and M. M. Mueckler. 2001. Structural analysis of
the GLUT1 facilitative glucose transporter (review). Mol. Memb.
Biol. 18:183–193.
Malandro, M., and M. Kilberg. 1996. Molecular biology of
mammalian amino acid transporters. Ann. Rev. Biochem.
66:305–336.
Mueckler, M. 1994. Facilitative glucose transporters. Eur. J.
Biochem. 219:713–725.

Borst, P., N. Zelcer, and A. van Helvoort. 2000. ABC transporters
in lipid transport. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1486:128–144.
Carafoli, E., and M. Brini. 2000. Calcium pumps: structural basis for and mechanism of calcium transmembrane transport. Curr.
Opin. Chem. Biol. 4:152–161.
Davies, J., F. Chen, and Y. Ioannou. 2000. Transmembrane molecular pump activity of Niemann-Pick C1 protein. Science
290:2295–2298.
Doige, C. A., and G. F. Ames. 1993. ATP-dependent transport
systems in bacteria and humans: relevance to cystic fibrosis and multidrug resistance. Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 47:291–319.
Gottesman, M. M. 2002. Mechanisms of cancer drug resistance.
Ann. Rev. Med. 53:615–627.
Gottesman, M. M., and S. V. Ambudkar. 2001. Overview: ABC
transporters and human disease. J. Bioenerg. Biomemb. 33:453–458.
Higgins, C. F., and K. J. Linton. 2001. Structural biology. The
xyz of ABC transporters. Science 293:1782–1784.
Holmgren, M., et al. 2000. Three distinct and sequential steps
in the release of sodium ions by the Na/K-ATPase. Nature
403:898–901.
Jencks, W. P. 1995. The mechanism of coupling chemical and
physical reactions by the calcium ATPase of sarcoplasmic reticulum
and other coupled vectorial systems. Biosci. Rept. 15:283–287.
Nishi, T., and M. Forgac. 2002. The vacuolar (H)-ATPases—
nature’s most versatile proton pumps. Nature. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
3:94–103.
Ostedgaard, L. S., O. Baldursson, and M. J. Welsh. 2001. Regulation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
Cl channel by its R domain. J. Biol. Chem. 276:7689–7692.
Raggers, R. J., et al. 2000. Lipid traffic: the ABC of transbilayer
movement. Traffic 1:226–234.
Rea, P. A., et al. 1992. Vacuolar H-translocating pyrophosphatases: a new category of ion translocase. Trends Biochem. Sci.
17:348–353.
Sweadner, K. J., and C. Donnet. 2001. Structural similarities of
Na,K-ATPase and SERCA, the Ca(2)-ATPase of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum. Biochem. J. 356:685–704.
Toyoshima, C., M. Nakasako, H. Nomura, and H. Ogawa.
2000. Crystal structure of the calcium pump of sarcoplasmic reticulum at 2.6 Å resolution. Nature 405:647–655.
Xu, C., W. J. Rice, W. He, and D. L. Stokes. 2002. A structural
model for the catalytic cycle of Ca(2)-ATPase. J. Mol. Biol.
316:201–211.

Nongated Ion Channels and the Resting
Membrane Potential
Clapham, D. 1999. Unlocking family secrets: K channel transmembrane domains. Cell 97:547–550.
Cooper, E. C., and L. Y. Jan. 1999. Ion channel genes and human neurological disease: recent progress, prospects, and challenges.
Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 96:4759–4766.
Dutzler, R., et al. 2002. X-ray structure of a ClC chloride channel at 3.0 Å reveals the molecular basis of anion selectivity. Nature
415:287–294.
Gulbis, J. M., M. Zhou, S. Mann, and R. MacKinnon. 2000.
Structure of the cytoplasmic beta subunit-T1 assembly of voltage-dependent K channels. Science 289:123–127.
Hanaoka, K., et al. 2000. Co-assembly of polycystin-1 and -2
produces unique cation-permeable currents. Nature 408:990–994.
Hille, B. 2001. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3d ed.
Sinauer Associates.

References
Montell, C., L. Birnbaumer, and V. Flockerzi. 2002. The TRP
channels, a remarkably functional family. Cell 108:595–598.
Neher, E. 1992. Ion channels for communication between and
within cells. Nobel Lecture reprinted in Neuron 8:605–612 and Science 256:498–502.
Neher, E., and B. Sakmann. 1992. The patch clamp technique.
Sci. Am. 266(3):28–35.
Nichols, C., and A. Lopatin. 1997. Inward rectifier potassium
channels. Ann. Rev. Physiol. 59:171–192.
Yi, B. A., et al. 2001. Controlling potassium channel activities:
interplay between the membrane and intracellular factors. Proc.
Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 98:11016–11023.
Zhou, M., J. H. Morais-Cabral, S. Mann, and R. MacKinnon.
2001. Potassium channel receptor site for the inactivation gate and
quaternary amine inhibitors. Nature 411:657–661.
Zhou, Y., J. Morais-Cabral, A. Kaufman, and R. MacKinnon.
2001. Chemistry of ion coordination and hydration revealed by a
K channel–Fab complex at 2 Å resolution. Nature 414:43–48.

Cotransport by Symporters and Antiporters
Alper, S. L., M. N. Chernova, and A. K. Stewart. 2001. Regulation of Na-independent Cl/HCO
3 exchangers by pH. J. Pancreas 2:171–175.
Barkla, B., and O. Pantoja. 1996. Physiology of ion transport
across the tonoplast of higher plants. Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant
Mol. Biol. 47:159–184.
Orlowski, J., and S. Grinstein. 1997. Na/H exchangers of
mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272:22373–22376.
Shrode, L. D., H. Tapper, and S. Grinstein. 1997. Role of intracellular pH in proliferation, transformation, and apoptosis. J. Bioenerg. Biomemb. 29:393–399.
Wakabayashi, S., M. Shigekawa, and J. Pouyssegur. 1997. Molecular physiology of vertebrate Na/H exchangers. Physiol. Rev.
77:51–74.
Wright, E. M. 2001. Renal Na()-glucose cotransporters. Am.
J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 280:F10–F18.
Wright, E. M., and D. D. Loo. 2000. Coupling between Na,
sugar, and water transport across the intestine. Ann. NY Acad. Sci.
915:54–66.
Zhang, H-X., and E. Blumwald. 2001. Transgenic salt-tolerant
tomato plants accumulate salt in foliage but not in fruit. Nature
Biotech. 19:765–769.

Movement of Water
Agre, P., M. Bonhivers, and M. Borgina. 1998. The aquaporins,
blueprints for cellular plumbing systems. J. Biol. Chem. 273:14659.
Engel, A., Y. Fujiyoshi, and P. Agre. 2000. The importance of
aquaporin water channel protein structures. EMBO J. 19:800–806.
Maurel, C. 1997. Aquaporins and water permeability of plant
membranes. Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 48:399–430.
Nielsen, S., et al. 2002. Aquaporins in the kidney: from molecules to medicine. Physiol. Rev. 82:205–244.
Schultz, S. G. 2001. Epithelial water absorption: osmosis or cotransport? Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 98:3628–3630.
Sui, H., et al. 2001. Structural basis of water-specific transport
through the AQP1 water channel. Nature 414:872–878.
Verkman, A. S. 2000. Physiological importance of aquaporins:
lessons from knockout mice. Curr. Opin. Nephrol. Hypertens.
9:517–522.

Transepithelial Transport
Cereijido, M., J. Valdés, L. Shoshani, and R. Conteras. 1998.
Role of tight junctions in establishing and maintaining cell polarity.
Ann. Rev. Physiol. 60:161–177.

299

Goodenough, D. A. 1999. Plugging the leaks. Proc. Nat’l. Acad.
Sci. USA 96:319.
Mitic, L., and J. Anderson. 1998. Molecular architecture of tight
junctions. Ann. Rev. Physiol. 60:121–142.
Schultz, S., et al., eds. 1997. Molecular Biology of Membrane
Transport Disorders. Plenum Press.

Propagation of Electric Impulses by Gated Ion Channels
Aldrich, R. W. 2001. Fifty years of inactivation. Nature
411:643–644.
Armstrong, C., and B. Hille. 1998. Voltage-gated ion channels
and electrical excitability. Neuron 20:371–380.
Catterall, W. A. 2000. From ionic currents to molecular mechanisms: the structure and function of voltage-gated sodium channels.
Neuron 26:13–25.
Catterall, W. A. 2000. Structure and regulation of voltage-gated
Ca2 channels. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 16:521–555.
Catterall, W. A. 2001. A 3D view of sodium channels. Nature
409:988–989.
del Camino, D., and G. Yellen. 2001. Tight steric closure at the
intracellular activation gate of a voltage-gated K() channel. Neuron 32:649–656.
Doyle, D. A., et al. 1998. The structure of the potassium channel: molecular basis of K conduction and selectivity. Science
280:69–77.
Hille, B. 2001. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3d ed.
Sinauer Associates.
Jan, Y. N., and L. Y. Jan. 2001. Dendrites. Genes Dev.
15:2627–2641.
Miller, C. 2000. Ion channel surprises: prokaryotes do it again!
Neuron 25:7–9.
Sato, C., et al. 2001. The voltage-sensitive sodium channel is a
bell-shaped molecule with several cavities. Nature 409:1047–1051.
Yi, B. A., and L. Y. Jan. 2000. Taking apart the gating of voltage-gated K channels. Neuron 27:423–425.

Myelin
Arroyo, E. J., and S. S. Scherer. 2000. On the molecular architecture of myelinated fibers. Histochem. Cell Biol. 113:1–18.
Pedraza, L., J. K. Huang, and D. R. Colman. 2001. Organizing
principles of the axoglial apparatus. Neuron 30:335–344.
Salzer, J. L. 1997. Clustering sodium channels at the node of
Ranvier: close encounters of the axon-glia kind. Neuron 18:843–846.
Trapp, B. D., and G. J. Kidd. 2000. Axo-glial septate junctions.
The maestro of nodal formation and myelination? J. Cell Biol.
150:F97–F100.

Neurotransmitters and Transport Proteins
in the Transmission of Electric Impulses
Amara, S. G., and M. J. Kuhar. 1993. Neurotransmitter transporters: recent progress. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 16:73–93.
Bajjalieh, S. M., and R. H. Scheller. 1995. The biochemistry of
neurotransmitter secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 270:1971–1974.
Betz, W., and J. Angleson. 1998. The synaptic vesicle cycle. Ann.
Rev. Physiol. 60:347–364.
Brejc, K., et al. 2001. Crystal structure of an ACh-binding protein reveals the ligand-binding domain of nicotinic receptors. Nature
411:269–276.
Fernandez, J. M. 1997. Cellular and molecular mechanics by
atomic force microscopy: capturing the exocytotic fusion pore in
vivo? Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 94:9–10.
Ikeda, S. R. 2001. Signal transduction. Calcium channels—link
locally, act globally. Science 294:318–319.

300

CHAPTER 7 • Transport of Ions and Small Molecules Across Cell Membranes

Jan, L. Y., and C. F. Stevens. 2000. Signaling mechanisms: a
decade of signaling. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 10:625–630.
Karlin, A. 2002. Emerging structure of the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 3:102–114.
Kavanaugh, M. P. 1998. Neurotransmitter transport: models in
flux. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 95:12737–12738.
Lin, R. C., and R. H. Scheller. 2000. Mechanisms of synaptic
vesicle exocytosis. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 16:19–49.
Neher, E. 1998. Vesicle pools and Ca2 microdo-mains: new
tools for understanding their roles in neurotransmitter release. Neuron 20:389–399.

Reith, M., ed. 1997. Neurotransmitter Transporters: Structure,
Function, and Regulation. Humana Press.
Sakmann, B. 1992. Elementary steps in synaptic transmission revealed by currents through single ion channels. Nobel Lecture
reprinted in EMBO J. 11:2002–2016 and Science 256:503–512.
Sudhof, T. C. 1995. The synaptic vesicle cycle: a cascade of
protein-protein interactions. Nature 375:645–653.
Usdin, T. B., L. E. Eiden, T. I. Bonner, and J. D. Erickson. 1995.
Molecular biology of the vesicular ACh transporter. Trends Neurosci.
18:218–224.

8
CELLULAR
ENERGETICS

Computer-generated model of a section of a mitochondrion from chicken brain, based on a three-dimensional
electron tomogram. [T. Frey and C. Mannella, 2000, Trends
Biochem. Sci. 25:319.]

T

he most important molecule for capturing and transferring free energy in biological systems is adenosine
triphosphate, or ATP (see Figure 2-24). Cells use the
energy released during hydrolysis of the terminal “highenergy” phosphoanhydride bond in ATP to power many
energetically unfavorable processes. Examples include the
synthesis of proteins from amino acids and of nucleic acids
from nucleotides (Chapter 4), transport of molecules against
a concentration gradient by ATP-powered pumps (Chapter
7), contraction of muscle (Chapter 19), and movement (beating) of cilia (Chapter 20). Although other high-energy molecules occur in cells, ATP is the universal “currency” of
chemical energy; it is found in all types of organisms and
must have occurred in the earliest life-forms.
This chapter focuses on how cells generate the highenergy phosphoanhydride bond of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate (HPO42). This endergonic reaction,
which is the reverse of ATP hydrolysis and requires an input
of 7.3 kcal/mol to proceed, can be written as
Pi2  H  ADP3 ¡ ATP4  H2O
where Pi2 represents inorganic phosphate (HPO42). The
energy to drive this reaction is produced primarily by two
main processes: aerobic oxidation, which occurs in nearly all
cells, and photosynthesis, which occurs only in leaf cells of
plants and certain single-celled organisms.
In aerobic oxidation, fatty acids and sugars, principally
glucose, are metabolized to carbon dioxide (CO2) and water
(H2O), and the released energy is converted to the chemical
energy of phosphoanhydride bonds in ATP. In animal cells
and most other nonphotosynthetic cells, ATP is generated
mainly by this process. The initial steps in the oxidation of

glucose, called glycolysis, occur in the cytosol in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes and do not require oxygen (O2).
The final steps, which require oxygen, generate most of the
ATP. In eukaryotes, these later stages of aerobic oxidation
occur in mitochondria; in prokaryotes, which contain only
a plasma membrane and lack internal organelles, many of
the final steps occur on the plasma membrane. The final
stages of fatty acid metabolism sometimes occur in mitochondria and generate ATP; in most eukaryotic cells, however, fatty acids are metabolized to CO2 and H2O in
peroxisomes without production of ATP.
In photosynthesis, light energy is converted to the chemical energy of phosphoanhydride bonds in ATP and stored
in the chemical bonds of carbohydrates (primarily sucrose
and starch). Oxygen also is formed during photosynthesis. In

OUTLINE
8.1 Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2
8.2 Electron Transport and Generation of
the Proton-Motive Force
8.3 Harnessing the Proton-Motive Force for EnergyRequiring Processes
8.4 Photosynthetic Stages and Light-Absorbing
Pigments
8.5 Molecular Analysis of Photosystems
8.6 CO2 Metabolism During Photosynthesis
301

302

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

ers their movement to other electron carriers, particularly
NADP; eventually these electrons are donated to CO2 to
synthesize carbohydrates. All these systems, however, contain some similar carriers that couple electron transport to
the pumping of protons across the membrane—always from
the cytosolic face to the exoplasmic face of the membrane—
thereby generating the proton-motive force (Figure 8-1, top).
Invariably, the cytosolic face has a negative electric potential relative to the exoplasmic face.
Moreover, mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria utilize essentially the same kind of membrane protein, the F0F1
complex, to synthesize ATP. The F0F1 complex, now commonly called ATP synthase, is a member of the F class of
ATP-powered proton pumps (see Figure 7-6). In all cases,
ATP synthase is positioned with the globular F1 domain,
which catalyzes ATP synthesis, on the cytosolic face of the
membrane, so ATP is always formed on the cytosolic face of
the membrane (Figure 8-2). Protons always flow through
ATP synthase from the exoplasmic to the cytosolic face of the
membrane, driven by a combination of the proton concentration gradient ([H]exoplasmic  [H]cytosolic) and the membrane electric potential (exoplasmic face positive with respect
to the cytosolic face).
These commonalities between mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria undoubtedly have an evolutionary
origin. In bacteria both photosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation occur on the plasma membrane. Analysis of
the sequences and transcription of mitochondrial and
chloroplast DNAs (Chapters 10 and 11) has given rise to
the popular hypothesis that these organelles arose early in
the evolution of eukaryotic cells by endocytosis of bacteria
capable of oxidative phosphorylation or photosynthesis, respectively (Figure 8-3). According to this endosymbiont

plants and eukaryotic single-celled algae, photosynthesis occurs in chloroplasts. Several prokaryotes also carry out photosynthesis on their plasma membrane or its invaginations by
a mechanism similar to that in chloroplasts. The oxygen generated during photosynthesis is the source of virtually all the
oxygen in the air, and the carbohydrates produced are the ultimate source of energy for virtually all nonphotosynthetic
organisms. Bacteria living in deep ocean vents, where there is
no sunlight, disprove the popular view that sunlight is the ultimate source of energy for all organisms on earth. These
bacteria obtain energy for converting carbon dioxide into
carbohydrates and other cellular constituents by oxidation of
reduced inorganic compounds in dissolved vent gas.
At first glance, photosynthesis and aerobic oxidation appear to have little in common. However, a revolutionary discovery in cell biology is that bacteria, mitochondria, and
chloroplasts all use the same basic mechanism, called
chemiosmosis (or chemiosmotic coupling), to generate ATP
from ADP and Pi. In chemiosmosis, a proton (H) concentration gradient and an electric potential (voltage gradient)
across the membrane, collectively termed the proton-motive
force, drive an energy-requiring process such as ATP synthesis (Figure 8-1, bottom).
Chemiosmosis can occur only in sealed, membranelimited compartments that are impermeable to H. The
proton-motive force is generated by the stepwise movement
of electrons from higher to lower energy states via membranebound electron carriers. In mitochondria and nonphotosynthetic bacterial cells, electrons from NADH (produced
during the metabolism of sugars, fatty acids, and other substances) are transferred to O2, the ultimate electron acceptor.
In the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts, energy absorbed
from light strips electrons from water (forming O2) and pow-

GENERATION OF PROTON-MOTIVE FORCE
Chemical energy

Light energy

Mitochondria and
aerobic bacteria

Chloroplasts and
photosynthetic bacteria

Electric potential

+
−

Exoplasmic
face

+++
–––

Cytosolic
face

 FIGURE 8-1 Overview of the generation
and utilization of a proton-motive force.
A transmembrane proton concentration gradient
and a voltage gradient, collectively called the
proton-motive force, are generated during photosynthesis and the aerobic oxidation of carbon
compounds in mitochondria and aerobic bacteria.
In chemiosmotic coupling, a proton-motive force
powers an energy-requiring process such as ATP
synthesis (A), transport of metabolites across the
membrane against their concentration gradient (B),
or rotation of bacterial flagella (C).

+++
–––
H+

Sealed
compartment

H+ H+ concentration
gradient
Membrane
impermeable
to H+

ATP
ADP + Pi

A
H

C

+

Y

H+

Synthesis of ATP
H+ symport
+
Transport of molecule (X or Y) H X
against concentration gradient

H+ antiport

B

H+

CHEMIOSMOTIC COUPLING

Rotation of bacterial
flagella

8.1 • Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2
Mitochondrion

Bacterium
H+

+++
– – –

F0
F1

H+

H+

+++
– – –

H2O

O2

H+

Matrix

ATP

F1

ADP + Pi
NADH

Intermembrane space

Outer
membrane
F0

ATP

Plasma
membrane

303

ADP + Pi

NAD+

H+
NADH

H+

O2

H2O

NAD+

Inner
membrane

▲ FIGURE 8-2 Membrane orientation and the direction
of proton movement during chemiosmotically coupled ATP
synthesis in bacteria, mitochondria, and chloroplasts. The
membrane surface facing a shaded area is a cytosolic face; the
surface facing an unshaded area is an exoplasmic face. Note that
the cytosolic face of the bacterial plasma membrane, the matrix
face of the inner mitochondrial membrane, and the stromal face
of the thylakoid membrane are all equivalent. During electron
transport, protons are always pumped from the cytosolic face to
the exoplasmic face, creating a proton concentration gradient
(exoplasmic face  cytosolic face) and an electric potential
(negative cytosolic face and positive exoplasmic face) across the
membrane. During the coupled synthesis of ATP, protons flow
in the reverse direction (down their electrochemical gradient)
through ATP synthase (F0F1 complex), which protrudes from
the cytosolic face in all cases.

Chloroplast
Light

Outer
membrane
NADP +

F0
F1

Stroma

O2 NADPH

H2O

–
– – +
++

Intermembrane
space

H+

H+

ATP
H+

ADP
+
Pi

Inner
membrane
Thylakoid membrane

Eukaryotic
plasma membrane
Endocytosis of bacterium
capable of oxidative
phosphorylation
1
Bacterial
plasma membrane

Bacterial plasma
membrane becomes
inner membrane
of mitochondrion

2

F0

F1

Ancestral
cell

Endocytosis of bacterium
capable of photosynthesis
1
Bacterial
plasma membrane

Bacterial plasma
membrane becomes
inner membrane
of chloroplast
Inner membrane buds
off thylakoid vesicles

Mitochondrial matrix

▲ FIGURE 8-3 Evolutionary origin of mitochondria
and chloroplasts according to endosymbiont hypothesis.
Membrane surfaces facing a shaded area are cytosolic faces;
surfaces facing an unshaded area are exoplasmic faces.
Endocytosis of a bacterium by an ancestral eukaryotic cell
would generate an organelle with two membranes, the outer
membrane derived from the eukaryotic plasma membrane and
the inner one from the bacterial membrane. The F1 subunit of

2

F0 F
1
3
Stroma
Thylakoid
membrane

ATP synthase, localized to the cytosolic face of the bacterial
membrane, would then face the matrix of the evolving
mitochondrion (left) or chloroplast (right). Budding of vesicles
from the inner chloroplast membrane, such as occurs during
development of chloroplasts in contemporary plants, would
generate the thylakoid vesicles with the F1 subunit remaining
on the cytosolic face, facing the chloroplast stroma.

304

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

hypothesis, the inner mitochondrial membrane would
be derived from the bacterial plasma membrane with the
globular F1 domain still on its cytosolic face pointing toward the matrix space of the mitochondrion. Similarly, the
globular F1 domain would be on the cytosolic face of
the thylakoid membrane facing the stromal space of the
chloroplast.
In addition to powering ATP synthesis, the protonmotive force can supply energy for the transport of small
molecules across a membrane against a concentration gradient (see Figure 8-1). For example, a H/sugar symport
protein catalyzes the uptake of lactose by certain bacteria,
and proton-driven antiporters catalyze the accumulation
of ions and sucrose by plant vacuoles (Chapter 7). The
proton-motive force also powers the rotation of bacterial
flagella. (The beating of eukaryotic cilia, however, is powered by ATP hydrolysis.) Conversely, hydrolysis of ATP by
V-class ATP-powered proton pumps, which are similar in
structure to F-class pumps (see Figure 7-6), provides the energy for transporting protons against a concentration gradient. Chemiosmotic coupling thus illustrates an important
principle introduced in our discussion of active transport in
Chapter 7: the membrane potential, the concentration gradients of protons (and other ions) across a membrane, and
the phosphoanhydride bonds in ATP are equivalent and interconvertible forms of chemical potential energy.
In this brief overview, we’ve seen that oxygen and
carbohydrates are produced during photosynthesis, whereas
they are consumed during aerobic oxidation. In both
processes, the flow of electrons creates a H electrochemical
gradient, or proton-motive force, that can power ATP synthesis. As we examine these two processes at the molecular
level, focusing first on aerobic oxidation and then on photosynthesis, the striking parallels between them will become
evident.

bulk of the ATP produced during the conversion of glucose to CO 2. In this section, we discuss the biochemical
pathways that oxidize glucose and fatty acids to CO2 and
H2O; the fate of the released electrons is described in the
next section.

Cytosolic Enzymes Convert Glucose
to Pyruvate During Glycolysis
A set of 10 water-soluble cytosolic enzymes catalyze the reactions constituting the glycolytic pathway, in which one
molecule of glucose is converted to two molecules of pyruvate (Figure 8-4). All the metabolic intermediates between
glucose and pyruvate are water-soluble phosphorylated
compounds.
Four molecules of ATP are formed from ADP during
glycolysis via substrate-level phosphorylation, which is
catalyzed by enzymes in the cytosol (reactions 7 and 10).
Unlike ATP formation in mitochondria and chloroplasts, a
proton-motive force is not involved in substrate-level
phosphorylation. Early in the glycolytic pathway, two ATP
molecules are consumed: one by the addition of a phosphate residue to glucose in the reaction catalyzed by hexokinase (reaction 1), and another by the addition of a
second phosphate to fructose 6-phosphate in the reaction
catalyzed by phosphofructokinase-1 (reaction 3). Thus
glycolysis yields a net of only two ATP molecules per glucose molecule.
The balanced chemical equation for the conversion of
glucose to pyruvate shows that four hydrogen atoms (four
protons and four electrons) are also formed:
O O
C6H12O6
Glucose

8.1 Oxidation of Glucose
and Fatty Acids to CO2
The complete aerobic oxidation of each molecule of glucose
yields 6 molecules of CO2 and is coupled to the synthesis of
as many as 30 molecules of ATP:
C6H12O6  6 O2  30 Pi2  30 ADP3  30 H
¡ 6 CO2  30 ATP4  36 H2O
Glycolysis, the initial stage of glucose metabolism, takes
place in the cytosol and does not involve molecular O 2.
It produces a small amount of ATP and the three-carbon
compound pyruvate. In aerobic cells, pyruvate formed in
glycolysis is transported into the mitochondria, where it is
oxidized by O 2 to CO 2. Via chemiosmotic coupling, the
oxidation of pyruvate in the mitochondria generates the

2 CH3

C

C

OH  4 H  4 e

Pyruvate

(For convenience, we show pyruvate here in its un-ionized
form, pyruvic acid, although at physiological pH it would be
largely dissociated.) All four electrons and two of the four
protons are transferred to two molecules of the oxidized
form of the electron carrier nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to produce the reduced form, NADH (see
Figure 2-26):
2 H  4 e  2 NAD ¡ 2 NADH
The reaction that generates these hydrogen atoms and
transfers them to NAD is catalyzed by glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (see Figure 8-4, reaction 6). The
overall chemical equation for this first stage of glucose
metabolism is
C6H12O6  2 NAD  2 ADP3  2 Pi2
¡ 2 C3H4O3  2 NADH  2 ATP4

305

8.1 • Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2

 FIGURE 8-4 The glycolytic pathway by which glucose is

CH2OH

degraded to pyruvic acid. Two reactions consume ATP, forming
ADP and phosphorylated sugars (red); two generate ATP from
ADP by substrate-level phosphorylation (green); and one yields
NADH by reduction of NAD (yellow). Note that all the intermediates between glucose and pyruvate are phosphorylated compounds. Reactions 1, 3, and 10, with single arrows, are essentially
irreversible (large negative ∆G values) under conditions ordinarily
obtaining in cells.

O

H

Glucose
HO
Hexokinase

1

ATP

O

H
HO
Phosphoglucose
isomerase

OH

H

H

OH

O

Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
4



HO3PO

H

O

OH

C

C

C

5
H

Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate

Triose
phosphate
isomerase

H

OH

Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
(2 molecules )

6

Phosphoglycerate
kinase

Many eukaryotes are obligate aerobes: they grow only in the
presence of oxygen and metabolize glucose (or related sugars) completely to CO2, with the concomitant production of
a large amount of ATP. Most eukaryotes, however, can generate some ATP by anaerobic metabolism. A few eukaryotes
are facultative anaerobes: they grow in either the presence
or the absence of oxygen. For example, annelids, mollusks,
and some yeasts can live and grow for days without oxygen.
In the absence of oxygen, facultative anaerobes convert
glucose to one or more two- or three-carbon compounds,
which are generally released into the surrounding medium.
For instance, yeasts degrade glucose to two pyruvate molecules via glycolysis, generating a net of two ATP. In this
process two NADH molecules are formed from NAD per
glucose molecule. In the absence of oxygen, yeasts convert
pyruvate to one molecule each of ethanol and CO2; in these

H
O

H

H

HC

C

C

H
2

OPO3



2 NADH  2 H

O

H

H

C

C

C

2

O3PO

2 ATP


O

H

H

C

C

C

O



O

O

H

H

C

C

C

O3PO

H

OH

Enolase

2 H2O
Phosphoenolpyruvate
(2 molecules)

O


O

C
2

10

H

OPO32

HO

Phosphoglyceromutase

2

9

H

OPO32

HO

2 ADP

2-Phosphoglycerate
(2 molecules)

Anaerobic Metabolism of Each Glucose Molecule
Yields Only Two ATP Molecules

H

OH



3-Phosphoglycerate
(2 molecules)
8

OH

2 NAD  2 Pi

1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
(2 molecules)
7

HO

OPO3

HO
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase

2

2

CH2

HO

H

H

Aldolase

OH

OPO3
O
CH2OH

OH

OPO32

CH2

OH

H

ATP
ADP

H

CH2

H
Phosphofructokinase-1

H

OH

Fructose 6-phosphate
3

OH

H

H

Glucose 6-phosphate
2

OPO32

CH2

ADP

H

H

Pyruvate
kinase

2 ADP
2 ATP

Pyruvate
(2 molecules)



O

H
C

C

H

O3PO

O

O

H

C

C

C

H

H

reactions two NADH molecules are oxidized to NAD for
each two pyruvates converted to ethanol, thereby regenerating the supply of NAD (Figure 8-5a, left). This anaerobic
degradation of glucose, called fermentation, is the basis of
beer and wine production.
During the prolonged contraction of mammalian skeletal
muscle cells, when oxygen becomes limited, muscle cells

306

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics
ANAEROBIC METABOLISM (FERMENTATION)

AEROBIC METABOLISM

Yeast
CYTOSOL

CYTOSOL

CYTOSOL

C6H12O6

C6H12O6

C6H12O6

Glucose

Glucose

Glucose

2 ADP + 2 NAD+ + 2 Pi

Glycolysis

CH3

Muscle

O

O

C

C

2 ADP + 2 NAD+ + 2 Pi
Glycolysis

2 ATP + 2 NADH + 2 Pi
+ 2 H2O

2 ATP + 2 NADH + 2 Pi
+ 2 H2O

OH

CH3

Pyruvic acid

Pyruvate
decarboxylase

O

O

C

C

2

CH

CH3

Acetaldehyde

Alcohol
dehydrogenase

CH3

OH

O

CH

C

O

C

C

MITOCHONDRION

OH

Lactic acid

CH3

O

O

C

C

NADH + H+

CO2
2

CH2

OH

Pyruvic acid

NAD+

CH3

OH

Transfer into
mitochondrion

NAD+

OH

O

Pyruvic acid

NADH + H+

Lactate
dehydrogenase

O
CH3

2 ATP + 2 NADH + 2 Pi
+ 2 H2O

Pyruvic acid

CO2

2

2 ADP + 2 NAD+ + 2 Pi

Glycolysis

CoA-SH

Pyruvate
dehydrogenase

NAD+

OH

Ethanol

NADH
O
Overall reactions of anaerobic metabolism:
Glucose + 2 ADP + 2 Pi

2 ethanol + 2 CO2 + 2 ATP + 2 H2O

Glucose + 2 ADP + 2 Pi

2 lactate + 2 ATP + 2 H2O

CH3

C

S-CoA

Acetyl
AcetylCoA
CoA

NADH

Citric acid
cycle

NAD+

Oxidative
phosphorylation

~28 ADP + ~28 Pi

▲ FIGURE 8-5 Anaerobic versus aerobic metabolism of glucose.
The ultimate fate of pyruvate formed during glycolysis depends on the
presence or absence of oxygen. In the formation of pyruvate from
glucose, one molecule of NAD is reduced (by addition of two electrons)
to NADH for each molecule of pyruvate formed (see Figure 8-4, reaction
6). (Left ) In the absence of oxygen, two electrons are transferred from
each NADH molecule to an acceptor molecule to regenerate NAD, which
is required for continued glycolysis. In yeasts, acetaldehyde is the acceptor
and ethanol is the product. This process is called alcoholic fermentation.
When oxygen is limiting in muscle cells, NADH reduces pyruvate to form
lactic acid, regenerating NAD. (Right ) In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate
is transported into mitochondria. First it is converted by pyruvate
dehydrogenase into one molecule of CO2 and one of acetic acid, the
latter linked to coenzyme A (CoA-SH) to form acetyl CoA, concomitant
with reduction of one molecule of NAD to NADH. Further metabolism
of acetyl CoA and NADH generates approximately an additional 28
molecules of ATP per glucose molecule oxidized.

3 O2
~28 ATP + ~28 H2O
2 CO2
Overall reaction of aerobic metabolism:
Glucose + 6 O2 + ~30 ADP + ~30 Pi
6 CO2 + 36 H2O + ~30 ATP

8.1 • Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2

307

ferment glucose to two molecules of lactic acid—again, with
the net production of only two molecules of ATP per glucose
molecule (Figure 8-5a, right). The lactic acid causes muscle
and joint aches. It is largely secreted into the blood; some
passes into the liver, where it is reoxidized to pyruvate and either further metabolized to CO2 aerobically or converted to
glucose. Much lactate is metabolized to CO2 by the heart,
which is highly perfused by blood and can continue aerobic
metabolism at times when exercising skeletal muscles secrete
lactate. Lactic acid bacteria (the organisms that “spoil” milk)
and other prokaryotes also generate ATP by the fermentation
of glucose to lactate.
In the presence of oxygen, however, pyruvate formed in
glycolysis is transported into mitochondria, where it is oxidized by O2 to CO2 in a series of oxidation reactions collectively termed cellular respiration (Figure 8-5b). These
reactions generate an estimated 28 additional ATP molecules
per glucose molecule, far outstripping the ATP yield from
anaerobic glucose metabolism. To understand how mitochondria operate as ATP-generating factories, we first describe their structure and then the reactions they employ to
degrade pyruvate.

Mitochondria are among the larger organelles in the cell,
each one being about the size of an E. coli bacterium. Most
eukaryotic cells contain many mitochondria, which collectively can occupy as much as 25 percent of the volume of the
cytoplasm. They are large enough to be seen under a light
microscope, but the details of their structure can be viewed
only with the electron microscope (see Figure 5-26). The
outer membrane defines the smooth outer perimeter of the
mitochondrion. In contrast, the inner membrane has numerous invaginations called cristae. These membranes define two
submitochondrial compartments: the intermembrane space
between the outer membrane and the inner membrane with
its cristae, and the matrix, or central compartment (Figure
8-6). The fractionation and purification of these membranes
and compartments have made it possible to determine their
protein and phospholipid compositions and to localize each
enzyme-catalyzed reaction to a specific membrane or space.
The outer membrane contains mitochondrial porin,
a transmembrane channel protein similar in structure to

(a)

(b)

Cristae junctions
0.1~0.5 m

Inner
membrane
Matrix

1~2 m

▲ FIGURE 8-6 Internal structure of a mitochondrion.
(a) Schematic diagram showing the principal membranes and
compartments. The cristae form sheets and tubes by invagination
of the inner membrane and connect to the inner membrane
through relatively small uniform tubular structures called crista
junctions. The intermembrane space appears continuous with the
lumen of each crista. The F0F1 complexes (small red spheres),
which synthesize ATP, are intramembrane particles that protrude
from the cristae and inner membrane into the matrix. The matrix
contains the mitochondrial DNA (blue strand), ribosomes
(small blue spheres), and granules (large yellow spheres).

(b) Computer-generated model of a section of a
mitochondrion from chicken brain. This model is based
on a three-dimensional electron tomogram calculated
from a series of two-dimensional electron micrographs
recorded at regular angular intervals. This technique is
analogous to a three-dimensional X-ray tomogram or CAT
scan. Note the tightly packed cristae (yellow-green), the
inner membrane (light blue), and the outer membrane
(dark blue). [Part (a) courtesy of T. Frey; part (b) from T. Frey and
C. Mannella, 2000, Trends Biochem. Sci. 25:319.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Outer
membrane

Cristae

Video: Mitochondrion Reconstructed by Electron Tomography

Intermembrane
space

Mitochondria Possess Two Structurally
and Functionally Distinct Membranes

308

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

tron carriers. Various transport proteins located in the inner
membrane and cristae allow otherwise impermeable molecules, such as ADP and Pi, to pass from the cytosol to the matrix, and other molecules, such as ATP, to move from the
matrix into the cytosol. Protein constitutes 76 percent of the
total weight of the inner membrane—a higher fraction than
in any other cellular membrane. Cardiolipin (diphosphatidyl
glycerol), a lipid concentrated in the inner membrane, sufficiently reduces the membrane’s permeability to protons that
a proton-motive force can be established across it.

bacterial porins (see Figure 5-14). Ions and most small molecules (up to about 5000 Da) can readily pass through these
channel proteins. Although the flow of metabolites across the
outer membrane may limit their rate of mitochondrial oxidation, the inner membrane and cristae are the major permeability barriers between the cytosol and the mitochondrial matrix.
Freeze-fracture studies indicate that mitochondrial cristae
contain many protein-rich intramembrane particles. Some
are the F0F1 complexes that synthesize ATP; others function
in transporting electrons to O2 from NADH or other elec-

Outer mitochondrial membrane (permeable to metabolites)

CO2

Intermembrane space
Inner mitochondrial membrane and cristae

Citric acid cycle

1
CO2

O O HSCoA
Pyruvate

C

CH3

C

OH

Transporter

Fatty
acid

ATP +
HSCoA

+

NAD

AMP +
PPi

NAD+

NAD+

NAD+

FAD

NADH

3

2

NAD+

NADH

2 e− + 2 H+ +

1
2 O2

III

ATP

ATP
ADP
+
Pi

H2O

O2

Fumarate
FAD

I

CO2

Mitochondrial matrix

Succinate
Electron
shuttle

FADH2

2 CO2

HSCoA

FADH2

Fatty acyl
CoA

Transporter

GTP

CH3 C SCoA
Acetyl CoA
NADH
3 NAD+ 3 NADH FAD
HSCoA

Fatty acyl
CoA

NADH

Pi  GDP

O

Transporters

Pi
OH−

H2O
IV

ADP

3

H+

II
+

H+

H

Electron transport chain

H+

3 H+
F0F1 complex

1 Pyruvate dehydrogenase, citric acid cycle, and fatty acid metabolism
2 Electron transport from NADH and FADH2 to oxygen; generation of proton-motive force
3 ATP synthesis by F0F1 using proton-motive force

▲ FIGURE 8-7 Summary of the aerobic oxidation of
pyruvate and fatty acids in mitochondria. The outer membrane
is freely permeable to all metabolites, but specific transport
proteins (colored ovals) in the inner membrane are required to
import pyruvate (yellow), ADP (green), and Pi (purple) into the
matrix and to export ATP (green). NADH generated in the cytosol
is not transported directly to the matrix because the inner
membrane is impermeable to NAD and NADH; instead, a shuttle
system (red) transports electrons from cytosolic NADH to NAD
in the matrix. O2 diffuses into the matrix and CO2 diffuses out.
Stage 1: Fatty acyl groups are transferred from fatty acyl CoA
and transported across the inner membrane via a special carrier
(blue oval) and then reattached to CoA on the matrix side.

Pyruvate is converted to acetyl CoA with the formation of NADH,
and fatty acids (attached to CoA) are also converted to acetyl CoA
with formation of NADH and FADH. Oxidation of acetyl CoA in
the citric acid cycle generates NADH and FADH2. Stage 2:
Electrons from these reduced coenzymes are transferred via
electron-transport complexes (blue boxes) to O2 concomitant with
transport of H ions from the matrix to the intermembrane space,
generating the proton-motive force. Electrons from NADH flow
directly from complex I to complex III, bypassing complex II.
Stage 3: ATP synthase, the F0F1 complex (orange), harnesses
the proton-motive force to synthesize ATP. Blue arrows indicate
electron flow; red arrows transmembrane movement of protons;
and green arrows transport of metabolites.

8.1 • Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2

The mitochondrial inner membrane, cristae, and matrix
are the sites of most reactions involving the oxidation of
pyruvate and fatty acids to CO2 and H2O and the coupled
synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi. These processes involve
many steps but can be subdivided into three groups of reactions, each of which occurs in a discrete membrane or space
in the mitochondrion (Figure 8-7):

Acetyl CoA Derived from Pyruvate Is Oxidized
to Yield CO2 and Reduced Coenzymes
in Mitochondria
Immediately after pyruvate is transported from the cytosol
across the mitochondrial membranes to the matrix, it reacts
with coenzyme A, forming CO2 and the intermediate acetyl
CoA (Figure 8-8). This reaction, catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase, is highly exergonic (G
8.0 kcal/mol)
and essentially irreversible. Note that during the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction, NAD is reduced, forming NADH;
in contrast, during the reactions catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase, NADH is oxidized,
forming NAD (see Figure 8-5).
As discussed later, acetyl CoA plays a central role in the
oxidation of fatty acids and many amino acids. In addition,
it is an intermediate in numerous biosynthetic reactions, such
as the transfer of an acetyl group to lysine residues in histone
proteins and to the N-termini of many mammalian proteins.
Acetyl CoA also is a biosynthetic precursor of cholesterol
and other steroids and of the farnesyl and related groups that
form the lipid anchors used to attach some proteins (e.g.,
Ras) to membranes (see Figure 5-15). In respiring mitochondria, however, the acetyl group of acetyl CoA is almost always oxidized to CO2.
The final stage in the oxidation of glucose entails a set
of nine reactions in which the acetyl group of acetyl CoA is
oxidized to CO2. These reactions operate in a cycle that is referred to by several names: the citric acid cycle, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and the Krebs cycle. The net result is that
for each acetyl group entering the cycle as acetyl CoA, two
molecules of CO2 are produced.
As shown in Figure 8-9, the cycle begins with condensation of the two-carbon acetyl group from acetyl CoA with the
four-carbon molecule oxaloacetate to yield the six-carbon
citric acid. The two-step conversion of citrate to iso-citrate
(reactions 2 and 3) is carried out by a single multifunctional
enzyme. In both reactions 4 and 5, a CO2 molecule is released. Reaction 5, catalyzed by the enzyme -ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase, also results in reduction of NAD to NADH.
This reaction is chemically similar to that catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase, and indeed these two large enzyme complexes are similar in structure and mechanism. Reduction of
NAD to NADH also occurs during reactions 4 and 9; thus
three molecules of NADH are generated per turn of the cycle.
In reaction 7, two electrons and two protons are transferred

1. Oxidation of pyruvate and fatty acids to CO2 coupled
to reduction of NAD to NADH and of flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD), another oxidized electron carrier, to its
reduced form, FADH2 (see Figure 2-26). These electron
carriers are often referred to as coenzymes. NAD, NADH,
FAD, and FADH2 are diffusible and not permanently
bound to proteins. Most of the reactions occur in the
matrix; two are catalyzed by inner-membrane enzymes
that face the matrix.
2. Electron transfer from NADH and FADH2 to O2, regenerating the oxidized electron carriers NAD and FAD.
These reactions occur in the inner membrane and are coupled to the generation of a proton-motive force across it.
3. Harnessing of the energy stored in the electrochemical
proton gradient for ATP synthesis by the F0F1 complex in
the inner membrane.
The cristae greatly expand the surface area of the inner
mitochondrial membrane, enhancing its ability to generate
ATP (see Figure 8-6). In typical liver mitochondria, for example, the area of the inner membrane including cristae is
about five times that of the outer membrane. In fact, the total
area of all inner mitochondrial membranes in liver cells is
about 17 times that of the plasma membrane. The mitochondria in heart and skeletal muscles contain three times
as many cristae as are found in typical liver mitochondria—
presumably reflecting the greater demand for ATP by muscle cells.
In plants, stored carbohydrates, mostly in the form
of starch, are hydrolyzed to glucose. Glycolysis
then produces pyruvate, which is transported into
mitochondria, as in animal cells. Mitochondrial oxidation of
pyruvate and concomitant formation of ATP occur in photosynthetic cells during dark periods when photosynthesis is
not possible, and in roots and other nonphotosynthetic tissues all the time. ❚

H

O
H3C

C

Acetyl

S

(CH2)2

N

H
C
O

(CH2)2

N

C
O

H

CH3

C

C

O

O
CH2

O

OH CH3

P
O−

O

P
O−

O

Ribose

Adenine

Phosphate

Coenzyme A (CoA)

▲ FIGURE 8-8 The structure of acetyl CoA. This compound is
an important intermediate in the aerobic oxidation of pyruvate,

309

fatty acids, and many amino acids. It also contributes acetyl
groups in many biosynthetic pathways.

310

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics
O
CH3


NADH  H




NAD

COO

SCoA  H2O

CH2

HSCoA
HO

O

CH2

COO
HO

COO
C

C

Acetyl CoA

9

CH2

COO

COO

H2O

CH2

1

CH2





C H

C

COO

COO

C

2

Citrate

Oxaloacetate



COO

HC




COO

COO

cis -Aconitate

Malate

H2O
8
H2O

3




COO

COO
CH

CH2



COO

HC
COO
Fumarate



COO
7

6

CH2
FAD
FADH2



COO

Succinate

CH2

COO

CH2

GDP  Pi
 H2O

GTP  HSCoA

H
4

CH2

CH2

5

CH2
C
SCoA
O

C

O


HO

C

COO

C

H

COO


NAD

Isocitrate

COO

 -KetoNAD

glutarate CO
2  NADH  H
 HSCoA


Succinyl

CoA
CO2  NADH  H

▲ FIGURE 8-9 The citric acid cycle, in which acetyl groups
transferred from acetyl CoA are oxidized to CO2. In reaction 1,
a two-carbon acetyl residue from acetyl CoA condenses with
the four-carbon molecule oxaloacetate to form the six-carbon
molecule citrate. In the remaining reactions (2–9) each molecule
of citrate is eventually converted back to oxaloacetate, losing two
CO2 molecules in the process. In each turn of the cycle, four
pairs of electrons are removed from carbon atoms, forming

three molecules of NADH and one molecule of FADH2. The
two carbon atoms that enter the cycle with acetyl CoA are
highlighted in blue through succinyl CoA. In succinate and
fumarate, which are symmetric molecules, they can no longer
be specifically denoted. Isotope labeling studies have shown that
these carbon atoms are not lost in the turn of the cycle in which
they enter; on average one will be lost as CO2 during the next
turn of the cycle and the other in subsequent turns.

to FAD, yielding the reduced form of this coenzyme, FADH2.
In reaction 6, hydrolysis of the high-energy thioester bond in
succinyl CoA is coupled to synthesis of one GTP by substratelevel phosphorylation (GTP and ATP are interconvertible).
Reaction 9, the final one, also regenerates oxaloacetate, so the
cycle can begin again. Note that molecular O2 does not participate in the citric acid cycle.
Most enzymes and small molecules involved in the citric
acid cycle are soluble in aqueous solution and are localized to
the mitochondrial matrix. These include CoA, acetyl CoA, succinyl CoA, NAD, and NADH, as well as six of the eight cycle
enzymes. Succinate dehydrogenase, (reaction 7) and -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (reaction 5) are integral proteins in the
inner membrane, with their active sites facing the matrix. When
mitochondria are disrupted by gentle ultrasonic vibration or osmotic lysis, the six non-membrane-bound enzymes in the citric
acid cycle are released as a very large multiprotein complex.
The reaction product of one enzyme is thought to pass directly
to the next enzyme without diffusing through the solution.
However, much work is needed to determine the structure of
this enzyme complex as it exists in the cell.

Since glycolysis of one glucose molecule generates two
acetyl CoA molecules, the reactions in the glycolytic pathway
and citric acid cycle produce six CO2 molecules, ten NADH
molecules, and two FADH2 molecules per glucose molecule
(Table 8-1). Although these reactions also generate four highenergy phosphoanhydride bonds in the form of two ATP and
two GTP molecules, this represents only a small fraction of
the available energy released in the complete aerobic oxidation of glucose. The remaining energy is stored in the reduced coenzymes NADH and FADH2.
Synthesis of most of the ATP generated in aerobic oxidation is coupled to the reoxidation of NADH and FADH2
by O2 in a stepwise process involving the respiratory chain,
also called the electron transport chain. Even though molecular O2 is not involved in any reaction of the citric acid
cycle, in the absence of O2 the cycle soon stops operating
as the supply of NAD and FAD dwindles. Before considering electron transport and the coupled formation of ATP
in detail, we discuss first how the supply of NAD in the
cytosol is regenerated and then the oxidation of fatty acids
to CO2.

8.1 • Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2

311

TABLE 8-1 Net Result of the Glycolytic Pathway and the Citric Acid Cycle
CO2 Molecules
Produced

NAD Molecules
Reduced to NADH

FAD Molecules
Reduced to FADH2

1 glucose molecule to 2
pyruvate molecules

0

2

0

2 pyruvates to 2 acetyl CoA
molecules

2

2

0

2 acetyl CoA to 4 CO2
molecules

4

6

2

Total

6

10

2

Reaction

Transporters in the Inner Mitochondrial
Membrane Allow the Uptake of Electrons
from Cytosolic NADH
For aerobic oxidation to continue, the NADH produced during glycolysis in the cytosol must be oxidized to NAD. As
with NADH generated in the mitochondrial matrix, electrons from cytosolic NADH are ultimately transferred to O2
via the respiratory chain, concomitant with the generation of

NADHcytosol NADcytosol

Cytosol
Aspartate

a proton-motive force. Although the inner mitochondrial
membrane is impermeable to NADH itself, several electron
shuttles can transfer electrons from cytosolic NADH to the
matrix.
Operation of the most widespread shuttle—the malateaspartate shuttle—is depicted in Figure 8-10. Critical to the
shuttle are two antiport proteins in the inner mitochondrial
membrane, a malate/-ketoglutarate antiporter and a
glutamate/aspartate antiporter, that permit transport of their

Transaminase

1
Oxaloacetate

Malate
Malate
dehydrogenase

6
-Ketoglutarate Glutamate

5

Mitochondrial
inner membrane

2

-Ketoglutarate Glutamate
Malate
dehydrogenase

4
Aspartate

Oxaloacetate
Transaminase

Matrix

▲ FIGURE 8-10 The malate shuttle. This cyclical series of
reactions transfers electrons from NADH in the cytosol
(intermembrane space) across the inner mitochondrial membrane,
which is impermeable to NADH itself. Step 1 : Cytosolic malate
dehydrogenase transfers electrons from cytosolic NADH to
oxaloacetate, forming malate. Step 2 : An antiporter (blue oval) in
the inner mitochondrial membrane transports malate into the matrix
in exchange for -ketoglutarate. Step 3 : Mitochondrial malate
dehydrogenase converts malate back to oxaloacetate, reducing
NAD in the matrix to NADH in the process. Step 4 : Oxaloacetate,
which cannot directly cross the inner membrane, is converted to

Malate
3

NADHmatrix NADmatrix

aspartate by addition of an amino group from glutamate. In this
transaminase-catalyzed reaction in the matrix, glutamate is
converted to -ketoglutarate. Step 5 : A second antiporter (red oval)
exports aspartate to the cytosol in exchange for glutamate. Step 6 :
A cytosolic transaminase converts aspartate to oxaloacetate,
completing the cycle. The blue and red arrows reflect the
movement of the -ketoglutarate and glutamate, respectively. In
step 4 glutamate is deaminated to -ketoglutarate, which is
transported to the cytosol by an antiporter (step 2 ; in step 6 , the
-ketoglutarate is aminated, converting it back to glutamate, which
is transported to the matrix by the antiporter in step 5 .

312

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

substrates into and out of the matrix. Because oxaloacetate,
one component of the shuttle, cannot directly cross the inner
membrane, it is converted to the amino acid aspartate in the
matrix and to malate in the cytosol. The net effect of the reactions constituting the malate-aspartate shuttle is oxidation
of cytosolic NADH to NAD and reduction of matrix
NAD to NADH:

O
CH3

(CH2)n

C
O

O

CH2

CH3

(CH2)n

C
O

O

CH  3 H2O

CH3

(CH2)n

C

O

CH2

NADHcytosol  NADmatrix
¡ NADcytosol  NADHmatrix

Mitochondrial Oxidation of Fatty Acids
Is Coupled to ATP Formation
Fatty acids are stored as triacylglycerols, primarily as
droplets in adipose (fat-storing) cells. In response to hormones such as adrenaline, triacylglycerols are hydrolyzed in
the cytosol to free fatty acids and glycerol:

HO

CH2

O

HO

CH

C

OH  HO

Triacylglycerol

3 CH3

(CH2)n
Fatty acid

CH2

Glycerol

Fatty acids released into the blood are taken up and oxidized
by most other cells, constituting the major energy source for
many tissues, particularly heart muscle. In humans, the
oxidation of fats is quantitatively more important than
the oxidation of glucose as a source of ATP. The oxidation of

(a) MITOCHONDRIAL OXIDATION

(b) PEROXISOMAL OXIDATION
O

R

CH2

CH2

CH2

C

SCoA

Fatty acyl CoA

O2

 FIGURE 8-11 Oxidation of fatty acids
in mitochondria and peroxisomes. In both
mitochondrial oxidation (a) and peroxisomal
oxidation (b), four identical enzyme-catalyzed
reactions (shown down the center of the
figure) convert a fatty acyl CoA molecule to
acetyl CoA and a fatty acyl CoA shortened
by two carbon atoms. Concomitantly (in
reactions moving to the left of center for
mitochondria and to the right of center
for peroxisomes), one FAD molecule is
reduced to FADH2, and one NAD molecule
is reduced to NADH. The cycle is repeated
on the shortened acyl CoA until fatty acids
with an even number of carbon atoms are
completely converted to acetyl CoA. In
mitochondria, electrons from FADH2 and
NADH enter the respiratory chain and
ultimately are used to generate ATP; the
acetyl CoA generated is oxidized in the
citric acid cycle, resulting in synthesis of
additional ATP. Because peroxisomes lack
the electron-transport complexes composing
the respiratory chain and the enzymes of
the citric acid cycle, oxidation of fatty acids
in these organelles yields no ATP. [Adapted
from D. L. Nelson and M. M. Cox, Lehninger
Principles of Biochemistry, 3d ed., 2000, Worth
Publishers.]

H2O

ADP
+ Pi

Dehydrogenase

FADH2

R

R

CH2

CH

CH2

ADP
+ Pi

CH

Hydratase

CH

OH
NAD+

H2O + 1/2 O2
SCoA

C

SCoA

NAD+

Dehydrogenase

NADH
O

NADH
CH2

C

CH2

Catalase

H2O
O

CH2

ATP
R

C

H2O2
O2

O

O2
Respiratory
chain

Oxidase

FADH2

ATP

H2O

H2O

FAD

FAD

Respiratory
chain

C

NADH
exported for
reoxidation

SCoA

O
Thiolase

CoASH
R

CH2

C

CoASH

SCoA

O
Acyl CoA shortened
by two carbon atoms


O
Citric acid
cycle

H3C

C

SCoA

Acetyl CoA

Acetyl CoA
exported

8.1 • Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2

1 g of triacylglycerol to CO2 generates about six times as
much ATP as does the oxidation of 1 g of hydrated glycogen,
the polymeric storage form of glucose in muscle and liver.
Triglycerides are more efficient for storage of energy because
they are stored in anhydrous form and are much more reduced (have more hydrogens) than carbohydrates and therefore yield more energy when oxidized.
In the cytosol, free fatty acids are esterified to coenzyme
A to form a fatty acyl CoA in an exergonic reaction coupled
to the hydrolysis of ATP to AMP and PPi (inorganic
pyrophosphate):
O
R C

O  HSCoA  ATP

Fatty acid

O
R

C

SCoA  AMP  PPi

Fatty acyl CoA

Subsequent hydrolysis of PPi to two molecules of phosphate
(Pi) drives this reaction to completion. Then the fatty acyl
group is transferred to carnitine and moved across the inner
mitochondrial membrane by an acylcarnitine transporter
protein (see Figure 8-7, blue oval); on the matrix side, the
fatty acyl group is released from carnitine and reattached to
another CoA molecule.
Each molecule of a fatty acyl CoA in the mitochondrion is
oxidized in a cyclical sequence of four reactions in which all the
carbon atoms are converted to acetyl CoA with generation of
NADH and FADH2 (Figure 8-11a). For example, mitochondrial oxidation of each molecule of the 18-carbon stearic acid,
CH3(CH2)16COOH, yields nine molecules of acetyl CoA and
eight molecules each of NADH and FADH2. As with acetyl
CoA generated from pyruvate, these acetyl groups enter the citric acid cycle and are oxidized to CO2. Electrons from the reduced coenzymes produced in the oxidation of fatty acyl CoA
to acetyl CoA and in the subsequent oxidation of acetyl CoA in
the citric acid cycle move via the respiratory chain to O2. This
electron movement is coupled to generation of a proton-motive
force that is used to power ATP synthesis as described previously for the oxidation of pyruvate (see Figure 8-7).

Peroxisomal Oxidation of Fatty
Acids Generates No ATP
Mitochondrial oxidation of fatty acids is the major source
of ATP in mammalian liver cells, and biochemists at one time
believed this was true in all cell types. However, rats treated
with clofibrate, a drug used to reduce the level of blood
lipoproteins, were found to exhibit an increased rate of fatty
acid oxidation and a large increase in the number of peroxisomes in their liver cells. This finding suggested that peroxisomes, as well as mitochondria, can oxidize fatty acids.
These small organelles, ≈0.2–1 µm in diameter, are lined by a
single membrane (see Figure 5-21). They are present in all

313

mammalian cells except erythrocytes and are also found in
plant cells, yeasts, and probably most other eukaryotic cells.
The peroxisome is now recognized as the principal organelle in which fatty acids are oxidized in most cell types.
Indeed, very long chain fatty acids containing more than
about 20 CH2 groups are degraded only in peroxisomes; in
mammalian cells, mid-length fatty acids containing 10–20
CH2 groups can be degraded in both peroxisomes and mitochondria. In contrast to mitochondrial oxidation of fatty
acids, which is coupled to generation of ATP, peroxisomal
oxidation of fatty acids is not linked to ATP formation, and
the released energy is converted to heat.
The reaction pathway by which fatty acids are degraded
to acetyl CoA in peroxisomes is similar to that used in liver
mitochondria (Figure 8-11b). However, peroxisomes lack a
respiratory chain, and electrons from the FADH2 produced
during the oxidation of fatty acids are immediately transferred to O2 by oxidases, regenerating FAD and forming
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). In addition to oxidases,
peroxisomes contain abundant catalase, which quickly decomposes the H2O2, a highly cytotoxic metabolite. NADH
produced during oxidation of fatty acids is exported and reoxidized in the cytosol. Peroxisomes also lack the citric acid
cycle, so acetyl CoA generated during peroxisomal degradation of fatty acids cannot be oxidized further; instead it is
transported into the cytosol for use in the synthesis of cholesterol and other metabolites.
Before fatty acids can be degraded in the peroxisome, they must first be transported into the organelle from the cytosol. Mid-length fatty acids are
esterified to coenzyme A in the cytosol; the resulting fatty
acyl CoAs are then transported into the peroxisome by a specific transporter. However, very long chain fatty acids enter
the peroxisome by another transporter and then are esterified to CoA once inside. In the human genetic disease
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), peroxisomal oxidation
of very long chain fatty acids is specifically defective, while
the oxidation of mid-length fatty acids is normal. The most
common peroxisomal disorder, ALD is marked by elevated
levels of very long chain fatty acids in the plasma and tissues.
Patients with the most severe form of ALD are unaffected
until mid-childhood, when severe neurological disorders appear, followed by death within a few years. In recent years,
the gene that is defective in ALD patients has been identified
and cloned by techniques described in Chapter 9. Sequence
analysis shows that the gene encodes an ABC transport protein (ABCD1) that is localized to peroxisomal membranes
and is thought to mediate the import of very long chain fatty
acids into the organelle. ❚

The Rate of Glucose Oxidation Is Adjusted
to Meet the Cell’s Need for ATP
All enzyme-catalyzed reactions and metabolic pathways are
regulated by cells so as to produce the needed amounts of

314

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

Another important allosteric activator of phosphofructokinase-1 is fructose 2,6-bisphosphate. This metabolite is
formed from fructose 6-phosphate by phosphofructokinase2, an enzyme different from phosphofructokinase-1. Fructose 6-phosphate accelerates the formation of fructose
2,6-bisphosphate, which, in turn, activates phosphofructokinase-1. This type of control, by analogy with feedback control, is known as feed-forward activation, in which the
abundance of a metabolite (here, fructose 6-phosphate)
induces an acceleration in its metabolism. Fructose 2,6bisphosphate allosterically activates phosphofructokinase-1
in liver cells by decreasing the inhibitory effect of high ATP
and by increasing the affinity of phosphofructokinase-1 for
one of its substrates, fructose 6-phosphate.
The three glycolytic enzymes that are regulated by allosteric molecules catalyze reactions with large negative G
values—reactions that are essentially irreversible under ordinary conditions. These enzymes thus are particularly suitable for regulating the entire glycolytic pathway. Additional
control is exerted by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, which catalyzes the reduction of NAD to NADH
(see Figure 8-4, step 6). If cytosolic NADH builds up owing
to a slowdown in mitochondrial oxidation, this reaction will
be slowed by mass action. As we discuss later, mitochondrial oxidation of NADH and FADH2, produced in the
glycolytic pathway and citric acid cycle, also is tightly
controlled to produce the appropriate amount of ATP required by the cell.
Glucose metabolism is controlled differently in various
mammalian tissues to meet the metabolic needs of the organism as a whole. During periods of carbohydrate starvation, for
instance, glycogen in the liver is converted directly to glucose
6-phosphate (without involvement of hexokinase). Under
these conditions, there is a reduction in fructose 2,6-bisphos-

metabolites but not an excess. The primary function of the
oxidation of glucose to CO2 via the glycolytic pathway, the
pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction, and the citric acid cycle is
to produce NADH and FADH2, whose oxidation in mitochondria generates ATP. Operation of the glycolytic pathway
and citric acid cycle is continuously regulated, primarily by
allosteric mechanisms, to meet the cell’s need for ATP (see
Chapter 3 for general principles of allosteric control).
Three allosterically controlled glycolytic enzymes play a
key role in regulating the entire glycolytic pathway (see Figure 8-4). Hexokinase (step 1 ) is inhibited by its reaction
product, glucose 6-phosphate. Pyruvate kinase (step 10) is
inhibited by ATP, so glycolysis slows down if too much ATP
is present. The third enzyme, phosphofructokinase-1, which
converts fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
(step 3 ), is the principal rate-limiting enzyme of the glycolytic
pathway. Emblematic of its critical role in regulating the rate
of glycolysis, this enzyme is allosterically controlled by several molecules (Figure 8-12).
Phosphofructokinase-1 is allosterically inhibited by ATP
and allosterically activated by AMP. As a result, the rate of
glycolysis is very sensitive to the cell’s energy charge, reflected in the ATP:AMP ratio. The allosteric inhibition of
phosphofructokinase-1 by ATP may seem unusual, since ATP
is also a substrate of this enzyme. But the affinity of the
substrate-binding site for ATP is much higher (has a lower
Km) than that of the allosteric site. Thus at low concentrations, ATP binds to the catalytic but not to the inhibitory allosteric site, and enzymatic catalysis proceeds at near
maximal rates. At high concentrations, ATP also binds to the
allosteric site, inducing a conformational change that reduces
the affinity of the enzyme for the other substrate, fructose
6-phosphate, and thus inhibits the rate of this reaction and
the overall rate of glycolysis.

High [ATP]
High [AMP]

High [citrate]
+

Glucose

Fructose
6-phosphate

–

Phosphofructokinase-1
ATP

ATP

Insulin

+

–
Fructose
1,6-bisphosphate

To pyruvate

ADP

+

Phosphofructokinase-2
ADP

Fructose
2,6-bisphosphate

▲ FIGURE 8-12 Allosteric control of glucose metabolism
in the cytosol at the level of fructose 6-phosphate. The key
regulatory enzyme in glycolysis, phosphofructokinase-1, is
allosterically activated by AMP and fructose 2,6-bisphosphate,
which are elevated when the cell’s energy stores are low. The
enzyme is inhibited by ATP and citrate, which are elevated when
the cell is actively oxidizing glucose to CO2. Phosphofructokinase-2
(PFK2) is a bifunctional enzyme: its kinase activity forms fructose

2,6-bisphosphate from fructose 6-phosphate, and its phosphatase
activity catalyzes the reverse reaction. Insulin, which is released
by the pancreas when blood glucose levels are high, promotes
PFK2 kinase activity and thus stimulates glycolysis. At low blood
glucose, glucagon is released by the pancreas and promotes
PFK2 phosphatase activity in the liver, indirectly slowing down
glycolysis. We describe the role of insulin and glucagon in the
integrated control of blood glucose levels in Chapter 15.

8.2 • Electron Transport and Generation of the Proton-Motive Force

phate levels and decreased phosphofructokinase-1 activity
(see Figure 8-12). As a result, glucose 6-phosphate derived
from glycogen is not metabolized to pyruvate; rather, it is
converted to glucose by a phosphatase and released into the
blood to nourish the brain and red blood cells, which depend
primarily on glucose as an energy fuel. (Chapter 13 contains
a more detailed discussion of hormonal control of glucose metabolism in liver and muscle.) In all cases, the activity of these
regulated enzymes is controlled by the level of small-molecule
metabolites, generally by allosteric interactions or by hormonemediated phosphorylation and dephosphorylation.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 8.1
Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2
In the cytosol of eukaryotic cells, glucose is converted
to pyruvate via the glycolytic pathway, with the net formation of two ATPs and the net reduction of two NAD
molecules to NADH (see Figure 8-4). ATP is formed by
two substrate-level phosphorylation reactions in the conversion of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to pyruvate.
■

In anaerobic conditions, cells can metabolize pyruvate
to lactate or to ethanol plus CO2 (in the case of yeast),
with the reoxidation of NADH. In aerobic conditions,
pyruvate is transported into the mitochondrion, where
pyruvate dehydrogenase converts it into acetyl CoA and
CO2 (see Figure 8-5).
■

Mitochondria have a permeable outer membrane and an
inner membrane, which is the site of electron transport and
ATP synthesis.

■

In each turn of the citric acid cycle, acetyl CoA condenses with the four-carbon molecule oxaloacetate to form
the six-carbon citrate, which is converted back to oxaloacetate by a series of reactions that release two molecules
of CO2 and generate three NADH molecules, one FADH2
molecule and one GTP (see Figure 8-9).
■

Although cytosolic NADH generated during glycolysis
cannot enter mitochondria directly, the malate-aspartate
shuttle indirectly transfers electrons from the cytosol to the
mitochondrial matrix, thereby regenerating cytosolic
NAD for continued glycolysis.

■

The flow of electrons from NADH and FADH2 to O2,
via a series of electron carriers in the inner mitochondrial
membrane, is coupled to pumping of protons across the
inner membrane (see Figure 8-7). The resulting protonmotive force powers ATP synthesis and generates most of
the ATP resulting from aerobic oxidation of glucose.

■

Oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria yields acetyl
CoA, which enters the citric acid cycle, and the reduced
coenzymes NADH and FADH2. Subsequent oxidation of
these metabolites is coupled to formation of ATP.

■

In most eukaryotic cells, oxidation of fatty acids, especially very long chain fatty acids, occurs primarily in per-

■

315

oxisomes and is not linked to ATP production; the released
energy is converted to heat.
The rate of glucose oxidation via glycolysis and the citric acid cycle is controlled by the inhibition or stimulation
of several enzymes, depending on the cell’s need for ATP.
This complex regulation coordinates the activities of the
glycolytic pathway and the citric acid cycle and results in
the storage of glucose (as glycogen) or fat when ATP is
abundant.

■

8.2 Electron Transport and Generation
of the Proton-Motive Force
As noted in the previous section, most of the free energy released during the oxidation of glucose to CO2 is retained in
the reduced coenzymes NADH and FADH2 generated during
glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. During respiration, electrons are released from NADH and FADH2 and eventually
are transferred to O2, forming H2O according to the following overall reactions:
NADH  H  1⁄2 O2 ¡ NAD  H2O
FADH2  1⁄2 O2 ¡ FAD  H2O
The G values for these strongly exergonic reactions are
52.6 kcal/mol (NADH) and 43.4 kcal/mol (FADH2).
Recall that the conversion of 1 glucose molecule to CO2 via
the glycolytic pathway and citric acid cycle yields 10
NADH and 2 FADH2 molecules (see Table 8-1). Oxidation of these reduced coenzymes has a total G of
613 kcal/mol [10 (52.6)  2 (43.4)]. Thus, of the potential free energy present in the chemical bonds of glucose
(680 kcal/mol), about 90 percent is conserved in the reduced coenzymes.
The free energy released during oxidation of a single
NADH or FADH2 molecule by O2 is sufficient to drive the
synthesis of several molecules of ATP from ADP and Pi, a reaction with a G of 7.3 kcal/mol. The mitochondrion
maximizes the production of ATP by transferring electrons
from NADH and FADH2 through a series of electron carriers, all but one of which are integral components of the inner
membrane. This step-by-step transfer of electrons via the respiratory (electron-transport) chain allows the free energy
in NADH and FADH2 to be released in small increments and
stored as the proton-motive force.
At several sites during electron transport from NADH to
O2, protons from the mitochondrial matrix are pumped
across the inner mitochondrial membrane; this “uphill”
transport generates a proton concentration gradient across
the inner membrane (Figure 8-13). Because the outer membrane is freely permeable to protons, whereas the inner membrane is not, this pumping causes the pH of the
mitochondrial matrix to become higher (i.e., the H concentration is lower) than that of the cytosol and intermembrane
space. An electric potential across the inner membrane also

316

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics
Redox potential
(mV)

Free energy
(kcal/mol)
60

−400

NADH-CoQ reductase
(complex I)
NAD + + H +

NADH

Fumarate + 2 H +

2 e−
−200

FMN
+

H

Succinate
H+out

in

50

FADH2

2 e−
FAD

Fe-S

FAD + 2 H +

2 e− Succinate-CoQ
reductase (complex II)
Fe-S
40

0

CoQ
Cyt b
H+in
Fe-S

H+out
30

200
Cyt c 1

CoQH2 –cytochrome c
reductase (complex III)
Cyt c
Cua
20

400
H+in

Cyt a

H+out

Cub
Cyt a3

600
Cytochrome c oxidase
(complex IV)
800

1/2

10

2 e−

O2 + 2H +

H2O

0

▲ FIGURE 8-13 Changes in redox potential and free
energy during stepwise flow of electrons through the
respiratory chain. Blue arrows indicate electron flow; red
arrows, translocation of protons across the inner mitochondrial
membrane. Four large multiprotein complexes located in the
inner membrane contain several electron-carrying prosthetic
groups. Coenzyme Q (CoQ) and cytochrome c transport

electrons between the complexes. Electrons pass through the
multiprotein complexes from those at a lower reduction potential
to those with a higher (more positive) potential (left scale), with a
corresponding reduction in free energy (right scale). The energy
released as electrons flow through three of the complexes is
sufficient to power the pumping of H ions across the
membrane, establishing a proton-motive force.

results from the uphill pumping of H outward from the matrix, which becomes negative with respect to the intermembrane space. Thus free energy released during the oxidation
of NADH or FADH2 is stored both as an electric potential
and a proton concentration gradient—collectively, the
proton-motive force—across the inner membrane. The
movement of protons back across the inner membrane,
driven by this force, is coupled to the synthesis of ATP from
ADP and Pi by ATP synthase (see Figure 8-7).
The synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi, driven by the
transfer of electrons from NADH or FADH2 to O2, is the
major source of ATP in aerobic nonphotosynthetic cells.
Much evidence shows that in mitochondria and bacteria this

process, called oxidative phosphorylation, depends on generation of a proton-motive force across the inner membrane,
with electron transport, proton pumping, and ATP formation occurring simultaneously. In the laboratory, for instance,
addition of O2 and an oxidizable substrate such as pyruvate
or succinate to isolated intact mitochondria results in a net
synthesis of ATP if the inner mitochondrial membrane is intact. In the presence of minute amounts of detergents that
make the membrane leaky, electron transport and the oxidation of these metabolites by O2 still occurs, but no ATP is
made. Under these conditions, no transmembrane proton
concentration gradient or membrane electric potential can be
maintained.

8.2 • Electron Transport and Generation of the Proton-Motive Force

In this section we first discuss the magnitude of the
proton-motive force, then the components of the respiratory
chain and the pumping of protons across the inner membrane. In the following section we describe the structure of
the ATP synthase and how it uses the proton-motive force
to synthesize ATP. We also consider how mitochondrial oxidation of NADH and FADH2 is controlled to meet the cell’s
need for ATP.

The Proton-Motive Force in Mitochondria Is Due
Largely to a Voltage Gradient Across the Inner
Membrane
As we’ve seen, the proton-motive force (pmf) is the sum of a
transmembrane proton concentration (pH) gradient and
electric potential, or voltage gradient. The relative contribution of the two components to the total pmf depends on the
permeability of the membrane to ions other than H. A significant voltage gradient can develop only if the membrane is
poorly permeable to other cations and to anions, as is the
inner mitochondrial membrane. In this case, the developing
voltage gradient (i.e., excess H ions on the intermembrane
face and excess anions on the matrix face) soon prevents further proton movement, so only a small pH gradient is generated. In contrast, a significant pH gradient can develop
only if the membrane is also permeable to a major anion
(e.g., Cl) or if the H ions are exchanged for another cation
(e.g., K). In either case, proton movement does not lead to
a voltage gradient across the membrane because there is always an equal concentration of positive and negative ions on
each side of the membrane. This is the situation in the
chloroplast thylakoid membrane during photosynthesis, as
we discuss later. Compared with chloroplasts, then, a greater
portion of the pmf in mitochondria is due to the membrane
electric potential, and the actual pH gradient is smaller.
Since a difference of one pH unit represents a tenfold difference in H concentration, a pH gradient of one unit
across a membrane is equivalent to an electric potential of
59 mV at 20 C according to the Nernst equation (Chapter 7). Thus we can define the proton-motive force, pmf, as
pmf

°a

RT
 ¢pHb
F

°  59 ¢pH

where R is the gas constant of 1.987 cal/(degree mol), T is
the temperature (in degrees Kelvin), F is the Faraday constant
[23,062 cal/(V mol)], and is the transmembrane electric
potential; and pmf are measured in millivolts. Measurements on respiring mitochondria have shown that the electric
potential across the inner membrane is 160 mV (negative inside matrix) and that pH is ≈1.0 (equivalent to
≈60 mV). Thus the total pmf is 220 mV, with the transmembrane electric potential responsible for about 73 percent.
Because mitochondria are much too small to be impaled
with electrodes, the electric potential and pH gradient
across the inner mitochondrial membrane cannot be deter-

317

mined by direct measurement. However, researchers can
measure the inside pH by trapping fluorescent pH-sensitive
dyes inside vesicles formed from the inner mitochondrial
membrane. They also can determine the electric potential by
adding radioactive 42K ions and a trace amount of valinomycin to a suspension of respiring mitochondria. Although
the inner membrane is normally impermeable to K, valinomycin is an ionophore, a small lipid-soluble molecule that
selectively binds a specific ion (in this case, K ) in its hydrophilic interior and carries it across otherwise impermeable membranes. In the presence of valinomycin, 42K
equilibrates across the inner membrane of isolated mitochondria in accordance with the electric potential; the more
negative the matrix side of the membrane, the more 42K
will accumulate in the matrix.
Addition of small amounts of valinomycin and radioactive K has little effect on oxidative phosphorylation by a
suspension of respiring mitochondria. At equilibrium, the
measured concentration of radioactive K ions in the matrix,
[Kin], is about 500 times greater than that in the surrounding
medium, [Kout]. Substitution of this value into the Nernst
equation shows that the electric potential E (in mV) across
the inner membrane in respiring mitochondria is 160 mV,
with the inside negative:
E

 59 log

3 Kin 4

3Kout 4

 59 log 500

 160 mV

Electron Transport in Mitochondria
Is Coupled to Proton Translocation
The coupling between electron transport from NADH (or
FADH2) to O2 and proton transport across the inner mitochondrial membrane, which generates the proton-motive
force, also can be demonstrated experimentally with isolated
mitochondria (Figure 8-14). As soon as O2 is added to a suspension of mitochondria, the medium outside the mitochondria becomes acidic. During electron transport from NADH
to O2, protons translocate from the matrix to the intermembrane space; since the outer membrane is freely permeable
to protons, the pH of the outside medium is lowered briefly.
The measured change in pH indicates that about 10 protons
are transported out of the matrix for every electron pair
transferred from NADH to O2.
When this experiment is repeated with succinate
rather than NADH as the reduced substrate, the medium
outside the mitochondria again becomes acidic, but less
so. Recall that oxidation of succinate to fumarate in the
citric acid cycle generates FADH2 (see Figure 8-9). Because
electrons in FADH2 have less potential energy (43.4
kcal/mol) than electrons in NADH (52.6 kcal/mole), FADH2
transfers electrons to the respiratory chain at a later point
than NADH does. As a result, electron transport from
FADH2 (or succinate) results in translocation of fewer protons from the matrix, and thus a smaller change in pH (see
Figure 8-13).

318

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics
pH electrode

O2 solution

No O2

Change in H+ concentration
(10−9 mol)

O2 added
60

40

20

0
0

Mitochondrion

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 8-14 Electron transfer from
NADH or FADH2 to O2 is coupled to proton transport
across the mitochondrial membrane. If NADH is added to a
suspension of mitochondria depleted of O2, no NADH is oxidized.
When a small amount of O2 is added to the system (arrow), the
pH of the surrounding medium drops sharply—a change that
corresponds to an increase in protons outside the mitochondria.
(The presence of a large amount of valinomycin and K in the

Electrons Flow from FADH2 and NADH
to O2 Through a Series of Four
Multiprotein Complexes
We now examine more closely the energetically favored
movement of electrons from NADH and FADH2 to the final
electron acceptor, O2. In respiring mitochondria, each
NADH molecule releases two electrons to the respiratory
chain; these electrons ultimately reduce one oxygen atom
(half of an O2 molecule), forming one molecule of water:
NADH ¡ NAD  H 2 e




2 e  2 H  ⁄2 O2 ¡ H2O
1

As electrons move from NADH to O2, their potential declines by 1.14 V, which corresponds to 26.2 kcal/mol of electrons transferred, or ≈ 53 kcal/mol for a pair of electrons.
As noted earlier, much of this energy is conserved in the
proton-motive force generated across the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Each of the four large multiprotein complexes in the respiratory chain spans the inner mitochondrial membrane and
contains several prosthetic groups that participate in moving
electrons. These small nonpeptide organic molecules or metal
ions are tightly and specifically associated with the multiprotein complexes (Table 8-2). Before considering the function of
each complex, we examine several of these electron carriers.
Several types of heme, an iron-containing prosthetic
group similar to that in hemoglobin and myoglobin, are
tightly bound or covalently linked to mitochondrial proteins,
forming the cytochromes (Figure 8-15a). Electron flow

60
120
180
Elapsed time (s)

240

300

reaction dissipates the voltage gradient generated by H
translocation, so that all pumped H ions contribute to the pH
change.) Thus the oxidation of NADH by O2 is coupled to the
movement of protons out of the matrix. Once the O2 is depleted,
the excess protons slowly move back into the mitochondria
(powering the synthesis of ATP) and the pH of the extracellular
medium returns to its initial value.

through the cytochromes occurs by oxidation and reduction
of the Fe atom in the center of the heme molecule:
Fe3  e

Fe2

TABLE 8-2 Electron-Carrying Prosthetic Groups
in the Respiratory Chain
Protein Component

Prosthetic Groups*

NADH-CoQ reductase
(complex I)

FMN
Fe-S

Succinate-CoQ reductase
(complex II)

FAD
Fe-S

CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase
(complex III)

Heme bL
Heme bH
Fe-S
Heme c1

Cytochrome c

Heme c

Cytochrome c oxidase
(complex IV)

Cua2
Heme a
Cub2
Heme a3

*Not included is coenzyme Q, an electron carrier that is not permanently bound to a protein complex.
SOURCE: J. W. De Pierre and L. Ernster, 1977, Ann. Rev. Biochem.
46:201.

8.2 • Electron Transport and Generation of the Proton-Motive Force
(a)

319

(b)
H2C

CH3

CH
C

H3C

C
C

C
C

N

N

C
C

N

C

C

O2C

C

CH

CH2

Protein

C

N

C

−

C
C

Fe2+

C
H3C

C

C

C
C

CH3

C

CH2

H2C

CH2

H2C

S

Cys-S
Fe

S-Cys
Fe

S

Cys-S

S-Cys

CO2−

▲ FIGURE 8-15 Heme and iron-sulfur prosthetic groups
in the respiratory (electron-transport) chain. (a) Heme portion
of cytochromes bL and bH, which are components of the CoQH2–
cytochrome c reductase complex. The same porphyrin ring
(yellow) is present in all hemes. The chemical substituents
attached to the porphyrin ring differ in the other cytochromes in

the respiratory chain. All hemes accept and release one electron
at a time. (b) Dimeric iron-sulfur cluster (2Fe-2S). Each Fe atom is
bonded to four S atoms: two are inorganic sulfur and two are in
cysteine side chains of the associated protein. (Note that only
the two inorganic S atoms are counted in the chemical formula.)
All Fe-S clusters accept and release one electron at a time.

In the respiratory chain, electrons move through the cytochromes in the following order: b, c 1, c, a, and a 3
(see Figure 8-13). The various cytochromes have slightly
different heme groups and axial ligands, which generate
different environments for the Fe ion. Therefore, each cytochrome has a different reduction potential, or tendency
to accept an electron—an important property dictating the
unidirectional electron flow along the chain. Because the
heme ring in cytochromes consists of alternating doubleand single-bonded atoms, a large number of resonance
forms exist, and the extra electron is delocalized to the
heme carbon and nitrogen atoms as well as to the Fe ion.
All the cytochromes, except cytochrome c, are components
of multiprotein complexes in the inner mitochondrial
membrane. Although cytochrome c comprises a hemeprotein complex, it moves freely by diffusion in the intermembrane space.
Iron-sulfur clusters are nonheme, iron-containing prosthetic groups consisting of Fe atoms bonded both to inorganic S atoms and to S atoms on cysteine residues on a
protein (Figure 8-15b). Some Fe atoms in the cluster bear a
2 charge; others have a 3 charge. However, the net
charge of each Fe atom is actually between 2 and 3 because electrons in the outermost orbits are dispersed among
the Fe atoms and move rapidly from one atom to another.
Iron-sulfur clusters accept and release electrons one at a time;
the additional electron is also dispersed over all the Fe atoms
in the cluster.
Coenzyme Q (CoQ), also called ubiquinone, is the only
electron carrier in the respiratory chain that is not a proteinbound prosthetic group. It is a carrier of hydrogen atoms, that
is, protons plus electrons. The oxidized quinone form of CoQ
can accept a single electron to form a semiquinone, a charged
free radical denoted by CoQ·. Addition of a second electron

and two protons to CoQ· forms dihydroubiquinone
(CoQH2), the fully reduced form (Figure 8-16). Both CoQ
and CoQH2 are soluble in phospholipids and diffuse freely
in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
O
Ubiquinone (CoQ)
(oxidized form)

H3CO

CH3

H3CO

(CH2

CH3
CH

C

CH2)10

H

CH2)10

H

CH2)10

H

O

e
O


Semiquinone (CoQ )
(free radical)

H3CO

CH3

H3CO

(CH2

CH3
CH

C

O




2H  e

OH
Dihydroquinone
(CoQH2)
(fully reduced form)

H3CO

CH3

H3CO

(CH2

CH3
CH

C

OH

▲ FIGURE 8-16 Oxidized and reduced forms of coenzyme
Q (CoQ), which carries two protons and two electrons.
Because of its long hydrocarbon “tail” of isoprene units, CoQ is
soluble in the hydrophobic core of phospholipid bilayers and is
very mobile. Reduction of CoQ to the fully reduced form, QH2,
occurs in two steps with a half-reduced free-radical intermediate,
called semiquinone.

320

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

2 H+
Intermembrane space

2H

4 H+

+

Fe-S

Focus Animation: Electron Transport

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

FMN

CoQ

Fe-S
CoQH2

4 H+

e−
Cyt c

Cyt c1
Fe-S

+++

–––

e−
Cyt c

e−
Cyt c

2 e−

Cua

CoQH2 Cyt bL
Cyt bH

Fe-S

NAD+ + H+

CoQH2

Fe-S

Cub•Cyt a3

2 H+

1/2 O

CoQH2 –cytochrome c
reductase (complex III)

▲ FIGURE 8-17 Overview of multiprotein complexes,
bound prosthetic groups, and associated mobile carriers
in the respiratory chain. Blue arrows indicate electron flow;
red arrows indicate proton translocation. (Left) Pathway from
NADH. A total of 10 protons are translocated per pair of
electrons that flow from NADH to O2. The protons released
into the matrix space during oxidation of NADH by
NADH-CoQ reductase are consumed in the formation of
water from O2 by cytochrome c oxidase, resulting in no net
proton translocation from these reactions. (Right) Pathway

As shown in Figure 8-17, CoQ accepts electrons released
from the NADH-CoQ reductase complex (I) and the
succinate-CoQ reductase complex (II) and donates them to
the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex (III). Importantly, reduction and oxidation of CoQ are coupled to pumping of protons. Whenever CoQ accepts electrons, it does so at
a binding site on the cytosolic (matrix) face of the protein
complex, always picking up protons from the medium facing the cytosolic face. Whenever CoQH2 releases its electrons,
it does so at a binding site on the exoplasmic face of the protein complex, releasing protons into the exoplasmic medium
(intermembrane space). Thus transport of each pair of electrons by CoQ is obligatorily coupled to movement of two
protons from the cytosolic to the exoplasmic medium.

NADH-CoQ Reductase (Complex I) Electrons are carried
from NADH to CoQ by the NADH-CoQ reductase complex. NAD is exclusively a two-electron carrier: it accepts
or releases a pair of electrons at a time. In the NADH-CoQ
reductase complex, electrons first flow from NADH to FMN
(flavin mononucleotide), a cofactor related to FAD, then to
an iron-sulfur cluster, and finally to CoQ (see Figure 8-17).
FMN, like FAD, can accept two electrons, but does so one
electron at a time.
The overall reaction catalyzed by this complex is
NADH  CoQ  2 H ¡ NAD  H  CoQH2
(Oxidized)

CoQ

Fe-S

Cyt a

FAD

CoQH2
2 H+

NADH-CoQ reductase
(complex I)

(Reduced)

2 H+

2 H+

Matrix
NADH

2 H+

(Oxidized)

(Reduced)

Each transported electron undergoes a drop in potential of
≈360 mV, equivalent to a G of 16.6 kcal/mol for the

2

+ 2 H+ H2O

2 H+

Cytochrome c oxidase
(complex IV)

Succinate Fumarate + 2 H+
Succinate-CoQ reductase
(complex II)

from succinate. During oxidation of succinate to fumarate
and reduction of CoQ by the succinate-CoQ reductase complex,
no protons are translocated across the membrane. The
remainder of electron transport from CoQH2 proceeds by the
same pathway as in the left diagram. Thus for every pair of
electrons transported from succinate to O2, six protons are
translocated from the matrix into the intermembrane space.
Coenzyme Q and cytochrome c function as mobile carriers in
electron transport from both NADH and succinate. See the
text for details.

two electrons transported (see Figure 8-13). Much of this released energy is used to transport four protons across the
inner membrane per molecule of NADH oxidized by the
NADH-CoQ reductase complex.

Succinate-CoQ Reductase (Complex II) Succinate dehydrogenase, the enzyme that oxidizes a molecule of succinate to
fumarate in the citric acid cycle, is an integral component of
the succinate-CoQ reductase complex. The two electrons released in conversion of succinate to fumarate are transferred
first to FAD, then to an iron-sulfur cluster, and finally to
CoQ (see Figure 8-17). The overall reaction catalyzed by this
complex is
Succinate  CoQ ¡ fumarate  CoQH2
(Reduced)

(Oxidized)

(Oxidized)

(Reduced)

Although the G for this reaction is negative, the released
energy is insufficient for proton pumping. Thus no protons
are translocated across the membrane by the succinate-CoQ
reductase complex, and no proton-motive force is generated
in this part of the respiratory chain.

CoQH2–Cytochrome c Reductase (Complex III) A CoQH2
generated either by complex I or complex II donates two
electrons to the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex,
regenerating oxidized CoQ. Concomitantly it releases two
protons picked up on the cytosolic face into the intermembrane space, generating part of the proton-motive force.
Within complex III, the released electrons first are transferred to an iron-sulfur cluster within complex III and then to

8.2 • Electron Transport and Generation of the Proton-Motive Force

321

two b-type cytochromes (bL and bH) or cytochrome c1. Finally, the two electrons are transferred to two molecules of
the oxidized form of cytochrome c, a water-soluble peripheral protein that diffuses in the intermembrane space (see
Figure 8-17). For each pair of electrons transferred, the overall reaction catalyzed by the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase
complex is

complex of another copper ion (Cub2) and cytochrome a3,
and finally to O2, the ultimate electron acceptor, yielding
H2O. For each pair of electrons transferred, the overall reaction catalyzed by the cytochrome c oxidase complex is

CoQH2  2 Cyt c3 ¡ CoQ  2 H  2 Cyt c2

During transport of each pair of electrons through the cytochrome c oxidase complex, two protons are translocated
across the membrane.

(Reduced)

(Oxidized)

(Oxidized)

(Reduced)

The G for this reaction is sufficiently negative that two
additional protons are translocated from the mitochondrial
matrix across the inner membrane for each pair of electrons
transferred; this involves the proton-motive Q cycle discussed later.

Cytochrome c Oxidase (Complex IV) Cytochrome c, after
being reduced by the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex, transports electrons, one at a time, to the cytochrome
c oxidase complex (Figure 8-18). Within this complex, electrons are transferred, again one at a time, first to a pair of
copper ions called Cua2, then to cytochrome a, next to a

Cua2+

2 Cyt c2  2 H  1⁄2 O2 ¡ 2 Cyt c3  H2O
(Reduced)

(Oxidized)

CoQ and Cytochrome c as Mobile Electron Shuttles The
four electron-transport complexes just described are laterally
mobile in the inner mitochondrial membrane; moreover, they
are present in unequal amounts and do not form stable contacts with one another. These properties preclude the direct
transfer of electrons from one complex to the next. Instead,
electrons are transported from one complex to another by
diffusion of CoQ in the membrane and by cytochrome c in
the intermembrane space, as depicted in Figure 8-17.

Reduction Potentials of Electron Carriers Favor
Electron Flow from NADH to O2
As we saw in Chapter 2, the reduction potential E for a partial reduction reaction

Heme a

Oxidized molecule  e

Intermembrane
space
Cub2+
Heme a 3

is a measure of the equilibrium constant of that partial reaction. With the exception of the b cytochromes in the
CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex, the standard reduction potential E of the carriers in the mitochondrial respiratory chain increases steadily from NADH to O2. For
instance, for the partial reaction
NAD  H  2 e

Matrix
II
III

I
Cytochrome c oxidase
(complex IV)

▲ FIGURE 8-18 Molecular structure of the core of the
cytochrome c oxidase complex in the inner mitochondrial
membrane. Mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidases contain 13
different subunits, but the catalytic core of the enzyme consists
of only three subunits: I (green), II (blue), and III (yellow). The
function of the remaining subunits (white) is not known. Bacterial
cytochrome c oxidases contain only the three catalytic subunits.
Hemes a and a3 are shown as purple and orange space-filling
models, respectively; the three copper atoms are dark blue
spheres. [Adapted from T. Tsukihara et al., 1996, Science 272:1136.]

reduced molecule

NADH

the value of the standard reduction potential is 320 mV,
which is equivalent to a G of 14.8 kcal/mol for transfer of two electrons. Thus this partial reaction tends to proceed toward the left, that is, toward the oxidation of NADH
to NAD.
By contrast, the standard reduction potential for the partial reaction
Cytochrome cox (Fe3)  e

cytochrome cred (Fe2)

is 220 mV (G 5.1 kcal/mol) for transfer of one electron. Thus this partial reaction tends to proceed toward the
right, that is, toward the reduction of cytochrome c (Fe3) to
cytochrome c (Fe2).
The final reaction in the respiratory chain, the reduction
of O2 to H2O
2 H  1⁄2 O2  2 e ¡ H2O
has a standard reduction potential of 816 mV (G
37.8 kcal/mol for transfer of two electrons), the most

322

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

positive in the whole series; thus this reaction also tends to
proceed toward the right.
As illustrated in Figure 8-13, the steady increase in E
values, and the corresponding decrease in G values, of the
carriers in the respiratory chain favors the flow of electrons
from NADH and succinate to oxygen.

CoQ and Three Electron-Transport
Complexes Pump Protons Out of
the Mitochondrial Matrix
The multiprotein complexes responsible for proton pumping
coupled to electron transport have been identified by selectively extracting mitochondrial membranes with detergents,
isolating each of the complexes in near purity, and then
preparing artificial phospholipid vesicles (liposomes) containing each complex (see Figure 7-5). When an appropriate
electron donor and electron acceptor are added to such liposomes, a change in pH of the medium will occur if the embedded complex transports protons (Figure 8-19). Studies
of this type indicate that the NADH-CoQ reductase complex
translocates four protons per pair of electrons transported,
whereas the cytochrome c oxidase complex translocates two
protons per electron pair transported (or, equivalently, for
every two molecules of cytochrome c oxidized).
(a)
Cytochrome c
oxidase complex

2 Cyt c 3+

Phospholipid
membrane

(oxidized)

2 e−

2 Cyt c 2+

1
2

(reduced)

O 2 + 2 H+

H2O

2 H+

Current evidence suggests that a total of 10 protons are
transported from the matrix space across the inner mitochondrial membrane for every electron pair that is transferred from NADH to O2 (see Figure 8-17). Since the
succinate-CoQ reductase complex does not transport protons, only six protons are transported across the membrane
for every electron pair that is transferred from succinate (or
FADH2) to O2. Relatively little is known about the coupling
of electron flow and proton translocation by the NADHCoQ reductase complex. More is known about operation of
the cytochrome c oxidase complex, which we discuss here.
The coupled electron and proton movements mediated by
the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex, which involves a unique mechanism, are described separately.
After cytochrome c is reduced by the QH2–cytochrome
c reductase complex, it is reoxidized by the cytochrome c oxidase complex, which transfers electrons to oxygen. As noted
earlier, cytochrome c oxidase contains three copper ions and
two heme groups (see Figure 8-18). The flow of electrons
through these carriers is depicted in Figure 8-20. Four molecules of reduced cytochrome c bind, one at a time, to a site
on subunit II of the oxidase. An electron is transferred from
the heme of each cytochrome c, first to Cua2 bound to subunit II, then to the heme a bound to subunit I, and finally to
the Cub2 and heme a3 that make up the oxygen reduction
center.
The cyclic oxidation and reduction of the iron and copper in the oxygen reduction center of cytochrome c oxidase,
together with the uptake of four protons from the matrix
space, are coupled to the transfer of the four electrons to
oxygen and the formation of water. Proposed intermediates
in oxygen reduction include the peroxide anion (O22) and
probably the hydroxyl radical (OH·) as well as unusual complexes of iron and oxygen atoms. These intermediates would
be harmful to the cell if they escaped from the reaction center, but they do so only rarely.

2 H+

▲

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 8-19 Electron transfer from

K+

K+
Valinomycinbound K+
(b)

pH of medium

O2

2 H+/2 e−

0

1
Elapsed time (min)

2

reduced cytochrome c (Cyt c2) to O2 via the cytochrome c
oxidase complex is coupled to proton transport. The oxidase
complex is incorporated into liposomes with the binding site for
cytochrome c positioned on the outer surface. (a) When O2 and
reduced cytochrome c are added, electrons are transferred to O2
to form H2O and protons are transported from the inside to the
outside of the vesicles. Valinomycin and K are added to the
medium to dissipate the voltage gradient generated by the
translocation of H, which would otherwise reduce the number
of protons moved across the membrane. (b) Monitoring of the
medium pH reveals a sharp drop in pH following addition of O2.
As the reduced cytochrome c becomes fully oxidized, protons
leak back into the vesicles, and the pH of the medium returns
to its initial value. Measurements show that two protons are
transported per O atom reduced. Two electrons are needed
to reduce one O atom, but cytochrome c transfers only one
electron; thus two molecules of Cyt c2 are oxidized for each
O reduced. [Adapted from B. Reynafarje et al., 1986, J. Biol. Chem.
261:8254.]

323

8.2 • Electron Transport and Generation of the Proton-Motive Force

space (outer) side of the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase
complex (Figure 8-21, step 1). Once bound to this site,
CoQH2 releases two protons into the intermembrane space
(step 2a); these represent two of the four protons pumped
per pair of electrons transferred. Operation of the Q cycle
results in pumping of the other two protons. To understand
this cycle, we first need to focus on the fates of the two electrons released by CoQH2 at the Qo site. One of the two

Cyt c

4 H+

e−

Intermembrane
space

Cua2+
I
III

Inner
membrane

a
a3
Cub2+

II

2 H+

Cyt c

Matrix

4 H+

6a 2a

Intermembrane
space
4 H+ + O2

2 H2O

Fe-S
Qo

1
5

CoQH2
(2 e −)

Cytochrome c oxidase
(complex IV)

e − 2b 6b
c1

bH

▲ FIGURE 8-20 Schematic depiction of the cytochrome c
oxidase complex showing the pathway of electron flow from
reduced cytochrome c to O2. Heme groups are denoted by
red diamonds. Blue arrows indicate electron flow. Four electrons,
sequentially released from four molecules of reduced cytochrome
c, together with four protons from the matrix, combine with one
O2 molecule to form two water molecules. Additionally, for each
electron transferred from cytochrome c to oxygen, one proton is
transported from the matrix to the intermembrane space, or a
total of four for each O2 molecule reduced to two H2O molecules.

For every four electrons transferred from reduced cytochrome c through cytochrome c oxidase (i.e., for every molecule of O2 reduced to two H2O molecules), four protons are
translocated from the matrix space to the intermembrane
space (two protons per electron pair). However, the mechanism by which these protons are translocated is not known.

The Q Cycle Increases the Number of Protons
Translocated as Electrons Flow Through the
CoQH2–Cytochrome c Reductase Complex
Experiments like the one depicted in Figure 8-19 have shown
that four protons are translocated across the membrane per
electron pair transported from CoQH2 through the
CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex. Thus this complex transports two protons per electron transferred,
whereas the cytochrome c oxidase complex transports only
one proton per electron transferred. An evolutionarily conserved mechanism, called the Q cycle, accounts for the twofor-one transport of protons and electrons by the
CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex.
CoQH2 is generated both by the NADH-CoQ reductase
and succinate-CoQ reductase complexes and, as we shall
see, by the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex itself.
In all cases, a molecule from the pool of reduced CoQH2
in the membrane binds to the Qo site on the intermembrane

CoQ

10

4

CoQ

9

CoQH2

bL
Qi

e−

3 7
(2 e −)

Matrix
2 H+

8

CoQH2 –cytochrome c
reductase (complex III)

At Qo site: 2 CoQH2 + 2 Cyt c3+ →
(4 H+, 4 e−)
2 CoQ + 2 Cyt c2+ + 2 e− + 4 H+

(outside)

(2 e−)

At Qi site: CoQ + 2 e− + 2 H+(matrix side) → CoQH2
(2 H+, 2 e−)
Net Q cycle (sum of reactions at Q o and Q i):
CoQH2 + 2 Cyt c3+ + 2 H+(matrix side) →
(2 H+, 2 e−)
CoQ + 2 Cyt c2+ + 4 H+
(2 e−)

(outside)

Per 2 e− transferred through complex III to cytochrome c, 4 H+
released to the intermembrane space

▲ FIGURE 8-21 The Q cycle. CoQH2 binds to the Qo site on
the intermembrane space (outer) side of CoQ–cytochrome c
reductase complex and CoQ binds to the Qi site on the matrix
(inner) side. One electron from the CoQH2 bound to Qo travels
directly to cytochrome c via an Fe-S cluster and cytochrome c1.
The other electron moves through the b cytochromes to CoQ at
the Qi site, forming the partially reduced semiquinone (Q ).
Simultaneously, CoQH2 releases its two protons into the intermembrane space. The CoQ now at the Qo site dissociates and
a second CoQH2 binds there. As before, one electron moves
directly to cytochrome c1 and the other to the Q at the Qi site
forming, together with two protons picked up from the matrix
space, CoQH2, which then dissociates. The net result is that four
protons are translocated from the matrix to the intermembrane
space for each pair of electrons transported through the
CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex (bottom). See the
text for details. [Adapted from B. Trumpower, 1990, J. Biol. Chem.
265:11409, and E. Darrouzet et al., 2001, Trends Biochem. Sci. 26:445.]

324

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

electrons from CoQH2 is transported, via an iron-sulfur
protein and cytochrome c1, directly to cytochrome c (step
2b). The other electron released from the CoQH2 moves
through cytochromes bL and bH and partially reduces an
oxidized CoQ molecule bound to the Qi site on the matrix
(inner) side of the complex, forming a CoQ semiquinone
anion Q· (step 3).
After the loss of two protons and two electrons, the now
oxidized CoQ at the Qo site dissociates (step 4), and a second
CoQH2 binds to the site (step 5). As before, the bound
CoQH2 releases two protons into the intermembrane space
(step 6a), while simultaneously one electron from CoQH2
moves directly to cytochrome c (step 6b), and the other electron moves through the b cytochromes to the Q· bound at
the Qi site (step 7). There the addition of two protons from
the matrix yields a fully reduced CoQH2 molecule at the Qi
site (step 8). This CoQH2 molecule then dissociates from the
CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex (step 9), freeing
the Qi to bind a new molecule of CoQ (step 10) and begin
the Q cycle over again.
In the Q cycle, two molecules of CoQH2 are oxidized to
CoQ at the Qo site and release a total of four protons into
the intermembrane space, but one molecule of CoQH2 is regenerated from CoQ at the Qi site (see Figure 8-21, bottom).
Thus the net result of the Q cycle is that four protons are
translocated to the intermembrane space for every two electrons transported through the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex and accepted by two molecules of cytochrome
c. The translocated protons are all derived from the matrix,
taken up either by the NADH-CoQ reductase complex or by
the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex during reduction of CoQ. While seemingly cumbersome, the Q cycle increases the numbers of protons pumped per pair of electrons
moving through the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex. The Q cycle is found in all plants and animals as well
as in bacteria. Its formation at a very early stage of cellular
evolution was likely essential for the success of all life-forms
as a way of converting the potential energy in reduced coenzyme Q into the maximum proton-motive force across a
membrane.
Although the model presented in Figure 8-21 is consistent
with a great deal of mutagenesis and spectroscopic studies on
the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex, it raises a
number of questions. For instance, how are the two electrons
released from CoQH2 at the Qo site directed to different acceptors (cytochromes c1 and bL)? Previous studies implicated
an iron-sulfur (2Fe-2S) cluster in the transfer of electrons,
one at a time, from CoQH2 at the Qo site to cytochrome c1.
Yet the recently determined three-dimensional structure of
the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex, which is a
dimeric protein, initially suggested that the 2Fe-2S cluster
is positioned too far away from the Qo site for an electron
to “jump” to it. Subsequently, researchers discovered that
the subunit containing the 2Fe-2S cluster has a flexible
hinge that permits it to exist in two conformational states

(Figure 8-22). In one conformation, the 2Fe-2S cluster is
close enough to the Qo site to pick up an electron from
CoQH2 bound there. Movement of the hinge then positions
the 2Fe-2S cluster near enough to the heme on cytochrome c1
for electron transfer to occur. With the Fe-S subunit in this alternative conformation, the second electron released from
CoQH2 bound to the Qo site cannot move to the 2Fe-2S cluster and has to take the less thermodynamically favored route
to cytochrome bL.
Fe-S subunit
conformation 2

Cyt c1

Heme c1
Intermembrane
space

2Fe-2S
conformation 2

Fe-S subunit
conformation 1
2Fe-2S
conformation 1

Qo
Heme bL
Heme bH
Qi

Matrix

CoQH2 –cytochrome c
reductase (complex III)

▲ FIGURE 8-22 Alternative three-dimensional conformations
of the Fe-S subunit of the CoQ–cytochrome c reductase
complex. In the dimeric complex, cytochromes bL and bH are
associated with one subunit and the 2Fe-2S cluster with the other
subunit. The subunit containing the 2Fe-2S cluster is shown in its
two alternative conformational states, which differ primarily in the
portion of the protein toward the intermembrane space. In one
conformation (yellow), the 2Fe-2S cluster (green) is positioned near
the Qo site on the intermembrane side of the protein, able to pick
up an electron from CoQH2. In the alternative conformation
(blue), the 2Fe-2S cluster is located adjacent to the c1 heme on
cytochrome c1 and able to transfer an electron to it. [Adapted from
Z. Zhang et al., 1998, Nature 392:678; see also E. Darrouzet et al., 2001,
Trends Biochem. Sci. 26:445.]

8.3 • Harnessing the Proton-Motive Force for Energy-Requiring Processes

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 8.2
Electron Transport and Generation of
the Proton-Motive Force
The proton-motive force is a combination of a proton
concentration (pH) gradient (exoplasmic face  cytosolic
face) and an electric potential (negative cytosolic face)
across a membrane.

■

In the mitochondrion, the proton-motive force is generated by coupling electron flow from NADH and FADH2
to O2 to the uphill transport of protons from the matrix
across the inner membrane to the intermembrane space.
■

The major components of the mitochondrial respiratory
chain are four inner membrane multiprotein complexes:
NADH-CoQ reductase (I), succinate-CoQ reductase (II),
CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase (III), and cytochrome c
oxidase (IV). The last complex transfers electrons to O2 to
form H2O.

325

membranes of chloroplasts or mitochondria was believed to
generate an intermediate containing a high-energy chemical
bond (e.g., a phosphate linked to an enzyme by an ester
bond), which was then used to convert Pi and ADP to ATP.
Despite intense efforts by a large number of investigators,
however, no such intermediate was ever identified.
Definitive evidence supporting the role of the protonmotive force in ATP synthesis awaited development of techniques to purify and reconstitute organelle membranes and
membrane proteins. The experiment with chloroplast thylakoid vesicles containing F0F1 particles, outlined in Figure
8-23, was one of several demonstrating that the F0F1 complex is an ATP-generating enzyme and that ATP generation is

■

Each complex contains one or more electron-carrying
prosthetic groups: iron-sulfur clusters, flavins, heme
groups, and copper ions (see Table 8-2). Cytochrome c,
which contains heme, and coenzyme Q (CoQ) are mobile
electron carriers.

F0 F1

pH 7.5

pH 7.5

■

Thylakoid membrane

Each electron carrier accepts an electron or electron pair
from a carrier with a less positive reduction potential and
transfers the electron to a carrier with a more positive reduction potential. Thus the reduction potentials of electron carriers favor unidirectional electron flow from
NADH and FADH2 to O2 (see Figure 8-13).

Soak for several minutes
at pH 4.0

■

pH 4.0

A total of 10 H ions are translocated from the matrix
across the inner membrane per electron pair flowing from
NADH to O2 (see Figure 8-17).

■

The Q cycle allows four protons (rather than two) to be
translocated per pair of electrons moving through the
CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex (see Figure 8-21).

Add a solution of pH 8.0
that contains ADP and Pi
ADP + Pi

■

The hypothesis that a proton-motive force across the inner
mitochondrial membrane is the immediate source of energy
for ATP synthesis was proposed in 1961 by Peter Mitchell.
Virtually all researchers working in oxidative phosphorylation and photosynthesis initially opposed this chemiosmotic
mechanism. They favored a mechanism similar to the wellelucidated substrate-level phosphorylation in glycolysis, in
which oxidation of a substrate molecule is directly coupled
to ATP synthesis. By analogy, electron transport through the

ADP + Pi

ATP

ATP

H+

H+
H+

8.3 Harnessing the Proton-Motive
Force for Energy-Requiring
Processes

pH 4.0

pH 4.0

H+

pH 8.0

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 8-23 Synthesis of ATP by F0F1
depends on a pH gradient across the membrane. Isolated
chloroplast thylakoid vesicles containing F0F1 particles were
equilibrated in the dark with a buffered solution at pH 4.0. When
the pH in the thylakoid lumen became 4.0, the vesicles were
rapidly mixed with a solution at pH 8.0 containing ADP and Pi.
A burst of ATP synthesis accompanied the transmembrane
movement of protons driven by the 10,000-fold H concentration
gradient (104 M versus 108 M). In similar experiments using
“inside-out” preparations of submitochondrial vesicles, an
artificially generated membrane electric potential also resulted
in ATP synthesis.

326

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

dependent on proton movement down an electrochemical
gradient. With general acceptance of Mitchell’s chemiosmotic mechanism, researchers turned their attention to the
structure and operation of the F0F1 complex.

Bacterial Plasma-Membrane Proteins
Catalyze Electron Transport and
Coupled ATP Synthesis
Although bacteria lack any internal membranes, aerobic bacteria nonetheless carry out oxidative phosphorylation by the
same processes that occur in eukaryotic mitochondria. Enzymes that catalyze the reactions of both the glycolytic pathway and the citric acid cycle are present in the cytosol of
bacteria; enzymes that oxidize NADH to NAD and transfer
the electrons to the ultimate acceptor O2 are localized to the
bacterial plasma membrane.
The movement of electrons through these membrane carriers is coupled to the pumping of protons out of the cell (see
Figure 8-2). The movement of protons back into the cell,
down their concentration gradient, is coupled to the synthesis of ATP. Bacterial F0F1 complexes are essentially identical
in structure and function with the mitochondrial F0F1 complex, but are simpler to purify and study. The protonmotive force across the bacterial plasma membrane is also
used to power the uptake of nutrients such as sugars, using
proton/sugar symporters, and the rotation of bacterial flagella (see Figure 8-1). As we noted earlier, a primitive aerobic
bacterium was probably the progenitor of mitochondria in
eukaryotic cells (see Figure 8-3).

ATP Synthase Comprises Two Multiprotein
Complexes Termed F0 and F1
The F0F1 complex, or ATP synthase, has two principal components, F0 and F1, both of which are multimeric proteins
(Figure 8-24). The F0 component contains three types of integral membrane proteins, designated a, b, and c. In bacteria and in yeast mitochondria the most common subunit
composition is a1b2c10, but F0 complexes in animal mitochondria have 12 c subunits and those in chloroplasts have
14. In all cases the c subunits form a donut-shaped ring in the
plane of the membrane. The a and two b subunits are rigidly
linked to one another but not to the ring of c subunits.
The F1 portion is a water-soluble complex of five distinct
polypeptides with the composition 3 3. The lower part
of the F1  subunit is a coiled coil that fits into the center of
the c-subunit ring of F0 and appears rigidly attached to it.
The F1  subunit is rigidly attached to  and also forms rigid
contacts with several of the c subunits of F0. The F1 and
subunits associate in alternating order to form a hexamer,
, or ( )3, which rests atop the single long  subunit.
The F1  subunit is permanently linked to one of the F1
subunits and also to the b subunit of F0. Thus the F0 a and
b subunits and the  subunit and ( )3 hexamer of the F1
complex form a rigid structure anchored in the membrane.
The rodlike b subunits form a “stator” that prevents the
( )3 hexamer from moving while it rests on the  subunit
(see Figure 8-24).
When ATP synthase is embedded in a membrane, the F1
component forms a knob that protrudes from the cytosolic

Focus Animation: ATP Synthesis

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

 FIGURE 8-24 Model of the structure and function
of ATP synthase (the F0F1 complex) in the bacterial
plasma membrane. The F0 portion is built of three integral
membrane proteins: one copy of a, two copies of b, and on
average 10 copies of c arranged in a ring in the plane of the
membrane. Two proton half-channels lie at the interface
between the a subunit and the c ring. Half-channel I allows
protons to move one at a time from the exoplasmic medium
and bind to aspartate-61 in the center of a c subunit near
the middle of the membrane. Half-channel II (after rotation
of the c ring) permits protons to dissociate from the
aspartate and move into the cytosolic medium. The F1
portion contains three copies each of subunits and that
form a hexamer resting atop the single rod-shaped 
subunit, which is inserted into the c ring of F0. The  subunit
is rigidly attached to the  subunit and also to several of the
c subunits. The  subunit permanently links one of the
subunits in the F1 complex to the b subunit of F0. Thus the
F0 a and b subunits and the F1  subunit and ( )3 hexamer
form a rigid structure anchored in the membrane (orange).
During proton flow, the c ring and the attached F1  and 
subunits rotate as a unit (green), causing conformation
changes in the F1 subunits leading to ATP synthesis.
[Adapted from M. J. Schnitzer, 2001, Nature 410:878, and P. D.
Boyer, 1999, Nature 402:247.]

100 nm
α

β

β

δ
α

α
β

α

ATP

ADP + Pi
b
Cytosolic
medium

b
Static

γ

H+

Rotates
ε
II

H+

a
I
Exoplasmic
medium

H+

Proton half channel

c

H+

H+

H+
c

c

H+

c

c

Rotation of c ring
Proton bound
to aspartate

8.3 • Harnessing the Proton-Motive Force for Energy-Requiring Processes

327

face. As demonstrated in the experiment depicted in Figure
8-25, submitochondrial vesicles from which F1 is removed by
mechanical agitation cannot catalyze ATP synthesis; when F1
particles reassociate with these vesicles, they once again become
fully active in ATP synthesis. Because F1 separated from membranes is capable of catalyzing ATP hydrolysis, it has been
called the F1 ATPase; however, its function in the cells is to synthesize ATP. We examine how it does so in the next section.

Inner
mitochondrial
membrane

Treatment
with ultrasonic
vibrations
F0

F1

"Inside-out"
submitochondrial
vesicles capable
of both electron
transport and ATP
synthesis

Mechanical
agitation

Membrane vesicles
capable of electron
transport, but not of
ATP synthesis

F1 particles incapable
of electron transport
or ATP synthesis but
with ATPase activity

Reconstituted vesicles
capable of both electron
transport and ATP
synthesis

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 8-25 Mitochondrial F1
particles are required for ATP synthesis, but not for electron
transport. “Inside-out” membrane vesicles that lack F1 and
retain the electron transport complexes are prepared as
indicated. Although these can transfer electrons from NADH to
O2, they cannot synthesize ATP. The subsequent addition of F1
particles reconstitutes the native membrane structure, restoring
the capacity for ATP synthesis. When detached from the
membrane, F1 particles exhibit ATPase activity.

Rotation of the F1  Subunit, Driven by Proton
Movement Through F0, Powers ATP Synthesis
Each of the three subunits in the complete F0F1 complex
can bind ADP and Pi and catalyze ATP synthesis. However,
the coupling between proton flow and ATP synthesis must be
indirect, since the nucleotide-binding sites on the subunits
of F1, where ATP synthesis occurs, are 9–10 nm from the surface of the mitochondrial membrane. The most widely accepted model for ATP synthesis by the F0F1 complex—the
binding-change mechanism—posits just such an indirect coupling (Figure 8-26).
According to this mechanism, energy released by the
“downhill” movement of protons through F0 directly powers
rotation of the c-subunit ring together with its attached 
and  subunits (see Figure 8-24). The  subunit acts as a cam,
or rotating shaft, whose movement within F1 causes cyclical
changes in the conformations of the subunits. As schematically depicted in Figure 8-26, rotation of the  subunit relative to the fixed (a )3 hexamer causes the nucleotide-binding
site of each subunit to cycle through three conformational
states in the following order:
1. An O state that binds ATP very poorly and ADP and Pi
weakly
2. An L state that binds ADP and Pi more strongly
3. A T state that binds ADP and Pi so tightly that they
spontaneously form ATP and that binds ATP very strongly
A final rotation of  returns the subunit to the O state,
thereby releasing ATP and beginning the cycle again. ATP or
ADP also binds to regulatory or allosteric sites on the three
subunits; this binding modifies the rate of ATP synthesis according to the level of ATP and ADP in the matrix, but is
not directly involved in synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi.
Several types of evidence support the binding-change
mechanism, which is now generally accepted. First, biochemical studies showed that one of the three subunits on isolated
F1 particles can tightly bind ADP and Pi and then form ATP,
which remains tightly bound. The measured G for this reaction is near zero, indicating that once ADP and Pi are bound to
what is now called the T state of a subunit, they spontaneously form ATP. Importantly, dissociation of the bound ATP
from the subunit on isolated F1 particles occurs extremely
slowly. This finding suggested that dissociation of ATP would
have to be powered by a conformational change in the subunit, which, in turn, would be caused by proton movement.

328

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

ADP + Pi

β3

O

H 2O

▲ FIGURE 8-26 The binding-change mechanism of ATP
synthesis from ADP and Pi by the F0F1 complex. This
view is looking up at F1 from the membrane surface (see
Figure 8-24). Each of the F1 subunits alternate between
three conformational states that differ in their binding affinities for ATP, ADP, and Pi. Step 1 : After ADP and Pi bind to
one of the three subunits (here, arbitrarily designated 1)
whose nucleotide-binding site is in the O (open) conformation, proton flux powers a 120 rotation of the  subunit (relative to the fixed subunits). This causes an increase in the
binding affinity of the 1 subunit for ADP and Pi to L (low),
an increase in the binding affinity of the 3 subunit for ADP

Video: Rotation of Actin Filament Bound to ATP Synthase

γ

β

α

β

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 8-27 Rotation of the 
subunit of the F1 complex relative to the ()3 hexamer
can be observed microscopically. F1 complexes were
engineered that contained subunits with an additional
His6 sequence, which causes them to adhere to a glass
plate coated with a metal reagent that binds histidine. The 
subunit in the engineered F1 complexes was linked
covalently to a fluorescently labeled actin filament. When
viewed in a fluorescence microscope, the actin filaments
were seen to rotate counterclockwise in discrete 120° steps
in the presence of ATP, powered by ATP hydrolysis by the
subunits. [Adapted from H. Noji et al., 1997, Nature 386:299, and
R. Yasuda et al., 1998, Cell 93:1117.] See also K. Nishio et al., 2002,
Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. 97:13448, for another way to demonstrate
and subunit rotation relative to the c subunit ring.]

T

O

β1

ADP + Pi
T

β2

γ

3
ATP

β3

β3

Actin filament

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

2

β2

γ

Energy—120°
rotation of γ

i

T

L

L

O
β3

P

β2

ATP formation
in T site

ADP + Pi

AD
P+

Pi

Pi

Focus Animation: ATP Synthesis

1

L

β1

P
AT

P+

T

ADP + Pi
γ

P+

L

Energy—120°
rotation of γ
AD

γ

AD

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

β2

β1

AT
P

O

AT
P

β1

ADP + Pi

and Pi from L to T (tight), and a decrease in the binding affinity of
the 2 subunit for ATP from T to O, causing release of the bound
ATP. Step 2 : The ADP and Pi in the T site (here the 3 subunit)
form ATP, a reaction that does not require an input of energy, and
ADP and Pi bind to the 2 subunit, which is in the O state. This
generates an F1 complex identical with that which started the
process (left) except that it is rotated 120. Step 3 : Another 120
rotation of  again causes the O n L n T n O conformational
changes in the subunits described above. Repetition of steps 1
and 2 leads to formation of three ATP molecules for every 360
rotation of . [Adapted from P. Boyer, 1989, FASEB J. 3:2164, and Y. Zhou
et al., 1997, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 94:10583.]

Later x-ray crystallographic analysis of the ( )3 hexamer
yielded a striking conclusion: although the three subunits
are identical in sequence and overall structure, the ADP/ATPbinding sites have different conformations in each subunit.
The most reasonable conclusion was that the three subunits
cycle between three conformational states, with different
nucleotide-binding sites, in an energy-dependent reaction.
In other studies, intact F0F1 complexes were treated with
chemical cross-linking agents that covalently linked the 
and  subunits and the c-subunit ring. The observation that
such treated complexes could synthesize ATP or use ATP to
power proton pumping indicates that the cross-linked proteins normally rotate together.
Finally, rotation of the  subunit relative to the fixed ( )3
hexamer, as proposed in the binding-change mechanism, was
observed directly in the clever experiment depicted in Figure
8-27. In one modification of this experiment in which tiny
gold particles were attached to the  subunit, rotation rates of
134 revolutions per second were observed. Recalling that hydrolysis of 3 ATPs is thought to power one revolution (see
Figure 8-26), this result is close to the experimentally determined rate of ATP hydrolysis by F0F1 complexes: about 400
ATPs per second. In a related experiment, a  subunit linked
to an  subunit and a ring of c subunits was seen to rotate
relative to the fixed ( )3 hexamer. Rotation of the  subunit
in these experiments was powered by ATP hydrolysis, the reverse of the normal process in which proton movement
through the F0 complex drives rotation of the  subunit.
Nonetheless, these observations established that the  subunit, along with the attached c ring and  subunit, does indeed rotate, thereby driving the conformational changes in

329

8.3 • Harnessing the Proton-Motive Force for Energy-Requiring Processes

the subunits that are required for binding of ADP and Pi,
followed by synthesis and subsequent release of ATP.

Number of Translocated Protons Required for ATP Synthesis A simple calculation indicates that the passage of more
than one proton is required to synthesize one molecule of
ATP from ADP and Pi. Although the G for this reaction
under standard conditions is7.3 kcal/mol, at the concentrations of reactants in the mitochondrion, G is probably
higher (10 to 12 kcal/mol). We can calculate the amount
of free energy released by the passage of 1 mol of protons
down an electrochemical gradient of 220 mV (0.22 V) from
the Nernst equation, setting n
1 and measuring E in
volts:
G (cal/mol)

nFE

1

(23,062 cal·V

1

·mol

) E

(23,062 cal·V1·mol1)(0.22 V)
5074 cal/mol, or 5.1 kcal/mol
Since the downhill movement of 1 mol of protons releases
just over 5 kcal of free energy, the passage of at least two
protons is required for synthesis of each molecule of ATP
from ADP and Pi.

ATPs. This value is consistent with experimental data on
proton flux during ATP synthesis, providing indirect support
for the model coupling proton movement to c-ring rotation
depicted in Figure 8-24. The F0 from chloroplasts contains
14 c subunits per ring, and movement of 14 protons would
be needed for synthesis of three ATPs. Why these otherwise
similar F0F1 complexes have evolved to have different
H:ATP ratios in not clear.

ATP-ADP Exchange Across the Inner
Mitochondrial Membrane Is Powered
by the Proton-Motive Force
In addition to powering ATP synthesis, the proton-motive
force across the inner mitochondrial membrane also powers
the exchange of ATP formed by oxidative phosphorylation
inside the mitochondrion for ADP and Pi in the cytosol. This
exchange, which is required for oxidative phosphorylation to
continue, is mediated by two proteins in the inner membrane: a phosphate transporter (HPO42/OH antiporter)
and an ATP/ADP antiporter (Figure 8-28).

Proton Movement Through F0 and Rotation of the c Ring
Each copy of subunit c contains two membrane-spanning
helices that form a hairpin. An aspartate residue, Asp61, in
the center of one of these helices is thought to participate in
proton movement. Chemical modification of this aspartate
by the poison dicyclohexylcarbodiimide or its mutation to
alanine specifically blocks proton movement through F0. According to one current model, two proton half-channels lie at
the interface between the a subunit and c ring (see Figure
8-24). Protons are thought to move one at a time through
half-channel I from the exoplasmic medium and bind to the
carboxylate side chain on Asp61 of one c subunit. Binding of
a proton to this aspartate would result in a conformational
change in the c subunit, causing it to move relative to the
fixed a subunit, or equivalently to rotate in the membrane
plane. This rotation would bring the adjacent c subunit, with
its ionized aspartyl side chain, into channel I, thereby allowing it to receive a proton and subsequently move relative to
the a subunit. Continued rotation of the c ring, due to binding of protons to additional c subunits, eventually would
align the first c subunit containing a protonated Asp61 with
the second half-channel (II), which is connected to the cytosol. Once this occurs, the proton on the aspartyl residue
could dissociate (forming ionized aspartate) and move into
the cytosolic medium.
Since the  subunit of F1 is tightly attached to the c ring
of F0, rotation of the c ring associated with proton movement causes rotation of the  subunit. According to the
binding-change mechanism, a 120 rotation of  powers synthesis of one ATP (see Figure 8-26). Thus complete rotation
of the c ring by 360 would generate three ATPs. In E. coli,
where the F0 composition is a1b2c10, movement of 10 protons drives one complete rotation and thus synthesis of three

Inner mitochondrial
membrane

H concentration
gradient
Membrane
electric
potential









Matrix

H
H

H2O
OH

OH

HPO42



Translocation of H
during electron transport



HPO42

ADP3

ADP3

ATP4

ATP4

Phosphate transporter

ATP/ADP antiporter

ADP3 HPO42
Intermembrane
space
3H



3H

ATP4  OH

▲ FIGURE 8-28 The phosphate and ATP/ADP transport
system in the inner mitochondrial membrane. The coordinated
action of two antiporters (purple and green) results in the uptake
of one ADP3 and one HPO42 in exchange for one ATP4,
powered by the outward translocation of one proton during
electron transport. The outer membrane is not shown here
because it is permeable to molecules smaller than 5000 Da.

330

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

The phosphate transporter catalyzes the import of one
HPO42 coupled to the export of one OH. Likewise, the
ATP/ADP antiporter allows one molecule of ADP to enter
only if one molecule of ATP exits simultaneously. The
ATP/ADP antiporter, a dimer of two 30,000-Da subunits,
makes up 10–15 percent of the protein in the inner membrane, so it is one of the more abundant mitochondrial proteins. Functioning of the two antiporters together produces
an influx of one ADP and one Pi and efflux of one ATP together with one OH. Each OH transported outward combines with a proton, translocated during electron transport
to the intermembrane space, to form H2O. This drives the
overall reaction in the direction of ATP export and ADP and
Pi import.
Because some of the protons translocated out of the mitochondrion during electron transport provide the power (by
combining with the exported OH) for the ATP-ADP exchange, fewer protons are available for ATP synthesis. It is
estimated that for every four protons translocated out, three
are used to synthesize one ATP molecule and one is used to
power the export of ATP from the mitochondrion in exchange for ADP and Pi. This expenditure of energy from the
proton concentration gradient to export ATP from the
mitochondrion in exchange for ADP and Pi ensures a high
ratio of ATP to ADP in the cytosol, where hydrolysis of the
high-energy phosphoanhydride bond of ATP is utilized to
power many energy-requiring reactions.

Rate of Mitochondrial Oxidation Normally
Depends on ADP Levels
If intact isolated mitochondria are provided with NADH (or
FADH2), O2, and Pi, but not with ADP, the oxidation of
NADH and the reduction of O2 rapidly cease, as the amount
of endogenous ADP is depleted by ATP formation. If ADP
then is added, the oxidation of NADH is rapidly restored.
Thus mitochondria can oxidize FADH2 and NADH only as
long as there is a source of ADP and Pi to generate ATP. This
phenomenon, termed respiratory control, occurs because oxidation of NADH, succinate, or FADH2 is obligatorily coupled to proton transport across the inner mitochondrial
membrane. If the resulting proton-motive force is not dissipated in the synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi (or for some
other purpose), both the transmembrane proton concentration gradient and the membrane electric potential will increase to very high levels. At this point, pumping of
additional protons across the inner membrane requires so
much energy that it eventually ceases, thus blocking the coupled oxidation of NADH and other substrates.
Certain poisons, called uncouplers, render the inner mitochondrial membrane permeable to protons. One example is
the lipid-soluble chemical 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP), which
can reversibly bind and release protons and shuttle protons
across the inner membrane from the intermembrane space
into the matrix. As a result, DNP dissipates the proton-motive

force by short-circuiting both the transmembrane proton concentration gradient and the membrane electric potential. Uncouplers such as DNP abolish ATP synthesis and overcome
respiratory control, allowing NADH oxidation to occur regardless of the ADP level. The energy released by the oxidation of NADH in the presence of DNP is converted to heat.

Brown-Fat Mitochondria Contain an Uncoupler
of Oxidative Phosphorylation
Brown-fat tissue, whose color is due to the presence of abundant mitochondria, is specialized for the generation of heat.
In contrast, white-fat tissue is specialized for the storage of
fat and contains relatively few mitochondria.
The inner membrane of brown-fat mitochondria contains
thermogenin, a protein that functions as a natural uncoupler
of oxidative phosphorylation. Like synthetic uncouplers,
thermogenin dissipates the proton-motive force across the
inner mitochondrial membrane, converting energy released
by NADH oxidation to heat. Thermogenin is a proton transporter, not a proton channel, and shuttles protons across the
membrane at a rate that is a millionfold slower than that of
typical ion channels. Its amino acid sequence is similar to
that of the mitochondrial ATP/ADP antiporter, and it functions at a rate that is characteristic of other transporters (see
Figure 7-2).
Environmental conditions regulate the amount of thermogenin in brown-fat mitochondria. For instance, during the
adaptation of rats to cold, the ability of their tissues to generate heat is increased by the induction of thermogenin synthesis. In cold-adapted animals, thermogenin may constitute
up to 15 percent of the total protein in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Adult humans have little brown fat, but human infants
have a great deal. In the newborn, thermogenesis by
brown-fat mitochondria is vital to survival, as it also is in
hibernating mammals. In fur seals and other animals naturally acclimated to the cold, muscle-cell mitochondria contain thermogenin; as a result, much of the proton-motive
force is used for generating heat, thereby maintaining body
temperature.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 8.3
Harnessing the Proton-Motive Force for EnergyRequiring Processes
The multiprotein F0F1 complex catalyzes ATP synthesis
as protons flow back through the inner mitochondrial
membrane (plasma membrane in bacteria) down their electrochemical proton gradient.
■

F0 contains a ring of 10–14 c subunits that is rigidly
linked to the rod-shaped  subunit and  subunit of F1.
Resting atop the  subunit is the hexameric knob of F1
[( )3], which protrudes into the mitochondrial matrix
■

8.4 • Photosynthetic Stages and Light-Absorbing Pigments
Glucose

(cytosol in bacteria). The three subunits are the sites of
ATP synthesis (see Figure 8-24).
Movement of protons across the membrane via two halfchannels at the interface of the F0 a subunit and the c ring
powers rotation of the c ring with its attached F1  and 
subunits.

6

■

Rotation of the F1  subunit leads to changes in the conformation of the nucleotide-binding sites in the F1 subunits (see Figure 8-26). By means of this binding-change
mechanism, the
subunits bind ADP and Pi, condense
them to form ATP, and then release the ATP.
■

The proton-motive force also powers the uptake of Pi
and ADP from the cytosol in exchange for mitochondrial
ATP and OH, thus reducing some of the energy available
for ATP synthesis.
■

Continued mitochondrial oxidation of NADH and the
reduction of O2 are dependent on sufficient ADP being
present. This phenomenon, termed respiratory control, is
an important mechanism for coordinating oxidation and
ATP synthesis in mitochondria.
■

In brown fat, the inner mitochondrial membrane contains thermogenin, a proton transporter that converts the
proton-motive force into heat. Certain chemicals (e.g.,
DNP) have the same effect, uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation from electron transport.

■

8.4 Photosynthetic Stages
and Light-Absorbing Pigments
We now shift our attention to photosynthesis, the
second main process for synthesizing ATP. Photosynthesis in plants occurs in chloroplasts, large organelles found mainly in leaf cells. The principal end
products are two carbohydrates that are polymers of hexose
(six-carbon) sugars: sucrose, a glucose-fructose disaccharide
(see Figure 2-17), and leaf starch, a large insoluble glucose
polymer that is the primary storage carbohydrate in higher
plants (Figure 8-29). Leaf starch is synthesized and stored in
the chloroplast. Sucrose is synthesized in the leaf cytosol
from three-carbon precursors generated in the chloroplast;
it is transported to nonphotosynthetic (nongreen) plant tissues (e.g., roots and seeds), which metabolize sucrose for energy by the pathways described in the previous sections.
Photosynthesis in plants, as well as in eukaryotic singlecelled algae and in several photosynthetic bacteria (e.g., the
cyanobacteria and prochlorophytes), also generates oxygen.
The overall reaction of oxygen-generating photosynthesis,
6 CO2  6 H2O ¡ 6 O2  C6H12O6
is the reverse of the overall reaction by which carbohydrates
are oxidized to CO2 and H2O.

331

H
4

O

CH2OH
5
O
H
OH H
3

H

H

H

1

O

CH2OH
O
H
OH H

H
O

2

OH

H

OH

Starch
[poly(1 4 glucose)]

▲ FIGURE 8-29 Structure of starch. This large glucose
polymer and the disaccharide sucrose (see Figure 2-17) are the
principal end products of photosynthesis. Both are built of sixcarbon sugars.
Although green and purple bacteria also carry out photosynthesis, they use a process that does not generate oxygen.
As discussed in Section 8.5, detailed analysis of the photosynthetic system in these bacteria has provided insights about
the first stages in the more common process of oxygengenerating photosynthesis. In this section, we provide an
overview of the stages in oxygen-generating photosynthesis
and introduce the main components, including the chlorophylls, the principal light-absorbing pigments.

Thylakoid Membranes Are the Sites
of Photosynthesis in Plants
Chloroplasts are bounded by two membranes, which do not
contain chlorophyll and do not participate directly in photosynthesis (Figure 8-30). As in mitochondria, the outer
membrane of chloroplasts contains porins and thus is permeable to metabolites of small molecular weight. The inner
membrane forms a permeability barrier that contains transport proteins for regulating the movement of metabolites
into and out of the organelle.
Unlike mitochondria, chloroplasts contain a third membrane—the thylakoid membrane—on which photosynthesis
occurs. The chloroplast thylakoid membrane is believed to
constitute a single sheet that forms numerous small, interconnected flattened vesicles, the thylakoids, which commonly are arranged in stacks termed grana (see Figure
8-30). The spaces within all the thylakoids constitute a single continuous compartment, the thylakoid lumen. The thylakoid membrane contains a number of integral membrane
proteins to which are bound several important prosthetic
groups and light-absorbing pigments, most notably chlorophyll. Carbohydrate synthesis occurs in the stroma, the soluble phase between the thylakoid membrane and the inner
membrane. In photosynthetic bacteria extensive invaginations of the plasma membrane form a set of internal
membranes, also termed thylakoid membranes, where
photosynthesis occurs.

332

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

Cuticle

Three of the Four Stages in Photosynthesis Occur
Only During Illumination

Leaf

Upper
epidermis
Chloroplasts
Mesophyll

Lower
epidermis
Cuticle

Chloroplast
Stroma: enzymes that
catalyze CO2 fixation
and starch synthesis

Thylakoid membrane:
absorption of light by
chlorophyll, synthesis
of ATP4, NADPH, and
electron transport

Inner membrane:
transporters for
phosphate and
sucrose precursors

The photosynthetic process in plants can be divided into
four stages, each localized to a defined area of the chloroplast: (1) absorption of light, (2) electron transport leading
to formation of O2 from H2O, reduction of NADP to
NADPH, and generation of a proton-motive force, (3) synthesis of ATP, and (4) conversion of CO2 into carbohydrates, commonly referred to as carbon fixation. All four
stages of photosynthesis are tightly coupled and controlled
so as to produce the amount of carbohydrate required by
the plant. All the reactions in stages 1–3 are catalyzed by
proteins in the thylakoid membrane. The enzymes that incorporate CO2 into chemical intermediates and then convert
them to starch are soluble constituents of the chloroplast
stroma. The enzymes that form sucrose from three-carbon
intermediates are in the cytosol.

Stage 1: Absorption of Light The initial step in photosynthesis is the absorption of light by chlorophylls attached to
proteins in the thylakoid membranes. Like the heme component of cytochromes, chlorophylls consist of a porphyrin ring
attached to a long hydrocarbon side chain (Figure 8-31).
In contrast to the hemes, chlorophylls contain a central

Intermembrane
space

Outer
membrane:
permeable to
small molecules

Chlorophyll a

CH2
H

CH
C

C

Thylakoid
membrane

O
0.1 µm

California, Davis.]

CH2

CH3

N

H
CH3

C
O

CH3

CH3

Phytol

CH2

▲ FIGURE 8-30 Cellular structure of a leaf and chloroplast.
Like mitochondria, plant chloroplasts are bounded by a double
membrane separated by an intermembrane space. Photosynthesis
occurs on the thylakoid membrane, which forms a series of
flattened vesicles (thylakoids) that enclose a single interconnected
luminal space. The green color of plants is due to the green color
of chlorophyll, all of which is localized to the thylakoid membrane.
A granum is a stack of adjacent thylakoids. The stroma is the
space enclosed by the inner membrane and surrounding the
thylakoids. [Photomicrograph courtesy of Katherine Esau, University of

C

C
N C
H C
C
Mg2
N C
H3C
C N
C
C
C
C
H
C
C
C
H
CH2
C
H C
O
CH2
CO2CH3

H3C

Granum

C

C
C

C

CH3

CH

C

CH2

(CH2

CH2

CH

CH2)3H

▲ FIGURE 8-31 Structure of chlorophyll a, the principal
pigment that traps light energy. The CH3 group (green) is
replaced by a CHO group in chlorophyll b. In the porphyrin ring
(yellow), electrons are delocalized among three of the four central
rings and the atoms that interconnect them in the molecule. In
chlorophyll, an Mg2 ion, rather than an Fe3 ion, is in the center
of the porphyrin ring and an additional five-membered ring (blue)
is present; otherwise, its structure is similar to that of heme
found in molecules such as hemoglobin and cytochromes (see
Figure 8-15a). The hydrocarbon phytol “tail” facilitates binding of
chlorophyll to hydrophobic regions of chlorophyll-binding proteins.

8.4 • Photosynthetic Stages and Light-Absorbing Pigments

Mg2 ion (rather than Fe atom) and have an additional fivemembered ring. The energy of the absorbed light is used to
remove electrons from an unwilling donor (water, in green
plants), forming oxygen,
light

2 H2O ¡ O2  4 H  4 e
and then to transfer the electrons to a primary electron acceptor, a quinone designated Q, which is similar to CoQ.

Stage 2: Electron Transport and Generation of a ProtonMotive Force Electrons move from the quinone primary electron acceptor through a series of electron carriers until they
reach the ultimate electron acceptor, usually the oxidized
form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADP), reducing it to NADPH. (NADP is identical in
structure with NAD except for the presence of an additional
phosphate group. Both molecules gain and lose electrons in
the same way; see Figure 2-26a.) The transport of electrons
in the thylakoid membrane is coupled to the movement of
protons from the stroma to the thylakoid lumen, forming a
pH gradient across the membrane (pHlumen  pHstroma). This
process is analogous to generation of a proton-motive force
across the inner mitochondrial membrane during electron
transport (see Figure 8-2).
Thus the overall reaction of stages 1 and 2 can be summarized as
light

2 H2O  2 NADP ¡ 2 H  2 NADPH  O2

Stage 3: Synthesis of ATP Protons move down their concentration gradient from the thylakoid lumen to the stroma
through the F0F1 complex (ATP synthase), which couples
proton movement to the synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi.
The mechanism whereby chloroplast F0F1 harnesses the
proton-motive force to synthesize ATP is identical with that
used by ATP synthase in the inner mitochondrial membrane
and bacterial plasma membrane (see Figures 8-24 and 8-26).

Stage 4: Carbon Fixation The ATP and NADPH generated
by the second and third stages of photosynthesis provide the
energy and the electrons to drive the synthesis of polymers of
six-carbon sugars from CO2 and H2O. The overall balanced
chemical equation is written as
6 CO2  18 ATP4  12 NADPH  12 H2O ¡
C6H12O6  18 ADP3  18 Pi2  12 NADP  6 H
The reactions that generate the ATP and NADPH used in
carbon fixation are directly dependent on light energy; thus
stages 1–3 are called the light reactions of photosynthesis.
The reactions in stage 4 are indirectly dependent on light energy; they are sometimes called the dark reactions of photosynthesis because they can occur in the dark, utilizing the
supplies of ATP and NADPH generated by light energy.
However, the reactions in stage 4 are not confined to the
dark; in fact, they occur primarily during illumination.

333

Each Photon of Light Has
a Defined Amount of Energy
Quantum mechanics established that light, a form of electromagnetic radiation, has properties of both waves and particles. When light interacts with matter, it behaves as discrete
packets of energy (quanta) called photons. The energy of a
photon, , is proportional to the frequency of the light wave:
 h, where h is Planck’s constant (1.58  1034 cal s, or
6.63  1034 J s) and  is the frequency of the light wave.
It is customary in biology to refer to the wavelength of the
light wave, , rather than to its frequency . The two are related by the simple equation  c  , where c is the velocity of light (3  1010 cm/s in a vacuum). Note that photons
of shorter wavelength have higher energies.
Also, the energy in 1 mol of photons can be denoted by
E
N, where N is Avogadro’s number (6.02  1023
molecules or photons/mol). Thus
E

Nh

Nhc


The energy of light is considerable, as we can calculate for
light with a wavelength of 550 nm (550  107 cm), typical of sunlight:
E

16.02  1023 photons/mol2 11.58  10 34cal # s2 13  1010 cm/s2
550  10 7cm

51,881 cal/mol
or about 52 kcal/mol. This is enough energy to synthesize
several moles of ATP from ADP and Pi if all the energy were
used for this purpose.

Photosystems Comprise a Reaction Center
and Associated Light-Harvesting Complexes
The absorption of light energy and its conversion into chemical energy occurs in multiprotein complexes called photosystems. Found in all photosynthetic organisms, both
eukaryotic and prokaryotic, photosystems consist of two
closely linked components: a reaction center, where the primary events of photosynthesis occur, and an antenna complex consisting of numerous protein complexes, termed
light-harvesting complexes (LHCs), which capture light energy and transmit it to the reaction center.
Both reaction centers and antennas contain tightly bound
light-absorbing pigment molecules. Chlorophyll a is the principal pigment involved in photosynthesis, being present in
both reaction centers and antennas. In addition to chlorophyll a, antennas contain other light-absorbing pigments:
chlorophyll b in vascular plants and carotenoids in both
plants and photosynthetic bacteria. Carotenoids consist of
long hydrocarbon chains with alternating single and double
bonds; they are similar in structure to the visual pigment
retinal, which absorbs light in the eye (Chapter 7). The
presence of various antenna pigments, which absorb light at

334

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics
Action spectrum
of photosynthesis

100

Photoelectron Transport from Energized
Reaction-Center Chlorophyll a Produces
a Charge Separation

Chlorophyll a
Relative rate of photosynthesis

Chlorophyll b

Absorption

80

β -Carotene

60

40

20
0
400

500

600

700

Wavelength (nm)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 8-32 The rate of photosynthesis is greatest at wavelengths of light absorbed by
three pigments. The action spectrum of photosynthesis in
plants, that is, the ability of light of different wavelengths to
support photosynthesis, is shown in black. Absorption spectra
for three photosynthetic pigments present in the antennas
of plant photosystems are shown in color. Each absorption
spectrum shows how well light of different wavelengths is
absorbed by one of the pigments. A comparison of the action
spectrum with the individual absorption spectra suggests that
photosynthesis at 680 nm is primarily due to light absorbed by
chlorophyll a; at 650 nm, to light absorbed by chlorophyll b; and
at shorter wavelengths, to light absorbed by chlorophylls a and b
and by carotenoid pigments, including -carotene.

2 H2O  4 chlorophyll a ¡ 4 H  O2  4 chlorophyll a
These potent biological reductants and oxidants provide all
the energy needed to drive all subsequent reactions of photosynthesis: electron transport, ATP synthesis, and CO2 fixation.
Chlorophyll a also absorbs light at discrete wavelengths
shorter than 680 nm (see Figure 8-32). Such absorption raises
Light

Reaction
center

Primary electron
acceptor

Strong reducing
agent (electron donor)

Q–
Charge
separation

e−

+

Thylakoid
membrane
Lumen

Chlorophyll a

Strong oxidizing
agent (electron acceptor)

▲ FIGURE 8-33 Photoelectron transport, the primary
event in photosynthesis. After absorption of a photon of
light, one of the excited special pair of chlorophyll a
molecules in the reaction center (left) donates an electron
to a loosely bound acceptor molecule, the quinone Q, on
the stromal surface of the thylakoid membrane, creating an
essentially irreversible charge separation across the membrane
(right). The electron cannot easily return through the reaction
center to neutralize the positively charged chlorophyll a.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Stroma
Q

Focus Animation: Photosynthesis

different wavelengths, greatly extends the range of light that
can be absorbed and used for photosynthesis.
One of the strongest pieces of evidence for the involvement of chlorophylls and carotenoids in photosynthesis is
that the absorption spectrum of these pigments is similar to
the action spectrum of photosynthesis (Figure 8-32). The latter is a measure of the relative ability of light of different
wavelengths to support photosynthesis.
When chlorophyll a (or any other molecule) absorbs
visible light, the absorbed light energy raises the chlorophyll a to a higher energy (excited) state. This differs from
the ground (unexcited) state largely in the distribution of
electrons around the C and N atoms of the porphyrin
ring. Excited states are unstable and return to the ground
state by one of several competing processes. For chlorophyll a molecules dissolved in organic solvents such as
ethanol, the principal reactions that dissipate the excitedstate energy are the emission of light (fluorescence and
phosphorescence) and thermal emission (heat). When the
same chlorophyll a is bound to the unique protein environment of the reaction center, dissipation of excited-state energy occurs by a quite different process that is the key
to photosynthesis.

The absorption of a photon of light of wavelength ≈680 nm
by chlorophyll a increases its energy by 42 kcal/mol (the first
excited state). Such an energized chlorophyll a molecule in a
plant reaction center rapidly donates an electron to an intermediate acceptor, and the electron is rapidly passed on to the
primary electron acceptor, quinone Q, on the stromal surface
of the thylakoid membrane. This light-driven electron transfer, called photoelectron transport, depends on the unique
environment of both the chlorophylls and the acceptor
within the reaction center. Photoelectron transport, which
occurs nearly every time a photon is absorbed, leaves a positive charge on the chlorophyll a close to the luminal surface
and generates a reduced, negatively charged acceptor (Q)
near the stromal surface (Figure 8-33).
The Q produced by photoelectron transport is a powerful reducing agent with a strong tendency to transfer an electron to another molecule, ultimately to NADP. The
positively charged chlorophyll a, a strong oxidizing agent,
attracts an electron from an electron donor on the luminal
surface to regenerate the original chlorophyll a. In plants, the
oxidizing power of four chlorophyll a molecules is used, by
way of intermediates, to remove four electrons from 2 H2O
molecules bound to a site on the luminal surface to form O2:

8.4 • Photosynthetic Stages and Light-Absorbing Pigments

the molecule into one of several higher excited states, which
decay within 1012 seconds (1 picosecond, ps) to the first excited state with loss of the extra energy as heat. Because photoelectron transport and the resulting charge separation occur
only from the first excited state of the reaction-center chlorophyll a, the quantum yield—the amount of photosynthesis per
absorbed photon—is the same for all wavelengths of visible
light shorter (and, therefore, of higher energy) than 680 nm.

Light-Harvesting Complexes Increase
the Efficiency of Photosynthesis
Although chlorophyll a molecules within a reaction center
are capable of directly absorbing light and initiating photosynthesis, they most commonly are energized indirectly by
energy transferred from light-harvesting complexes (LHCs)
in an associated antenna. Even at the maximum light intensity encountered by photosynthetic organisms (tropical
noontime sunlight), each reaction-center chlorophyll a molecule absorbs only about one photon per second, which is not
enough to support photosynthesis sufficient for the needs of
the plant. The involvement of LHCs greatly increases the efficiency of photosynthesis, especially at more typical light intensities, by increasing absorption of 680-nm light and by
extending the range of wavelengths of light that can be absorbed by other antenna pigments.
Photons can be absorbed by any of the pigment molecules in an LHC. The absorbed energy is then rapidly transferred (in  109 seconds) to one of the two “special-pair”
chlorophyll a molecules in the associated reaction center,
where it promotes the primary photosynthetic charge sepa-

Reaction
center

Light

Energy resonance
transfer

335

ration (see Figure 8-33). LHC proteins maintain the pigment
molecules in the precise orientation and position optimal for
light absorption and energy transfer, thereby maximizing the
very rapid and efficient resonance transfer of energy from antenna pigments to reaction-center chlorophylls. Recent studies on one of the two photosystems in cyanobacteria, which
are similar to those in higher plants, suggest that energy from
absorbed light is funneled first to a “bridging” chlorophyll in
each LHC and then to the special pair of reaction-center
chlorophylls (Figure 8-34). Surprisingly, however, the molecular structures of LHCs from plants and cyanobacteria are
completely different from those in green and purple bacteria,
even though both types contain carotenoids and chlorophylls
in a clustered geometric arrangement within the membrane.
Although LHC antenna chlorophylls can transfer light
energy absorbed from a photon, they cannot release an electron. As we’ve seen already, this function resides in the two
reaction-center chlorophylls. To understand their electronreleasing ability, we examine the structure and function of
the reaction center in bacterial and plant photosystems in the
next section.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 8.4
Photosynthetic Stages and Light-Absorbing Pigments
The principal end products of photosynthesis in plants
are oxygen and polymers of six-carbon sugars (starch and
sucrose).

■

The light-capturing and ATP-generating reactions of
photosynthesis occur in the thylakoid membrane located
within chloroplasts. The permeable outer membrane and
inner membrane surrounding chloroplasts do not participate in photosynthesis (see Figure 8-30).

■

In stage 1 of photosynthesis, light is absorbed by chlorophyll a molecules bound to reaction-center proteins in the
thylakoid membrane. The energized chlorophylls donate
an electron to a quinone on the opposite side of the membrane, creating a charge separation (see Figure 8-33). In
green plants, the positively charged chlorophylls then remove electrons from water, forming oxygen.

■

Stroma

Thylakoid
membrane

Lumen
LHC

Special-pair
chlorophylls

LHC

▲ FIGURE 8-34 Energy transfer from light-harvesting
complexes to associated reaction center in photosystem I of
cyanobacteria. The multiprotein light-harvesting complex binds
90 chlorophyll molecules (white and blue) and 31 other small
molecules, all held in a specific geometric arrangement for
optimal light absorption. Of the six chlorophyll molecules (green)
in the reaction center, two constitute the special-pair chlorophylls
(ovals) that can initiate photoelectron transport when excited
(blue arrows). Resonance transfer of energy (red arrows) rapidly
funnels energy from absorbed light to one of two “bridging”
chlorophylls (blue) and thence to chlorophylls in the reaction
center. [Adapted from W. Kühlbrandt, 2001, Nature 411:896, and
P. Jordan et al., 2001, Nature 411:909.]

In stage 2, electrons are transported from the reduced
quinone via carriers in the thylakoid membrane until they
reach the ultimate electron acceptor, usually NADP, reducing it to NADPH. Electron transport is coupled to
movement of protons across the membrane from the
stroma to the thylakoid lumen, forming a pH gradient
(proton-motive force) across the thylakoid membrane.

■

In stage 3, movement of protons down their electrochemical gradient through F0F1 complexes powers the synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi.

■

In stage 4, the ATP and NADPH generated in stages 2
and 3 provide the energy and the electrons to drive the fixation of CO2 and synthesis of carbohydrates. These reactions occur in the thylakoid stroma and cytosol.

■

336

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

Associated with each reaction center are multiple lightharvesting complexes (LHCs), which contain chlorophylls
a and b, carotenoids, and other pigments that absorb light
at multiple wavelengths. Energy is transferred from the
LHC chlorophyll molecules to reaction-center chlorophylls
by resonance energy transfer (see Figure 8-34).

■

Cytosol

8.5 Molecular Analysis
of Photosystems
As noted in the previous section, photosynthesis in
the green and purple bacteria does not generate oxygen, whereas photosynthesis in cyanobacteria, algae,
and higher plants does.* This difference is attributable to the
presence of two types of photosystem (PS) in the latter organisms: PSI reduces NADP to NADPH, and PSII forms O2 from
H2O. In contrast, the green and purple bacteria have only one
type of photosystem, which cannot form O2. We first discuss the
simpler photosystem of purple bacteria and then consider the
more complicated photosynthetic machinery in chloroplasts.

Exterior

QA

The Single Photosystem of Purple Bacteria
Generates a Proton-Motive Force but No O2
The three-dimensional structures of the photosynthetic reaction centers from two purple bacteria have been determined, permitting scientists to trace the detailed paths of
electrons during and after the absorption of light. Similar
proteins and pigments compose photosystem II of plants as
well, and the conclusions drawn from studies on this simple
photosystem have proven applicable to plant systems.
The reaction center of purple bacteria contains three protein subunits (L, M, and H) located in the plasma membrane
(Figure 8-35). Bound to these proteins are the prosthetic
groups that absorb light and transport electrons during photosynthesis. The prosthetic groups include a “special pair” of
bacteriochlorophyll a molecules equivalent to the reactioncenter chlorophyll a molecules in plants, as well as several
other pigments and two quinones, termed QA and QB, that
are structurally similar to mitochondrial ubiquinone.

Initial Charge Separation The mechanism of charge separation in the photosystem of purple bacteria is identical with
that in plants outlined earlier; that is, energy from absorbed
light is used to strip an electron from a reaction-center bacteriochlorophyll a molecule and transfer it, via several different pigments, to the primary electron acceptor QB, which
is loosely bound to a site on the cytosolic membrane face.
The chlorophyll thereby acquires a positive charge, and QB
acquires a negative charge. To determine the pathway traversed by electrons through the bacterial reaction center, re*A very different type of bacterial photosynthesis, which occurs only in
certain archaebacteria, is not discussed here because it is very different
from photosynthesis in higher plants. In this type of photosynthesis, the
plasma-membrane protein bacteriorhodopsin pumps one proton from the

Pheophytin

QB

Voyeur
chlorophyll
"Special-pair"
chlorophyll

▲ FIGURE 8-35 Three-dimensional structure of the photosynthetic reaction center from the purple bacterium
Rhodobacter spheroides. (Top) The L subunit (yellow) and
M subunit (white) each form five transmembrane helices and
have a very similar structure overall; the H subunit (light blue) is
anchored to the membrane by a single transmembrane helix. A
fourth subunit (not shown) is a peripheral protein that binds to the
exoplasmic segments of the other subunits. (Bottom) Within each
reaction center is a special pair of bacteriochlorophyll a molecules
(green), capable of initiating photoelectron transport; two voyeur
chlorophylls (purple); two pheophytins (dark blue), and two quinones,
QA and QB (orange). QB is the primary electron acceptor during
photosynthesis. [After M. H. Stowell et al., 1997, Science 276:812.]
searchers exploited the fact that each pigment absorbs light
of only certain wavelengths, and its absorption spectrum
changes when it possesses an extra electron. Because these
electron movements are completed in less than 1 millisecond
(ms), a special technique called picosecond absorption spectroscopy is required to monitor the changes in the absorption
spectra of the various pigments as a function of time shortly
after the absorption of a light photon.
When a preparation of bacterial membrane vesicles is exposed to an intense pulse of laser light lasting less than 1 ps, each
cytosol to the extracellular space for every quantum of light absorbed.
This small protein has seven membrane-spanning segments and a covalently attached retinal pigment (see Figure 5-13).

8.5 • Molecular Analysis of Photosystems

reaction center absorbs one photon. Light absorbed by the
chlorophyll a molecules in each reaction center converts them to
the excited state, and the subsequent electron transfer processes
are synchronized in all reaction centers. Within 4  1012 seconds (4 ps), an electron moves to one of the pheophytin molecules (Ph), leaving a positive charge on the chlorophyll a. It takes
200 ps for the electron to move to QA, and then, in the slowest
step, 200s for it to move to QB. This pathway of electron flow
is traced in the left portion of Figure 8-36.

Subsequent Electron Flow and Coupled Proton Movement
After the primary electron acceptor, QB, in the bacterial reaction center accepts one electron, forming QB·, it accepts a
second electron from the same reaction-center chlorophyll
following its absorption of a second photon. The quinone
then binds two protons from the cytosol, forming the reduced quinone (QH2), which is released from the reaction
center (see Figure 8-36). QH2 diffuses within the bacterial
membrane to the Qo site on the exoplasmic face of a cytochrome bc1 complex, where it releases its two protons into
the periplasmic space (the space between the plasma membrane and the bacterial cell wall). This process moves protons from the cytosol to the outside of the cell, generating a
proton-motive force across the plasma membrane. Simultaneously, QH2 releases its two electrons, which move through
the cytochrome bc1 complex exactly as depicted for the mito-

2 H+

chondrial CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex in Figure 8-21. The Q cycle in the bacterial reaction center, like the
Q cycle in mitochondria, pumps additional protons from the
cytosol to the intermembrane space, thereby increasing the
proton-motive force.
The acceptor for electrons transferred through the cytochrome bc1 complex is a soluble cytochrome, a one-electron
carrier, in the periplasmic space, which is reduced from the
Fe3 to the Fe2 state. The reduced cytochrome (analogous
to cytochrome c in mitochondria) then diffuses to a reaction
center, where it releases its electron to a positively charged
chlorophyll a, returning the chlorophyll to the ground state
and the cytochrome to the Fe3 state. This cyclic electron flow
generates no oxygen and no reduced coenzymes.
Electrons also can flow through the single photosystem of
purple bacteria via a linear (noncyclic) pathway. In this case,
electrons removed from reaction-center chlorophylls ultimately
are transferred to NAD (rather than NADP as in plants),
forming NADH. To reduce the oxidized reaction-center chlorophyll a back to its ground state, an electron is transferred from
a reduced cytochrome c; the oxidized cytochrome c that is
formed is reduced by electrons removed from hydrogen sulfide
(H2S), forming elemental sulfur (S), or from hydrogen gas (H2).
Since H2O is not the electron donor, no O2 is formed.
Both the cyclic and linear pathways of electron flow in
the bacterial photosystem generate a proton-motive force. As

Q cycle: additional
proton transport

Pi +
ADP

ATP

H+

Cytosol
––––

4 H+
QA

QB

Qi

Plasma
membrane

2 photons

337

QH2
Ph

Q
2 e−
Qo

++++
Periplasmic
space

e−

Cytochrome
Special-pair
chlorophylls

e−

Bacterial reaction
center

▲ FIGURE 8-36 Cyclic electron flow in the single photosystem of purple bacteria. Blue arrows indicate flow of
electrons; red arrows indicate proton movement. (Left) Energy
funneled from an associated LHC (not illustrated here) energizes
one of the special-pair chlorophylls in the reaction center. Photoelectron transport from the energized chlorophyll, via pheophytin
(Ph) and quinone A (QA), to quinone B (QB) forms the
semiquinone Q and leaves a positive charge on the chlorophyll.
Following absorption of a second photon and transfer of a
second electron to the semiquinone, it rapidly picks up two
protons from the cytosol to form QH2. (Center) After diffusing
through the membrane and binding to the Qo site on the

4 H+

2 H+ H+

Cytochrome bc1
complex

F0 F1 complex

exoplasmic face of the cytochrome bc1 complex, QH2 donates
two electrons and simultaneously gives up two protons to the
external medium, generating a proton-motive force (Hexoplasmic
 Hcytosolic). Electrons are transported back to the reactioncenter chlorophyll via a soluble cytochrome, which diffuses in the
periplasmic space. Operation of a Q cycle in the cytochrome bc1
complex pumps additional protons across the membrane to the
external medium, as in mitochondria. The proton-motive force is
used by the F0F1 complex to synthesize ATP and, as in other
bacteria, to transport molecules in and out of the cell. [Adapted
from J. Deisenhofer and H. Michael, 1991, Ann. Rev. Cell Biol. 7:1.]

338

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

in other systems, this proton-motive force is used by the F0F1
complex located in the plasma membrane to synthesize ATP
and also to transport molecules across the membrane against
a concentration gradient.

Chloroplasts Contain Two Functionally
and Spatially Distinct Photosystems
In the 1940s, biophysicist R. Emerson discovered that the
rate of plant photosynthesis generated by light of wavelength
700 nm can be greatly enhanced by adding light of shorter
wavelength. He found that a combination of light at, say,
600 and 700 nm supports a greater rate of photosynthesis
than the sum of the rates for the two separate wavelengths.
This so-called Emerson effect led researchers to conclude
that photosynthesis in plants involves the interaction of two
separate photosystems, referred to as PSI and PSII. PSI is
driven by light of wavelength 700 nm or less; PSII, only by
light of shorter wavelength 680 nm.
As in the reaction center of green and purple bacteria,
each chloroplast photosystem contains a pair of specialized
reaction-center chlorophyll a molecules, which are capable
of initiating photoelectron transport. The reaction-center
chlorophylls in PSI and PSII differ in their light-absorption
maxima because of differences in their protein environment.
For this reason, these chlorophylls are often denoted P680

(PSII) and P700 (PSI). Like a bacterial reaction center, each
chloroplast reaction center is associated with multiple lightharvesting complexes (LHCs); the LHCs associated with PSII
and PSI contain different proteins.
The two photosystems also are distributed differently
in thylakoid membranes: PSII primarily in stacked regions
(grana) and PSI primarily in unstacked regions. The stacking of the thylakoid membranes may be due to the binding properties of the proteins in PSII. Evidence for this
distribution came from studies in which thylakoid membranes were gently fragmented into vesicles by ultrasound.
Stacked and unstacked thylakoid vesicles were then fractionated by density-gradient centrifugation. The stacked
fractions contained primarily PSII protein and the unstacked fraction, PSI.
Finally, and most importantly, the two chloroplast photosystems differ significantly in their functions: only PSII
splits water to form oxygen, whereas only PSI transfers electrons to the final electron acceptor, NADP. Photosynthesis
in chloroplasts can follow a linear or cyclic pathway, again
like green and purple bacteria. The linear pathway, which we
discuss first, can support carbon fixation as well as ATP synthesis. In contrast, the cyclic pathway supports only ATP
synthesis and generates no reduced NADPH for use in carbon fixation. Photosynthetic algae and cyanobacteria contain two photosystems analogous to those in chloroplasts.

NADP-FAD
reductase

Stroma
––––

Qi

e−

2 photons

ATP

Ferredoxin
Fe-S
4 H+

QB

Thylakoid
membrane

Pi +
ADP

NADPH

Q cycle: additional
proton transport H+

2 H+

NADP + H+

e−

QH2

2 photons

Q

e−

e−

Qo
++++
Lumen

O2-evolving
complex

e−
2 H+ H+

P680
chlorophyll
H2O

2 H+ + 1/2 O2

PSII reaction center

Cytochrome bf
complex

▲ FIGURE 8-37 Linear electron flow in plants, which
requires both chloroplast photosystems, PSI and PSII. Blue
arrows indicate flow of electrons; red arrows indicate proton
movement. LHCs are not shown. (Left) In the PSII reaction
center, two sequential light-induced excitations of the same P680
chlorophylls result in reduction of the primary electron acceptor
QB to QH2. On the luminal side of PSII, electrons removed from
H2O in the thylakoid lumen are transferred to P680, restoring the
reaction-center chlorophylls to the ground state and generating
O2. (Center) The cytochrome bf complex then accepts electrons
from QH2, coupled to the release of two protons into the lumen.
Operation of a Q cycle in the cytochrome bf complex

4 H+
Plastocyanin

e−

P700
chlorophyll
PSI reaction
center

F0 F1 complex

translocates additional protons across the membrane to the
thylakoid lumen, increasing the proton-motive force generated.
(Right) In the PSI reaction center, each electron released from
light-excited P700 chlorophylls moves via a series of carriers in the
reaction center to the stromal surface, where soluble ferredoxin
(an Fe-S protein) transfers the electron to FAD and finally to
NADP, forming NADPH. P700 is restored to its ground state by
addition of an electron carried from PSII via the cytochrome bf
complex and plastocyanin, a soluble electron carrier. The protonmotive force generated by linear electron flow from PSII to
NADP-FAD reductase powers ATP synthesis by the F0F1
complex.

8.5 • Molecular Analysis of Photosystems

Linear Electron Flow Through Both Plant
Photosystems, PSII and PSI, Generates
a Proton-Motive Force, O2, and NADPH
Linear electron flow in chloroplasts involves PSII and PSI in
an obligate series in which electrons are transferred from
H2O to NADP. The process begins with absorption of a
photon by PSII, causing an electron to move from a P680
chlorophyll a to an acceptor plastoquinone (QB) on the stromal surface (Figure 8-37). The resulting oxidized P680 strips
one electron from the highly unwilling donor H2O, forming
an intermediate in O2 formation and a proton, which remains in the thylakoid lumen and contributes to the protonmotive force. After P680 absorbs a second photon, the
semiquinone Q· accepts a second electron and picks up two
protons from the stromal space, generating QH2. After diffusing in the membrane, QH2 binds to the Qo site on a cytochrome bf complex, which is analogous in structure and
function to the cytochrome bc1 complex in purple bacteria
and the CoQH2–cytochrome c reductase complex in mitochondria. As in these systems a Q cycle operates in the cytochrome bf complex in association with the PSII reaction
center, thereby increasing the proton-motive force generated
by electron transport.
Absorption of a photon by PSI leads to removal of an
electron from the reaction-center chlorophyll a, P700 (see Figure 8-37). The resulting oxidized P700 is reduced by an electron passed from the PSII reaction center via the cytochrome
bf complex and plastocyanin, a soluble electron carrier that
contains a single copper (Cu) atom. After the cytochrome bf
complex accepts electrons from QH2, it transfers them, one
at a time, to the Cu2 form of plastocyanin, reducing it to
the Cu form. Reduced plastocyanin then diffuses in the thylakoid lumen, carrying the electron to P700 in PSI. The electron taken up at the luminal surface by P700 moves via
several carriers to the stromal surface of the thylakoid membrane, where it is accepted by ferredoxin, an iron-sulfur
(Fe-S) protein. Electrons excited in PSI can be transferred
from ferredoxin via the electron carrier FAD to NADP,
forming, together with one proton picked up from the
stroma, the reduced molecule NADPH.
F0F1 complexes in the thylakoid membrane use the
proton-motive force generated during linear electron flow
to synthesize ATP on the stromal side of membrane. Thus
this pathway yields both NADPH and ATP in the stroma of
the chloroplast, where they are utilized for CO2 fixation.

An Oxygen-Evolving Complex Is Located on the
Luminal Surface of the PSII Reaction Center
Somewhat surprisingly, the structure of the PSII reaction
center, which removes electrons from H2O to form O2, resembles that of the reaction center of photosynthetic purple bacteria, which does not form O2. Like the bacterial
reaction center, the PSII reaction center contains two molecules of chlorophyll a (P680), as well as two other chlorophylls, two pheophytins, two quinones (QA and QB), and

339

PSll reaction
center
D2
D1
Stroma
QB
Thylakoid
membrane

QA

Fe

Pheo

Pheo
Chl
Y161

Thylakoid
lumen

Chl
P680

4 photons

Ca2+
Cl−

P680

4 e−
33 kDa

Mn
17 kDa
23 kDa

2 H2O

Special-pair
chlorophylls

O2-evolving
complex

4 H+ + O2

▲ FIGURE 8-38 Electron flow and O2 evolution in
chloroplast PSII. The PSII reaction center, comprising two
integral proteins, D1 and D2, special-pair chlorophylls (P680), and
other electron carriers, is associated with an oxygen-evolving
complex on the luminal surface. Bound to the three extrinsic
proteins (33, 23, and 17 kDa) of the oxygen-evolving complex are
four manganese ions (red), a Ca2 ion (blue), and a Cl ion
(yellow). These bound ions function in the splitting of H2O and
maintain the environment essential for high rates of O2 evolution.
Tyrosine-161 (Y161) of the D1 polypeptide conducts electrons
from the Mn ions to the oxidized reaction-center chlorophyll (P680),
reducing it to the ground state P680. See the text for details.
[Adapted from C. Hoganson and G. Babcock, 1997, Science 277:1953.]

one nonheme iron atom. These small molecules are bound
to two PSII proteins, called D1 and D2, whose sequences are
remarkably similar to the sequences of the L and M peptides
of the bacterial reaction center, attesting to their common
evolutionary origins (see Figure 8-35). When PSII absorbs
a photon with a wavelength of 680 nm, it triggers the loss
of an electron from a P680 molecule, generating P680. As
in photosynthetic purple bacteria, the electron is transported via a pheophytin and a quinone (QA) to the primary
electron acceptor, QB, on the outer (stromal) surface of the
thylakoid membrane (Figures 8-37 and 8-38).
The photochemically oxidized reaction-center chlorophyll of PSII, P680, is the strongest biological oxidant
known. The reduction potential of P680 is more positive
than that of water, and thus it can oxidize water to generate
O2 and H ions. Photosynthetic bacteria cannot oxidize
water because the excited chlorophyll a in the bacterial reaction center is not a sufficiently strong oxidant. (As noted
earlier, purple bacteria use H2S and H2 as electron donors
to reduce chlorophyll a in linear electron flow.)
The splitting of H2O, which provides the electrons for reduction of P680 in PSII, is catalyzed by a three-protein complex, the oxygen-evolving complex, located on the luminal
surface of the thylakoid membrane. The oxygen-evolving
complex contains four manganese (Mn) ions as well as

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

O2 evolved per flash

340

1

2

3

4

5 6 7 8
Flash number

9

10 11 12

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 8-39 A single PSII absorbs
a photon and transfers an electron four times to generate
one O2. Dark-adapted chloroplasts were exposed to a series of
closely spaced, short (5-s) pulses of light that activated virtually
all the PSIIs in the preparation. The peaks in O2 evolution
occurred after every fourth pulse, indicating that absorption of
four photons by one PSII is required to generate each O2
molecule. Because the dark-adapted chloroplasts were initially in
a partially reduced state, the peaks in O2 evolution occurred after
flashes 3, 7, and 11. [From J. Berg et al., 2002, Biochemistry, 5th ed.,
W. H. Freeman and Company.]

bound Cl and Ca2 ions (see Figure 8-38); this is one of
the very few cases in which Mn plays a role in a biological
system. These Mn ions together with the three extrinsic proteins can be removed from the reaction center by treatment
with solutions of concentrated salts; this abolishes O2
formation but does not affect light absorption or the initial
stages of electron transport.
The oxidation of two molecules of H2O to form O2 requires the removal of four electrons, but absorption of each
photon by PSII results in the transfer of just one electron. A
simple experiment, described in Figure 8-39, resolved
whether the formation of O2 depends on a single PSII or
multiple ones acting in concert. The results indicated that a
single PSII must lose an electron and then oxidize the
oxygen-evolving complex four times in a row for an O2 molecule to be formed.
Manganese is known to exist in multiple oxidation states
with from two to five positive charges. Subsequent spectroscopic studies indeed showed that the bound Mn ions in the
oxygen-evolving complex cycle through five different oxidation states, S0–S4. In this S cycle, a total of two H2O molecules are split into four protons, four electrons, and one O2
molecule. The electrons released from H2O are transferred,
one at a time, via the Mn ions and a nearby tyrosine side
chain on the D1 subunit, to the reaction-center P680, where
they regenerate the reduced chlorophyll, P680. The protons
released from H2O remain in the thylakoid lumen. Despite
a great deal of experimentation we still do not know the details of how O2 is formed by this Mn-containing complex.

Herbicides that inhibit photosynthesis not only
are very important in agriculture but also have
proved useful in dissecting the pathway of photoelectron transport in plants. One such class of herbicides,
the s-triazines (e.g., atrazine), binds specifically to D1 in the
PSII reaction center, thus inhibiting binding of oxidized QB
to its site on the stromal surface of the thylakoid membrane.
When added to illuminated chloroplasts, s-triazines cause
all downstream electron carriers to accumulate in the oxidized form, since no electrons can be released from PSII. In
atrazine-resistant mutants, a single amino acid change in D1
renders it unable to bind the herbicide, so photosynthesis
proceeds at normal rates. Such resistant weeds are prevalent
and present a major agricultural problem. ❚

Cyclic Electron Flow Through PSI Generates
a Proton-Motive Force but No NADPH or O2
As we’ve seen, electrons from reduced ferredoxin in PSI are
transferred to NADP during linear electron flow (see Figure
8-37). Alternatively, reduced ferredoxin can donate two electrons to a quinone (Q) bound to a site on the stromal surface of
PSI; the quinone then picks up two protons from the stroma,
forming QH2. This QH2 then diffuses through the thylakoid
membrane to the Qo binding site on the luminal surface of the
cytochrome bf complex. There it releases two electrons to the
cytochrome bf complex and two protons to the thylakoid
lumen, generating a proton-motive force. As in linear electron
flow, these electrons return to PSI via plastocyanin. This cyclic
electron flow, which does not involve PSII, is similar to the
cyclic process that occurs in the single photosystem of purple
bacteria (see Figure 8-36). A Q cycle operates in the cytochrome bf complex during cyclic electron flow, leading to
transport of two additional protons into the lumen for each
pair of electrons transported and a greater proton-motive force.
The proton-motive force generated during cyclic electron
flow in chloroplasts powers ATP synthesis by F0F1 complexes in the thylakoid membrane. This process, however,
generates no NADPH, and no O2 evolves.

Relative Activity of Photosystems
I and II Is Regulated
In order for PSII and PSI to act in sequence during linear electron flow, the amount of light energy delivered to the two
reaction centers must be controlled so that each center activates the same number of electrons. If the two photosystems
are not equally excited, then cyclic electron flow occurs in
PSI, and PSII becomes less active. One mechanism for regulating the relative contribution of linear and cyclic electron
flow in chloroplasts entails the reversible phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation of the proteins associated with the
PSII light-harvesting complex (LHCII).
According to this mechanism, a membrane-bound protein kinase senses the relative activities of the two photosys-

8.5 • Molecular Analysis of Photosystems

tems. This monitoring may involve recognition of the oxidized-reduced state of the plastoquinone pool that transfers
electrons from PSII to the cytochrome bf complex en route to
PSI. Balanced excitation of the two photosystems is associated with linear electron flow (Figure 8-40, state I). However,
if too much plastoquinone is reduced (indicating excessive
activation of PSII relative to PSI), the kinase becomes activated and some LHCIIs are phosphorylated. These phosphorylated LHCIIs dissociate from PSII, which is
preferentially located in the grana, and diffuse in the membrane to the unstacked thylakoid membranes, where they
can activate PSI. This redistribution of LHCIIs, which decreases the antenna size of PSII and increases that of PSI, and
the concomitant redistribution of cytochrome bf complexes
from PSII-rich to PSI-rich membrane domains promote cyclic
electron flow (Figure 8-40, state II).
The supramolecular organization of the photosystems in
plants thus has the effect of directing them toward ATP production (state II) or toward generation of reducing equivalents (NADPH) and ATP (state I). Both NADPH and ATP
are required to convert CO2 to sucrose or starch, the fourth
stage in photosynthesis, which we cover in the last section
of this chapter.

341

Plants contain two photosystems, PSI and PSII, which
have different functions and are physically separated in the
thylakoid membrane. PSII splits H2O into O2. PSI reduces
NADP to NADPH. Cyanobacteria have two analogous
photosystems.
■

In chloroplasts, light energy absorbed by light-harvesting
complexes (LHCs) is transferred to chlorophyll a molecules
in the reaction centers (P680 in PSII and P700 in PSI).
■

Electrons flow through PSII via the same carriers that
are present in the bacterial photosystem. In contrast to the
bacterial system, photochemically oxidized P680 in PSII is
regenerated to P680 by electrons derived from the splitting
of H2O with evolution of O2 (see Figure 8-37, left).
■

In linear electron flow, photochemically oxidized P700
in PSI is reduced, regenerating P700, by electrons transferred from PSII via the cytochrome bf complex and soluble plastocyanin. Electrons lost from P700 following excitation of PSI are transported via several carriers ultimately
to NADP, generating NADPH (see Figure 8-37, right).
■

In contrast to linear electron flow, which requires both
PSII and PSI, cyclic electron flow in plants involves only
PSI. In this pathway, neither NADPH nor O2 is formed,
although a proton-motive force is generated.
■

The proton-motive force generated by photoelectron
transport in plant and bacterial photosystems is augmented
by operation of the Q cycle in cytochrome bf complexes
associated with each of the photosystems.

■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 8.5
Molecular Analysis of Photosystems
In the single photosystem of purple bacteria, cyclic electron flow from light-excited chlorophyll a molecules in the
reaction center generates a proton-motive force, which is
used mainly to power ATP synthesis by the F0F1 complex
in the plasma membrane (Figure 8-36).

■

Reversible phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of
the PSII light-harvesting complex control the functional organization of the photosynthetic apparatus in thylakoid
membranes. State I favors linear electron flow, whereas
state II favors cyclic electron flow (see Figure 8-40).

■

342

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

 FIGURE 8-42 The pathway of carbon during photo-

8.6 CO2 Metabolism During
Photosynthesis

synthesis. (Top) Six molecules of CO2 are converted into two
molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. These reactions,
which constitute the Calvin cycle, occur in the stroma of the
chloroplast. Via the phosphate/triosephosphate antiporter, some
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is transported to the cytosol in
exchange for phosphate. (Bottom) In the cytosol, an exergonic
series of reactions converts glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate and, ultimately, to the disaccharide
sucrose. Some glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (not shown here) is
also converted to amino acids and fats, compounds essential to
plant growth.

Chloroplasts perform many metabolic reactions
in green leaves. In addition to CO2 fixation, the
synthesis of almost all amino acids, all fatty acids
and carotenes, all pyrimidines, and probably all purines
occurs in chloroplasts. However, the synthesis of sugars
from CO 2 is the most extensively studied biosynthetic
pathway in plant cells. We first consider the unique pathway, known as the Calvin cycle (after discoverer Melvin
Calvin), that fixes CO 2 into three-carbon compounds,
powered by energy released during ATP hydrolysis and oxidation of NADPH.

radioactivity is found in the carboxyl group. This finding
establishes that ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase fixes
the CO2. Because CO2 is initially incorporated into a threecarbon compound, the Calvin cycle is also called the C3
pathway of carbon fixation.
The fate of 3-phosphoglycerate formed by rubisco is
complex: some is converted to starch or sucrose, but some
is used to regenerate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. At least
nine enzymes are required to regenerate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate from 3-phosphoglycerate. Quantitatively, for
every 12 molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate generated by rubisco (a total of 36 C atoms), 2 molecules (6 C atoms) are
converted to 2 molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
(and later to 1 hexose), while 10 molecules (30 C atoms)
are converted to 6 molecules of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
(Figure 8-42, top). The fixation of six CO2 molecules and
the net formation of two glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate molecules require the consumption of 18 ATPs and 12
NADPHs, generated by the light-requiring processes of
photosynthesis.

CO2 Fixation Occurs in the Chloroplast Stroma
The reaction that actually fixes CO2 into carbohydrates is
catalyzed by ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase (often
called rubisco), which is located in the stromal space of the
chloroplast. This enzyme adds CO2 to the five-carbon
sugar ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to form two molecules of
3-phosphoglycerate (Figure 8-41). Rubisco is a large enzyme (≈500 kDa) composed of eight identical large subunits and eight identical small subunits. One subunit is
encoded in chloroplast DNA; the other, in nuclear DNA.
Because the catalytic rate of rubisco is quite slow, many
copies of the enzyme are needed to fix sufficient CO2. Indeed, this enzyme makes up almost 50 percent of the
chloroplast protein and is believed to be the most abundant
protein on earth.
When photosynthetic algae are exposed to a brief pulse
of 14C-labeled CO2 and the cells are then quickly disrupted,
3-phosphoglycerate is radiolabeled most rapidly, and all the

CH2
O

CH2
O

C

O



C



O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

PO3H

O

O

O

CH2

C

C

H


PO3H

O

H2O

H

OH

C

OH

C

O

O

C

OH
O

O

O
PO3H
H

C

O

C

OH

CH2
CO2

Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate

▲ FIGURE 8-41 The initial reaction that fixes CO2 into
organic compounds. In this reaction, catalyzed by ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, CO2 condenses with the five-

PO3H



C

CH2

PO3H

O

Enzyme-bound intermediate

O

PO3H

3-Phosphoglycerate
(two molecules)

carbon sugar ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. The products are two
molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate.

8.6 • CO2 Metabolism During Photosynthesis
6 CO2

1C

O

C

O

CO2

O

6

Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate

6 ADP

5C

12 3-Phosphoglycerate

3C

H
12 ATP

CO2 FIXATION
(CALVIN CYCLE)

6 ATP
6

C

O

C

OH
2

CH2

OPO3

C

O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

3-Phosphoglycerate

12 ADP

5C

12 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate

3C
H

12 NADP

7 enzymes
12 Pi
Glyceraldehyde
10
3-phosphate

Glyceraldehyde
12
3-phosphate

3C

Ribulose
5-phosphate

2

C

OPO3

C

OH

OPO32

CH2
2

CH2

OPO3

C

O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate

3C
H

H
Glyceraldehyde
2
3-phosphate

OPO32

CH2

12 NADPH
4 Pi

CH2OH


O

Ribulose
5-phosphate

343

3C

C

O

C

OH

CH2

2

CH2

OPO3

Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate

2

OPO3

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate

2 Pi
Stroma
Phosphatetriosephosphate
antiport protein

Inner chloroplast membrane
Cytosol
2 Pi

2

Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate

3C

1

Fructose
1,6-bisphosphate

Pi
1

C

O

HO

C

H

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

6C

Pi

Fructose
1-phosphate

6C
CH2
6

Glucose
1-phosphate

6C

1

UTP

Fructose
6-phosphate

1

CH2OH

6C

5

CH2OH
O

O

4

1 UDP-glucose

3

6C

2

1

OH

HO

PPi

OPO3

3

2

CH2OH
O

O
1

HO
Pi
Sucrose

12C

OH

2

HO

O
OH

6

Fructose 6-phosphate

CH2OH

12C

4

5

CH2OPO32

OH

OH

UDP

HO

HO

2

Glucose 1-phosphate

Sucrose
1
6-phosphate

PO32

O

Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate

SUCROSE SYNTHESIS
1

PO32

O

CH2

OH

Sucrose 6-phosphate

CH2OPO32

344

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

Calvin cycle enzymes. Because protons are transported from
the stroma into the thylakoid lumen during photoelectron
transport (see Figure 8-37), the pH of the stroma increases
from ≈7 in the dark to ≈8 in the light. The increased activity
of several Calvin cycle enzymes at the higher pH promotes
CO2 fixation in the light.
A stromal protein called thioredoxin (Tx) also plays a
role in controlling some Calvin cycle enzymes. In the dark,
thioredoxin contains a disulfide bond; in the light, electrons
are transferred from PSI, via ferredoxin, to thioredoxin, reducing its disulfide bond:

Synthesis of Sucrose Incorporating Fixed
CO2 Is Completed in the Cytosol
After its formation in the chloroplast stroma, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate is transported to the cytosol in exchange for
phosphate. The final steps of sucrose synthesis occur in the
cytosol of leaf cells. In these reactions, one molecule of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is isomerized to dihydroxyacetone
phosphate. This compound condenses with a second molecule of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to form fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, which is the reverse of the aldolase reaction in
glycolysis (see Figure 8-4, step 4). Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
is converted primarily to sucrose by the reactions shown in
the bottom portion of Figure 8-42.
The transport protein in the chloroplast membrane that
brings fixed CO2 (as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate) into the
cytosol when the cell is exporting sucrose vigorously is a
strict antiporter: No fixed CO2 leaves the chloroplast unless
phosphate is fed into it. The phosphate is generated in the cytosol, primarily during the formation of sucrose, from phosphorylated three-carbon intermediates. Thus the synthesis of
sucrose and its export from leaf cells to other cells encourages the transport of additional glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
from the chloroplast to the cytosol.

PSI
2e

2 H
Tx

S

Tx

SH
SH

S

Reduced thioredoxin then activates several Calvin cycle enzymes by reducing disulfide bonds in them. In the dark,
when thioredoxin becomes reoxidized, these enzymes are reoxidized and thus inactivated.
Rubisco is spontaneously activated in the presence of high
CO2 and Mg2 concentrations. The activating reaction entails covalent addition of CO2 to the side-chain amino group
of lysine-191, forming a carbamate group that then binds a
Mg2 ion. Under normal conditions, however, with ambient
levels of CO2, the reaction requires catalysis by rubisco activase, an enzyme that simultaneously hydrolyzes ATP and uses
the energy to attach a CO2 to the lysine. This enzyme was discovered during the study of a mutant strain of Arabidopsis
thaliana that required high CO2 levels to grow and that did
not exhibit light activation of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase; the mutant had a defective rubisco activase.

Light and Rubisco Activase
Stimulate CO2 Fixation
The Calvin cycle enzymes that catalyze CO2 fixation are rapidly inactivated in the dark, thereby conserving ATP that is
generated in the dark for other synthetic reactions, such as
lipid and amino acid biosynthesis. One mechanism that contributes to this control is the pH dependence of several
O


C

O

C

OH

Sugars

H

OPO32

CH2
O
CO2 + H2O

H

2

O PO3

CH2
O

H

C

OH

CO2 fixation

H

C

OH

Photorespiration

CH2

1

OPO32

C

OH

ADP

O
ATP
C

OPO32

C
H

C
CH2

CO2

CH2OH
Glycerate

O

O

2



O

CHOH

3-Phosphoglycerate

Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate

O2

O

CH2

C



C

O
OH
OPO32

3-Phosphoglycerate

▲ FIGURE 8-43 CO2 fixation and photorespiration.
These competing pathways are both initiated by ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase (rubisco), and both utilize ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate. CO2 fixation, pathway (1), is favored by high
CO2 and low O2 pressures; photorespiration, pathway (2), occurs
at low CO2 and high O2 pressures (that is, under normal

O


C


O

C
CH2

OPO32



O

Two glycolate

CH2OH
H2O

Pi

Glycolate

Phosphoglycolate

atmospheric conditions). Phosphoglycolate is recycled via a
complex set of reactions that take place in peroxisomes and
mitochondria, as well as chloroplasts. The net result: for every
two molecules of phosphoglycolate formed by photorespiration
(four C atoms), one molecule of 3-phosphoglycerate is ultimately
formed and recycled, and one molecule of CO2 is lost.

8.6 • CO2 Metabolism During Photosynthesis

Photorespiration, Which Competes with
Photosynthesis, Is Reduced in Plants
That Fix CO2 by the C4 Pathway
Photosynthesis is always accompanied by photorespiration—a
process that takes place in light, consumes O2, and converts
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate in part to CO2. As Figure 8-43
shows, rubisco catalyzes two competing reactions: the addition
of CO2 to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to form two molecules
of 3-phosphoglycerate and the addition of O2 to form one
molecule of 3-phosphoglycerate and one molecule of the twocarbon compound phosphoglycolate. Photorespiration is
wasteful to the energy economy of the plant: it consumes ATP
and O2, and it generates CO2. It is surprising, therefore, that all
known rubiscos catalyze photorespiration. Probably the necessary structure of the active site of rubisco precluded evolution
of an enzyme that does not catalyze photorespiration.
In a hot, dry environment, plants must keep the gasexchange pores (stomata) in their leaves closed much of the
Vascular bundle
(xylem, phloem)

(a)

Mesophyll
cells
Air
space

Bundle
sheath
cells

time to prevent excessive loss of moisture. This causes the
CO2 level inside the leaf to fall below the Km of rubisco for
CO2. Under these conditions, the rate of photosynthesis is
slowed and photorespiration is greatly favored. Corn, sugar
cane, crabgrass, and other plants that can grow in hot, dry
environments have evolved a way to avoid this problem by
utilizing a two-step pathway of CO2 fixation in which a
CO2-hoarding step precedes the Calvin cycle. The pathway
has been named the C4 pathway because [14C] CO2 labeling
showed that the first radioactive molecules formed during
photosynthesis in this pathway are four-carbon compounds,
such as oxaloacetate and malate, rather than the threecarbon molecules that begin the Calvin cycle (C3 pathway).
The C4 pathway involves two types of cells: mesophyll
cells, which are adjacent to the air spaces in the leaf interior,
and bundle sheath cells, which surround the vascular tissue
(Figure 8-44a). In the mesophyll cells of C4 plants, phosphoenolpyruvate, a three-carbon molecule derived from pyruvate, reacts with CO2 to generate oxaloacetate, a four-

 FIGURE 8-44 Leaf anatomy of C4 plants and the C4
pathway. (a) In C4 plants, bundle sheath cells line the vascular
bundles containing the xylem and phloem. Mesophyll cells,
which are adjacent to the substomal air spaces, can assimilate
CO2 into four-carbon molecules at low ambient CO2 and deliver
it to the interior bundle sheath cells. Bundle sheath cells contain
abundant chloroplasts and are the sites of photosynthesis and
sucrose synthesis. Sucrose is carried to the rest of the plant
via the phloem. In C3 plants, which lack bundle sheath cells, the
Calvin cycle operates in the mesophyll cells to fix CO2. (b) The
key enzyme in the C4 pathway is phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase, which assimilates CO2 to form oxaloacetate in
mesophyll cells. Decarboxylation of malate or other C4
intermediates in bundle sheath cells releases CO2, which
enters the standard Calvin cycle (see Figure 8-42, top).

Epidermis
CO2 O2

(b)

Mesophyll cell

Stoma

Chloroplast

O

NADPH

H



C

O

C

Phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase

C

C

H


O

CO2

C
C

O

C

O

OH


O

C

O

C

O

O
Phosphoenolpyruvate

PO32

Pyruvate–
phosphate
dikinase

AMP

PPi

ATP

Pi

H

C

OH

C

O

CO2

Calvin
cycle

O

Malate

CH2

O



CH2

O

Oxaloacetate

CO2



CH2
O

Bundle sheath cell

O

O
NADP

CH2

Pi

345

CH3

Malate

CH3

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

O

O

Pyruvate

Pyruvate

NADP

NADPH  H

346

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

carbon compound. The enzyme that catalyzes this reaction,
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, is found almost exclusively in C4 plants and unlike rubisco is insensitive to O2.
The overall reaction from pyruvate to oxaloacetate involves
the hydrolysis of one phosphoanhydride bond in ATP and
has a negative G. Therefore, CO2 fixation will proceed
even when the CO2 concentration is low. The oxaloacetate
formed in mesophyll cells is reduced to malate, which is
transferred, by a special transporter, to the bundle sheath
cells, where the CO2 is released by decarboxylation and enters the Calvin cycle (Figure 8-44b).
Because of the transport of CO2 from mesophyll cells, the
CO2 concentration in the bundle sheath cells of C4 plants is
much higher than it is in the normal atmosphere. Bundle
sheath cells are also unusual in that they lack PSII and carry
out only cyclic electron flow catalyzed by PSI, so no O2 is
evolved. The high CO2 and reduced O2 concentrations in the
bundle sheath cells favor the fixation of CO2 by rubisco to
(a)

form 3-phosphoglycerate and inhibit the utilization of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate in photorespiration.
In contrast, the high O2 concentration in the atmosphere favors photorespiration in the mesophyll cells of C3 plants (pathway 2 in Figure 8-43); as a result, as much as 50 percent of the
carbon fixed by rubisco may be reoxidized to CO2 in C3 plants.
C4 plants are superior to C3 plants in utilizing the available
CO2, since the C4 enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
has a higher affinity for CO2 than does rubisco in the Calvin
cycle. However, one phosphodiester bond of ATP is consumed
in the cyclic C4 process (to generate phosphoenolpyruvate from
pyruvate); thus the overall efficiency of the photosynthetic production of sugars from NADPH and ATP is lower than it is in
C3 plants, which use only the Calvin cycle for CO2 fixation.
Nonetheless, the net rates of photosynthesis for C4 grasses,
such as corn or sugar cane, can be two to three times the rates
for otherwise similar C3 grasses, such as wheat, rice, or oats,
owing to the elimination of losses from photorespiration.
(b)
Mesophyll cell
(photosynthetic
source of sucrose)

H2O

Loss of water by
transpiration

Photosynthesis

H2O

CO2

High
osmotic
pressure

Chloroplast
Sucrose
Companion cell

CO2
H2O

Plasmodesmata
Sucrose

Upward
water movement
in acellular xylem

Sieve plate

Sucrose and water
movement
in cellular phloem

Sieve-tube cell

Absorption by
root cells
H2O,

K+,

Na+,

Root cells
("sink" of sucrose)

Low
osmotic
pressure

Cl−

H2O

Xylem
vessel

▲ FIGURE 8-45 Schematic diagrams of the two vascular
systems—xylem and phloem—in higher plants, showing the
transport of water (blue) and sucrose (red). (a) Water and salts
enter the xylem through the roots. Water is lost by evaporation,
mainly through the leaves, creating a suction pressure that draws
the water and dissolved salts upward through the xylem. The
phloem is used to conduct dissolved sucrose, produced in the
leaves, to other parts of the plant. (b) Enlarged view illustrates
the mechanism of sucrose flow in a higher plant. Sucrose is
actively transported from mesophyll cells into companion cells,

Phloem
vessel

and then moves through plasmodesmata into the sieve-tube
cells that constitute the phloem vessels. The resulting increase
in osmotic pressure within the phloem causes water carried in
xylem vessels to enter the phloem by osmotic flow. Root cells
and other nonphotosynthetic cells remove sucrose from the
phloem by active transport and metabolize it. This lowers the
osmotic pressure in the phloem, causing water to exit the
phloem. These differences in osmotic pressure in the phloem
between the source and the sink of sucrose provide the force
that drives sucrose through the phloem.

Key Terms

Sucrose Is Transported from Leaves Through
the Phloem to All Plant Tissues
Of the two carbohydrate products of photosynthesis, starch
remains in the mesophyll cells of C3 plants and the bundle
sheaf cells in C4 plants. In these cells, starch is subjected to
glycolysis, mainly in the dark, forming ATP, NADH, and
small molecules that are used as building blocks for the synthesis of amino acids, lipids, and other cellular constituents.
Sucrose, in contrast, is exported from the photosynthetic
cells and transported throughout the plant. The vascular system used by higher plants to transport water, ions, sucrose,
and other water-soluble substances has two components: the
xylem and the phloem, which generally are grouped together
in the vascular bundle (see Figure 8-44).
As illustrated in Figure 8-45a, the xylem conducts salts
and water from the roots through the stems to the leaves.
Water transported upward through the xylem is lost from the
plant by evaporation, primarily from the leaves. In young
plants the xylem is built of cells interconnected by plasmodesmata, but in mature tissues the cell body degenerates, leaving only the cell walls. The phloem, in contrast, transports
dissolved sucrose and organic molecules such as amino acids
from their sites of origin in leaves to tissues throughout the
plant; water also is transported downward in the phloem.
A phloem vessel consists of long, narrow cells, called
sieve-tube cells, interconnected by sieve plates, a type of cell
wall that contains many plasmodesmata and is highly perforated (Figure 8-45b). Numerous plasmodesmata also connect
the sieve-tube cells to companion cells, which line the phloem
vessels, and mesophyll cells to companion cells. Sieve-tube
cells have lost their nuclei and most other organelles but retain a water-permeable plasma membrane and cytoplasm,
through which sucrose and water move. In effect, the sievetube cells form one continuous tube of cytosol that extends
throughout the plant. Differences in osmotic strength cause
the movement of sucrose from the photosynthetic mesophyll
cells in the leaves, through the phloem, to the roots and other
nonphotosynthetic tissues that catabolize sucrose.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 8.6

action catalyzed by rubisco that is favored at low CO2 and
high O2 pressures (see Figure 8-43).
■ In C4 plants, CO2 is fixed initially in the outer mesophyll cells by reaction with phosphoenolpyruvate. The
four-carbon molecules so generated are shuttled to the interior bundle sheath cells, where the CO2 is released and
then used in the Calvin cycle. The rate of photorespiration
in C4 plants is much lower than in C3 plants.

Sucrose from photosynthetic cells is transported through
the phloem to nonphotosynthetic parts of the plant. Osmotic pressure differences provide the force that drives sucrose transport (see Figure 8-45).

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
Although the overall processes of photosynthesis and mitochondrial oxidation are well understood, many important
details remain to be uncovered by a new generation of scientists. For example, little is known about how complexes I
and IV in mitochondria couple proton and electron movements to create a proton-motive force. Similarly, although
the binding-change mechanism for ATP synthesis by the F0F1
complex is now generally accepted, we do not understand
how conformational changes in each subunit are coupled
to the cyclical binding of ADP and Pi, formation of ATP, and
then release of ATP. Many questions also remain about the
structure and function of transport proteins in the inner mitochondrial and chloroplast membranes that play key roles
in oxidative phosphorylation and photosynthesis. Molecular
analysis of such membrane proteins is difficult, and new
types of techniques will be needed to elucidate the details of
their structure and operation.
We now know that release of cytochrome c and other
proteins from the intermembrane space of mitochondria into
the cytosol plays a major role in triggering apoptosis (Chapter 22). Certain members of the Bcl-2 family of apoptotic
proteins and ion channels localized in part to the outer mitochondrial membrane participate in this process. Yet much
remains to be learned about the structure of these proteins in
the mitochondrial membrane, their normal functions in cell
metabolism, and the alterations that lead to apoptosis.

CO2 Metabolism During Photosynthesis
In the Calvin cycle, CO2 is fixed into organic molecules in a series of reactions that occur in the chloroplast
stroma. The initial reaction, catalyzed by rubisco, forms
a three-carbon intermediate. Some of the glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate generated in the cycle is transported to the
cytosol and converted to sucrose (see Figure 8-42).

■

The light-dependent activation of several Calvin cycle
enzymes and other mechanisms increases fixation of CO2
in the light.
■

■ In C3 plants, much of the CO2 fixed by the Calvin cycle is lost as the result of photorespiration, a wasteful re-

347

KEY TERMS
aerobic oxidation 301
ATP synthase 302
C4 pathway 345
Calvin cycle 342
cellular respiration 307
chemiosmosis 302
chlorophylls 331
chloroplasts 302

citric acid cycle 309
cytochromes 318
electron carriers 302
endosymbiont
hypothesis 302
F0F1 complex 302
glycolysis 301
mitochondria 301

348

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

oxidative
phosphorylation 316
photoelectron transport 334
photorespiration 345
photosynthesis 301
photosystems 333
proton-motive force 302
Q cycle 323

respiratory (electrontransport) chain 310
respiratory control 330
rubisco 342
substrate-level
phosphorylation 304
thylakoids 331
uncouplers 330

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. The proton motive force (pmf) is essential for both mitochondrial and chloroplast function. What produces the
pmf, and what is its relationship to ATP?
2. The mitochondrial inner membrane exhibits all of the
fundamental characteristics of a typical cell membrane, but it
also has several unique characteristics that are closely associated with its role in oxidative phosphorylation. What are
these unique characteristics? How does each contribute to
the function of the inner membrane?
3. Maximal production of ATP from glucose involves the
reactions of glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron
transport chain. Which of these reactions requires O2, and
why? Which, in certain organisms or physiological conditions, can proceed in the absence of O2?
4. Describe how the electrons produced by glycolysis are
delivered to the electron transport chain. What role do
amino acids play in this process? What would be the consequence for overall ATP yield per glucose molecule if a mutation inactivated this delivery system? What would be the
longer-term consequence for the activity of the glycolytic
pathway?
5. Each of the cytochromes in the mitochondria contains
prosthetic groups. What is a prosthetic group? Which type of
prosthetic group is associated with the cytochromes? What
property of the various cytochromes ensures unidirectional
electron flow along the electron transport chain?
6. It is estimated that each electron pair donated by NADH
leads to the synthesis of approximately three ATP molecules,
while each electron pair donated by FADH2 leads to the synthesis of approximately two ATP molecules. What is the underlying reason for the difference in yield for electrons
donated by FADH2 versus NADH?
7. Much of our understanding of ATP synthase is derived
from research on aerobic bacteria. What makes these organisms useful for this research? Where do the reactions of glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transport chain
occur in these organisms? Where is the pmf generated in aerobic bacteria? What other cellular processes depend on the
pmf in these organisms?

8. An important function of the mitochondrial inner membrane is to provide a selectively permeable barrier to the
movement of water-soluble molecules and thus generate different chemical environments on either side of the membrane. However, many of the substrates and products of
oxidative phosphorylation are water-soluble and must cross
the inner membrane. How does this transport occur?
9. The Q cycle plays a major role in the electron transport
chain of mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria. What is
the function of the Q cycle, and how does it carry out this
function? What electron transport train components participate in the Q cycle in mitochondria, in purple bacteria, and
in chloroplasts?
10. Write the overall reaction of oxygen-generating photosynthesis. Explain the following statement: the O2 generated
by photosynthesis is simply a by-product of the reaction’s
generation of carbohydrates and ATP.
11. Photosynthesis can be divided into multiple stages.
What are the stages of photosynthesis, and where does each
occur within the chloroplast? Where is the sucrose produced
by photosynthesis generated?
12. The photosystems responsible for absorption of light energy are composed of two linked components, the reaction
center and an antenna complex. What is the pigment composition and role of each in the process of light absorption?
What evidence exists that the pigments found in these components are involved in photosynthesis?
13. Photosynthesis in green and purple bacteria does not
produce O2. Why? How can these organisms still use photosynthesis to produce ATP? What molecules serve as electron donors in these organisms?
14. Chloroplasts contain two photosystems. What is the
function of each? For linear electron flow, diagram the
flow of electrons from photon absorption to NADPH formation. What does the energy stored in the form of
NADPH synthesize?
15. The Calvin cycle reactions that fix CO2 do not function
in the dark. What are the likely reasons for this? How are
these reactions regulated by light?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
A proton gradient can be analyzed with fluorescent dyes
whose emission intensity profiles depend on pH. One of the
most useful dyes for measuring the pH gradient across
mitochondrial membranes is the membrane-impermeant,
water-soluble fluorophore 2,7-bis-(2-carboxyethyl)-5(6)carboxyfluorescein (BCECF). The effect of pH on the emission intensity of BCECF, excited at 505 nm, is shown in the
accompanying figure. In one study, sealed vesicles containing
this compound were prepared by mixing unsealed, isolated

References

inner mitochondrial membranes with BCECF; after resealing
of the membranes, the vesicles were collected by centrifugation and then resuspended in nonfluorescent medium.
pH 8.0

Emission intensity

pH 7.4

pH 7.0

pH 6.7

349

Company. Contains an excellent discussion of the reaction mechanisms of key enzymes.
Fothergill-Gilmore, L. A., and P. A. Michels. 1993. Evolution of
glycolysis. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 59:105–135.
Guest, J. R., and G. C. Russell. 1992. Complexes and complexities of the citric acid cycle in Escherichia coli. Curr. Top. Cell Reg.
33:231–247.
Krebs, H. A. 1970. The history of the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Perspect. Biol. Med. 14:154–170.
Mannaerts, G. P., and P. P. Van Veldhoven. 1993. Metabolic
pathways in mammalian peroxisomes. Biochimie 75:147–158.
Nelson, D. L., and M. M. Cox. 2000. Lehninger Principles of
Biochemistry. Worth, chaps. 14–17, 19.
Pilkis, S. J., T. H. Claus, I. J. Kurland, and A. J. Lange. 1995.
6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase: a metabolic
signaling enzyme. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 64:799–835.
Rasmussen, B., and R. Wolfe. 1999. Regulation of fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle. Ann. Rev. Nutrition 19:463–484.
Velot, C., M. Mixon, M. Teige, and P. Srere. 1997. Model of a
quinary structure between Krebs TCA cycle enzymes: a model for
the metabolon. Biochemistry 36:14271–14276.

pH 6.3

450

500

600
550
Wavelength (nm)

650

a. When these vesicles were incubated in a physiological
buffer containing NADH, ADP, Pi, and O2, the fluorescence
of BCECF trapped inside gradually decreased in intensity.
What does this decrease in fluorescent intensity suggest
about this vesicular preparation?
b. How would you expect the concentrations of ADP, Pi,
and O2 to change during the course of the experiment described in part a? Why?
c. After the vesicles were incubated in buffer containing
ADP, Pi, and O2 for a period of time, addition of dinitrophenol caused an increase in BCECF fluorescence. In contrast,
addition of valinomycin produced only a small transient effect. Explain these findings.
d. Predict the outcome of an experiment performed as described in part a if brown-fat tissue was used as a source of
unsealed, isolated inner mitochondrial membranes. Explain
your answer.

REFERENCES

Oxidation of Glucose and Fatty Acids to CO2
Berg, J., J. Tymoczko, and L. Stryer. 2002. Biochemistry, 5th ed.
W. H. Freeman and Company, chaps. 16 and 17.
Depre, C., M. Rider, and L. Hue. 1998. Mechanisms of control
of heart glycolysis. Eur. J. Biochem. 258:277–290.
Fell, D. 1997. Understanding the Control of Metabolism. Portland Press.
Fersht, A. 1999. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A
Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein Folding. W. H. Freeman and

Electron Transport and Generation
of the Proton-Motive Force
Babcock, G. 1999. How oxygen is activated and reduced in respiration. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 96:12971–12973.
Beinert, H., R. Holm, and E. Münck. 1997. Iron-sulfur
clusters: nature’s modular, multipurpose structures. Science
277:653–659.
Brandt, U., and B. Trumpower. 1994. The protonmotive Q cycle
in mitochondria and bacteria. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol.
29:165–197.
Darrouzet, E., C. Moser, P. L. Dutton, and F. Daldal. 2001. Large
scale domain movement in cytochrome bc1: a new device for electron transfer in proteins. Trends Biochem. Sci. 26:445–451.
Grigorieff, N. 1999. Structure of the respiratory
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I). Curr. Opin. Struc.
Biol. 9:476–483.
Michel, H., J. Behr, A. Harrenga, and A. Kannt. 1998. Cytochrome c oxidase. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struc. 27:329–356.
Mitchell, P. 1979. Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its
chemiosmotic consequences. Science 206:1148–1159. (Nobel Prize
Lecture.)
Ramirez, B. E., B. Malmström, J. R. Winkler, and H. B. Gray.
1995. The currents of life: the terminal electron-transfer complex of
respiration. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 92:11949–11951.
Ruitenberg, M., et al. 2002. Reduction of cytochrome c oxidase
by a second electron leads to proton translocation. Nature
417:99–102.
Saraste, M. 1999. Oxidative phosphorylation at the fin de siecle.
Science 283:1488–1492.
Scheffler, I. 1999. Mitochondria. Wiley.
Schultz, B., and S. Chan. 2001. Structures and protonpumping strategies of mitochondrial respiratory enzymes. Ann. Rev.
Biophys. Biomol. Struc. 30:23–65.
Tsukihara, T., et al. 1996. The whole structure of the
13-subunit oxidized cytochrome c oxidase at 2.8 Å. Science
272:1136–1144.
Walker, J. E. 1995. Determination of the structures of respiratory enzyme complexes from mammalian mitochondria. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1271:221–227.
Xia, D., et al. 1997. Crystal structure of the cytochrome bc1
complex from bovine heart mitochondria. Science 277:60–66.

350

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

Zaslavsky, D., and R. Gennis. 2000. Proton pumping by
cytochrome oxidase: progress and postulates. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1458:164–179.
Zhang, Z., et al. 1998. Electron transfer by domain movement
in cytochrome bc1. Nature 392:677–684.

Harnessing the Proton-Motive Force
for Energy-Requiring Processes
Bianchet, M. A., J. Hullihen, P. Pedersen, and M. Amzel.
The 2.8-Å structure of rat liver F1-ATPase: configuration of a
critical intermediate in ATP synthesis/hydrolysis. Proc. Nat’l. Acad.
Sci. USA 95:11065–11070.
Boyer, P. D. 1989. A perspective of the binding change
mechanism for ATP synthesis. FASEB J. 3:2164–2178.
Boyer, P. D. 1997. The ATP synthase—a splendid molecular machine. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 66:717–749.
Capaldi, R., and R. Aggeler. 2002. Mechanism of the
F0F1-type ATP synthase—a biological rotary motor. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 27:154–160.
Elston, T., H. Wang, and G. Oster. 1998. Energy transduction
in ATP synthase. Nature 391:510–512.
Kinosita, K., et al. 1998. F1-ATPase: a rotary motor made of
a single molecule. Cell 93:21–24.
Klingenberg, M., and S. Huang. 1999. Structure and function of
the uncoupling protein from brown adipose tissue. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1415:271–296.
Tsunoda, S., R. Aggeler, M. Yoshida, and R. Capaldi. 2001. Rotation of the c subunit oligomer in fully functional F0F1 ATP synthase. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 98:898–902.
Yasuda, R., et al. 2001. Resolution of distinct rotational
substeps by submillisecond kinetic analysis of F1- ATPase. Nature
410:898–904.

Deisenhofer, J., and H. Michel. 1989. The photosynthetic
reaction center from the purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas
viridis. Science 245:1463–1473. (Nobel Prize Lecture.)
Deisenhofer, J., and H. Michel. 1991. Structures of bacterial photosynthetic reaction centers. Ann. Rev. Cell Biol. 7:1–23.
Golbeck, J. H. 1993. Shared thematic elements in photochemical reaction centers. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 90:
1642–1646.
Haldrup, A., P. Jensen, C. Lunde, and H. Scheller. 2001.
Balance of power: a view of the mechanism of photosynthetic state
transitions. Trends Plant Sci. 6:301–305.
Hankamer, B., J. Barber, and E. Boekema. 1997. Structure
and membrane organization of photosystem II from green plants.
Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 48:641–672.
Heathcote, P., P. Fyfe, and M. Jones. 2002. Reaction centres: the
structure and evolution of biological solar power. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 27:79–87.
Horton, P., A. Ruban, and R. Walters. 1996. Regulation of light
harvesting in green plants. Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.
47:655–684.
Jordan, P., et al. 2001 Three-dimensional structure of cyanobacterial photosystem I at 2.5 Å resolution. Nature 411:909–917.
Kühlbrandt, W. 2001. Chlorophylls galore. Nature
411:896–898.
Martin, J. L., and M. H. Vos. 1992. Femtosecond biology. Ann.
Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struc. 21:199–222.
Penner-Hahn, J. 1998. Structural characterization of the Mn site
in the photosynthetic oxygen-evolving complex. Struc. and Bonding
90:1–36.
Tommos, C., and G. Babcock. 1998. Oxygen production in nature: a light-driven metalloradical enzyme process. Accounts Chem.
Res. 31:18–25.

Photosynthetic Stages and Light-Absorbing Pigments

CO2 Metabolism During Photosynthesis

Blankenship, R. E. 2002. Molecular Mechanisms of Photosynthesis. Blackwell.
Deisenhofer, J., and J. R. Norris, eds. 1993. The Photosynthetic
Reaction Center, vols. 1 and 2. Academic Press.
Govindjee, and W. J. Coleman. 1990. How plants make
oxygen. Sci. Am. 262(2):50–58.
Harold, F. M. 1986. The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics.
W. H. Freeman and Company, chap. 8.
McDermott, G., et al. 1995. Crystal structure of an integral
membrane light-harvesting complex from photosynthetic bacteria.
Nature 364:517.
Prince, R. 1996. Photosynthesis: the Z-scheme revisited. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 21:121–122.
Wollman, F. A. 2001. State transitions reveal the dynamics and
flexibility of the photosynthetic apparatus. EMBO J. 20:3623–3630.

Bassham, J. A. 1962. The path of carbon in photosynthesis. Sci.
Am. 206(6):88–100.
Buchanan, B. B. 1991. Regulation of CO2 assimilation in
oxygenic photosynthesis: the ferredoxin/thioredoxin system.
Perspective on its discovery, present status, and future development.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 288:1–9.
Portis, A. 1992. Regulation of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase activity. Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant
Mol. Biol. 43:415–437.
Rawsthorne, S. 1992. Towards an understanding of C3-C4 photosynthesis. Essays Biochem. 27:135–146.
Rokka, A., I. Zhang, and E.-M. Aro. 2001. Rubisco activase: an
enzyme with a temperature-dependent dual function? Plant J.
25:463–472.
Sage, R., and J. Colemana. 2001. Effects of low atmospheric
CO2 on plants: more than a thing of the past. Trends Plant Sci.
6:18–24.
Schneider, G., Y. Lindqvist, and C. I. Branden. 1992. Rubisco:
structure and mechanism. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struc.
21:119–153.
Wolosiuk, R. A., M. A. Ballicora, and K. Hagelin. 1993.
The reductive pentose phosphate cycle for photosynthetic CO2
assimilation: enzyme modulation. FASEB J. 7:622–637.

Molecular Analysis of Photosystems
Allen, J. F. 2002. Photosynthesis of ATP—electrons, proton
pumps, rotors, and poise. Cell 110:273–276.
Aro, E. M., I. Virgin, and B. Andersson. 1993. Photoinhibition
of photosystem II. Inactivation, protein damage, and turnover.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1143:113–134.

8.1 • Last A Head

351

352

CHAPTER 8 • Cellular Energetics

8.1 • Last A Head

353

9
MOLECULAR GENETIC
TECHNIQUES AND GENOMICS

The effect of mutations on Drosophila development. Scanning electron micrographs of the eye from (left) a
wild-type fly, (middle) a fly carrying a dominant developmental mutation produced by recombinant DNA
methods, and (right) a fly carrying a suppresor mutation that partially reverses the effect of the dominant
mutation. [Courtesy of Ilaria Rebay, Whitehead Institute, MIT.]

I

n previous chapters, we were introduced to the variety of
tasks that proteins perform in biological systems. How
some proteins carry out their specific tasks is described
in detail in later chapters. In studying a newly discovered
protein, cell biologists usually begin by asking what is its
function, where is it located, and what is its structure? To answer these questions, investigators employ three tools: the
gene that encodes the protein, a mutant cell line or organism that lacks the function of the protein, and a source of the
purified protein for biochemical studies. In this chapter we
consider various aspects of two basic experimental strategies for obtaining all three tools (Figure 9-1).
The first strategy, often referred to as classical genetics,
begins with isolation of a mutant that appears to be defective
in some process of interest. Genetic methods then are used to

OUTLINE
9.1 Genetic Analysis of Mutations to Identify
and Study Genes
9.2 DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods
9.3 Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA
Fragments
9.4 Genomics: Genome-wide Analysis of Gene
Structure and Expression
9.5 Inactivating the Function of Specific Genes
in Eukaryotes
9.6 Identifying and Locating Human Disease Genes
351

352

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

 FIGURE 9-1 Overview of two
strategies for determining the function,
location, and primary structure of
proteins. A mutant organism is the starting
point for the classical genetic strategy
(green arrows). The reverse strategy (orange
arrows) begins with biochemical isolation
of a protein or identification of a putative
protein based on analysis of stored gene and
protein sequences. In both strategies, the
actual gene is isolated from a DNA library,
a large collection of cloned DNA sequences
representing an organism’s genome. Once
a cloned gene is isolated, it can be used to
produce the encoded protein in bacterial or
eukaryotic expression systems. Alternatively,
a cloned gene can be inactivated by one of
various techniques and used to generate
mutant cells or organisms.

Mutant organism/cell
Comparison of mutant and
wild-type function
Genetic analysis
Screening of DNA library

Gene inactivation

Cloned gene
DNA sequencing
Sequence comparisons with known proteins
Evolutionary relationships
Sequencing of protein or
database search to identify
putative protein
Isolation of corresponding
gene

Expression in cultured
cells

identify the affected gene, which subsequently is isolated
from an appropriate DNA library, a large collection of individual DNA sequences representing all or part of an organism’s genome. The isolated gene can be manipulated to
produce large quantities of the protein for biochemical experiments and to design probes for studies of where and
when the encoded protein is expressed in an organism. The
second strategy follows essentially the same steps as the
classical approach but in reverse order, beginning with isolation of an interesting protein or its identification based on
analysis of an organism’s genomic sequence. Once the
corresponding gene has been isolated from a DNA library,
the gene can be altered and then reinserted into an organism.
By observing the effects of the altered gene on the organism,
researchers often can infer the function of the normal
protein.
An important component in both strategies for studying
a protein and its biological function is isolation of the corresponding gene. Thus we discuss various techniques by
which researchers can isolate, sequence, and manipulate specific regions of an organism’s DNA. The extensive collections
of DNA sequences that have been amassed in recent years
has given birth to a new field of study called genomics, the
molecular characterization of whole genomes and overall
patterns of gene expression. Several examples of the types
of information available from such genome-wide analysis
also are presented.

9.1 Genetic Analysis of Mutations
to Identify and Study Genes
As described in Chapter 4, the information encoded in the
DNA sequence of genes specifies the sequence and therefore

Protein
Localization
Biochemical studies
Determination of structure

the structure and function of every protein molecule in a cell.
The power of genetics as a tool for studying cells and organisms lies in the ability of researchers to selectively alter every
copy of just one type of protein in a cell by making a change
in the gene for that protein. Genetic analyses of mutants defective in a particular process can reveal (a) new genes required for the process to occur; (b) the order in which gene
products act in the process; and (c) whether the proteins encoded by different genes interact with one another. Before
seeing how genetic studies of this type can provide insights
into the mechanism of complicated cellular or developmental
process, we first explain some basic genetic terms used
throughout our discussion.
The different forms, or variants, of a gene are referred
to as alleles. Geneticists commonly refer to the numerous
naturally occurring genetic variants that exist in populations,
particularly human populations, as alleles. The term mutation usually is reserved for instances in which an allele is
known to have been newly formed, such as after treatment of
an experimental organism with a mutagen, an agent that
causes a heritable change in the DNA sequence.
Strictly speaking, the particular set of alleles for all the
genes carried by an individual is its genotype. However, this
term also is used in a more restricted sense to denote just the
alleles of the particular gene or genes under examination. For
experimental organisms, the term wild type often is used to
designate a standard genotype for use as a reference in breeding experiments. Thus the normal, nonmutant allele will usually be designated as the wild type. Because of the enormous
naturally occurring allelic variation that exists in human
populations, the term wild type usually denotes an allele that
is present at a much higher frequency than any of the other
possible alternatives.
Geneticists draw an important distinction between the
genotype and the phenotype of an organism. The phenotype

9.1 • Genetic Analysis of Mutations to Identify and Study Genes

refers to all the physical attributes or traits of an individual
that are the consequence of a given genotype. In practice,
however, the term phenotype often is used to denote the
physical consequences that result from just the alleles that
are under experimental study. Readily observable phenotypic characteristics are critical in the genetic analysis of
mutations.

Recessive and Dominant Mutant Alleles Generally
Have Opposite Effects on Gene Function
A fundamental genetic difference between experimental organisms is whether their cells carry a single set of chromosomes or two copies of each chromosome. The former are
referred to as haploid; the latter, as diploid. Complex multicellular organisms (e.g., fruit flies, mice, humans) are diploid,
whereas many simple unicellular organisms are haploid.
Some organisms, notably the yeast Saccharomyces, can exist
in either haploid or diploid states. Many cancer cells and the
normal cells of some organisms, both plants and animals,
carry more than two copies of each chromosome. However,
our discussion of genetic techniques and analysis relates to
diploid organisms, including diploid yeasts.
Since diploid organisms carry two copies of each gene,
they may carry identical alleles, that is, be homozygous for
a gene, or carry different alleles, that is, be heterozygous for
a gene. A recessive mutant allele is defined as one in which
both alleles must be mutant in order for the mutant phenotype to be observed; that is, the individual must be homozygous for the mutant allele to show the mutant phenotype. In
contrast, the phenotypic consequences of a dominant mutant
allele are observed in a heterozygous individual carrying one
mutant and one wild-type allele (Figure 9-2).
Whether a mutant allele is recessive or dominant provides valuable information about the function of the affected
gene and the nature of the causative mutation. Recessive alleles usually result from a mutation that inactivates the affected gene, leading to a partial or complete loss of function.
Such recessive mutations may remove part of or the entire
gene from the chromosome, disrupt expression of the gene,
or alter the structure of the encoded protein, thereby altering its function. Conversely, dominant alleles are often the
consequence of a mutation that causes some kind of gain
of function. Such dominant mutations may increase the ac-

DIPLOID
GENOTYPE
DIPLOID
PHENOTYPE

tivity of the encoded protein, confer a new activity on it,
or lead to its inappropriate spatial or temporal pattern of
expression.
Dominant mutations in certain genes, however, are associated with a loss of function. For instance, some genes are
haplo-insufficient, meaning that both alleles are required for
normal function. Removing or inactivating a single allele in
such a gene leads to a mutant phenotype. In other rare instances a dominant mutation in one allele may lead to a
structural change in the protein that interferes with the function of the wild-type protein encoded by the other allele. This
type of mutation, referred to as a dominant negative, produces a phenotype similar to that obtained from a loss-offunction mutation.
Some alleles can exhibit both recessive and dominant properties. In such cases, statements about
whether an allele is dominant or recessive must
specify the phenotype. For example, the allele of the hemoglobin gene in humans designated Hbs has more than one
phenotypic consequence. Individuals who are homozygous
for this allele (Hbs/Hbs) have the debilitating disease sicklecell anemia, but heterozygous individuals (Hbs/Hba) do not
have the disease. Therefore, Hbs is recessive for the trait of
sickle-cell disease. On the other hand, heterozygous
(Hbs/Hba) individuals are more resistant to malaria than
homozygous (Hba/Hba) individuals, revealing that Hbs is
dominant for the trait of malaria resistance. ❚
A commonly used agent for inducing mutations (mutagenesis) in experimental organisms is ethylmethane sulfonate (EMS). Although this mutagen can alter DNA
sequences in several ways, one of its most common effects
is to chemically modify guanine bases in DNA, ultimately
leading to the conversion of a G C base pair into an A T
base pair. Such an alteration in the sequence of a gene,
which involves only a single base pair, is known as a point
mutation. A silent point mutation causes no change in the
amino acid sequence or activity of a gene’s encoded protein.
However, observable phenotypic consequences due to
changes in a protein’s activity can arise from point mutations that result in substitution of one amino acid for another (missense mutation), introduction of a premature stop
codon (nonsense mutation), or a change in the reading

Wild type

Dominant

Recessive

Wild type

Mutant

Wild type

▲ FIGURE 9-2 Effects of recessive and dominant mutant
alleles on phenotype in diploid organisms. Only one copy of a
dominant allele is sufficient to produce a mutant phenotype,
whereas both copies of a recessive allele must be present to

353

Mutant

cause a mutant phenotype. Recessive mutations usually cause a
loss of function; dominant mutations usually cause a gain of
function or an altered function.

354

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

frame of a gene (frameshift mutation). Because alterations in
the DNA sequence leading to a decrease in protein activity
are much more likely than alterations leading to an increase
or qualitative change in protein activity, mutagenesis usually
produces many more recessive mutations than dominant
mutations.

MITOTIC CELL
DIVISION

Segregation of Mutations in Breeding
Experiments Reveals Their Dominance
or Recessivity
Geneticists exploit the normal life cycle of an organism to
test for the dominance or recessivity of alleles. To see how

Paternal
homolog

MEIOTIC CELL
DIVISION

Paternal
homolog

Maternal
homolog
Somatic cell (2n)

Maternal
homolog
Premeiotic germ cell (2n)

DNA replication

DNA replication

Sister
chromatids

Sister
chromatids

Homologous chromosomes
align
Mitotic
apparatus

Overview Animation: Life Cycle of a Cell

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Cell division

Mitotic
apparatus

Synapsis
of homologs

Cell division I

Daughter cells (2n)

▲ FIGURE 9-3 Comparison of mitosis and meiosis. Both
somatic cells and premeiotic germ cells have two copies of each
chromosome (2n), one maternal and one paternal. In mitosis, the
replicated chromosomes, each composed of two sister chromatids,
align at the cell center in such a way that both daughter cells
receive a maternal and paternal homolog of each morphologic type
of chromosome. During the first meiotic division, however, each
replicated chromosome pairs with its homologous partner at the cell
center; this pairing off is referred to as synapsis. One replicated
chromosome of each morphologic type then goes into one daughter
cell, and the other goes into the other cell in a random fashion. The
resulting cells undergo a second division without intervening DNA
replication, with the sister chromatids of each morphologic type
being apportioned to the daughter cells. Each diploid cell that
undergoes meiosis produces four haploid (1n) cells.

Cell division II

Gametes (1n)

355

9.1 • Genetic Analysis of Mutations to Identify and Study Genes

this is done, we need first to review the type of cell division
that gives rise to gametes (sperm and egg cells in higher
plants and animals). Whereas the body (somatic) cells of
most multicellular organisms divide by mitosis, the germ
cells that give rise to gametes undergo meiosis. Like somatic
cells, premeiotic germ cells are diploid, containing two homologs of each morphologic type of chromosome. The two
homologs constituting each pair of homologous chromosomes are descended from different parents, and thus their
genes may exist in different allelic forms. Figure 9-3 depicts
the major events in mitotic and meiotic cell division. In mitosis DNA replication is always followed by cell division,
yielding two diploid daughter cells. In meiosis one round of
DNA replication is followed by two separate cell divisions,
yielding four haploid (1n) cells that contain only one chromosome of each homologous pair. The apportionment, or
segregation, of the replicated homologous chromosomes to
daughter cells during the first meiotic division is random;
that is, maternally and paternally derived homologs segregate independently, yielding daughter cells with different
mixes of paternal and maternal chromosomes.
As a way to avoid unwanted complexity, geneticists usually strive to begin breeding experiments with strains that are
homozygous for the genes under examination. In such truebreeding strains, every individual will receive the same allele
from each parent and therefore the composition of alleles
will not change from one generation to the next. When a
true-breeding mutant strain is mated to a true-breeding wildtype strain, all the first filial (F1) progeny will be heterozygous (Figure 9-4). If the F1 progeny exhibit the mutant trait,
then the mutant allele is dominant; if the F1 progeny exhibit
the wild-type trait, then the mutant is recessive. Further
crossing between F1 individuals will also reveal different patterns of inheritance according to whether the mutation is
dominant or recessive. When F1 individuals that are heterozygous for a dominant allele are crossed among themselves, three-fourths of the resulting F2 progeny will exhibit
the mutant trait. In contrast, when F1 individuals that are
heterozygous for a recessive allele are crossed among themselves, only one-fourth of the resulting F2 progeny will exhibit the mutant trait.
As noted earlier, the yeast Saccharomyces, an important
experimental organism, can exist in either a haploid or a
diploid state. In these unicellular eukaryotes, crosses between
haploid cells can determine whether a mutant allele is dominant or recessive. Haploid yeast cells, which carry one copy
of each chromosome, can be of two different mating types
known as a and . Haploid cells of opposite mating type can
mate to produce a/ diploids, which carry two copies of each
chromosome. If a new mutation with an observable phenotype is isolated in a haploid strain, the mutant strain can be
mated to a wild-type strain of the opposite mating type to
produce a/ diploids that are heterozygous for the mutant
allele. If these diploids exhibit the mutant trait, then the
mutant allele is dominant, but if the diploids appear as
wild-type, then the mutant allele is recessive. When a/
diploids are placed under starvation conditions, the cells

(a) Segregation of dominant mutation
Mutant

Wild-type

A/ A

a/a

All
A

All
a

Gametes

First filial
generation, F1:
all offspring have
mutant phenotype

Gametes

A/a

A

Second filial
generation, F2:
3/4 of offspring have
mutant phenotype

a

or

A

A/ A

or

a/A

A/a

a

a/a

Mutant

Normal

(b) Segregation of recessive mutation
Mutant

Wild-type

b/ b

B/ B

All
b

All
B

Gametes

First filial
generation, F1;
no offspring have
mutant phenotype

Gametes
Second filial
generation, F2:
1/4 of offspring have
mutant phenotype

b /B

b

or

B

b/ b
Mutant

b

b/B

B/b

or

B

B/ B

Normal

▲ FIGURE 9-4 Segregation patterns of dominant and
recessive mutations in crosses between true-breeding strains
of diploid organisms. All the offspring in the first (F1) generation
are heterozygous. If the mutant allele is dominant, the F1
offspring will exhibit the mutant phenotype, as in part (a). If the
mutant allele is recessive, the F1 offspring will exhibit the
wild-type phenotype, as in part (b). Crossing of the F1
heterozygotes among themselves also produces different
segregation ratios for dominant and recessive mutant alleles in
the F2 generation.

356

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics
Wild type
(type a)

Mutant
(type α)

A

a

2 Incubate at 23 °C for 5 h

(a)
1

Haploid cells of
opposite mating type

Diploid cells:
will not exhibit mutant
phenotype if mutation
is recessive

Add mutagen;
distribute into
smaller aliquots
Yeast in liquid
culture

A/a
(type a/α)

Agar

3

Colonies
4

Sporulation

Haploid spores in tetrad:
2 will be mutant
2 will be wild type

Incubate
at 23 °C

A
Replica-plate
and incubate

a

A

Plate out
individual
aliquots

a

▲ FIGURE 9-5 Segregation of alleles in yeast. Haploid
Saccharomyces cells of opposite mating type (i.e., one of mating
type  and one of mating type a) can mate to produce an a/
diploid. If one haploid carries a dominant mutant allele and the
other carries a recessive wild-type allele of the same gene, the
resulting heterozygous diploid will express the dominant trait.
Under certain conditions, a diploid cell will form a tetrad of four
haploid spores. Two of the spores in the tetrad will express the
recessive trait and two will express the dominant trait.

23 °C
(b)
Wild type

undergo meiosis, giving rise to a tetrad of four haploid
spores, two of type a and two of type . Sporulation of a heterozygous diploid cell yields two spores carrying the mutant
allele and two carrying the wild-type allele (Figure 9-5).
Under appropriate conditions, yeast spores will germinate,
producing vegetative haploid strains of both mating types.
cdc28 mutants

Conditional Mutations Can Be Used to Study
Essential Genes in Yeast
The procedures used to identify and isolate mutants, referred
to as genetic screens, depend on whether the experimental
organism is haploid or diploid and, if the latter, whether the
mutation is recessive or dominant. Genes that encode proteins essential for life are among the most interesting and important ones to study. Since phenotypic expression of
mutations in essential genes leads to death of the individual,
ingenious genetic screens are needed to isolate and maintain
organisms with a lethal mutation.
In haploid yeast cells, essential genes can be studied
through the use of conditional mutations. Among the most
common conditional mutations are temperature-sensitive
mutations, which can be isolated in bacteria and lower eukaryotes but not in warm-blooded eukaryotes. For instance,
a mutant protein may be fully functional at one temperature
(e.g., 23 C) but completely inactive at another temperature
(e.g., 36 C), whereas the normal protein would be fully
functional at both temperatures. A temperature at which the

cdc7 mutants

5

Temperature-sensitive
for growth; growth at 23°,
no growth at 36°

36 °C

9.1 • Genetic Analysis of Mutations to Identify and Study Genes

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-6 Haploid yeasts carrying
temperature-sensitive lethal mutations are maintained at
permissive temperature and analyzed at nonpermissive
temperature. (a) Genetic screen for temperature-sensitive
cell-division cycle (cdc) mutants in yeast. Yeasts that grow and
form colonies at 23 C (permissive temperature) but not at 36 C
(nonpermissive temperature) may carry a lethal mutation that
blocks cell division. (b) Assay of temperature-sensitive colonies for
blocks at specific stages in the cell cycle. Shown here are
micrographs of wild-type yeast and two different temperaturesensitive mutants after incubation at the nonpermissive
temperature for 6 h. Wild-type cells, which continue to grow, can
be seen with all different sizes of buds, reflecting different stages
of the cell cycle. In contrast, cells in the lower two micrographs
exhibit a block at a specific stage in the cell cycle. The cdc28
mutants arrest at a point before emergence of a new bud and
therefore appear as unbudded cells. The cdc7 mutants, which
arrest just before separation of the mother cell and bud (emerging
daughter cell), appear as cells with large buds. [Part (a) see L. H.
Hartwell, 1967, J. Bacteriol. 93:1662; part (b) from L. M. Hereford and L. H.
Hartwell, 1974, J. Mol. Biol. 84:445.]

mutant phenotype is observed is called nonpermissive; a permissive temperature is one at which the mutant phenotype
is not observed even though the mutant allele is present.
Thus mutant strains can be maintained at a permissive temperature and then subcultured at a nonpermissive temperature for analysis of the mutant phenotype.
An example of a particularly important screen for temperature-sensitive mutants in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae comes from the studies of L. H. Hartwell and
colleagues in the late 1960s and early 1970s. They set out
to identify genes important in regulation of the cell cycle during which a cell synthesizes proteins, replicates its DNA, and
then undergoes mitotic cell division, with each daughter cell
receiving a copy of each chromosome. Exponential growth
of a single yeast cell for 20–30 cell divisions forms a visible
yeast colony on solid agar medium. Since mutants with a
complete block in the cell cycle would not be able to form a
colony, conditional mutants were required to study mutations that affect this basic cell process. To screen for such
mutants, the researchers first identified mutagenized yeast
cells that could grow normally at 23 C but that could not
form a colony when placed at 36 C (Figure 9-6a).
Once temperature-sensitive mutants were isolated, further
analysis revealed that they indeed were defective in cell division. In S. cerevisiae, cell division occurs through a budding
process, and the size of the bud, which is easily visualized by
light microscopy, indicates a cell’s position in the cell cycle.
Each of the mutants that could not grow at 36 C was examined by microscopy after several hours at the nonpermissive
temperature. Examination of many different temperaturesensitive mutants revealed that about 1 percent exhibited a
distinct block in the cell cycle. These mutants were therefore
designated cdc (cell-division cycle) mutants. Importantly,
these yeast mutants did not simply fail to grow, as they might

357

if they carried a mutation affecting general cellular metabolism. Rather, at the nonpermissive temperature, the mutants
of interest grew normally for part of the cell cycle but then arrested at a particular stage of the cell cycle, so that many cells
at this stage were seen (Figure 9-6b). Most cdc mutations in
yeast are recessive; that is, when haploid cdc strains are mated
to wild-type haploids, the resulting heterozygous diploids are
neither temperature-sensitive nor defective in cell division.

Recessive Lethal Mutations in Diploids
Can Be Identified by Inbreeding
and Maintained in Heterozygotes
In diploid organisms, phenotypes resulting from recessive
mutations can be observed only in individuals homozygous
for the mutant alleles. Since mutagenesis in a diploid organism typically changes only one allele of a gene, yielding heterozygous mutants, genetic screens must include inbreeding
steps to generate progeny that are homozygous for the mutant alleles. The geneticist H. Muller developed a general and
efficient procedure for carrying out such inbreeding experiments in the fruit fly Drosophila. Recessive lethal mutations
in Drosophila and other diploid organisms can be maintained in heterozygous individuals and their phenotypic consequences analyzed in homozygotes.
The Muller approach was used to great effect by C.
Nüsslein-Volhard and E. Wieschaus, who systematically
screened for recessive lethal mutations affecting embryogenesis in Drosophila. Dead homozygous embryos carrying recessive lethal mutations identified by this screen were
examined under the microscope for specific morphological
defects in the embryos. Current understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying development of multicellular organisms is based, in large part, on the detailed picture of
embryonic development revealed by characterization of these
Drosophila mutants. We will discuss some of the fundamental discoveries based on these genetic studies in Chapter 15.

Complementation Tests Determine Whether
Different Recessive Mutations Are in the
Same Gene
In the genetic approach to studying a particular cellular
process, researchers often isolate multiple recessive mutations that produce the same phenotype. A common test for
determining whether these mutations are in the same gene
or in different genes exploits the phenomenon of genetic
complementation, that is, the restoration of the wild-type
phenotype by mating of two different mutants. If two recessive mutations, a and b, are in the same gene, then a diploid
organism heterozygous for both mutations (i.e., carrying one
a allele and one b allele) will exhibit the mutant phenotype
because neither allele provides a functional copy of the gene.
In contrast, if mutation a and b are in separate genes, then
heterozygotes carrying a single copy of each mutant allele

358

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-7
Complementation analysis determines
whether recessive mutations are in the
same or different genes. Complementation
tests in yeast are performed by mating
haploid a and  cells carrying different
recessive mutations to produce diploid
cells. In the analysis of cdc mutations, pairs
of different haploid temperature-sensitive
cdc strains were systematically mated
and the resulting diploids tested for growth
at the permissive and nonpermissive
temperatures. In this hypothetical example,
the cdcX and cdcY mutants complement
each other and thus have mutations in
different genes, whereas the cdcX and
cdcZ mutants have mutations in the same
gene.

Mate haploids of
opposite mating types
and carrying different
recessive temperaturesensitive cdc mutations

Mutant
(type a)

Mutant
(type α)

Mutant
(type a)

Mutant
(type α)

cdcX

cdcY

cdcX

cdc Z

cdcX/cdcY
(type a/α)

cdcX/cdcZ
(type a/α)
Plate and incubate
at permissive
temperature

Test resulting diploids
for a temperaturesensitive cdc phenotype

23 °C

23 °C
Replica-plate
and incubate
at nonpermissive
temperature

36 °C

Growth

cdcX/
cdcY

PHENOTYPE:

Growth indicates that
mutations cdcX and cdcY
are in different genes
X
Y
Respective wild-type alleles
provide normal function

will not exhibit the mutant phenotype because a wild-type
allele of each gene will also be present. In this case, the mutations are said to complement each other.
Complementation analysis of a set of mutants exhibiting the same phenotype can distinguish the individual genes
in a set of functionally related genes, all of which must
function to produce a given phenotypic trait. For example,
the screen for cdc mutations in Saccharomyces described
above yielded many recessive temperature-sensitive mutants that appeared arrested at the same cell-cycle stage. To
determine how many genes were affected by these mutations, Hartwell and his colleagues performed complementation tests on all of the pair-wise combinations of cdc
mutants following the general protocol outlined in Figure
9-7. These tests identified more than 20 different CDC
genes. The subsequent molecular characterization of the
CDC genes and their encoded proteins, as described in detail in Chapter 21, has provided a framework for understanding how cell division is regulated in organisms ranging
from yeast to humans.

No growth

cdcX/
cdcZ

Wild type
INTERPRETATION:

36 °C

Mutant
Absence of growth
indicates that mutations
cdcX and cdcZ are in the
same gene
X
Z
Both alleles nonfunctional

Double Mutants Are Useful in Assessing
the Order in Which Proteins Function
Based on careful analysis of mutant phenotypes associated
with a particular cellular process, researchers often can deduce the order in which a set of genes and their protein products function. Two general types of processes are amenable
to such analysis: (a) biosynthetic pathways in which a precursor material is converted via one or more intermediates to
a final product and (b) signaling pathways that regulate
other processes and involve the flow of information rather
than chemical intermediates.

Ordering of Biosynthetic Pathways A simple example of
the first type of process is the biosynthesis of a metabolite
such as the amino acid tryptophan in bacteria. In this case,
each of the enzymes required for synthesis of tryptophan catalyzes the conversion of one of the intermediates in the pathway to the next. In E. coli, the genes encoding these enzymes
lie adjacent to one another in the genome, constituting the

9.1 • Genetic Analysis of Mutations to Identify and Study Genes
(a) Analysis of a biosynthetic pathway

A mutation in A accumulates intermediate 1.
A mutation in B accumulates intermediate 2.
PHENOTYPE OF
DOUBLE MUTANT:
INTERPRETATION:

A double mutation in A and B accumulates
intermediate 1.

The reaction catalyzed by A precedes the
reaction catalyzed by B.
A
B
1
2
3

A mutation in A gives repressed reporter expression.
A mutation in B gives constitutive reporter expression.

INTERPRETATION:

A double mutation in A and B gives
repressed reporter expression.

A positively regulates reporter expression
and is negatively regulated by B.
B

−

A

+
Reporter

PHENOTYPE OF
DOUBLE MUTANT:
INTERPRETATION:

A double mutation in A and B gives
constitutive reporter expression.

B negatively regulates reporter expression
and is negatively regulated by A.
A

−

B

clusive ordering of the steps. Double mutants defective in
two steps in the pathway are particularly useful in ordering
such pathways (Figure 9-8a).
In Chapter 17 we discuss the classic use of the doublemutant strategy to help elucidate the secretory pathway. In
this pathway proteins to be secreted from the cell move from
their site of synthesis on the rough endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) to the Golgi complex, then to secretory vesicles, and finally to the cell surface.

Ordering of Signaling Pathways As we learn in later chap-

(b) Analysis of a signaling pathway

PHENOTYPE OF
DOUBLE MUTANT:

359

−

ters, expression of many eukaryotic genes is regulated by signaling pathways that are initiated by extracellular hormones,
growth factors, or other signals. Such signaling pathways
may include numerous components, and double-mutant
analysis often can provide insight into the functions and interactions of these components. The only prerequisite for obtaining useful information from this type of analysis is that
the two mutations must have opposite effects on the output
of the same regulated pathway. Most commonly, one mutation represses expression of a particular reporter gene even
when the signal is present, while another mutation results in
reporter gene expression even when the signal is absent (i.e.,
constitutive expression). As illustrated in Figure 9-8b, two
simple regulatory mechanisms are consistent with such single
mutants, but the double-mutant phenotype can distinguish
between them. This general approach has enabled geneticists
to delineate many of the key steps in a variety of different
regulatory pathways, setting the stage for more specific biochemical assays.

Reporter

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-8 Analysis of double
mutants often can order the steps in biosynthetic or
signaling pathways. When mutations in two different genes
affect the same cellular process but have distinctly different
phenotypes, the phenotype of the double mutant can often
reveal the order in which the two genes must function. (a) In the
case of mutations that affect the same biosynthetic pathway, a
double mutant will accumulate the intermediate immediately
preceding the step catalyzed by the protein that acts earlier in
the wild-type organism. (b) Double-mutant analysis of a signaling
pathway is possible if two mutations have opposite effects on
expression of a reporter gene. In this case, the observed
phenotype of the double mutant provides information about the
order in which the proteins act and whether they are positive or
negative regulators.

trp operon (see Figure 4-12a). The order of action of the different genes for these enzymes, hence the order of the biochemical reactions in the pathway, initially was deduced
from the types of intermediate compounds that accumulated
in each mutant. In the case of complex synthetic pathways,
however, phenotypic analysis of mutants defective in a single step may give ambiguous results that do not permit con-

Genetic Suppression and Synthetic Lethality
Can Reveal Interacting or Redundant Proteins
Two other types of genetic analysis can provide additional
clues about how proteins that function in the same cellular
process may interact with one another in the living cell. Both
of these methods, which are applicable in many experimental organisms, involve the use of double mutants in which the
phenotypic effects of one mutation are changed by the presence of a second mutation.

Suppressor Mutations The first type of analysis is based
on genetic suppression. To understand this phenomenon,
suppose that point mutations lead to structural changes in
one protein (A) that disrupt its ability to associate with another protein (B) involved in the same cellular process. Similarly, mutations in protein B lead to small structural
changes that inhibit its ability to interact with protein A.
Assume, furthermore, that the normal functioning of proteins A and B depends on their interacting. In theory, a specific structural change in protein A might be suppressed by
compensatory changes in protein B, allowing the mutant
proteins to interact. In the rare cases in which such suppressor mutations occur, strains carrying both mutant

360

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

alleles would be normal, whereas strains carrying only one
or the other mutant allele would have a mutant phenotype
(Figure 9-9a).
The observation of genetic suppression in yeast strains
carrying a mutant actin allele (act1-1) and a second mutation (sac6) in another gene provided early evidence for
a direct interaction in vivo between the proteins encoded
by the two genes. Later biochemical studies showed that
these two proteins—Act1 and Sac6—do indeed interact in
the construction of functional actin structures within the
cell.

(a) Suppression
Genotype
Phenotype

AB
Wild type

aB
Mutant

Ab
Mutant

ab
Suppressed
mutant

INTERPRETATION

Synthetic Lethal Mutations Another phenomenon, called
synthetic lethality, produces a phenotypic effect opposite to
that of suppression. In this case, the deleterious effect of one
mutation is greatly exacerbated (rather than suppressed) by
a second mutation in the same or a related gene. One situation in which such synthetic lethal mutations can occur is
illustrated in Figure 9-9b. In this example, a heterodimeric
protein is partially, but not completely, inactivated by mutations in either one of the nonidentical subunits. However, in
double mutants carrying specific mutations in the genes
encoding both subunits, little interaction between subunits
occurs, resulting in severe phenotypic effects.
Synthetic lethal mutations also can reveal nonessential
genes whose encoded proteins function in redundant pathways for producing an essential cell component. As depicted
in Figure 9-9c, if either pathway alone is inactivated by a mutation, the other pathway will be able to supply the needed
product. However, if both pathways are inactivated at the
same time, the essential product cannot be synthesized, and
the double mutants will be nonviable.

A
B

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 9.1
Genetic Analysis of Mutations to Identify and Study
Genes

(b) Synthetic lethality 1
Genotype
Phenotype

AB
Wild type

aB

Ab

Partial
defect

Partial
defect

ab
Severe
defect

Diploid organisms carry two copies (alleles) of each
gene, whereas haploid organisms carry only one copy.

■

Recessive mutations lead to a loss of function, which
is masked if a normal allele of the gene is present. For
the mutant phenotype to occur, both alleles must carry
the mutation.

■

INTERPRETATION

A
B

Dominant mutations lead to a mutant phenotype in the
presence of a normal allele of the gene. The phenotypes
associated with dominant mutations often represent a gain
of function but in the case of some genes result from a loss
of function.

■

(c) Synthetic lethality 2

AB

Genotype
Phenotype

Wild type

INTERPRETATION Precursor

A

B

aB

Ab

Wild type

Wild type

Mutant

Precursor

Precursor

Precursor

a

A

a

B

ab

b

b

Product

In meiosis, a diploid cell undergoes one DNA replication and two cell divisions, yielding four haploid cells in
which maternal and paternal alleles are randomly assorted
(see Figure 9-3).

■

Dominant and recessive mutations exhibit characteristic
segregation patterns in genetic crosses (see Figure 9-4).

■

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-9 Mutations that result in
genetic suppression or synthetic lethality reveal interacting
or redundant proteins. (a) Observation that double mutants
with two defective proteins (A and B) have a wild-type
phenotype but that single mutants give a mutant phenotype
indicates that the function of each protein depends on interaction
with the other. (b) Observation that double mutants have a more
severe phenotypic defect than single mutants also is evidence
that two proteins (e.g., subunits of a heterodimer) must interact
to function normally. (c) Observation that a double mutant is
nonviable but that the corresponding single mutants have the
wild-type phenotype indicates that two proteins function in
redundant pathways to produce an essential product.

In haploid yeast, temperature-sensitive mutations are
particularly useful for identifying and studying genes essential to survival.

■

The number of functionally related genes involved in a
process can be defined by complementation analysis (see
Figure 9-7).

■

The order in which genes function in either a biosynthetic or a signaling pathway can be deduced from the phenotype of double mutants defective in two steps in the affected process.

■

9.2 • DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods

Functionally significant interactions between proteins can
be deduced from the phenotypic effects of allele-specific
suppressor mutations or synthetic lethal mutations.

■

9.2 DNA Cloning by Recombinant
DNA Methods
Detailed studies of the structure and function of a gene at the
molecular level require large quantities of the individual gene
in pure form. A variety of techniques, often referred to as recombinant DNA technology, are used in DNA cloning, which
permits researchers to prepare large numbers of identical
DNA molecules. Recombinant DNA is simply any DNA molecule composed of sequences derived from different sources.
The key to cloning a DNA fragment of interest is to link
it to a vector DNA molecule, which can replicate within a
host cell. After a single recombinant DNA molecule, composed of a vector plus an inserted DNA fragment, is introduced into a host cell, the inserted DNA is replicated along
with the vector, generating a large number of identical DNA
molecules. The basic scheme can be summarized as follows:
Vector  DNA fragment
↓
Recombinant DNA
↓
Replication of recombinant DNA within host cells
↓
Isolation, sequencing, and manipulation
of purified DNA fragment
Although investigators have devised numerous experimental variations, this flow diagram indicates the essential steps
in DNA cloning. In this section, we cover the steps in this
basic scheme, focusing on the two types of vectors most commonly used in E. coli host cells: plasmid vectors, which replicate along with their host cells, and bacteriophage  vectors,
which replicate as lytic viruses, killing the host cell and
packaging their DNA into virions. We discuss the characterization and various uses of cloned DNA fragments in subsequent sections.

Cutting DNA Molecules into Small Fragments Restriction
enzymes are endonucleases produced by bacteria that typically recognize specific 4- to 8-bp sequences, called restriction sites, and then cleave both DNA strands at this site.
Restriction sites commonly are short palindromic sequences;
that is, the restriction-site sequence is the same on each DNA
strand when read in the 5 → 3 direction (Figure 9-10).
For each restriction enzyme, bacteria also produce a
modification enzyme, which protects a bacterium’s own
DNA from cleavage by modifying it at or near each potential cleavage site. The modification enzyme adds a methyl
group to one or two bases, usually within the restriction
site. When a methyl group is present there, the restriction
endonuclease is prevented from cutting the DNA. Together
with the restriction endonuclease, the methylating enzyme
forms a restriction-modification system that protects the
host DNA while it destroys incoming foreign DNA (e.g.,
bacteriophage DNA or DNA taken up during transformation) by cleaving it at all the restriction sites in the DNA.
Many restriction enzymes make staggered cuts in the two
DNA strands at their recognition site, generating fragments
that have a single-stranded “tail” at both ends (see Figure
9-10). The tails on the fragments generated at a given restriction site are complementary to those on all other fragments generated by the same restriction enzyme. At room
temperature, these single-stranded regions, often called
“sticky ends,” can transiently base-pair with those on other
DNA fragments generated with the same restriction enzyme.
A few restriction enzymes, such as AluI and SmaI, cleave
both DNA strands at the same point within the restriction
site, generating fragments with “blunt” (flush) ends in which
all the nucleotides at the fragment ends are base-paired to
nucleotides in the complementary strand.
The DNA isolated from an individual organism has a specific sequence, which purely by chance will contain a specific

EcoRI
5
3

GA AT T C
C T T AAG
Cleavage

Restriction Enzymes and DNA Ligases Allow
Insertion of DNA Fragments into Cloning Vectors
A major objective of DNA cloning is to obtain discrete, small
regions of an organism’s DNA that constitute specific genes.
In addition, only relatively small DNA molecules can be
cloned in any of the available vectors. For these reasons, the
very long DNA molecules that compose an organism’s
genome must be cleaved into fragments that can be inserted
into the vector DNA. Two types of enzymes—restriction
enzymes and DNA ligases—facilitate production of such recombinant DNA molecules.

361

3
5

EcoRI

Sticky ends

5
3

G
C T T AA

A A T T C
G

3
5

▲ FIGURE 9-10 Cleavage of DNA by the restriction enzyme
EcoRI. This restriction enzyme from E. coli makes staggered cuts
at the specific 6-bp inverted repeat (palindromic) sequence
shown, yielding fragments with single-stranded, complementary
“sticky” ends. Many other restriction enzymes also produce
fragments with sticky ends.

362

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

TABLE 9-1

Selected Restriction Enzymes and Their Recognition Sequences

Enzyme

Source Microorganism

BamHI

Bacillus amyloliquefaciens

EcoRI

Escherichia coli

HindIII

Haemophilus influenzae

KpnI

Klebsiella pneumonia

PstI

Providencia stuartii

SacI

Streptomyces achromogenes

SalI

Streptomyces albue

SmaI

Serratia marcescens

SphI

Streptomyces phaeochromogenes

XbaI

Xanthomonas badrii

Recognition Site*
↓
-G-G-A-T-C-C-C-C-T-A-G-G↑
↓
-G-A-A-T-T-C-C-T-T-A-A-G↑
↓
-A-A-G-C-T-T-T-T-C-G-A-A↑
↓
-G-G-T-A-C-C-C-C-A-T-G-G↑
↓
-C-T-G-C-A-G-G-A-C-G-T-C↑
↓
-G-A-G-C-T-C-C-T-C-G-A-G↑
↓
-G-T-C-G-A-C-C-A-G-C-T-G↑
↓
-C-C-C-G-G-G-G-G-G-C-C-C↑
↓
-G-C-A-T-G-C-C-G-T-A-C-G↑
↓
-T-C-T-A-G-A-A-G-A-T-C-T↑

Ends Produced
Sticky

Sticky

Sticky

Sticky

Sticky

Sticky

Sticky

Blunt

Sticky

Sticky

*

These recognition sequences are included in a common polylinker sequence (see Figure 9-12).

set of restriction sites. Thus a given restriction enzyme will
cut the DNA from a particular source into a reproducible
set of fragments called restriction fragments. Restriction enzymes have been purified from several hundred different
species of bacteria, allowing DNA molecules to be cut at a
large number of different sequences corresponding to the
recognition sites of these enzymes (Table 9-1).

Inserting DNA Fragments into Vectors DNA fragments
with either sticky ends or blunt ends can be inserted into vec-

tor DNA with the aid of DNA ligases. During normal DNA
replication, DNA ligase catalyzes the end-to-end joining (ligation) of short fragments of DNA, called Okazaki fragments.
For purposes of DNA cloning, purified DNA ligase is used to
covalently join the ends of a restriction fragment and vector
DNA that have complementary ends (Figure 9-11). The vector DNA and restriction fragment are covalently ligated together through the standard 3 → 5 phosphodiester bonds
of DNA. In addition to ligating complementary sticky ends,
the DNA ligase from bacteriophage T4 can ligate any two

9.2 • DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods
Genomic DNA fragments
(a)

(a)
5
3

3
3
5

P AATT
OH

Vector DNA

(b)

+

OH

P CG
HO

TTAA P

3
5
(c)
3
5

P AGCT
HO
Complementary
ends base-pair
OH

P
(a)

(a)
5

AATT

3

T TAA
P

3

Unpaired genomic

+ fragments (b) and (c)
5
HO
2 ATP

T4 DNA ligase
2 AMP + 2 PPi
(a)

(a)

5

AATT

3

3

TTAA

5

▲ FIGURE 9-11 Ligation of restriction fragments with
complementary sticky ends. In this example, vector DNA cut
with EcoRI is mixed with a sample containing restriction
fragments produced by cleaving genomic DNA with several
different restriction enzymes. The short base sequences
composing the sticky ends of each fragment type are shown. The
sticky end on the cut vector DNA (a) base-pairs only with the
complementary sticky ends on the EcoRI fragment (a) in the
genomic sample. The adjacent 3-hydroxyl and 5-phosphate
groups (red) on the base-paired fragments then are covalently
joined (ligated) by T4 DNA ligase.

blunt DNA ends. However, blunt-end ligation is inherently
inefficient and requires a higher concentration of both DNA
and DNA ligase than for ligation of sticky ends.

E. coli Plasmid Vectors Are Suitable for Cloning
Isolated DNA Fragments
Plasmids are circular, double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) molecules that are separate from a cell’s chromosomal DNA.
These extrachromosomal DNAs, which occur naturally in
bacteria and in lower eukaryotic cells (e.g., yeast), exist in a
parasitic or symbiotic relationship with their host cell. Like
the host-cell chromosomal DNA, plasmid DNA is duplicated
before every cell division. During cell division, copies of the
plasmid DNA segregate to each daughter cell, assuring con-

363

tinued propagation of the plasmid through successive generations of the host cell.
The plasmids most commonly used in recombinant DNA
technology are those that replicate in E. coli. Investigators
have engineered these plasmids to optimize their use as vectors in DNA cloning. For instance, removal of unneeded portions from naturally occurring E. coli plasmids yields
plasmid vectors, ≈1.2–3 kb in circumferential length, that
contain three regions essential for DNA cloning: a replication origin; a marker that permits selection, usually a drugresistance gene; and a region in which exogenous DNA
fragments can be inserted (Figure 9-12). Host-cell enzymes
replicate a plasmid beginning at the replication origin (ORI),
a specific DNA sequence of 50–100 base pairs. Once DNA
replication is initiated at the ORI, it continues around the circular plasmid regardless of its nucleotide sequence. Thus any
DNA sequence inserted into such a plasmid is replicated
along with the rest of the plasmid DNA.
Figure 9-13 outlines the general procedure for cloning a
DNA fragment using E. coli plasmid vectors. When E. coli
cells are mixed with recombinant vector DNA under certain
conditions, a small fraction of the cells will take up the plasmid DNA, a process known as transformation. Typically,
1 cell in about 10,000 incorporates a single plasmid DNA
molecule and thus becomes transformed. After plasmid vectors are incubated with E. coli, those cells that take up the
plasmid can be easily selected from the much larger number
of cells. For instance, if the plasmid carries a gene that confers resistance to the antibiotic ampicillin, transformed cells

OR
I
HindIII
SphI
PstI
SalI
XbaI
BamHI
SmaI
KpnI
SacI
EcoRI

Polylinker

Region into which
exogenous DNA
can be inserted

r

am

p

Plasmid
cloning vector

▲ FIGURE 9-12 Basic components of a plasmid cloning
vector that can replicate within an E. coli cell. Plasmid vectors
contain a selectable gene such as ampr, which encodes the
enzyme -lactamase and confers resistance to ampicillin.
Exogenous DNA can be inserted into the bracketed region
without disturbing the ability of the plasmid to replicate or
express the ampr gene. Plasmid vectors also contain a replication
origin (ORI) sequence where DNA replication is initiated by hostcell enzymes. Inclusion of a synthetic polylinker containing the
recognition sequences for several different restriction enzymes
increases the versatility of a plasmid vector. The vector is
designed so that each site in the polylinker is unique on the
plasmid.

364

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

Plasmid
vector

+
r

DNA fragment
to be cloned

am

p

Enzymatically insert
DNA into plasmid vector

r

Recombinant
plasmid
am

p

Mix E. coli with plasmids
in presence of CaCl2; heat
pulse
Culture on nutrient agar
plates containing ampicillin

E. coli
chromosome

Transformed cell
survives

Cells that do not
take up plasmid die
on ampicillin plates

Plasmid replication

Technique Animation: Plasmid Cloning

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Cell multiplication

Colony of cells, each containing copies
of the same recombinant plasmid

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-13 DNA cloning in a
plasmid vector permits amplification of a DNA fragment.
A fragment of DNA to be cloned is first inserted into a
plasmid vector containing an ampicillin-resistance gene
(ampr), such as that shown in Figure 9-12. Only the few
cells transformed by incorporation of a plasmid molecule
will survive on ampicillin-containing medium. In transformed
cells, the plasmid DNA replicates and segregates into
daughter cells, resulting in formation of an ampicillinresistant colony.

can be selected by growing them in an ampicillin-containing
medium.
DNA fragments from a few base pairs up to ≈20 kb commonly are inserted into plasmid vectors. If special precautions
are taken to avoid manipulations that might mechanically
break DNA, even longer DNA fragments can be inserted into
a plasmid vector. When a recombinant plasmid with an
inserted DNA fragment transforms an E. coli cell, all the
antibiotic-resistant progeny cells that arise from the initial
transformed cell will contain plasmids with the same inserted
DNA. The inserted DNA is replicated along with the rest of
the plasmid DNA and segregates to daughter cells as the
colony grows. In this way, the initial fragment of DNA is
replicated in the colony of cells into a large number of identical copies. Since all the cells in a colony arise from a single
transformed parental cell, they constitute a clone of cells, and
the initial fragment of DNA inserted into the parental plasmid
is referred to as cloned DNA or a DNA clone.
The versatility of an E. coli plasmid vector is increased by
incorporating into it a polylinker, a synthetically generated
sequence containing one copy of several different restriction
sites that are not present elsewhere in the plasmid sequence
(see Figure 9-12). When such a vector is treated with a restriction enzyme that recognizes a restriction site in the
polylinker, the vector is cut only once within the polylinker.
Subsequently any DNA fragment of appropriate length produced with the same restriction enzyme can be inserted into
the cut plasmid with DNA ligase. Plasmids containing a
polylinker permit a researcher to clone DNA fragments generated with different restriction enzymes using the same plasmid vector, which simplifies experimental procedures.

Bacteriophage  Vectors Permit Efficient
Construction of Large DNA Libraries
Vectors constructed from bacteriophage  are about a thousand times more efficient than plasmid vectors in cloning
large numbers of DNA fragments. For this reason, phage 
vectors have been widely used to generate DNA libraries,
comprehensive collections of DNA fragments representing
the genome or expressed mRNAs of an organism. Two factors account for the greater efficiency of phage  as a cloning
vector: infection of E. coli host cells by  virions occurs at
about a thousandfold greater frequency than transformation
by plasmids, and many more  clones than transformed
colonies can be grown and detected on a single culture plate.
When a  virion infects an E. coli cell, it can undergo a
cycle of lytic growth during which the phage DNA is replicated and assembled into more than 100 complete progeny
phage, which are released when the infected cell lyses (see Figure 4-40). If a sample of  phage is placed on a lawn of E. coli
growing on a petri plate, each virion will infect a single cell.
The ensuing rounds of phage growth will give rise to a visible cleared region, called a plaque, where the cells have been
lysed and phage particles released (see Figure 4-39).

9.2 • DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods
(a)  Phage genome
Head

0

Nu1 A

Tail

Replaceable region

10

20

30

J

Lytic functions

O
N cro

40

P

49 kb

Q

(b)  Phage assembly

Preassembled
 tail

Preassembled
 head
COS

(49 kb)

COS

Concatomer of  DNA
Nu1 and A proteins
promote filling of  head
with DNA between COS
sites

 genome (1 copy)

 tail attaches only
to filled head

Complete  virion

▲ FIGURE 9-14 The bacteriophage  genome and
packaging of bacteriophage  DNA. (a) Simplified map of the 
phage genome. There are about 60 genes in the  genome, only
a few of which are shown in this diagram. Genes encoding
proteins required for assembly of the head and tail are located at
the left end; those encoding additional proteins required for the
lytic cycle, at the right end. Some regions of the genome can be
replaced by exogenous DNA (diagonal lines) or deleted (dotted)
without affecting the ability of  phage to infect host cells and
assemble new virions. Up to ≈25 kb of exogenous DNA can be
stably inserted between the J and N genes. (b) In vivo assembly
of  virions. Heads and tails are formed from multiple copies of
several different  proteins. During the late stage of  infection,
long DNA molecules called concatomers are formed; these
multimeric molecules consist of multiple copies of the 49-kb 
genome linked end to end and separated by COS sites (red),
protein-binding nucleotide sequences that occur once in each
copy of the  genome. Binding of  head proteins Nu1 and A to
COS sites promotes insertion of the DNA segment between two
adjacent COS sites into an empty head. After the heads are filled
with DNA, assembled  tails are attached, producing complete 
virions capable of infecting E. coli cells.

365

A  virion consists of a head, which contains the phage
DNA genome, and a tail, which functions in infecting E. coli
host cells. The  genes encoding the head and tail proteins, as
well as various proteins involved in phage DNA replication
and cell lysis, are grouped in discrete regions of the ≈50-kb
viral genome (Figure 9-14a). The central region of the 
genome, however, contains genes that are not essential for
the lytic pathway. Removing this region and replacing it with
a foreign DNA fragment up to ≈25 kb long yields a recombinant DNA that can be packaged in vitro to form phage
capable of replicating and forming plaques on a lawn of E. coli
host cells. In vitro packaging of recombinant  DNA, which
mimics the in vivo assembly process, requires preassembled
heads and tails as well as two viral proteins (Figure 9-14b).
It is technically feasible to use  phage cloning vectors to
generate a genomic library, that is, a collection of  clones
that collectively represent all the DNA sequences in the
genome of a particular organism. However, such genomic
libraries for higher eukaryotes present certain experimental
difficulties. First, the genes from such organisms usually contain extensive intron sequences and therefore are too large to
be inserted intact into  phage vectors. As a result, the sequences of individual genes are broken apart and carried in
more than one  clone (this is also true for plasmid clones).
Moreover, the presence of introns and long intergenic regions
in genomic DNA often makes it difficult to identify the
important parts of a gene that actually encode protein
sequences. Thus for many studies, cellular mRNAs, which
lack the noncoding regions present in genomic DNA, are a
more useful starting material for generating a DNA library.
In this approach, DNA copies of mRNAs, called complementary DNAs (cDNAs), are synthesized and cloned in
phage vectors. A large collection of the resulting cDNA
clones, representing all the mRNAs expressed in a cell type,
is called a cDNA library.

cDNAs Prepared by Reverse Transcription
of Cellular mRNAs Can Be Cloned
to Generate cDNA Libraries
The first step in preparing a cDNA library is to isolate the
total mRNA from the cell type or tissue of interest. Because
of their poly(A) tails, mRNAs are easily separated from the
much more prevalent rRNAs and tRNAs present in a cell extract by use of a column to which short strings of thymidylate (oligo-dTs) are linked to the matrix.
The general procedure for preparing a  phage cDNA library from a mixture of cellular mRNAs is outlined in Figure
9-15. The enzyme reverse transcriptase, which is found in
retroviruses, is used to synthesize a strand of DNA complementary to each mRNA molecule, starting from an oligo-dT
primer (steps 1 and 2 ). The resulting cDNA-mRNA hybrid
molecules are converted in several steps to double-stranded
cDNA molecules corresponding to all the mRNA molecules
in the original preparation (steps 3 – 5 ). Each double-stranded

366

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics
mRNA 5

Oligo-dT primer
T T T T 5

A A A ....An 3
3 poly(A) tail
1

Hybridize mRNA with
oligo-dT primer

AAAA
T T T T 5
2

Transcribe RNA into cDNA
A A A A 3
T T T T 5

3
Single-stranded 3 G G G G
cDNA

Remove RNA with alkali
Add poly(dG) tail
T T T T 5

4
5 C C C C
3 G G G G

Hybridize with
oligo-dC primer
T T T T 5

5
Double-stranded 5 C C C C
3 G G G G
cDNA

Synthesize complementary
strand
A A A A 3
T T T T 5

6
CH3
5 C C C C
3 G G G G

Protect cDNA by
methylation at EcoRI sites
A A A A 3
T T T T 5

cDNA contains an oligo-dC  oligo-dG double-stranded region at one end and an oligo-dToligo-dA double-stranded
region at the other end. Methylation of the cDNA protects
it from subsequent restriction enzyme cleavage (step 6 ).
To prepare double-stranded cDNAs for cloning, short
double-stranded DNA molecules containing the recognition
site for a particular restriction enzyme are ligated to both
ends of the cDNAs using DNA ligase from bacteriophage T4
(Figure 9-15, step 7 ). As noted earlier, this ligase can join
“blunt-ended” double-stranded DNA molecules lacking
sticky ends. The resulting molecules are then treated with the
restriction enzyme specific for the attached linker, generating
cDNA molecules with sticky ends at each end (step 8a ). In
a separate procedure,  DNA first is treated with the same
restriction enzyme to produce fragments called  vector
arms, which have sticky ends and together contain all the
genes necessary for lytic growth (step 8b ).
The  arms and the collection of cDNAs, all containing
complementary sticky ends, then are mixed and joined covalently by DNA ligase (Figure 9-15, step 9 ). Each of the
resulting recombinant DNA molecules contains a cDNA located between the two arms of the  vector DNA. Virions
containing the ligated recombinant DNAs then are assembled in vitro as described above (step 10 ). Only DNA molecules of the correct size can be packaged to produce fully
infectious recombinant  phage. Finally, the recombinant 
phages are plated on a lawn of E. coli cells to generate a large
number of individual plaques (step 11 ).

CH3

EcoRI linker
GAATTC
C T T AA G
GAATTC
C T T AA G

7

CCCC
GGGG

Ligate cDNA to restriction
site linkers

AAAA
T TTT
8a

GAATTC
C T T AA G

Replaceable region

Cleave with EcoRI
Bacteriophage λ DNA

AATTC
G

CCCC
GGGG

Sticky end

AAAA
T TTT
9

Ligate to λ arms

10

Package in vitro

Recombinant
λ virions

11
Individual
λ clones

Infect E. coli

G
CTTAA

8b

Cut with EcoRI
Remove replaceable region

G
AATTC
G
CTTAA

λ vector arms with
sticky ends

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-15 A cDNA library can
be constructed using a bacteriophage  vector. A mixture
of mRNAs is the starting point for preparing recombinant 
virions each containing a cDNA. To maximize the size of the
exogenous DNA that can be inserted into the  genome,
the nonessential regions of the  genome (diagonal lines in
Figure 9-14) usually are deleted. Plating of the recombinant
phage on a lawn of E. coli generates a set of cDNA clones
representing all the cellular mRNAs. See the text for a stepby-step discussion.

9.2 • DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods

Since each plaque arises from a single recombinant
phage, all the progeny  phages that develop are genetically
identical and constitute a clone carrying a cDNA derived
from a single mRNA; collectively they constitute a  cDNA
library. One feature of cDNA libraries arises because different genes are transcribed at very different rates. As a result,
cDNA clones corresponding to rapidly transcribed genes will
be represented many times in a cDNA library, whereas
cDNAs corresponding to slowly transcribed genes will be extremely rare or not present at all. This property is advantageous if an investigator is interested in a gene that is
transcribed at a high rate in a particular cell type. In this
case, a cDNA library prepared from mRNAs expressed in
that cell type will be enriched in the cDNA of interest, facilitating screening of the library for  clones carrying that
cDNA. However, to have a reasonable chance of including
clones corresponding to slowly transcribed genes, mammalian cDNA libraries must contain 106–107 individual recombinant  phage clones.

DNA Libraries Can Be Screened by Hybridization
to an Oligonucleotide Probe
Both genomic and cDNA libraries of various organisms
contain hundreds of thousands to upwards of a million individual clones in the case of higher eukaryotes. Two general approaches are available for screening libraries to
identify clones carrying a gene or other DNA region of interest: (1) detection with oligonucleotide probes that bind
to the clone of interest and (2) detection based on expression of the encoded protein. Here we describe the first
method; an example of the second method is presented in
the next section.
The basis for screening with oligonucleotide probes is hybridization, the ability of complementary single-stranded
DNA or RNA molecules to associate (hybridize) specifically
with each other via base pairing. As discussed in Chapter 4,
double-stranded (duplex) DNA can be denatured (melted)
into single strands by heating in a dilute salt solution. If the
temperature then is lowered and the ion concentration
raised, complementary single strands will reassociate (hybridize) into duplexes. In a mixture of nucleic acids, only
complementary single strands (or strands containing complementary regions) will reassociate; moreover, the extent of
their reassociation is virtually unaffected by the presence of
noncomplementary strands.
In the membrane-hybridization assay outlined in Figure
9-16, a single-stranded nucleic acid probe is used to detect
those DNA fragments in a mixture that are complementary
to the probe. The DNA sample first is denatured and the single strands attached to a solid support, commonly a nitrocellulose filter or treated nylon membrane. The membrane
is then incubated in a solution containing a radioactively labeled probe. Under hybridization conditions (near neutral
pH, 40–65 C, 0.3–0.6 M NaCl), this labeled probe hybridizes to any complementary nucleic acid strands bound to

367

Doublestranded
DNA

Bound
singlestranded
DNA

Melt and place
DNA on filter

Filter

Incubate with
labeled DNA (

)

Hybridized
complementary
DNAs

Wash away labeled DNA
that does not hybridize
to DNA bound to filter

Perform autoradiography

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-16 Membrane-hybridization
assay detects nucleic acids complementary to an
oligonucleotide probe. This assay can be used to detect both
DNA and RNA, and the radiolabeled complementary probe can
be either DNA or RNA.

the membrane. Any excess probe that does not hybridize is
washed away, and the labeled hybrids are detected by autoradiography of the filter.
Application of this procedure for screening a  cDNA library is depicted in Figure 9-17. In this case, a replica of the
petri dish containing a large number of individual  clones
initially is reproduced on the surface of a nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane is then assayed using a radiolabeled
probe specific for the recombinant DNA containing the fragment of interest. Membrane hybridization with radiolabeled
oligonucleotides is most commonly used to screen  cDNA
libraries. Once a cDNA clone encoding a particular protein
is obtained, the full-length cDNA can be radiolabeled and
used to probe a genomic library for clones containing fragments of the corresponding gene.

368

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics
Individual phage plaques
HO
Master plate of
λ phage plaques
on E. coli lawn

O

5

Base 1


3

O

DMT

O

3

Monomer 1

O

Glass
support

Base 2

Monomer 2

P
MeO

Place nitrocellulose filter on plate
to pick up phages from each plaque

Nitrocellulose filter

O

5

N(IP)2

Coupling
(weak acid)

DMT

Base 2

O

O

O
Incubate filter in alkaline
solution to lyse phages and
denature released phage DNA

MeO

P

O

O

Base 1

O
Single-stranded phage
DNA bound to filter
Hybridize with labeled probe;
perform autoradiography

Signal appears over
phage DNA that is
complementary
to probe

Oxidation by I2
Removal of DMT by ZnBr2

O

HO

Base 2

O
MeO

P

O

O

Base 1

O
O

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-17 Phage cDNA libraries can
be screened with a radiolabeled probe to identify a clone of
interest. In the initial plating of a library, the  phage plaques are
not allowed to develop to a visible size so that up to 50,000
recombinants can be analyzed on a single plate. The appearance
of a spot on the autoradiogram indicates the presence of a
recombinant  clone containing DNA complementary to the
probe. The position of the spot on the autoradiogram is the
mirror image of the position on the original petri dish of that
particular clone. Aligning the autoradiogram with the original petri
dish will locate the corresponding clone from which infectious
phage particles can be recovered and replated at low density,
resulting in well-separated plaques. Pure isolates eventually are
obtained by repeating the hybridization assay.

Oligonucleotide Probes Are Designed Based
on Partial Protein Sequences
Clearly, identification of specific clones by the membranehybridization technique depends on the availability of complementary radiolabeled probes. For an oligonucleotide to be
useful as a probe, it must be long enough for its sequence to
occur uniquely in the clone of interest and not in any other
clones. For most purposes, this condition is satisfied by
oligonucleotides containing about 20 nucleotides. This is be-

Repeat process with
monomer 3, monomer 4, etc.

Oligonucleotide

▲ FIGURE 9-18 Chemical synthesis of oligonucleotides by
sequential addition of reactive nucleotide derivatives. The first
(3) nucleotide in the sequence (monomer 1) is bound to a glass
support by its 3 hydroxyl; its 5 hydroxyl is available for addition
of the second nucleotide. The second nucleotide in the sequence
(monomer 2) is derivatized by addition of 4,4-dimethoxytrityl
(DMT) to its 5 hydroxyl, thus blocking this hydroxyl from
reacting; in addition, a highly reactive group (red letters) is
attached to the 3 hydroxyl. When the two monomers are mixed
in the presence of a weak acid, they form a 5 → 3
phosphodiester bond with the phosphorus in the trivalent state.
Oxidation of this intermediate increases the phosphorus valency
to 5, and subsequent removal of the DMT group with zinc
bromide (ZnBr2) frees the 5 hydroxyl. Monomer 3 then is added,
and the reactions are repeated. Repetition of this process
eventually yields the entire oligonucleotide. Finally, all the methyl
groups on the phosphates are removed at the same time at
alkaline pH, and the bond linking monomer 1 to the glass
support is cleaved. [See S. L. Beaucage and M. H. Caruthers, 1981,
Tetrahedron Lett. 22:1859.]

9.2 • DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods

cause a specific 20-nucleotide sequence occurs once in every
420 (≈1012) nucleotides. Since all genomes are much smaller
(≈3  109 nucleotides for humans), a specific 20-nucleotide
sequence in a genome usually occurs only once. Oligonucleotides of this length with a specific sequence can be synthesized chemically and then radiolabeled by using
polynucleotide kinase to transfer a 32P-labeled phosphate
group from ATP to the 5 end of each oligonucleotide.
How might an investigator design an oligonucleotide
probe to identify a cDNA clone encoding a particular protein? If all or a portion of the amino acid sequence of the protein is known, then a DNA probe corresponding to a small
region of the gene can be designed based on the genetic code.
However, because the genetic code is degenerate (i.e., many
amino acids are encoded by more than one codon), a probe
based on an amino acid sequence must include all the possible oligonucleotides that could theoretically encode that peptide sequence. Within this mixture of oligonucleotides will be
one that hybridizes perfectly to the clone of interest.
In recent years, this approach has been simplified by the
availability of the complete genomic sequences for humans
and some important model organisms such as the mouse,
Drosophila, and the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans.
Using an appropriate computer program, a researcher can
search the genomic sequence database for the coding sequence that corresponds to a specific portion of the amino
acid sequence of the protein under study. If a match is found,
then a single, unique DNA probe based on this known genomic sequence will hybridize perfectly with the clone encoding the protein under study.
Chemical synthesis of single-stranded DNA probes of defined sequence can be accomplished by the series of reactions
shown in Figure 9-18. With automated instruments now
available, researchers can program the synthesis of oligonucleotides of specific sequence up to about 100 nucleotides
long. Alternatively, these probes can be prepared by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a widely used technique for
amplifying specific DNA sequences that is described later.

369

Yeast Genomic Libraries Can Be Constructed
with Shuttle Vectors and Screened
by Functional Complementation
In some cases a DNA library can be screened for the ability to
express a functional protein that complements a recessive mutation. Such a screening strategy would be an efficient way
to isolate a cloned gene that corresponds to an interesting recessive mutation identified in an experimental organism. To
illustrate this method, referred to as functional complementation, we describe how yeast genes cloned in special E. coli
Polylinker

(a)

ORI

URA3
Shuttle vector

ampr

ARS
CEN

(b)

Yeast genomic DNA
Shuttle vector
Cut with BamHI

Partially digest
with Sau3A

Ligate

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-19 Yeast genomic library can
be constructed in a plasmid shuttle vector that can replicate in
yeast and E. coli. (a) Components of a typical plasmid shuttle
vector for cloning Saccharomyces genes. The presence of a yeast
origin of DNA replication (ARS) and a yeast centromere (CEN)
allows, stable replication and segregation in yeast. Also included
is a yeast selectable marker such as URA3, which allows a ura3
mutant to grow on medium lacking uracil. Finally, the vector
contains sequences for replication and selection in E. coli (ORI and
ampr) and a polylinker for easy insertion of yeast DNA fragments.
(b) Typical protocol for constructing a yeast genomic library. Partial
digestion of total yeast genomic DNA with Sau3A is adjusted to
generate fragments with an average size of about 10 kb. The
vector is prepared to accept the genomic fragments by digestion
with BamHI, which produces the same sticky ends as Sau3A.
Each transformed clone of E. coli that grows after selection for
ampicillin resistance contains a single type of yeast DNA fragment.

Transform E. coli
Screen for ampicillin resistance

Isolate and pool recombinant
plasmids from 105 transformed
E. coli colonies
Assay yeast genomic library by functional complementation

370

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

plasmids can be introduced into mutant yeast cells to identify the wild-type gene that is defective in the mutant strain.
Libraries constructed for the purpose of screening among
yeast gene sequences usually are constructed from genomic
DNA rather than cDNA. Because Saccharomyces genes do
not contain multiple introns, they are sufficiently compact so
that the entire sequence of a gene can be included in a genomic DNA fragment inserted into a plasmid vector. To construct a plasmid genomic library that is to be screened by
functional complementation in yeast cells, the plasmid vector
must be capable of replication in both E. coli cells and yeast
cells. This type of vector, capable of propagation in two different hosts, is called a shuttle vector. The structure of a typical yeast shuttle vector is shown in Figure 9-19a (see page
369). This vector contains the basic elements that permit
cloning of DNA fragments in E. coli. In addition, the shuttle
vector contains an autonomously replicating sequence (ARS),
which functions as an origin for DNA replication in yeast; a
yeast centromere (called CEN), which allows faithful segregation of the plasmid during yeast cell division; and a yeast
gene encoding an enzyme for uracil synthesis (URA3), which
serves as a selectable marker in an appropriate yeast mutant.
To increase the probability that all regions of the yeast
genome are successfully cloned and represented in the plasmid library, the genomic DNA usually is only partially digested to yield overlapping restriction fragments of ≈10 kb.
These fragments are then ligated into the shuttle vector in

which the polylinker has been cleaved with a restriction enzyme that produces sticky ends complementary to those on
the yeast DNA fragments (Figure 9-19b). Because the 10-kb
restriction fragments of yeast DNA are incorporated into the
shuttle vectors randomly, at least 105 E. coli colonies, each
containing a particular recombinant shuttle vector, are necessary to assure that each region of yeast DNA has a high
probability of being represented in the library at least once.
Figure 9-20 outlines how such a yeast genomic library
can be screened to isolate the wild-type gene corresponding
to one of the temperature-sensitive cdc mutations mentioned
earlier in this chapter. The starting yeast strain is a double
mutant that requires uracil for growth due to a ura3
mutation and is temperature-sensitive due to a cdc28 mutation identified by its phenotype (see Figure 9-6). Recombinant plasmids isolated from the yeast genomic library are
mixed with yeast cells under conditions that promote transformation of the cells with foreign DNA. Since transformed
yeast cells carry a plasmid-borne copy of the wild-type
URA3 gene, they can be selected by their ability to grow in
the absence of uracil. Typically, about 20 petri dishes, each
containing about 500 yeast transformants, are sufficient to
represent the entire yeast genome. This collection of yeast
transformants can be maintained at 23 C, a temperature
permissive for growth of the cdc28 mutant. The entire
collection on 20 plates is then transferred to replica plates,
which are placed at 36 C, a nonpermissive temperature for

Library of yeast genomic DNA
carrying URA3 selective marker

23 °C
Temperature-sensitive
cdc-mutant yeast;
ura3 − (requires uracil)

Transform yeast by treatment with
LiOAC, PEG, and heat shock
Plate and incubate at
permissive temperature
on medium lacking uracil

Only colonies
carrying a
URA3 marker
are able to
grow

23 °C

Replica-plate and
incubate at nonpermissive
temperature

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-20 Screening of a yeast
genomic library by functional complementation can
identify clones carrying the normal form of mutant yeast
gene. In this example, a wild-type CDC gene is isolated by
complementation of a cdc yeast mutant. The Saccharomyces
strain used for screening the yeast library carries ura3 and a
temperature-sensitive cdc mutation. This mutant strain is
grown and maintained at a permissive temperature (23 C).
Pooled recombinant plasmids prepared as shown in Figure 9-19

Only colonies carrying
a wild-type CDC gene
are able to grow

36 °C

are incubated with the mutant yeast cells under conditions
that promote transformation. The relatively few transformed
yeast cells, which contain recombinant plasmid DNA, can grow
in the absence of uracil at 23 C. When transformed yeast
colonies are replica-plated and placed at 36 C (a
nonpermissive temperature), only clones carrying a library
plasmid that contains the wild-type copy of the CDC gene will
survive. LiOAC
lithium acetate; PEG
polyethylene glycol.

9.3 • Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA Fragments

cdc mutants. Yeast colonies that carry recombinant plasmids
expressing a wild-type copy of the CDC28 gene will be able
to grow at 36 C. Once temperature-resistant yeast colonies
have been identified, plasmid DNA can be extracted from the
cultured yeast cells and analyzed by subcloning and DNA
sequencing, topics we take up in the next section.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 9.2

371

9.3 Characterizing and Using Cloned
DNA Fragments
Now that we have described the basic techniques for using recombinant DNA technology to isolate specific DNA clones,
we consider how cloned DNAs are further characterized and
various ways in which they can be used. We begin here with
several widely used general techniques and examine some
more specific applications in the following sections.

DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods
In DNA cloning, recombinant DNA molecules are
formed in vitro by inserting DNA fragments into vector
DNA molecules. The recombinant DNA molecules are then
introduced into host cells, where they replicate, producing
large numbers of recombinant DNA molecules.

■

Restriction enzymes (endonucleases) typically cut DNA
at specific 4- to 8-bp palindromic sequences, producing defined fragments that often have self-complementary singlestranded tails (sticky ends).

■

Two restriction fragments with complementary ends can
be joined with DNA ligase to form a recombinant DNA
(see Figure 9-11).

■

E. coli cloning vectors are small circular DNA molecules
(plasmids) that include three functional regions: an origin
of replication, a drug-resistance gene, and a site where a
DNA fragment can be inserted. Transformed cells carrying a vector grow into colonies on the selection medium
(see Figure 9-13).

■

Phage cloning vectors are formed by replacing nonessential parts of the  genome with DNA fragments up to
≈25 kb in length and packaging the resulting recombinant
DNAs with preassembled heads and tails in vitro.

■

In cDNA cloning, expressed mRNAs are reversetranscribed into complementary DNAs, or cDNAs. By a
series of reactions, single-stranded cDNAs are converted
into double-stranded DNAs, which can then be ligated into
a  phage vector (see Figure 9-15).

■

A cDNA library is a set of cDNA clones prepared from
the mRNAs isolated from a particular type of tissue. A
genomic library is a set of clones carrying restriction fragments produced by cleavage of the entire genome.

■

The number of clones in a cDNA or genomic library
must be large enough so that all or nearly all of the original nucleotide sequences are present in at least one clone.

■

A particular cloned DNA fragment within a library can
be detected by hybridization to a radiolabeled oligonucleotide whose sequence is complementary to a portion of
the fragment (see Figures 9-16 and 9-17).

■

Shuttle vectors that replicate in both yeast and E. coli
can be used to construct a yeast genomic library. Specific
genes can be isolated by their ability to complement the corresponding mutant genes in yeast cells (see Figure 9-20).

■

Gel Electrophoresis Allows Separation of Vector
DNA from Cloned Fragments
In order to manipulate or sequence a cloned DNA fragment,
it first must be separated from the vector DNA. This can be
accomplished by cutting the recombinant DNA clone with
the same restriction enzyme used to produce the recombinant
vectors originally. The cloned DNA and vector DNA then
are subjected to gel electrophoresis, a powerful method for
separating DNA molecules of different size.
Near neutral pH, DNA molecules carry a large negative
charge and therefore move toward the positive electrode during gel electrophoresis. Because the gel matrix restricts random diffusion of the molecules, molecules of the same length
migrate together as a band whose width equals that of the
well into which the original DNA mixture was placed at the
start of the electrophoretic run. Smaller molecules move
through the gel matrix more readily than larger molecules, so
that molecules of different length migrate as distinct bands
(Figure 9-21). DNA molecules composed of up to ≈2000
nucleotides usually are separated electrophoretically on
polyacrylamide gels, and molecules from about 200 nucleotides to more than 20 kb on agarose gels.
A common method for visualizing separated DNA bands
on a gel is to incubate the gel in a solution containing the
fluorescent dye ethidium bromide. This planar molecule
binds to DNA by intercalating between the base pairs. Binding concentrates ethidium in the DNA and also increases its
intrinsic fluorescence. As a result, when the gel is illuminated
with ultraviolet light, the regions of the gel containing DNA
fluoresce much more brightly than the regions of the gel
without DNA.
Once a cloned DNA fragment, especially a long one, has
been separated from vector DNA, it often is treated with various restriction enzymes to yield smaller fragments. After separation by gel electrophoresis, all or some of these smaller
fragments can be ligated individually into a plasmid vector
and cloned in E. coli by the usual procedure. This process,
known as subcloning, is an important step in rearranging
parts of genes into useful new configurations. For instance, an
investigator who wants to change the conditions under which
a gene is expressed might use subcloning to replace the normal promoter associated with a cloned gene with a DNA segment containing a different promoter. Subcloning also can be
used to obtain cloned DNA fragments that are of an appropriate length for determining the nucleotide sequence.

372

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics
DNA restriction fragments

Place mixture in the well of
an agarose or polyacrylamide
gel. Apply electric field

Well
–
Gel particle

Pores

+
Molecules move through pores
in gel at a rate inversely
proportional to their chain length

–

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-21 Gel electrophoresis
separates DNA molecules of different lengths. A gel is
prepared by pouring a liquid containing either melted agarose
or unpolymerized acrylamide between two glass plates a few
millimeters apart. As the agarose solidifies or the acrylamide
polymerizes into polyacrylamide, a gel matrix (orange ovals) forms
consisting of long, tangled chains of polymers. The dimensions of
the interconnecting channels, or pores, depend on the
concentration of the agarose or acrylamide used to form the gel.
The separated bands can be visualized by autoradiography (if the
fragments are radiolabeled) or by addition of a fluorescent dye
(e.g., ethidium bromide) that binds to DNA.

Cloned DNA Molecules Are Sequenced Rapidly
by the Dideoxy Chain-Termination Method
The complete characterization of any cloned DNA fragment
requires determination of its nucleotide sequence. F. Sanger
and his colleagues developed the method now most commonly
used to determine the exact nucleotide sequence of DNA fragments up to ≈500 nucleotides long. The basic idea behind this
method is to synthesize from the DNA fragment to be sequenced a set of daughter strands that are labeled at one end
and differ in length by one nucleotide. Separation of the truncated daughter strands by gel electrophoresis can then establish the nucleotide sequence of the original DNA fragment.
Synthesis of truncated daughter stands is accomplished by
use of 2,3-dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (ddNTPs).
These molecules, in contrast to normal deoxyribonucleotides
(dNTPs), lack a 3 hydroxyl group (Figure 9-22). Although
ddNTPs can be incorporated into a growing DNA chain by





O


O

O

P



O

O

O


O



Subject to autoradiography
or incubate with fluorescent dye

O

O

O

P



O

O

O
+

P

P

O

O


O

P

Base

O
CH2

O

O

P

Base

O
CH2

O
H

O
H

H

H
H

3'

Signal corresponding
to DNA band

OH

H

H

H
3'

H

Deoxyribonucleoside
triphosphate
(dNTP)

H

H

Dideoxyribonucleoside
triphosphate
(ddNTP)

▲ FIGURE 9-22 Structures of deoxyribonucleoside
triphosphate (dNTP) and dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphate
(ddNTP). Incorporation of a ddNTP residue into a growing DNA
strand terminates elongation at that point.

9.3 • Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA Fragments

5
DNA polymerase
+ dNTPs (100 µM)

(a)
5 T A G C T G A C T C 3
3 A T C G A C T G A G T C A A G A A C T A T T GGG C T T A A . . .
+ ddATP
(1 µM)

DNA polymerase
+ dATP, dGTP, dCTP, dTTP
+ ddGTP in low concentration
5 T A G C T G A C T C A G 3
3 A T C G A C T G A G T C A A G A A C T A T T GGG C T T A A . . .
+
5 T A G C T G A C T C A G T T C T T G 3
3 A T C G A C T G A G T C A A G A A C T A T T GGG C T T A A . . .
+
5 T A G C T G A C T C A G T T C T T G A T A A C C C G 3
3 A T C G A C T G A G T C A A G A A C T A T T GGG C T T A A . . .

(c)

A

+ ddGTP
(1 µM)

G

+ ddTTP
(1 µM)

C

T
G

A

etc.

T
G

A
etc.

+ ddCTP
(1 µM)

T
etc.

C
C
etc.

Denature
and separate
daughter
strands
by electrophoresis
Denature
and separate
daughter
strands
by electrophoresis

T NNNN AA T G CCAAT ACG ACT CACT A T AG G G C G A AT T CG A G C T C G G T AC C C G GG G A T C C T C T A G A G T C G A C C T G C A G G C A T G C A A G C T T G A G T A T T C T
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
10

AT A GT G T CAC C T A A A T AG CT TG GCG T A A T C AT GG T C A T A G C TG T T TC C TG TG TG A A AT T G T T A T C C G C T C A C A A T T C CAC A C A A C A T A
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-23 Cloned DNAs can be
sequenced by the Sanger method, using fluorescenttagged dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (ddNTPs). (a)
A single (template) strand of the DNA to be sequenced (blue
letters) is hybridized to a synthetic deoxyribonucleotide primer
(black letters). The primer is elongated in a reaction mixture
containing the four normal deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates
plus a relatively small amount of one of the four
dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates. In this example, ddGTP
(yellow) is present. Because of the relatively low
concentration of ddGTP, incorporation of a ddGTP, and thus
chain termination, occurs at a given position in the sequence
only about 1 percent of the time. Eventually the reaction
mixture will contain a mixture of prematurely terminated

(truncated) daughter fragments ending at every occurrence of
ddGTP. (b) To obtain the complete sequence of a template
DNA, four separate reactions are performed, each with a
different dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (ddNTP). The
ddNTP that terminates each truncated fragment can be
identified by use of ddNTPs tagged with four different
fluorescent dyes (indicated by colored highlights). (c) In an
automated sequencing machine, the four reaction mixtures are
subjected to gel electrophoresis and the order of appearance
of each of the four different fluorescent dyes at the end of the
gel is recorded. Shown here is a sample printout from an
automated sequencer from which the sequence of the original
template DNA can be read directly. N
nucleotide that
cannot be assigned. [Part (c) from Griffiths et al., Figure 14-27.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Primer 5
Template 3

Technique Animation: Dideoxy Sequencing of DNA

(b)

373

374

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

DNA polymerase, once incorporated they cannot form a
phosphodiester bond with the next incoming nucleotide
triphosphate. Thus incorporation of a ddNTP terminates
chain synthesis, resulting in a truncated daughter strand.
Sequencing using the Sanger dideoxy chain-termination
method begins by denaturing a double-stranded DNA fragment to generate template strands for in vitro DNA synthesis.
A synthetic oligodeoxynucleotide is used as the primer for four
separate polymerization reactions, each with a low concen-

Cycle 1

Denaturation of DNA
Annealing of primers

Elongation of primers

Cycle 2

Denaturation of DNA
Annealing of primers

Elongation of primers

Technique Animation: Polymerase Chain Reaction

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Cycle 3

Denaturation of DNA
Annealing of primers

Elongation of primers

Cycles 4, 5, 6, etc.

tration of one of the four ddNTPs in addition to higher concentrations of the normal dNTPs. In each reaction, the ddNTP
is randomly incorporated at the positions of the corresponding
dNTP, causing termination of polymerization at those positions in the sequence (Figure 9-23a). Inclusion of fluorescent
tags of different colors on each of the ddNTPs allows each set
of truncated daughter fragments to be distinguished by their
corresponding fluorescent label (Figure 9-23b). For example,
all truncated fragments that end with a G would fluoresce one
color (e.g., yellow), and those ending with an A would fluoresce another color (e.g., red), regardless of their lengths. The
mixtures of truncated daughter fragments from each of the
four reactions are subjected to electrophoresis on special polyacrylamide gels that can separate single-stranded DNA molecules differing in length by only 1 nucleotide. In automated
DNA sequencing machines, a fluorescence detector that can
distinguish the four fluorescent tags is located at the end of the
gel. The sequence of the original DNA template strand can be
determined from the order in which different labeled fragments migrate past the fluorescence detector (Figure 9-23c).
In order to sequence a long continuous region of genomic
DNA, researchers often start with a collection of cloned
DNA fragments whose sequences overlap. Once the sequence of one of these fragments is determined, oligonucleotides based on that sequence can be chemically
synthesized for use as primers in sequencing the adjacent
overlapping fragments. In this way, the sequence of a long
stretch of DNA is determined incrementally by sequencing of
the overlapping cloned DNA fragments that compose it.

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-24 The polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) is widely used to amplify DNA regions of
known sequences. To amplify a specific region of DNA, an
investigator will chemically synthesize two different
oligonucleotide primers complementary to sequences of
approximately 18 bases flanking the region of interest (designated
as light blue and dark blue bars). The complete reaction is
composed of a complex mixture of double-stranded DNA (usually
genomic DNA containing the target sequence of interest), a
stoichiometric excess of both primers, the four deoxynucleoside
triphosphates, and a heat-stable DNA polymerase known as Taq
polymerase. During each PCR cycle, the reaction mixture is first
heated to separate the strands and then cooled to allow the
primers to bind to complementary sequences flanking the region
to be amplified. Taq polymerase then extends each primer from
its 3 end, generating newly synthesized strands that extend in
the 3 direction to the 5 end of the template strand. During the
third cycle, two double-stranded DNA molecules are generated
equal in length to the sequence of the region to be amplified. In
each successive cycle the target segment, which will anneal to
the primers, is duplicated, and will eventually vastly outnumber all
other DNA segments in the reaction mixture. Successive PCR
cycles can be automated by cycling the reaction for timed
intervals at high temperature for DNA melting and at a defined
lower temperature for the annealing and elongation portions of
the cycle. A reaction that cycles 20 times will amplify the specific
target sequence 1-million-fold.

9.3 • Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA Fragments

The Polymerase Chain Reaction Amplifies a
Specific DNA Sequence from a Complex Mixture
If the nucleotide sequences at the ends of a particular DNA
region are known, the intervening fragment can be amplified directly by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Here
we describe the basic PCR technique and three situations in
which it is used.
The PCR depends on the ability to alternately denature
(melt) double-stranded DNA molecules and renature (anneal) complementary single strands in a controlled fashion.
As in the membrane-hybridization assay described earlier,
the presence of noncomplementary strands in a mixture has
little effect on the base pairing of complementary single DNA
strands or complementary regions of strands. The second requirement for PCR is the ability to synthesize oligonucleotides at least 18–20 nucleotides long with a defined
sequence. Such synthetic nucleotides can be readily produced
with automated instruments based on the standard reaction
scheme shown in Figure 9-18.
As outlined in Figure 9-24, a typical PCR procedure begins by heat-denaturation of a DNA sample into single
strands. Next, two synthetic oligonucleotides complementary to the 3 ends of the target DNA segment of interest are
added in great excess to the denatured DNA, and the temperature is lowered to 50–60 C. These specific oligonucleotides, which are at a very high concentration, will
hybridize with their complementary sequences in the DNA
sample, whereas the long strands of the sample DNA remain
apart because of their low concentration. The hybridized
oligonucleotides then serve as primers for DNA chain synthesis in the presence of deoxynucleotides (dNTPs) and a
temperature-resistant DNA polymerase such as that from
Thermus aquaticus (a bacterium that lives in hot springs).
This enzyme, called Taq polymerase, can remain active even
after being heated to 95 C and can extend the primers at
temperatures up to 72 C. When synthesis is complete, the
whole mixture is then heated to 95 C to melt the newly
formed DNA duplexes. After the temperature is lowered
again, another cycle of synthesis takes place because excess
primer is still present. Repeated cycles of melting (heating)
and synthesis (cooling) quickly amplify the sequence of interest. At each cycle, the number of copies of the sequence
between the primer sites is doubled; therefore, the desired sequence increases exponentially—about a million-fold after
20 cycles—whereas all other sequences in the original DNA
sample remain unamplified.

Direct Isolation of a Specific Segment of Genomic DNA
For organisms in which all or most of the genome has been
sequenced, PCR amplification starting with the total genomic DNA often is the easiest way to obtain a specific
DNA region of interest for cloning. In this application, the
two oligonucleotide primers are designed to hybridize to sequences flanking the genomic region of interest and to include sequences that are recognized by specific restriction
enzymes (Figure 9-25). After amplification of the desired

375

target sequence for about 20 PCR cycles, cleavage with the
appropriate restriction enzymes produces sticky ends that
allow efficient ligation of the fragment into a plasmid vector cleaved by the same restriction enzymes in the
polylinker. The resulting recombinant plasmids, all carrying
the identical genomic DNA segment, can then be cloned in

Region to be amplified
5

3

3

5 G G A T C C

3

Primer 1

5
DNA synthesis

Round 1
3

5

5 G G A T C C
DNA synthesis

3

3

T T C G A A 5

Primer 2

Round 2
3

5 G G A T C C
3 C C T A G G
5 G G A T C C

Primer 1
3 C C T A G G
5 G G A T C C
BamHI site

3

T T C G A A 5
DNA synthesis

Round 3
T T C G A A 5
A A G C T T 3

HindIII site

Continue for ~20
PCR cycles
Cut with restriction
enzymes
3 G
5 G A T C C
Sticky end

T T C G A 5
A 3
Sticky end

Ligate with plasmid vector
with sticky ends

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-25 A specific target region
in total genomic DNA can be amplified by PCR for use in
cloning. Each primer for PCR is complementary to one end of
the target sequence and includes the recognition sequence for a
restriction enzyme that does not have a site within the target
region. In this example, primer 1 contains a BamHI sequence,
whereas primer 2 contains a HindIII sequence. (Note that for
clarity, in any round, amplification of only one of the two strands
is shown, the one in brackets.) After amplification, the target
segments are treated with appropriate restriction enzymes,
generating fragments with sticky ends. These can be
incorporated into complementary plasmid vectors and cloned in
E. coli by the usual procedure (see Figure 9-13).

376

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

E. coli cells. With certain refinements of the PCR, DNA
segments 10 kb in length can be amplified and cloned in
this way.
Note that this method does not involve cloning of large
numbers of restriction fragments derived from genomic
DNA and their subsequent screening to identify the specific
fragment of interest. In effect, the PCR method inverts this
traditional approach and thus avoids its most tedious aspects. The PCR method is useful for isolating gene sequences
to be manipulated in a variety of useful ways described later.
In addition the PCR method can be used to isolate gene sequences from mutant organisms to determine how they differ from the wild-type.

Preparation of Probes Earlier we discussed how oligonucleotide probes for hybridization assays can be chemically
synthesized. Preparation of such probes by PCR amplification requires chemical synthesis of only two relatively short
primers corresponding to the two ends of the target sequence. The starting sample for PCR amplification of the target sequence can be a preparation of genomic DNA.
Alternatively, if the target sequence corresponds to a mature
mRNA sequence, a complete set of cellular cDNAs synthesized from the total cellular mRNA using reverse transcriptase or obtained by pooling cDNA from all the clones in a 
cDNA library can be used as a source of template DNA. To
generate a radiolabeled product from PCR, 32P-labeled
dNTPs are included during the last several amplification cycles. Because probes prepared by PCR are relatively long and
have many radioactive 32P atoms incorporated into them,
these probes usually give a stronger and more specific signal
than chemically synthesized probes.
Tagging of Genes by Insertion Mutations Another useful
application of the PCR is to amplify a “tagged” gene from
the genomic DNA of a mutant strain. This approach is a sim-

pler method for identifying genes associated with a particular mutant phenotype than screening of a library by functional complementation (see Figure 9-20).
The key to this use of PCR is the ability to produce mutations by insertion of a known DNA sequence into the
genome of an experimental organism. Such insertion mutations can be generated by use of mobile DNA elements,
which can move (or transpose) from one chromosomal site
to another. As discussed in more detail in Chapter 10, these
DNA sequences occur naturally in the genomes of most organisms and may give rise to loss-of-function mutations if
they transpose into a protein-coding region.
For example, researchers have modified a Drosophila mobile DNA element, known as the P element, to optimize its
use in the experimental generation of insertion mutations.
Once it has been demonstrated that insertion of a P element
causes a mutation with an interesting phenotype, the genomic
sequences adjacent to the insertion site can be amplified by a
variation of the standard PCR protocol that uses synthetic
primers complementary to the known P-element sequence but
that allows unknown neighboring sequences to be amplified.
Again, this approach avoids the cloning of large numbers of
DNA fragments and their screening to detect a cloned DNA
corresponding to a mutated gene of interest.
Similar methods have been applied to other organisms
for which insertion mutations can be generated using either
mobile DNA elements or viruses with sequenced genomes
that can insert randomly into the genome.

Blotting Techniques Permit Detection of Specific
DNA Fragments and mRNAs with DNA Probes
Two very sensitive methods for detecting a particular DNA
or RNA sequence within a complex mixture combine separation by gel electrophoresis and hybridization with a complementary radiolabeled DNA probe. We will encounter

DNA
Cleave with
restriction enzymes
Nitrocellulose

Electrophoresis

Gel
Filter
paper

Nitrocellulose
Gel

Autoradiogram
Hybridize with
labeled DNA or
RNA probe

Alkaline solution
Capillary action transfers
DNA from gel to nitrocellulose

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-26 Southern blot technique
can detect a specific DNA fragment in a complex mixture of
restriction fragments. The diagram depicts three different
restriction fragments in the gel, but the procedure can be applied
to a mixture of millions of DNA fragments. Only fragments that

hybridize to a labeled probe will give a signal on an
autoradiogram. A similar technique called Northern blotting
detects specific mRNAs within a mixture. [See E. M. Southern,
1975, J. Mol. Biol. 98:508.]

9.3 • Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA Fragments

references to both these techniques, which have numerous
applications, in other chapters.

Southern Blotting The first blotting technique to be devised
is known as Southern blotting after its originator E. M.
Southern. This technique is capable of detecting a single specific restriction fragment in the highly complex mixture of
fragments produced by cleavage of the entire human genome
with a restriction enzyme. In such a complex mixture, many
fragments will have the same or nearly the same length and
thus migrate together during electrophoresis. Even though all
the fragments are not separated completely by gel electrophoresis, an individual fragment within one of the bands
can be identified by hybridization to a specific DNA probe.
To accomplish this, the restriction fragments present in the
gel are denatured with alkali and transferred onto a nitrocellulose filter or nylon membrane by blotting (Figure 9-26).
This procedure preserves the distribution of the fragments
in the gel, creating a replica of the gel on the filter, much like
the replica filter produced from clones in a  library. (The
blot is used because probes do not readily diffuse into the
original gel.) The filter then is incubated under hybridization conditions with a specific radiolabeled DNA probe,
which usually is generated from a cloned restriction frag-

UN

48 h

2 kb

1 kb
 -globin
mRNA

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-27 Northern blot analysis
reveals increased expression of -globin mRNA in
differentiated erythroleukemia cells. The total mRNA in
extracts of erythroleukemia cells that were growing but
uninduced and in cells induced to stop growing and allowed to
differentiate for 48 hours or 96 hours was analyzed by Northern
blotting for -globin mRNA. The density of a band is proportional
to the amount of mRNA present. The -globin mRNA is barely
detectable in uninduced cells (UN lane) but increases more than
1000-fold by 96 hours after differentiation is induced. [Courtesy of
L. Kole.]

ment. The DNA restriction fragment that is complementary
to the probe hybridizes, and its location on the filter can be
revealed by autoradiography.

Northern Blotting One of the most basic ways to characterize a cloned gene is to determine when and where in an
organism the gene is expressed. Expression of a particular
gene can be followed by assaying for the corresponding
mRNA by Northern blotting, named, in a play on words,
after the related method of Southern blotting. An RNA sample, often the total cellular RNA, is denatured by treatment
with an agent such as formaldehyde that disrupts the hydrogen bonds between base pairs, ensuring that all the RNA
molecules have an unfolded, linear conformation. The individual RNAs are separated according to size by gel electrophoresis and transferred to a nitrocellulose filter to which
the extended denatured RNAs adhere. As in Southern blotting, the filter then is exposed to a labeled DNA probe that
is complementary to the gene of interest; finally, the labeled
filter is subjected to autoradiography. Because the amount
of a specific RNA in a sample can be estimated from a
Northern blot, the procedure is widely used to compare the
amounts of a particular mRNA in cells under different conditions (Figure 9-27).

E. coli Expression Systems Can Produce Large
Quantities of Proteins from Cloned Genes

96 h

5 kb

0.65 kb

377

Many protein hormones and other signaling or
regulatory proteins are normally expressed at
very low concentrations, precluding their isolation and purification in large quantities by standard biochemical techniques. Widespread therapeutic use of such
proteins, as well as basic research on their structure and
functions, depends on efficient procedures for producing
them in large amounts at reasonable cost. Recombinant
DNA techniques that turn E. coli cells into factories for
synthesizing low-abundance proteins now are used to commercially produce factor VIII (a blood-clotting factor),
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), insulin,
growth hormone, and other human proteins with therapeutic uses. For example, G-CSF stimulates the production
of granulocytes, the phagocytic white blood cells critical
to defense against bacterial infections. Administration of
G-CSF to cancer patients helps offset the reduction in granulocyte production caused by chemotherapeutic agents,
thereby protecting patients against serious infection while
they are receiving chemotherapy. ❚
The first step in producing large amounts of a lowabundance protein is to obtain a cDNA clone encoding the
full-length protein by methods discussed previously. The second step is to engineer plasmid vectors that will express large
amounts of the encoded protein when it is inserted into
E. coli cells. The key to designing such expression vectors is

378

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

(a)

lac
promoter

lacZ
mRNA

lacZ
gene

β-galactosidase

− IPTG

+ IPTG

(b)
G-CSF
cDNA
Plasmid
expression
vector

lacZ
gene

Plasmid Expression Vectors Can Be Designed for
Use in Animal Cells

Transform
E. coli

lac
promoter
G-CSF
cDNA

− IPTG

To aid in purification of a eukaryotic protein produced in
an E. coli expression system, researchers often modify the
cDNA encoding the recombinant protein to facilitate its separation from endogenous E. coli proteins. A commonly used
modification of this type is to add a short nucleotide sequence to the end of the cDNA, so that the expressed protein
will have six histidine residues at the C-terminus. Proteins
modified in this way bind tightly to an affinity matrix that
contains chelated nickel atoms, whereas most E. coli proteins
will not bind to such a matrix. The bound proteins can be released from the nickel atoms by decreasing the pH of the surrounding medium. In most cases, this procedure yields a pure
recombinant protein that is functional, since addition of
short amino acid sequences to either the C-terminus or the
N-terminus of a protein usually does not interfere with the
protein’s biochemical activity.

G-CSF
mRNA
G-CSF
protein
+ IPTG

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-28 Some eukaryotic proteins
can be produced in E. coli cells from plasmid vectors
containing the lac promoter. (a) The plasmid expression vector
contains a fragment of the E. coli chromosome containing the lac
promoter and the neighboring lacZ gene. In the presence of the
lactose analog IPTG, RNA polymerase normally transcribes the
lacZ gene, producing lacZ mRNA, which is translated into the
encoded protein, -galactosidase. (b) The lacZ gene can be cut
out of the expression vector with restriction enzymes and
replaced by a cloned cDNA, in this case one encoding
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). When the resulting
plasmid is transformed into E. coli cells, addition of IPTG and
subsequent transcription from the lac promoter produce G-CSF
mRNA, which is translated into G-CSF protein.

inclusion of a promoter, a DNA sequence from which transcription of the cDNA can begin. Consider, for example, the
relatively simple system for expressing G-CSF shown in Figure 9-28. In this case, G-CSF is expressed in E. coli transformed with plasmid vectors that contain the lac promoter
adjacent to the cloned cDNA encoding G-CSF. Transcription
from the lac promoter occurs at high rates only when lactose,
or a lactose analog such as isopropylthiogalactoside (IPTG),
is added to the culture medium. Even larger quantities of a
desired protein can be produced in more complicated E. coli
expression systems.

One disadvantage of bacterial expression systems is that
many eukaryotic proteins undergo various modifications
(e.g., glycosylation, hydroxylation) after their synthesis on
ribosomes (Chapter 3). These post-translational modifications generally are required for a protein’s normal cellular
function, but they cannot be introduced by E. coli cells,
which lack the necessary enzymes. To get around this limitation, cloned genes are introduced into cultured animal
cells, a process called transfection. Two common methods
for transfecting animal cells differ in whether the recombinant vector DNA is or is not integrated into the host-cell
genomic DNA.
In both methods, cultured animal cells must be treated
to facilitate their initial uptake of a recombinant plasmid
vector. This can be done by exposing cells to a preparation
of lipids that penetrate the plasma membrane, increasing its
permeability to DNA. Alternatively, subjecting cells to a
brief electric shock of several thousand volts, a technique
known as electroporation, makes them transiently permeable to DNA. Usually the plasmid DNA is added in sufficient concentration to ensure that a large proportion of the
cultured cells will receive at least one copy of the plasmid
DNA.

Transient Transfection The simplest of the two expression
methods, called transient transfection, employs a vector similar to the yeast shuttle vectors described previously. For use
in mammalian cells, plasmid vectors are engineered also to
carry an origin of replication derived from a virus that infects
mammalian cells, a strong promoter recognized by mammalian RNA polymerase, and the cloned cDNA encoding the
protein to be expressed adjacent to the promoter (Figure
9-29a). Once such a plasmid vector enters a mammalian cell,
the viral origin of replication allows it to replicate efficiently,
generating numerous plasmids from which the protein is ex-

9.3 • Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA Fragments
(a) Transient transfection
cDNA
Promoter
Vector

Viral origin of
replication

Transfect cultured
cells by lipid treatment
or electroporation

Protein is expressed from cDNA in plasmid DNA
(b) Stable transfection (transformation)

379

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-29 Transient and stable
transfection with specially designed plasmid vectors permit
expression of cloned genes in cultured animal cells. Both
methods employ plasmid vectors that contain the usual
elements—ORI, selectable marker (e.g., ampr), and polylinker—
that permit propagation in E. coli and insertion of a cloned cDNA
with an adjacent animal promoter. For simplicity, these elements
are not depicted. (a) In transient transfection, the plasmid vector
contains an origin of replication for a virus that can replicate in
the cultured animal cells. Since the vector is not incorporated
into the genome of the cultured cells, production of the cDNAencoded protein continues only for a limited time. (b) In stable
transfection, the vector carries a selectable marker such as neor,
which confers resistance to G-418. The relatively few transfected
animal cells that integrate the exogenous DNA into their
genomes are selected on medium containing G-418. These stably
transfected, or transformed, cells will continue to produce the
cDNA-encoded protein as long as the culture is maintained. See
the text for discussion.

cDNA
Promoter
Vector

neor
Transfect cultured
cells by lipid treatment
or electroporation
Select for G-418 resistance
G-418-resistant
clones

Protein is expressed from cDNA integrated
into host chromosome

pressed. However, during cell division such plasmids are not
faithfully segregated into both daughter cells and in time a
substantial fraction of the cells in a culture will not contain
a plasmid, hence the name transient transfection.

Stable Transfection (Transformation) If an introduced vector
integrates into the genome of the host cell, the genome is permanently altered and the cell is said to be transformed.
Integration most likely is accomplished by mammalian enzymes that function normally in DNA repair and recombination. Because integration is a rare event, plasmid expression
vectors designed to transform animal cells must carry a se-

lectable marker in order to identify the small fraction of cells
that integrate the plasmid DNA. A commonly used selectable
marker is the gene for neomycin phosphotransferase (designated neor), which confers resistance to a toxic compound
chemically related to neomycin known as G-418. The basic
procedure for expressing a cloned cDNA by stable transfection is outlined in Figure 9-29b. Only those cells that have
integrated the expression vector into the host chromosome
will survive and give rise to a clone in the presence of a high
concentration of G-418. Because integration occurs at random sites in the genome, individual transformed clones resistant to G-418 will differ in their rates of transcribing the
inserted cDNA. Therefore, the stable transfectants usually are
screened to identify those that produce the protein of interest at the highest levels.

Epitope Tagging In addition to their use in producing proteins that are modified after translation, eukaryotic expression vectors provide an easy way to study the intracellular
localization of eukaryotic proteins. In this method, a cloned
cDNA is modified by fusing it to a short DNA sequence
encoding an amino acid sequence recognized by a known
monoclonal antibody. Such a short peptide that is bound by
an antibody is called an epitope; hence this method is
known as epitope tagging. After transfection with a plasmid
expression vector containing the fused cDNA, the expressed
epitope-tagged form of the protein can be detected by
immunofluorescence labeling of the cells with the monoclonal antibody specific for the epitope. Figure 9-30
illustrates the use of this method to localize AP1 adapter
proteins, which participate in formation of clathrin-coated
vesicles involved in intracellular protein trafficking (Chapter
17). Epitope tagging of a protein so it is detectable with an
available monoclonal antibody obviates the time-consuming
task of producing a new monoclonal antibody specific for
the natural protein.

380

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

Expression vectors derived from plasmids allow the
production of abundant amounts of a protein of interest
once a cDNA encoding it has been cloned. The unique
feature of these vectors is the presence of a promoter fused
to the cDNA that allows high-level transcription in host
cells.

■

Eukaryotic expression vectors can be used to express
cloned genes in yeast or mammalian cells (see Figure 9-29).
An important application of these methods is the tagging
of proteins with an epitope for antibody detection.

■

AP1

Furin

Merged

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-30 Epitope tagging
facilitates cellular localization of proteins expressed from
cloned genes. In this experiment, the cloned cDNA encoding
one subunit of the AP1 adapter protein was modified by addition
of a sequence encoding an epitope for a known monoclonal
antibody. Plasmid expression vectors, similar to those shown in
Figure 9-29, were constructed to contain the epitope-tagged AP1
cDNA. After cells were transfected and allowed to express the
epitope-tagged version of the AP1 protein, they were fixed and
labeled with monoclonal antibody to the epitope and with
antibody to furin, a marker protein for the late Golgi and
endosomal membranes. Addition of a green fluorescently labeled
secondary antibody specific for the anti-epitope antibody
visualized the AP1 protein (left). Another secondary antibody with
a different (red) fluorescent signal was used to visualize furin
(center). The colocalization of epitope-tagged AP1 and furin to the
same intracellular compartment is evident when the two
fluorescent signals are merged (right). [Courtesy of Ira Mellman, Yale
University School of Medicine.]

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 9.3
Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA Fragments
Long cloned DNA fragments often are cleaved with
restriction enzymes, producing smaller fragments that
then are separated by gel electrophoresis and subcloned
in plasmid vectors prior to sequencing or experimental
manipulation.

9.4 Genomics: Genome-wide Analysis
of Gene Structure and Expression
Using specialized recombinant DNA techniques, researchers have determined vast amounts of DNA sequence
including the entire genomic sequence of humans and many
key experimental organisms. This enormous volume of
data, which is growing at a rapid pace, has been stored and
organized in two primary data banks: the GenBank at the
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, and the
EMBL Sequence Data Base at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory in Heidelberg, Germany. These databases
continuously exchange newly reported sequences and make
them available to scientists throughout the world on the Internet. In this section, we examine some of the ways researchers use this treasure trove of data to provide insights
about gene function and evolutionary relationships, to
identify new genes whose encoded proteins have never
been isolated, and to determine when and where genes are
expressed.

■

DNA fragments up to about 500 nucleotides long are
most commonly sequenced in automated instruments
based on the Sanger (dideoxy chain termination) method
(see Figure 9-23).

■

The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) permits exponential amplification of a specific segment of DNA from just
a single initial template DNA molecule if the sequence
flanking the DNA region to be amplified is known (see
Figure 9-24).

■

Southern blotting can detect a single, specific DNA
fragment within a complex mixture by combining gel
electrophoresis, transfer (blotting) of the separated bands
to a filter, and hybridization with a complementary radiolabeled DNA probe (see Figure 9-26). The similar technique of Northern blotting detects a specific RNA within
a mixture.

■

Stored Sequences Suggest Functions of Newly
Identified Genes and Proteins
As discussed in Chapter 3, proteins with similar functions
often contain similar amino acid sequences that correspond
to important functional domains in the three-dimensional
structure of the proteins. By comparing the amino acid sequence of the protein encoded by a newly cloned gene with
the sequences of proteins of known function, an investigator can look for sequence similarities that provide clues to
the function of the encoded protein. Because of the degeneracy in the genetic code, related proteins invariably exhibit
more sequence similarity than the genes encoding them. For
this reason, protein sequences rather than the corresponding
DNA sequences are usually compared.
The computer program used for this purpose is known
as BLAST (basic local alignment search tool). The BLAST
algorithm divides the new protein sequence (known as the
query sequence) into shorter segments and then searches the
database for significant matches to any of the stored sequences. The matching program assigns a high score to

9.4 • Genomics: Genome-wide Analysis of Gene Structure and Expression

identically matched amino acids and a lower score to
matches between amino acids that are related (e.g., hydrophobic, polar, positively charged, negatively charged).
When a significant match is found for a segment, the BLAST
algorithm will search locally to extend the region of similarity. After searching is completed, the program ranks the
matches between the query protein and various known proteins according to their p-values. This parameter is a measure of the probability of finding such a degree of similarity
between two protein sequences by chance. The lower the
p-value, the greater the sequence similarity between two sequences. A p-value less than about 10 3 usually is considered as significant evidence that two proteins share a
common ancestor.
To illustrate the power of this approach, we consider NF1, a human gene identified and cloned by
methods described later in this chapter. Mutations in NF1 are associated with the inherited disease neurofibromatosis 1, in which multiple tumors develop in the
peripheral nervous system, causing large protuberances in
the skin (the “elephant-man” syndrome). After a cDNA
clone of NF1 was isolated and sequenced, the deduced sequence of the NF1 protein was checked against all other
protein sequences in GenBank. A region of NF1 protein
was discovered to have considerable homology to a portion

NF1

381

of the yeast protein called Ira (Figure 9-31). Previous studies had shown that Ira is a GTPase-accelerating protein
(GAP) that modulates the GTPase activity of the
monomeric G protein called Ras (see Figure 3-E). As we examine in detail in Chapters 14 and 15, GAP and Ras proteins normally function to control cell replication and
differentiation in response to signals from neighboring
cells. Functional studies on the normal NF1 protein, obtained by expression of the cloned wild-type gene, showed
that it did, indeed, regulate Ras activity, as suggested by its
homology with Ira. These findings suggest that individuals
with neurofibromatosis express a mutant NF1 protein in
cells of the peripheral nervous system, leading to inappropriate cell division and formation of the tumors characteristic of the disease. ❚
Even when a protein shows no significant similarity to
other proteins with the BLAST algorithm, it may nevertheless share a short sequence with other proteins that is functionally important Such short segments recurring in many
different proteins, referred to as motifs, generally have similar functions. Several such motifs are described in Chapter 3
(see Figure 3-6). To search for these and other motifs in a
new protein, researchers compare the query protein sequence
with a database of known motif sequences. Table 9-2 summarizes several of the more commonly occurring motifs.

841 T R A T F M E V L T K I L Q Q G T E F D T L A E T V L A D R F E R L V E L V T MM G D Q G E L P I A 890
•
•
•
•
•
•
• • •
•
•
•
I R I A F L R V F I D I V . . . T N Y P V N P E K H E M D K M L A I D D F L K Y I I K N P I L A F F 1546

Ira 1500

891 M A L A N V V P C S Q W D E L A R V L V T L F D S R H L L Y Q L L W N M F S K E V E L A D S M Q T L 940
• •
•
•
• •
•
•
1547 G S L A . . C S P A D V D L Y A G G F L N A F D T R N A S H I L V T E L L K Q E I K R A A R S D D I 1594
941 F R G N S L A S K I M T F C F K V Y G A T Y L Q K L L D P L L R I V I T S S D W Q H V S F E V D P T 990
•
•
•
•
•
• •
•
•
1595 L R R N S C A T R A L S L Y T R S R G N K Y L I K T L R P V L Q G I V D N K E . . . . S F E I D . . 1638
991 R L E P S E S L E E N Q R N L L Q M T E K F . . . . F H A I I S S S S E F P P Q L R S V C H C L Y Q 1036
• •
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
1639 K M K P G . . . S E N S E K M L D L F E K Y M T R L I D A I T S S I D D F P I E L V D I C K T I Y N 1685
1037 V V S Q R F P Q N S I G A V G S A M F L R F I N P A I V S P Y E A G I L D K K P P P R I E R G L K L 1086
• •
•
•
•
•
•
1686 A A S V N F P E Y A Y I A V G S F V F L R F I G P A L V S P D S E N I I . I V T H A H D R K P F I T 1734
1087 M S K I L Q S I A N . . . . . . . . H V L F T K E E H M R P F N D . . . . F V K S N F D A A R R F F 1124
•
• •
•
•
• •
•
1735 L A K V I Q S L A N G R E N I F K K D I L V S K E E F L K T C S D K I F N F L S E L C K I P T N N F 1784
1125 L D I A S D C P T S D A V N H S L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S F I S D G N V L A L H R L L W N N . 1159
•
•
• •
•
•
•
1785 T V N V R E D P T P I S F D Y S F L H K F F Y L N E F T I R K E I I N E S K L P G E F S F L K N T V 1834
1160

. . Q E K I GQY L S S NR DH K A V GR R P F . . . .
D K M A T L L A Y L G P P E H K P V A 1200
•
•
•
• • •
1835 M L N D K I L G V L G Q P S M E I K N E I P P F V V E N R E K Y P S L Y E F M S R Y A F K K V D 1882

▲ FIGURE 9-31 Comparison of the regions of human NF1
protein and S. cerevisiae Ira protein that show significant
sequence similarity. The NF1 and the Ira sequences are shown
on the top and bottom lines of each row, respectively, in the oneletter amino acid code (see Figure 2-13). Amino acids that are
identical in the two proteins are highlighted in yellow. Amino
acids with chemically similar but nonidentical side chains are

connected by a blue dot. Amino acid numbers in the protein
sequences are shown at the left and right ends of each row.
Dots indicate “gaps” in the protein sequence inserted in order to
maximize the alignment of homologous amino acids. The BLAST
p-value for these two sequences is 10 28, indicating a high
degree of similarity. [From Xu et al., 1990, Cell 62:599.]

382

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

Protein Sequence Motifs

TABLE 9-2
Name

Sequence*

Function

ATP/GTP binding

[A,G]-X4-G-K-[S,T]

Residues within a nucleotide-binding domain that
contact the nucleotide

Prenyl-group binding site

C-Ø-Ø-X (C-terminus)

C-terminal sequence covalently attached to isoprenoid
lipids in some lipid-anchored proteins (e.g., Ras)

Zinc finger (C2H2 type)

C-X2–4-C-X3-Ø-X8-H-X3–5-H

Zn2-binding sequence within DNA- or RNA-binding
domain of some proteins

DEAD box

Ø2-D-E-A-D-[R,K,E,N]-Ø

Sequence present in many ATP-dependent RNA helicases

Heptad repeat

(Ø-X2-Ø-X3)n

Repeated sequence in proteins that form coiled-coil
structures

*

Single-letter amino acid abbreviations used for sequences (see Figure 2-13). X
Ø hydrophobic residue. Brackets enclose alternative permissible residues.

Comparison of Related Sequences from Different
Species Can Give Clues to Evolutionary
Relationships Among Proteins
BLAST searches for related protein sequences may reveal that
proteins belong to a protein family. (The corresponding genes
constitute a gene family.) Protein families are thought to arise

any residue;

by two different evolutionary processes, gene duplication and
speciation, discussed in Chapter 10. Consider, for example,
the tubulin family of proteins, which constitute the basic subunits of microtubules. According to the simplified scheme in
Figure 9-32a, the earliest eukaryotic cells are thought to have
contained a single tubulin gene that was duplicated early in
evolution; subsequent divergence of the different copies of the

(b)

(a)
Ancestral
cell

Orthologous

α-Tubulin (human)

Tubulin
4
3

α-Tubulin (fly)
α-Tubulin (worm)

2

α-Tubulin ( yeast)
α-Tubulin

Orthologous

β-Tubulin

Ancestral
tubulin

1

β-Tubulin (human)
4

Gene duplication
and divergence

3
2

α-Tubulin 1 β-Tubulin 1

α-Tubulin 2 β-Tubulin 2

Species 1

Species 2

▲ FIGURE 9-32 The generation of diverse tubulin
sequences during the evolution of eukaryotes. (a) Probable
mechanism giving rise to the tubulin genes found in existing
species. It is possible to deduce that a gene duplication event
occurred before speciation because the -tubulin sequences
from different species (e.g., humans and yeast) are more alike
than are the -tubulin and -tubulin sequences within a species.
(b) A phylogenetic tree representing the relationship between the
tubulin sequences. The branch points (nodes), indicated by small
numbers, represent common ancestral genes at the time that

Paralogous

Gene duplication
and divergence

β-Tubulin (fly)
β-Tubulin (worm)
β-Tubulin ( yeast)

two sequences diverged. For example, node 1 represents the
duplication event that gave rise to the -tubulin and -tubulin
families, and node 2 represents the divergence of yeast from
multicellular species. Braces and arrows indicate, respectively,
the orthologous tubulin genes, which differ as a result of
speciation, and the paralogous genes, which differ as a result of
gene duplication. This diagram is simplified somewhat because
each of the species represented actually contains multiple
-tubulin and -tubulin genes that arose from later gene
duplication events.

383

9.4 • Genomics: Genome-wide Analysis of Gene Structure and Expression

original tubulin gene formed the ancestral versions of the and -tubulin genes. As different species diverged from these
early eukaryotic cells, each of these gene sequences further diverged, giving rise to the slightly different forms of -tubulin
and -tubulin now found in each species.
All the different members of the tubulin family are sufficiently similar in sequence to suggest a common ancestral
sequence. Thus all these sequences are considered to be homologous. More specifically, sequences that presumably diverged as a result of gene duplication (e.g., the - and
-tubulin sequences) are described as paralogous. Sequences
that arose because of speciation (e.g., the -tubulin genes in
different species) are described as orthologous. From the degree of sequence relatedness of the tubulins present in different organisms today, evolutionary relationships can
deduced, as illustrated in Figure 9-32b. Of the three types of
sequence relationships, orthologous sequences are the most
likely to share the same function.

Genes Can Be Identified Within Genomic
DNA Sequences
The complete genomic sequence of an organism contains
within it the information needed to deduce the sequence of
every protein made by the cells of that organism. For organisms such as bacteria and yeast, whose genomes have few introns and short intergenic regions, most protein-coding

sequences can be found simply by scanning the genomic sequence for open reading frames (ORFs) of significant length.
An ORF usually is defined as a stretch of DNA containing
at least 100 codons that begins with a start codon and ends
with a stop codon. Because the probability that a random
DNA sequence will contain no stop codons for 100 codons
in a row is very small, most ORFs encode a protein.
ORF analysis correctly identifies more than 90 percent of
the genes in yeast and bacteria. Some of the very shortest
genes are missed by this method, and occasionally long open
reading frames that are not actually genes arise by chance.
Both types of miss assignments can be corrected by more sophisticated analysis of the sequence and by genetic tests for
gene function. Of the Saccharomyces genes identified in this
manner, about half were already known by some functional
criterion such as mutant phenotype. The functions of some
of the proteins encoded by the remaining putative genes identified by ORF analysis have been assigned based on their sequence similarity to known proteins in other organisms.
Identification of genes in organisms with a more complex
genome structure requires more sophisticated algorithms
than searching for open reading frames. Figure 9-33 shows
a comparison of the genes identified in a representative 50kb segment from the genomes of yeast, Drosophila, and humans. Because most genes in higher eukaryotes, including
humans and Drosophila, are composed of multiple, relatively short coding regions (exons) separated by noncoding

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
YFL046W
RGD2

YFL040W
FET5

TUB2

RP041

YFL030W
HAC1

YFL034W

STE2

0

50

SEC53
YFL044C
YFL042C

ACT1
YPT1

MOB2
RPL22B

RIM15

CAK1
CAF16
GYP8

Drosophila melanogaster

BST1

EPL1

CG3131
syt

CG15400

0

50

CG16987 CG2964

CG3123

Human
GATA1

HDAC6

LOC139168

0

50

PCSK1N

▲ FIGURE 9-33 Arrangement of gene sequences in
representative 50-kb segments of yeast, fruit fly, and human
genomes. Genes above the line are transcribed to the right;
genes below the line are transcribed to the left. Blue blocks
represent exons (coding sequences); green blocks represent
introns (noncoding sequences). Because yeast genes contain few
if any introns, scanning genomic sequences for open reading
frames (ORFs) correctly identifies most gene sequences. In

contrast, the genes of higher eukaryotes typically comprise
multiple exons separated by introns. ORF analysis is not effective
in identifying genes in these organisms. Likely gene sequences
for which no functional data are available are designated by
numerical names: in yeast, these begin with Y; in Drosophila,
with CG; and in humans, with LOC. The other genes shown here
encode proteins with known functions.

384

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

regions (introns), scanning for ORFs is a poor method for
finding genes. The best gene-finding algorithms combine all
the available data that might suggest the presence of a gene
at a particular genomic site. Relevant data include alignment
or hybridization to a full-length cDNA; alignment to a partial cDNA sequence, generally 200–400 bp in length, known
as an expressed sequence tag (EST); fitting to models for
exon, intron, and splice site sequences; and sequence similarity to other organisms. Using these methods computational biologists have identified approximately 35,000 genes
in the human genome, although for as many as 10,000 of
these putative genes there is not yet conclusive evidence that
they actually encode proteins or RNAs.
A particularly powerful method for identifying human
genes is to compare the human genomic sequence with that
of the mouse. Humans and mice are sufficiently related to
have most genes in common; however, largely nonfunctional
DNA sequences, such as intergenic regions and introns, will
tend to be very different because they are not under strong
selective pressure. Thus corresponding segments of the

Organism
Genes

human and mouse genome that exhibit high sequence similarity are likely to be functional coding regions (i.e., exons).

The Size of an Organism’s Genome Is Not
Directly Related to Its Biological Complexity
The combination of genomic sequencing and gene-finding
computer algorithms has yielded the complete inventory of
protein-coding genes for a variety of organisms. Figure 9-34
shows the total number of protein-coding genes in several eukaryotic genomes that have been completely sequenced. The
functions of about half the proteins encoded in these
genomes are known or have been predicted on the basis of
sequence comparisons. One of the surprising features of this
comparison is that the number of protein-coding genes
within different organisms does not seem proportional to our
intuitive sense of their biological complexity. For example,
the roundworm C. elegans apparently has more genes than
the fruit fly Drosophila, which has a much more complex
body plan and more complex behavior. And humans have

Arabidopsis (plant)

Human
~32,000

C. elegans (roundworm)

25,706

18,266

Metabolism
DNA replication/modification
Transcription/translation
Intracellular signaling

Organism
Genes

Drosophila (fly)

Saccharomyces (yeast)

13,338

~6000

▲ FIGURE 9-34 Comparison of the number and types of
proteins encoded in the genomes of different eukaryotes. For
each organism, the area of the entire pie chart represents the
total number of protein-coding genes, all shown at roughly the
same scale. In most cases, the functions of the proteins
encoded by about half the genes are still unknown (light blue).
The functions of the remainder are known or have been
predicted by sequence similarity to genes of known function.
[Adapted from International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium,
2001, Nature 409:860.]

Cell-cell communication
Protein folding and degradation
Transport
Multifunctional proteins
Cytoskeleton/structure
Defense and immunity
Miscellaneous function
Unknown

9.4 • Genomics: Genome-wide Analysis of Gene Structure and Expression

fewer than twice the number of genes as C. elegans, which
seems completely inexplicable given the enormous differences between these organisms.
Clearly, simple quantitative differences in the genomes of
different organisms are inadequate for explaining differences
in biological complexity. However, several phenomena can
generate more complexity in the expressed proteins of higher
eukaryotes than is predicted from their genomes. First, alternative splicing of a pre-mRNA can yield multiple functional
mRNAs corresponding to a particular gene (Chapter 12). Second, variations in the post-translational modification of some
proteins may produce functional differences. Finally, qualitative differences in the interactions between proteins and their
integration into pathways may contribute significantly to the
differences in biological complexity among organisms. The
specific functions of many genes and proteins identified by
analysis of genomic sequences still have not been determined.
As researchers unravel the functions of individual proteins in
different organisms and further detail their interactions, a
more sophisticated understanding of the genetic basis of complex biological systems will emerge.

385

Effect of Carbon Source on Gene Expression in Yeast The
initial step in a microarray expression study is to prepare
fluorescently labeled cDNAs corresponding to the mRNAs
expressed by the cells under study. When the cDNA preparation is applied to a microarray, spots representing genes
Cells grown on
glucose medium

Cells grown on
ethanol medium

Isolate total mRNA
Green dye

Reverse-transcribe
to cDNA labeled with
a fluorescent dye

Red dye

Mix

DNA Microarrays Can Be Used to Evaluate
the Expression of Many Genes at One Time
Monitoring the expression of thousands of genes simultaneously is possible with DNA microarray analysis. A DNA microarray consists of thousands of individual, closely packed
gene-specific sequences attached to the surface of a glass microscopic slide. By coupling microarray analysis with the results
from genome sequencing projects, researchers can analyze the
global patterns of gene expression of an organism during specific physiological responses or developmental processes.

Preparation of DNA Microarrays In one method for prepar-

ing microarrays, a ≈1-kb portion of the coding region of each
gene analyzed is individually amplified by PCR. A robotic
device is used to apply each amplified DNA sample to the
surface of a glass microscope slide, which then is chemically
processed to permanently attach the DNA sequences to the
glass surface and to denature them. A typical array might
contain ≈6000 spots of DNA in a 2  2 cm grid.
In an alternative method, multiple DNA oligonucleotides, usually at least 20 nucleotides in length, are synthesized from an initial nucleotide that is covalently bound to
the surface of a glass slide. The synthesis of an oligonucleotide of specific sequence can be programmed in a small
region on the surface of the slide. Several oligonucleotide sequences from a single gene are thus synthesized in neighboring regions of the slide to analyze expression of that gene.
With this method, oligonucleotides representing thousands
of genes can be produced on a single glass slide. Because the
methods for constructing these arrays of synthetic oligonucleotides were adapted from methods for manufacturing
microscopic integrated circuits used in computers, these
types of oligonucleotide microarrays are often called DNA
chips.

Hybridize to DNA
microarray

cDNAs hybridized to
DNAs for a single gene

Wash
Measure green and red
fluorescence over each spot

B
A

C

Array of
6000 genes

A If a spot is yellow, expression of that gene is the same in
cells grown either on glucose or ethanol
B If a spot is green, expression of that gene is greater in cells
grown in glucose
C If a spot is red, expression of that gene is greater in cells
grown in ethanol

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-35 DNA microarray analysis
can reveal differences in gene expression in yeast cells under
different experimental conditions. In this example, cDNA
prepared from mRNA isolated from wild-type Saccharomyces cells
grown on glucose or ethanol is labeled with different fluorescent
dyes. A microarray composed of DNA spots representing each
yeast gene is exposed to an equal mixture of the two cDNA
preparations under hybridization conditions. The ratio of the
intensities of red and green fluorescence over each spot, detected
with a scanning confocal laser microscope, indicates the relative
expression of each gene in cells grown on each of the carbon
sources. Microarray analysis also is useful for detecting differences
in gene expression between wild-type and mutant strains.

386

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

400 of the differentially expressed genes have no known
function, these results provide the first clue as to their possible function in yeast biology.

Cluster Analysis of Multiple Expression
Experiments Identifies Co-regulated Genes
Firm conclusions rarely can be drawn from a single microarray experiment about whether genes that exhibit similar
changes in expression are co-regulated and hence likely to be
closely related functionally. For example, many of the observed differences in gene expression just described in yeast
growing on glucose or ethanol could be indirect consequences
of the many different changes in cell physiology that occur
when cells are transferred from one medium to another. In
other words, genes that appear to be co-regulated in a single
microarray expression experiment may undergo changes in
expression for very different reasons and may actually have
very different biological functions. A solution to this problem is to combine the information from a set of expression
array experiments to find genes that are similarly regulated
under a variety of conditions or over a period of time.
This more informative use of multiple expression array
experiments is illustrated by the changes in gene expression
observed after starved human fibroblasts are transferred to a
rich, serum-containing, growth medium. In one study, the relative expression of 8600 genes was determined at different

Time

that are expressed will hybridize under appropriate conditions
to their complementary cDNAs and can subsequently be detected in a scanning laser microscope.
Figure 9-35 depicts how this method can be applied to
compare gene expression in yeast cells growing on glucose
versus ethanol as the source of carbon and energy. In this type
of experiment, the separate cDNA preparations from glucosegrown and ethanol-grown cells are labeled with differently
colored fluorescent dyes. A DNA array comprising all 6000
genes then is incubated with a mixture containing equal
amounts of the two cDNA preparations under hybridization
conditions. After unhybridized cDNA is washed away, the intensity of green and red fluorescence at each DNA spot is
measured using a fluorescence microscope and stored in computer files under the name of each gene according to its
known position on the slide. The relative intensities of red
and green fluorescence signals at each spot are a measure of
the relative level of expression of that gene in cells grown in
glucose or ethanol. Genes that are not transcribed under these
growth conditions give no detectable signal.
Hybridization of fluorescently labeled cDNA preparations to DNA microarrays provides a means for analyzing
gene expression patterns on a genomic scale. This type of
analysis has shown that as yeast cells shift from growth on
glucose to growth on ethanol, expression of 710 genes increases by a factor of two or more, while expression of 1030
genes decreases by a factor of two or more. Although about

A

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-36 Cluster analysis of data
from multiple microarray expression experiments can
identify co-regulated genes. In this experiment, the expression
of 8600 mammalian genes was detected by microarray analysis
at time intervals over a 24-hour period after starved fibroblasts
were provided with serum. The cluster diagram shown here is
based on a computer algorithm that groups genes showing
similar changes in expression compared with a starved control
sample over time. Each column of colored boxes represents a
single gene, and each row represents a time point. A red box
indicates an increase in expression relative to the control; a
green box, a decrease in expression; and a black box, no

B

C

D

E

significant change in expression. The “tree” diagram at the top
shows how the expression patterns for individual genes can be
organized in a hierarchical fashion to group together the genes
with the greatest similarity in their patterns of expression over
time. Five clusters of coordinately regulated genes were
identified in this experiment, as indicated by the bars at the
bottom. Each cluster contains multiple genes whose encoded
proteins function in a particular cellular process: cholesterol
biosynthesis (A), the cell cycle (B), the immediate-early response
(C), signaling and angiogenesis (D), and wound healing and tissue
remodeling (E). [Courtesy of Michael B. Eisen, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory.]

9.5 • Inactivating the Function of Specific Genes in Eukaryotes

times after serum addition, generating more than 104 individual pieces of data. A computer program, related to the one
used to determine the relatedness of different protein sequences, can organize these data and cluster genes that show
similar expression over the time course after serum addition.
Remarkably, such cluster analysis groups sets of genes whose
encoded proteins participate in a common cellular process,
such as cholesterol biosynthesis or the cell cycle (Figure 9-36).
Since genes with identical or similar patterns of regulation generally encode functionally related proteins, cluster
analysis of multiple microarray expression experiments is another tool for deducing the functions of newly identified
genes. This approach allows any number of different experiments to be combined. Each new experiment will refine the
analysis, with smaller and smaller cohorts of genes being
identified as belonging to different clusters.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 9.4
Genomics: Genome-wide Analysis of Gene Structure
and Expression
The function of a protein that has not been isolated often can be predicted on the basis of similarity of its amino
acid sequence to proteins of known function.

■

A computer algorithm known as BLAST rapidly searches
databases of known protein sequences to find those with
significant similarity to a new (query) protein.

■

Proteins with common functional motifs may not be
identified in a typical BLAST search. These short sequences
may be located by searches of motif databases.

■

A protein family comprises multiple proteins all derived
from the same ancestral protein. The genes encoding these
proteins, which constitute the corresponding gene family,
arose by an initial gene duplication event and subsequent
divergence during speciation (see Figure 9-32).

■

Related genes and their encoded proteins that derive
from a gene duplication event are paralogous; those that
derive from speciation are orthologous. Proteins that are
orthologous usually have a similar function.

■

Open reading frames (ORFs) are regions of genomic
DNA containing at least 100 codons located between a
start codon and stop codon.

■

■ Computer search of the entire bacterial and yeast genomic
sequences for open reading frames (ORFs) correctly identifies most protein-coding genes. Several types of additional
data must be used to identify probable genes in the genomic
sequences of humans and other higher eukaryotes because
of the more complex gene structure in these organisms.

Analysis of the complete genome sequences for several
different organisms indicates that biological complexity is
not directly related to the number of protein-coding genes
(see Figure 9-34).

■

387

DNA microarray analysis simultaneously detects the relative level of expression of thousands of genes in different
types of cells or in the same cells under different conditions (see Figure 9-35).

■

Cluster analysis of the data from multiple microarray
expression experiments can identify genes that are similarly regulated under various conditions. Such co-regulated
genes commonly encode proteins that have biologically related functions.

■

9.5 Inactivating the Function
of Specific Genes in Eukaryotes
The elucidation of DNA and protein sequences in recent
years has led to identification of many genes, using sequence
patterns in genomic DNA and the sequence similarity of the
encoded proteins with proteins of known function. As discussed in the previous section, the general functions of proteins identified by sequence searches may be predicted by
analogy with known proteins. However, the precise in vivo
roles of such “new” proteins may be unclear in the absence
of mutant forms of the corresponding genes. In this section,
we describe several ways for disrupting the normal function
of a specific gene in the genome of an organism. Analysis of
the resulting mutant phenotype often helps reveal the in vivo
function of the normal gene and its encoded protein.
Three basic approaches underlie these gene-inactivation
techniques: (1) replacing a normal gene with other sequences;
(2) introducing an allele whose encoded protein inhibits functioning of the expressed normal protein; and (3) promoting
destruction of the mRNA expressed from a gene. The normal endogenous gene is modified in techniques based on the
first approach but is not modified in the other approaches.

Normal Yeast Genes Can Be Replaced with
Mutant Alleles by Homologous Recombination
Modifying the genome of the yeast Saccharomyces is particularly easy for two reasons: yeast cells readily take up exogenous DNA under certain conditions, and the introduced
DNA is efficiently exchanged for the homologous chromosomal site in the recipient cell. This specific, targeted recombination of identical stretches of DNA allows any gene in
yeast chromosomes to be replaced with a mutant allele. (As
we discuss in Section 9.6, recombination between homologous chromosomes also occurs naturally during meiosis.)
In one popular method for disrupting yeast genes in this
fashion, PCR is used to generate a disruption construct containing a selectable marker that subsequently is transfected
into yeast cells. As shown in Figure 9-37a, primers for PCR
amplification of the selectable marker are designed to include
about 20 nucleotides identical with sequences flanking the
yeast gene to be replaced. The resulting amplified construct
comprises the selectable marker (e.g., the kanMX gene,

388

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

(a)

20-nt flanking
sequence

5
3

20-nt flanking
sequence

DNA synthesis

5
3

3
5

Target yeast gene

Primer 2

kanMX
Primer 1

3
5

DNA synthesis

PCR

kanMX

Disruption
construct

(b)
Diploid
cell

Transform diploid cells with
disruption construct

Homologous
recombination

Select for G-418 resistance

Sporulation

Four
haploid
spores

If the disrupted
gene is essential,
these spores
will be nonviable

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-37 Homologous
recombination with transfected disruption constructs can
inactivate specific target genes in yeast. (a) A suitable
construct for disrupting a target gene can be prepared by the
PCR. The two primers designed for this purpose each contain a
sequence of about 20 nucleotides (nt) that is homologous to one
end of the target yeast gene as well as sequences needed to
amplify a segment of DNA carrying a selectable marker gene
such as kanMX, which confers resistance to G-418. (b) When
recipient diploid Saccharomyces cells are transformed with the
gene disruption construct, homologous recombination between
the ends of the construct and the corresponding chromosomal
sequences will integrate the kanMX gene into the chromosome,
replacing the target gene sequence. The recombinant diploid
cells will grow on a medium containing G-418, whereas
nontransformed cells will not. If the target gene is essential for
viability, half the haploid spores that form after sporulation of
recombinant diploid cells will be nonviable.

which like neor confers resistance to G-418) flanked by
about 20 base pairs that match the ends of the target yeast
gene. Transformed diploid yeast cells in which one of the two
copies of the target endogenous gene has been replaced by
the disruption construct are identified by their resistance to
G-418 or other selectable phenotype. These heterozygous
diploid yeast cells generally grow normally regardless of the
function of the target gene, but half the haploid spores derived from these cells will carry only the disrupted allele (Figure 9-37b). If a gene is essential for viability, then spores
carrying a disrupted allele will not survive.
Disruption of yeast genes by this method is proving particularly useful in assessing the role of proteins identified by ORF
analysis of the entire genomic DNA sequence. A large consortium of scientists has replaced each of the approximately 6000
genes identified by ORF analysis with the kanMX disruption
construct and determined which gene disruptions lead to nonviable haploid spores. These analyses have shown that about
4500 of the 6000 yeast genes are not required for viability, an
unexpectedly large number of apparently nonessential genes. In
some cases, disruption of a particular gene may give rise to subtle defects that do not compromise the viability of yeast cells
growing under laboratory conditions. Alternatively, cells carrying a disrupted gene may be viable because of operation of
backup or compensatory pathways. To investigate this possibility, yeast geneticists currently are searching for synthetic
lethal mutations that might reveal nonessential genes with redundant functions (see Figure 9-9c).

Transcription of Genes Ligated to a Regulated
Promoter Can Be Controlled Experimentally
Although disruption of an essential gene required for cell
growth will yield nonviable spores, this method provides little information about what the encoded protein actually does
in cells. To learn more about how a specific gene contributes
to cell growth and viability, investigators must be able to selectively inactivate the gene in a population of growing cells.
One method for doing this employs a regulated promoter to
selectively shut off transcription of an essential gene.
A useful promoter for this purpose is the yeast GAL1
promoter, which is active in cells grown on galactose but
completely inactive in cells grown on glucose. In this approach, the coding sequence of an essential gene (X) ligated
to the GAL1 promoter is inserted into a yeast shuttle vector
(see Figure 9-19a). The recombinant vector then is introduced into haploid yeast cells in which gene X has been disrupted. Haploid cells that are transformed will grow on
galactose medium, since the normal copy of gene X on the
vector is expressed in the presence of galactose. When the
cells are transferred to a glucose-containing medium, gene
X no longer is transcribed; as the cells divide, the amount of
the encoded protein X gradually declines, eventually reaching a state of depletion that mimics a complete loss-offunction mutation. The observed changes in the phenotype
of these cells after the shift to glucose medium may suggest

9.5 • Inactivating the Function of Specific Genes in Eukaryotes

which cell processes depend on the protein encoded by the
essential gene X.
In an early application of this method, researchers explored the function of cytosolic Hsc70 genes in yeast. Haploid cells with a disruption in all four redundant Hsc70 genes
were nonviable, unless the cells carried a vector containing
a copy of the Hsc70 gene that could be expressed from the
GAL1 promoter on galactose medium. On transfer to glucose, the vector-carrying cells eventually stopped growing because of insufficient Hsc70 activity. Careful examination of
these dying cells revealed that their secretory proteins could
no longer enter the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). This study
provided the first evidence for the unexpected role of Hsc70
protein in translocation of secretory proteins into the ER, a
process examined in detail in Chapter 16.

Specific Genes Can Be Permanently Inactivated
in the Germ Line of Mice
Many of the methods for disrupting genes in yeast can be applied to genes of higher eukaryotes. These genes can be introduced into the germ line via homologous recombination
to produce animals with a gene knockout, or simply “knockout.” Knockout mice in which a specific gene is disrupted are
a powerful experimental system for studying mammalian development, behavior, and physiology. They also are useful
in studying the molecular basis of certain human genetic
diseases.
Gene-targeted knockout mice are generated by a twostage procedure. In the first stage, a DNA construct contain-

ing a disrupted allele of a particular target gene is introduced
into embryonic stem (ES) cells. These cells, which are derived
from the blastocyst, can be grown in culture through many
generations (see Figure 22-3). In a small fraction of transfected cells, the introduced DNA undergoes homologous recombination with the target gene, although recombination at
nonhomologous chromosomal sites occurs much more frequently. To select for cells in which homologous genetargeted insertion occurs, the recombinant DNA construct
introduced into ES cells needs to include two selectable
marker genes (Figure 9-38). One of these genes (neor), which
(a) Formation of ES cells carrying a knockout mutation
neo r

tk HSV

Gene X replacement construct

Homologous
recombination

ES
cells

ES
cells

Nonhomologous
recombination

ES-cell DNA

ES-cell DNA

Gene X

Other genes

Gene-targeted
insertion

Random
insertion

Mutation in gene X

No mutation in gene X

Cells are resistant to
G-418 and ganciclovir

Cells are resistant to
G-418 but sensitive
to ganciclovir

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-38 Isolation of mouse ES
cells with a gene-targeted disruption is the first stage in
production of knockout mice. (a) When exogenous DNA is
introduced into embryonic stem (ES) cells, random insertion via
nonhomologous recombination occurs much more frequently
than gene-targeted insertion via homologous recombination.
Recombinant cells in which one allele of gene X (orange and
white) is disrupted can be obtained by using a recombinant
vector that carries gene X disrupted with neor (green), which
confers resistance to G-418, and, outside the region of
homology, tkHSV (yellow), the thymidine kinase gene from herpes
simplex virus. The viral thymidine kinase, unlike the endogenous
mouse enzyme, can convert the nucleotide analog ganciclovir
into the monophosphate form; this is then modified to the
triphosphate form, which inhibits cellular DNA replication in ES
cells. Thus ganciclovir is cytotoxic for recombinant ES cells
carrying the tkHSV gene. Nonhomologous insertion includes the
tkHSV gene, whereas homologous insertion does not; therefore,
only cells with nonhomologous insertion are sensitive to
ganciclovir. (b) Recombinant cells are selected by treatment with
G-418, since cells that fail to pick up DNA or integrate it into their
genome are sensitive to this cytotoxic compound. The surviving
recombinant cells are treated with ganciclovir. Only cells with a
targeted disruption in gene X, and therefore lacking the tkHSV
gene, will survive. [See S. L. Mansour et al., 1988, Nature 336:348.]

389

(b) Positive and negative selection of recombinant ES cells
Nonrecombinant cells
Recombinants
with random
insertion

Recombinants with
gene-targeted insertion

Treat with G-418
(positive selection)

Treat with ganciclovir
(negative selection)

ES cells with targeted disruption in gene X

390

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

1

Inject ES cells into blastocoel
cavity of early embryos

Brown mouse
(A/A, X−/X+)
Black mouse
(a/a, X+/X+)
4.5-day blastocyst
2

Surgically transfer embryos
into pseudopregnant female

Foster mother
Possible
progeny

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-39 ES cells heterozygous
for a disrupted gene are used to produce gene-targeted
knockout mice. Step 1 : Embryonic stem (ES) cells
heterozygous for a knockout mutation in a gene of interest (X)
and homozygous for a dominant allele of a marker gene (here,
brown coat color, A) are transplanted into the blastocoel cavity of
4.5-day embryos that are homozygous for a recessive allele of
the marker (here, black coat color, a). Step 2 : The early embryos
then are implanted into a pseudopregnant female. Those progeny
containing ES-derived cells are chimeras, indicated by their mixed
black and brown coats. Step 3 : Chimeric mice then are
backcrossed to black mice; brown progeny from this mating have
ES-derived cells in their germ line. Steps 4 – 6 : Analysis of DNA
isolated from a small amount of tail tissue can identify brown
mice heterozygous for the knockout allele. Intercrossing of these
mice produces some individuals homozygous for the disrupted
allele, that is, knockout mice. [Adapted from M. R. Capecchi, 1989,
Trends Genet. 5:70.]

Chimeric

Black
Select chimeric mice for
crosses to wild-type black mice

Video: Microinjection of ES Cells into a Blastocyst

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

×
Possible germ cells:
A/X +; A/X −; a/X +
3

A/a, X +/X +

All germ cells:
a/X +

ES cell-derived progeny
will be brown

A/a, X −/X +

a/a, X +/X +

Progeny from ES cell-derived
germ cells
4

Screen brown progeny DNA
to identify X −/X + heterozygotes

5

Mate X −/X + heterozygotes

6

Screen progeny DNA to identify
X −/X − homozygotes

Knockout mouse

confers G-418 resistance, is inserted within the target gene (X),
thereby disrupting it. The other selectable gene, the thymidine
kinase gene from herpes simplex virus (tkHSV), confers sensitivity to ganciclovir, a cytotoxic nucleotide analog; it is inserted
into the construct outside the target-gene sequence. Only ES
cells that undergo homologous recombination can survive in
the presence of both G-418 and ganciclovir. In these cells one
allele of gene X will be disrupted.

In the second stage in production of knockout mice, ES
cells heterozygous for a knockout mutation in gene X are injected into a recipient wild-type mouse blastocyst, which
subsequently is transferred into a surrogate pseudopregnant
female mouse (Figure 9-39). The resulting progeny will be
chimeras, containing tissues derived from both the transplanted ES cells and the host cells. If the ES cells also are homozygous for a visible marker trait (e.g., coat color), then
chimeric progeny in which the ES cells survived and proliferated can be identified easily. Chimeric mice are then mated
with mice homozygous for another allele of the marker trait
to determine if the knockout mutation is incorporated into
the germ line. Finally, mating of mice, each heterozygous for
the knockout allele, will produce progeny homozygous for the
knockout mutation.
Development of knockout mice that mimic certain
human diseases can be illustrated by cystic fibrosis.
By methods discussed in Section 9.6, the recessive
mutation that causes this disease eventually was shown to
be located in a gene known as CFTR, which encodes a chloride channel. Using the cloned wild-type human CFTR gene,
researchers isolated the homologous mouse gene and subsequently introduced mutations in it. The gene-knockout technique was then used to produce homozygous mutant mice,
which showed symptoms (i.e., a phenotype), including disturbances to the functioning of epithelial cells, similar to
those of humans with cystic fibrosis. These knockout mice
are currently being used as a model system for studying this
genetic disease and developing effective therapies. ❚

Somatic Cell Recombination Can Inactivate Genes
in Specific Tissues
Investigators often are interested in examining the effects of
knockout mutations in a particular tissue of the mouse, at a
specific stage in development, or both. However, mice car-

9.5 • Inactivating the Function of Specific Genes in Eukaryotes

LoxP
Mouse
All cells carry endogenous gene
X with loxP sites flanking exon2

1

2

loxP

Heterozygous for gene X knockout; all cells carry cre gene

cre
Cell-type-specific
promoter

loxP

2

Cre
Mouse

3

Cells not expressing Cre
1

×

391

Cells expressing Cre
2

3

Cre
protein

1

Gene function is normal

3
2

loxP -Cre
Mouse
All cells carry one copy of loxP modified gene X, one copy of
gene X knockout, and cre genes

1

3

Gene function is disrupted

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-40 The loxP-Cre
recombination system can knock out genes in specific cell
types. Two loxP sites are inserted on each side of an essential
exon (2) of the target gene X (blue) by homologous
recombination, producing a loxP mouse. Since the loxP sites are
in introns, they do not disrupt the function of X. The Cre mouse
carries one gene X knockout allele and an introduced cre gene
(orange) from bacteriophage P1 linked to a cell-type-specific
promoter (yellow). The cre gene is incorporated into the mouse
genome by nonhomologous recombination and does not affect

the function of other genes. In the loxP-Cre mice that result from
crossing, Cre protein is produced only in those cells in which the
promoter is active. Thus these are the only cells in which
recombination between the loxP sites catalyzed by Cre occurs,
leading to deletion of exon 2. Since the other allele is a
constitutive gene X knockout, deletion between the loxP sites
results in complete loss of function of gene X in all cells
expressing Cre. By using different promoters, researchers can
study the effects of knocking out gene X in various types of
cells.

rying a germ-line knockout may have defects in numerous
tissues or die before the developmental stage of interest. To
address this problem, mouse geneticists have devised a clever
technique to inactivate target genes in specific types of somatic cells or at particular times during development.
This technique employs site-specific DNA recombination
sites (called loxP sites) and the enzyme Cre that catalyzes recombination between them. The loxP-Cre recombination
system is derived from bacteriophage P1, but this site-specific
recombination system also functions when placed in mouse
cells. An essential feature of this technique is that expression
of Cre is controlled by a cell-type-specific promoter. In loxPCre mice generated by the procedure depicted in Figure 9-40,
inactivation of the gene of interest (X) occurs only in cells in
which the promoter controlling the cre gene is active.
An early application of this technique provided strong evidence that a particular neurotransmitter receptor is important for learning and memory. Previous pharmacological and
physiological studies had indicated that normal learning requires the NMDA class of glutamate receptors in the hippocampus, a region of the brain. But mice in which the gene
encoding an NMDA receptor subunit was knocked out died

neonatally, precluding analysis of the receptor’s role in learning. Following the protocol in Figure 9-40, researchers generated mice in which the receptor subunit gene was
inactivated in the hippocampus but expressed in other
tissues. These mice survived to adulthood and showed
learning and memory defects, confirming a role for these receptors in the ability of mice to encode their experiences into
memory.

Dominant-Negative Alleles Can Functionally
Inhibit Some Genes
In diploid organisms, as noted in Section 9.1, the phenotypic
effect of a recessive allele is expressed only in homozygous
individuals, whereas dominant alleles are expressed in heterozygotes. That is, an individual must carry two copies of
a recessive allele but only one copy of a dominant allele to
exhibit the corresponding phenotypes. We have seen how
strains of mice that are homozygous for a given recessive
knockout mutation can be produced by crossing individuals
that are heterozygous for the same knockout mutation (see
Figure 9-39). For experiments with cultured animal cells,

392

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

however, it is usually difficult to disrupt both copies of a gene
in order to produce a mutant phenotype. Moreover, the difficulty in producing strains with both copies of a gene mutated is often compounded by the presence of related genes
of similar function that must also be inactivated in order to
reveal an observable phenotype.
For certain genes, the difficulties in producing homozygous
knockout mutants can be avoided by use of an allele carrying
a dominant-negative mutation. These alleles are genetically
dominant; that is, they produce a mutant phenotype even in
cells carrying a wild-type copy of the gene. But unlike other

1

Inject foreign DNA
into one of the pronuclei

Pronuclei

Fertilized mouse egg prior
to fusion of male and
female pronuclei

Technique Animation: Creating a Transgenic Mouse
Video: DNA Injected into a Pronucleus of a Mouse Zygote

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

2

Transfer injected eggs
into foster mother

About 10 – 30% of offspring will contain
foreign DNA in chromosomes of
all their tissues and germ line

3

Breed mice expressing
foreign DNA to propagate
DNA in germ line

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-41 Transgenic mice
are produced by random integration of a foreign gene
into the mouse germ line. Foreign DNA injected into
one of the two pronuclei (the male and female haploid
nuclei contributed by the parents) has a good chance of
being randomly integrated into the chromosomes of the
diploid zygote. Because a transgene is integrated into the
recipient genome by nonhomologous recombination, it
does not disrupt endogenous genes. [See R. L. Brinster
et al., 1981, Cell 27:223.]

Inactive
(a) In cells with two
alleles for wild-type
small GTPase

Active
GTP

GDP

GTP
GDP
GTP

Wild type

(b) In cells with one
wild-type and one
dominant-negative
allele
Dominant-negative
mutant

GEF

GDP
GDP

GDP

GDP

GEF

▲ FIGURE 9-42 Inactivation of the function of a wild-type
GTPase by the action of a dominant-negative mutant allele.
(a) Small (monomeric) GTPases (purple) are activated by their
interaction with a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF),
which catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP. (b) Introduction of
a dominant-negative allele of a small GTPase gene into cultured
cells or transgenic animals leads to expression of a mutant
GTPase that binds to and inactivates the GEF. As a result,
endogenous wild-type copies of the same small GTPase are
trapped in the inactive GDP-bound state. A single dominantnegative allele thus causes a loss-of-function phenotype in
heterozygotes similar to that seen in homozygotes carrying two
recessive loss-of-function alleles.
types of dominant alleles, dominant-negative alleles produce
a phenotype equivalent to that of a loss-of-function mutation.
Useful dominant-negative alleles have been identified for
a variety of genes and can be introduced into cultured cells
by transfection or into the germ line of mice or other organisms. In both cases, the introduced gene is integrated into the
genome by nonhomologous recombination. Such randomly
inserted genes are called transgenes; the cells or organisms
carrying them are referred to as transgenic. Transgenes carrying a dominant-negative allele usually are engineered so
that the allele is controlled by a regulated promoter, allowing
expression of the mutant protein in different tissues at different times. As noted above, the random integration of exogenous DNA via nonhomologous recombination occurs at
a much higher frequency than insertion via homologous recombination. Because of this phenomenon, the production of
transgenic mice is an efficient and straightforward process
(Figure 9-41).
Among the genes that can be functionally inactivated by
introduction of a dominant-negative allele are those encoding small (monomeric) GTP-binding proteins belonging to
the GTPase superfamily. As we will examine in several later
chapters, these proteins (e.g., Ras, Rac, and Rab) act as
intracellular switches. Conversion of the small GTPases from
an inactive GDP-bound state to an active GTP-bound state
depends on their interacting with a corresponding guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF). A mutant small GTPase

9.5 • Inactivating the Function of Specific Genes in Eukaryotes

that permanently binds to the GEF protein will block conversion of endogenous wild-type small GTPases to the active GTP-bound state, thereby inhibiting them from
performing their switching function (Figure 9-42).

(a) In vitro production of double-stranded RNA
Sense transcript

Antisense transcript

S E N S E
5

SENSE

E S N E S

5

3

E SNES

3

Gene
of interest

Gene
of interest

Double-Stranded RNA Molecules Can Interfere
with Gene Function by Targeting mRNA
for Destruction
Researchers are exploiting a recently discovered phenomenon known as RNA interference (RNAi) to inhibit the function of specific genes. This approach is technically simpler
than the methods described above for disrupting genes. First
observed in the roundworm C. elegans, RNAi refers to the
ability of a double-stranded (ds) RNA to block expression
of its corresponding single-stranded mRNA but not that of
mRNAs with a different sequence.
To use RNAi for intentional silencing of a gene of interest, investigators first produce dsRNA based on the sequence
of the gene to be inactivated (Figure 9-43a). This dsRNA is
injected into the gonad of an adult worm, where it has access
to the developing embryos. As the embryos develop, the
mRNA molecules corresponding to the injected dsRNA are
rapidly destroyed. The resulting worms display a phenotype
similar to the one that would result from disruption of the
corresponding gene itself. In some cases, entry of just a few
molecules of a particular dsRNA into a cell is sufficient to inactivate many copies of the corresponding mRNA. Figure 9-43b
illustrates the ability of an injected dsRNA to interfere with
production of the corresponding endogenous mRNA in C.
elegans embryos. In this experiment, the mRNA levels in embryos were determined by incubating the embryos with a fluorescently labeled probe specific for the mRNA of interest.
This technique, in situ hybridization, is useful in assaying expression of a particular mRNA in cells and tissue sections.
Initially, the phenomenon of RNAi was quite mysterious
to geneticists. Recent studies have shown that specialized
RNA-processing enzymes cleave dsRNA into short segments,
which base-pair with endogenous mRNA. The resulting hybrid molecules are recognized and cleaved by specific nucleases at these hybridization sites. This model accounts for the
specificity of RNAi, since it depends on base pairing, and for
its potency in silencing gene function, since the complementary mRNA is permanently destroyed by nucleolytic degradation. Although the normal cellular function of RNAi is not
understood, it may provide a defense against viruses with
dsRNA genomes or help regulate certain endogenous genes.
(For a more detailed discussion of the mechanism of RNA interference, see Section 12.4.)
Other organisms in which RNAi-mediated gene inactivation has been successful include Drosophila, many kinds
of plants, zebrafish, spiders, the frog Xenopus, and mice. Although most other organisms do not appear to be as sensitive
to the effects of RNAi as C. elegans, the method does have
general use when the dsRNA is injected directly into embryonic tissues.

393

5

dsRNA

3

SENSE
SENSE
3

5

(b)

Noninjected

Injected

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-43 RNA interference (RNAi)
can functionally inactivate genes in C. elegans and some
other organisms. (a) Production of double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA) for RNAi of a specific target gene. The coding sequence
of the gene, derived from either a cDNA clone or a segment of
genomic DNA, is placed in two orientations in a plasmid vector
adjacent to a strong promoter. Transcription of both constructs in
vitro using RNA polymerase and ribonucleotide triphosphates
yields many RNA copies in the sense orientation (identical with
the mRNA sequence) or complementary antisense orientation.
Under suitable conditions, these complementary RNA molecules
will hybridize to form dsRNA. (b) Inhibition of mex3 RNA
expression in worm embryos by RNAi (see the text for the
mechanism). (Left ) Expression of mex3 RNA in embryos was
assayed by in situ hybridization with a fluorescently labeled probe
(purple) specific for this mRNA. (Right ) The embryo derived from
a worm injected with double-stranded mex3 mRNA produces
little or no endogenous mex3 mRNA, as indicated by the
absence of color. Each four-cell stage embryo is ≈50 m in
length. [Part (b) from A. Fire et al., 1998, Nature 391:806.]

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 9.5
Inactivating the Function of Specific Genes
in Eukaryotes
Once a gene has been cloned, important clues about its
normal function in vivo can be deduced from the observed
phenotypic effects of mutating the gene.

■

Genes can be disrupted in yeast by inserting a selectable
marker gene into one allele of a wild-type gene via homologous recombination, producing a heterozygous mutant.
When such a heterozygote is sporulated, disruption of an
essential gene will produce two nonviable haploid spores
(Figure 9-37).

■

A yeast gene can be inactivated in a controlled manner
by using the GAL1 promoter to shut off transcription of
a gene when cells are transferred to glucose medium.

■

394

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

In mice, modified genes can be incorporated into the
germ line at their original genomic location by homologous recombination, producing knockouts (see Figures
9-38 and 9-39). Mouse knockouts can provide models for
human genetic diseases such as cystic fibrosis.

■

The loxP-Cre recombination system permits production
of mice in which a gene is knocked out in a specific tissue.

■

In the production of transgenic cells or organisms, exogenous DNA is integrated into the host genome by nonhomologous recombination (see Figure 9-41). Introduction
of a dominant-negative allele in this way can functionally
inactivate a gene without altering its sequence.

■

In some organisms, including the roundworm C. elegans,
double-stranded RNA triggers destruction of the all the
mRNA molecules with the same sequence (see Figure 9-43).
This phenomenon, known as RNAi (RNA interference),
provides a specific and potent means of functionally inactivating genes without altering their structure.

■

TABLE 9-3

9.6 Identifying and Locating Human
Disease Genes
Inherited human diseases are the phenotypic consequence of defective human genes. Table 9-3 lists
several of the most commonly occurring inherited
diseases. Although a “disease” gene may result from a new
mutation that arose in the preceding generation, most cases
of inherited diseases are caused by preexisting mutant alleles that have been passed from one generation to the next for
many generations.
Nowadays, the typical first step in deciphering the underlying cause for any inherited human disease is to identify
the affected gene and its encoded protein. Comparison of the
sequences of a disease gene and its product with those of
genes and proteins whose sequence and function are known
can provide clues to the molecular and cellular cause of the
disease. Historically, researchers have used whatever pheno-

Common Inherited Human Diseases

Disease

Molecular and Cellular Defect

Incidence

Sickle-cell anemia

Abnormal hemoglobin causes deformation
of red blood cells, which can become lodged
in capillaries; also confers resistance to malaria.

1/625 of sub-Saharan
African origin

Cystic fibrosis

Defective chloride channel (CFTR) in epithelial
cells leads to excessive mucus in lungs.

1/2500 of European
origin

Phenylketonuria (PKU)

Defective enzyme in phenylalanine metabolism
(tyrosine hydroxylase) results in excess
phenylalanine, leading to mental retardation,
unless restricted by diet.

1/10,000 of European
origin

Tay-Sachs disease

Defective hexosaminidase enzyme leads to
accumulation of excess sphingolipids in the
lysosomes of neurons, impairing neural
development.

1/1000 Eastern European
Jews

Huntington’s disease

Defective neural protein (huntingtin) may
assemble into aggregates causing damage
to neural tissue.

1/10,000 of European
origin

Hypercholesterolemia

Defective LDL receptor leads to excessive
cholesterol in blood and early heart attacks.

1/122 French Canadians

Duchenne muscular
dystrophy (DMD)

Defective cytoskeletal protein dystrophin
leads to impaired muscle function.

1/3500 males

Hemophilia A

Defective blood clotting factor VIII leads
to uncontrolled bleeding.

1–2/10,000 males

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT

X-LINKED RECESSIVE

9.6 • Identifying and Locating Human Disease Genes

typic clues might be relevant to make guesses about the molecular basis of inherited diseases. An early example of successful guesswork was the hypothesis that sickle-cell anemia,
known to be a disease of blood cells, might be caused by a
defective hemoglobin. This idea led to identification of a specific amino acid substitution in hemoglobin that causes polymerization of the defective hemoglobin molecules, causing
the sickle-like deformation of red blood cells in individuals
who have inherited two copies of the Hbs allele for sickle-cell
hemoglobin.
Most often, however, the genes responsible for inherited
diseases must be found without any prior knowledge or reasonable hypotheses about the nature of the affected gene or
its encoded protein. In this section, we will see how human
geneticists can find the gene responsible for an inherited disease by following the segregation of the disease in families.
The segregation of the disease can be correlated with the segregation of many other genetic markers, eventually leading
to identification of the chromosomal position of the affected
gene. This information, along with knowledge of the sequence of the human genome, can ultimately allow the affected gene and the disease-causing mutations to be
pinpointed. ❚

Many Inherited Diseases Show One of Three
Major Patterns of Inheritance
Human genetic diseases that result from mutation in one specific gene exhibit several inheritance patterns depending on
the nature and chromosomal location of the alleles that cause
them. One characteristic pattern is that exhibited by a dominant allele in an autosome (that is, one of the 22 human
chromosomes that is not a sex chromosome). Because an autosomal dominant allele is expressed in the heterozygote,
usually at least one of the parents of an affected individual
will also have the disease. It is often the case that the diseases
caused by dominant alleles appear later in life after the reproductive age. If this were not the case, natural selection
would have eliminated the allele during human evolution. An
example of an autosomal dominant disease is Huntington’s
disease, a neural degenerative disease that generally strikes in
mid- to late life. If either parent carries a mutant HD allele,
each of his or her children (regardless of sex) has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the mutant allele and being affected
(Figure 9-44a).
A recessive allele in an autosome exhibits a quite different
segregation pattern. For an autosomal recessive allele, both
parents must be heterozygous carriers of the allele in order
for their children to be at risk of being affected with the disease. Each child of heterozygous parents has a 25 percent
chance of receiving both recessive alleles and thus being affected, a 50 percent chance of receiving one normal and one
mutant allele and thus being a carrier, and a 25 percent
chance of receiving two normal alleles. A clear example of an
autosomal recessive disease is cystic fibrosis, which results
from a defective chloride channel gene known as CFTR (Fig-

AHD/A
Affected

(a) Huntington’s
disease



395

A/A

Males and females
A/A
Not affected

A /A
Affected
HD

ACFTR/A
Carrier

(b) Cystic
fibrosis



ACFTR/A
Carrier

Males and females
CFTR

A

A
/A
Carrier

CFTR

/A
Affected

X  /Y

(c) Duchenne
muscular
dystrophy

Males
DMD

X
/Y
Affected

A/ACFTR
Carrier

CFTR

X /Y
Unaffected



A/A
Noncarrier

X DMD /X 
Carrier
Females
X DMD /X 
Carrier

X /X 
Noncarrier

▲ FIGURE 9-44 Three common inheritance patterns for
human genetic diseases. Wild-type autosomal (A) and sex
chromosomes (X and Y) are indicated by superscript plus signs.
(a) In an autosomal dominant disorder such as Huntington’s
disease, only one mutant allele is needed to confer the disease.
If either parent is heterozygous for the mutant HD allele, his or
her children have a 50 percent chance of inheriting the mutant
allele and getting the disease. (b) In an autosomal recessive
disorder such as cystic fibrosis, two mutant alleles must be
present to confer the disease. Both parents must be
heterozygous carriers of the mutant CFTR gene for their children
to be at risk of being affected or being carriers. (c) An X-linked
recessive disease such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy is
caused by a recessive mutation on the X chromosome and
exhibits the typical sex-linked segregation pattern. Males born to
mothers heterozygous for a mutant DMD allele have a 50
percent chance of inheriting the mutant allele and being affected.
Females born to heterozygous mothers have a 50 percent
chance of being carriers.

ure 9-44b). Related individuals (e.g., first or second cousins)
have a relatively high probability of being carriers for the
same recessive alleles. Thus children born to related parents
are much more likely than those born to unrelated parents to
be homozygous for, and therefore affected by, an autosomal
recessive disorder.
The third common pattern of inheritance is that of an Xlinked recessive allele. A recessive allele on the X-chromosome will most often be expressed in males, who receive only
one X chromosome from their mother, but not in females
who receive an X chromosome from both their mother and
father. This leads to a distinctive sex-linked segregation pattern where the disease is exhibited much more frequently in

396

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

males than in females. For example, Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a muscle degenerative disease that specifically affects males, is caused by a recessive allele on the X
chromosome. DMD exhibits the typical sex-linked segregation pattern in which mothers who are heterozygous and
therefore phenotypically normal can act as carriers, transmitting the DMD allele, and therefore the disease, to 50 percent of their male progeny (Figure 9-44c).

Recombinational Analysis Can Position Genes
on a Chromosome
The independent segregation of chromosomes during meiosis provides the basis for determining whether genes are on
the same or different chromosomes. Genetic traits that segregate together during meiosis more frequently than expected
from random segregation are controlled by genes located on
the same chromosome. (The tendency of genes on the same
chromosome to be inherited together is referred to as genetic
linkage.) However, the occurrence of recombination during
meiosis can separate linked genes; this phenomenon provides
a means for locating (mapping) a particular gene relative to
other genes on the same chromosome.
Recombination takes place before the first meiotic cell division in germ cells when the replicated chromosomes of
each homologous pair align with each other, an act called
synapsis (see Figure 9-3). At this time, homologous DNA sequences on maternally and paternally derived chromatids

(a) Homologous chromosomes undergoing crossing over
Chromatid

(b)
To separate a and b,
crossover must occur
in this narrow stretch

a
b
c
d

To separate a and e,
crossover can occur
anywhere in this
stretch

e

▲ FIGURE 9-45 Recombination during meiosis. (a) Crossing
over can occur between chromatids of homologous
chromosomes before the first meiotic division (see Figure 9-3).
(b) The longer the distance between two genes on a chromatid,
the more likely they are to be separated by recombination.

can exchange with each other, a process known as crossing
over. The sites of recombination occur more or less at random along the length of chromosomes; thus the closer together two genes are, the less likely that recombination will
occur between them during meiosis (Figure 9-45). In other
words, the less frequently recombination occurs between two
genes on the same chromosome, the more tightly they are
linked and the closer together they are. The frequency of recombination between two genes can be determined from the
proportion of recombinant progeny, whose phenotypes differ from the parental phenotypes, produced in crosses of parents carrying different alleles of the genes.
The presence of many different already mapped genetic
traits, or markers, distributed along the length of a chromosome facilitates the mapping of a new mutation by assessing
its possible linkage to these marker genes in appropriate
crosses. The more markers that are available, the more precisely a mutation can be mapped. As more and more mutations are mapped, the linear order of genes along the length
of a chromosome can be constructed. This ordering of genes
along a chromosome is called a genetic map, or linkage map.
By convention, one genetic map unit is defined as the distance between two positions along a chromosome that results in one recombinant individual in 100 progeny. The
distance corresponding to this 1 percent recombination frequency is called a centimorgan (cM). Comparison of the actual physical distances between known genes, determined by
molecular analysis, with their recombination frequency indicates that in humans 1 centimorgan on average represents
a distance of about 7.5  105 base pairs.

DNA Polymorphisms Are Used in LinkageMapping Human Mutations
Many different genetic markers are needed to construct a
high-resolution genetic map. In the experimental organisms
commonly used in genetic studies, numerous markers with
easily detectable phenotypes are readily available for genetic
mapping of mutations. This is not the case for mapping
genes whose mutant alleles are associated with inherited diseases in humans. However, recombinant DNA technology
has made available a wealth of useful DNA-based molecular markers. Because most of the human genome does not
code for protein, a large amount of sequence variation exists between individuals. Indeed, it has been estimated that
nucleotide differences between unrelated individuals can be
detected on an average of every 103 nucleotides. If these variations in DNA sequence, referred to as DNA polymorphisms, can be followed from one generation to the next,
they can serve as genetic markers for linkage studies. Currently, a panel of as many as 104 different known polymorphisms whose locations have been mapped in the human
genome is used for genetic linkage studies in humans.
Restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs)
were the first type of molecular markers used in linkage studies. RFLPs arise because mutations can create or destroy the

9.6 • Identifying and Locating Human Disease Genes

sites recognized by specific restriction enzymes, leading to
variations between individuals in the length of restriction
fragments produced from identical regions of the genome.
Differences in the sizes of restriction fragments between individuals can be detected by Southern blotting with a probe
specific for a region of DNA known to contain an RFLP (Figure 9-46a). The segregation and meiotic recombination of
such DNA polymorphisms can be followed like typical
genetic markers. Figure 9-46b illustrates how RFLP analysis
of a family can detect the segregation of an RFLP that can
be used to test for statistically significant linkage to the
allele for an inherited disease or some other human trait of
interest.
The amassing of vast amounts of genomic sequence information from different humans in recent years has led to
identification of other useful DNA polymorphisms. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) constitute the most abundant type and are therefore useful for constructing highresolution genetic maps. Another useful type of DNA polymorphism consists of a variable number of repetitions of a
one- two-, or three-base sequence. Such polymorphisms,
known as simple sequence repeats (SSRs), or microsatellites,
presumably are formed by recombination or a slippage
mechanism of either the template or newly synthesized
Hybridization
banding pattern
from individual
with both allele 1
and allele 2

(a)

Allele 1

Chromosomal arrangement

strands during DNA replication. A useful property of SSRs is
that different individuals will often have different numbers of
repeats. The existence of multiple versions of an SSR makes
it more likely to produce an informative segregation pattern
in a given pedigree and therefore be of more general use in
mapping the positions of disease genes. If an SNP or SSR alters a restriction site, it can be detected by RFLP analysis.
More commonly, however, these polymorphisms do not alter
restriction fragments and must be detected by PCR amplification and DNA sequencing.

Linkage Studies Can Map Disease Genes
with a Resolution of About 1 Centimorgan
Without going into all the technical considerations, let’s see
how the allele conferring a particular dominant trait (e.g., familial hypercholesterolemia) might be mapped. The first step
is to obtain DNA samples from all the members of a family
containing individuals that exhibit the disease. The DNA
from each affected and unaffected individual then is analyzed
to determine the identity of a large number of known DNA
polymorphisms (either SSR or SNP markers can be used).
The segregation pattern of each DNA polymorphism within
the family is then compared with the segregation of the
(b)
Grandparents
2 2

Grandparents
2 2

1 2

2 3

Parent

Parent

Enzyme Enzyme
A
B

1 2

2 3

Children

a1

b1

b2

a2

a3

2 3

Mutation at site a2
prevents cleavage
Allele 2

397

2 2

Alleles

a1

b1

b2

2 2

a3

2 3

2 2
2 3

1 2

1 2

Fragment
lengths

1

10 kb

2

7.7 kb

3

6.5 kb

Restriction endonuclease A

Probed single-copy region

MW

Restriction endonuclease B

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 9-46 Restriction fragment
length polymorphisms (RFLPs) can be followed like genetic
markers. (a) In the example shown, DNA from an individual is
treated with two different restriction enzymes (A and B), which
cut DNA at different sequences (a and b). The resulting
fragments are subjected to Southern blot analysis (see Figure
9-26) with a radioactive probe that binds to the indicated DNA
region (green) to detect the fragments. Since no differences
between the two homologous chromosomes occur in the
sequences recognized by the B enzyme, only one fragment is
recognized by the probe, as indicated by a single hybridization
band. However, treatment with enzyme A produces fragments of

two different lengths (two bands are seen), indicating that a
mutation has caused the loss of one of the a sites in one of the
two chromosomes. (b) Pedigree based on RFLP analysis of the
DNA from a region known to be present on chromosome 5. The
DNA samples were cut with the restriction enzyme TaqI and
analyzed by Southern blotting. In this family, this region of the
genome exists in three allelic forms characterized by TaqI sites
spaced 10, 7.7, or 6.5 kb apart. Each individual has two alleles;
some contain allele 2 (7.7 kb) on both chromosomes, and others
are heterozygous at this site. Circles indicate females; squares
indicate males. The gel lanes are aligned below the
corresponding subjects. [After H. Donis-Keller et al., 1987, Cell 51:319.]

398

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

disease under study to find those polymorphisms that tend to
segregate along with the disease. Finally, computer analysis
of the segregation data is used to calculate the likelihood of
linkage between each DNA polymorphism and the diseasecausing allele.
In practice, segregation data are collected from different
families exhibiting the same disease and pooled. The more
families exhibiting a particular disease that can be examined,
the greater the statistical significance of evidence for linkage
that can be obtained and the greater the precision with which
the distance can be measured between a linked DNA polymorphism and a disease allele. Most family studies have a
maximum of about 100 individuals in which linkage between a disease gene and a panel of DNA polymorphisms
can be tested. This number of individuals sets the practical
upper limit on the resolution of such a mapping study to
about 1 centimorgan, or a physical distance of about 7.5 
105 base pairs.
A phenomenon called linkage disequilibrium is the basis
for an alternative strategy, which in some cases can afford a
higher degree of resolution in mapping studies. This approach depends on the particular circumstance in which a genetic disease commonly found in a particular population
results from a single mutation that occurred many generations in the past. This ancestral chromosome will carry
closely linked DNA polymorphisms that will have been conserved through many generations. Polymorphisms that are
farthest away on the chromosome will tend to become separated from the disease gene by recombination, whereas those
closest to the disease gene will remain associated with it. By
assessing the distribution of specific markers in all the affected individuals in a population, geneticists can identify
DNA markers tightly associated with the disease, thus localizing the disease-associated gene to a relatively small region.
The resolving power of this method comes from the ability to
determine whether a polymorphism and the disease allele
were ever separated by a meiotic recombination event at any
time since the disease allele first appeared on the ancestral
chromosome. Under ideal circumstances linkage disequilibrium studies can improve the resolution of mapping studies
to less than 0.1 centimorgan.

Further Analysis Is Needed to Locate a Disease
Gene in Cloned DNA
Although linkage mapping can usually locate a human disease gene to a region containing about 7.5  105 base pairs,
as many as 50 different genes may be located in a region of
this size. The ultimate objective of a mapping study is to locate the gene within a cloned segment of DNA and then to
determine the nucleotide sequence of this fragment.
One strategy for further localizing a disease gene within
the genome is to identify mRNA encoded by DNA in the region of the gene under study. Comparison of gene expression
in tissues from normal and affected individuals may suggest

tissues in which a particular disease gene normally is expressed. For instance, a mutation that phenotypically affects
muscle, but no other tissue, might be in a gene that is expressed only in muscle tissue. The expression of mRNA in
both normal and affected individuals generally is determined
by Northern blotting or in situ hybridization of labeled DNA
or RNA to tissue sections. Northern blots permit comparison
of both the level of expression and the size of mRNAs in mutant and wild-type tissues (see Figure 9-27). Although the
sensitivity of in situ hybridization is lower than that of
Northern blot analysis, it can be very helpful in identifying
an mRNA that is expressed at low levels in a given tissue but
at very high levels in a subclass of cells within that tissue. An
mRNA that is altered or missing in various individuals affected with a disease compared with wild-type individuals
would be an excellent candidate for encoding the protein
whose disrupted function causes that disease.
In many cases, point mutations that give rise to diseasecausing alleles may result in no detectable change in the level
of expression or electrophoretic mobility of mRNAs. Thus
if comparison of the mRNAs expressed in normal and affected individuals reveals no detectable differences in the
candidate mRNAs, a search for point mutations in the DNA
regions encoding the mRNAs is undertaken. Now that highly
efficient methods for sequencing DNA are available, researchers frequently determine the sequence of candidate regions of DNA isolated from affected individuals to identify
point mutations. The overall strategy is to search for a coding sequence that consistently shows possibly deleterious alterations in DNA from individuals that exhibit the disease. A
limitation of this approach is that the region near the affected
gene may carry naturally occurring polymorphisms unrelated to the gene of interest. Such polymorphisms, not functionally related to the disease, can lead to misidentification of
the DNA fragment carrying the gene of interest. For this reason, the more mutant alleles available for analysis, the more
likely that a gene will be correctly identified.

Many Inherited Diseases Result from Multiple
Genetic Defects
Most of the inherited human diseases that are now understood at the molecular level are monogenetic traits. That is, a
clearly discernible disease state is produced by the presence
of a defect in a single gene. Monogenic diseases caused by
mutation in one specific gene exhibit one of the characteristic inheritance patterns shown in Figure 9-44. The genes associated with most of the common monogenic diseases have
already been mapped using DNA-based markers as described
previously.
However, many other inherited diseases show more
complicated patterns of inheritance, making the identification of the underlying genetic cause much more difficult.
One type of added complexity that is frequently encountered is genetic heterogeneity. In such cases, mutations in

Perspectives for the Future

any one of multiple different genes can cause the same disease. For example, retinitis pigmentosa, which is characterized by degeneration of the retina usually leading to
blindness, can be caused by mutations in any one of more
than 60 different genes. In human linkage studies, data from
multiple families usually must be combined to determine
whether a statistically significant linkage exists between a
disease gene and known molecular markers. Genetic heterogeneity such as that exhibited by retinitis pigmentosa can
confound such an approach because any statistical trend in
the mapping data from one family tends to be canceled out
by the data obtained from another family with an unrelated
causative gene.
Human geneticists used two different approaches to identify the many genes associated with retinitis pigmentosa. The
first approach relied on mapping studies in exceptionally
large single families that contained a sufficient number of affected individuals to provide statistically significant evidence
for linkage between known DNA polymorphisms and a single causative gene. The genes identified in such studies
showed that several of the mutations that cause retinitis pigmentosa lie within genes that encode abundant proteins of
the retina. Following up on this clue, geneticists concentrated
their attention on those genes that are highly expressed in the
retina when screening other individuals with retinitis pigmentosa. This approach of using additional information to
direct screening efforts to a subset of candidate genes led to
identification of additional rare causative mutations in many
different genes encoding retinal proteins.
A further complication in the genetic dissection of human
diseases is posed by diabetes, heart disease, obesity, predisposition to cancer, and a variety of mental disorders that
have at least some heritable properties. These and many
other diseases can be considered to be polygenic traits in the
sense that alleles of multiple genes, acting together within
an individual, contribute to both the occurrence and the
severity of disease. A systematic solution to the problem of
mapping complex polygenic traits in humans does not yet
exist. Future progress may come from development of refined diagnostic methods that can distinguish the different
forms of diseases resulting from multiple causes.
Models of human disease in experimental organisms may
also contribute to unraveling the genetics of complex traits
such as obesity or diabetes. For instance, large-scale controlled breeding experiments in mice can identify mouse
genes associated with diseases analogous to those in humans.
The human orthologs of the mouse genes identified in such
studies would be likely candidates for involvement in the corresponding human disease. DNA from human populations
then could be examined to determine if particular alleles of
the candidate genes show a tendency to be present in individuals affected with the disease but absent from unaffected
individuals. This “candidate gene” approach is currently
being used intensively to search for genes that may contribute to the major polygenic diseases in humans.

399

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 9.6
Identifying and Locating Human Disease Genes
Inherited diseases and other traits in humans show three
major patterns of inheritance: autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked recessive (see Figure 9-44).

■

■ Genes located on the same chromosome can be separated
by crossing over during meiosis, thus producing new recombinant genotypes in the next generation (see Figure 9-45).

Genes for human diseases and other traits can be mapped
by determining their cosegregation with markers whose locations in the genome are known. The closer a gene is to a
particular marker, the more likely they are to cosegregate.

■

Mapping of human genes with great precision requires
thousands of molecular markers distributed along the chromosomes. The most useful markers are differences in the
DNA sequence (polymorphisms) among individuals in
noncoding regions of the genome.

■

DNA polymorphisms useful in mapping human genes include restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs),
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and simple sequence repeats (SSRs).

■

Linkage mapping often can locate a human disease gene
to a chromosomal region that includes as many as 50 genes.
To identify the gene of interest within this candidate region typically requires expression analysis and comparison
of DNA sequences between wild-type and disease-affected
individuals.

■

Some inherited diseases can result from mutations in different genes in different individuals (genetic heterogeneity).
The occurrence and severity of other diseases depend on
the presence of mutant alleles of multiple genes in the same
individuals (polygenic traits). Mapping of the genes associated with such diseases is particularly difficult because
the occurrence of the disease cannot readily be correlated
to a single chromosomal locus.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
As the examples in this chapter and throughout the book illustrate, genetic analysis is the foundation of our understanding of many fundamental processes in cell biology. By
examining the phenotypic consequences of mutations that
inactivate a particular gene, geneticists are able to connect
knowledge about the sequence, structure, and biochemical
activity of the encoded protein to its function in the context
of a living cell or multicellular organism. The classical approach to making these connections in both humans and
simpler, experimentally accessible organisms has been to
identify new mutations of interest based on their phenotypes
and then to isolate the affected gene and its protein product.

400

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics

Although scientists continue to use this classical genetic
approach to dissect fundamental cellular processes and biochemical pathways, the availability of complete genomic sequence information for most of the common experimental
organisms has fundamentally changed the way genetic experiments are conducted. Using various computational methods, scientists have identified most of the protein-coding
gene sequences in E. coli, yeast, Drosophila, Arabidopsis,
mouse, and humans. The gene sequences, in turn, reveal the
primary amino acid sequence of the encoded protein products, providing us with a nearly complete list of the proteins
found in each of the major experimental organisms.
The approach taken by most researchers has thus shifted
from discovering new genes and proteins to discovering the
functions of genes and proteins whose sequences are already
known. Once an interesting gene has been identified, genomic
sequence information greatly speeds subsequent genetic manipulations of the gene, including its designed inactivation, to
learn more about its function. Already all the ≈6000 possible
gene knockouts in yeast have been produced; this relatively
small but complete collection of mutants has become the preferred starting point for many genetic screens in yeast. Similarly, sets of vectors for RNAi inactivation of a large number
of defined genes in the nematode C. elegans now allow efficient genetic screens to be performed in this multicellular organism. Following the trajectory of recent advances, it seems
quite likely that in the foreseeable future either RNAi or
knockout methods will have been used to inactivate every gene
in the principal model organisms, including the mouse.
In the past, a scientist might spend many years studying
only a single gene, but nowadays scientists commonly study
whole sets of genes at once. For example, with DNA microarrays the level of expression of all genes in an organism
can be measured almost as easily as the expression of a single
gene. One of the great challenges facing geneticists in the
twenty-first century will be to exploit the vast amount of
available data on the function and regulation of individual
genes to gain fundamental insights into the organization of
complex biochemical pathways and regulatory networks.

KEY TERMS
alleles 352
clone 364
complementary DNAs
(cDNAs) 365
complementation 357
DNA cloning 361
DNA library 352
DNA microarray 385
dominant 353
gene knockout 389
genomics 352

genotype 352
heterozygous 353
homozygous 353
hybridization 367
linkage 396
mutation 352
Northern blotting 377
phenotype 352
plasmids 363
polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) 375

probes 367
recessive 353
recombinant DNA 361
recombination 387
restriction enzymes 361
RNA interference
(RNAi) 393
segregation 355

Southern blotting 377
temperature-sensitive
mutations 356
transfection 378
transformation 363
transgenes 392
vectors 361

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Genetic mutations can provide insights into the mechanisms of complex cellular or developmental processes. What
is the difference between recessive and dominant mutations?
What is a temperature-sensitive mutation, and how is this
type of mutation useful?
2. A number of experimental approaches can be used to
analyze mutations. Describe how complementation analysis
can be used to reveal whether two mutations are in the same
or in different genes. What are suppressor mutations and
synthetic lethal mutations?
3. Restriction enzymes and DNA ligase play essential roles
in DNA cloning. How is it that a bacterium that produces a
restriction enzyme does not cut its own DNA? Describe some
general features of restriction enzyme sites. What are the
three types of DNA ends that can be generated after cutting
DNA with restriction enzymes? What reaction is catalyzed
by DNA ligase?
4. Bacterial plasmids and  phage serve as cloning vectors.
Describe the essential features of a plasmid and a  phage
vector. What are the advantages and applications of plasmids
and  phage as cloning vectors?
5. A DNA library is a collection of clones, each containing a different fragment of DNA, inserted into a cloning vector. What is the difference between a cDNA and a genomic
DNA library? How can you use hybridization or expression
to screen a library for a specific gene? What oligonucleotide
primers could be synthesized as probes to screen a library for
the gene encoding the peptide Met-Pro-Glu-Phe-Tyr?
6. In 1993, Kerry Mullis won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
for his invention of the PCR process. Describe the three steps
in each cycle of a PCR reaction. Why was the discovery of a
thermostable DNA polymerase (e.g., Taq polymerase) so important for the development of PCR?
7. Southern and Northern blotting are powerful tools in
molecular biology; describe the technique of each. What are
the applications of these two blotting techniques?
8. A number of foreign proteins have been expressed in
bacterial and mammalian cells. Describe the essential fea-

Analyze the Data

tures of a recombinant plasmid that are required for expression of a foreign gene. How can you modify the foreign protein to facilitate its purification? What is the advantage of
expressing a protein in mammalian cells versus bacteria?

labeled p24 cDNA or p25 cDNA as probes. The control for
this experiment is a mock transfection with no siRNA. What
do you conclude from this Northern blot about the specificity of the siRNAs for their target mRNAs?

9. Why is the screening for genes based on the presence of
ORFs (open reading frames) more useful for bacterial
genomes than for eukaryotic genomes? What are paralogous
and orthologous genes? What are some of the explanations
for the finding that humans are a much more complex organism than the roundworm C. elegans, yet have only less
than twice the number of genes (35,000 versus 19,000)?
10. A global analysis of gene expression can be accomplished by using a DNA microarray. What is a DNA microarray? How are DNA microarrays used for studying gene
expression? How do experiments with microarrays differ
from Northern botting experiments described in question 7?

401

Probe = p24 cDNA

Control

siRNA–p24

siRNA–p25

Probe = p25 cDNA

11. The ability to selectively modify the genome in the
mouse has revolutionized mouse genetics. Outline the procedure for generating a knockout mouse at a specific genetic
locus. How can the loxP-Cre system be used to conditionally
knock out a gene? What is an important medical application
of knockout mice?
12. Two methods for functionally inactivating a gene without altering the gene sequence are by dominant negative mutations and RNA interference (RNAi). Describe how each
method can inhibit expression of a gene.
13. DNA polymorphisms can be used as DNA markers. Describe the differences among RFLP, SNP, and SSR polymorphisms. How can these markers be used for DNA mapping
studies?
14. Genetic linkage studies can roughly locate the chromosomal position of a “disease” gene. Describe how expression
analysis and DNA sequence analysis can be used to identify
a “disease” gene.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
RNA interference (RNAi) is a process of post-transcriptional
gene silencing mediated by short double-stranded RNA molecules called siRNA (small interfering RNAs). In mammalian
cells, transfection of 21–22 nucleotide siRNAs leads to
degradation of mRNA molecules that contain the same sequence as the siRNA. In the following experiment, siRNA
and knockout mice are used to investigate two related cell
surface proteins designated p24 and p25 that are suspected to
be cellular receptors for the uptake of a newly isolated virus.
a. To test the efficacy of RNAi in cells, siRNAs specific to
cell surface proteins p24 (siRNA–p24) and p25 (siRNA–p25)
are transfected individually into cultured mouse cells. RNA
is extracted from these transfected cells and the mRNA for
proteins p24 and p25 are detected on Northern blots using

Control

siRNA–p24

siRNA–p25

b. Next, the ability of siRNAs to inhibit viral replication is investigated. Cells are transfected with siRNA–p24 or
siRNA–p25 or with siRNA to an essential viral protein.
Twenty hours later, transfected cells are infected with the
virus. After a further incubation period, the cells are collected
and lysed. The number of viruses produced by each culture
is shown below. The control is a mock transfection with no
siRNA. What do you conclude about the role of p24 and p25
in the uptake of the virus? Why might the siRNA to the viral
protein be more effective than siRNA to the receptors in reducing the number of viruses?
Cell Treatment

Number of Viruses/ml

Control
siRNA–p24
siRNA–p25
siRNA–p24 and siRNA–p25
siRNA to viral protein

1  107
3  106
2  106
1  104
1  102

c. To investigate the role of proteins p24 and p25 for viral
replication in live mice, transgenic mice that lack genes for
p24 or p25 are generated. The loxP-Cre conditional knockout system is used to selectively delete the genes in cells of
either the liver or the lung. Wild type and knockout mice are
infected with virus. After a 24-hour incubation period, mice
are killed and lung and liver tissues are removed and examined for the presence (infected) or absence (normal) of virus
by immunohistochemistry. What do these data indicate
about the cellular requirements for viral infection in different tissues?

402

CHAPTER 9 • Molecular Genetic Techniques and Genomics
Tissue Examined

Mouse

Liver

Lung

Wild type
Knockout of p24 in liver
Knockout of p24 in lung
Knockout of p25 in liver
Knockout of p25 in lung

infected
normal
infected
infected
infected

infected
infected
infected
infected
normal

d. By performing Northern blots on different tissues from
wild-type mice, you find that p24 is expressed in the liver but
not in the lung, whereas p25 is expressed in the lung but not
the liver. Based on all the data you have collected, propose a
model to explain which protein(s) are involved in the virus
entry into liver and lung cells? Would you predict that the
cultered mouse cells used in parts (a) and (b) express p24,
p25, or both proteins?

REFERENCES

Genetic Analysis of Mutations to Identify
and Study Genes
Adams, A. E. M., D. Botstein, and D. B. Drubin. 1989. A yeast
actin-binding protein is encoded by sac6, a gene found by suppression of an actin mutation. Science 243:231.
Griffiths, A. G. F., et al. 2000. An Introduction to Genetic Analysis, 7th ed. W. H. Freeman and Company.
Guarente, L. 1993. Synthetic enhancement in gene interaction:
a genetic tool comes of age. Trends Genet. 9:362–366.
Hartwell, L. H. 1967. Macromolecular synthesis of temperaturesensitive mutants of yeast. J. Bacteriol. 93:1662.
Hartwell, L. H. 1974. Genetic control of the cell division cycle
in yeast. Science 183:46.
Nüsslein-Volhard, C., and E. Wieschaus. 1980. Mutations affecting segment number and polarity in Drosophila. Nature
287:795–801.
Simon, M. A., et al. 1991. Ras1 and a putative guanine nucleotide exchange factor perform crucial steps in signaling by the sevenless protein tyrosine kinase. Cell 67:701–716.
Tong, A. H., et al. 2001. Systematic genetic analysis with ordered arrays of yeast deletion mutants. Science 294:2364–2368.

DNA Cloning by Recombinant DNA Methods
Ausubel, F. M., et al. 2002. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. Wiley.
Gubler, U., and B. J. Hoffman. 1983. A simple and very efficient
method for generating cDNA libraries. Gene 25:263–289.
Han, J. H., C. Stratowa, and W. J. Rutter. 1987. Isolation of fulllength putative rat lysophospholipase cDNA using improved methods for mRNA isolation and cDNA cloning. Biochem.
26:1617–1632.
Itakura, K., J. J. Rossi, and R. B. Wallace. 1984. Synthesis and
use of synthetic oligonucleotides. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 53:323–356.
Maniatis, T., et al. 1978. The isolation of structural genes from
libraries of eucaryotic DNA. Cell 15:687–701.
Nasmyth, K. A., and S. I. Reed. 1980. Isolation of genes by complementation in yeast: molecular cloning of a cell-cycle gene. Proc.
Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 77:2119–2123.

Nathans, D., and H. O. Smith. 1975. Restriction endonucleases
in the analysis and restructuring of DNA molecules. Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 44:273–293.
Roberts, R. J., and D. Macelis. 1997. REBASE—restriction enzymes and methylases. Nucl. Acids Res. 25:248–262. Information on
accessing a continuously updated database on restriction and modification enzymes at http://www.neb.com/rebase.
Thomas, M., J. R. Cameron, and R. W. Davis. 1974. Viable molecular hybrids of bacteriophage lambda and eukaryotic DNA. Proc.
Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 71:4579–4583.
Sambrook, J., and D. Russell. 2001. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.

Characterizing and Using Cloned DNA Fragments
Andrews, A. T. 1986. Electrophoresis, 2d ed. Oxford University
Press.
Erlich, H., ed. 1992. PCR Technology: Principles and Applications for DNA Amplification. W. H. Freeman and Company.
Pellicer, A., M. Wigler, R. Axel, and S. Silverstein. 1978. The
transfer and stable integration of the HSV thymidine kinase gene into
mouse cells. Cell 41:133–141.
Saiki, R. K., et al. 1988. Primer-directed enzymatic amplification
of DNA with a thermostable DNA polymerase. Science 239:487–491.
Sanger, F. 1981. Determination of nucleotide sequences in DNA.
Science 214:1205–1210.
Souza, L. M., et al. 1986. Recombinant human granulocytecolony stimulating factor: effects on normal and leukemic myeloid
cells. Science 232:61–65.
Wahl, G. M., J. L. Meinkoth, and A. R. Kimmel. 1987. Northern and Southern blots. Meth. Enzymol. 152:572–581.
Wallace, R. B., et al. 1981. The use of synthetic oligonucleotides
as hybridization probes. II: Hybridization of oligonucleotides of mixed
sequence to rabbit -globin DNA. Nucl. Acids Res. 9:879–887.

Genomics: Genome-wide Analysis of Gene Structure
and Expression
BLAST Information can be found at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/Education/BLASTinfo/information3.htm
Ballester, R., et al. 1990. The NF1 locus encodes a protein functionally related to mammalian GAP and yeast IRA proteins. Cell
63:851–859.
Chervitz, S. A., et al. 1998. Comparison of the complete protein
sets of worm and yeast: orthology and divergence. Science
282:2022–2028.
Gene Ontology Consortium. 2000. Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. Nature Gen. 25:25–29.
Lander, E. S., et al. 2001 Initial sequencing and analysis of the
human genome. Nature 409:860–921.
Rubin, G. M., et al. 2000. Comparative genomics of the eukaryotes.
Science 287:2204–2215.
Waterston, R. H., et al. 2002. Initial sequencing and comparative analysis of the mouse genome. Nature 420:520–562.

Inactivating the Function of Specific Genes in Eukaryotes
Capecchi, M. R. 1989. Altering the genome by homologous recombination. Science 244:1288–1292.
Deshaies, R. J., et al. 1988. A subfamily of stress proteins facilitates translocation of secretory and mitochondrial precursor
polypeptides. Nature 332:800–805.
Fire, A., et al. 1998. Potent and specific genetic interference by
double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature391:806–811.

References
Gu, H., et al. 1994. Deletion of a DNA polymerase beta gene
segment in T cells using cell type-specific gene targeting. Science
265:103–106.
Zamore, P. D., T. Tuschl, P. A. Sharp, and D. P. Bartel. 2000.
RNAi: double-stranded RNA directs the ATP-dependent cleavage of
mRNA at 21 to 23 nucleotide intervals. Cell 101:25–33.
Zimmer, A. 1992. Manipulating the genome by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 15:115.

Identifying and Locating Human Disease Genes
Botstein, D., et al. 1980. Construction of a genetic linkage map
in man using restriction fragment length polymorphisms. Am. J.
Genet. 32:314–331.

403

Donis-Keller, H., et al. 1987. A genetic linkage map of the human
genome. Cell 51:319–337.
Hartwell, et al. 2000. Genetics: From Genes to Genomes.
McGraw-Hill.
Hastbacka, T., et al. 1994. The diastrophic dysplasia gene
encodes a novel sulfate transporter: positional cloning by fine-structure linkage disequilibrium mapping. Cell 78:1073.
Orita, M., et al. 1989. Rapid and sensitive detection of point
mutations and DNA polymorphisms using the polymerase chain reaction. Genomics 5:874.
Tabor, H. K., N. J. Risch, and R. M. Myers. 2002. Opinion: candidate-gene approaches for studying complex genetic traits: practical
considerations. Nat. Rev. Genet. 3:391–397.

10
MOLECULAR
STRUCTURE
OF GENES AND
CHROMOSOMES
These brightly colored RxFISH-painted chromosomes are both
beautiful and useful in revealing chromosome anomalies and
in comparing karyotypes of different species. [© Department of
Clinical Cytogenetics, Addenbrookes Hospital/Photo Researchers, Inc.]

B

y the beginning of the twenty-first century, molecular
biologists had completed sequencing the entire genomes
of hundreds of viruses, scores of bacteria, and the budding yeast S. cerevisiae, a unicellular eukaryote. In addition,
the vast majority of the genome sequence is now known
for several multicellular eukaryotes including the roundworm
C. elegans, the fruit fly D. melanogaster, and humans (see
Figure 9-34). Detailed analysis of these sequencing data has
revealed that a large portion of the genomes of higher eukaryotes does not encode mRNAs or any other RNAs required by
the organism. Remarkably, such noncoding DNA constitutes
more than 95 percent of human chromosomal DNA.
The noncoding DNA in multicellular organisms contains
many regions that are similar but not identical. Variations
within some stretches of this repetitious DNA are so great
that each single person can be distinguished by a DNA “fingerprint” based on these sequence variations. Moreover,
some repetitious DNA sequences are not found in constant
positions in the DNA of individuals of the same species. Such
“mobile” DNA elements, which are present in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, can cause mutations when
they move to new sites in the genome. Even though they generally have no function in the life cycle of an individual organism, mobile elements probably have played an important
role in evolution.
In higher eukaryotes, DNA regions encoding proteins—
that is, genes—lie amidst this expanse of apparently nonfunctional DNA. In addition to the nonfunctional DNA
between genes, noncoding introns are common within genes
of multicellular plants and animals. Introns are less common,
but sometimes present, in single-celled eukaryotes and very

rare in bacteria. Sequencing of the same protein-coding gene
in a variety of eukaryotic species has shown that evolutionary pressure selects for maintenance of relatively similar sequences in the coding regions, or exons. In contrast, wide
sequence variation, even including total loss, occurs among
introns, suggesting that most intron sequences have little
functional significance.
The sheer length of cellular DNA is a significant problem with which cells must contend. The DNA in a single
human cell, which measures about 2 meters in total length,
must be contained within cells with diameters of less than
10 m, a compaction ratio of greater than 105. Specialized
eukaryotic proteins associated with nuclear DNA fold and
organize it into the structures of DNA and protein visualized
as individual chromosomes during mitosis. Mitochondria and

OUTLINE
10.1 Molecular Definition of a Gene
10.2 Chromosomal Organization of Genes
and Noncoding DNA
10.3 Mobile DNA
10.4 Structural Organization of Eukaryotic
Chromosomes
10.5 Morphology and Functional Elements
of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
10.6 Organelle DNAs
405

406

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

 FIGURE 10-1 Overview of the
structure of genes and chromosomes.
DNA of higher eukaryotes consists of
unique and repeated sequences. Only
~5% of human DNA encodes proteins
and functional RNAs and the regulatory
sequences that control their expression; the
remainder is merely spacer DNA between
genes and introns within genes. Much of
this DNA, ~50% in humans, is derived
from mobile DNA elements, genetic
symbiots that have contributed to the
evolution of contemporary genomes.
Each chromosome consists of a single,
long molecule of DNA up to ~280 Mb
in humans, organized into increasing
levels of condensation by the histone
and nonhistone proteins with which it
is intricately complexed. Much smaller
DNA molecules are localized in
mitochondria and chloroplasts.

Nucleus

Interphase
chromosome

Loops of
30-nm fiber
associated with
chromosome
scaffold
"Beads on a string"

Mitochondrion

Gene
families

Single
copy gene

DNA

chloroplasts also contain DNA, probably evolutionary remnants of their origins, that encode essential components of
these vital organelles.
In this chapter we first present a molecular definition of
genes and the complexities that arise in higher organisms
from the processing of mRNA precursors into alternatively
spliced mRNAs. Next we discuss the main classes of eukaryotic DNA and the special properties of mobile DNA. We also
consider the packaging of DNA and proteins into compact
complexes, the large-scale structure of chromosomes, and
the functional elements required for chromosome duplication and segregation. In the final section, we consider
organelle DNA and how it differs from nuclear DNA. Figure 10-1 provides an overview of these interrelated subjects.

10.1

Higher-order
chromatin
folding

30-nm
fiber

Molecular Definition of a Gene

In molecular terms, a gene commonly is defined as the entire nucleic acid sequence that is necessary for the synthesis
of a functional gene product (polypeptide or RNA). According to this definition, a gene includes more than the nucleotides encoding the amino acid sequence of a protein,
referred to as the coding region. A gene also includes all the
DNA sequences required for synthesis of a particular RNA
transcript. In eukaryotic genes, transcription-control regions
known as enhancers can lie 50 kb or more from the coding
region. Other critical noncoding regions in eukaryotic genes
are the sequences that specify 3 cleavage and polyadenylation, known as poly(A) sites, and splicing of primary RNA
transcripts, known as splice sites (see Figure 4-14). Mutations in these RNA-processing signals prevent expression of
a functional mRNA and thus of the encoded polypeptide.

Simplesequence
DNA
Mobile
elements

Introns

Spacer DNA

Nucleosome

Although most genes are transcribed into mRNAs, which
encode proteins, clearly some DNA sequences are transcribed into RNAs that do not encode proteins (e.g., tRNAs
and rRNAs). However, because the DNA that encodes
tRNAs and rRNAs can cause specific phenotypes when it is
mutated, these DNA regions generally are referred to as
tRNA and rRNA genes, even though the final products of
these genes are RNA molecules and not proteins. Many
other RNA molecules described in later chapters also are
transcribed from non-protein-coding genes.

Most Eukaryotic Genes Produce Monocistronic
mRNAs and Contain Lengthy Introns
As discussed in Chapter 4, many bacterial mRNAs are polycistronic; that is, a single mRNA molecule (e.g., the mRNA
encoded by the trp operon) includes the coding region for
several proteins that function together in a biological
process. In contrast, most eukaryotic mRNAs are monocistronic; that is, each mRNA molecule encodes a single protein. This difference between polycistronic and monocistronic
mRNAs correlates with a fundamental difference in their
translation.
Within a bacterial polycistronic mRNA a ribosomebinding site is located near the start site for each of the proteincoding regions, or cistrons, in the mRNA. Translation initiation can begin at any of these multiple internal sites,
producing multiple proteins (see Figure 4-12a). In most eukaryotic mRNAs, however, the 5-cap structure directs ribosome binding, and translation begins at the closest AUG start
codon (see Figure 4-12b). As a result, translation begins only
at this site. In many cases, the primary transcripts of eukaryotic protein-coding genes are processed into a single type of

407

10.1 • Molecular Definition of a Gene

mRNA, which is translated to give a single type of polypeptide (see Figure 4-14).
Unlike bacterial and yeast genes, which generally lack introns, most genes in multicellular animals and plants contain
introns, which are removed during RNA processing. In many
cases, the introns in a gene are considerably longer than the
exons. For instance, of the ≈50,000 base pairs composing
many human genes encoding average-size proteins, more
than 95 percent are present in introns and noncoding 5 and
3 regions. Many large proteins in higher organisms have repeated domains and are encoded by genes consisting of repeats of similar exons separated by introns of variable
length. An example of this is fibronectin, a component of the
extracellular matrix that is encoded by a gene containing
multiple copies of three types of exons (see Figure 4-15).

Simple and Complex Transcription Units Are
Found in Eukaryotic Genomes

able in prokaryotes. In contrast, most eukaryotic genes and
transcription units generally are identical, and the two terms
commonly are used interchangeably. Eukaryotic transcription units, however, are classified into two types, depending
on the fate of the primary transcript.
The primary transcript produced from a simple transcription unit is processed to yield a single type of mRNA,
encoding a single protein. Mutations in exons, introns,
and transcription-control regions all may influence expression of the protein encoded by a simple transcription
unit (Figure 10-2a).

(a) Simple transcription unit
50 kb

a

b

Cap site

c

d

Poly(A) site

Gene
Exon 1

The cluster of genes that form a bacterial operon comprises
a single transcription unit, which is transcribed from a particular promoter into a single primary transcript. In other
words, genes and transcription units often are distinguish-

Exon 2

Exon 3

Control regions
5

mRNA

3

(b) Complex transcription units
Cap site

 FIGURE 10-2 Comparison of simple and complex
eukaryotic transcription units. (a) A simple transcription unit
includes a region that encodes one protein, extending from the
5 cap site to the 3 poly(A) site, and associated control regions.
Introns lie between exons (blue rectangles) and are removed
during processing of the primary transcripts (dashed red lines);
they thus do not occur in the functional monocistronic mRNA.
Mutations in a transcription-control region (a, b) may reduce or
prevent transcription, thus reducing or eliminating synthesis of
the encoded protein. A mutation within an exon (c) may result in
an abnormal protein with diminished activity. A mutation within
an intron (d ) that introduces a new splice site results in an
abnormally spliced mRNA encoding a nonfunctional protein.
(b) Complex transcription units produce primary transcripts that
can be processed in alternative ways. (Top) If a primary transcript
contains alternative splice sites, it can be processed into mRNAs
with the same 5 and 3 exons but different internal exons.
(Middle) If a primary transcript has two poly(A) sites, it can be
processed into mRNAs with alternative 3 exons. (Bottom) If
alternative promoters (f or g) are active in different cell types,
mRNA1, produced in a cell type in which f is activated, has a
different exon (1A) than mRNA2 has, which is produced in a cell
type in which g is activated (and where exon 1B is used).
Mutations in control regions (a and b) and those designated c
within exons shared by the alternative mRNAs affect the proteins
encoded by both alternatively processed mRNAs. In contrast,
mutations (designated d and e) within exons unique to one of
the alternatively processed mRNAs affect only the protein
translated from that mRNA. For genes that are transcribed from
different promoters in different cell types (bottom), mutations in
different control regions (f and g) affect expression only in the
cell type in which that control region is active.

a

b

c

d

Poly(A)

Gene
Exon 1

Exon 2

Exon 3

Exon 4

mRNA1
or

5

3

mRNA2

5

3

Cap site

a

b

Poly(A)

Poly(A)

c

d

e

Exon 1

Exon 2

Exon 3

Gene

mRNA1
or

5

mRNA2

5

f

Cap site
d

3

3

Cap site

g

e

c

Exon 1B

Exon 2

Poly(A)

Gene
Exon 1A

mRNA1
or
mRNA2

Exon 3

3

5

5

3

408

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

In the case of complex transcription units, which are
quite common in multicellular organisms, the primary RNA
transcript can be processed in more than one way, leading
to formation of mRNAs containing different exons. Each
mRNA, however, is monocistronic, being translated into a
single polypeptide, with translation usually initiating at the
first AUG in the mRNA. Multiple mRNAs can arise from a
primary transcript in three ways (Figure 10-2b):

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 10.1
Molecular Definition of a Gene
In molecular terms, a gene is the entire DNA sequence
required for synthesis of a functional protein or RNA molecule. In addition to the coding regions (exons), a gene
includes control regions and sometimes introns.

■

Most bacterial and yeast genes lack introns, whereas
most genes in multicellular organisms contain introns. The
total length of intron sequences often is much longer than
that of exon sequences.

■

1. Use of different splice sites, producing mRNAs with the
same 5 and 3 exons but different internal exons. Figure
10-2b (top) shows one example of this type of alternative
RNA processing, exon skipping.
2. Use of alternative poly(A) sites, producing mRNAs that
share the same 5 exons but have different 3 exons (Figure
10-2b [middle]).
3. Use of alternative promoters, producing mRNAs that
have different 5 exons and common 3 exons. A gene
expressed selectively in two or more types of cells is often
transcribed from distinct cell-type-specific promoters
(Figure 10-2b [bottom]).
Examples of all three types of alternative RNA processing occur during sexual differentiation in Drosophila (see
Figure 12-14). Commonly, one mRNA is produced from a
complex transcription unit in some cell types, and an alternative mRNA is made in other cell types. For example,
differences in RNA splicing of the primary fibronectin transcript in fibroblasts and hepatocytes determines whether or
not the secreted protein includes domains that adhere to cell
surfaces (see Figure 4-15).
The relationship between a mutation and a gene is not
always straightforward when it comes to complex transcription units. A mutation in the control region or in an
exon shared by alternative mRNAs will affect all the alternative proteins encoded by a given complex transcription
unit. On the other hand, mutations in an exon present in
only one of the alternative mRNAs will affect only the protein encoded by that mRNA. As explained in Chapter 9,
genetic complementation tests commonly are used to determine if two mutations are in the same or different genes
(see Figure 9-7). However, in the complex transcription
unit shown in Figure 10-2b (middle), mutations d and e
would complement each other in a genetic complementation test, even though they occur in the same gene. This is
because a chromosome with mutation d can express a normal protein encoded by mRNA2 and a chromosome with
mutation e can express a normal protein encoded by
mRNA1. However, a chromosome with mutation c in an
exon common to both mRNAs would not complement either mutation d or e. In other words, mutation c would be
in the same complementation groups as mutations d and e,
even though d and e themselves would not be in the same
complementation group!

A simple eukaryotic transcription unit produces a single
monocistronic mRNA, which is translated into a single
protein.

■

A complex eukaryotic transcription unit is transcribed into
a primary transcript that can be processed into two or more
different monocistronic mRNAs depending on the choice of
splice sites or polyadenylation sites (see Figure 10-2b).

■

Many complex transcription units (e.g., the fibronectin
gene) express one mRNA in one cell type and an alternative mRNA in a different cell type.

■

10.2 Chromosomal Organization
of Genes and Noncoding DNA
Having reviewed the relation between transcription units
and genes, we now consider the organization of genes on
chromosomes and the relationship of noncoding DNA sequences to coding sequences.

Genomes of Many Organisms Contain Much
Nonfunctional DNA
Comparisons of the total chromosomal DNA per cell in various species first suggested that much of the DNA in certain
organisms does not encode RNA or have any apparent regulatory or structural function. For example, yeasts, fruit flies,
chickens, and humans have successively more DNA in their
haploid chromosome sets (12; 180; 1300; and 3300 Mb, respectively), in keeping with what we perceive to be the increasing complexity of these organisms. Yet the vertebrates
with the greatest amount of DNA per cell are amphibians,
which are surely less complex than humans in their structure and behavior. Even more surprising, the unicellular protozoal species Amoeba dubia has 200 times more DNA per
cell than humans. Many plant species also have considerably
more DNA per cell than humans have. For example, tulips
have 10 times as much DNA per cell as humans. The DNA
content per cell also varies considerably between closely related species. All insects or all amphibians would appear to
be similarly complex, but the amount of haploid DNA in

10.2 • Chromosomal Organization of Genes and Noncoding DNA

409

(a) Human -globin gene cluster (chromosome 11)
Exon

Pseudogene

2



Alu site

G

A

1





(b) S. cerevisiae (chromosome lll)
Open reading frame

tRNA gene

▲ FIGURE 10-3 Comparative density of genes in ≈80-kb
regions of genomic DNA from humans and the yeast
S. cerevisiae. (a) In the diagram of the -globin gene cluster on
human chromosome 11, the green boxes represent exons of
-globin–related genes. Exons spliced together to form one
mRNA are connected by caret-like spikes. The human -globin
gene cluster contains two pseudogenes (white); these regions
are related to the functional globin-type genes but are not
transcribed. Each red arrow indicates the location of an Alu

species within each of these phylogenetic classes varies by a
factor of 100.
Detailed sequencing and identification of exons in chromosomal DNA have provided direct evidence that the
genomes of higher eukaryotes contain large amounts of
noncoding DNA. For instance, only a small portion of the
-globin gene cluster of humans, about 80 kb long, encodes
protein (Figure 10-3a). Moreover, compared with other regions of vertebrate DNA, the -globin gene cluster is unusually rich in protein-coding sequences, and the introns in
globin genes are considerably shorter than those in many
human genes. In contrast, a typical 80-kb stretch of DNA
from the yeast S. cerevisiae, a single-celled eukaryote (Figure
10-3b) contains many closely spaced protein-coding sequences
without introns and relatively much less noncoding DNA.
The density of genes varies greatly in different regions of
human chromosomal DNA, from “gene-rich” regions, such
as the -globin cluster, to large gene-poor “deserts.” Of the
94 percent of human genomic DNA that has been sequenced,
only ≈1.5 percent corresponds to protein-coding sequences
(exons). Most human exons contain 50–200 base pairs, although the 3 exon in many transcription units is much
longer. Human introns vary in length considerably. Although
many are ≈90 bp long, some are much longer; their median
length is 3.3 kb. Approximately one-third of human genomic
DNA is thought to be transcribed into pre-mRNA precursors, but some 95 percent of these sequences are in introns,
which are removed by RNA splicing.
Different selective pressures during evolution may account, at least in part, for the remarkable difference in the
amount of nonfunctional DNA in unicellular and multicellu-

sequence, an ≈300-bp noncoding repeated sequence that is
abundant in the human genome. (b) In the diagram of yeast DNA
from chromosome III, the green boxes indicate open reading
frames. Most of these potential protein-coding sequences
probably are functional genes without introns. Note the much
higher proportion of noncoding-to-coding sequences in the
human DNA than in the yeast DNA. [Part (a), see F. S. Collins and
S. M. Weissman, 1984, Prog. Nucl. Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 31:315; part
(b), see S. G. Oliver et al., 1992, Nature 357:28.]

lar organisms. For example, microorganisms must compete
for limited amounts of nutrients in their environment, and
metabolic economy thus is a critical characteristic. Since synthesis of nonfunctional (i.e., noncoding) DNA requires time
and energy, presumably there was selective pressure to lose
nonfunctional DNA during the evolution of microorganisms.
On the other hand, natural selection in vertebrates depends
largely on their behavior. The energy invested in DNA synthesis is trivial compared with the metabolic energy required
for the movement of muscles; thus there was little selective
pressure to eliminate nonfunctional DNA in vertebrates.

Protein-Coding Genes May Be Solitary
or Belong to a Gene Family
The nucleotide sequences within chromosomal DNA can be
classified on the basis of structure and function, as shown in
Table 10-1. We will examine the properties of each class,
beginning with protein-coding genes, which comprise two
groups.
In multicellular organisms, roughly 25–50 percent of
the protein-coding genes are represented only once in the
haploid genome and thus are termed solitary genes. A wellstudied example of a solitary protein-coding gene is the chicken lysozyme gene. The 15-kb DNA sequence encoding
chicken lysozyme constitutes a simple transcription unit
containing four exons and three introns. The flanking regions, extending for about 20 kb upstream and downstream from the transcription unit, do not encode any
detectable mRNAs. Lysozyme, an enzyme that cleaves the
polysaccharides in bacterial cell walls, is an abundant

410

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

TABLE 10-1 Major Classes of Eukaryotic DNA and Their Representation in the Human Genome

Length

Copy Number
in Human
Genome

Fraction of
Human Genome,
%

Solitary genes

Variable

1

≈15* (0.8)†

Duplicated or diverged genes in
gene families

Variable

2–≈1000

≈15* (0.8)†

Variable

20–300

0.3

1–500 bp

Variable

3

DNA transposons

2–3 kb

300,000

3

LTR retrotransposons

6–11 kb

440,000

8

LINEs

6–8 kb

860,000

21

SINEs

100–300 bp

1,600,000

13

Variable

1–≈100

≈0.4

Variable

n.a.‡

≈25

Class
Protein-coding genes

Tandemly repeated genes encoding
rRNAs, tRNAs, snRNAs, and histones
Repetitious DNA
Simple-sequence DNA
Interspersed repeats

Non-LTR retrotransposons

Processed pseudogenes
Unclassified spacer DNA

*Complete transcription units, including introns.
†
Protein-coding exons. The total number of human protein-coding genes is estimated to be 30,000–35,000, but this number
is based on current methods for identifying genes in the human genome sequence and may be an underestimate.
‡
Not applicable.
SOURCE:

E. S. Lander et al., 2001, Nature 409:860.

component of chicken egg-white protein and also is found
in human tears. Its activity helps to keep the surface of the
eye and the chicken egg sterile.
Duplicated genes constitute the second group of proteincoding genes. These are genes with close but nonidentical sequences that generally are located within 5–50 kb of one
another. In vertebrate genomes, duplicated genes probably
constitute half the protein-coding DNA sequences. A set of
duplicated genes that encode proteins with similar but nonidentical amino acid sequences is called a gene family; the encoded, closely related, homologous proteins constitute a
protein family. A few protein families, such as protein
kinases, transcription factors, and vertebrate immunoglobulins, include hundreds of members. Most protein families,
however, include from just a few to 30 or so members; common examples are cytoskeletal proteins, 70-kDa heat-shock
proteins, the myosin heavy chain, chicken ovalbumin, and
the - and -globins in vertebrates.

The genes encoding the -like globins are a good example of a gene family. As shown in Figure 10-3a, the -like
globin gene family contains five functional genes designated
, , A, G, and ; the encoded polypeptides are similarly
designated. Two identical -like globin polypeptides combine with two identical -globin polypeptides (encoded by
another gene family) and four small heme groups to form a
hemoglobin molecule (see Figure 3-10). All the hemoglobins
formed from the different -like globins carry oxygen in the
blood, but they exhibit somewhat different properties that
are suited to specific roles in human physiology. For example, hemoglobins containing either the A or G polypeptides are expressed only during fetal life. Because these fetal
hemoglobins have a higher affinity for oxygen than adult
hemoglobins, they can effectively extract oxygen from the
maternal circulation in the placenta. The lower oxygen
affinity of adult hemoglobins, which are expressed after
birth, permits better release of oxygen to the tissues, espe-

10.2 • Chromosomal Organization of Genes and Noncoding DNA
L1

411

-globin gene

Recombination
(unequal crossing over)

Recombinant
chromosomes

▲ FIGURE 10-4 Gene duplication resulting from unequal
crossing over. Each parental chromosome (top) contains one
ancestral -globin gene containing three exons and two introns.
Homologous noncoding L1 repeated sequences lie 5 and 3 of
the -globin gene. The parental chromosomes are shown
displaced relative to each other, so that the L1 sequences are
aligned. Homologous recombination between L1 sequences as
shown would generate one recombinant chromosome with two

cially muscles, which have a high demand for oxygen during
exercise.
The different -globin genes probably arose by duplication of an ancestral gene, most likely as the result of an
“unequal crossover” during meiotic recombination in a developing germ cell (egg or sperm) (Figure 10-4). Over evolutionary time the two copies of the gene that resulted
accumulated random mutations; beneficial mutations that
conferred some refinement in the basic oxygen-carrying function of hemoglobin were retained by natural selection, resulting in sequence drift. Repeated gene duplications and
subsequent sequence drift are thought to have generated the
contemporary globin-like genes observed in humans and
other complex species today.
Two regions in the human -like globin gene cluster contain nonfunctional sequences, called pseudogenes, similar to
those of the functional -like globin genes (see Figure 10-3a).
Sequence analysis shows that these pseudogenes have the
same apparent exon-intron structure as the functional -like
globin genes, suggesting that they also arose by duplication
of the same ancestral gene. However, sequence drift during
evolution generated sequences that either terminate translation or block mRNA processing, rendering such regions nonfunctional even if they were transcribed into RNA. Because
such pseudogenes are not deleterious, they remain in the
genome and mark the location of a gene duplication that occurred in one of our ancestors. As discussed in a later section, other nonfunctional gene copies can arise by reverse
transcription of mRNA into cDNA and integration of this
intron-less DNA into a chromosome.
Several different gene families encode the various proteins that make up the cytoskeleton. These proteins are
present in varying amounts in almost all cells. In vertebrates, the major cytoskeletal proteins are the actins, tubulins, and intermediate filament proteins like the keratins.
We examined the origin of one such family, the tubulin

copies of the -globin gene and one chromosome with a
deletion of the -globin gene. Subsequent independent
mutations in the duplicated genes could lead to slight changes in
sequence that might result in slightly different functional
properties of the encoded proteins. Unequal crossing over also
can result from rare recombinations between unrelated
sequences. [See D. H. A. Fitch et al., 1991, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA
88:7396.]

family, in the last chapter (see Figure 9-32). Although the
physiological rationale for the cytoskeletal protein families
is not as obvious as it is for the globins, the different members of a family probably have similar but subtly different
functions suited to the particular type of cell in which they
are expressed.

Tandemly Repeated Genes Encode
rRNAs, tRNAs, and Histones
In vertebrates and invertebrates, the genes encoding rRNAs
and some other noncoding RNAs such as some of the snRNAs
involved in RNA splicing occur as tandemly repeated arrays.
These are distinguished from the duplicated genes of gene
families in that the multiple tandemly repeated genes encode
identical or nearly identical proteins or functional RNAs.
Most often copies of a sequence appear one after the other,
in a head-to-tail fashion, over a long stretch of DNA. Within a
tandem array of rRNA genes, each copy is exactly, or almost
exactly, like all the others. Although the transcribed portions
of rRNA genes are the same in a given individual, the nontranscribed spacer regions between the transcribed regions
can vary.
The tandemly repeated rRNA, tRNA, and histone genes
are needed to meet the great cellular demand for their transcripts. To understand why, consider that a fixed maximal
number of RNA copies can be produced from a single gene
during one cell generation when the gene is fully loaded with
RNA polymerase molecules. If more RNA is required than
can be transcribed from one gene, multiple copies of the gene
are necessary. For example, during early embryonic development in humans, many embryonic cells have a doubling
time of ≈24 hours and contain 5–10 million ribosomes. To
produce enough rRNA to form this many ribosomes, an embryonic human cell needs at least 100 copies of the large and
small subunit rRNA genes, and most of these must be close

412

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

TABLE 10-2 Effect of Gene Copy Number and RNA Polymerase Loading on Rate
of Pre-rRNA Synthesis in Humans
Copies of
Pre-rRNA Gene

RNA Polymerase
Molecules per Gene

Molecules of Pre-rRNA
Produced in 24 Hours

1

1

288

1

≈250

≈70,000

100

≈250

≈7,000,000

to maximally active for the cell to divide every 24 hours
(Table 10-2). That is, multiple RNA polymerases must be
loaded onto and transcribing each rRNA gene at the same
time (see Figure 12-32).
All eukaryotes, including yeasts, contain 100 or more
copies of the genes encoding 5S rRNA and the large and
small subunit rRNAs. The importance of repeated rRNA
genes is illustrated by Drosophila mutants called bobbed (because they have stubby wings), which lack a full complement
of the tandemly repeated pre-rRNA genes. A bobbed mutation that reduces the number of pre-rRNA genes to less than
≈50 is a recessive lethal mutation.
Multiple copies of tRNA and histone genes also occur,
often in clusters, but generally not in tandem arrays.

Microsatellites occasionally occur within transcription units. Some individuals are born with a
larger number of repeats in specific genes than observed in the general population, presumably because of
daughter-strand slippage during DNA replication in a germ
cell from which they developed. Such expanded microsatellites have been found to cause at least 14 different types of
neuromuscular diseases, depending on the gene in which they
occur. In some cases expanded microsatellites behave like a
recessive mutation because they interfere with the function
or expression of the encoded gene. But in the more common
types of diseases associated with expanded microsatellite repeats, myotonic dystrophy and spinocerebellar ataxia, the
expanded repeats behave like dominant mutations because
they interfere with RNA processing in general in the neurons
where the affected genes are expressed. ❚

Most Simple-Sequence DNAs Are Concentrated
in Specific Chromosomal Locations
Besides duplicated protein-coding genes and tandemly repeated genes, eukaryotic cells contain multiple copies of
other DNA sequences in the genome, generally referred to
as repetitious DNA (see Table 10-1). Of the two main types
of repetitious DNA, the less prevalent is simple-sequence
DNA, which constitutes about 3 percent of the human
genome and is composed of perfect or nearly perfect repeats
of relatively short sequences. The more common type of repetitious DNA, composed of much longer sequences, is discussed in Section 10.3.
Simple-sequence DNA is commonly called satellite DNA
because in early studies of DNAs from higher organisms
using equilibrium buoyant-density ultracentrifugation some
simple-sequence DNAs banded at a different position from
the bulk of cellular DNA. These were called satellite bands
to distinguish them from the main band of DNA in the
buoyant-density gradient. Simple-sequence DNAs in which
the repeats contain 1–13 base pairs are often called microsatellites. Most have repeat lengths of 1–4 base pairs and
usually occur in tandem repeats of 150 base pairs or fewer.
Microsatellites are thought to have originated by “backward
slippage” of a daughter strand on its template strand during
DNA replication so that the same short sequence is copied
twice.

16
16

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-5 Simple-sequence DNAs
are useful chromosomal markers. Human metaphase
chromosomes stained with a fluorescent dye were hybridized in
situ with a particular simple-sequence DNA labeled with a
fluorescent biotin derivative. When viewed under the appropriate
wavelength of light, the DNA appears red and the hybridized
simple-sequence DNA appears as a yellow band on chromosome
16, thus locating this particular simple sequence to one site in
the genome. [See R. K. Moyzis et al., 1987, Chromosoma 95:378;
courtesy of R. K. Moyzis.]

413

10.2 • Chromosomal Organization of Genes and Noncoding DNA

Most satellite DNA is composed of repeats of 14–500
base pairs in tandem repeats of 20–100 kb. In situ hybridization studies with metaphase chromosomes have localized these satellite DNAs to specific chromosomal regions. In
most mammals, much of this satellite DNA lies near centromeres, the discrete chromosomal regions that attach to
spindle microtubules during mitosis and meiosis. Satellite
DNA is also located at telomeres, the ends of chromosomes,
and at specific locations within chromosome arms in some
organisms. These latter sequences can be useful for identifying particular chromosomes by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), as illustrated in Figure 10-5.
Simple-sequence DNA located at centromeres may assist
in attaching chromosomes to spindle microtubules during
mitosis. As yet, however, there is little clear-cut experimental evidence demonstrating any function for most simplesequence DNA, with the exception of the short repeats at the
very ends of chromosomes discussed in a later section.

Individual
2

1

kb

3

20

10

6

4

DNA Fingerprinting Depends on Differences
in Length of Simple-Sequence DNAs
Within a species, the nucleotide sequences of the repeat units
composing simple-sequence DNA tandem arrays are highly
conserved among individuals. In contrast, differences in the
number of repeats, and thus in the length of simple-sequence
tandem arrays containing the same repeat unit, are quite
common among individuals. These differences in length are

Simple-sequence tandem array
1 2 3 4 5 6
Parental
chromosomes
(equal tandem
arrays)

×
1 2 3 4 5 6

2

a

b

c

a

b

c

a

b

c

Probes

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-7 Probes for minisatellite
DNA can reveal unique restriction fragments (DNA fingerprints)
that distinguish individuals. DNA samples from three individuals
(1, 2, and 3) were subjected to Southern blot analysis using the
restriction enzyme Hinf1 and three different labeled minisatellites
as probes (lanes a, b, and c). DNA from each individual produced a
unique band pattern with each probe. Conditions of electrophoresis
can be adjusted so that for each person at least 50 bands can be
resolved with this restriction enzyme. The nonidentity of these
three samples is easily distinguished. [From A. J. Jeffreys et al., 1985,
Nature 316:76; courtesy of A. J. Jeffreys.]

Meiotic recombination
1 2 3 4 3 4 5 6
Germ-cell
chromosomes
(unequal tandem
arrays)

+
1 2 5 6
Meiotic division

8-unit array

Germ
cells

4-unit array

▲ FIGURE 10-6 Generation of differences in lengths of a
simple-sequence DNA by unequal crossing over during
meiosis. In this example, unequal crossing over within a
stretch of DNA containing six copies (1–6) of a particular simplesequence repeat unit yields germ cells containing either an eightunit or a four-unit tandem array.

thought to result from unequal crossing over within regions
of simple-sequence DNA during meiosis (Figure 10-6). As a
consequence of this unequal crossing over, the lengths of
some tandem arrays are unique in each individual.
In humans and other mammals, some of the satellite
DNA exists in relatively short 1- to 5-kb regions made up of
20–50 repeat units, each containing 15 to about 100 base
pairs. These regions are called minisatellites to distinguish
them from the more common regions of tandemly repeated
satellite DNA, which are ≈20–100 kb in length. They differ
from microsatellites mentioned earlier, which have very short
repeat units. Even slight differences in the total lengths of
various minisatellites from different individuals can be detected by Southern blotting of cellular DNA treated with a
restriction enzyme that cuts outside the repeat sequence (Figure 10-7). The polymerase chain reaction (PCR), using

414

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

primers that hybridize to the unique sequences flanking each
minisatellite, also can detect differences in minisatellite
lengths between individuals. These DNA polymorphisms
form the basis of DNA fingerprinting, which is superior to
conventional fingerprinting for identifying individuals.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 10.2
Chromosomal Organization of Genes and
Noncoding DNA
In the genomes of prokaryotes and most lower eukaryotes, which contain few nonfunctional sequences, coding
regions are densely arrayed along the genomic DNA.

■

In contrast, vertebrate genomes contain many sequences
that do not code for RNAs or have any structural or regulatory function. Much of this nonfunctional DNA is composed of repeated sequences. In humans, only about 1.5
percent of total DNA (the exons) actually encodes proteins
or functional RNAs.

■

Variation in the amount of nonfunctional DNA in the
genomes of various species is largely responsible for the
lack of a consistent relationship between the amount of
DNA in the haploid chromosomes of an animal or plant
and its phylogenetic complexity.

■

Eukaryotic genomic DNA consists of three major classes
of sequences: genes encoding proteins and functional
RNAs, including gene families and tandemly repeated
genes; repetitious DNA; and spacer DNA (see Table 10-1).

■

About half the protein-coding genes in vertebrate genomic DNA are solitary genes, each occurring only once
in the haploid genome. The remainder are duplicated genes,
which arose by duplication of an ancestral gene and subsequent independent mutations (see Figure 10-4).

■

Duplicated genes encode closely related proteins and
generally appear as a cluster in a particular region of DNA.
The proteins encoded by a gene family have homologous
but nonidentical amino acid sequences and exhibit similar
but slightly different properties.

■

In invertebrates and vertebrates, rRNAs are encoded by
multiple copies of genes located in tandem arrays in genomic DNA. Multiple copies of tRNA and histone genes
also occur, often in clusters, but not generally in tandem
arrays.

■

Simple-sequence DNA, which consists largely of quite
short sequences repeated in long tandem arrays, is preferentially located in centromeres, telomeres, and specific locations within the arms of particular chromosomes.

■

The length of a particular simple-sequence tandem array
is quite variable between individuals in a species, probably
because of unequal crossing over during meiosis (see Figure
10-6). Differences in the lengths of some simple-sequence
tandem arrays form the basis for DNA fingerprinting.

■

10.3

Mobile DNA

The second type of repetitious DNA in eukaryotic genomes,
termed interspersed repeats (also known as moderately repeated DNA, or intermediate-repeat DNA) is composed of
a very large number of copies of relatively few sequence families (see Table 10-1). These sequences, which are interspersed throughout mammalian genomes, make up ≈25–50
percent of mammalian DNA (≈45 percent of human DNA).
Because moderately repeated DNA sequences have the
unique ability to “move” in the genome, they are called
mobile DNA elements (or transposable elements). Although
mobile DNA elements, ranging from hundreds to a few thousand base pairs in length, originally were discovered in eukaryotes, they also are found in prokaryotes. The process by
which these sequences are copied and inserted into a new site
in the genome is called transposition. Mobile DNA elements
(or simply mobile elements) are essentially molecular symbiots that in most cases appear to have no specific function in
the biology of their host organisms, but exist only to maintain themselves. For this reason, Francis Crick referred to
them as “selfish DNA.”
When transposition of eukaryotic mobile elements occurs
in germ cells, the transposed sequences at their new sites can
be passed on to succeeding generations. In this way, mobile
elements have multiplied and slowly accumulated in eukaryotic genomes over evolutionary time. Since mobile elements
are eliminated from eukaryotic genomes very slowly, they
now constitute a significant portion of the genomes of many
eukaryotes. Transposition also may occur within a somatic
cell; in this case the transposed sequence is transmitted only
to the daughter cells derived from that cell. In rare cases,
this may lead to a somatic-cell mutation with detrimental
phenotypic effects, for example, the inactivation of a tumorsuppressor gene (Chapter 23).

Movement of Mobile Elements Involves
a DNA or an RNA Intermediate
Barbara McClintock discovered the first mobile elements
while doing classical genetic experiments in maize (corn) during the 1940s. She characterized genetic entities that could
move into and back out of genes, changing the phenotype of
corn kernels. Her theories were very controversial until similar mobile elements were discovered in bacteria, where they
were characterized as specific DNA sequences, and the molecular basis of their transposition was deciphered.
As research on mobile elements progressed, they were
found to fall into two categories: (1) those that transpose directly as DNA and (2) those that transpose via an RNA intermediate transcribed from the mobile element by an RNA
polymerase and then converted back into double-stranded
DNA by a reverse transcriptase (Figure 10-8). Mobile elements that transpose through a DNA intermediate are generally referred to as DNA transposons. Mobile elements that
transpose to new sites in the genome via an RNA intermedi-

10.3 • Mobile DNA
(a)

(b)

DNA transposon

Retrotransposon

Donor DNA

Donor DNA
Former
transposon
site

Flanking
DNA

RNA
polymerase

RNA intermediate
Donor DNA
DNA
intermediates

Reverse
transcriptase

Target
DNA

Transposed
mobile elements

Bacterial Insertion Sequences The first molecular understanding of mobile elements came from the study of certain E.
coli mutations caused by the spontaneous insertion of a DNA
sequence, ≈1–2 kb long, into the middle of a gene. These inserted stretches of DNA are called insertion sequences, or IS
elements. So far, more than 20 different IS elements have been
found in E. coli and other bacteria.
Transposition of an IS element is a very rare event, occurring in only one in 105–107 cells per generation, depending on the IS element. Many transpositions inactivate
essential genes, killing the host cell and the IS elements it carries. Therefore, higher rates of transposition would probably
result in too great a mutation rate for the host cell to survive.
However, since IS elements transpose more or less randomly,
some transposed sequences enter nonessential regions of the
genome (e.g., regions between genes), allowing the cell to
survive. At a very low rate of transposition, most host cells
survive and therefore propagate the symbiotic IS element. IS
elements also can insert into plasmids or lysogenic viruses,
and thus be transferred to other cells. When this happens, IS
elements can transpose into the chromosomes of virgin cells.
The general structure of IS elements is diagrammed in
Figure 10-9. An inverted repeat, usually containing ≈50 base
pairs, invariably is present at each end of an insertion sequence. In an inverted repeat the 5 n 3sequence on one
strand is repeated on the other strand, as:
8888n
5 GAGC –––––– GCTC 3
3 C TC G–––––– C GAG 5
m8888

▲ FIGURE 10-8 Classification of mobile elements into two
major classes. (a) Eukaryotic DNA transposons (orange) move
via a DNA intermediate, which is excised from the donor site.
(b) Retrotransposons (green) are first transcribed into an RNA
molecule, which then is reverse-transcribed into double-stranded
DNA. In both cases, the double-stranded DNA intermediate is
integrated into the target-site DNA to complete movement.
Thus DNA transposons move by a cut-and-paste mechanism,
whereas retrotransposons move by a copy-and-paste
mechanism.

ate are called retrotransposons because their movement is
analogous to the infectious process of retroviruses. Indeed,
retroviruses can be thought of as retrotransposons that
evolved genes encoding viral coats, thus allowing them to
transpose between cells. Retrotransposons can be further
classified on the basis of their specific mechanism of transposition. We describe the structure and movement of the
major types of mobile elements and then consider their likely
role in evolution.

Mobile Elements That Move as DNA Are Present
in Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
Most mobile elements in bacteria transpose directly as DNA.
In contrast, most mobile elements in eukaryotes are retrotransposons, but eukaryotic DNA transposons also occur. Indeed, the original mobile elements discovered by Barbara
McClintock are DNA transposons.

415

Between the inverted repeats is a region that encodes transposase, an enzyme required for transposition of the IS ele-

IS element (≈1–2 kb)
5
3

Inverted repeat
(≈50-bp)

3
5

Protein-coding
region

Target-site
direct repeat
(5–11-bp)

▲ FIGURE 10-9 General structure of bacterial IS elements.
The relatively large central region of an IS element, which
encodes one or two enzymes required for transposition, is
flanked by an inverted repeat at each end. The sequences of
the inverted repeats are nearly identical, but they are oriented in
opposite directions. The sequence is characteristic of a particular
IS element. The 5 and 3 short direct (as opposed to inverted)
repeats are not transposed with the insertion element; rather,
they are insertion-site sequences that become duplicated, with
one copy at each end, during insertion of a mobile element.
The length of the direct repeats is constant for a given IS
element, but their sequence depends on the site of insertion
and therefore varies with each transposition of the IS element.
Arrows indicate sequence orientation. The regions in this diagram
are not to scale; the coding region makes up most of the length
of an IS element.

416

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes
Donor DNA

5
3

Target DNA
5
3

3
5

IS10

3
5
9-bp target site

Transposase makes blunt-ended
cuts in donor DNA and staggered
cuts in target DNA

1

5
3

3

5

3

5
3

3
5

IS10

3

5

5

Unpaired
bases
2

5

Transposase ligates IS10
to 5 single-stranded ends
of target DNA
5

3

3

IS10
3

5

3

The length of the direct repeat is characteristic of each type
of IS element, but its sequence depends on the target site
where a particular copy of the IS element is inserted. When
the sequence of a mutated gene containing an IS element is
compared with the sequence of the wild-type gene before insertion, only one copy of the short direct-repeat sequence is
found in the wild-type gene. Duplication of this target-site
sequence to create the second direct repeat adjacent to an IS
element occurs during the insertion process.
As depicted in Figure 10-10, transposition of an IS element is similar to a “cut-and-paste” operation in a wordprocessing program. Transposase performs three functions in
this process: it (1) precisely excises the IS element in the
donor DNA, (2) makes staggered cuts in a short sequence in
the target DNA, and (3) ligates the 3 termini of the IS element to the 5 ends of the cut donor DNA. Finally, a host-cell
DNA polymerase fills in the single-stranded gaps, generating the short direct repeats that flank IS elements, and DNA
ligase joins the free ends.

3

5

Cellular DNA polymerase extends
3 cut ends and ligase joins
extended 3 ends to IS10 5 ends

IS10
9-bp target-site
direct repeats

▲ FIGURE 10-10 Model for transposition of bacterial
insertion sequences. Step 1 : Transposase, which is encoded by
the IS element (IS10 in this example), cleaves both strands of the
donor DNA next to the inverted repeats (dark red), excising the
IS10 element. At a largely random target site, transposase makes
staggered cuts in the target DNA. In the case of IS10, the two
cuts are 9 bp apart. Step 2 : Ligation of the 3 ends of the
excised IS element to the staggered sites in the target DNA also
is catalyzed by transposase. Step 3 : The 9-bp gaps of singlestranded DNA left in the resulting intermediate are filled in by a
cellular DNA polymerase; finally cellular DNA ligase forms the
3→5 phosphodiester bonds between the 3 ends of the
extended target DNA strands and the 5 ends of the IS10
strands. This process results in duplication of the target-site
sequence on each side of the inserted IS element. Note that the
length of the target site and IS10 are not to scale. [See H. W.
Benjamin and N. Kleckner, 1989, Cell 59:373, and 1992, Proc. Nat’l. Acad.
Sci. USA 89:4648.]

ment to a new site. The transposase is expressed at a very
low rate, accounting for the very low frequency of transposition. An important hallmark of IS elements is the presence
of a short direct-repeat sequence, containing 5–11 base pairs,
immediately adjacent to both ends of the inserted element.

Eukaryotic DNA Transposons McClintock’s original discovery of mobile elements came from observation of certain
spontaneous mutations in maize that affect production of
any of the several enzymes required to make anthocyanin, a
purple pigment in maize kernels. Mutant kernels are white,
and wild-type kernels are purple. One class of these mutations is revertible at high frequency, whereas a second class
of mutations does not revert unless they occur in the presence of the first class of mutations. McClintock called the
agent responsible for the first class of mutations the activator
(Ac) element and those responsible for the second class dissociation (Ds) elements because they also tended to be associated with chromosome breaks.
Many years after McClintock’s pioneering discoveries,
cloning and sequencing revealed that Ac elements are equivalent to bacterial IS elements. Like IS elements, they contain
inverted terminal repeat sequences that flank the coding region for a transposase, which recognizes the terminal repeats
and catalyzes transposition to a new site in DNA. Ds elements
are deleted forms of the Ac element in which a portion of the
sequence encoding transposase is missing. Because it does not
encode a functional transposase, a Ds element cannot move
by itself. However, in plants that carry the Ac element, and
thus express a functional transposase, Ds elements can move.
Since McClintock’s early work on mobile elements in
corn, transposons have been identified in other eukaryotes.
For instance, approximately half of all the spontaneous mutations observed in Drosophila are due to the insertion of
mobile elements. Although most of the mobile elements in
Drosophila function as retrotransposons, at least one—the
P element—functions as a DNA transposon, moving by a
cut-and-paste mechanism similar to that used by bacterial
insertion sequences. Current methods for constructing transgenic Drosophila depend on engineered, high-level expression of the P-element transposase and use of the P-element
inverted terminal repeats as targets for transposition.

10.3 • Mobile DNA

DNA transposition by the cut-and-paste mechanism can
result in an increase in the copy number of a transposon
when it occurs during S phase, the period of the cell cycle
when DNA synthesis occurs. This happens when the donor
DNA is from one of the two daughter DNA molecules in a
region of a chromosome that has replicated and the target
DNA is in the region that has not yet replicated. When
DNA replication is complete at the end of the S phase, the
target DNA in its new location is also replicated. This results in a net increase by one in the total number of these
transposons in the cell. When this occurs during the S phase
preceding meiosis, two of the four germ cells produced
have the extra copy. Repetition of this process over evolutionary time has resulted in the accumulation of large numbers of DNA transposons in the genomes of some organisms.
Human DNA contains about 300,000 copies of full-length
and deleted DNA tranposons, amounting to ≈3 percent of
human DNA.

Some Retrotransposons Contain LTRs and Behave
Like Intracellular Retroviruses
The genomes of all eukaryotes studied from yeast to humans
contain retrotransposons, mobile DNA elements that transpose through an RNA intermediate utilizing a reverse transcriptase (see Figure 10-8b). These mobile elements are
divided into two major categories, those containing and
those lacking long terminal repeats (LTRs). LTR retrotransposons, which we discuss in this section, are common in
yeast (e.g., Ty elements) and in Drosophila (e.g., copia elements). Although less abundant in mammals than non-LTR
retrotransposons, LTR retrotransposons nonetheless constitute ≈8 percent of human genomic DNA. Because they exhibit some similarities with retroviruses, these mobile
elements sometimes are called viral retrotransposons. In
mammals, retrotransposons lacking LTRs are the most common type of mobile element; these are described in the next
section.

417

The general structure of LTR retrotransposons found in
eukaryotes is depicted in Figure 10-11. In addition to short
5 and 3 direct repeats typical of all mobile elements, these
retrotransposons are marked by the presence of LTRs flanking the central protein-coding region. These long direct
terminal repeats, containing ≈250–600 base pairs, are characteristic of integrated retroviral DNA and are critical to the
life cycle of retroviruses. In addition to sharing LTRs with
retroviruses, LTR retrotransposons encode all the proteins of
the most common type of retroviruses, except for the envelope proteins. Lacking these envelope proteins, LTR retrotransposons cannot bud from their host cell and infect other
cells; however, they can transpose to new sites in the DNA of
their host cell.
A key step in the retroviral life cycle is formation of retroviral genomic RNA from integrated retroviral DNA (see Figure
4-43). This process serves as a model for generation of the RNA
intermediate during transposition of LTR retrotransposons. As
depicted in Figure 10-12, the leftward retroviral LTR functions
as a promoter that directs host-cell RNA polymerase II to initiate transcription at the 5 nucleotide of the R sequence. After the
entire downstream retroviral DNA has been transcribed, the
RNA sequence corresponding to the rightward LTR directs
host-cell RNA-processing enzymes to cleave the primary transcript and add a poly(A) tail at the 3 end of the R sequence.

LTR
Integrated
retroviral
DNA

U3 R U5
Start site

Coding region

LTR

Host-cell DNA

U3 R U5
Poly(A) site
RNA polymerase II

Primary
transcript

3

5
RNA-processing enzymes
Poly(A) polymerase

LTR retrotransposon (≈6–11 kb)
5
3

3
5

LTR
(250–600 bp)

Protein-coding
region

Target-site
direct repeat
(5–10-bp)

▲ FIGURE 10-11 General structure of eukaryotic LTR
retrotransposons. The central protein-coding region is flanked by
two long terminal repeats (LTRs), which are element-specific
direct repeats. Like other mobile elements, integrated
retrotransposons have short target-site direct repeats at each
end. Note that the different regions are not drawn to scale. The
protein-coding region constitutes 80 percent or more of a
retrotransposon and encodes reverse transcriptase, integrase,
and other retroviral proteins.

Retroviral
RNA
genome

(A)n

▲ FIGURE 10-12 Generation of retroviral genomic RNA
from integrated retroviral DNA. The left LTR directs cellular
RNA polymerase II to initiate transcription at the first nucleotide
of the left R region. The resulting primary transcript extends
beyond the right LTR. The right LTR, now present in the RNA
primary transcript, directs cellular enzymes to cleave the primary
transcript at the last nucleotide of the right R region and to add a
poly(A) tail, yielding a retroviral RNA genome with the structure
shown at the top of Figure 10-13. A similar mechanism is
thought to generate the RNA intermediate during transposition of
retrotransposons. The short direct-repeat sequences (black) of
target-site DNA are generated during integration of the retroviral
DNA into the host-cell genome.

418

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

tRNA

5

3
Retroviral
genomic 5
RNA

R

U5

Coding region
PBS

U3

R

(A)n 3

PBS

U3

R

(A)n 3

PBS

U3

R

(A)n 3

R

U5

DNA
1 tRNA extended
to form DNA copy
of 5 end of
genomic RNA

2 RNA of DNA-RNA
hybrid digested

3

R

U5

5

R

U5

3

R

U5
5

5
3

3 First jump: DNA hybridized
with remaining RNA R sequence
5

PBS

U3

R

(A)n 3

3

PBS

U3

R

U5

5

PBS

U3

R

(A)n 3

3

PBS

U3

R

U5

U3

R

U5

U3

R

U5

U3

R

U5

U3

R

U5

U3

R

U5

5

U3

R

U5

5

5
4 DNA strand extended
from 3 end

5
5 Most hybrid RNA digested

3

Focus Animation: Retroviral Reverse Transcription

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

5

418

5
3

6 3 end of second DNA strand
synthesized

PBS
5

3

7 tRNA in DNA-RNA hybrid
digested

PBS
5

3

8 Second jump

PBS

5

U3

R

U5

PBS

9 Both strands 3
completed by
synthesis from 5
3 ends

U3

R

U5

PBS

U3

R

U5

PBS

3
LTR
Retroviral DNA

3

PBS

3

5

3

LTR

PBS

10.3 • Mobile DNA

 FIGURE 10-13 Model for reverse transcription of
retroviral genomic RNA into DNA. In this model, a complicated
series of nine events generates a double-stranded DNA copy of
the single-stranded RNA genome of a retrovirus (top). The
genomic RNA is packaged in the virion with a retrovirus-specific
cellular tRNA hybridized to a complementary sequence near its
5 end called the primer-binding site (PBS). The retroviral RNA
has a short direct-repeat terminal sequence (R) at each end. The
overall reaction is carried out by reverse transcriptase, which
catalyzes polymerization of deoxyribonucleotides. RNaseH
digests the RNA strand in a DNA-RNA hybrid. The entire process
yields a double-stranded DNA molecule that is longer than the
template RNA and has a long terminal repeat (LTR) at each end.
The different regions are not shown to scale. The PBS and R
regions are actually much shorter than the U5 and U3 regions,
and the central coding region is very much longer than the other
regions. [See E. Gilboa et al., 1979, Cell 18:93.]

Coding region
Ty element LTR

LTR

Ty mRNA
Galactose-sensitive
promoter

Experiment 1

Engineer
recombinant Ty
in plasmid vectors

Intron from
another gene

Experiment 2

419

The resulting retroviral RNA genome, which lacks a complete LTR, is packaged into a virion that buds from the
host cell.
After a retrovirus infects a cell, reverse transcription of
its RNA genome by the retrovirus-encoded reverse transcriptase yields a double-stranded DNA containing complete LTRs (Figure 10-13). Integrase, another enzyme
encoded by retroviruses that is closely related to the transposase of some DNA transposons, uses a similar mechanism
to insert the double-stranded retroviral DNA into the hostcell genome. In this process, short direct repeats of the targetsite sequence are generated at either end of the inserted viral
DNA sequence.
As noted above, LTR retrotransposons encode reverse
transcriptase and integrase. By analogy with retroviruses,
these mobile elements are thought to move by a “copyand-paste” mechanism whereby reverse transcriptase converts an RNA copy of a donor-site element into DNA,
which is inserted into a target site by integrase. The experiments depicted in Figure 10-14 provided strong evidence
for the role of an RNA intermediate in transposition of Ty
elements.
Sequencing of the human genome has revealed that the
most common LTR retrotransposon–related sequences in
humans are derived from endogenous retroviruses (ERVs).
Most of the 443,000 ERV-related DNA sequences in the
human genome consist only of isolated LTRs. These are derived from full-length proviral DNA by homologous recombination between the two LTRs, resulting in deletion of the
internal retroviral sequences.

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-14 Recombinant plasmids
Gal-responsive Ty

Gal-responsive Ty
with unrelated
added intron

Transform yeast cells;
grow in galactose- and
nongalactose-containing media
Results in galactosecontaining medium
1. Ty mRNA synthesis
increased
2. Transposition of Ty
elements increased

Results in galactosecontaining medium
1. Ty mRNAs lack
intron
2. Transposed Ty
elements lack intron

Ty mRNA

Primary transcript

Reverse
transcription

Transposed Ty

RNA
splicing

Ty mRNA
Reverse
transcription

Transposed Ty

demonstrate that the yeast Ty element transposes through
an RNA intermediate. When yeast cells are transformed with
a Ty-containing plasmid, the Ty element can transpose to new
sites, although normally this occurs at a low rate. Using the
elements diagrammed at the top, researchers engineered two
different plasmid vectors containing recombinant Ty elements
adjacent to a galactose-sensitive promoter. These plasmids
were transformed into yeast cells, which were grown in a
galactose-containing and a nongalactose medium. In experiment
1, growth of cells in galactose-containing medium resulted in
many more transpositions than in nongalactose medium,
indicating that transcription into an mRNA intermediate is
required for Ty transposition. In experiment 2, an intron from
an unrelated yeast gene was inserted into the putative proteincoding region of the recombinant galactose-responsive Ty
element. The observed absence of the intron in transposed
Ty elements is strong evidence that transposition involves an
mRNA intermediate from which the intron was removed by
RNA splicing, as depicted in the box on the right. In contrast,
eukaryotic DNA transposons, like the Ac element of maize,
contain introns within the transposase gene, indicating that they
do not transpose via an RNA intermediate. [See J. Boeke et al.,
1985, Cell 40:491.]

420

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

Retrotransposons That Lack LTRs Move
by a Distinct Mechanism
The most abundant mobile elements in mammals are retrotransposons that lack LTRs, sometimes called nonviral retrotransposons. These moderately repeated DNA sequences
form two classes in mammalian genomes: long interspersed
elements (LINEs) and short interspersed elements (SINEs).
In humans, full-length LINEs are ≈6 kb long, and SINEs are
≈300 bp long. Repeated sequences with the characteristics of
LINEs have been observed in protozoans, insects, and plants,
but for unknown reasons they are particularly abundant in
the genomes of mammals. SINEs also are found primarily in
mammalian DNA. Large numbers of LINEs and SINEs in
higher eukaryotes have accumulated over evolutionary time
by repeated copying of sequences at a few positions in the
genome and insertion of the copies into new positions. Although these mobile elements do not contain LTRs, the available evidence indicates that they transpose through an RNA
intermediate.

LINEs Human DNA contains three major families of LINE
sequences that are similar in their mechanism of transposition, but differ in their sequences: L1, L2, and L3. Only
members of the L1 family transpose in the contemporary
human genome. LINE sequences are present at ≈900,000
sites in the human genome, accounting for a staggering 21
percent of total human DNA. The general structure of a
complete LINE is diagrammed in Figure 10-15. LINEs usually are flanked by short direct repeats, the hallmark of mobile elements, and contain two long open reading frames
(ORFs). ORF1, ≈1 kb long, encodes an RNA-binding protein. ORF2, ≈4 kb long, encodes a protein that has a long
region of homology with the reverse transcriptases of retroviruses and viral retrotransposons, but also exhibits DNA
endonuclease activity.

Long interspersed element (LINE)
5
3

ORF1
A/T-rich
region

3
5

ORF2
Protein-coding
region

Target-site
direct repeat

▲ FIGURE 10-15 General structure of a LINE, one of the
two classes of non-LTR retrotransposons in mammalian
DNA. The length of the target-site direct repeats varies
among copies of the element at different sites in the genome.
Although the full-length L1 sequence is ≈6 kb long, variable
amounts of the left end are absent at over 90 percent of the
sites where this mobile element is found. The shorter open
reading frame (ORF1), ≈1 kb in length, encodes an RNA-binding
protein. The longer ORF2, ≈4 kb in length, encodes a bifunctional
protein with reverse transcriptase and DNA endonuclease
activity.

Evidence for the mobility of L1 elements first came
from analysis of DNA cloned from humans with
certain genetic diseases. DNA from these patients
was found to carry mutations resulting from insertion of an
L1 element into a gene, whereas no such element occurred
within this gene in either parent. About 1 in 600 mutations
that cause significant disease in humans are due to L1 transpositions or SINE transpositions that are catalyzed by L1encoded proteins. Later experiments similar to those just described with yeast Ty elements (see Figure 10-14) confirmed
that L1 elements transpose through an RNA intermediate. In
these experiments, an intron was introduced into a cloned
mouse L1 element, and the recombinant L1 element was stably transformed into cultured hamster cells. After several cell
doublings, a PCR-amplified fragment corresponding to the
L1 element but lacking the inserted intron was detected in
the cells. This finding strongly suggests that over time the recombinant L1 element containing the inserted intron had
transposed to new sites in the hamster genome through an
RNA intermediate that underwent RNA splicing to remove
the intron. ❚
Since LINEs do not contain LTRs, their mechanism of
transposition through an RNA intermediate differs from that
of LTR retrotransposons. ORF1 and ORF2 proteins are
translated from a LINE RNA. In vitro studies indicate that
transcription by RNA polymerase II is directed by promoter
sequences at the left end of integrated LINE DNA. LINE
RNA is polyadenylated by the same post-transcriptional
mechanism that polyadenylates other mRNAs. The LINE
RNA then is transported into the cytoplasm, where it is
translated into ORF1 and ORF2 proteins. Multiple copies of
ORF1 protein then bind to the LINE RNA, and ORF2 protein binds to the poly(A) tail.
The LINE RNA is then transported back into the nucleus
as a complex with ORF1 and ORF2. ORF2 then makes staggered nicks in chromosomal DNA on either side of any A/Trich sequence in the genome (Figure 10-16, step 1 ). Reverse
transcription of LINE RNA by ORF2 is primed by the
single-stranded T-rich sequence generated by the nick in the
bottom strand, which hybridizes to the LINE poly(A) tail (step
2 ). ORF2 then reverse-transcribes the LINE RNA (step 3 )
and then continues this new DNA strand, switching to the
single-stranded region of the upper chromosomal strand as a
template (steps 4 and 5 ). Cellular enzymes then hydrolyze
the RNA and extend the 3 end of the chromosomal DNA top
strand, replacing the LINE RNA strand with DNA (step 6 ).

 FIGURE 10-16 Proposed mechanism of LINE reverse
transcription and integration. Only ORF2 protein is
represented. Newly synthesized LINE DNA is shown in black.
See the text for explanation. [Adapted from D. D. Luan et al., 1993,
Cell 72:595.]

10.3 • Mobile DNA
ORF2
protein
Chromosomal DNA
AAATACT
T T TATGA
AAA 3

5
3

3
5

LINE RNA

1

Nicking
Nick site

Nick site

AAATACT
T T TATGA
AAA

5
3

2

Priming of reverse transcription
by chromosomal DNA
AAATACT

5
3

A
T T T A TG
AAA

3

3
5

3
5

Reverse transcription
of LINE RNA by ORF2

T T TA TGA
AAA

3
5

4
LINE RNA
AAATACT

5
3

3

5

AAA
T T TATGA

6

Copying of chromosomal
DNA by ORF2

AAA
T T TATGA

3
5

Insertion completed by
celluar enzymes
3
AAATACT
T T TATGA

5
3

3
5

LINE DNA

AAATACT
TATGA

5
3

AAA
T T TATGA

3
5

AAATACT
T T TATGA

3
5

7
LINE DNA
5
3

AAATACT
T T TATGA

LINE DNA
Direct repeats

Finally, 5 and 3 ends of DNA strands are ligated, completing the insertion (step 7 ). These last steps ( 6 and 7 ) probably are catalyzed by the same cellular enzymes that remove
RNA primers and ligate Okazaki fragments during DNA
replication (see Figure 4-33). The complete process results in
insertion of a copy of the original LINE retrotransposon into
a new site in chromosomal DNA. A short direct repeat is generated at the insertion site because of the initial staggered
cleavage of the two chromosomal DNA strands (step 1 ).
The vast majority of LINEs in the human genome are
truncated at their 5 end, suggesting that reverse transcription terminated before completion and the resulting fragments extending variable distances from the poly(A) tail
were inserted. Because of this shortening, the average size
of LINE elements is only about 900 base pairs, whereas the
full-length sequence is ≈6 kb long. In addition, nearly all
the full-length elements contain stop codons and frameshift
mutations in ORF1 and ORF2; these mutations probably
have accumulated in most LINE sequences over evolutionary time. As a result of truncation and mutation, only
≈0.01 percent of the LINE sequences in the human genome
are full-length with intact open reading frames for ORF1
and ORF2, ≈60–100 in total.

SINEs The second most abundant class of mobile elements

AAATACT

5
3

421

in the human genome, SINEs constitute ≈13 percent of total
human DNA. Varying in length from about 100 to 400 base
pairs, these retrotransposons do not encode protein, but
most contain a 3 A/T-rich sequence similar to that in
LINEs. SINEs are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, the
same nuclear RNA polymerase that transcribes genes encoding tRNAs, 5S rRNAs, and other small stable RNAs
(Chapter 11). Most likely, the ORF1 and ORF2 proteins expressed from full-length LINEs mediate transposition of
SINEs by the retrotransposition mechanism depicted in Figure 10-16.
SINEs occur at about 1.6 million sites in the human
genome. Of these, ≈1.1 million are Alu elements, so named
because most of them contain a single recognition site for the
restriction enzyme AluI. Alu elements exhibit considerable
sequence homology with and may have evolved from 7SL
RNA, a component of the signal-recognition particle. This
abundant cytosolic ribonucleoprotein particle aids in targeting certain polypeptides, as they are being synthesized, to the
membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum (Chapter 16). Alu
elements are scattered throughout the human genome at sites
where their insertion has not disrupted gene expression: between genes, within introns, and in the 3 untranslated regions of some mRNAs. For instance, nine Alu elements are
located within the human -globin gene cluster (see Figure
10-3b). The overall frequency of L1 and SINE retrotranspositions in humans is estimated to be about one new retrotransposition in very eight individuals, with ≈40 percent
being L1 and 60 percent SINEs, of which ≈90 percent are
Alu elements.

422

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

Similar to other mobile elements, most SINEs have accumulated mutations from the time of their insertion in the
germ line of an ancient ancestor of modern humans. Like
LINEs, many SINEs also are truncated at their 5 end. Table
10-1 summarizes the major types of interspersed repeats derived from mobile elements in the human genome.
In addition to the mobile elements listed in Table 10-1,
DNA copies of a wide variety of mRNAs appear to have integrated into chromosomal DNA. Since these sequences lack
introns and do not have flanking sequences similar to those
of the functional gene copies, they clearly are not simply duplicated genes that have drifted into nonfunctionality and become pseudogenes, as discussed earlier (Figure 10-3a).
Instead, these DNA segments appear to be retrotransposed
copies of spliced and polyadenylated (processed) mRNA.
Compared with normal genes encoding mRNAs, these inserted segments generally contain multiple mutations, which
are thought to have accumulated since their mRNAs were
first reverse-transcribed and randomly integrated into the
genome of a germ cell in an ancient ancestor. These nonfunctional genomic copies of mRNAs are referred to as
processed pseudogenes. Most processed pseudogenes are
flanked by short direct repeats, supporting the hypothesis
that they were generated by rare retrotransposition events involving cellular mRNAs.
Other moderately repetitive sequences representing partial or mutant copies of genes encoding small nuclear RNAs
(snRNAs) and tRNAs are found in mammalian genomes.
Like processed pseudogenes derived from mRNAs, these
nonfunctional copies of small RNA genes are flanked by
short direct repeats and most likely result from rare retrotransposition events that have accumulated through the
course of evolution. Enzymes expressed from a LINE are
thought to have carried out all these retrotransposition
events involving mRNAs, snRNAs, and tRNAs.

Mobile DNA Elements Probably Had
a Significant Influence on Evolution
Although mobile DNA elements appear to have no direct
function other than to maintain their own existence, their
presence probably had a profound impact on the evolution

 FIGURE 10-17 Exon shuffling via
recombination between homologous
interspersed repeats. Recombination
between interspersed repeats in the
introns of separate genes produces
transcription units with a new combination
of exons. In the example shown here, a
double crossover between two sets of
Alu repeats results in an exchange of
exons between the two genes.

of modern-day organisms. As mentioned earlier, about half
the spontaneous mutations in Drosophila result from insertion of a mobile DNA element into or near a transcription
unit. In mammals, however, mobile elements cause a much
smaller proportion of spontaneous mutations: ≈10 percent in
mice and only 0.1–0.2 percent in humans. Still, mobile elements have been found in mutant alleles associated with several human genetic diseases.
In lineages leading to higher eukaryotes, homologous recombination between mobile DNA elements dispersed
throughout ancestral genomes may have generated gene duplications and other DNA rearrangements during evolution
(see Figure 10-4). For instance, cloning and sequencing of the
-globin gene cluster from various primate species has provided strong evidence that the human G and A genes arose
from an unequal homologous crossover between two L1 sequences flanking an ancestral globin gene. Subsequent divergence of such duplicated genes could lead to acquisition
of distinct, beneficial functions associated with each member
of a gene family. Unequal crossing over between mobile elements located within introns of a particular gene could lead
to the duplication of exons within that gene. This process
most likely influenced the evolution of genes that contain
multiple copies of similar exons encoding similar protein domains, such as the fibronectin gene (see Figure 4-15).
Some evidence suggests that during the evolution of
higher eukaryotes, recombination between interspersed
repeats in introns of two separate genes also occurred, generating new genes made from novel combinations of preexisting exons (Figure 10-17). This evolutionary process, termed
exon shuffling, may have occurred during evolution of the
genes encoding tissue plasminogen activator, the Neu receptor, and epidermal growth factor, which all contain an EGF
domain (see Figure 3-8). In this case, exon shuffling presumably resulted in insertion of an EGF domain–encoding exon
into an intron of the ancestral form of each of these genes.
Both DNA transposons and LINE retrotransposons have
been shown to occasionally carry unrelated flanking sequences when they insert into new sites by the mechanisms
diagrammed in Figure 10-18. These mechanisms likely also
contributed to exon shuffling during the evolution of contemporary genes.

Alu

Alu

Gene 1
Gene 2
Alu

Alu

Double crossover
betweeen Alu elements

10.3 • Mobile DNA

 FIGURE 10-18 Exon shuffling by

DNA transposons

(a)
Gene 1

Transposase excision from gene 1

Insertion site

Gene 2
Transposase insertion into gene 2

Weak poly(A)
signal

(b)
Gene 1

423

Gene's poly(A)
signal

LINE
3 exon

Transcription and polyadenylation
at end of downstream exon
AAAA
Insertion site

Gene 2

transposition. (a) Transposition of an exon
flanked by homologous DNA transposons
into an intron on a second gene. As we
saw in Figure 10-10, step 1 , transposase
can recognize and cleave the DNA at the
ends of the transposon inverted repeats. In
gene 1, if the transposase cleaves at the
left end of the transposon on the left and at
the right end of the transposon on the right,
it can transpose all the intervening DNA,
including the exon from gene 1, to a new
site in an intron of gene 2. The net result is
an insertion of the exon from gene 1 into
gene 2. (b) Integration of an exon into
another gene via LINE transposition. Some
LINEs have weak poly(A) signals. If such a
LINE is in the 3-most intron of gene 1,
during transposition its transcription may
continue beyond its own poly(A) signals and
extend into the 3 exon, transcribing the
cleavage and polyadenylation signals of
gene 1 itself. This RNA can then be reversetranscribed and integrated by the LINE
ORF2 protein (Figure 10-16) into an intron
on gene 2, introducing a new 3 exon
(from gene 1) into gene 2.

ORF2 reverse transcription
and insertion
LINE

In addition to causing changes in coding sequences in the
genome, recombination between mobile elements and transposition of DNA adjacent to DNA transposons and retrotransposons likely played a significant role in the evolution
of regulatory sequences that control gene expression. As
noted earlier, eukaryotic genes have transcription-control regions, called enhancers, that can operate over distances of
tens of thousands of base pairs. Transcription of many genes
is controlled through the combined effects of several enhancer elements. Insertion of mobile elements near such
transcription-control regions probably contributed to the
evolution of new combinations of enhancer sequences. These
in turn control which specific genes are expressed in particular cell types and the amount of the encoded protein produced in modern organisms, as we discuss in the next
chapter.
These considerations suggest that the early view of mobile DNA elements as completely selfish molecular parasites
misses the mark. Rather, they have likely contributed profoundly to the evolution of higher organisms by promoting
(1) the generation of gene families via gene duplication,
(2) the creation of new genes via shuffling of preexisting
exons, and (3) formation of more complex regulatory regions that provide multifaceted control of gene expression.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 10.3
Mobile DNA
Mobile DNA elements are moderately repeated DNA sequences interspersed at multiple sites throughout the
genomes of higher eukaryotes. They are present less frequently in prokaryotic genomes.

■

Mobile DNA elements that transpose to new sites directly as DNA are called DNA transposons; those that first
are transcribed into an RNA copy of the element, which
then is reverse-transcribed into DNA, are called retrotransposons (see Figure 10-8).
■

A common feature of all mobile elements is the presence
of short direct repeats flanking the sequence.

■

Enzymes encoded by mobile elements themselves catalyze
insertion of these sequences at new sites in genomic DNA.

■

Although DNA transposons, similar in structure to bacterial IS elements, occur in eukaryotes (e.g., the Drosophila
P element), retrotransposons generally are much more
abundant, especially in vertebrates.

■

■ LTR retrotransposons are flanked by long terminal
repeats (LTRs), similar to those in retroviral DNA; like

424

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

retroviruses, they encode reverse transcriptase and integrase. They move in the genome by being transcribed into
RNA, which then undergoes reverse transcription and integration into the host-cell chromosome (see Figure 10-13).
Long interspersed elements (LINEs) and short interspersed elements (SINEs) are the most abundant mobile
elements in the human genome. LINEs account for ≈21
percent of human DNA; SINEs, for ≈13 percent.

■

Both LINEs and SINEs lack LTRs and have an A/T-rich
stretch at one end. They are thought to move by a nonviral retrotransposition mechanism mediated by LINEencoded proteins involving priming by chromosomal DNA
(see Figure 10-16).

■

SINE sequences exhibit extensive homology with small
cellular RNAs transcribed by RNA polymerase III. Alu elements, the most common SINEs in humans, are ≈300-bp
sequences found scattered throughout the human genome.

■

Some moderately repeated DNA sequences are derived
from cellular RNAs that were reverse-transcribed and inserted into genomic DNA at some time in evolutionary history. Those derived from mRNAs, called processed pseudogenes, lack introns, a feature that distinguishes them from
pseudogenes, which arose by sequence drift of duplicated
genes.

■

Mobile DNA elements most likely influenced evolution
significantly by serving as recombination sites and by mobilizing adjacent DNA sequences.

of protein as chromatin. The general structure of chromatin
has been found to be remarkably similar in the cells of all
eukaryotes, including fungi, plants, and animals.
The most abundant proteins associated with eukaryotic
DNA are histones, a family of small, basic proteins present in
all eukaryotic nuclei. The five major types of histone proteins—termed H1, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4—are rich in positively charged basic amino acids, which interact with the
negatively charged phosphate groups in DNA.
The amino acid sequences of four histones (H2A, H2B,
H3, and H4) are remarkably similar among distantly related
species. For example, the sequences of histone H3 from sea
urchin tissue and calf thymus differ by only a single amino
acid, and H3 from the garden pea and calf thymus differ only
in four amino acids. Minor histone variants encoded by
genes that differ from the highly conserved major types also
exist, particularly in vertebrates.
The amino acid sequence of H1 varies more from organism to organism than do the sequences of the other major
histones. In certain tissues, H1 is replaced by special histones. For example, in the nucleated red blood cells of birds,
a histone termed H5 is present in place of H1. The similarity in sequence among histones from all eukaryotes suggests
that they fold into very similar three-dimensional conformations, which were optimized for histone function early in
evolution in a common ancestor of all modern eukaryotes.

■

10.4 Structural Organization
of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
We turn now to the question of how DNA molecules are organized within eukaryotic cells. Because the total length of cellular DNA is up to a hundred thousand times a cell’s length,
the packing of DNA is crucial to cell architecture. During interphase, when cells are not dividing, the genetic material exists as a nucleoprotein complex called chromatin, which is
dispersed through much of the nucleus. Further folding and
compaction of chromatin during mitosis produces the visible
metaphase chromosomes, whose morphology and staining
characteristics were detailed by early cytogeneticists. In this
section, we consider the properties of chromatin and its organization into chromosomes. Important features of chromosomes in their entirety are covered in the next section.

Eukaryotic Nuclear DNA Associates
with Histone Proteins to Form Chromatin
When the DNA from eukaryotic nuclei is isolated in isotonic
buffers (i.e., buffers with the same salt concentration found
in cells, ≈0.15 M KCl), it is associated with an equal mass

Chromatin Exists in Extended
and Condensed Forms
When chromatin is extracted from nuclei and examined in
the electron microscope, its appearance depends on the salt
concentration to which it is exposed. At low salt concentration in the absence of divalent cations such as Mg 2, isolated
chromatin resembles “beads on a string” (Figure 10-19a).
In this extended form, the string is composed of free DNA
called “linker” DNA connecting the beadlike structures
termed nucleosomes. Composed of DNA and histones, nucleosomes are about 10 nm in diameter and are the primary
structural units of chromatin. If chromatin is isolated at
physiological salt concentration (≈0.15 M KCl, 0.004 M
Mg 2), it assumes a more condensed fiberlike form that is
30 nm in diameter (Figure 10-19b).

Structure of Nucleosomes The DNA component of nucleosomes is much less susceptible to nuclease digestion
than is the linker DNA between them. If nuclease treatment is carefully controlled, all the linker DNA can be digested, releasing individual nucleosomes with their DNA
component. A nucleosome consists of a protein core with
DNA wound around its surface like thread around a spool.
The core is an octamer containing two copies each of histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. X-ray crystallography has
shown that the octameric histone core is a roughly diskshaped molecule made of interlocking histone subunits

10.4 • Structural Organization of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
(a)

425

(b)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-19 The extended and
condensed forms of extracted chromatin have very different
appearances in electron micrographs. (a) Chromatin isolated in
low-ionic-strength buffer has an extended “beads-on-a-string”
appearance. The “beads” are nucleosomes (10-nm diameter) and

the “string” is connecting (linker) DNA. (b) Chromatin isolated in
buffer with a physiological ionic strength (0.15 M KCl) appears as a
condensed fiber 30 nm in diameter. [Part (a) courtesy of S. McKnight

(Figure 10-20). Nucleosomes from all eukaryotes contain
147 base pairs of DNA wrapped slightly less than two
turns around the protein core. The length of the linker
DNA is more variable among species, ranging from about
15 to 55 base pairs.
In cells, newly replicated DNA is assembled into nucleosomes shortly after the replication fork passes, but when isolated histones are added to DNA in vitro at physiological salt
concentration, nucleosomes do not spontaneously form.

However, nuclear proteins that bind histones and assemble
them with DNA into nucleosomes in vitro have been characterized. Proteins of this type are thought to assemble histones and newly replicated DNA into nucleosomes in vivo
as well.

and O. Miller, Jr.; part (b) courtesy of B. Hamkalo and J. B. Rattner.]

Structure of Condensed Chromatin When extracted from
cells in isotonic buffers, most chromatin appears as fibers
≈30 nm in diameter (see Figure 10-19b). In these condensed

(b)
(a)

H3

H4

H3

H4

H2B

H2B
H2A

▲ FIGURE 10-20 Structure of the nucleosome based on
x-ray crystallography. (a) Space-filling model shown from the front
(left) and from the side (right, rotated clockwise 90°). H2A is yellow;
H2B is red; H3 is blue; H4 is green. The sugar-phosphate backbone
of the DNA strands is shown as white tubes. The N-terminal tails of
the eight histones and the two H2A C-terminal tails, involved in

H2A

condensation of the chromatin, are not visible because they are
disordered in the crystal. (b) Ribbon diagram of the histones
showing the lengths of the histone tails (dotted lines) not visible in
the crystal structure. H2A N-terminal tails at the bottom, C-terminal
tails at the top. [Part (a) after K. Luger et al., 1997, Nature 389:251; part (b)
K. Luger and T. J. Richmond, 1998, Curr. Opin. Gen. Dev. 8:140.]

fibers, nucleosomes are thought to be packed into an irregular spiral or solenoid arrangement, with approximately six
nucleosomes per turn (Figure 10-21). H1, the fifth major
histone, is bound to the DNA on the inside of the solenoid,
with one H1 molecule associated with each nucleosome. Recent electron microscopic studies suggest that the 30-nm
fiber is less uniform than a perfect solenoid. Condensed chromatin may in fact be quite dynamic, with regions occasionally partially unfolding and then refolding into a solenoid
structure.
The chromatin in chromosomal regions that are not
being transcribed exists predominantly in the condensed, 30-

10.4 • Structural Organization of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
(a)

BamHI

4.6 kb

4.6 kb

Globin

Globin

DNase

BamHI

BamHI

14-day erythroblast

DNase (µg/ml)

0

Nonhistone Proteins Provide a Structural
Scaffold for Long Chromatin Loops
BamHI

MSB

DNA from
14-day
erythroblasts

(b)

DNase

.01 .05

.1

.5

427

DNA
from
MSB
.1 1.5 1.5

4.6 kb

Although histones are the predominant proteins in chromosomes, nonhistone proteins are also involved in organizing chromosome structure. Electron micrographs of
histone-depleted metaphase chromosomes from HeLa cells
reveal long loops of DNA anchored to a chromosome
scaffold composed of nonhistone proteins (Figure 10-23).
This scaffold has the shape of the metaphase chromosome
and persists even when the DNA is digested by nucleases.
As depicted schematically in Figure 10-24, loops of the 30nm chromatin fiber a few megabases in length have been
proposed to associate with a flexible chromosome scaffold,
yielding an extended form characteristic of chromosomes
during interphase. Folding of the scaffold has been proposed to produce the highly condensed structure characteristic of metaphase chromosomes. But the geometry of
scaffold folding in metaphase chromosomes has not yet
been determined.

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-22 Nontranscribed genes
are less susceptible to DNase I digestion than active genes.
Chick embryo erythroblasts at 14 days actively synthesize globin,
whereas cultured undifferentiated MSB cells do not. (a) Nuclei
from each type of cell were isolated and exposed to increasing
concentrations of DNase I. The nuclear DNA was then extracted
and treated with the restriction enzyme BamHI, which cleaves
the DNA around the globin sequence and normally releases a
4.6-kb globin fragment. (b) The DNase I- and BamHI-digested
DNA was subjected to Southern blot analysis with a probe of
labeled cloned adult globin DNA, which hybridizes to the 4.6-kb
BamHI fragment. If the globin gene is susceptible to the initial
DNase digestion, it would be cleaved repeatedly and would not
be expected to show this fragment. As seen in the Southern
blot, the transcriptionally active DNA from the 14-day globinsynthesizing cells was sensitive to DNase I digestion, indicated
by the absence of the 4.6-kb band at higher nuclease
concentrations. In contrast, the inactive DNA from MSB cells
was resistant to digestion. These results suggest that the
inactive DNA is in a more condensed form of chromatin in which
the globin gene is shielded from DNase digestion. [See J. Stalder

Loops
of
DNA

Protein
scaffold

et al., 1980, Cell 19:973; photograph courtesy of H. Weintraub.]

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-23 An electron micrograph
Chapter 11, the control of acetylation of histone N-termini
in specific chromosomal regions is thought to contribute to
gene control by regulating the strength of the interaction of
histones with DNA and the folding of chromatin into condensed structures. Genes in condensed, folded regions of
chromatin are inaccessible to RNA polymerase and other
proteins required for transcription.

of a histone-depleted metaphase chromosome reveals the
scaffold around which the DNA is organized. The long loops
of DNA are visible extending from the nonhistone protein
scaffold (the dark structure). The scaffold shape reflects that
of the metaphase chromosome itself. The chromosome was
prepared from HeLa cells by treatment with a mild detergent.
[From J. R. Paulson and U. K. Laemmli, 1977, Cell 12:817. Copyright
1977 MIT.]

428

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

Metaphase
chromosome

1400 nm

Condensed scaffoldassociated chromatin

700 nm
Interphase:
extended
scaffoldassociated
chromatin
Chromosome
scaffold

Focus Animation: Three-Dimensional Packing of Nuclear Chromosomes

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

300 nm

In situ hybridization experiments with several different
fluorescent-labeled probes to DNA in human interphase
cells support the loop model shown in Figure 10-24. In these
experiments, some probe sequences separated by millions of
base pairs in linear DNA appeared reproducibly very close
to one another in interphase nuclei from different cells (Figure 10-25). These closely spaced probe sites are postulated
to lie close to specific sequences in the DNA, called scaffoldassociated regions (SARs) or matrix-attachment regions
(MARs), that are bound to the chromosome scaffold. SARs
have been mapped by digesting histone-depleted chromosomes with restriction enzymes and then recovering the
fragments that are bound to scaffold proteins.
In general, SARs are found between transcription units.
In other words, genes are located primarily within chromatin
loops, which are attached at their bases to a chromosome
scaffold. Experiments with transgenic mice indicate that in
some cases SARs are required for transcription of neighboring genes. In Drosophila, some SARs can insulate transcription units from each other, so that proteins regulating
transcription of one gene do not influence the transcription
of a neighboring gene separated by a SAR.

F
30-nm
chromatin
fiber of
packed
nucleosomes

E
30 nm

G
D
H
A

"Beadson-a-string"
form of
chromatin

Loop of
30-nm
chromatin
fiber

B

C

Chromosome
scaffold
11 nm

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-25 Fluorescent-labeled

Short
region of
DNA double
helix

2 nm

▲ FIGURE 10-24 Model for the packing of chromatin
and the chromosome scaffold in metaphase
chromosomes. In interphase chromosomes, long stretches
of 30-nm chromatin loop out from extended scaffolds. In
metaphase chromosomes, the scaffold is folded further
into a highly compacted structure, whose precise
geometry has not been determined.

probes hybridized to interphase chromosomes demonstrate
chromatin loops and permit their measurement. In situ
hybridization of interphase cells was carried out with several
different probes specific for sequences separated by known
distances in linear, cloned DNA. Lettered circles represent
probes. Measurement of the distances between different
hybridized probes, which could be distinguished by their color,
showed that some sequences (e.g., A, B, and C), separated from
one another by millions of base pairs, appear located near one
another within nuclei. For some sets of sequences, the
measured distances in nuclei between one probe (e.g., C) and
sequences successively farther away initially appear to increase
(e.g., D, E, and F) and then appear to decrease (e.g., G and H).
The measured distances between probes are consistent with
loops ranging in size from 1 million to 4 million base pairs.
[Adapted from H. Yokota et al., 1995, J. Cell Biol. 130:1239.]

10.4 • Structural Organization of Eukaryotic Chromosomes

429

matin and metaphase chromosomes also contain small
amounts of a complex set of other proteins. For instance, a
growing list of DNA-binding transcription factors have been
identified associated with interphase chromatin. The structure and function of these critical nonhistone proteins, which
help regulate transcription, are examined in Chapter 11.
Other low-abundance nonhistone proteins associated with
chromatin regulate DNA replication during the eukaryotic
cell cycle (Chapter 21).
A few other nonhistone DNA-binding proteins are
present in much larger amounts than the transcription or
replication factors. Some of these exhibit high mobility
during electrophoretic separation and thus have been designated HMG (high-mobility group) proteins. When genes
encoding the most abundant HMG proteins are deleted
from yeast cells, normal transcription is disturbed in most
other genes examined. Some HMG proteins have been
found to bind to DNA cooperatively with transcription
factors that bind to specific DNA sequences, stabilizing
multiprotein complexes that regulate transcription of a
neighboring gene.

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-26 During interphase
human chromosomes remain in specific domains in the
nucleus. Fixed interphase human lymphocytes were hybridized in
situ to biotin-labeled probes specific for sequences along the full
length of human chromosome 7 and visualized with fluorescently
labeled avidin. In the diploid cell shown here, each of the two
chromosome 7s is restricted to a territory or domain within the
nucleus, rather than stretching throughout the entire nucleus.
[From P. Lichter et al., 1988, Hum. Genet. 80:224.]

Individual interphase chromosomes, which are less condensed than metaphase chromosomes, cannot be resolved by
standard microscopy or electron microscopy. Nonetheless,
the chromatin of interphase cells is associated with extended
scaffolds and is further organized into specific domains. This
can be demonstrated by the in situ hybridization of interphase nuclei with a large mixture of fluorescent-labeled
probes specific for sequences along the length of a particular chromosome. As illustrated in Figure 10-26, the bound
probes are visualized within restricted regions or domains
of the nucleus rather than appearing throughout the nucleus.
Use of probes specific for different chromosomes shows that
there is little overlap between chromosomes in interphase nuclei. However, the precise positions of chromosomes are not
reproducible between cells.

Chromatin Contains Small Amounts
of Other Proteins in Addition to Histones
and Scaffold Proteins
The total mass of the histones associated with DNA in chromatin is about equal to that of the DNA. Interphase chro-

Eukaryotic Chromosomes Contain
One Linear DNA Molecule
In lower eukaryotes, the sizes of the largest DNA molecules
that can be extracted indicate that each chromosome
contains a single DNA molecule. For example, the DNA
from each of the quite small chromosomes of S. cerevisiae
(2.3 105 to 1.5 106 base pairs) can be separated and
individually identified by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis.
Physical analysis of the largest DNA molecules extracted
from several genetically different Drosophila species and
strains shows that they are from 6 107 to 1 108 base
pairs long. These sizes match the DNA content of single
stained metaphase chromosomes of these Drosophila
species, as measured by the amount of DNA-specific stain
absorbed. The longest DNA molecules in human chromosomes are too large (2.8 108 base pairs, or almost 10 cm
long) to extract without breaking. Nonetheless, the observations with lower eukaryotes support the conclusion that
each chromosome visualized during mitosis contains a single DNA molecule.
To summarize our discussion so far, we have seen that the
eukaryotic chromosome is a linear structure composed of an
immensely long, single DNA molecule that is wound around
histone octamers about every 200 bp, forming strings of
closely packed nucleosomes. Nucleosomes fold to form a 30nm chromatin fiber, which is attached to a flexible protein
scaffold at intervals of millions of base pairs, resulting in
long loops of chromatin extending from the scaffold (see Figure 10-24). In addition to this general chromosomal structure, a complex set of thousands of low-abundance
regulatory proteins are associated with specific sequences in
chromosomal DNA.

430

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 10.4
Structural Organization of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
In eukaryotic cells, DNA is associated with about an
equal mass of histone proteins in a highly condensed nucleoprotein complex called chromatin. The building block
of chromatin is the nucleosome, consisting of a histone
octamer around which is wrapped 147 bp of DNA (see
Figure 10-21).
■

The chromatin in transcriptionally inactive regions of
DNA within cells is thought to exist in a condensed, 30nm fiber form and higher-order structures built from it (see
Figure 10-19).

■

The chromatin in transcriptionally active regions of
DNA within cells is thought to exist in an open, extended
form.

■

The reversible acetylation and deacetylation of lysine
residues in the N-termini of histones H2A, H2B, H3, and
H4 controls how tightly DNA is bound by the histone octamer and affects the assembly of nucleosomes into the
condensed forms of chromatin (see Figure 10-20b).

■

Histone tails can also be modified by methylation,
phosphorylation, and monoubiquitination. These modifications influence chromatin structure by regulating the
binding of histone tails to other less abundant chromatinassociated proteins.

■

Chromosome Number, Size, and Shape
at Metaphase Are Species-Specific
As noted previously, in nondividing cells individual chromosomes are not visible, even with the aid of histologic stains for
DNA (e.g., Feulgen or Giemsa stains) or electron microscopy.
During mitosis and meiosis, however, the chromosomes condense and become visible in the light microscope. Therefore,
almost all cytogenetic work (i.e., studies of chromosome morphology) has been done with condensed metaphase chromosomes obtained from dividing cells—either somatic cells in
mitosis or dividing gametes during meiosis.
The condensation of metaphase chromosomes probably
results from several orders of folding and coiling of 30-nm
chromatin fibers (see Figure 10-24). At the time of mitosis,
cells have already progressed through the S phase of the cell
cycle and have replicated their DNA. Consequently, the chromosomes that become visible during metaphase are duplicated structures. Each metaphase chromosome consists of
two sister chromatids, which are attached at the centromere (Figure 10-27). The number, sizes, and shapes of the
metaphase chromosomes constitute the karyotype, which is
distinctive for each species. In most organisms, all cells have
the same karyotype. However, species that appear quite similar can have very different karyotypes, indicating that similar genetic potential can be organized on chromosomes in
very different ways. For example, two species of small deer—
the Indian muntjac and Reeves muntjac—contain about the
same total amount of genomic DNA. In one species, this

Hypoacetylated, transcriptionally inactive chromatin assumes a more condensed structure and is more resistant to
DNase I than hyperacetylated, transcriptionally active
chromatin.

■

■ Each eukaryotic chromosome contains a single DNA
molecule packaged into nucleosomes and folded into
a 30-nm chromatin fiber, which is attached to a protein scaffold at specific sites (see Figure 10-24). Additional folding of the scaffold further compacts the
structure into the highly condensed form of metaphase
chromosomes.

10.5 Morphology and Functional
Elements of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
Having examined the detailed structural organization of
chromosomes in the previous section, we now view them
from a more global perspective. Early microscopic observations on the number and size of chromosomes and their
staining patterns led to the discovery of many important general characteristics of chromosome structure. Researchers
subsequently identified specific chromosomal regions critical
to their replication and segregation to daughter cells during
cell division.

Centromere

Telomere
Chromatid
Metaphase
chromosome

▲ FIGURE 10-27 Microscopic appearance of typical
metaphase chromosome. Each chromosome has replicated and
comprises two chromatids, each containing one of two identical
DNA molecules. The centromere, where the chromatids are
attached, is required for their separation late in mitosis. Special
telomere sequences at the ends function in preventing
chromosome shortening.

10.5 • Morphology and Functional Elements of Eukaryotic Chromosomes

431

tinctiveness of these banding patterns permits cytologists to
identify specific parts of a chromosome and to locate the sites
of chromosomal breaks and translocations (Figure 10-29a).
In addition, cloned DNA probes that have hybridized to specific sequences in the chromosomes can be located in particular bands.
A recently developed method for visualizing each of the
human chromosomes in distinct, bright colors, called chromosome painting, greatly simplifies differentiating chromosomes of similar size and shape. This technique, a variation of
fluorescence in situ hybridization, makes use of probes specific for sites scattered along the length of each chromosome.
The probes are labeled with one of two dyes that fluoresce at
different wavelengths. Probes specific for each chromosome
are labeled with a predetermined fraction of each of the two
dyes. After the probes are hybridized to chromosomes and the
excess removed, the sample is observed with a fluorescent microscope in which a detector determines the fraction of each
dye present at each fluorescing position in the microscopic
field. This information is conveyed to a computer, and a special program assigns a false color image to each type of chromosome. A related technique called multicolor FISH can
detect chromosomal translocations (Figure 10-29b). The
much more detailed analysis possible with this technique permits detection of chromosomal translocations that banding
analysis does not reveal.

DNA is organized into 22 pairs of homologous autosomes
and two physically separate sex chromosomes. In contrast,
the other species contains only three pairs of autosomes; one
sex chromosome is physically separate, but the other is
joined to the end of one autosome.

During Metaphase, Chromosomes Can Be
Distinguished by Banding Patterns
and Chromosome Painting
Certain dyes selectively stain some regions of metaphase
chromosomes more intensely than other regions, producing
characteristic banding patterns that are specific for individual chromosomes. Although the molecular basis for the regularity of chromosomal bands remains unknown, they serve
as useful visible landmarks along the length of each chromosome and can help to distinguish chromosomes of similar
size and shape.
G bands are produced when metaphase chromosomes
are subjected briefly to mild heat or proteolysis and then
stained with Giemsa reagent, a permanent DNA dye (Figure
10-28). G bands correspond to large regions of the human
genome that have an unusually low G C content. Treatment
of chromosomes with a hot alkaline solution before staining
with Giemsa reagent produces R bands in a pattern that is
approximately the reverse of the G-band pattern. The dis-

(a)
X

4

5

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-28

(b)
p

2
1

1

5
4
3
2
1

1
Centromere

1

1

1
q
2

2
2
3
X

3
4

5

G bands produced with Giemsa stains
are useful markers for identifying
specific chromosomes. The chromosomes
are subjected to brief proteolytic treatment
and then stained with Giemsa reagent,
producing distinctive bands at characteristic
places. (a) Scanning electron micrographs
of chromosomes X, 4, and 5 show
constrictions at the sites where bands
appear in light micrographs (insets).
(b) Standard diagrams of G bands (purple).
Regions of variable length (green) are most
common in the centromere region (e.g., on
chromosome 4). By convention, p denotes
the short arm; q, the long arm. Each arm is
divided into major sections (1, 2, etc.) and
subsections. The short arm of chromosome
4, for example, has five subsections. DNA
located in the fourth subsection would be
said to be in p14. [Part (a) from C. J. Harrison
et al., 1981, Exp. Cell Res. 134:141; courtesy of
C. J. Harrison.]

432

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes
(b)

(a)
Philadelphia
chromosome

Normal chromosome 9
“Philadelphia
chromosome”
der (22)
Normal chromosome 22

der (22)
22

der (9)

9
der (9)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-29 Chromosomal
translocations can be analyzed using banding patterns and
multicolor FISH. Characteristic chromosomal translocations are
associated with certain genetic disorders and specific types of
cancers. For example, in nearly all patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia, the leukemic cells contain the
Philadelphia chromosome, a shortened chromosome 22 [der

(22)], and an abnormally long chromosome 9 [der (9)]. These
result from a translocation between normal chromosomes 9 and
22. This translocation can be detected by classical banding
analysis (a) and by multicolor FISH (b). [Part (a) from J. Kuby, 1997,
Immunology, 3d ed., W. H. Freeman and Company, p. 578; part (b)
courtesy of J. Rowley and R. Espinosa.]

(a)
Chromocenter

2L
4

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-30 Banding on Drosophila
polytene salivary gland chromosomes and in situ
hybridization are used together to localize gene sequences.
(a) In this light micrograph of Drosophila melanogaster larval
salivary gland chromosomes, four chromosomes can be observed
(X, 2, 3, and 4), with a total of approximately 5000
distinguishable bands. The centromeres of all four chromosomes
often appear fused at the chromocenter. The tips of
chromosomes 2 and 3 are labeled (L = left arm; R = right arm),
as is the tip of the X chromosome. (b) A particular DNA
sequence can be mapped on Drosophila salivary gland
chromosomes by in situ hybridization. This photomicrograph
shows a portion of a chromosome that was hybridized with a
cloned DNA sequence labeled with biotin-derivatized nucleotides.
Hybridization is detected with the biotin-binding protein avidin
that is covalently bound to the enzyme alkaline phosphatase. On
addition of a soluble substrate, the enzyme catalyzes a reaction
that results in formation of an insoluble colored precipitate at the
site of hybridization (asterisk). Since the very reproducible
banding patterns are characteristic of each Drosophila polytene
chromosome, the hybridized sequence can be located on a
particular chromosome. The numbers indicate major bands.
Bands between those indicated are designated with numbers
and letters (not shown). [Part (a) courtesy of J. Gall; part (b) courtesy
of F. Pignoni.]

2R

3L

3R

X

(b)

97

98
99

100

10.5 • Morphology and Functional Elements of Eukaryotic Chromosomes

Interphase Polytene Chromosomes
Arise by DNA Amplification
The larval salivary glands of Drosophila species and other
dipteran insects contain enlarged interphase chromosomes
that are visible in the light microscope. When fixed and
stained, these polytene chromosomes are characterized by a
large number of reproducible, well-demarcated bands that
have been assigned standardized numbers (Figure 10-30a).
The highly reproducible banding pattern seen in Drosophila
salivary gland chromosomes provides an extremely powerful
method for locating specific DNA sequences along the
lengths of the chromosomes in this species. For example, the
chromosomal location of a cloned DNA sequence can be accurately determined by hybridizing a labeled sample of the
cloned DNA to polytene chromosomes prepared from larval salivary glands (Figure 10-30b).
A generalized amplification of DNA gives rise to the
polytene chromosomes found in the salivary glands of
Drosophila. This process, termed polytenization, occurs
when the DNA repeatedly replicates, but the daughter chromosomes do not separate. The result is an enlarged chro-

(a)
Paternal
telomere
Maternal
telomere

Centromere
Telomere
5 µm

(b)
Centromere

Telomere

433

mosome composed of many parallel copies of itself (Figure
10-31). The amplification of chromosomal DNA greatly increases gene copy number, presumably to supply sufficient
mRNA for protein synthesis in the massive salivary gland
cells. Although the bands seen in human metaphase chromosomes probably represent very long folded or compacted
stretches of DNA containing about 107 base pairs, the
bands in Drosophila polytene chromosomes represent much
shorter stretches of only 50,000–100,000 base pairs.

Heterochromatin Consists of Chromosome
Regions That Do Not Uncoil
As cells exit from mitosis and the condensed chromosomes
uncoil, certain sections of the chromosomes remain darkstaining. The dark-staining areas, termed heterochromatin,
are regions of condensed chromatin. The light-staining, less
condensed portions of chromatin are called euchromatin.
Heterochromatin appears most frequently—but not exclusively—at the centromere and telomeres of chromosomes and
is mostly simple-sequence DNA.
In mammalian cells, heterochromatin appears as darkly
staining regions of the nucleus, often associated with the nuclear envelope. Pulse labeling with 3H-uridine and autoradiography have shown that most transcription occurs in
regions of euchromatin and the nucleolus. Because of this
and because heterochromatic regions apparently remain condensed throughout the life cycle of the cell, they have been
regarded as sites of inactive genes. However, some transcribed genes have been located in regions of heterochromatin. Also, not all inactive genes and nontranscribed
regions of DNA are visible as heterochromatin.

Three Functional Elements Are Required
for Replication and Stable Inheritance
of Chromosomes
Telomere

▲ FIGURE 10-31 Amplification of DNA along the
polytene fourth chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster.
(a) Morphology of the stained polytene fourth chromosome as
it appears in the light microscope at high magnification. The
fourth chromosome is by far the smallest (see Figure 10-30).
The homologous chromatids (paternal and maternal) are paired.
The banding pattern results from reproducible packing of DNA
and protein within each amplified site along the chromosome.
Dark bands are regions of more highly compacted chromatin.
(b) The pattern of amplification of one of the two homologous
chromatids during five replications. Double-stranded DNA is
represented by a single line. Telomere and centromere DNA
are not amplified. In salivary gland polytene chromosomes, each
parental chromosome undergoes ≈10 replications (210 = 1024
strands). [Part (a) from C. Bridges, 1935, J. Hered. 26:60; part (b)
adapted from C. D. Laird et al., 1973, Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
Quant. Biol. 38:311.]

Although chromosomes differ in length and number between
species, cytogenetic studies have shown that they all behave
similarly at the time of cell division. Moreover, any eukaryotic chromosome must contain three functional elements in
order to replicate and segregate correctly: (1) replication origins at which DNA polymerases and other proteins initiate
synthesis of DNA (see Figures 4-34 and 4-36), (2) the centromere, and (3) the two ends, or telomeres. The yeast transformation studies depicted in Figure 10-32 demonstrated the
functions of these three chromosomal elements and established their importance for chromosome function.
As discussed in Chapter 4, replication of DNA begins
from sites that are scattered throughout eukaryotic chromosomes. The yeast genome contains many ≈100-bp sequences,
called autonomously replicating sequences (ARSs), that act
as replication origins. The observation that insertion of an
ARS into a circular plasmid allows the plasmid to replicate in
yeast cells provided the first functional identification of origin sequences in eukaryotic DNA (see Figure 10-32a).

434

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes
Progeny of transfected cell

Plasmid with
Transfected

sequence from leu cell
normal yeast

Growth
without
leucine

(a)

LEU

LEU

Conclusion

Mitotic
segregation

ARS required
for plasmid
replication

No

No
LEU

LEU

ARS

ARS

LEU

Yes

Poor
(5–20%
of cells
have
plasmid)

In presence
of ARS,
plasmid
replication occurs,
but mitotic
segregation is
faulty

Good
(>90%
of cells
have
plasmid)

Genomic
fragment
CEN required
for good
segregation

ARS

(b)
CE N

LEU

Yes

LEU

LEU

CE N

CE N

ARS

ARS

ARS

CE N

LEU

Yes

ARS

(c)
LEU

CE N

CE N

LEU

ARS

No

Linear plasmid
lacking TEL
is unstable

Yes

Linear plasmids
containing ARS
and CEN behave
like normal
chromosomes if
genomic fragment
TEL is added
to both ends

ARS

Restriction
enzyme
produces linear
plasmid

CE

ARS

LEU

TE
L

N

L

TE

LEU
CE

ARS

L

N

L

TE

TE

L

TE

L

N

Good

TE

TEL
ARS LEU CEN

CE

TEL

ARS

LEU

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-32 Yeast transfection
experiments identify the functional chromosomal elements
necessary for normal chromosome replication and
segregation. In these experiments, plasmids containing the LEU
gene from normal yeast cells are constructed and introduced into
leu cells by transfection. If the plasmid is maintained in the leu
cells, they are transformed to LEU by the LEU gene on the
plasmid and can form colonies on medium lacking leucine.
(a) Sequences that allow autonomous replication (ARS) of a
plasmid were identified because their insertion into a plasmid
vector containing a cloned LEU gene resulted in a high frequency
of transformation to LEU . However, even plasmids with ARS
exhibit poor segregation during mitosis, and therefore do not
appear in each of the daughter cells. (b) When randomly broken

Yes

pieces of genomic yeast DNA are inserted into plasmids
containing ARS and LEU, some of the subsequently transfected
cells produce large colonies, indicating that a high rate of mitotic
segregation among their plasmids is facilitating the continuous
growth of daughter cells. The DNA recovered from plasmids in
these large colonies contains yeast centromere (CEN)
sequences. (c) When leu yeast cells are transfected with
linearized plasmids containing LEU, ARS, and CEN, no colonies
grow. Addition of telomere (TEL) sequences to the ends of the
linear DNA gives the linearized plasmids the ability to replicate as
new chromosomes that behave very much like a normal
chromosome in both mitosis and meiosis. [See A. W. Murray and
J. W. Szostak, 1983, Nature 305:89, and L. Clarke and J. Carbon, 1985,
Ann. Rev. Genet. 19:29.]

10.5 • Morphology and Functional Elements of Eukaryotic Chromosomes

Even though circular ARS-containing plasmids can replicate in yeast cells, only about 5–20 percent of progeny cells
contain the plasmid because mitotic segregation of the plasmids is faulty. However, plasmids that also carry a CEN sequence, derived from the centromeres of yeast chromosomes,
segregate equally or nearly so to both mother and daughter
cells during mitosis (see Figure 10-32b).
If circular plasmids containing an ARS and CEN sequence are cut once with a restriction enzyme, the resulting
linear plasmids do not produce LEU colonies unless they
contain special telomeric (TEL) sequences ligated to their
ends (see Figure 10-32c). The first successful experiments involving transfection of yeast cells with linear plasmids were
achieved by using the ends of a DNA molecule that was
known to replicate as a linear molecule in the ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena. During part of the life cycle of Tetrahymena, much of the nuclear DNA is repeatedly copied in short
pieces to form a so-called macronucleus. One of these repeated fragments was identified as a dimer of ribosomal
DNA, the ends of which contained a repeated sequence
(G4T2)n. When a section of this repeated TEL sequence was
ligated to the ends of linear yeast plasmids containing ARS
and CEN, replication and good segregation of the linear
plasmids occurred.

Centromere Sequences Vary Greatly in Length
Once the yeast centromere regions that confer mitotic segregation were cloned, their sequences could be determined and
compared, revealing three regions (I, II, and III) conserved
between them (Figure 10-33a). Short, fairly well conserved
nucleotide sequences are present in regions I and III. Although region II seems to have a fairly constant length, it
contains no definite consensus sequence; however, it is rich in
A and T residues. Regions I and III are bound by proteins
that interact with a set of more than 30 proteins that bind the
short S. cerevisiae chromosome to one microtubule of the
spindle apparatus during mitosis. Region II is bound to a nucleosome that has a variant form of histone H3 replacing the
usual H3. Centromeres from all eukaryotes similarly are
bound by nucleosomes with a specialized, centromerespecific form of histone H3 called CENP-A in humans.

I

(a)

Yeast CEN

(b)

Drosophila
(Dom 359)

A
A
GT CA CG T G
GT CA CA T AG

S. cerevisiae has by far the simplest centromere sequence
known in nature.
In the fission yeast S. pombe, centromeres are ≈40 kb in
length and are composed of repeated copies of sequences
similar those in S. cerevisiae centromeres. Multiple copies of
proteins homologous to those that interact with the S. cerevisiae centromeres bind to these complex S. pombe centromeres and in turn bind the much longer S. pombe
chromosomes to several microtubules of the mitotic spindle
apparatus. In plants and animals, centromeres are megabases
in length and are composed of multiple repeats of simplesequence DNA. One Drosophila simple-sequence DNA,
which comes from a centromeric region, has a repeat unit
that bears some similarity to yeast CEN regions I and III (see
Figure 10-33b). In humans, centromeres contain 2- to 4megabase arrays of a 171-bp simple-sequence DNA called
alphoid DNA that is bound by nucleosomes with the
CENP-A histone H3 variant, as well as other repeated simplesequence DNA.
In higher eukaryotes, a complex protein structure called
the kinetochore assembles at centromeres and associates with
multiple mitotic spindle fibers during mitosis. Homologs of
most of the centromeric proteins found in the yeasts occur in
humans and other higher eukaryotes and are thought to be
components of kinetochores. The role of the centromere and
proteins that bind to it in the segregation of sister chromatids
during mitosis is described in Chapters 20 and 21.

Addition of Telomeric Sequences by Telomerase
Prevents Shortening of Chromosomes
Sequencing of telomeres from a dozen or so organisms, including humans, has shown that most are repetitive
oligomers with a high G content in the strand with its 3 end
at the end of the chromosome. The telomere repeat sequence
in humans and other vertebrates is TTAGGG. These simple
sequences are repeated at the very termini of chromosomes
for a total of a few hundred base pairs in yeasts and protozoans and a few thousand base pairs in vertebrates. The 3
end of the G-rich strand extends 12–16 nucleotides beyond
the 5 end of the complementary C-rich strand. This region
is bound by specific proteins that both protect the ends of

II

III
T
T G T T T C T GN T T T C CG A AA

78–86 bp

TG AT TA T T T GA TG ACC GA A A

264 bp

▲ FIGURE 10-33 Comparison of yeast CEN sequence and
Drosophila simple-sequence DNA. (a) Consensus yeast CEN
sequence, based on analysis of 10 yeast centromeres, includes
three conserved regions. Region II, although variable in
sequence, is fairly constant in length and is rich in A and T

435

residues. (b) One Drosophila simple-sequence DNA located near
the centromere has a repeat unit with some homology to the
yeast consensus CEN, including two identical 4-bp and 6-bp
stretches (red). [See L. Clarke and J. Carbon, 1985, Ann. Rev. Genet.
19:29.]

436

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

Single-stranded
Catalytic site for dNTP addition
DNA at terminus
3 T T AACCCCAAAA
of telomere
C
40
AA
35
Telomeraseassociated
RNA template
3

5

5
1

Reverse transcription catalyzed
by telomerase to position 35 of
RNA template

G

GGG T T
T TG
T
T TAAAC C C C AAAAT
C
A

3

5

5
2

Dissociation of 3 end of DNA
and base pairing to a
downstream region of
telomerase RNA

G
T G
T G
G
T G T T TACCCCAAA
AC
T T AA
A

3

5

 FIGURE 10-34 Mechanism of action of telomerase.
The single-stranded 3 terminus of a telomere is extended by

5
3

Reverse transcription
to position 35

Focus Animation: Telomere Replication

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

G

G
T G
T G
GG G
T T G C C AT T T T
T G
AA
T TAAAC C
T
AC
A

5

3
5

5

4
Translocation and hybridization
T
T T
T •G
G •G
T TG
G •G
G •G T TAAAC C C C AAAA
C
G
A
TTTT

3

5
5

linear chromosomes from attack by exonucleases and associate telomeres in specific domains within the nucleus.
The need for a specialized region at the ends of eukaryotic
chromosomes is apparent when we consider that all known
DNA polymerases elongate DNA chains at the 3 end, and all
require an RNA or DNA primer. As the growing fork approaches the end of a linear chromosome, synthesis of the
leading strand continues to the end of the DNA template
strand, completing one daughter DNA double helix. However, because the lagging-strand template is copied in a discontinuous fashion, it cannot be replicated in its entirety (see
Figure 4-33). When the final RNA primer is removed, there is
no upstream strand onto which DNA polymerase can build to
fill the resulting gap. Without some special mechanism, the
daughter DNA strand resulting from lagging-strand synthesis would be shortened at each cell division.
The problem of telomere shortening is solved by an enzyme that adds telomeric sequences to the ends of each chromosome. The enzyme is a protein and RNA complex called
telomere terminal transferase, or telomerase. Because the sequence of the telomerase-associated RNA, as we will see,
serves as the template for addition of deoxyribonucleotides
to the ends of telomeres, the source of the enzyme and not
the source of the telomeric DNA primer determines the sequence added. This was proved by transforming Tetrahymena with a mutated form of the gene encoding the

Repetition of reverse-transcription
and translocation-hybridization
steps

telomerase, counteracting the inability of the DNA replication
mechanism to synthesize the extreme terminus of linear DNA.
Telomerase elongates this single-stranded end by a reiterative
reverse-transcription mechanism. The action of the telomerase
from the protozoan Oxytricha, which adds a T4G4 repeat unit, is
depicted; other telomerases add slightly different sequences. The
telomerase contains an RNA template (red) that base-pairs to the
3 end of the lagging-strand template. The telomerase catalytic
site (green) then adds deoxyribonucleotides (blue) using the RNA
molecule as a template; this reverse transcription proceeds to
position 35 of the RNA template (step 1 ). The strands of the
resulting DNA-RNA duplex are then thought to slip relative to
each other, leading to displacement of a single-stranded region of
the telomeric DNA strand and to uncovering of part of the RNA
template sequence (step 2 ). The lagging-strand telomeric
sequence is again extended to position 35 by telomerase, and
the DNA-RNA duplex undergoes translocation and hybridization
as before (steps 3 and 4 ). The slippage mechanism is thought
to be facilitated by the unusual base pairing (black dots) between
the displaced G residues, which is less stable than Watson-Crick
base pairing. Telomerases can add multiple repeats by repetition
of steps 3 and 4 . DNA polymerase -primase can prime
synthesis of new Okazaki fragments on this extended template
strand. The net result prevents shortening of the lagging strand
at each cycle of DNA replication [Adapted from D. Shippen-Lentz and
E. H. Blackburn, 1990, Nature 247:550.]

10.5 • Morphology and Functional Elements of Eukaryotic Chromosomes

telomerase-associated RNA. The resulting telomerase added
a DNA sequence complementary to the mutated RNA sequence to the ends of telomeric primers. Thus telomerase is a
specialized form of a reverse transcriptase that carries its
own internal RNA template to direct DNA synthesis.
Figure 10-34 depicts how telomerase, by reverse transcription of its associated RNA, elongates the 3 end of the
single-stranded DNA at the end of the G-rich strand mentioned above. Cells from knockout mice that cannot produce
the telomerase-associated RNA exhibit no telomerase activity, and their telomeres shorten successively with each cell
generation. Such mice can breed and reproduce normally for
three generations before the long telomere repeats become
substantially eroded. Then, the absence of telomere DNA results in adverse effects, including fusion of chromosome termini and chromosomal loss. By the fourth generation, the
reproductive potential of these knockout mice declines, and
they cannot produce offspring after the sixth generation.
The human genes expressing the telomerase protein and the telomerase-associated RNA are active
in germ cells but are turned off in most adult tissues, in which cells replicate only rarely. However, these genes
are reactivated in most human cancer cells, where telomerase
is required for the multiple cell divisions necessary to form
a tumor. This phenomenon has stimulated a search for inhibitors of human telomerase as potential therapeutic agents
for treating cancer. ❚
While telomerase prevents telomere shortening in most
eukaryotes, some organisms use alternative strategies.
Drosophila species maintain telomere lengths by the regulated insertion of non-LTR retrotransposons into telomeres.
This is one of the few instances in which a mobile element
has a specific function in its host organism.

Yeast Artificial Chromosomes Can Be Used
to Clone Megabase DNA Fragments
The research on circular and linear plasmids in yeast identified
all the basic components of a yeast artificial chromosome
(YAC). To construct YACs, TEL sequences from yeast cells or
from the protozoan Tetrahymena are combined with yeast
CEN and ARS sequences; to these are added DNA with selectable yeast genes and enough DNA from any source to make a
total of more than 50 kb. (Smaller DNA segments do not work
as well.) Such artificial chromosomes replicate in yeast cells and
segregate almost perfectly, with only 1 daughter cell in 1000
to 10,000 failing to receive an artificial chromosome. During
meiosis, the two sister chromatids of the artificial chromosome
separate correctly to produce haploid spores. The successful
propagation of YACs and studies such as those depicted in Figure 10-32 strongly support the conclusion that yeast chromosomes, and probably all eukaryotic chromosomes, are linear,
double-stranded DNA molecules containing special regions
that ensure replication and proper segregation.

437

YACs are valuable experimental tools that can be
used to clone very long chromosomal pieces from
other species. For instance, YACs have been used
extensively for cloning fragments of human DNA up to
1000 kb (1 megabase) in length, permitting the isolation of
overlapping YAC clones that collectively encompass nearly
the entire length of individual human chromosomes. Currently, research is in progress to construct human artificial
chromosomes using the much longer centromeric DNA of
human chromosomes and the longer human telomeres. Such
human artificial chromosomes might be useful in gene therapy to treat human genetic diseases such as sickle-cell anemia, cystic fibrosis, and inborn errors of metabolism. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 10.5
Morphology and Functional Elements
of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
During metaphase, eukaryotic chromosomes become
sufficiently condensed that they can be visualized individually in the light microscope.

■

The karyotype, the set of metaphase chromosomes, is
characteristic of each species. Closely related species can
have dramatically different karyotypes, indicating that similar genetic information can be organized on chromosomes
in different ways.

■

Banding analysis and chromosome painting, a more precise method, are used to identify the different human
metaphase chromosomes and to detect translocations and
deletions (see Figure 10-29).

■

■ In certain cells of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
and related insects, interphase chromosomes are reduplicated 10 times, generating polytene chromosomes that are
visible in the light microscope (see Figure 10-31).

The highly reproducible banding patterns of polytene
chromosomes make it possible to localize cloned
Drosophila DNA on a Drosophila chromosome by in situ
hybridization (Figure 10-30) and to visualize chromosomal
deletions and rearrangements as changes in the normal pattern of bands.
■

When metaphase chromosomes decondense during interphase, certain regions, termed heterochromatin, remain
much more condensed than the bulk of chromatin, called
euchromatin.
■

Three types of DNA sequences are required for a long
linear DNA molecule to function as a chromosome: a replication origin, called ARS in yeast; a centromere (CEN) sequence; and two telomere (TEL) sequences at the ends of
the DNA (see Figure 10-32).

■

DNA fragments up to 106 base pairs long can be cloned
in yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) vectors.

■

438

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

10.6

Organelle DNAs

Although the vast majority of DNA in most eukaryotes is
found in the nucleus, some DNA is present within the mitochondria of animals, plants, and fungi and within the
chloroplasts of plants. These organelles are the main cellular sites for ATP formation, during oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria and photosynthesis in chloroplasts
(Chapter 8). Many lines of evidence indicate that mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved from bacteria that were endocytosed into ancestral cells containing a eukaryotic nucleus,
forming endosymbionts. Over evolutionary time, most of the
bacterial genes encoding components of the present-day organelles were transferred to the nucleus. However, mitochondria and chloroplasts in today’s eukaryotes retain DNAs
encoding proteins essential for organellar function as well
as the ribosomal and transfer RNAs required for their translation. Thus eukaryotic cells have multiple genetic systems:
a predominant nuclear system and secondary systems with
their own DNA in the mitochondria and chloroplasts.

Mitochondria Contain Multiple mtDNA Molecules

(mtDNA) can be detected by fluorescence microscopy. The
mtDNA is located in the interior of the mitochondrion, the
region known as the matrix (see Figure 5-26). As judged by
the number of yellow fluorescent “dots” of mtDNA, a Euglena gracilis cell contains at least 30 mtDNA molecules
(Figure 10-35).
Since the dyes used to visualize nuclear and mitochondrial DNA do not affect cell growth or division, replication
of mtDNA and division of the mitochondrial network can be
followed in living cells using time-lapse microscopy. Such
studies show that in most organisms mtDNA replicates
throughout interphase. At mitosis each daughter cell receives
approximately the same number of mitochondria, but since
there is no mechanism for apportioning exactly equal numbers of mitochondria to the daughter cells, some cells contain
more mtDNA than others. By isolating mitochondria from
cells and analyzing the DNA extracted from them, it can be
seen that each mitochondrion contains multiple mtDNA
molecules. Thus the total amount of mtDNA in a cell depends on the number of mitochondria, the size of the
mtDNA, and the number of mtDNA molecules per mitochondrion. Each of these parameters varies greatly between
different cell types.

Individual mitochondria are large enough to be seen under
the light microscope, and even the mitochondrial DNA

mtDNA Is Inherited Cytoplasmically
and Encodes rRNAs, tRNAs, and
Some Mitochondrial Proteins

10 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 10-35 Dual staining reveals
the multiple mitochondrial DNA molecules in a growing
Euglena gracilis cell. Cells were treated with a mixture of two
dyes: ethidium bromide, which binds to DNA and emits a red
fluorescence, and DiOC6, which is incorporated specifically into
mitochondria and emits a green fluorescence. Thus the nucleus
emits a red fluorescence, and areas rich in mitochondrial
DNA fluoresce yellow—a combination of red DNA and green
mitochondrial fluorescence. [From Y. Hayashi and K. Ueda, 1989,
J. Cell Sci. 93:565.]

Studies of mutants in yeasts and other single-celled organisms first indicated that mitochondria exhibit cytoplasmic
inheritance and thus must contain their own genetic system
(Figure 10-36). For instance, petite yeast mutants exhibit
structurally abnormal mitochondria and are incapable of oxidative phosphorylation. As a result, petite cells grow more
slowly than wild-type yeasts and form smaller colonies
(hence the name “petite”). Genetic crosses between different (haploid) yeast strains showed that the petite mutation
does not segregate with any known nuclear gene or chromosome. In later studies, most petite mutants were found to
contain deletions of mtDNA.
In the mating by fusion of haploid yeast cells, both
parents contribute equally to the cytoplasm of the resulting diploid; thus inheritance of mitochondria is biparental
(see Figure 10-36a). In mammals and most other multicellular organisms, however, the sperm contributes little
(if any) cytoplasm to the zygote, and virtually all the mitochondria in the embryo are derived from those in the
egg, not the sperm. Studies in mice have shown that 99.99
percent of mtDNA is maternally inherited, but a small
part (0.01 percent) is inherited from the male parent. In
higher plants, mtDNA is inherited exclusively in a uniparental fashion through the female parent (egg), not the
male (pollen).
The entire mitochondrial genome from a number of different organisms has now been cloned and sequenced, and

10.6 • Organelle DNAs
(a)

Haploid parents with
wild-type nuclear genes

Normal
mitochondrion

"Petite"
mitochondrion

Mating by
cell fusion

mtDNAs from all these sources have been found to encode
rRNAs, tRNAs, and essential mitochondrial proteins. All
proteins encoded by mtDNA are synthesized on mitochondrial ribosomes. All mitochondrially synthesized polypeptides identified thus far (with one possible exception) are not
complete enzymes but subunits of multimeric complexes
used in electron transport or ATP synthesis. Most proteins
localized in mitochondria, such as the mitochondrial RNA
and DNA polymerases, are synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes and are imported into the organelle by processes discussed in Chapter 16.

The Size and Coding Capacity
of mtDNA Vary Considerably
in Different Organisms

Diploid
zygote

Meiosis: random distribution
of mitochondria to
daughter cells

All haploid cells respiratory-proficient

(b)

Mitosis: random
distribution of
mitochondria to
daughter cells

Surprisingly, the size of the mtDNA, the number and nature
of the proteins it encodes, and even the mitochondrial genetic code itself vary greatly between different organisms.
Human mtDNA, a circular molecule that has been completely sequenced, is among the smallest known mtDNAs,
containing 16,569 base pairs (Figure 10-37). It encodes the
two rRNAs found in mitochondrial ribosomes and the 22
tRNAs used to translate mitochondrial mRNAs. Human
mtDNA has 13 sequences that begin with an ATG (methionine) codon, end with a stop codon, and are long enough to
encode a polypeptide of more than 50 amino acids; all the
possible proteins encoded by these open reading frames
have been identified. Mammalian mtDNA, in contrast to
nuclear DNA, lacks introns and contains no long noncoding sequences.
The mtDNA from most multicellular animals (metazoans) is about the same size as human mtDNA and encodes
similar gene products. In contrast, yeast mtDNA is almost
five times as large (≈78,000 bp). The mtDNAs from yeast
and other fungi encode many of the same gene products as
mammalian mtDNA, as well as others whose genes are
found in the nuclei of metazoan cells.

 FIGURE 10-36 Cytoplasmic inheritance of the petite

Mitosis

Respiratory-proficient

439

Mitosis

Petite

Respiratoryproficient

mutation in yeast. Petite-strain mitochondria are defective
in oxidative phosphorylation owing to a deletion in mtDNA.
(a) Haploid cells fuse to produce a diploid cell that
undergoes meiosis, during which random segregation of
parental chromosomes and mitochondria containing mtDNA
occurs. Since yeast normally contain ≈50 mtDNA molecules
per cell, all products of meiosis usually contain both normal
and petite mtDNAs and are capable of respiration. (b) As
these haploid cells grow and divide mitotically, the cytoplasm
(including the mitochondria) is randomly distributed to the
daughter cells. Occasionally, a cell is generated that contains
only defective petite mtDNA and yields a petite colony. Thus
formation of such petite cells is independent of any nuclear
genetic marker.

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes
Small
ribosomal R
NA

 FIGURE 10-37 The coding capacity of

m
ro

e

b
Phe

Lar
rib ge
os
om
al
R

Val

Pro

A

Cy
to
ch

Thr

N

human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Proteins
and RNAs encoded by each of the two strands are
shown separately. Transcription of the outer (H)
strand occurs in the clockwise direction and of the
inner (L) strand in the counterclockwise direction.
The abbreviations for amino acids denote the
corresponding tRNA genes. ND1, ND2, etc.,
denote genes encoding subunits of the NADHCoQ reductase complex. The 207-bp gene
encoding F0 ATPase subunit 8 overlaps, out of
frame, with the N-terminal portion of the segment ND5
encoding F0 ATPase subunit 6. Mammalian mtDNA
genes do not contain introns, although intervening
DNA lies between some genes. [See D. A. Clayton,

Leu
Glu

ND1
ND6
Human mtDNA

Gln

L strand

1991, Ann. Rev. Cell Biol. 7:453.]

ND2

H strand

Ala
Asn
Cys
Tyr

Leu
Ser
His

ND4

Arg
Gly

Asp

Ser

Lys

ND4L
ND3

In contrast to other eukaryotes, which contain a
single type of mtDNA, plants contain several types
of mtDNA that appear to recombine with one another. Plant mtDNAs are much larger and more variable in
size than the mtDNAs of other organisms. Even in a single
family of plants, mtDNAs can vary as much as eightfold in
size (watermelon = 330 kb; muskmelon = 2500 kb). Unlike
animal, yeast, and fungal mtDNAs, plant mtDNAs contain
genes encoding a 5S mitochondrial rRNA, which is present
only in the mitochondrial ribosomes of plants, and the  subunit of the F1 ATPase. The mitochondrial rRNAs of plants are
also considerably larger than those of other eukaryotes. Long,
noncoding regions and duplicated sequences are largely responsible for the greater length of plant mtDNAs. ❚
Differences in the size and coding capacity of mtDNA
from various organisms most likely reflect the movement of
DNA between mitochondria and the nucleus during evolution. Direct evidence for this movement comes from the observation that several proteins encoded by mtDNA in some
species are encoded by nuclear DNA in others. It thus appears that entire genes moved from the mitochondrion to the
nucleus, or vice versa, during evolution.
The most striking example of this phenomenon involves
the gene cox II, which encodes subunit 2 of cytochrome c oxidase. This gene is found in mtDNA in all organisms studied
except for one species of legume, the mung bean: in this or-

IIe
f-Met

Cyto
oxid chrome
ase
c
3

ATPase
subunit 6
se
ATPa

e
om
chr 2
o
t
Cy dase
oxi
nit 8
subu

Trp

C
ox ytoc
id hr
as om
e
1 ec

440

c

ganism only, the cox II gene is nuclear. Many RNA transcripts
of plant mitochondrial genes are edited, mainly by the enzymecatalyzed conversion of selected C residues to U, and occasionally U to C. (RNA editing is discussed in Chapter 12.) The
nuclear cox II gene of mung bean corresponds more closely
to the edited cox II RNA transcripts than to the mitochondrial cox II genes found in other legumes. These observations
are strong evidence that the cox II gene moved from the mitochondrion to the nucleus during mung bean evolution by a
process that involved an RNA intermediate. Presumably this
movement involved a reverse-transcription mechanism similar
to that by which processed pseudogenes are generated in the
nuclear genome from nuclear-encoded mRNAs.

Products of Mitochondrial Genes
Are Not Exported
As far as is known, all RNA transcripts of mtDNA and their
translation products remain in the mitochondrion, and all
mtDNA-encoded proteins are synthesized on mitochondrial
ribosomes. Mitochondria encode the rRNAs that form mitochondrial ribosomes, although all but one or two of the ribosomal proteins (depending on the species) are imported
from the cytosol. In most eukaryotes, all the tRNAs used for
protein synthesis in mitochondria are encoded by mtDNAs.
However, in wheat, in the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma
brucei (the cause of African sleeping sickness), and in ciliated

10.6 • Organelle DNAs

protozoans, most mitochondrial tRNAs are encoded by the
nuclear DNA and imported into the mitochondrion.
Reflecting the bacterial ancestry of mitochondria,
mitochondrial ribosomes resemble bacterial ribosomes and differ from eukaryotic cytosolic ribosomes in their RNA and protein compositions, their size, and
their sensitivity to certain antibiotics (see Figure 4-24). For instance, chloramphenicol blocks protein synthesis by bacterial and mitochondrial ribosomes from most organisms, but
cycloheximide does not. This sensitivity of mitochondrial ribosomes to the important aminoglycoside class of antibiotics
is the main cause of the toxicity that these antibiotics can
cause. Conversely, cytosolic ribosomes are sensitive to cycloheximide and resistant to chloramphenicol. In cultured mammalian cells the only proteins synthesized in the presence of
cycloheximide are encoded by mtDNA and produced by mitochondrial ribosomes. ❚

Mitochondrial Genetic Codes Differ
from the Standard Nuclear Code
The genetic code used in animal and fungal mitochondria is
different from the standard code used in all prokaryotic and
eukaryotic nuclear genes; remarkably, the code even differs
in mitochondria from different species (Table 10-3). Why
and how these differences arose during evolution is mysterious. UGA, for example, is normally a stop codon, but is read
as tryptophan by human and fungal mitochondrial translation systems; however, in plant mitochondria, UGA is still
recognized as a stop codon. AGA and AGG, the standard nuclear codons for arginine, also code for arginine in fungal
and plant mtDNA, but they are stop codons in mammalian
mtDNA and serine codons in Drosophila mtDNA.

441

As shown in Table 10-3, plant mitochondria appear to utilize the standard genetic code. However,
comparisons of the amino acid sequences of plant
mitochondrial proteins with the nucleotide sequences of
plant mtDNAs suggested that CGG could code for either
arginine (the “standard” amino acid) or tryptophan. This apparent nonspecificity of the plant mitochondrial code is explained by editing of mitochondrial RNA transcripts, which
can convert cytosine residues to uracil residues. If a CGG sequence is edited to UGG, the codon specifies tryptophan, the
standard amino acid for UGG, whereas unedited CGG
codons encode the standard arginine. Thus the translation
system in plant mitochondria does utilize the standard
genetic code. ❚

Mutations in Mitochondrial DNA Cause Several
Genetic Diseases in Humans
The severity of disease caused by a mutation in mtDNA depends on the nature of the mutation and on the proportion
of mutant and wild-type mtDNAs present in a particular
cell type. Generally, when mutations in mtDNA are found,
cells contain mixtures of wild-type and mutant mtDNAs—
a condition known as heteroplasmy. Each time a mammalian somatic or germ-line cell divides, the mutant and
wild-type mtDNAs will segregate randomly into the daughter cells, as occurs in yeast cells (see Figure 10-36). Thus,
the mtDNA genotype, which fluctuates from one generation and from one cell division to the next, can drift toward predominantly wild-type or predominantly mutant
mtDNAs. Since all enzymes for the replication and growth
of mitochondria, such as DNA and RNA polymerases, are
imported from the cytosol, a mutant mtDNA should not be
at a “replication disadvantage”; mutants that involve large

TABLE 10-3 Alterations in the Standard Genetic Code in Mitochondria

Codon

Standard Code:
Nuclear-Encoded
Proteins

Mitochondria
Mammals

Drosophila

Neurospora

Yeasts

Plants

UGA

Stop

Trp

Trp

Trp

Trp

Stop

AGA, AGG

Arg

Stop

Ser

Arg

Arg

Arg

AUA

Ile

Met

Met

Ile

Met

Ile

AUU

Ile

Met

Met

Met

Met

Ile

CUU, CUC,
CUA, CUG

Leu

Leu

Leu

Leu

Thr

Leu

SOURCES: S. Anderson et al., 1981, Nature 290:457; P. Borst, in International Cell Biology 1980–1981,
H. G. Schweiger, ed., Springer-Verlag, p. 239; C. Breitenberger and U. L. Raj Bhandary, 1985,
Trends Biochem. Sci. 10:478–483; V. K. Eckenrode and C. S. Levings, 1986, In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol.
22:169–176; J. M. Gualber et al., 1989, Nature 341:660–662; and P. S. Covello and M. W. Gray, 1989,
Nature 341:662–666.

442

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

deletions of mtDNA might even be at a selective advantage
in replication because they can replicate faster.
All cells have mitochondria, yet mutations in
mtDNA affect only some tissues. Those most usually affected are tissues that have a high requirement for ATP produced by oxidative phosphorylation and
tissues that require most of or all the mtDNA in the cell to
synthesize sufficient amounts of functional mitochondrial
proteins. Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (degeneration
of the optic nerve, accompanied by increasing blindness),
for instance, is caused by a missense mutation in the
mtDNA gene encoding subunit 4 of the NADH-CoQ reductase. Any of several large deletions in mtDNA causes another set of diseases including chronic progressive external
ophthalmoplegia and Kearns-Sayre syndrome, which are
characterized by eye defects and, in Kearns-Sayre syndrome,
also by abnormal heartbeat and central nervous system degeneration. A third condition, causing “ragged” muscle
fibers (with improperly assembled mitochondria) and associated uncontrolled jerky movements, is due to a single mutation in the TCG loop of the mitochondrial lysine tRNA.
As a result of this mutation, the translation of several mitochondrial proteins apparently is inhibited ❚

Chloroplasts Contain Large Circular DNAs
Encoding More Than a Hundred Proteins
As we discuss in Chapter 8, the structure of chloroplasts is similar in many respects to that of mitochondria. Like mitochondria, chloroplasts contain
multiple copies of the organellar DNA and ribosomes, which
synthesize some chloroplast-encoded proteins using the
“standard” genetic code. Other chloroplast proteins are fabricated on cytosolic ribosomes and are incorporated into the
organelle after translation (Chapter 16).
Chloroplast DNAs are circular molecules of 120,000–
160,000 bp, depending on the species. The complete sequences of several chloroplast DNAs have been determined.
Of the ≈120 genes in chloroplast DNA, about 60 are involved in RNA transcription and translation, including genes
for rRNAs, tRNAs, RNA polymerase subunits, and ribosomal proteins. About 20 genes encode subunits of the chloroplast photosynthetic electron-transport complexes and the
F0F1 ATPase complex. Also encoded in the chloroplast
genome is the larger of the two subunits of ribulose 1,5bisphosphate carboxylase, which is involved in the fixation
of carbon dioxide during photosynthesis.
Reflecting the endosymbiotic origin of chloroplasts,
some regions of chloroplast DNA are strikingly similar to
the DNA of present-day bacteria. For instance, chloroplast
DNA encodes four subunits of RNA polymerase that are
highly homologous to the subunits of E. coli RNA polymerase. One segment of chloroplast DNA encodes eight

proteins that are homologous to eight E. coli ribosomal
proteins; moreover, the order of these genes is the same in
the two DNAs.
Although the overall organization of chloroplast DNAs
from different species is similar, some differences in gene
composition occur. For instance, liverwort chloroplast DNA
has some genes that are not detected in the larger tobacco
chloroplast DNA, and vice versa. Since chloroplasts in both
species contain virtually the same set of proteins, these data
suggest that some genes are present in the chloroplast DNA
of one species and in the nuclear DNA of the other, indicating that some exchange of genes between chloroplast and
nucleus occurred during evolution. ❚
Methods similar to those used for the transformation of yeast cells (Chapter 9) have been developed
for stably introducing foreign DNA into the
chloroplasts of higher plants. The large number of chloroplast DNA molecules per cell permits the introduction of
thousands of copies of an engineered gene into each cell, resulting in extraordinarily high levels of foreign protein production. Chloroplast transformation has recently led to the
engineering of plants that are resistant to bacterial and fungal infections, drought, and herbicides. The level of production of foreign proteins is comparable with that achieved
with engineered bacteria, making it likely that chloroplast
transformation will be used for the production of human
pharmaceuticals and possibly for the engineering of food
crops containing high levels of all the amino acids essential to
humans. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 10.6
Organelle DNAs
Mitochondria and chloroplasts most likely evolved from
bacteria that formed a symbiotic relationship with ancestral cells containing a eukaryotic nucleus. Most of the genes
originally within these organelles moved to the nuclear
genome over evolutionary time, leaving different gene sets
in the mtDNAs of different organisms.

■

Most mitochondrial and chloroplast DNAs are circular molecules, reflecting their probable bacterial origin.
Plant mtDNAs and chloroplast DNAs generally are
longer than mtDNAs from other eukaryotes, largely because they contain more noncoding regions and repetitive sequences.

■

All mtDNAs and chloroplast DNAs appear to encode
rRNAs, tRNAs, and some of the proteins involved in mitochondrial or photosynthetic electron transport and ATP
synthesis.

■

Because most mtDNA is inherited from egg cells rather
than sperm, mutations in mtDNA exhibit a maternal cytoplasmic pattern of inheritance.

■

Review the Concepts

Mitochondrial ribosomes resemble bacterial ribosomes
in their structure, sensitivity to chloramphenicol, and resistance to cycloheximide.

■

The genetic code of animal and fungal mtDNAs differs
slightly from that of bacteria and the nuclear genome and
varies between different animals and plants (see Table 10-3).
In contrast, plant mtDNAs and chloroplast DNAs appear to
conform to the standard genetic code.

■

Several human neuromuscular disorders result from mutations in mtDNA. Patients generally have a mixture of
wild-type and mutant mtDNA in their cells (heteroplasmy):
the higher the fraction of mutant mtDNA, the more severe
the mutant phenotype.

443

time elapsed from the initial insertion can be estimated by
the differences in sequences of the element among individuals that carry them because these differences arose from the
accumulation of random mutations. Further studies of these
retrotransposon polymorphisms will undoubtedly add immensely to our understanding both of human migrations
since Homo sapiens first evolved and of the history of contemporary populations.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
The human genome sequence is a goldmine for new discoveries about molecular cell biology, new proteins that may be
the basis of effective therapies of human diseases, and even
for discoveries concerning early human history and evolution. However, because only ≈1.5 percent of the sequence encodes proteins, finding new genes is like finding a needle in
a haystack. Identification of genes in bacterial genome sequences is relatively simple because of the scarcity of introns.
Simply searching for long open reading frames free of stop
codons identifies most genes. In contrast, the search for
human genes is vastly complicated by the structure of human
genes, most of which are composed of multiple, relatively
short exons separated by much longer, noncoding introns.
Some have estimated that only approximately half of all
human genes have been identified. And the identification of
complex transcription units by examining DNA sequence
alone is even more challenging. Future improvements in
bioinformatic methods for gene identification, and further
characterization of cDNA copies of mRNAs isolated from
the hundreds of human cell types, will likely lead to the discovery of new proteins and, through their study, to a new understanding of biological processes and applications to
medicine and agriculture.
We have seen that although most transposons do not
function directly in cellular processes, they have helped to
shape modern genomes by promoting gene duplications,
exon shuffling, the generation of new combinations of transcription control sequences, and other aspects of contemporary genomes. They also have the potential today to teach
us about our own history and origins. This is because L1
and Alu retrotransposons have inserted into new sites in individuals throughout our history. Large numbers of these
interspersed repeats are polymorphic in the population—
they occur at a particular site in some individuals and not
others. Individuals sharing an insertion at a particular site
descended from the same common ancestor that developed
from an egg or sperm in which that insertion occurred. The

KEY TERMS
centromere 413
chromatid 430
chromatin 424
chromosome
scaffold 427
cytoplasmic
inheritance 438
euchromatin 433
exon shuffling 422
fluorescence in situ
hybridization
(FISH) 413
G bands 431
gene family 410
heterochromatin 433
histones 424
karyotype 430
LINEs 420

long terminal
repeats (LTRs) 417
mobile DNA elements 414
nucleosome 424
P element 416
polytene chromosomes 433
pseudogene 411
retrotransposons 415
scaffold-associated
regions (SARs) 428
simple-sequence DNA 412
SINEs 420
telomere 413
transcription unit 407
transposition 414
transposons 414

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Genes can be transcribed into mRNA for protein-coding
genes or RNA for genes such as ribosomal or transfer RNAs.
Define a gene. Describe how a complex transcription unit
can be alternatively processed to generate a variety of
mRNAs and ultimately proteins.
2. Sequencing of the human genome has revealed much
about the organization of genes. Describe the differences between single genes, gene families, pseudogenes, and tandemly
repeated genes.
3. Much of the human genome consists of repetitive DNA.
Describe the difference between microsatellite and minisatellite DNA. How is this repetitive DNA useful for identifying
individuals by the technique of DNA fingerprinting?
4. Mobile DNA elements that can move or transpose to a
new site directly as DNA are called DNA transposons. Describe the mechanism by which a bacterial insertion sequence
can transpose.

444

CHAPTER 10 • Molecular Structure of Genes and Chromosomes

5. Retrotransposons are a class of mobile elements that use
a RNA intermediate. Contrast the mechanism of transposition between retrotransposons that contain and those that
lack long terminal repeats (LTRs).
6. Describe the role that mobile DNA elements may have
played in the evolution of modern organisms. What is the
process known as exon shuffling, and what role do mobile
DNA elements play in this process?
7. DNA in a cell associates with proteins to form chromatin. What is a nucleosome? What role do histones play in
nucleosomes? How are nucleosomes arranged in condensed
30-nm fibers?

negative cells (cell B) were transfected with a plasmid expressing a wild-type or mutated hTERT. Telomerase activity
in cell extracts was measured using the telomeric repeat amplification protocol (TRAP) assay, a PCR-based assay that
measures the addition of telomere repeat units onto a DNA
fragment. A six-base-pair ladder pattern is typically seen.
Control indicates transfection of cells with just the plasmid.
Wild type and mutant indicate transfection with a plasmid expressing a wild-type hTERT or the mutated hTERT, respectively. What do you conclude about the effect of the mutant
hTERT on telomerase activity in the transfected cells? What
type of mutation would this represent?
Cell A
Control Wild type Mutant

8. Describe the general organization of a eukaryotic chromosome. What structural role do scaffold associated regions
(SARs) or matrix attachment regions (MARs) play? Where are
genes primarily located relative to chromosome structure?

Cell B
Control Wild type Mutant

9. Metaphase chromosomes can be identified by characteristic banding patterns. What are G bands and R bands? What
is chromosome painting, and how is this technique useful?

12. Mitochondria and chloroplasts are thought to have
evolved from symbiotic bacteria present in nucleated cells. Review the experimental evidence that supports this hypothesis.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
In culture, normal human cells undergo a finite number of
cell divisions until they no longer proliferate and enter a state
known as replicative senescence. The inability to maintain
normal telomere length is thought to play an important role
in this process. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex
that regenerates the ends of telomeres lost during each round
of DNA replication. Human telomerase consists of a template containing RNA subunit and a catalytic protein subunit
known as human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT).
Most normal cells do not express telomerase; most cancer
cells do express telomerase. Thus, telomerase is proposed to
play a key role in the transformation of cells from a normal
to a malignant state.
a. In the following experiments, the role of telomerase in the
growth of human cancer cells was investigated (see W. C.
Hahn et al., 1999, Nature Medicine 5:1164–1170). Immortal,
telomerase-positive cells (cell A) and immortal, telomerase-

DNA fragment size (kb)

11. Mitochondria contain their own DNA molecules. Describe the types of genes encoded in the mitochondrial
genome. How do the mitochondrial genomes of plants,
fungi, and animals differ?

b. Telomere length in these transfected cells was examined
by Southern blot analysis of total genomic DNA digested
with a restriction enzyme and probed with a telomerespecific DNA sequence. What do you conclude about the
lengths of the telomeres in cell A and cell B after transfection with the wild-type or mutant hTERT? By what mechanism do cells A and B maintain their telomere lengths?
Cell B
Control Wild type Mutant

Cell A
Control Wild type Mutant
40

40

20

20

10

10

2

2

c. The proliferation of transfected cells A and B was assayed
by measuring the number of cells versus time in culture.
What do you conclude about the effect of the mutant hTERT
on cell proliferation in transfected cells A and B?
Cell A

Culture growth

10. Replication and segregation of eukaryotic chromosomes
require three functional elements: replication origins, a centromere, and telomeres. Describe how these three elements
function. What is the role of telomerase in maintaining chromosome structure? What is a yeast artificial chromosome
(YAC)?

Cell B

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10
20
40
Time (hr)

60

20
40
Time (hr)

60

References

445

d. Do the results of the three assays support or refute the
proposed role of telomerase in long-term survival of cells in
culture? What is the value of comparing transfection of cells
A with cells B?

Kazazian, H. H., Jr. 1999. An estimated frequency of endogenous insertional mutations in humans. Nature Genet. 22:130.
Ostertag, E. M., and H. H. Kazazian, Jr. 2001. Biology of mammalian L1 retrotransposons. Ann. Rev. Genet. 35:501–538.

e. Tumorigenic cells, which can replicate continuously in culture, can cause tumors when injected into mice that lack a functional immune system (nude mice). From the above assays,
what would you predict would happen if wild-type or mutant
hTERT transfected cells A were injected into nude mice?

Structural Organization of Eukaryotic Chromosomes

REFERENCES

Molecular Definition of a Gene
Ayoubi, T. A., and W. J. Van De Ven. 1996. Regulation of gene
expression by alternative promoters. FASEB J. 10:453–460.
Maniatis, T., and B. Tasic. 2002. Alternative pre-mRNA splicing and proteome expansion in metazoans. Nature 418:236–243.
Mathe, C., et al. 2002. Current methods of gene prediction, their
strengths and weaknesses. Nucl. Acids Res. 30:4103–4117.

Chromosomal Organization of Genes
and Noncoding DNA
Cummings, C. J., and H. Y. Zoghbi. 2000. Trinucleotide repeats:
mechanisms and pathophysiology. Ann. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet.
1:281–328.
Goff, S. A., et al. 2002. A draft sequence of the rice genome
(Oryza sativa L. ssp. japonica). Science 296:92–100.
Lander, E. S., et al. 2001. Initial sequencing and analysis of the
human genome. Nature 409:860–921.
Ranum, L. P., and J. W. Day. 2002. Dominantly inherited, noncoding microsatellite expansion disorders. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.
12:266–271.

Mobile DNA
Feschotte, C., N. Jiang, and S. R. Wessler. 2002. Plant transposable elements: where genetics meets genomics. Nat. Rev. Genet.
3:329–341.
Gray, Y. H. 2000. It takes two transposons to tango:
transposable-element-mediated
chromosomal
rearrangements.
Trends Genet. 16:461–468.

Horn, P. J., and C. L. Peterson. 2002. Molecular biology. Chromatin higher order folding—wrapping up transcription. Science
297:1824–1827.
Luger, K., and T. J. Richmond. 1998. The histone tails of the
nucleosome. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 8:140–146.

Morphology and Functional Elements
of Eukaryotic Chromosomes
Cheeseman, I. M., D. G. Drubin, and G. Barnes. 2002. Simple
centromere, complex kinetochore: linking spindle microtubules and
centromeric DNA in budding yeast. J. Cell Biol. 157:199–203.
Kelleher, C., et al. 2002. Telomerase: biochemical considerations
for enzyme and substrate. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27:572–579.
Kitagawa, K., and P. Hieter. 2001. Evolutionary conservation between budding yeast and human kinetochores. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 2:678–687.
Larin, Z., and J. E. Mejia. 2002. Advances in human artificial
chromosome technology. Trends Genet. 18:313–319.
McEachern, M. J., A. Krauskopf, and E. H. Blackburn. 2000.
Telomeres and their control. Ann. Rev. Genet. 34:331–358.

Organelle DNA
Clayton, D. A. 2000. Transcription and replication of
mitochondrial DNA. Hum. Reprod. 2(Suppl.):11–17.
Dahl, H.-H. M., and D. R. Thorburn. 2001. Mitochondrial diseases: beyond the magic circle. Am. J. Med. Genet. 106:1–3.
Daniell, H., M. S. Khan, and L. Allison. 2002. Milestones in
chloroplast genetic engineering: an environmentally friendly era in
biotechnology. Trends Plant Sci. 7:84–91.
Gray, M. W. 1999. Evolution of organellar genomes. Curr. Opin.
Genet. Dev. 9:678–687.
Palmer, J. D., et al. 2000. Dynamic evolution of plant mitochondrial genomes: mobile genes and introns and highly variable mutation rates. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 97:6960–6966.
Sugiura, M., T. Hirose, and M. Sugita. 1998. Evolution and
mechanism of translation in chloroplasts. Ann. Rev. Genet.
32:437–459.

11
TRANSCRIPTIONAL
CONTROL OF GENE
EXPRESSION

Yeast RSC chromatin remodeling complex structure
determined by electron microscopy. The complex (red)
is shown bound to a nucleosome (yellow). [Courtesy of
Francisco J. Asturias, 2002, PNAS 99:13477.]

I

n previous chapters we’ve seen that the actions and properties of each cell type are determined by the proteins it
contains. In this and the next chapter, we consider how the
kinds and amounts of the various proteins produced by a particular cell type in a multicellular organism are regulated. The
basic steps in gene expression, the entire process whereby the
information encoded in a particular gene is decoded into a
particular protein, are reviewed in Chapter 4. Synthesis of
mRNA requires that an RNA polymerase initiate transcription, polymerize ribonucleoside triphosphates complementary
to the DNA coding strand, and then terminate transcription
(see Figure 4-10). In prokaryotes, ribosomes and translationinitiation factors have immediate access to newly formed
RNA transcripts, which function as mRNA without further
modification. In eukaryotes, however, the initial RNA transcript is subjected to processing that yields a functional
mRNA (see Figure 4-14). The mRNA then is transported
from its site of synthesis in the nucleus to the cytoplasm,
where it is translated into protein with the aid of ribosomes,
tRNAs, and translation factors (see Figure 4-26).
Theoretically, regulation at any one of the various steps
in gene expression could lead to differential production of
proteins in different cell types or developmental stages or in
response to external conditions. Although examples of regulation at each step in gene expression have been found, control of transcription initiation—the first step—is the most
important mechanism for determining whether most genes
are expressed and how much of the encoded mRNAs and,
consequently, proteins are produced. The molecular mecha-

nisms that regulate transcription initiation are critical to numerous biological phenomena, including the development
of a multicellular organism from a single fertilized egg cell,
the immune responses that protect us from pathogenic microorganisms, and neurological processes such as learning
and memory. When these regulatory mechanisms function
improperly, pathological processes such as cancer and aging
may occur.
In this chapter, we focus on the molecular events that
determine when transcription of eukaryotic genes is initiated

OUTLINE
11.1 Overview of Eukaryotic Gene Control
and RNA Polymerases
11.2 Regulatory Sequences in Protein-Coding
Genes
11.3 Activators and Repressors of Transcription
11.4 Transcription Initiation by RNA Polymerase II
11.5 Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription
Activation and Repression
11.6 Regulation of Transcription-Factor Activity
11.7 Regulated Elongation and Termination
of Transcription
11.8 Other Eukaryotic Transcription Systems
447

448

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

and also briefly consider control of premature termination of
transcription. RNA processing and various posttranscriptional
mechanisms for controlling eukaryotic gene expression are
covered in the next chapter. Subsequent chapters, particularly Chapters 13, 14, and 15, provide examples of how
transcription is regulated by interactions between cells and
how the resulting gene control contributes to the development and function of specific types of cells in multicellular
organisms.

11.1 Overview of Eukaryotic Gene
Control and RNA Polymerases
In bacteria, gene control serves mainly to allow a single cell
to adjust to changes in its environment so that its growth and
division can be optimized. In multicellular organisms, environmental changes also induce changes in gene expression.
An example is the response to low oxygen (hypoxia) that is
described in Chapter 15. However, the most characteristic
and biologically far-reaching purpose of gene control in multicellular organisms is execution of the genetic program that
underlies embryological development. Generation of the
many different cell types that collectively form a multicellular organism depends on the right genes being activated in
the right cells at the right time during the developmental
period.
In most cases, once a developmental step has been taken
by a cell, it is not reversed. Thus these decisions are fundamentally different from the reversible activation and repression of bacterial genes in response to environmental
conditions. In executing their genetic programs, many differentiated cells (e.g., skin cells, red blood cells, and antibodyproducing cells) march down a pathway to final cell death,
leaving no progeny behind. The fixed patterns of gene con-

trol leading to differentiation serve the needs of the whole organism and not the survival of an individual cell. Despite the
differences in the purposes of gene control in bacteria and eukaryotes, two key features of transcription control first discovered in bacteria and described in Chapter 4 also apply to
eukaryotic cells. First, protein-binding regulatory DNA sequences, or control elements, are associated with genes. Second, specific proteins that bind to a gene’s regulatory
sequences determine where transcription will start, and
either activate or repress its transcription. As represented in
Figure 11-1, in multicellular eukaryotes, inactive genes are
assembled into condensed chromatin, which inhibits the
binding of RNA polymerases and general transcription factors required for transcription initiation. Activator proteins
bind to control elements near the transcription start site of
a gene as well as kilobases away and promote chromatin decondensation and binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter. Repressor proteins bind to alternative control
elements, causing condensation of chromatin and inhibition
of polymerase binding. In this chapter we consider how activators and repressors control chromatin structure and stimulate or inhibit transcription initiation by RNA polymerase.

Most Genes in Higher Eukaryotes Are Regulated
by Controlling Their Transcription
Direct measurements of the transcription rates of multiple
genes in different cell types have shown that regulation of
transcription initiation is the most widespread form of gene
control in eukaryotes, as it is in bacteria. Nascent-chain
analysis is a common method for determining the relative
rates of transcription of different genes in cultured cells. In
this method, also called run-on transcription analysis, isolated nuclei are incubated with 32P-labeled ribonucleoside
triphosphates for a brief time (e.g., 5 minutes or less). During

Condensed
chromatin

GENE
“OFF”

 FIGURE 11-1 Overview of transcription
control in multicellular eukaryotes. Activator
proteins bind to specific DNA control elements
in chromatin and interact with multiprotein coactivator machines, such as mediator, to
decondense chromatin and assemble RNA
polymerase and general transcription factors
on promoters. Inactive genes are assembled
into regions of condensed chromatin that
inhibit RNA polymerases and their associated
general transcription factors (GTFs) from
interacting with promoters. Alternatively,
repressor proteins bind to other control
elements to inhibit initiation by RNA
polymerase and interact with multiprotein corepressor complexes to condense chromatin.

Repressors

Activators

Decondensed
chromatin
GENE
“ON”

Activators

Mediator

General
transcription
factors

RNA
polymerase

11.1 • Overview of Eukaryotic Gene Control and RNA Polymerases

this incubation period, RNA polymerase molecules that were
actively transcribing genes when the nuclei were isolated incorporate several hundred labeled nucleotides into each nascent (growing) RNA chain, but little initiation of new chains
occurs. The total radioactive label incorporated into RNA
is a measure of the overall transcription rate. The fraction
of the total labeled RNA produced by transcription of a particular gene—that is, its relative transcription rate—is determined by hybridizing the labeled RNA to the cloned DNA of
that gene attached to a membrane.
The results of run-on transcription analyses illustrated
in Figure 11-2 show that transcription of genes encoding
proteins expressed specifically in hepatocytes (the major cell
type in mammalian liver) is readily detected in nuclei pre-

Liver
cDNAs

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

A

T

T

pV

tRNA

Other cDNAs

Liver
RNA

Controls

449

pared from liver, but not in nuclei from brain or kidney. Since
the run-on transcription assay measures RNA synthesis,
these results indicate that differential synthesis of liver-specific proteins is regulated by controlling transcription of the
corresponding genes in different tissues. Similar results have
been obtained in run-on transcription experiments with
other cell types and a wide variety of tissue-specific proteins,
indicating that transcriptional control is the primary mechanism of gene control in complex organisms.

Regulatory Elements in Eukaryotic DNA Often
Are Many Kilobases from Start Sites
In eukaryotes, as in bacteria, a DNA sequence that specifies
where RNA polymerase binds and initiates transcription of a
gene is called a promoter. Transcription from a particular promoter is controlled by DNA-binding proteins, termed transcription factors, that are equivalent to bacterial repressors
and activators. However, the DNA control elements in eukaryotic genomes that bind transcription factors often are located much farther from the promoter they regulate than is
the case in prokaryotic genomes. In some cases, transcription
factors that regulate expression of protein-coding genes in
higher eukaryotes bind at regulatory sites tens of thousands of
base pairs either upstream (opposite to the direction of transcription) or downstream (in the same direction as transcription) from the promoter. As a result of this arrangement,
transcription from a single promoter may be regulated by
binding of multiple transcription factors to alternative control
elements, permitting complex control of gene expression.
For example, alternative transcription-control elements
regulate expression of the mammalian gene that encodes
transthyretin (TTR), which transports thyroid hormone in
blood and the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds the brain

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-2 Measurement of RNA

Kidney
RNA

Brain
RNA

production in various tissues demonstrates that transcription
of a given gene generally occurs only in the cell types in
which it is expressed. Nuclei from mouse liver, kidney, and
brain cells were exposed to 32P-UTP. The three resulting labeled
RNA samples were hybridized to separate nitrocellulose
membranes; on each membrane was fixed an identical pattern
of various cDNAs (top). The cDNAs labeled 1–12 (green) encode
proteins synthesized actively in liver (e.g., albumin, transferrin)
but not in most other tissues. The other cDNAs tested were
actin (A) and - and -tubulin (T, T) (yellow), which are proteins
found in almost all cell types. A gene encoding methionine tRNA
and the plasmid vector DNA (pV) in which the cDNAs were
cloned were included as controls (purple). After removal of
unhybridized RNAs, the labeled RNAs complementary to the
cDNAs were revealed by autoradiography. RNA from the liver
sample hybridized extensively with the cDNAs. Little hybridization
is seen for the kidney and brain samples, indicating that genes
encoding proteins found in hepatocytes are transcribed in liver
cells but not in the cells of the other tissues. [See E. Derman et al.,
1981, Cell 23:731, and D. J. Powell et al., 1984, J. Mol. Biol. 197:21.]

450
5

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
Upstream region
of TTR DNA

1

Start
3

Recombinant DNA
techniques

Reporter
gene

1
2

Plasmid
vector

3
4
5
5-deletion series

1

2

Ligate into vector
carrying reporter gene

3

Transform E. coli
and isolate plasmid DNAs

3

2

4

5

5-deletion mutants
4

Reporter
plasmid

Transfect each type of
plasmid (1–5) separately into
cultured cells
Reporter
enzyme

Reporter
mRNA
5

Plasmid no.
1
2
3
4
5

Prepare cell extract and
assay activity of reporter
enzyme

Reporter-gene expression
+++
+++
+
+
−

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-3 5-Deletion analysis can
identify transcription-control sequences in DNA upstream of
a eukaryotic gene. Step 1 : Recombinant DNA techniques are
used to prepare a series of DNA fragments that extend from the
5’-untranslated region of a gene various distances upstream.
Step 2 : The DNA fragments are ligated into a reporter plasmid
upstream of an easily assayed reporter gene. Step 3 : The DNA
is transformed into E. coli to isolate plasmids with deletions of
various lengths 5 to the transcription start site. Step 4 : Each
plasmid is then transfected into cultured cells (or used to prepare
transgenic organisms) and expression of the reporter gene is
assayed (step 5 ). The results of this hypothetical example
(bottom ) indicate that the test fragment contains two control
elements. The 5 end of one lies between deletions 2 and 3; the
5 end of the other lies between deletions 4 and 5.

and spinal cord. Transthyretin is expressed in hepatocytes,
which synthesize and secrete most of the blood serum proteins, and in choroid plexus cells in the brain, which secrete
cerebrospinal fluid and its constituent proteins. The control
elements required for transcription of the TTR gene were
identified by the procedure outlined in Figure 11-3. In this
experimental approach, DNA fragments with varying extents of sequence upstream of a start site are cloned in front
of a reporter gene in a bacterial plasmid using recombinant
DNA techniques. Reporter genes express enzymes that are
easily assayed in cell extracts. Commonly used reporter genes
include the E. coli lacZ gene encoding -galactosidase; the
firefly gene encoding luciferase, which converts energy from
ATP hydrolysis into light; and the jellyfish gene encoding
green fluorescent protein (GFP).
By constructing and analyzing a 5-deletion series upstream of the TTR gene, researchers identified two control
elements that stimulate reporter-gene expression in hepatocytes, but not in other cell types. One region mapped between ≈2.01 and 1.85 kb upstream of the TTR gene start
site; the other mapped between ≈200 base pairs upstream
and the start site. Further studies demonstrated that alternative DNA sequences control TTR transcription in choroid
plexus cells. Thus, alternative control elements regulate transcription of the TTR gene in two different cell types. We examine the basic molecular events underlying this type of
eukaryotic transcriptional control in later sections.

Three Eukaryotic Polymerases Catalyze Formation
of Different RNAs
The nuclei of all eukaryotic cells examined so far (e.g., vertebrate, Drosophila, yeast, and plant cells) contain three different RNA polymerases, designated I, II, and III. These
enzymes are eluted at different salt concentrations during
ion-exchange chromatography and also differ in their sensitivity to -amanitin, a poisonous cyclic octapeptide produced by some mushrooms (Figure 11-4). Polymerase I is
very insensitive to -amanitin; polymerase II is very sensitive;
and polymerase III has intermediate sensitivity.
Each eukaryotic RNA polymerase catalyzes transcription
of genes encoding different classes of RNA. RNA polymerase
I, located in the nucleolus, transcribes genes encoding precursor rRNA (pre-rRNA), which is processed into 28S, 5.8S,
and 18S rRNAs. RNA polymerase III transcribes genes encoding tRNAs, 5S rRNA, and an array of small, stable
RNAs, including one involved in RNA splicing (U6) and the
RNA component of the signal-recognition particle (SRP) involved in directing nascent proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum (Chapter 16). RNA polymerase II transcribes all
protein-coding genes; that is, it functions in production of
mRNAs. RNA polymerase II also produces four of the five
small nuclear RNAs that take part in RNA splicing.
Each of the three eukaryotic RNA polymerases is more
complex than E. coli RNA polymerase, although their structures are similar (Figure 11-5). All three contain two large

11.1 • Overview of Eukaryotic Gene Control and RNA Polymerases

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-4 Column chromatography

[NaCl]

Total
protein

Protein
RNA synthesis

Pol II

Pol III

20
30
Fraction number

40

RNA synthesis in presence
of 1 µg/ml α-amanitin

Pol I

10

separates and identifies the three eukaryotic RNA
polymerases, each with its own sensitivity to -amanitin. A
protein extract from the nuclei of cultured eukaryotic cells is
passed through a DEAE Sephadex column and adsorbed protein
eluted (black curve) with a solution of constantly increasing NaCl
concentration. Three fractions from the eluate subsequently
showed RNA polymerase activity (red curve). At a concentration
of 1 g/ml, -amanitin inhibits polymerase II activity but has no
effect on polymerases I and III (green shading). Polymerase III is
inhibited by 10 g/ml of -amanitin, whereas polymerase I is
unaffected even at this higher concentration. [See R. G. Roeder,
1974, J. Biol. Chem. 249:241.]

50

subunits and 10–14 smaller subunits, some of which are
present in two or all three of the polymerases. The bestcharacterized eukaryotic RNA polymerases are from the
yeast S. cerevisiae. Each of the yeast genes encoding the
polymerase subunits has been cloned and sequenced and the
effects of gene-knockout mutations have been characterized.
In addition, the three-dimensional structure of yeast RNA
(a) Bacterial RNA polymerase

polymerase II missing two nonessential subunits has been
determined (see Figure 11-5). The three nuclear RNA polymerases from all eukaryotes so far examined are very similar to those of yeast.
The two large subunits (RPB1 and RPB2) of all three
eukaryotic RNA polymerases are related to each other and
are similar to the E. coli  and  subunits, respectively
(b) Yeast RNA polymerase II

10

9

DNA

451

β

β'

αΙ

RPB2

DNA
5

αΙΙ

ω

▲ FIGURE 11-5 Comparison of three-dimensional structures
of bacterial and eukaryotic RNA polymerases. These C trace
models are based on x-ray crystallographic analysis of RNA
polymerase from the bacterium T. aquaticus and RNA polymerase
II from S. cerevisiae. (a) The five subunits of the bacterial enzyme
are distinguished by color. Only the N-terminal domains of the 
subunits are included in this model. (b) Ten of the twelve subunits
constituting yeast RNA polymerase II are shown in this model.

3

12

11

RPB1
6

8

Subunits that are similar in conformation to those in the bacterial
enzyme are shown in the same colors. The C-terminal domain of
the large subunit RPB1 was not observed in the crystal structure,
but it is known to extend from the position marked with a red
arrow. (RPB is the abbreviation for “R NA polymerase B,” which
is an alternative way of referring to RNA polymerase II.) [Part (a)
based on crystal structures from G. Zhang et al.,1999, Cell 98:811.
Part (b) from P. Cramer et al., 2001, Science 292:1863.]

452

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
E. coli core RNA polymerase (α2ββω)
β

β

αI

αII

seems likely that all the subunits are necessary for eukaryotic
RNA polymerases to function normally.

ω

The Largest Subunit in RNA Polymerase II Has
an Essential Carboxyl-Terminal Repeat
Eukaryotic RNA polymerases
I
βand
β-like subunits

1

II
2

1

III
2

1

2

CTD
α-like subunits
ω-like subunit

The carboxyl end of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase
II (RPB1) contains a stretch of seven amino acids that is
nearly precisely repeated multiple times. Neither RNA polymerase I nor III contains these repeating units. This heptapeptide repeat, with a consensus sequence of Tyr-Ser-ProThr-Ser-Pro-Ser, is known as the carboxyl-terminal domain
(CTD). Yeast RNA polymerase II contains 26 or more repeats, the mammalian enzyme has 52 repeats, and an intermediate number of repeats occur in RNA polymerase II from
nearly all other eukaryotes. The CTD is critical for viability,
and at least 10 copies of the repeat must be present for yeast
to survive.

Common
subunits

Additional
enzyme-specific
subunits

+5

+3

+7

▲ FIGURE 11-6 Schematic representation of the subunit
structure of the E. coli RNA core polymerase and yeast
nuclear RNA polymerases. All three yeast polymerases have
five core subunits homologous to the , , two , and ω
subunits of E. coli RNA polymerase. The largest subunit (RPB1)
of RNA polymerase II also contains an essential C-terminal
domain (CTD). RNA polymerases I and III contain the same two
nonidentical -like subunits, whereas RNA polymerase II contains
two other nonidentical -like subunits. All three polymerases
share the same ω-like subunit and four other common subunits.
In addition, each yeast polymerase contains three to seven
unique smaller subunits.

74EF
75B

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-7 Antibody staining
(Figure 11-6). Each of the eukaryotic polymerases also contains an ω-like and two nonidentical -like subunits. The
extensive similarity in the structures of these core subunits
in RNA polymerases from various sources indicates that
this enzyme arose early in evolution and was largely conserved. This seems logical for an enzyme catalyzing a
process so basic as copying RNA from DNA.
In addition to their core subunits related to the E. coli
RNA polymerase subunits, all three yeast RNA polymerases
contain four additional small subunits, common to them but
not to the bacterial RNA polymerase. Finally, each eukaryotic polymerase has several enzyme-specific subunits that are
not present in the other two polymerases. Gene-knockout
experiments in yeast indicate that most of these subunits are
essential for cell viability. Disruption of the few polymerase
subunit genes that are not absolutely essential for viability
nevertheless results in very poorly growing cells. Thus it

demonstrates that the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of
RNA polymerase II is phosphorylated during in vivo
transcription. Salivary gland polytene chromosomes were
prepared from Drosophila larvae just before molting. The
preparation was treated with a rabbit antibody specific for
phosphorylated CTD and with a goat antibody specific for
unphosphorylated CTD. The preparation then was stained with
fluorescein-labeled anti-goat antibody (green) and rhodaminelabeled anti-rabbit antibody (red). Thus polymerase molecules
with an unphosphorylated CTD stain green, and those with a
phosphorylated CTD stain red. The molting hormone ecdysone
induces very high rates of transcription in the puffed regions
labeled 74EF and 75B; note that only phosphorylated CTD is
present in these regions. Smaller puffed regions transcribed at
high rates also are visible. Nonpuffed sites that stain red (up
arrow) or green (horizontal arrow) also are indicated, as is a site
staining both red and green, producing a yellow color (down
arrow). [From J. R. Weeks et al., 1993, Genes & Dev. 7:2329; courtesy
of J. R. Weeks and A. L. Greenleaf.]

11.1 • Overview of Eukaryotic Gene Control and RNA Polymerases

In vitro experiments with model promoters first showed
that RNA polymerase II molecules that initiate transcription
have an unphosphorylated CTD. Once the polymerase initiates transcription and begins to move away from the promoter, many of the serine and some tyrosine residues in the
CTD are phosphorylated. Analysis of polytene chromosomes
from Drosophila salivary glands prepared just before molting of the larva indicate that the CTD also is phosphorylated
during in vivo transcription. The large chromosomal “puffs”
induced at this time in development are regions where the
genome is very actively transcribed. Staining with antibodies specific for the phosphorylated or unphosphorylated
CTD demonstrated that RNA polymerase II associated with
the highly transcribed puffed regions contains a phosphorylated CTD (Figure 11-7).

RNA Polymerase II Initiates Transcription at DNA
Sequences Corresponding to the 5 Cap of mRNAs
Several experimental approaches have been used to identify
DNA sequences at which RNA polymerase II initiates transcription. Approximate mapping of the transcription start

site is possible by exposing cultured cells or isolated nuclei to
32
P-labeled ribonucleotides for very brief times, as described
earlier. After the resulting labeled nascent transcripts are separated on the basis of chain length, each size fraction is incubated under hybridization conditions with overlapping
restriction fragments that encompass the DNA region of interest. The restriction fragment that hybridizes to the shortest labeled nascent chain, as well as all the longer ones,
contains the transcription start site. One of the first transcription units to be analyzed in this way was the major late
transcription unit of adenovirus. This analysis indicated that
transcription was initiated in a region ≈6 kb from the left end
of the viral genome.
The precise base pair where RNA polymerase II initiates
transcription in the adenovirus late transcription unit was
determined by analyzing the RNAs synthesized during in
vitro transcription of adenovirus DNA restriction fragments
that extended somewhat upstream and downstream of the
approximate initiation region determined by nascenttranscript analysis. The rationale of this experiment and typical results are illustrated in Figure 11-8. The RNA transcripts synthesized in vitro by RNA polymerase II from the

(a)

(b)

Hin dIII

Hin dIII

Xma III
16 m.u.
Sma I

Hin dIII

453

Xma III

Sma I

Sma I
+
α-amanitin

Xma III Sma I
560

Adenovirus DNA

430

Start site
205 nt

Hin dIII
430 nt

Xma III

205
Restriction
fragments

560 nt

Sma I

1

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-8 In vitro transcription of
restriction fragments and measurement of the RNA lengths
localize the initiation site of the adenovirus major late
transcription unit. (a) The top line shows restriction sites for
HindIII (black), XmaIII (blue), and SmaI (red) in the region of the
adenovirus genome where the transcription-initiation site was
located by nascent-transcript analysis (near 16 map units). The
HindIII, XmaIII, and SmaI restriction fragments that encompass
the initiation site were individually incubated with a nuclear extract
prepared from cultured cells and 32P-labeled ribonucleoside
triphosphates. Transcription of each fragment begins at the start
site and ends when an RNA polymerase II molecule “runs off”
the cut end of the fragment template, producing a run-off
transcript (wavy red lines). (b) The run-off transcripts synthesized

2

3a

3b

from each fragment were then subjected to gel electrophoresis
and autoradiography to determine their exact lengths. Since the
positions of the restriction sites in the adenovirus DNA were
known, the lengths of the run-off transcripts in nucleotides (nt)
produced from the restriction fragments precisely map the
initiation site on the adenovirus genome, as diagrammed in part
(a). In the gels shown here, the bands at the top and bottom
represent high- and low-molecular-weight RNA transcripts that are
formed under the conditions of the experiment. The sample in
lane 3b is the same as that in lane 3a, except that -amanitin, an
inhibitor of RNA polymerase II, was included in the transcription
mixture. See the text for further discussion. [See R. M. Evans and
E. Ziff, 1978, Cell 15:1463, and P. A. Weil et al., 1979, Cell 18:469.
Autoradiogram courtesy of R. G. Roeder.]

454

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

start site determined in this experiment contained an RNA
cap structure identical with that present at the 5 end of
nearly all eukaryotic mRNAs (see Figure 4-13). This 5 cap
was added by enzymes in the nuclear extract, which can add
a cap only to an RNA that has a 5 tri- or diphosphate. Because a 5 end generated by cleavage of a longer RNA would
have a 5 monophosphate, it could not be capped. Consequently, researchers concluded that the capped nucleotide
generated in the in vitro transcription reaction must have
been the nucleotide with which transcription was initiated.
The finding that the sequence at the 5 end of the RNA transcripts produced in vitro is the same as that at the 5 end of
late adenovirus mRNAs isolated from cells confirmed that
the capped nucleotide of adenovirus late mRNAs coincides
with the transcription-initiation site.
Similar in vitro transcription assays with other cloned
eukaryotic genes have produced similar results. In each
case, the start site was found to be equivalent to the capped
5 sequence of the corresponding mRNA. Thus synthesis of
eukaryotic precursors of mRNAs by RNA polymerase II
begins at the DNA sequence encoding the capped 5 end of
the mRNA. Today, the transcription start site for a newly
characterized mRNA generally is determined simply by
identifying the DNA sequence encoding the 5 end of the
mRNA.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 11.1
Overview of Eukaryotic Gene Control and RNA
Polymerases
The primary purpose of gene control in multicellular organisms is the execution of precise developmental decisions
so that the proper genes are expressed in the proper cells
during development and cellular differentiation.

■

Transcriptional control is the primary means of regulating gene expression in eukaryotes, as it is in bacteria.

■

In eukaryotic genomes, DNA transcription control elements may be located many kilobases away from the promoter they regulate. Different control regions can control
transcription of the same gene in different cell types.

■

Eukaryotes contain three types of nuclear RNA polymerases. All three contain two large and three smaller core
subunits with homology to the , , , and ω subunits of
E. coli RNA polymerase, as well several additional small
subunits (see Figure 11-6).

■

RNA polymerase I synthesizes only pre-rRNA. RNA
polymerase II synthesizes mRNAs and some of the small
nuclear RNAs that participate in mRNA splicing. RNA
polymerase III synthesizes tRNAs, 5S rRNA, and several
other relatively short, stable RNAs.

■

The carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) in the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II becomes phosphorylated dur-

■

ing transcription initiation and remains phosphorylated as
the enzyme transcribes the template.
RNA polymerase II initiates transcription of genes at the
nucleotide in the DNA template that corresponds to the 5
nucleotide that is capped in the encoded mRNA.

■

11.2 Regulatory Sequences
in Protein-Coding Genes
As noted in the previous section, expression of eukaryotic
protein-coding genes is regulated by multiple protein-binding
DNA sequences, generically referred to as transcriptioncontrol regions. These include promoters and other types of
control elements located near transcription start sites, as well
as sequences located far from the genes they regulate. In this
section, we take a closer look at the properties of various
control elements found in eukaryotic protein-coding genes
and some techniques used to identify them.

The TATA Box, Initiators, and CpG Islands
Function as Promoters in Eukaryotic DNA
The first genes to be sequenced and studied in in vitro transcription systems were viral genes and cellular proteincoding genes that are very actively transcribed either at particular times of the cell cycle or in specific differentiated cell
types. In all these rapidly transcribed genes, a conserved sequence called the TATA box was found ≈25–35 base pairs
upstream of the start site (Figure 11-9). Mutagenesis studies
have shown that a single-base change in this nucleotide sequence drastically decreases in vitro transcription by RNA
polymerase II of genes adjacent to a TATA box. In most
cases, sequence changes between the TATA box and start site
do not significantly affect the transcription rate. If the base
pairs between the TATA box and the normal start site are
deleted, transcription of the altered, shortened template begins at a new site ≈25 base pairs downstream from the TATA
box. Consequently, the TATA box acts similarly to an E. coli
promoter to position RNA polymerase II for transcription
initiation (see Figure 4-11).
Instead of a TATA box, some eukaryotic genes contain
an alternative promoter element called an initiator. Most
naturally occurring initiator elements have a cytosine (C) at
the 1 position and an adenine (A) residue at the transcription start site (1). Directed mutagenesis of mammalian genes with an initiator-containing promoter has
revealed that the nucleotide sequence immediately surrounding the start site determines the strength of such promoters. Unlike the conserved TATA box sequence, however,
only an extremely degenerate initiator consensus sequence
has been defined:
(5) Y-Y-A1-N-T/A-Y-Y-Y (3)

11.2 • Regulatory Sequences in Protein-Coding Genes
TATA box
A

21 16

4 91

0 95 67 97 52 41 16 24

Base
C
frequency
G
(%)

23 39 10

0

0

0

0

0

28 35

0

0

0

0

3 12 40 38 30

T

28 10 83

5

3

T
35
to 25

9 100
A

T

5 33
A

A
T

0

0 36 10 11
A

A
T

Consensus sequence

▲ FIGURE 11-9 Determination of consensus TATA box
sequence. The nucleotide sequences upstream of the start site
in 900 different eukaryotic protein-coding genes were aligned to
maximize homology in the region from 35 to 26. The
tabulated numbers are the percentage frequency of each base at
each position. Maximum homology occurs over an eight-base

where A1 is the base at which transcription starts, Y is a
pyrimidine (C or T), N is any of the four bases, and T/A is
T or A at position 3.
Transcription of genes with promoters containing a
TATA box or initiator element begins at a well-defined initiation site. However, transcription of many protein-coding
genes has been shown to begin at any one of multiple possible sites over an extended region, often 20–200 base pairs
in length. As a result, such genes give rise to mRNAs with
multiple alternative 5 ends. These genes, which generally are
transcribed at low rates (e.g., genes encoding the enzymes of
intermediary metabolism, often called “housekeeping
genes”), do not contain a TATA box or an initiator. Most
genes of this type contain a CG-rich stretch of 20–50 nucleotides within ≈100 base pairs upstream of the start-site region. The dinucleotide CG is statistically underrepresented in
vertebrate DNAs, and the presence of a CG-rich region, or
CpG island, just upstream from a start site is a distinctly
nonrandom distribution. For this reason, the presence of a
CpG island in genomic DNA suggests that it may contain a
transcription-initiation region.

Promoter-Proximal Elements Help Regulate
Eukaryotic Genes
Recombinant DNA techniques have been used to systematically mutate the nucleotide sequences upstream of the
start sites of various eukaryotic genes in order to identify
transcription-control regions. By now, hundreds of eukaryotic genes have been analyzed, and scores of transcriptioncontrol regions have been identified. These control elements,
together with the TATA-box or initiator, often are referred to
as the promoter of the gene they regulate. However, we prefer to reserve the term promoter for the TATA-box or initiator sequences that determine the initiation site in the
template. We use the term promoter-proximal elements for

9 35 37

A
G

455

mRNA starts
A ≈ 50%
G ≈ 25%
C,U ≈ 25%

Transcription

9
1

3

region, referred to as the TATA box, whose consensus sequence
is shown at the bottom. The initial base in mRNAs encoded
by genes containing a TATA box most frequently is an A.
[See P. Bucher, 1990, J. Mol. Biol. 212:563, and http: // www.epd.isb-sib.
ck/ promoter_elements.]

control regions lying within 100–200 base pairs upstream
of the start site. In some cases, promoter-proximal elements
are cell-type-specific; that is, they function only in specific
differentiated cell types.
One approach frequently taken to determine the upstream border of a transcription-control region for a mammalian gene involves constructing a set of 5 deletions as
discussed earlier (see Figure 11-3). Once the 5 border of
a transcription-control region is determined, analysis of
linker scanning mutations can pinpoint the sequences with
regulatory functions that lie between the border and the
transcription start site. In this approach, a set of constructs
with contiguous overlapping mutations are assayed for
their effect on expression of a reporter gene or production
of a specific mRNA (Figure 11-10a). One of the first uses
of this type of analysis identified promoter-proximal elements of the thymidine kinase (tk) gene from herpes simplex virus (HSV). The results demonstrated that the DNA
region upstream of the HSV tk gene contains three separate transcription-control sequences: a TATA box in the interval from 32 to 16, and two other control elements
farther upstream (Figure 11-10b).
To test the spacing constraints on control elements in
the HSV tk promoter region identified by analysis of linker
scanning mutations, researchers prepared and assayed
constructs containing small deletions and insertions between the elements. Changes in spacing between the promoter and promoter-proximal control elements of 20
nucleotides or fewer had little effect. However, insertions
of 30 to 50 base pairs between a promoter-proximal element and the TATA box was equivalent to deleting the element. Similar analyses of other eukaryotic promoters
have also indicated that considerable flexibility in the
spacing between promoter-proximal elements is generally
tolerated, but separations of several tens of base pairs may
decrease transcription.

456

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
(a)
Reporter gene

Vector DNA

tk mRNA


Control region
Mutant
no.
1



2



3



4



5



6



7



8



9


Control elements

(b)

105

80

61

PE-2

47

PE-1

32

16

TATA box

tk

Control region of tk gene

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-10 Linker scanning
mutations identify transcription-control elements. (a) A region
of eukaryotic DNA (orange) that supports high-level expression of
a reporter gene (light blue) is cloned in a plasmid vector as
diagrammed at the top. Overlapping linker scanning (LS)
mutations (crosshatch) are introduced from one end of the region
being analyzed to the other. These mutations result from
scrambling the nucleotide sequence in a short stretch of the
DNA. After the mutant plasmids are transfected separately into
cultured cells, the activity of the reporter-gene product is
assayed. In the hypothetical example shown here, LS mutations

Distant Enhancers Often Stimulate Transcription
by RNA Polymerase II
As noted earlier, transcription from many eukaryotic promoters can be stimulated by control elements located thousands of base pairs away from the start site. Such
long-distance transcription-control elements, referred to as
enhancers, are common in eukaryotic genomes but fairly rare
in bacterial genomes. The first enhancer to be discovered that
stimulates transcription of eukaryotic genes was in a 366bp fragment of the simian virus 40 (SV40) genome (Figure
11-11). Further analysis of this region of SV40 DNA revealed that an ≈100-bp sequence lying ≈100 base pairs upstream of the SV40 early transcription start site was

1, 4, 6, 7, and 9 have little or no effect on expression of the
reporter gene, indicating that the regions altered in these
mutants contain no control elements. Reporter-gene expression
is significantly reduced in mutants 2, 3, 5, and 8, indicating that
control elements (brown) lie in the intervals shown at the
bottom. (b) Analysis of LS mutations in the transcription-control
region of the thymidine kinase (tk ) gene from herpes simplex
virus (HSV) identified a TATA box and two promoter-proximal
elements (PE-1 and PE-2). [Part (b) see S. L. McKnight and
R. Kingsbury, 1982, Science 217:316.]

responsible for its ability to enhance transcription. In SV40,
this enhancer sequence functions to stimulate transcription
from viral promoters. The SV40 enhancer, however, stimulates transcription from all mammalian promoters that have
been tested when it is inserted in either orientation anywhere
on a plasmid carrying the test promoter, even when it is thousands of base pairs from the start site. An extensive linker
scanning mutational analysis of the SV40 enhancer indicated
that it is composed of multiple individual elements, each of
which contributes to the total activity of the enhancer. As discussed later, each of these regulatory elements is a proteinbinding site.
Soon after discovery of the SV40 enhancer, enhancers
were identified in other viral genomes and in eukaryotic

11.2 • Regulatory Sequences in Protein-Coding Genes

Plasmid
1

Plasmid
2
β-globin
gene

SV40
DNA

Transfect plasmid 1 or 2
into cultured fibroblasts
Isolate RNA and hybridize
with labeled β-globin DNA probe

1
2

An 3

5
3
β-globin probe

5

C

β-globin mRNA

3

Treat with S1 nuclease
and then denature

4

Perform gel electrophoresis
and autoradiography

1

2

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-11 Plasmids containing a
particular SV40 DNA fragment showed marked increase in
mRNA production compared with plasmids lacking this
enhancer. Plasmids containing the -globin gene with or without
a 366-bp fragment of SV40 DNA were constructed. These
plasmids were transfected into cultured cells, and any resulting
RNA was hybridized to a -globin DNA probe (steps 1 and 2 ).
The amount of -globin mRNA synthesized by cells transfected
with one or the other plasmid was assayed by the S1 nuclease–
protection method (step 3 ). The restriction-fragment probe,
generated from a -globin cDNA clone, was complementary to
the 5 end of -globin mRNA. The 5 end of the probe was
labeled with 32P (red dot). Hybridization of -globin mRNA to the
probe protected an ≈340-nucleotide fragment of the probe from
digestion by S1 nuclease, which digests single-stranded DNA but
not DNA in an RNA-DNA hybrid. Autoradiography of
electrophoresed S1-protected fragments (step 4 ) revealed that
cells transfected with plasmid 1 (lane 1) produced much more
-globin mRNA than those transfected with plasmid 2 (lane 2).
Lane C is a control assay of -globin mRNA isolated from
reticulocytes, which actively synthesize -globin. These results
show that the SV40 DNA fragment in plasmid 1 contains an
element, the enhancer, that greatly stimulates synthesis of
-globin mRNA. [Adapted from J. Banerji et al., 1981, Cell 27:299.]

457

cellular DNA. Some of these control elements are located
50 or more kilobases from the promoter they control.
Analyses of many different eukaryotic cellular enhancers
have shown that they can occur upstream from a promoter,
downstream from a promoter within an intron, or even
downstream from the final exon of a gene. Like promoterproximal elements, many enhancers are cell-type-specific.
For example, the genes encoding antibodies (immunoglobulins) contain an enhancer within the second intron that
can stimulate transcription from all promoters tested, but
only in B lymphocytes, the type of cells that normally express antibodies. Analyses of the effects of deletions and
linker scanning mutations in cellular enhancers have shown
that, like the SV40 enhancer, they generally are composed
of multiple elements that contribute to the overall activity
of the enhancer.

Most Eukaryotic Genes Are Regulated by Multiple
Transcription-Control Elements
Initially, enhancers and promoter-proximal elements were
thought to be distinct types of transcription-control elements. However, as more enhancers and promoter-proximal
elements were analyzed, the distinctions between them became less clear. For example, both types of element generally can stimulate transcription even when inverted, and both
types often are cell-type-specific. The general consensus now
is that a spectrum of control elements regulates transcription by RNA polymerase II. At one extreme are enhancers,
which can stimulate transcription from a promoter tens of
thousands of base pairs away (e.g., the SV40 enhancer). At
the other extreme are promoter-proximal elements, such as
the upstream elements controlling the HSV tk gene, which
lose their influence when moved an additional 30–50 base
pairs farther from the promoter. Researchers have identified
a large number of transcription-control elements that can
stimulate transcription from distances between these two
extremes.
Figure 11-12a summarizes the locations of transcriptioncontrol sequences for a hypothetical mammalian gene. The
start site at which transcription initiates encodes the first (5)
nucleotide of the first exon of an mRNA, the nucleotide that
is capped. For many genes, especially those encoding abundantly expressed proteins, a TATA box located approximately 25–35 base pairs upstream from the start site directs
RNA polymerase II to begin transcription at the proper nucleotide. Promoter-proximal elements, which are relatively
short (≈10–20 base pairs), are located within the first ≈200
base pairs upstream of the start site. Enhancers, in contrast,
usually are ≈100 base pairs long and are composed of multiple elements of ≈10–20 base pairs. Enhancers may be located up to 50 kilobases upstream or downstream from the
start site or within an intron. Many mammalian genes are
controlled by more than one enhancer region.
The S. cerevisiae genome contains regulatory elements
called upstream activating sequences (UASs), which function

458

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
1

(a) Mammalian gene

200

up to
50 kb
1

(b) S. cerevisiae gene

10 to
50 kb

30

≈90

Exon

Intron

Promoter-proximal
element

TATA box
Enhancer;
yeast UAS

▲ FIGURE 11-12 General pattern of control elements that
regulate gene expression in multicellular eukaryotes and
yeast. (a) Genes of multicellular organisms contain both
promoter-proximal elements and enhancers, as well as a TATA
box or other promoter element. The promoter elements position
RNA polymerase II to initiate transcription at the start site and
influence the rate of transcription. Enhancers may be either

upstream or downstream and as far away as 50 kb from the
transcription start site. In some cases, enhancers lie within
introns. For some genes, promoter-proximal elements occur
downstream from the start site as well as upstream. (b) Most
S. cerevisiae genes contain only one regulatory region, called an
upstream activating sequence (UAS), and a TATA box, which is
≈90 base pairs upstream from the start site.

similarly to enhancers and promoter-proximal elements in
higher eukaryotes. Most yeast genes contain only one UAS,
which generally lies within a few hundred base pairs of the
start site. In addition, S. cerevisiae genes contain a TATA box
≈90 base pairs upstream from the transcription start site
(Figure 11-12b).

11.3 Activators and Repressors
of Transcription

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 11.2

The various transcription-control elements found in eukaryotic DNA are binding sites for regulatory proteins. In this
section, we discuss the identification, purification, and structures of these transcription factors, which function to activate or repress expression of eukaryotic protein-coding
genes.

Regulatory Sequences in Protein-Coding Genes
Expression of eukaryotic protein-coding genes generally
is regulated through multiple protein-binding control regions that are located close to or distant from the start site
(Figure 11-12).

■

Promoters direct binding of RNA polymerase II to DNA,
determine the site of transcription initiation, and influence
transcription rate.

■

Three principal types of promoter sequences have been
identified in eukaryotic DNA. The TATA box, the most
common, is prevalent in rapidly transcribed genes. Initiator promoters are found in some genes, and CpG islands
are characteristic of genes transcribed at a low rate.

■

Promoter-proximal elements occur within ≈200 base
pairs upstream of a start site. Several such elements, containing ≈10–20 base pairs, may help regulate a particular
gene.
■

■ Enhancers, which contain multiple short control elements, may be located from 200 base pairs to tens of
kilobases upstream or downstream from a promoter,
within an intron, or downstream from the final exon of
a gene.

Promoter-proximal elements and enhancers often are
cell-type-specific, functioning only in specific differentiated
cell types.

■

Footprinting and Gel-Shift Assays Detect
Protein-DNA Interactions
In yeast, Drosophila, and other genetically tractable eukaryotes, numerous genes encoding transcriptional activators and
repressors have been identified by classical genetic analyses
like those described in Chapter 9. However, in mammals and
other vertebrates, which are less amenable to such genetic
analysis, most transcription factors have been detected initially and subsequently purified by biochemical techniques.
In this approach, a DNA regulatory element that has been
identified by the kinds of mutational analyses described in
the previous section is used to identify cognate proteins that
bind specifically to it. Two common techniques for detecting such cognate proteins are DNase I footprinting and the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
DNase I footprinting takes advantage of the fact that
when a protein is bound to a region of DNA, it protects that
DNA sequence from digestion by nucleases. As illustrated in
Figure 11-13, when samples of a DNA fragment that is
labeled at one end are digested in the presence and absence
of a DNA-binding protein and then denatured, electrophoresed, and the resulting gel subjected to autoradiography,
the region protected by the bound protein appears as a gap,
or “footprint,” in the array of bands resulting from digestion
in the absence of protein. When footprinting is performed

11.3 • Activators and Repressors of Transcription

reveals control-element sequences and can be used as an
assay in transcription factor purification. (a) DNase I
footprinting can identify control element sequences. A DNA
fragment known to contain the control-element is labeled at one
end with 32P (red dot). Portions of the labeled DNA sample then
are digested with DNase I in the presence and absence of
protein samples thought to contain a cognate protein. DNase I
randomly hydrolyzes the phosphodiester bonds of DNA between
the 3 oxygen on the deoxyribose of one nucleotide and the 5
phosphate of the next nucleotide. A low concentration of DNase I
is used so that on average each DNA molecule is cleaved just
once (vertical arrows). If the protein sample does not contain a
cognate DNA-binding protein, the DNA fragment is cleaved at
multiple positions between the labeled and unlabeled ends of the
original fragment, as in sample A on the left. If the protein
sample contains a cognate protein, as in sample B on the right,
the protein binds to the DNA, thereby protecting a portion of the
fragment from digestion. Following DNase treatment, the DNA is
separated from protein, denatured to separate the strands, and
electrophoresed. Autoradiography of the resulting gel detects
only labeled strands and reveals fragments extending from the
labeled end to the site of cleavage by DNase I. Cleavage
fragments containing the control sequence show up on the gel
for sample A, but are missing in sample B because the bound
cognate protein blocked cleavages within that sequence and thus
production of the corresponding fragments. The missing bands
on the gel constitute the footprint. (b) A protein fraction
containing a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein can be
purified by column chromatography. DNase I footprinting can
then identify which of the eluted fractions contain the cognate
protein. In the absence of added protein (NE, no extract), DNase I
cleaves the DNA fragment at multiple sites, producing multiple
bands on the gel shown here. A cognate protein present in the
nuclear extract applied to the column (O, onput) generated a
footprint. This protein was bound to the column, since
footprinting activity was not detected in the flow-through protein
fraction (FT). After applying a salt gradient to the column, most of
the cognate protein eluted in fractions 9–12, as evidenced by the
missing bands (footprints). The sequence of the protein-binding
region can be determined by comparison with marker DNA
fragments of known length analyzed on the same gel (M). [Part

Sample A
(DNA-binding protein absent)

Sample B
(DNA-binding protein present)
Sequence-specific
binding protein

Protein-binding
sequence
5

3

5

3

3

5

3

5

(b)

Fraction
M NE O FT 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 18 20 22

Footprint

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-13 DNase I footprinting

459

(b) from S. Yoshinaga et al., 1989, J. Biol. Chem. 264:10529.]

with a DNA fragment containing a known DNA control element, the appearance of a footprint indicates the presence
of a transcription factor that binds that control element in
the protein sample being assayed. Footprinting also identifies
the specific DNA sequence to which the transcription factor
binds.
The electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), also
called the gel-shift or band-shift assay, is more useful than
the footprinting assay for quantitative analysis of DNAbinding proteins. In general, the electrophoretic mobility of a
DNA fragment is reduced when it is complexed to protein,
causing a shift in the location of the fragment band. This
assay can be used to detect a transcription factor in protein

fractions incubated with a radiolabeled DNA fragment containing a known control element (Figure 11-14).
In the biochemical isolation of a transcription factor, an
extract of cell nuclei commonly is subjected sequentially to
several types of column chromatography (Chapter 3). Fractions eluted from the columns are assayed by DNase I footprinting or EMSA using DNA fragments containing an
identified regulatory element (see Figures 11-13 and 11-14).
Fractions containing protein that binds to the regulatory element in these assays probably contain a putative transcription factor. A powerful technique commonly used for the
final step in purifying transcription factors is sequencespecific DNA affinity chromatography, a particular type of

460

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-14 Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay can be used to detect transcription factors during
purification. In this example, protein fractions separated by
column chromatography were assayed for their ability to bind to
a radiolabeled DNA-fragment probe containing a known
regulatory element. After an aliquot of the protein sample loaded
onto the column (ON) and successive column fractions (numbers)
were incubated with the labeled probe, the samples were
electrophoresed under conditions that do not denature proteins.
The free probe not bound to protein migrated to the bottom of
the gel. A protein in the preparation applied to the column and in
fractions 7 and 8 bound to the probe, forming a DNA-protein
complex that migrated more slowly than the free probe. These
fractions therefore likely contain the regulatory protein being
sought. [From S. Yoshinaga et al., 1989, J. Biol. Chem. 264:10529.]

Fraction ON 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 14 16 18 20 22

affinity chromatography in which long DNA strands containing multiple copies of the transcription factor–binding
site are coupled to a column matrix. As a final test that an
isolated protein is in fact a transcription factor, its ability to
modulate transcription of a template containing the corresponding protein-binding sites is assayed in an in vitro transcription reaction. Figure 11-15 shows the results of such an
assay for SP1, a transcription factor that binds to GC-rich
sequences, thereby activating transcription from nearby
promoters.

Once a transcription factor is isolated and purified, its
partial amino acid sequence can be determined and used to
clone the gene or cDNA encoding it, as outlined in Chapter
9. The isolated gene can then be used to test the ability of
the encoded protein to activate or repress transcription in an
in vivo transfection assay (Figure 11-16).

Bound
probe

Free
probe

Gene-encoding
protein X

Reporter
gene

Plasmid
1

Adenovirus
DNA

X binding
site

SV40
DNA

Plasmid
2

Protein X

Reporter-gene
transcripts

1
2
Nucleus

SP1:





▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-15 Transcription factors can
be identified by in vitro assay for transcription activity. SP1
was identified based on its ability to bind to a region of the SV40
genome that contains six copies of a GC-rich promoter-proximal
element and was purified by column chromatography. To test the
transcription-activating ability of purified SP1, it was incubated in
vitro with template DNA, a protein fraction containing RNA
polymerase II and associated general transcription factors, and
labeled ribonucleoside triphosphates. The labeled RNA products
were subjected to electrophoresis and autoradiography. Shown
here are autoradiograms from assays with adenovirus and SV40
DNA in the absence () and presence () of SP1. SP1 had no
significant effect on transcription from the adenovirus promoter,
which contains no SP1-binding sites. In contrast, SP1 stimulated
transcription from the SV40 promoter about tenfold. [Adapted from
M. R. Briggs et al., 1986, Science 234:47.]

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-16 In vivo transfection
assay measures transcription activity to evaluate proteins
believed to be transcription factors. The assay system requires
two plasmids. One plasmid contains the gene encoding the
putative transcription factor ( protein X ). The second plasmid
contains a reporter gene (e.g., lacZ ) and one or more binding
sites for protein X. Both plasmids are simultaneously introduced
into cells that lack the gene encoding protein X. The production
of reporter-gene RNA transcripts is measured; alternatively, the
activity of the encoded protein can be assayed. If reporter-gene
transcription is greater in the presence of the X-encoding
plasmid, then the protein is an activator; if transcription is less,
then it is a repressor. By use of plasmids encoding a mutated or
rearranged transcription factor, important domains of the protein
can be identified.

11.3 • Activators and Repressors of Transcription

461

GAL4 protein binds to UASGAL sequences. When a copy of
UASGAL was cloned upstream of a TATA box followed by a
lacZ reporter gene, expression of lacZ was activated in galactose media in wild-type cells, but not in gal4 mutants. These
results showed that UASGAL is a transcription-control element activated by the GAL4 protein in galactose media.
A remarkable set of experiments with gal4 deletion mutants demonstrated that the GAL4 transcription factor is
composed of separable functional domains: an N-terminal
DNA-binding domain, which binds to specific DNA sequences, and a C-terminal activation domain, which interacts with other proteins to stimulate transcription from a
nearby promoter (Figure 11-17). When the N-terminal
DNA-binding domain of GAL4 was fused directly to various

Activators Are Modular Proteins Composed
of Distinct Functional Domains
Studies with a yeast transcription activator called GAL4 provided early insight into the domain structure of transcription factors. The gene encoding the GAL4 protein, which
promotes expression of enzymes needed to metabolize galactose, was identified by complementation analysis of gal4
mutants (Chapter 9). Directed mutagenesis studies like those
described previously identified UASs for the genes activated
by GAL4. Each of these UASs was found to contain one or
more copies of a related 17-bp sequence called UASGAL.
DNase I footprinting assays with recombinant GAL4 protein
produced in E. coli from the yeast GAL4 gene showed that
(a) Reporter-gene construct

lacZ gene
UASGAL

TATA
box

β-galactosidase
Binding
activity
to UASGAL

(b) Wild-type and mutant GAL4 proteins
1

Wild-type

738 823

74

C

+

+++

881

_

_

+

+++

+

+++

+

++

+

+

+

–

+

–

881

+

+++

881

+

+++

881

+

++

N
DNA-binding
domain

Activation
domain

50

848
823

N- and
C-terminal
deletion
mutants

792
755
692
74

74

Internal
deletion
mutants

684

74
74

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-17 Deletion mutants of the
GAL4 gene in yeast with a UASGAL reporter-gene construct
demonstrate the separate functional domains in an activator.
(a) Diagram of DNA construct containing a lacZ reporter gene and
TATA box ligated to UASGAL, a regulatory element that contains
several GAL4-binding sites. The reporter-gene construct and DNA
encoding wild-type or mutant (deleted) GAL4 were simultaneously
introduced into mutant (gal4) yeast cells, and the activity of galactosidase expressed from lacZ was assayed. Activity will be
high if the introduced GAL4 DNA encodes a functional protein.
(b) Schematic diagrams of wild-type GAL4 and various mutant
forms. Small numbers refer to positions in the wild-type sequence.
Deletion of 50 amino acids from the N-terminal end destroyed the

738
768

ability of GAL4 to bind to UASGAL and to stimulate expression of
-galactosidase from the reporter gene. Proteins with extensive
deletions from the C-terminal end still bound to UASGAL. These
results localize the DNA-binding domain to the N-terminal end of
GAL4. The ability to activate -galactosidase expression was not
entirely eliminated unless somewhere between 126–189 or more
amino acids were deleted from the C-terminal end. Thus the
activation domain lies in the C-terminal region of GAL4. Proteins
with internal deletions (bottom) also were able to stimulate
expression of -galactosidase, indicating that the central region of
GAL4 is not crucial for its function in this assay. [See J. Ma and
M. Ptashne, 1987, Cell 48:847; I. A. Hope and K. Struhl, 1986, Cell 46:885;
and R. Brent and M. Ptashne, 1985, Cell 43:729.]

462

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

of its C-terminal fragments, the resulting truncated proteins
retained the ability to stimulate expression of a reporter gene
in an in vivo assay like that depicted in Figure 11-16. Thus
the internal portion of the protein is not required for functioning of GAL4 as a transcription factor. Similar experiments with another yeast transcription factor, GCN4, which
regulates genes required for synthesis of many amino acids,
indicated that it contains an ≈60-aa DNA-binding domain at
its C-terminus and an ≈20-aa activation domain near the
middle of its sequence.
Further evidence for the existence of distinct activation
domains in GAL4 and GCN4 came from experiments in
which their activation domains were fused to a DNA-binding
domain from an entirely unrelated E. coli DNA-binding protein. When these fusion proteins were assayed in vivo, they
activated transcription of a reporter gene containing the cognate site for the E. coli protein. Thus functional transcription
factors can be constructed from entirely novel combinations
of prokaryotic and eukaryotic elements.
Studies such as these have now been carried out with
many eukaryotic activators. The structural model of eukaryotic activators that has emerged from these studies is a modular one in which one or more activation domains are
connected to a sequence-specific DNA-binding domain
through flexible protein domains (Figure 11-18). In some
cases, amino acids included in the DNA-binding domain also
contribute to transcriptional activation. As discussed in a
later section, activation domains are thought to function by
Examples
N

C

GAL4

N

C

GCN4

N

C

GR

N

C

SP1

DNA-binding
domain
Activation
domain
Flexible protein
domain

▲ FIGURE 11-18 Schematic diagrams illustrating the
modular structure of eukaryotic transcription activators.
These transcription factors may contain more than one activation
domain but rarely contain more than one DNA-binding domain.
GAL4 and GCN4 are yeast transcription activators. The
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) promotes transcription of target
genes when certain hormones are bound to the C-terminal
activation domain. SP1 binds to GC-rich promoter elements in a
large number of mammalian genes.

binding other proteins involved in transcription. The presence of flexible domains connecting the DNA-binding domains to activation domains may explain why alterations in
the spacing between control elements are so well tolerated
in eukaryotic control regions. Thus even when the positions
of transcription factors bound to DNA are shifted relative
to each other, their activation domains may still be able to interact because they are attached to their DNA-binding domains through flexible protein regions.

Repressors Are the Functional Converse
of Activators
Eukaryotic transcription is regulated by repressors as well
as activators. For example, geneticists have identified mutations in yeast that result in continuously high expression of
certain genes. This type of unregulated, abnormally high expression is called constitutive expression and results from the
inactivation of a repressor that normally inhibits the transcription of these genes. Similarly, mutants of Drosophila
and C. elegans have been isolated that are defective in embryonic development because they express genes in embryonic cells where they are normally repressed. The mutations
in these mutants inactivate repressors, leading to abnormal
development.
Repressor-binding sites in DNA have been identified by
systematic linker scanning mutation analysis similar to that
depicted in Figure 11-10. In this type of analysis, mutation of
an activator-binding site leads to decreased expression of
the linked reporter gene, whereas mutation of a repressorbinding site leads to increased expression of a reporter gene.
Repressor proteins that bind such sites can be purified and
assayed using the same biochemical techniques described
earlier for activator proteins.
Eukaryotic transcription repressors are the functional
converse of activators. They can inhibit transcription from
a gene they do not normally regulate when their cognate
binding sites are placed within a few hundred base pairs of
the gene’s start site. Like activators, most eukaryotic repressors are modular proteins that have two functional domains:
a DNA-binding domain and a repression domain. Similar to
activation domains, repression domains continue to function
when fused to another type of DNA-binding domain. If
binding sites for this second DNA-binding domain are inserted within a few hundred base pairs of a promoter, expression of the fusion protein inhibits transcription from the
promoter. Also like activation domains, repression domains
function by interacting with other proteins as discussed later.
The absence of appropriate repressor activity can
have devastating consequences. For instance, the
protein encoded by the Wilms’ tumor (WT1) gene
is a repressor that is expressed preferentially in the developing kidney. Children who inherit mutations in both the maternal and paternal WT1 genes, so that they produce no
functional WT1 protein, invariably develop kidney tumors

11.3 • Activators and Repressors of Transcription
1 kb

(a)

EGR-1
EGR-1 control
region

463

(b)

WT1 binding site
SRF/TCF binding site
AP1 binding site

∗

▲ FIGURE 11-19 Diagram of the control region of the gene
encoding EGR-1, a transcription activator. The binding sites for
WT1, a eukaryotic repressor protein, do not overlap the binding
sites for the activator AP1 or the composite binding site for the
activators SRF and TCF. Thus repression by WT1 does not involve
direct interference with binding of other proteins as in the case
of bacterial repressors.

early in life. The WT1 protein binds to the control region of
the gene encoding a transcription activator called EGR-1
(Figure 11-19). This gene, like many other eukaryotic genes,
is subject to both repression and activation. Binding by WT1
represses transcription of the EGR-1 gene without inhibiting
binding of the activators that normally stimulate expression
of this gene. ❚

DNA-Binding Domains Can Be Classified
into Numerous Structural Types
The DNA-binding domains of eukaryotic activators and repressors contain a variety of structural motifs that bind specific DNA sequences. The ability of DNA-binding proteins to
bind to specific DNA sequences commonly results from noncovalent interactions between atoms in an  helix in the
DNA-binding domain and atoms on the edges of the bases
within a major groove in the DNA. Interactions with sugarphosphate backbone atoms and, in some cases, with atoms
in a DNA minor groove also contribute to binding.
The principles of specific protein-DNA interactions were
first discovered during the study of bacterial repressors.
Many bacterial repressors are dimeric proteins in which an 
helix from each monomer inserts into a major groove in the
DNA helix (Figure 11-20). This  helix is referred to as the
recognition helix or sequence-reading helix because most of
the amino acid side chains that contact DNA extend from
this helix. The recognition helix that protrudes from the surface of bacterial repressors to enter the DNA major groove
and make multiple, specific interactions with atoms in the
DNA is usually supported in the protein structure in part
by hydrophobic interactions with a second  helix just Nterminal to it. This structural element, which is present in
many bacterial repressors, is called a helix-turn-helix motif.
Many additional motifs that can present an  helix to the
major groove of DNA are found in eukaryotic transcription
factors, which often are classified according to the type of
DNA-binding domain they contain. Because most of these
motifs have characteristic consensus amino acid sequences,
newly characterized transcription factors frequently can be
classified once the corresponding genes or cDNAs are cloned

∗

▲ FIGURE 11-20 Interaction of bacteriophage 434 repressor
with DNA. (a) Ribbon diagram of 434 repressor bound to its
specific operator DNA. Repressor monomers are in yellow and
green. The recognition helices are indicated by asterisks. A space
filling model of the repressor-operator complex (b) shows how
the protein interacts intimately with one side of the DNA
molecule over a length of 1.5 turns. [Adapted from A. K. Aggarwal
et al., 1988, Science 242:899.]

and sequenced. The genomes of higher eukaryotes encode
dozens of classes of DNA-binding domains and hundreds to
thousands of transcription factors. The human genome, for
instance, encodes ≈2000 transcription factors.
Here we introduce several common classes of DNAbinding proteins whose three-dimensional structures have
been determined. In all these examples and many other transcription factors, at least one  helix is inserted into a major
groove of DNA. However, some transcription factors contain alternative structural motifs (e.g.,  strands and loops)
that interact with DNA.

Homeodomain Proteins Many eukaryotic transcription
factors that function during development contain a conserved 60-residue DNA-binding motif that is similar to the
helix-turn-helix motif of bacterial repressors. Called homeodomain proteins, these transcription factors were first identified in Drosophila mutants in which one body part was
transformed into another during development (Chapter 15).
The conserved homeodomain sequence has also been found
in vertebrate transcription factors, including those that have
similar master control functions in human development.

Zinc-Finger Proteins A number of different eukaryotic proteins have regions that fold around a central Zn2 ion, producing a compact domain from a relatively short length of
the polypeptide chain. Termed a zinc finger, this structural
motif was first recognized in DNA-binding domains but now

464

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

tion factors are now commonly called nuclear receptors. The
characteristic feature of C4 zinc fingers is the presence of two
groups of four critical cysteines, one toward each end of the
55- or 56-residue domain. Although the C4 zinc finger initially was named by analogy with the C2H2 zinc finger, the
three-dimensional structures of proteins containing these
DNA-binding motifs later were found to be quite distinct. A
particularly important difference between the two is that
C2H2 zinc-finger proteins generally contain three or more repeating finger units and bind as monomers, whereas C4 zincfinger proteins generally contain only two finger units and
generally bind to DNA as homodimers or heterodimers. Homodimers of C4 zinc-finger DNA-binding domains have
twofold rotational symmetry (Figure 11-21b). Consequently,
homodimeric nuclear receptors bind to consensus DNA sequences that are inverted repeats.

is known to occur also in proteins that do not bind to DNA.
Here we describe two of the several classes of zinc-finger
motifs that have been identified in eukaryotic transcription
factors.
The C2H2 zinc finger is the most common DNA-binding
motif encoded in the human genome and the genomes of
most other multicellular animals. It is also common in multicellular plants, but is not the dominant type of DNAbinding domain in plants as it is in animals. This motif has
a 23- to 26-residue consensus sequence containing two conserved cysteine (C) and two conserved histidine (H) residues,
whose side chains bind one Zn2 ion (see Figure 3-6b). The
name “zinc finger” was coined because a two-dimensional
diagram of the structure resembles a finger. When the threedimensional structure was solved, it became clear that the
binding of the Zn2 ion by the two cysteine and two histidine residues folds the relatively short polypeptide sequence
into a compact domain, which can insert its  helix into the
major groove of DNA. Many transcription factors contain
multiple C2H2 zinc fingers, which interact with successive
groups of base pairs, within the major groove, as the protein wraps around the DNA double helix (Figure 11-21a).
A second type of zinc-finger structure, designated the C4
zinc finger (because it has four conserved cysteines in contact
with the Zn2), is found in ≈50 human transcription factors.
The first members of this class were identified as specific intracellular high-affinity binding proteins, or “receptors,” for
steroid hormones, leading to the name steroid receptor
superfamily. Because similar intracellular receptors for nonsteroid hormones subsequently were found, these transcrip-

Leucine-Zipper Proteins Another structural motif present in
the DNA-binding domains of a large class of transcription
factors contains the hydrophobic amino acid leucine at every
seventh position in the sequence. These proteins bind to
DNA as dimers, and mutagenesis of the leucines showed that
they were required for dimerization. Consequently, the name
leucine zipper was coined to denote this structural motif.
The DNA-binding domain of the yeast GCN4 transcription factor mentioned earlier is a leucine-zipper domain. Xray crystallographic analysis of complexes between DNA
and the GCN4 DNA-binding domain has shown that the
dimeric protein contains two extended  helices that “grip”
the DNA molecule, much like a pair of scissors, at two ad-

5

(a)

(b)

3

3

5
C
N

 FIGURE 11-21 Interaction between
DNA and proteins containing zinc fingers.
(a) GL1 is a monomeric protein that contains
five C2H2 zinc fingers. -Helices are shown
as cylinders, Zn+2 ions as spheres. Finger 1
does not interact with DNA, whereas the
other four fingers do. (b) The glucocorticoid
receptor is a homodimeric C4 zinc-finger
protein. -Helices are shown as purple
ribbons, -strands as green arrows, Zn+2
ions as spheres. Two  helices (darker
shade), one in each monomer, interact with
the DNA. Like all C4 zinc-finger
homodimers, this transcription factor has
twofold rotational symmetry; the center of
symmetry is shown by the yellow ellipse. In
contrast, heterodimeric nuclear receptors do
not exhibit rotational symmetry. [See N. P.
Pavletich and C. O. Pabo, 1993, Science 261:1701,
and B. F. Luisi et al., 1991, Nature 352:497.]

C
Finger 5
Finger 4

Finger 3
Finger 2
N

N
Finger 1
5

3
5

C
3

11.3 • Activators and Repressors of Transcription
(a)

(b)

▲ FIGURE 11-22 Interaction of homodimeric leucine-zipper
and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins with DNA. (a) In
leucine-zipper proteins, basic residues in the extended -helical
regions of the monomers interact with the DNA backbone at
adjacent major grooves. The coiled-coil dimerization domain is
stabilized by hydrophobic interactions between the monomers.
(b) In bHLH proteins, the DNA-binding helices at the bottom
(N-termini of the monomers) are separated by nonhelical loops
from a leucine-zipper-like region containing a coiled-coil
dimerization domain. [Part (a) see T. E. Ellenberger et al., 1992, Cell
71:1223; part (b) see A. R. Ferre-D’Amare et al., 1993, Nature 363:38.]

jacent major grooves separated by about half a turn of the
double helix (Figure 11-22a). The portions of the  helices
contacting the DNA include positively charged (basic)
residues that interact with phosphates in the DNA backbone
and additional residues that interact with specific bases in the
major groove.
GCN4 forms dimers via hydrophobic interactions between the C-terminal regions of the  helices, forming a
coiled-coil structure. This structure is common in proteins
containing amphipathic  helices in which hydrophobic
amino acid residues are regularly spaced alternately three or
four positions apart in the sequence, forming a stripe down
one side of the  helix. These hydrophobic stripes make up
the interacting surfaces between the -helical monomers in
a coiled-coil dimer (see Figure 3-6c).
Although the first leucine-zipper transcription factors to
be analyzed contained leucine residues at every seventh position in the dimerization region, additional DNA-binding
proteins containing other hydrophobic amino acids in these
positions subsequently were identified. Like leucine-zipper
proteins, they form dimers containing a C-terminal coiledcoil dimerization region and an N-terminal DNA-binding
domain. The term basic zipper (bZip) now is frequently used
to refer to all proteins with these common structural features. Many basic-zipper transcription factors are heterodimers of two different polypeptide chains, each
containing one basic-zipper domain.

465

Basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) Proteins The DNA-binding
domain of another class of dimeric transcription factors contains a structural motif very similar to the basic-zipper motif
except that a nonhelical loop of the polypeptide chain separates two -helical regions in each monomer (Figure
11-22b). Termed a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH), this motif
was predicted from the amino acid sequences of these proteins, which contain an N-terminal  helix with basic
residues that interact with DNA, a middle loop region, and a
C-terminal region with hydrophobic amino acids spaced at
intervals characteristic of an amphipathic  helix. As with
basic-zipper proteins, different bHLH proteins can form
heterodimers.

Transcription-Factor Interactions Increase
Gene-Control Options
Two types of DNA-binding proteins discussed in the previous section—basic-zipper proteins and bHLH proteins—
often exist in alternative heterodimeric combinations of
monomers. Other classes of transcription factors not discussed here also form heterodimeric proteins. In some heterodimeric transcription factors, each monomer has a
DNA-binding domain with equivalent sequence specificity.
In these proteins, the formation of alternative heterodimers
does not influence DNA-binding specificity, but rather allows the activation domains associated with each monomer
to be brought together in alternative combinations in a single
transcription factor. As we shall see later, and in subsequent
chapters, the activities of individual transcription factors can
be regulated by multiple mechanisms. Consequently, a single bZIP or bHLH DNA regulatory element in the control region of a gene may elicit different transcriptional responses
depending on which bZIP or bHLH monomers that bind to
that site are expressed in a particular cell at a particular time
and how their activities are regulated.
In some heterodimeric transcription factors, however,
each monomer has a different DNA-binding specificity. The
resulting combinatorial possibilities increase the number of
potential DNA sequences that a family of transcription factors can bind. Three different factor monomers theoretically
could combine to form six homo- and heterodimeric factors,
as illustrated in Figure 11-23a. Four different factor
monomers could form a total of 10 dimeric factors; five
monomers, 16 dimeric factors; and so forth. In addition, inhibitory factors are known that bind to some basic-zipper and
bHLH monomers, thereby blocking their binding to DNA.
When these inhibitory factors are expressed, they repress
transcriptional activation by the factors with which they interact (Figure 11-23b). The rules governing the interactions of
members of a heterodimeric transcription-factor class are
complex. This combinatorial complexity expands both the
number of DNA sites from which these factors can activate
transcription and the ways in which they can be regulated.
Similar combinatorial transcriptional regulation is
achieved through the interaction of structurally unrelated

466

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

 FIGURE 11-23 Combinatorial
possibilities due to formation of
heterodimeric transcription factors.
(a) In the hypothetical example shown,
transcription factors A, B, and C can all
interact with one another, permitting the
three factors to bind to six different DNA
sequences (sites 1– 6) and creating six
combinations of activation domains. Each
composite binding site is divided into two
half-sites, and each heterodimeric factor
contains the activation domains of its two
constituent monomers. (b) Expression of
an inhibitory factor (green) that interacts
only with factor A inhibits binding; hence,
transcriptional activation at sites 1, 4,
and 5 is inhibited, but activation at sites 2,
3, and 6 is unaffected.

Factor
A

Factor
B

Factor
C

Activation
domain

Inhibitory
factor

DNA-binding
domain

(a)
Site 1

Site 2

Site 3

Site 4

Site 5

Site 6

Site 1

Site 2

Site 3

Site 4

Site 5

Site 6

(b)

transcription factors bound to closely spaced binding sites
in DNA. An example is the interaction of two transcription
factors, NFAT and AP1, which bind to neighboring sites in
a composite promoter-proximal element regulating the gene
encoding interleukon-2 (IL-2). Expression of the IL-2 gene is
critical to the immune response, but abnormal expression of
IL-2 can lead to autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis. Neither NFAT nor AP1 binds to its site in the IL-2
control region in the absence of the other. The affinities of
the factors for these particular DNA sequences are too low
for the individual factors to form a stable complex with
DNA. However, when both NFAT and AP1 are present,
protein-protein interactions between them stabilize the DNA
ternary complex composed of NFAT, AP1, and DNA (Figure 11-24). Such cooperative DNA binding of various transcription factors results in considerable combinatorial
complexity of transcription control. As a result, the approx-

imately 2000 transcription factors encoded in the human
genome can bind to DNA through a much larger number of
cooperative interactions, resulting in unique transcriptional
control for each of the several tens of thousands of human
genes. In the case of IL-2, transcription occurs only when
both NFAT is activated, resulting in its transport from cytoplasm to the nucleus, and the two subunits of AP1 are synthesized. These events are controlled by distinct signal
transduction pathways (Chapters 13 and 14), allowing stringent control of IL-2 expression.
Cooperative binding by NFAT and AP1 occurs only
when their weak binding sites are located at a precise distance, quite close to each other in DNA. Recent studies have
shown that the requirements for cooperative binding are not
so stringent in the case of some other transcription factors
and control regions. For example, the EGR-1 control region
contains a composite binding site to which the SRF and TCF

AP1
NFAT

 FIGURE 11-24 Cooperative binding
of two unrelated transcription factors to
neighboring sites in a composite control
element. By themselves, both monomeric
NFAT and heterodimeric AP1 transcription
factors have low affinity for their respective
binding sites in the IL-2 promoter-proximal
region. Protein-protein interactions between
NFAT and AP1 add to the overall stability of
the NFAT-AP1-DNA complex, so that the two
proteins bind to the composite site cooperatively. [See L. Chen et al., 1998, Nature 392:42.]

Weak NFAT
binding site

Weak AP1
binding site

Cooperative binding
of NFAT and AP1

11.3 • Activators and Repressors of Transcription

transcription factors bind cooperatively (see Figure 11-19).
Because a TCF has a long, flexible domain that interacts with
SRF, the two proteins can bind cooperatively when their individual sites in DNA are separated by any distance up to
10 base pairs or are inverted relative to each other.

Structurally Diverse Activation and Repression
Domains Regulate Transcription
Experiments with fusion proteins composed of the GAL4
DNA-binding domain and random segments of E. coli proteins demonstrated that a diverse group of amino acid sequences can function as activation domains, 1% of all
E. coli sequences, even though they evolved to perform other
functions. Many transcription factors contain activation domains marked by an unusually high percentage of particular
amino acids. GAL4, GCN4, and most other yeast transcription factors, for instance, have activation domains that are
rich in acidic amino acids (aspartic and glutamic acids).
These so-called acidic activation domains generally are capable of stimulating transcription in nearly all types of eukaryotic cells—fungal, animal, and plant cells. Activation
domains from some Drosophila and mammalian transcription factors are glutamine-rich, and some are proline-rich;
still others are rich in the closely related amino acids serine
and threonine, both of which have hydroxyl groups. However, some strong activation domains are not particularly
rich in any specific amino acid.
Biophysical studies indicate that acidic activation domains have an unstructured, random-coil conformation.
These domains stimulate transcription when they are bound
to a protein co-activator. The interaction with a co-activator
causes the activation domain to assume a more structured helical conformation in the activation domain–co-activator
complex. A well-studied example of a transcription factor
with an acidic activation domain is the mammalian CREB
protein, which is phosphorylated in response to increased
levels of cAMP. This regulated phosphorylation is required
for CREB to bind to its co-activator CBP (CREB binding
protein), resulting in the transcription of genes whose control
regions contain a CREB-binding site (see Figure 13-32).
When the phosphorylated random coil activation domain of
CREB interacts with CBP, it undergoes a conformational
change to form two  helices that wrap around the interacting domain of CBP.
Some activation domains are larger and more highly structured than acidic activation domains. For example, the ligandbinding domains of nuclear receptors function as activation
domains when they bind their specific ligand (Figure 11-25).
Binding of ligand induces a large conformational change that
allows the ligand-binding domain with bound hormone to interact with a short  helix in nuclear-receptor co-activators;
the resulting complex then can activate transcription of genes
whose control regions bind the nuclear receptor.
Thus the acidic activation domain in CREB and the ligandbinding activation domains in nuclear receptors represent

467

two structural extremes. The CREB acidic activation domain
is a random coil that folds into two -helices when it binds
to the surface of a globular domain in a co-activator. In contrast, the nuclear-receptor ligand-binding activation domain
is a structured globular domain that interacts with a short 
helix in a co-activator, which probably is a random coil before it is bound. In both cases, however, specific proteinprotein interactions between co-activators and the activation
domains permit the transcription factors to stimulate gene
expression.
Currently, less is known about the structure of repression
domains. The globular ligand-binding domains of some nuclear receptors function as repression domains in the absence
of their specific hormone ligand (see Figure 11-25b). Like activation domains, repression domains may be relatively
short, comprising 15 or fewer amino acids. Biochemical and
(a) RAR plus ligand

(b) RXR without ligand
N

N

9

1

9

1
8

4

8
4
C

10

5
10

5
12

3
7

3
s1

7

s2

11

2

s1

11

s2

6

6
loop

loop
12

C

▲ FIGURE 11-25 Effect of ligand binding on conformation
of the ligand-binding activation domains in two related
human nuclear receptors. Cylinders represent  helices.
Regions that do not change significantly in conformation after
ligand binding are shown in green; regions that do, in yellow.
(a) Ligand-binding domain of human RAR monomer when
bound to its ligand, all-trans retinoic acid. In this fairly compact
conformation, RAR can stimulate transcription. (b) Ligandbinding domain of human RXR monomer in the absence of its
ligand, 9-cis retinoic acid. As discussed later, RXR associates
with several different nuclear-receptor monomers (e.g., RAR),
forming heterodimeric transcription factors. [From
J. M. Wurtz et al., 1996, Nature Struc. 3:87; courtesy of Hinrich
Gronemeyer.]

468

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

genetic studies indicate that repression domains also mediate
protein-protein interactions and bind to co-repressor proteins, forming a complex that inhibits transcription initiation
by mechanisms that are discussed later in the chapter.

Multiprotein Complexes Form on Enhancers
As noted previously, enhancers generally range in length
from about 50 to 200 base pairs and include binding sites for
several transcription factors. The multiple transcription factors that bind to a single enhancer are thought to interact.
Analysis of the ≈70-bp enhancer that regulates expression
of -interferon, an important protein in defense against viral
infections in humans, provides a good example of such transcription-factor interactions. The -interferon enhancer contains four control elements that bind four different
transcription factors simultaneously. In the presence of a
small, abundant protein associated with chromatin called
HMGI, binding of the transcription factors is highly cooperative, similar to the binding of NFAT and AP1 to the composite promoter-proximal site in the IL-2 control region (see
Figure 11-24). This cooperative binding produces a multiprotein complex on the -interferon enhancer DNA (Figure
11-26). The term enhancesome has been coined to describe
such large nucleoprotein complexes that assemble from transcription factors as they bind cooperatively to their multiple
binding sites in an enhancer.
HMGI binds to the minor groove of DNA regardless of
the sequence and, as a result, bends the DNA molecule
sharply. This bending of the enhancer DNA permits bound
transcription factors to interact properly. The inherently

cJun
HMGI
IRF-3

ATF-2
p65
p50
HMGI

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 11.3
Activators and Repressors of Transcription
Transcription factors, which stimulate or repress transcription, bind to promoter-proximal regulatory elements
and enhancers in eukaryotic DNA.

■

Transcription activators and repressors are generally
modular proteins containing a single DNA-binding domain
and one or a few activation domains (for activators) or repression domains (for repressors). The different domains
frequently are linked through flexible polypeptide regions
(see Figure 11-18).

■

Among the most common structural motifs found in the
DNA-binding domains of eukaryotic transcription factors
are the C2H2 zinc finger, homeodomain, basic helix-loophelix (bHLH), and basic zipper (leucine zipper). All these
and many other DNA-binding motifs contain one or more
 helices that interact with major grooves in their cognate
site in DNA.
■

HMGI

IRF-7

weak, noncovalent protein-protein interactions between
transcription factors are strengthened by their binding to
neighboring DNA sites, which keeps the proteins at very high
relative concentrations.
Because of the presence of flexible regions connecting
the DNA-binding domains and activation or repression domains in transcription factors (see Figure 11-18) and the
ability of bound proteins to bend DNA, considerable leeway in the spacing between regulatory elements in transcription-control regions is permissible. This property
probably contributed to rapid evolution of gene control in
eukaryotes. Transposition of DNA sequences and recombination between repeated sequences over evolutionary
time likely created new combinations of control elements
that were subjected to natural selection and retained if they
proved beneficial. The latitude in spacing between regulatory elements probably allowed many more functional
combinations to be subjected to this evolutionary experimentation than would be the case if constraints on the
spacing between regulatory elements were strict.

HMGI

The transcription-control regions of most genes contain
binding sites for multiple transcription factors. Transcription of such genes varies depending on the particular repertoire of transcription factors that are expressed and activated in a particular cell at a particular time.

■

▲ FIGURE 11-26 Model of the enhancesome that forms on
the -interferon enhancer. Two monomeric transcription factors,
IRF-3 and IRF-7, and two heterodimeric factors, Jun/ATF-2 and
p50/ p65 (NF-B) bind to the four control elements in this
enhancer. Cooperative binding of these transcription factors is
facilitated by HMGI, which binds to the minor groove of DNA
and also interacts directly with the dimeric factors. Bending of
the enhancer sequence resulting from HMGI binding is critical to
formation of an enhancesome. Different DNA-bending proteins
act similarly at other enhancers. [Adapted from D. Thanos and
T. Maniatis, 1995, Cell 83:1091, and M. A. Wathel et al., 1998,
Mol. Cell 1:507.]

Combinatorial complexity in transcription control results from alternative combinations of monomers that form
heterodimeric transcription factors (see Figure 11-23) and
from cooperative binding of transcription factors to composite control sites (see Figure 11-24).

■

Activation and repression domains in transcription factors exhibit a variety of amino acid sequences and threedimensional structures. In general, these functional do-

■

11.4 • Transcription Initiation by RNA Polymerase II

mains interact with co-activators or co-repressors, which
are critical to the ability of transcription factors to modulate gene expression.
Cooperative binding of multiple activators to nearby
sites in an enhancer forms a multiprotein complex called
an enhancesome (see Figure 11-26). Assembly of enhancesomes often requires small proteins that bind to the
DNA minor groove and bend the DNA sharply, allowing
bound proteins on either side of the bend to interact more
readily.

■

11.4 Transcription Initiation
by RNA Polymerase II
In previous sections many of the eukaryotic proteins and
DNA sequences that participate in transcription and its control have been introduced. In this section, we focus on assembly of transcription preinitiation complexes involving
RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Recall that this eukaryotic RNA
polymerase catalyzes synthesis of mRNAs and a few small
nuclear RNAs (snRNAs). Mechanisms that control the assembly of Pol II transcription preinitiation complexes, and
hence the rate of transcription of protein-coding genes, are
considered in the next section.

General Transcription Factors Position RNA
Polymerases II at Start Sites and Assist
in Initiation
In vitro transcription by purified RNA polymerase II requires
the addition of several initiation factors that are separated
from the polymerase during purification. These initiation factors, which position polymerase molecules at transcription
start sites and help to melt the DNA strands so that the template strand can enter the active site of the enzyme, are called
general transcription factors. In contrast to the transcription
factors discussed in the previous section, which bind to specific sites in a limited number of genes, general transcription
factors are required for synthesis of RNA from most genes.
The general transcription factors that assist Pol II in initiation of transcription from most TATA-box promoters in
vitro have been isolated and characterized. These proteins
are designated TFIIA, TFIIB, etc., and most are multimeric
proteins. The largest is TFIID, which consists of a single
38-kDa TATA box–binding protein (TBP) and thirteen TBPassociated factors (TAFs). General transcription factors with
similar activities have been isolated from cultured human
cells, rat liver, Drosophila embryos, and yeast. The genes encoding these proteins in yeast have been sequenced as part of
the complete yeast genome sequence, and many of the
cDNAs encoding human and Drosophila Pol II general transcription factors have been cloned and sequenced. In all
cases, equivalent general transcription factors from different eukaryotes are highly conserved.

469

Sequential Assembly of Proteins Forms the Pol II
Transcription Preinitiation Complex in Vitro
Detailed biochemical studies revealed how the Pol II preinitiation complex, comprising a Pol II molecule and general
transcription factors bound to a promoter region of DNA,
is assembled. In these studies DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to determine the
order in which Pol II and general transcription factors bound
to TATA-box promoters. Because the complete, multisubunit
TFIID is difficult to purify, researchers used only the isolated
TBP component of this general transcription factor in these
experiments. Pol II can initiate transcription in vitro in the
absence of the other TFIID subunits.
Figure 11-27 summarizes our current understanding of
the stepwise assembly of the Pol II transcription preinitiation
complex in vitro. TBP is the first protein to bind to a TATAbox promoter. All eukaryotic TBPs analyzed to date have
very similar C-terminal domains of 180 residues. The sequence of this region is 80 percent identical in the yeast and
human proteins, and most differences are conservative substitutions. This conserved C-terminal domain functions as
well as the full-length protein does in in vitro transcription.
(The N-terminal domain of TBP, which varies greatly in sequence and length among different eukaryotes, functions in
the Pol II–catalyzed transcription of genes encoding snRNAs.)
TBP is a monomer that folds into a saddle-shape structure;
the two halves of the molecule exhibit an overall dyad
symmetry but are not identical. Like the HMGI and other
DNA-bending proteins that participate in formation of enhancesomes, TBP interacts with the minor groove in DNA,
bending the helix considerably (see Figure 4-5). The DNAbinding surface of TBP is conserved in all eukaryotes, explaining the high conservation of the TATA-box promoter
element (see Figure 11-9).
Once TBP has bound to the TATA box, TFIIB can bind.
TFIIB is a monomeric protein, slightly smaller than TBP. The
C-terminal domain of TFIIB makes contact with both TBP
and DNA on either side of the TATA-box, while its Nterminal domain extends toward the transcription start site.
Following TFIIB binding, a preformed complex of tetrameric
TFIIF and Pol II binds, positioning the polymerase over the
start site. At most promoters, two more general transcription
factors must bind before the DNA duplex can be separated
to expose the template strand. First to bind is tetrameric
TFIIE, creating a docking site for TFIIH, another multimeric
factor containing nine subunits. Binding of TFIIH completes
assembly of the transcription preinitiation complex in vitro
(see Figure 11-27).
The helicase activity of one of the TFIIH subunits uses
energy from ATP hydrolysis to unwind the DNA duplex at
the start site, allowing Pol II to form an open complex in
which the DNA duplex surrounding the start site is melted
and the template strand is bound at the polymerase active
site. If the remaining ribonucleoside triphosphates are present, Pol II begins transcribing the template strand. As the

470

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

polymerase transcribes away from the promoter region, another subunit of TFIIH phosphorylates the Pol II CTD at
multiple sites (see Figure 11-27). In the minimal in vitro transcription assay containing only these general transcription
factors and purified RNA polymerase II, TBP remains bound

TATA box

TBP

1

TFIIB
2
Pol II
TFIIF

to the TATA box as the polymerase transcribes away from
the promoter region, but the other general transcription factors dissociate.
The first subunits of TFIIH to be cloned from humans were identified because mutations in the
genes encoding them cause defects in the repair of
damaged DNA. In normal individuals, when a transcribing
RNA polymerase becomes stalled at a region of damaged
template DNA, a subcomplex of TFIIH is thought to recognize the stalled polymerase and then recruit other proteins
that function with TFIIH in repairing the damaged DNA region. In the absence of functional TFIIH, such repair of damaged DNA in transcriptionally active genes is impaired. As
a result, affected individuals have extreme skin sensitivity to
sunlight (a common cause of DNA damage) and exhibit a
high incidence of cancer. Depending on the severity of the
defect in TFIIH function, these individuals may suffer from
diseases such as xeroderma pigmentosum and Cockayne’s
syndrome (Chapter 23). ❚

3

In Vivo Transcription Initiation by Pol II Requires
Additional Proteins

CTD

4

TFIIE

TFIIH

5

Preinitiation
complex

NTPs

ATP
6

 FIGURE 11-27 In vitro assembly of RNA polymerase II

ADP

Nascent
RNA
Release of
general factors,
except TBP

Although the general transcription factors discussed above
allow Pol II to initiate transcription in vitro, another general
transcription factor, TFIIA, is required for initiation by Pol II
in vivo. Purified TFIIA forms a complex with TBP and
TATA-box DNA. X-ray crystallography of this complex
shows that TFIIA interacts with the side of TBP that is upstream from the direction of transcription. Biochemical experiments suggest that in cells of higher eukaryotes TFIIA
and TFIID, with its multiple TAF subunits, bind first to
TATA-box DNA and then the other general transcription
factors subsequently bind as indicated in Figure 11-27.
The TAF subunits of TFIID appear to play a role in initiating transcription from promoters that lack a TATA box.
For instance, some TAF subunits contact the initiator element in promoters where it occurs, probably explaining how
such sequences can replace a TATA box. Additional TFIID
TAF subunits can bind to a consensus sequence A/G-G-A/ TC-G-T-G centered ≈30 base pairs downstream from the tran-

P P
P P P

Elongating
Pol II with
phosphorylated
CTD

preinitiation complex. The indicated general transcription factors
and purified RNA polymerase II (Pol II) bind sequentially to TATAbox DNA to form a preinitiation complex. ATP hydrolysis then
provides the energy for unwinding of DNA at the start site by a
TFIIH subunit. As Pol II initiates transcription in the resulting
open complex, the polymerase moves away from the promoter
and its CTD becomes phosphorylated. In vitro, the general
transcription factors (except for TBP) dissociate from the TBPpromoter complex, but it is not yet known which factors remain
associated with promoter regions following each round of
transcription initiation in vivo.

11.5 • Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription Activation and Repression

scription start site in many genes that lack a TATA-box promoter. Because of its position, this regulatory sequence is
called the downstream promoter element (DPE). The DPE
facilitates transcription of TATA-less genes that contain it
by increasing TFIID binding.
In addition to general transcription factors, specific activators and repressors regulate transcription of genes by Pol
II. In the next section we will examine how these regulatory
proteins influence Pol II transcription initiation.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 11.4
Transcription Initiation by RNA Polymerase II
Transcription of protein-coding genes by Pol II can be
initiated in vitro by sequential binding of the following in
the indicated order: TBP, which binds to TATA-box DNA;
TFIIB; a complex of Pol II and TFIIF; TFIIE; and finally
TFIIH (see Figure 11-27).

■

The helicase activity of a TFIIH subunit separates the
template strands at the start site in most promoters, a
process that requires hydrolysis of ATP. As Pol II begins
transcribing away from the start site, its CTD is phosphorylated by another TFIIH subunit.

■

In vivo transcription initiation by Pol II also requires
TFIIA and, in metazoans, a complete TFIID protein, including its multiple TAF subunits as well as the TBP
subunit.

■

11.5 Molecular Mechanisms of
Transcription Activation and Repression
The activators and repressors that bind to specific sites in
DNA and regulate expression of the associated proteincoding genes do so by two general mechanisms. First, these
regulatory proteins act in concert with other proteins to
modulate chromatin structure, thereby influencing the ability of general transcription factors to bind to promoters. Recall from Chapter 10 that the DNA in eukaryotic cells is not
free, but is associated with a roughly equal mass of protein in
the form of chromatin. The basic structural unit of chromatin is the nucleosome, which is composed of ≈147 base
pairs of DNA wrapped tightly around a disk-shaped core of
histone proteins. Residues within the N-terminal region of
each histone, and the C-terminal region of histone H2A,
called histone tails, extend from the surface of the nucleosome, and can be reversibly modified (see Figure 10-20).
Such modifications, especially the acetylation of histone H3
and H4 tails, influence the relative condensation of chromatin and thus its accessibility to proteins required for transcription initiation. In addition to their role in such
chromatin-mediated transcriptional control, activators and
repressors interact with a large multiprotein complex called
the mediator of transcription complex, or simply mediator.

471

This complex in turn binds to Pol II and directly regulates assembly of transcription preinitiation complexes.
In this section, we review current understanding of how
activators and repressors control chromatin structure and
preinitiation complex assembly. In the next section of the
chapter, we discuss how the concentrations and activities of
activators and repressors themselves are controlled, so that
gene expression is precisely attuned to the needs of the cell
and organism.

Formation of Heterochromatin Silences Gene
Expression at Telomeres, near Centromeres,
and in Other Regions
For many years it has been clear that inactive genes in eukaryotic cells are often associated with heterochromatin, regions of chromatin that are more highly condensed and stain
more darkly with DNA dyes than euchromatin, where most
transcribed genes are located (see Figure 5-25). Regions of
chromosomes near the centromeres and telomeres and additional specific regions that vary in different cell types are organized into heterochromatin. The DNA in heterochromatin
is less accessible to externally added proteins than DNA in
euchromatin, and consequently often referred to as “closed”
chromatin. For instance, in an experiment described in the
last chapter, the DNA of inactive genes was found to be far
more resistant to digestion by DNase I than the DNA of
transcribed genes (see Figure 10-22).
Study of DNA regions in S. cerevisiae that behave like the
heterochromatin of higher eukaryotes provided early insight
into the chromatin-mediated repression of transcription.
This yeast can grow either as haploid or diploid cells. Haploid cells exhibit one of two possible mating types, called a
and . Cells of different mating type can “mate,” or fuse, to
generate a diploid cell (see Figure 1-5). When a haploid cell
divides by budding, the larger “mother” cell switches its mating type (see Figure 22-21). Genetic and molecular analyses
have revealed that three genetic loci on yeast chromosome III
control the mating type of yeast cells (Figure 11-28). Only
the central mating-type locus, termed MAT, is actively transcribed. How the proteins encoded at the MAT locus determine whether a cell has the a or  phenotype is explained in
Chapter 22. The two additional loci, termed HML and
HMR, near the left and right telomere, respectively, contain
“silent” (nontranscribed) copies of the a or  genes. These
sequences are transferred alternately from HML or HMRa
into the MAT locus by a type of nonreciprocal recombination between sister chromatids during cell division. When the
MAT locus contains the DNA sequence from HML, the
cells behave as  cells. When the MAT locus contains the
DNA sequence from HMRa, the cells behave like a cells.
Our interest here is how transcription of the silent matingtype loci at HML and HMR are repressed. If the genes at
these loci are expressed, as they are in yeast mutants with defects in the repressing mechanism, both a and  proteins are
expressed, causing the cells to behave like diploid cells,

472

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
Yeast chromosome III
Centromere

Silencer
Telomere

Silencer


a

HML 

Telomere

HMRa

MATa or 

 sequences at MAT locus

2

1

a sequences at MAT locus

a1

▲ FIGURE 11-28 Arrangement of mating-type loci on
chromosome III in the yeast S. cerevisiae. Silent (unexpressed)
mating-type genes (either a or , depending on the strain) are
located at the HML locus. The opposite mating-type genes are
present at the silent HMR locus. When the  or a sequences are
present at the MAT locus, they can be transcribed into mRNAs

whose encoded proteins specify the mating-type phenotype of
the cell. The silencer sequences near HML and HMR bind
proteins that are critical for repression of these silent loci.
Haploid cells can switch mating types in a process that transfers
the DNA sequence from HML or HMR to the transcriptionally
active MAT locus.

which cannot mate. The promoters and UASs controlling
transcription of the a and  genes lie near the center of the
DNA sequence that is transferred and are identical whether
the sequences are at the MAT locus or at one of the silent
loci. Consequently, the function of the transcription factors
that interact with these sequences is somehow blocked at
HML and HMR. This repression of the silent loci depends
on silencer sequences located next to the region of transferred DNA at HML and HMR (see Figure 11-28). If the silencer is deleted, the adjacent silent locus is transcribed.
Remarkably, any gene placed near the yeast mating-type silencer sequence by recombinant DNA techniques is repressed, or “silenced,” even a tRNA gene transcribed by
RNA polymerase III, which uses a different set of general
transcription factors than RNA polymerase II uses.
Several lines of evidence indicate that repression of the
HML and HMR loci results from a condensed chromatin
structure that sterically blocks transcription factors from interacting with the DNA. In one telling experiment, the gene
encoding an E. coli enzyme that methylates adenine residues
in GATC sequences was introduced into yeast cells under the
control of a yeast promoter so that the enzyme was expressed. Researchers found that GATC sequences within the
MAT locus and most other regions of the genome in these
cells were methylated, but not those within the HML and
HMR loci. These results indicate that the DNA of the silent
loci is inaccessible to the E. coli methylase and presumably to
proteins in general, including transcription factors and RNA
polymerase. Similar experiments conducted with various
yeast histone mutants indicated that specific interactions involving the histone tails of H3 and H4 are required for formation of a fully repressing chromatin structure. Other
studies have shown that the telomeres of every yeast chromosome also behave like silencer sequences. For instance,

when a gene is placed within a few kilobases of any yeast
telomere, its expression is repressed. In addition, this repression is relieved by the same mutations in the H3 and
H4 histone tails that interfere with repression at the silent
mating-type loci.
Genetic studies led to identification of several proteins,
RAP1 and three SIR proteins, that are required for repression
of the silent mating-type loci and the telomeres in yeast.
RAP1 was found to bind within the DNA silencer sequences
associated with HML and HMR and to a sequence that is repeated multiple times at each yeast chromosome telomere.
Further biochemical studies showed that the SIR proteins
bind to one another and that two bind to the N-terminal tails
of histones H3 and H4 that are maintained in a largely
unacetylated state by the deacetylase activity of SIR2. Several
experiments using fluorescence confocal microscopy of yeast
cells either stained with fluorescent-labeled antibody to any
one of the SIR proteins or RAP1 or hybridized to a labeled
telomere-specific DNA probe revealed that these proteins form
large, condensed telomeric nucleoprotein structures resembling the heterochromatin found in higher eukaryotes (Figure
11-29). Figure 11-30 depicts a model for the chromatinmediated silencing at yeast telomeres based on these and
other studies. Formation of heterochromatin at telomeres is
nucleated by multiple RAP1 proteins bound to repeated sequences in a nucleosome-free region at the extreme end of a
telomere. A network of protein-protein interactions involving telomere- bound RAP1, three SIR proteins (2, 3, and 4),
and hypo-acetylated histones H3 and H4 creates a stable,
higher-order nucleoprotein complex that includes several
telomeres and in which the DNA is largely inaccessible to external proteins. One additional protein, SIR1, is also required for silencing of the silent mating-type loci. Although
the function of SIR1 is not yet well understood, it is known

11.5 • Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription Activation and Repression
(b) Telomeres

(a) Nuclei and telomeres

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-29 Antibody and DNA
probes colocalize SIR3 protein with telomeric
heterochromatin in yeast nuclei. (a) Confocal micrograph
0.3 m thick through three diploid yeast cells, each containing
68 telomeres. Telomeres were labeled by hybridization to a
fluorescent telomere-specific probe (yellow). DNA was stained
red to reveal the nuclei. The 68 telomeres coalesce into a much
smaller number of regions near the nuclear periphery. (b, c)

Hypoacetylated histone
N-terminal tails

RAP1

Telomeric
DNA

SIR2, 3, 4 proteins
SIR2
SIR3

SIR4

Nucleosomes condense
and multiple telomeres
associate

473

(c) SIR3 protein

Confocal micrographs of yeast cells labeled with a telomerespecific hybridization probe (b) and a fluorescent-labeled antibody
specific for SIR3 (c). Note that SIR3 is localized in the repressed
telomeric heterochromatin. Similar experiments with RAP1, SIR2,
and SIR4 have shown that these proteins also colocalize with the
repressed telomeric heterochromatin. [From M. Gotta et al., 1996,
J. Cell Biol. 134:1349; courtesy of M. Gotta, T. Laroche, and S. M. Gasser.]

to associate with the silencer region, where it is thought to
cause further assembly of the multiprotein telomeric silencing complex so that it spreads farther from the end of the
chromosome, encompassing HML and HMR.
An important feature of this model is the dependence of
silencing on hypoacetylation of the histone tails. This was
shown in experiments with yeast mutants expressing histones in which lysines in histone N-termini were substituted
with arginines or glutamines. Arginine is positively charged
like lysine, but cannot be acetylated. It is thought to function
in histone N-terminal tails like an unacetylated lysine. Glutamine on the other hand simulates an acetylated lysine. Repression at telomeres and at the silent mating-type loci was
defective in the mutants with glutamine substitutions, but
not in mutants with arginine substitutions. Hyperacetylation
of the H3 and H4 tails subsequently was found to interfere
with binding by SIR3 and SIR4.
Although chromatin-mediated repression of transcription
is also important in multicellular eukaryotes, the mechanism
of this repression is still being worked out. Genetic and

 FIGURE 11-30 Schematic model of silencing mechanism
at yeast telomeres. Multiple copies of RAP1 bind to a simple
repeated sequence at each telomere region, which lacks
nucleosomes (top ). This nucleates the assembly of a multiprotein
complex (bottom ) through protein-protein interactions between
RAP1, SIR2, SIR3, SIR4, and the hypoacetylated N-terminal tails
of histones H3 and H4 of nearby nucleosomes. SIR2 deacetylates
the histone tails. The heterochromatin structure at each telomere
encompasses ≈4 kb of DNA neighboring the RAP1-binding sites,
irrespective of its sequence. Association of several condensed
telomeres forms higher-order heterochromatin complexes, such as
those shown in Figure 11-29, that sterically block other proteins
from interacting with the DNA. See the text for more details.
[Adapted from M. Grunstein, 1997, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9:383.]

474

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

biochemical analyses in Drosophila have revealed that multiple proteins associated in large multiprotein complexes participate in the process. These Polycomb complexes are
discussed further in Chapter 15. As in the case of SIR proteins binding to yeast telomeres (see Figure 11-29), these
Drosophila Polycomb proteins can be visualized binding to
the genes they repress at multiple, specific locations in the
genome by in situ binding of specific-labeled antibodies to
salivary gland polytene chromosomes.

Repressors Can Direct Histone Deacetylation
at Specific Genes
The importance of histone deacetylation in chromatinmediated gene repression has been further supported by
studies of eukaryotic repressors that regulate genes at internal chromosomal positions. These proteins are now known
to act in part by causing deacetylation of histone tails in nucleosomes that bind to the TATA box and promoter-proximal region of the genes they repress. In vitro studies have shown
that when promoter DNA is assembled onto a nucleosome
with unacetylated histones, the general transcription factors
cannot bind to the TATA box and initiation region. In un-

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-31
The chromatin immunoprecipitation
method can reveal the acetylation state
of histones in chromatin. Histones are
lightly cross-linked to DNA in vivo using a
cell-permeable, reversible, chemical crosslinking agent. Nucleosomes with acetylated
histone tails are shown in green. Step 1 :
Cross-linked chromatin is then isolated and
sheared to an average length of two to
three nucleosomes. Step 2 : An antibody
against a particular acetylated histone tail
sequence is added, and (step 3 ) bound
nucleosomes are immunoprecipitated.
Step 4 : DNA in the immunoprecipitated
chromatin fragments is released by
reversing the cross-link and then is
quantitated using a sensitive PCR method.
The method can be used to analyze the
in vivo association of any protein with a
specific sequence of DNA by using an
antibody against the protein of interest
in step 2 . [See S. E. Rundlett et al., 1998,

acetylated histones, the N-terminal lysines are positively
charged and interact strongly with DNA phosphates. The
unacetylated histone tails also interact with neighboring histone octamers, favoring the folding of chromatin into condensed, higher-order structures whose precise conformation
is not well understood. The net effect is that general transcription factors cannot assemble into a preinitiation complex on a promoter associated with hypoacetylated histones.
In contrast, binding of general transcription factors is repressed much less by histones with hyperacetylated tails in
which the positively charged lysines are neutralized and electrostatic interactions with DNA phosphates are eliminated.
The connection between histone deacetylation and repression of transcription at nearby yeast promoters became
clearer when the cDNA encoding a human histone deacetylase was found to have high homology to the yeast RPD3
gene, known to be required for the normal repression of a
number of yeast genes. Further work showed that RPD3 protein has histone deacetylase activity. The ability of RPD3 to
deacetylate histones at a number of promoters depends on
two other proteins: UME6, a repressor that binds to a specific upstream regulatory sequence (URS1), and SIN3, which
is part of a large, multiprotein complex that also contains

Cross-linked
chromatin

1

Isolate and shear chromatin mechanically

2

Add antibody specific for acetylated N-terminal
histone tail
Antibody against
acetylated histone
N-terminal tail
Nucleosome with
acetylated histone
tails

3

Immunoprecipitate

4

Release immunoprecipitated
DNA and assay by PCR

Nature 392:831.]

11.5 • Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription Activation and Repression

 FIGURE 11-32 Proposed mechanism

(a) Repressor-directed histone deacetylation
= Acetyl group
Rpd3

Deacetylation of histone
N-terminal tails

Sin3
RD

Ume6
DBD

URS1

Histone
N-terminal
tail
(b) Activator-directed histone hyperacetylation

Gcn5

475

Hyperacetylation of histone
N-terminal tails

AD

Gcn4
DBD

UAS

RPD3. SIN3 also binds to the repression domain of UME6,
thus positioning the RPD3 histone deacetylase in the complex so it can interact with nearby promoter-associated nucleosomes and remove acetyl groups from histone N-terminal
lysines. Additional experiments, using the chromatin immunoprecipitation technique outlined in Figure 11-31,
demonstrated that in wild-type yeast, one or two nucleosomes
in the immediate vicinity of UME6-binding sites are hypoacetylated. These DNA regions include the promoters of
genes repressed by UME6. In sin3 and rpd3 deletion mutants,
not only were these promoters derepressed, but the nucleosomes near the UME6-binding sites were hyperacetylated.
All these findings provide considerable support for the
model of repressor-directed deacetylation shown in Figure
11-32a. In this model, the SIN3-RPD3 complex functions as
a co-repressor. Co-repressor complexes containing histone
deacetylases also have been found associated with many repressors from mammalian cells. Some of these complexes
contain the mammalian homolog of SIN3 (mSin3), which
interacts with the repressor protein. Other histone deacetylase complexes identified in mammalian cells appear to contain additional or different repressor-binding proteins.
These various repressor and co-repressor combinations are
thought to mediate histone deacetylation at specific promoters by a mechanism similar to the yeast mechanism (see

of histone deacetylation and
hyperacetylation in yeast transcription
control. (a) Repressor-directed deacetylation
of histone N-terminal tails. The DNA-binding
domain (DBD) of the repressor UME6
interacts with a specific upstream control
element (URS1) of the genes it regulates.
The UME6 repression domain (RD) binds
SIN3, a subunit of a multiprotein complex
that includes RPD3, a histone deacetylase.
Deacetylation of histone N-terminal tails on
nucleosomes in the region of the UME6binding site inhibits binding of general
transcription factors at the TATA box, thereby
repressing gene expression. (b) Activatordirected hyperacetylation of histone
N-terminal tails. The DNA-binding domain of
the activator GCN4 interacts with specific
upstream activating sequences (UAS) of the
genes it regulates. The GCN4 activation
domain (AD) then interacts with a
multiprotein histone acetylase complex
that includes the GCN5 catalytic subunit.
Subsequent hyperacetylation of histone Nterminal tails on nucleosomes in the vicinity
of the GCN4-binding site facilitates access
of the general transcription factors required
for initiation. Repression and activation of
many genes in higher eukaryotes occurs
by similar mechanisms.

Figure 11-32a). However, the observation that a number of
eukaryotic repressor proteins inhibit in vitro transcription
in the absence of histones indicates that more direct repression mechanisms, not involving histone deacetylation, also
operate.
The discovery of mSin3-containing histone deacetylase
complexes provides an explanation for earlier observations
that in vertebrates transcriptionally inactive DNA regions
often contain the modified cytidine residue 5-methylcytidine
(mC) followed immediately by a G, whereas transcriptionally active DNA regions lack mC residues. DNA containing
5-methylcytidine has been found to bind a specific protein
that in turn interacts specifically with mSin3. This finding
suggests that association of mSin3-containing co-repressors
with methylated sites in DNA leads to deacetylation of histones in neighboring nucleosomes, making these regions inaccessible to general transcription factors and Pol II, and
hence transcriptionally inactive.

Activators Can Direct Histone Acetylation
at Specific Genes
Genetic and biochemical studies in yeast led to discovery of
a large multiprotein complex containing the protein GCN5,
which has histone acetylase activity. Another subunit of this

476

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

histone acetylase complex binds to acidic activation domains
in yeast activator proteins such as GCN4. Maximal transcription activation by GCN4 depends on these histone
acetylase complexes, which thus function as co-activators.
The model shown in Figure 11-32b is consistent with the observation that nucleosomes near the promoter region of a
gene regulated by the GCN4 activator are specifically hyperacetylated, as determined by the chromatin immunoprecipitation method. The activator-directed hyperacetylation of
nucleosomes near a promoter region changes (“opens”) the
chromatin structure so as to facilitate the binding of other
proteins required for transcription initiation.
A similar activation mechanism operates in higher eukaryotes. For example, mammals express two related ≈400-kD,
multidomain proteins called CBP and P300, which are
thought to function similarly. As noted earlier, one domain of
CBP binds the phosphorylated acidic activation domain in
the CREB transcription factor. Other domains of CBP interact with different activation domains in other transcription
factors. Yet another domain of CBP has histone acetylase activity, and another CBP domain associates with a multiprotein histone acetylase complex that is homologous to the
yeast GCN5-containing complex. CREB and many other
mammalian activators are thought to function in part by directing CBP and the associated histone acetylase complex to
specific nucleosomes, where they acetylate histone tails, facilitating the interaction of general transcription factors with
promoter DNA. In addition, the largest TFIID subunit also
has histone acetylase activity and may function as a coactivator by acetylating histone N-terminal tails in the vicinity of the TATA box.

Modifications of Specific Residues in Histone
Tails Control Chromatin Condensation
In addition to reversible acetylation, histone tails in chromatin can undergo reversible phosphorylation of serine and
threonine residues, reversible monoubiquitination of a lysine
residue in the H2A C-terminal tail, and irreversible methy-

Euchromatin (active/open)
Ac P

Ac

H3 AR TKQTARK STGGK APRKQL
9 10

Ac

14

Ac Me

H4 SGRGKGGKGLGKGGAKRHRK
3

Chromatin-Remodeling Factors Help Activate
or Repress Some Genes
In addition to histone acetylase complexes, another type of
multiprotein complex, called the SWI/SNF chromatinremodeling complex, is required for activation at some yeast
promoters. Several of the SWI/SNF subunits have homology
to DNA helicases, enzymes that use energy from ATP hydrolysis to disrupt interactions between base-paired nucleic
acids or between nucleic acids and proteins. The SWI/SNF
complex is thought to transiently dissociate DNA from the
surface of nucleosomes, permitting nucleosomes to “slide”
along the DNA and promoting the unfolding of condensed,

Heterochromatin (inactive/condensed)
P

P

H3 AR TKQT ARK STGGK APRKQL

14

Me

H3 AR TKQTARK STGGK APRKQL
4

lation of lysine residues. Evidence is accumulating that it is
not simply the overall level of histone acetylation that controls the condensation of chromatin and hence the accessibility of DNA. Rather the precise amino acids in the tails that
are acetylated or otherwise modified may constitute a “histone code” that helps control the condensation of chromatin
(Figure 11-33). For instance, the lysine at position 9 in histone H3 often is methylated in heterochromatin.
The histone code is “read” by proteins that bind to these
specific modifications and in turn promote condensation or
decondensation of chromatin, forming “closed” or “open”
chromatin structures. For example, higher eukaryotes express a number of heterochromatin-associated proteins containing a so-called chromodomain, which binds to the
histone H3 tail when it is methylated at lysine 9. These proteins are postulated to contribute to the higher-order folding characteristic of heterochromatin, somewhat like the SIR
proteins at yeast telomeres (see Figure 11-30). Alternatively,
the bromodomain found in a number of euchromatinassociated proteins binds to acetylated histone tails. The
largest subunit of TFIID, for example, contains two closely
spaced bromodomains, which may help it to associate with
chromatin containing an active code, while the histone acetylase activity of this same subunit maintains the chromatin in
a hyperacetylated state.

5

▲ FIGURE 11-33 Examples of the histone code. Specific
post-translational modifications of the N-terminal tails in histones
H3 and H4 are found in euchromatin, which is accessible to
proteins and transcriptionally active. Different modifications are
found in heterochromatin, which is condensed and thus largely

10

CENP-A MGPRRRSRKPE AP R RRSPSP
7

Me

Ac

H3 AR TKQT ARK STGGK APRKQL
9

H4 SGRGKGGKGLGKGGAKRHRK
12

inaccessible to proteins and transcriptionally inactive. Histone tail
sequences are shown in the one-letter amino acid code. CENP-A
is a variant form for H3 found in nucleosomes associated with
the centromeres of mammalian chromosomes. [Adapted from
T. Jenuwein and C. D. Allis, 2001, Science 293:1074.]

11.5 • Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription Activation and Repression
(a)

(b)

477

folding of chromatin into condensed, higher-order structures.
Much remains to be learned about how this important class
of co-activators and co-repressors alters chromatin structure
to influence gene expression.

The Mediator Complex Forms a Molecular Bridge
Between Activation Domains and Pol II
Still another type of co-activator, the multiprotein mediator
complex, assists more directly in assembly of Pol II preinitiation complexes (Figure 11-35). Some of the ≈20 mediator
subunits binds to RNA polymerase II, and other mediator
subunits bind to activation domains in various activator proteins. Thus mediator can form a molecular bridge between

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-34 Expression of fusion
proteins demonstrates chromatin decondensation in
response to an activation domain. A cultured hamster cell line
was engineered to contain multiple copies of a tandem array of
E. coli lac operator sequences integrated into a chromosome in a
region of heterochromatin. (a) When an expression vector for the
lac repressor was transfected into these cells, lac repressors
bound to the lac operator sites could be visualized in a region of
condensed chromatin using an antibody against the lac repressor
(red). DNA was visualized by staining with DAPI (blue), revealing
the nucleus. (b) When an expression vector for the lac repressor
fused to an activation domain was transfected into these cells,
staining as in (a) revealed that the activation domain causes this
region of chromatin to decondense into a thinner chromatin fiber
that fills a much larger volume of the nucleus. Bar
1 µm.
[Courtesy of Andrew S. Belmont, 1999, J. Cell Biol. 145:1341.]

(a) Yeast mediator−Pol II complex

Mediator

Pol II

(b) Human mediator
TRAP240

TRAP230

higher-order chromatin structures. The net result of such
chromatin remodeling is to facilitate the binding of transcription factors to DNA in chromatin. Some activation domains have been shown to bind to the SWI/SNF complex,
and this binding stimulates in vitro transcription from chromatin templates (DNA bound to nucleosomes). Thus the
SWI/SNF complex represents another type of co-activator
complex. Other multi-protein complexes with similar
chromatin-remodeling activities have been identified in yeast,
raising the possibility that different chromatin-remodeling
complexes may be required by distinct families of activators
(see chapter opening figure).
Higher eukaryotes also contain multiprotein complexes
with homology to the yeast SWI/SNF complex. These complexes isolated from nuclear extracts of mammalian and
Drosophila cells have been found to assist binding of transcription factors to their cognate sites in nucleosomal DNA
in an ATP-requiring process. The experiment shown in Figure
11-34 dramatically demonstrates how an activation domain
can cause decondensation of a region of chromatin. This is
thought to result from the interaction of the activation domain
with chromatin remodeling and histone acetylase complexes.
Surprisingly, SWI/SNF complexes are also required for
the repression of some genes, perhaps because they help expose histone tails to deacetylases or because they assist in the

TRAP80

p22

p37
p24
TRAP220

TRAP95

NUT2

TRAP97
SRB11/
cyc C

TRFP

SRB7 p12

SUR2

MED7
TRAP170/RGR1

TRAP93
p78
p36

SRB10/
CDK8

MED6

SOH1

TRAP100

▲ FIGURE 11-35 Structure of yeast and human mediator
complexes. (a) Reconstructed image of mediator from S.
cerevisiae bound to Pol II. Multiple electron microscopy images
were aligned and computer-processed to produce this average
image in which the three-dimensional Pol II structure (light blue)
is shown associated with the yeast mediator complex (dark blue).
(b) Diagrammatic representation of mediator subunits from
human cells. Subunits shown in the same color are thought to
form a module. Subunits in orange, yellow, and green are
homologous with subunits in the yeast mediator complex.
Genetic studies in yeast show that mutations in one of the
subunits in a module inhibit the association of other subunits in
the same module with the rest of the complex. [Part (a) courtesy
of Francisco J. Asturias, 2002, Mol. Cell 10:409. Part (b) adapted from
S. Malik and R. G. Roeder, 2000, Trends Biochem. Sci. 25:277.]

478

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

an activator bound to its cognate site in DNA and Pol II at
a promoter. In addition, one of the mediator subunits has histone acetylase activity and may function to maintain a promoter region in a hyperacetylated state.
Experiments with temperature-sensitive yeast mutants
indicate that some mediator subunits are required for transcription of virtually all yeast genes. These subunits most
likely help maintain the overall structure of the mediator
complex or bind to Pol II and therefore are required for activation by all activators. In contrast, other mediator subunits are required for activation of specific subsets of genes.
DNA microarray analysis of gene expression in mutants
with defects in these mediator subunits indicates that each
such subunit influences transcription of ≈3–10 percent
of all genes (see Figure 9-35 for DNA microarray technique).These mediator subunits are thought to interact with
specific activation domains; thus when one subunit is defective, transcription of genes regulated by activators that
bind to that subunit is severely depressed but transcription
of other genes is unaffected. Consistent with this explanation are binding studies showing that some activation domains do indeed interact with specific mediator subunits.
Large mediator complexes, isolated from cultured mammalian cells, are required for mammalian activators to stimulate transcription by Pol II in vitro. Since genes encoding
homologs of the mammalian mediator subunits have been
identified in the genome sequences of C. elegans and
Drosophila, it appears that most multicellular animals
(metazoans) have homologous mediator complexes. About
one third of the metazoan mediator subunits are clearly homologous to yeast mediator subunits (see Figure 11-35b).
But the remaining subunits, which appear to be distinct from
any yeast proteins, may interact with activation domains that

DNA-binding
domain
Activator
domain

Mediator

TAFs
TFIIE
TFIIF
TFIIH

TBP

TFIIB

Pol II

▲ FIGURE 11-36 Model of several DNA-bound activators
interacting with a single mediator complex. The ability of
different mediator subunits to interact with specific activation
domains may contribute to the integration of signals from several
activators at a single promoter. See the text for discussion.

are not found in yeast. As with yeast mediator, some of the
mammalian mediator subunits have been shown to interact
with specific activation domains. For example, the Sur2 subunit of mammalian mediator binds to the activation domain
of a TCF transcription factor that controls expression of the
EGR-1 gene (see Figure 11-19). The function of this TCF activator in vivo normally is regulated in response to specific
protein hormones present in serum. Mouse embryonic stem
cells with a knockout of the sur2 gene fail to induce expression of EGR-1 protein in response to serum, whereas multiple other activators function normally in the mutant cells.
This finding implicates the mediator Sur2 subunit in the
activating function of TCF.
The various experimental results indicating that individual mediator subunits bind to specific activation domains
suggest that multiple activators influence transcription from
a single promoter by interacting with a mediator complex simultaneously (Figure 11-36). Activators bound at enhancers
or promoter-proximal elements can interact with mediator
associated with a promoter because DNA is flexible and can
form a loop bringing the regulatory regions and the promoter close together. Such loops have been observed in experiments with the E. coli NtrC activator and 54-RNA
polymerase (see Figure 4-17). The multiprotein nucleoprotein complexes that form on eukaryotic promoters may
comprise as many as 100 polypeptides with a total mass of
≈3 megadaltons (MDa), as large as a ribosome.

Transcription of Many Genes Requires Ordered
Binding of Activators and Action of Co-Activators
We can now extend the model of Pol II transcription initiation in Figure 11-27 to take into account the role of activators and co-activators. These accessory proteins function not
only to make genes within nucleosomal DNA accessible to
general transcription factors and Pol II but also directly recruit Pol II to promoter regions.
Recent studies have analyzed the order in which activators bind to a transcription-control region and interact with
co-activators as a gene is induced. Such studies show that
assembly of preinitiation complexes depends on multiple
protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions, as illustrated
in Figure 11-37 depicting activation of the yeast HO gene.
This gene encodes a sequence-specific nuclease that initiates
mating-type switching in haploid yeast cells (see Figure
11-28). Activation of the HO gene begins with binding of
the SWI5 activator to an upstream enhancer. Bound SWI5
then interacts with the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex and GCN5-containing histone acetylase complex.
Once the chromatin in the HO control region is decondensed and hyperacetylated, a second activator, SBF, can
bind to several sites in the promoter-proximal region. Subsequent binding of the mediator complex by SBF then leads
to assembly of the transcription preinitiation complex containing Pol II and the general transcription factors shown
in Figure 11-36.

11.5 • Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription Activation and Repression

479

 FIGURE 11-37 Ordered binding and interaction of

Condensed
chromatin

activators and co-activators leading to transcription of the
yeast HO gene. Step 1 : Initially, the HO gene is packaged into
condensed chromatin. Activation begins when the SWI5 activator
binds to enhancer sites 1200–1400 base pairs upstream of the
start site and interacts with the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex. Step 2 : The SWI/SNF complex acts to decondense the
chromatin, thereby exposing histone tails. Step 3 : A GCN5containing histone acetylase complex associates with bound
SWI5 and acetylates histone tails in the HO locus as SWI/SNF
continues to decondense adjacent chromatin. Step 4 : SWI5 is
released from the DNA, but the SWI/SNF and GCN5 complexes
remain associated with the HO control region (in the case of
GCN5, by poorly understood interactions). Their action allows the
SBF activator to bind several sites in the promoter-proximal
region. Step 5 : SBF then binds the mediator complex. Step 6 :
Subsequent binding of Pol II and general transcription factors
results in assembly of a transcription preinitiation complex whose
components are detailed in Figure 11-37. [Adapted from C. J. Fry and

1
SWI5
SWI/
SNF

2
GCN5

C. L. Peterson, 2001, Curr. Biol. 11:R185. See also M. P. Cosma et al.,
1999, Cell 97:299, and M. P. Cosma et al., 2001, Mol. Cell 7:1213.]

3

ated by several activators. This allows genes to be regulated
in a cell-type-specific manner by specific combinations of
transcription factors. The TTR gene, which encodes
transthyretin in mammals, is a good example of this. As
noted earlier, transthyretin is expressed in hepatocytes and
in choroid plexus cells. Transcription of the TTR gene in hepatocytes is controlled by at least five different transcriptional activators (Figure 11-38). Even though three of these
activators—HNF4, C/EBP, and AP1— are also expressed in
cells of the intestine and kidney, TTR transcription does not
occur in these cells, because all five activators are required
but HNF1 and HNF3 are missing. Other hepatocyte-

4
SBF

5

Mediator

6

Enhancer

Preinitiation
complex

Promoter-proximal region
TATA
box

−1.96 kb

−1.86

−200 bp

−100

Activators
HNF1
HNF3

C/EBP
Expressed only
in hepatocytes

HNF4

Expressed in
other cells

AP1

We can now see that the assembly of a preinitiation complex and stimulation of transcription at a promoter results
from the interaction of several activators with various multiprotein co-activator complexes. These include chromatinremodeling complexes, histone acetylase complexes, and a
mediator complex. While much remains to be learned about
these processes, it is clear that the net result of these multiple molecular events is that activation of transcription at a
promoter depends on highly cooperative interactions initi-

▲ FIGURE 11-38 Transcription-control region of the mouse
transthyretin (TTR ) gene. Binding sites for the five activators
required for transcription of TTR in hepatocytes are indicated.
The complete set of activators is expressed at the required
concentrations to stimulate transcription only in hepatocytes.
A different set of activators stimulates transcription in choroid
plexus cells. [See R. Costa et al., 1989, Mol. Cell Biol. 9:1415, and
K. Xanthopoulus et al., 1989, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 86:4117.]

480

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

specific enhancers and promoter-proximal regions that regulate additional genes expressed only in hepatocytes contain
binding sites for other specific combinations of transcription
factors found only in these cells, together with those expressed unbiquitously.

(a) Hybrid proteins
DNA-binding
domain

Bait
domain

Activation
domain

Fish domain

Bait hybrid

Fish hybrid

(b) Transcriptional activation by hybrid proteins in yeast
HIS gene

UAS

Transfect yeast cells
with genes encoding
bait and fish hybrids
Co-activators and
transcription preinitiation complex

The Yeast Two-Hybrid System Exploits Activator
Flexibility to Detect cDNAs That Encode
Interacting Proteins
A powerful molecular genetic method called the yeast twohybrid system exploits the flexibility in activator structures
to identify genes whose products bind to a specific protein of
interest. Because of the importance of protein-protein interactions in virtually every biological process, the yeast twohybrid system is used widely in biological research.
This method employs a yeast vector for expressing a
DNA-binding domain and flexible linker region without the
associated activation domain, such as the deleted GAL4 containing amino acids 1–692 (see Figure 11-17). A cDNA sequence encoding a protein or protein domain of interest,
called the bait domain, is fused in frame to the flexible linker
region so that the vector will express a hybrid protein composed of the DNA-binding domain, linker region, and bait
domain (Figure 11-39a, left). A cDNA library is cloned into
multiple copies of a second yeast vector that encodes a strong
activation domain and flexible linker, to produce a vector library expressing multiple hybrid proteins, each containing
a different fish domain (Figure 11-39a, right).
The bait vector and library of fish vectors are then transfected into engineered yeast cells in which the only copy of

HIS mRNA

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-39 The yeast two-hybrid
(c) Fishing for proteins that interact with bait domain
Fish cDNA from
library

Technique Animation: Yeast Two-Hybrid System

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Bait gene

TRP
Bait vector

LEU
Fish vector
1. Transfect into trp, leu, his
mutant yeast cells
2. Select for cells that grow in
absence of tryptophan
and leucine
3. Plate selected cells on medium
lacking histidine

Bait

Bait
hybrid

Bait

Bait
hybrid

Fish

Fish

HIS
HIS

Bait-interacting
hybrid

Colony
formation

Noninteracting
hybrid

No colony
formation

system provides a way of screening a cDNA library for
clones encoding proteins that interact with a specific protein
of interest. This is a common technique for screening a cDNA
library for clones encoding proteins that interact with a specific
protein of interest. (a) Two vectors are constructed containing
genes that encode hybrid (chimeric) proteins. In one vector (left ),
coding sequence for the DNA-binding domain of a transcription
factor is fused to the sequences for a known protein, referred to
as the “bait” domain (light blue). The second vector (right )
expresses an activation domain fused to a “fish” domain (green)
that interacts with the bait domain. (b) If yeast cells are
transformed with vectors expressing both hybrids, the bait and
fish portions of the chimeric proteins interact to produce a
functional transcriptional activator. In this example, the activator
promotes transcription of a HIS gene. One end of this protein
complex binds to the upstream activating sequence (UAS) of the
HIS3 gene; the other end, consisting of the activation domain,
stimulates assembly of the transcription preinitiation complex
(orange) at the promoter (yellow). (c) To screen a cDNA library for
clones encoding proteins that interact with a particular bait
protein of interest, the library is cloned into the vector encoding
the activation domain so that hybrid proteins are expressed. The
bait vector and fish vectors contain wild-type selectable genes
(e.g., a TRP or LEU gene). The only transformed cells that survive
the indicated selection scheme are those that express the bait
hybrid and a fish hybrid that interacts with it. See the text for
discussion. [See S. Fields and O. Song, 1989, Nature 340:245.]

11.6 • Regulation of Transcription-Factor Activity

a gene required for histidine synthesis (HIS) is under control
of a UAS with binding sites for the DNA-binding domain of
the hybrid bait protein. Transcription of the HIS gene requires activation by proteins bound to the UAS. Transformed
cells that express the bait hybrid and an interacting fish hybrid will be able to activate transcription of the HIS gene
(Figure 11-39b). This system works because of the flexibility in the spacing between the DNA-binding and activation
domains of eukaryotic activators.
A two-step selection process is used (Figure 11-39c). The
bait vector also expresses a wild-type TRP gene, and the hybrid vector expresses a wild-type LEU gene. Transfected cells
are first grown in a medium that lacks tryptophan and
leucine but contains histidine. Only cells that have taken up
the bait vector and one of the fish plasmids will survive in
this medium. The cells that survive then are plated on a
medium that lacks histidine. Those cells expressing a fish hybrid that does not bind to the bait hybrid cannot transcribe
the HIS gene and consequently will not form a colony on
medium lacking histidine. The few cells that express a baitbinding fish hybrid will grow and form colonies in the absence of histidine. Recovery of the fish vectors from these
colonies yields cDNAs encoding protein domains that interact with the bait domain.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 11.5
Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription Activation
and Repression
Eukaryotic transcription activators and repressors exert
their effects largely by binding to multisubunit co-activators
or co-repressors that influence assembly of Pol II transcription preinitiation complexes either by modulating
chromatin structure (indirect effect) or by interacting with
Pol II and general transcription factors (direct effect).

■

The DNA in condensed regions of chromatin (heterochromatin) is relatively inaccessible to transcription factors
and other proteins, so that gene expression is repressed.

■

The interactions of several proteins with each other and
with the hypoacetylated N-terminal tails of histones H3
and H4 are responsible for the chromatin-mediated repression of transcription that occurs in the telomeres and the
silent mating-type loci in S. cerevisiae. (see Figure 11-30).

■

Some repression domains function by interacting with
co-repressors that are histone deacetylase complexes. The
subsequent deacetylation of histone N-terminal tails in nucleosomes near the repressor-binding site inhibits interaction between the promoter DNA and general transcription
factors, thereby repressing transcription initiation (see Figure 11-32a).

■

Some activation domains function by binding multiprotein co-activator complexes such as histone acetylase

■

481

complexes. The subsequent hyperacetylation of histone Nterminal tails in nucleosomes near the activator-binding site
facilitates interactions between the promoter DNA and
general transcription factors, thereby stimulating transcription initiation (see Figure 11-32b).
SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling factors constitute another type of co-activator. These multisubunit complexes
can transiently dissociate DNA from histone cores in an
ATP-dependent reaction and may also decondense regions
of chromatin, thereby promoting the binding of DNAbinding proteins needed for initiation to occur at some
promoters.

■

■ Mediator, another type of co-activator, is an ≈20subunit complex that forms a molecular bridge between
activation domains and RNA polymerase II by binding directly to the polymerase and activation domains. By binding to several different activators simultaneously, mediator
probably helps integrate the effects of multiple activators
on a single promoter (see Figure 11-36).

Activators bound to a distant enhancer can interact with
transcription factors bound to a promoter because DNA
is flexible and the intervening DNA can form a large loop.

■

The highly cooperative assembly of preinitiation complexes in vivo generally requires several activators. A cell
must produce the specific set of activators required for
transcription of a particular gene in order to express that
gene.

■

The yeast two-hybrid system is widely used to detect
cDNAs encoding protein domains that bind to a specific
protein of interest (see Figure 11-39).

■

11.6 Regulation of TranscriptionFactor Activity
We have seen in the preceding discussion how combinations
of activators and repressors that bind to specific DNA regulatory sequences control transcription of eukaryotic genes.
Whether or not a specific gene in a multicellular organism is
expressed in a particular cell at a particular time is largely a
consequence of the concentrations and activities of the transcription factors that interact with the regulatory sequences of
that gene. Which transcription factors are expressed in a
particular cell type, and the amounts produced, is determined
by multiple regulatory interactions between transcriptionfactor genes that occur during the development and differentiation of a particular cell type. In Chapters 15 and 22, we
present examples of such regulatory interactions during development and discuss the principles of development and differentiation that have emerged from these examples.
Not only is the expression of transcription factors by
a cell regulated, but the activities of those factors expressed
in a particular cell type commonly are further controlled

482

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

 FIGURE 11-40 Examples of hormones that

CH2OH

bind to nuclear receptors. These and related lipidsoluble hormones bind to receptors located in the
cytosol or nucleus. The ligand-receptor complex
functions as a transcription activator.

C
HO

H3C

CH3

CH3

CH3

O
C

O
OH

OH
CH3
Retinoic acid

I

O
Cortisol

HO

I
O

NH2
CH2

CH

O
C
OH

I

I
Thyroxine

indirectly as the result of interactions between proteins on
the surfaces of neighboring cells and by extracellular hormones and growth factors. In multicellular organisms, these
latter signaling molecules are secreted from one cell type and
affect the function of cells that may be nearby or at a different location in the organism. One major group of extracellular signals comprises peptides and proteins, which bind to
receptors in the plasma membrane. Ligand binding to these
receptors triggers intracellular signal-transduction pathways.
In Chapters 14 and 15, we describe the major types of cellsurface receptors and intracellular signaling pathways that
regulate transcription-factor activity.
In this section, we discuss the second major group of extracellular signals, the small, lipid-soluble hormones—
including many different steroid hormones, retinoids, and
thyroid hormones—that can diffuse through plasma and nuclear membranes and interact directly with the transcription
factors they control (Figure 11-40). As noted earlier, the intracellular receptors for most of these lipid-soluble hormones,

which constitute the nuclear-receptor superfamily, function as
transcription activators when bound to their ligands.

All Nuclear Receptors Share a Common
Domain Structure
Cloning and sequencing of the genes encoding various nuclear receptors revealed a remarkable conservation in their
amino acid sequences and three functional regions (Figure
11-41). All the nuclear receptors have a unique N-terminal
region of variable length (100–500 amino acids). Portions
of this variable region function as activation domains in
some nuclear receptors. The DNA-binding domain maps
near the center of the primary sequence and has a repeat
of the C4 zinc-finger motif. The hormone-binding domain,
located near the C-terminal end, contains a hormonedependent activation domain. In some nuclear receptors, the
hormone-binding domain functions as a repression domain
in the absence of ligand.

1

Estrogen receptor (ER)

553

1

1

1

946

Progesterone receptor (PR)

777

Glucocorticoid receptor (GR)

408

Thyroxine receptor (TR)

1

Retinoic acid receptor (RAR)

432

N

C
Variable region
(100–500 aa)

Amino acid identity:

0

DNA-binding
domain (68 aa)

Ligand-binding
domain (225–285 aa)

42–94%

15–57%

▲ FIGURE 11-41 General design of transcription factors in
nuclear-receptor superfamily. The centrally located DNA-binding
domain exhibits considerable sequence homology among
different receptors and contains two copies of the C4 zinc-finger

General primary structure

motif. The C-terminal hormone-binding domain exhibits somewhat
less homology. The N-terminal regions in various receptors vary
in length, have unique sequences, and may contain one or more
activation domains. [See R. M. Evans, 1988, Science 240:889.]

11.6 • Regulation of Transcription-Factor Activity

Nuclear-Receptor Response Elements Contain
Inverted or Direct Repeats
The characteristic nucleotide sequences of the DNA sites,
called response elements, that bind several nuclear receptors
have been determined. The sequences of the consensus response elements for the glucocorticoid and estrogen receptors
are 6-bp inverted repeats separated by any three base pairs
(Figure 11-42a, b). This finding suggested that the cognate
steroid hormone receptors would bind to DNA as symmetrical dimers, as was later shown from the x-ray crystallographic
analysis of the homodimeric glucocorticoid receptor’s C4
zinc-finger DNA-binding domain (see Figure 11-21b).
Some nuclear-receptor response elements, such as those
for the receptors that bind vitamin D3, thyroid hormone,
and retinoic acid, are direct repeats of the same sequence
recognized by the estrogen receptor, separated by three
to five base pairs (Figure 11-42c–e). The specificity for
responding to these different hormones by binding distinct
receptors is determined by the spacing between the repeats.
The receptors that bind to such direct-repeat response elements do so as heterodimers with a common nuclearreceptor monomer called RXR. The vitamin D3 response
element, for example, is bound by the RXR-VDR heterodimer,

(a)

GRE

5 AGA A C A(N)3 T G T T C T 3
3 T C T T G T(N)3 A C A AG A 5

(b)

ERE

5 AGG T C A(N)3 T GA C C T 3
3 T C C AG T(N)3 A C T GG A 5

(c) VDRE

5 AGG T C A(N)3 AGG T C A 3
3 T C C AG T(N)3 T C C AG T 5

(d)

TRE

5 AGG T C A(N)4 AGG T C A 3
3 T C C AG T(N)4 T C C AG T 5

(e) RARE

5 AGG T C A(N)5 AGG T C A 3
3 T C C AG T(N)5 T C C AG T 5

▲ FIGURE 11-42 Consensus sequences of DNA response
elements that bind three nuclear receptors. The response
elements for the glucocorticoid receptor (GRE) and estrogen
receptor (ERE) contain inverted repeats that bind these
homodimeric proteins. The response elements for heterodimeric
receptors contain a common direct repeat separated by three to
five base pairs, for the vitamin D3 receptor (VDRE), thyroid
hormone receptor (TRE), and retinoic acid receptor (RARE). The
repeat sequences are indicated by red arrows. [See K. Umesono
et al., 1991, Cell 65:1255, and A. M. Naar et al., 1991, Cell 65:1267.]

483

and the retinoic acid response element is bound by RXR-RAR.
The monomers composing these heterodimers interact with
each other in such a way that the two DNA-binding domains
lie in the same rather than inverted orientation, allowing the
RXR heterodimers to bind to direct repeats of the binding site
for each monomer. In contrast, the monomers in homodimeric
nuclear receptors (e.g., GRE and ERE) have an inverted
orientation.

Hormone Binding to a Nuclear Receptor
Regulates Its Activity as a Transcription Factor
The mechanism whereby hormone binding controls the activity of nuclear receptors differs for heterodimeric and homodimeric receptors. Heterodimeric nuclear receptors (e.g.,
RXR-VDR, RXR-TR, and RXR-RAR) are located exclusively in the nucleus. In the absence of their hormone ligand, they repress transcription when bound to their
cognate sites in DNA. They do so by directing histone
deacetylation at nearby nucleosomes by the mechanism described earlier (see Figure 11-32a). As we saw earlier, in the
presence of hormone, the ligand-binding domain of the
RAR monomer undergoes a dramatic conformational
change compared with the ligand-binding domain of a nuclear receptor in the absence of hormone (see Figure
11-25). In the ligand-bound conformation, heterodimeric
nuclear receptors containing RXR can direct hyperacetylation of histones in nearby nucleosomes, thereby reversing
the repressing effects of the free ligand-binding domain. In
the presence of ligand, ligand-binding domains of nuclear
receptors also bind mediator, stimulating preinitiation
complex assembly.
In contrast to heterodimeric nuclear receptors, homodimeric receptors are found in the cytoplasm in the absence of their ligands. Hormone binding to these receptors
leads to their translocation to the nucleus. The hormonedependent translocation of the homodimeric glucocorticoid receptor (GR) was demonstrated in the transfection
experiments shown in Figure 11-43. The GR hormonebinding domain alone mediates this transport. Subsequent
studies showed that, in the absence of hormone, GR is anchored in the cytoplasm as a large protein aggregate complexed with inhibitor proteins, including Hsp90, a protein
related to Hsp70, the major heat-shock chaperone in eukaryotic cells. As long as the receptor is confined to the cytoplasm, it cannot interact with target genes and hence
cannot activate transcription. Hormone binding to a homodimeric nuclear receptor releases the inhibitor proteins,
allowing the receptor to enter the nucleus, where it can
bind to response elements associated with target genes
(Figure 11-44). Once the receptor with bound hormone
binds to a response element, it activates transcription by
interacting with chromatin-remodeling and histone acetylase complexes and mediator.

484

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
(a)

(b)

(c)

Video: Hormone-Regulated Nuclear Translocation
of the Glucocorticoid Receptor

+ Dex

Proteins
expressed:

N

C

N

-Galactosidase

C
Glucocorticoid
receptor

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 11-43 Fusion proteins
from expression vectors demonstrate that the
hormone-binding domain of the glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) mediates translocation to the nucleus in
the presence of hormone. Cultured animal cells were
transfected with expression vectors encoding the proteins
diagrammed at the bottom. Immunofluorescence with a
labeled antibody specific for -galactosidase was used to
detect the expressed proteins in transfected cells. (a) In
cells that expressed -galactosidase alone, the enzyme

Exterior
Inhibitor
AD

DBD

LBD

DBD DBD

AD

Response element
DBD

GR

GR ligand-binding
domain

was localized to the cytoplasm in the presence and absence of the
glucocorticoid hormone dexamethasone (Dex). (b) In cells that
expressed a fusion protein consisting of -galactosidase and the
entire glucocorticoid receptor (GR), the fusion protein was present
in the cytoplasm in the absence of hormone but was transported to
the nucleus in the presence of hormone. (c) Cells that expressed a
fusion protein composed of -galactosidase and just the GR ligandbinding domain (light purple) also exhibited hormone-dependent
transport of the fusion protein to the nucleus. [From D. Picard and
K. R. Yamamoto, 1987, EMBO J. 6:3333; courtesy of the authors.]

The activities of many transcription factors are indirectly
regulated by binding of extracellular proteins and peptides
to cell-surface receptors. These receptors activate intracellular signal transduction pathways that regulate specific
transcription factors through a variety of mechanisms discussed in Chapters 13 and 14.

■

AD

AD

C

Regulation of Transcription-Factor Activity

Cytosol

LBD

GR

N

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 11.6

Hormone

LBD

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

− Dex

LBD

Nucleus

Nuclear receptors constitute a superfamily of dimeric C4
zinc-finger transcription factors that bind lipid-soluble hormones and interact with specific response elements in DNA
(see Figure 11-41).
■

Hormone binding to nuclear receptors induces conformational changes that modify their interactions with other
proteins.

■

▲ FIGURE 11-44 Model of hormone-dependent gene
activation by a homodimeric nuclear receptor. In the absence
of hormone, the receptor is kept in the cytoplasm by interaction
between its ligand-binding domain (LBD) and inhibitor proteins.
When hormone is present, it diffuses through the plasma
membrane and binds to the ligand-binding domain, causing a
conformational change that releases the receptor from the
inhibitor proteins. The receptor with bound ligand is then
translocated into the nucleus, where its DNA-binding domain
(DBD) binds to response elements, allowing the ligand-binding
domain and an additional activation domain (AD) at the
N-terminus to stimulate transcription of target genes.

Heterodimeric nuclear receptors (e.g., those for retinoids,
vitamin D, and thyroid hormone) are found only in the nucleus. In the absence of hormone, they repress transcription
of target genes with the corresponding response element.
When bound to their ligands, they activate transcription.

■

Steroid hormone receptors are homodimeric nuclear receptors. In the absence of hormone, they are trapped in
the cytoplasm by inhibitor proteins. When bound to their
ligands, they can translocate to the nucleus and activate
transcription of target genes (see Figure 11-44).

■

11.7 • Regulated Elongation and Termination of Transcription

11.7 Regulated Elongation and
Termination of Transcription
In eukaryotes, the mechanisms for terminating transcription
differ for each of the three RNA polymerases. Transcription
of pre-rRNA genes by RNA polymerase I is terminated by
a mechanism that requires a polymerase-specific termination factor. This DNA-binding protein binds to a specific
DNA sequence downstream of the transcription unit. Efficient termination requires that the termination factor bind
to the template DNA in the correct orientation. Purified
RNA polymerase III terminates after polymerizing a series
of U residues. The deoxy(A)n-ribo(U)n DNA-RNA hybrid
that results when a stretch of U’s are synthesized is particularly unstable compared with all other base-paired sequences. The ease with which this hybrid can be melted
probably contributes to the mechanism of termination by
RNA polymerase III.
In most mammalian protein-coding genes transcribed by
RNA polymerase II, once the polymerase has transcribed beyond about fifty bases, further elongation is highly processive and does not terminate until after a sequence is
transcribed that directs cleavage and polyadenylation of the
RNA at the sequence that forms the 3 end of the encoded
mRNA. RNA polymerase II then can terminate at multiple
sites located over a distance of 0.5–2 kb beyond this poly(A)
addition site. Experiments with mutant genes show that termination is coupled to the process that cleaves and
polyadenylates the 3 end of a transcript, which is discussed
in the next chapter. Biochemical and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments suggest that the protein complex that
cleaves and polyadenylates the nascent mRNA transcript at
specific sequences associates with the phosphorylated
carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II
following initiation (see Figure 11-27). This cleavage/
polyadenylation complex may suppress termination by RNA
polymerase II until the sequence signaling cleavage and
polyadenylation is transcribed by the polymerase.
While transcription termination is unregulated for most
genes, for some specific genes, a choice is made between
elongation and termination or pausing within a few tens of
bases from the transcription start site. This choice between
elongation and termination or pausing can be regulated; thus
expression of the encoded protein is controlled not only by
transcription initiation, but also by control of transcription
elongation early in the transcription unit. We discuss two examples of such regulation next.

Transcription of the HIV Genome Is Regulated
by an Antitermination Mechanism
Currently, transcription of the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) genome by RNA polymerase II provides the bestunderstood example of regulated transcription termination
in eukaryotes. Efficient expression of HIV genes requires a
small viral protein encoded at the tat locus. Cells infected

485

with tat mutants produce short viral transcripts that
hybridize to restriction fragments containing promoterproximal regions of the HIV DNA but not to restriction fragments farther downstream from the promoter. In contrast,
cells infected with wild-type HIV synthesize long viral transcripts that hybridize to restriction fragments throughout the
single HIV transcription unit. Thus Tat protein functions as
an antitermination factor, permitting RNA polymerase II to
read through a transcriptional block. Since antitermination
by Tat protein is required for HIV replication, further understanding of this gene-control mechanism may offer possibilities for designing effective therapies for acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Tat is a sequence-specific RNA-binding protein. It binds to
the RNA copy of a sequence called TAR, which is located near
the 5 end of the HIV transcript. The TAR sequence folds into
an RNA hairpin with a bulge in the middle of the stem (Figure 11-45). TAR contains two binding sites: one that interacts
with Tat and one that interacts with a cellular protein called
cyclin T. As depicted in Figure 11-45, the HIV Tat protein and
cellular cyclin T each bind to TAR RNA and also interact directly with each other so that they bind cooperatively, much
like the cooperative binding of DNA-binding transcription factors (see Figure 11-24). Interaction of cyclin T with a protein
kinase called CDK9 activates the kinase, whose substrate is the
CTD of RNA polymerase II. In vitro transcription studies
using a specific inhibitor of CDK9 suggest that RNA polymerase II molecules that initiate transcription on the HIV promoter terminate after transcribing ≈50 bases unless the CTD is
hyperphosphorylated by CDK9. Cooperative binding of cyclin
T and Tat to the TAR sequence at the 5 end of the HIV transcript positions CDK9 so that it can phosphorylate the CTD,
thereby preventing termination and permitting the polymerase
to continue chain elongation.
5
Tat

RNA Pol II
NELF
Spt4/5

Cyclin T

Cdk9
TAR
P

P
P

HIV
DNA
P

P

P

CTD

▲ FIGURE 11-45 Model of antitermination complex
composed of HIV Tat protein and several cellular proteins.
The TAR element in the HIV transcript contains sequences
recognized by Tat and the cellular protein cyclin T. Cyclin T
activates and helps position the protein kinase CDK9 near its
substrate, the CTD of RNA polymerase II. See the text for a
more detailed discussion. [See P. Wei et al., 1998, Cell 92:451;
T. Wada et al., 1998, Genes & Devel. 12:357; and Y. Yamaguchi et al.,
1999, Cell 97:41.]

486

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

Several additional cellular proteins, including Spt4 and
Spt5 and the NELF complex, participate in the process by
which HIV Tat controls elongation versus termination (see
Figure 11-45). Experiments with the specific inhibitor of
CDK9 mentioned above and with spt4 and spt5 yeast mutants indicate that these cellular proteins are required for
transcription elongation beyond ≈50 bases for most cellular
genes. But for most genes, these proteins appear to function
constitutively, that is, without being regulated. As discussed
in Chapter 12, RNA polymerase II pausing instigated by
Spt4/5 and NELF is thought to delay elongation until mRNA
processing factors associate with the phosphorylated CTD.
Further phosphorylation of the CTD by cyclin T–CDK9
(also known as pTEFb) appears to reverse this pause and
allow elongation to continue. Currently, it is not clear why
this process is not constitutive for the HIV promoter, where
cooperative binding of HIV Tat and cyclin T to the TAR
RNA sequence is required for efficient elongation.

Promoter-Proximal Pausing of RNA Polymerase II
Occurs in Some Rapidly Induced Genes
The heat-shock genes (e.g., hsp70) illustrate another mechanism for regulating RNA chain elongation in eukaryotes.
During transcription of these genes, RNA polymerase II
pauses after transcribing ≈25 nucleotides but does not terminate transcription (as it does when transcribing the HIV
genome in the absence of Tat protein). The paused polymerase remains associated with the nascent RNA and template DNA, until conditions occur that lead to activation of
HSTF (heat-shock transcription factor). Subsequent binding
of activated HSTF to specific sites in the promoter-proximal
region of heat-shock genes stimulates the paused polymerase to continue chain elongation and promotes rapid reinitiation by additional RNA polymerase II molecules.
The pausing during transcription of heat-shock genes initially was discovered in Drosophila, but a similar mechanism
most likely occurs in other eukaryotes. Heat-shock genes are
induced by intracellular conditions that denature proteins
(such as elevated temperature, “heat shock”). Some encode
proteins that are relatively resistant to denaturing conditions
and act to protect other proteins from denaturation; others
are chaperonins that refold denatured proteins (see Chapter
3). The mechanism of transcriptional control that evolved to
regulate expression of these genes permits a rapid response:
these genes are already paused in a state of suspended transcription and therefore, when an emergency arises, require no
time to remodel and acetylate chromatin over the promoter
and assemble a transcription preinitiation complex.

terminated until an RNA sequence is synthesized that specifies a site of cleavage and polyadenylation.
■ Transcription of the HIV genome by RNA polymerase II
is regulated by an antitermination mechanism that requires
cooperative binding by the virus-encoded Tat protein and
cyclin T to the TAR sequence near the 5 end of the HIV
RNA.

During transcription of Drosophila heat-shock genes,
RNA polymerase II pauses within the downstream promoterproximal region; this interruption in transcription is released
when the HSTF transcription factor is activated, resulting in
very rapid transcription of the heat-shock genes in response
to the accumulation of denatured proteins.

■

11.8 Other Eukaryotic
Transcription Systems
We conclude this chapter with a brief discussion of transcription initiation by the other two eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerases, Pol I and Pol III, and by the distinct polymerases that
transcribe mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA. Although
these systems, particularly their regulation, are less thoroughly understood than transcription by RNA polymerase
II, they are also fundamental to the life of eukaryotic cells.

Transcription Initiation by Pol I and Pol III
Is Analogous to That by Pol II
The formation of transcription-initiation complexes involving Pol I and Pol III is similar in some respects to assembly
of Pol II initiation complexes (see Figure 11-27). However,
each of the three eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerases requires its own polymerase-specific general transcription factors and recognizes different DNA control elements.
Moreover, neither Pol I nor Pol III requires ATP hydrolysis to
initiate transcription, whereas Pol II does.
Transcription initiation by Pol I, which synthesizes prerRNA, and by Pol III, which synthesizes tRNAs, 5S rRNA,
and other short, stable RNAs, has been characterized most
extensively in S. cerevisiae using both biochemical and
genetic approaches. It is clear that synthesis of tRNAs and of
rRNAs, which are incorporated into ribosomes, is tightly
coupled to the rate of cell growth and proliferation. However, much remains to be learned about how transcription
initiation by Pol I and Pol III is regulated so that synthesis
of pre-rRNA, 5S rRNA, and tRNAs is coordinated with the
growth and replication of cells.

Initiation by Pol I The regulatory elements directing Pol I
KEY CONCEPTS FOR SECTION 11.7
Regulated Elongation and Termination of Transcription
Different mechanisms of transcription termination are
employed by each of the eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerases. Transcription of most protein-coding genes is not

■

initiation are similarly located relative to the transcription
start site in both yeast and mammals. A core element spanning the transcription start site from – 40 to 5 is essential
for Pol I transcription. An additional upstream element extending from roughly –155 to –60 stimulates in vitro Pol I
transcription tenfold.

11.8 • Other Eukaryotic Transcription Systems
Upstream
element

Core
element

Pre-rRNA promoter DNA

Upstream activating
factor (UAF)
UAF

H3

H4

Core factor (CF), TPB,
and other factors
CF

TBP
Pol I and Rrn3p
Rrn3p

Pol I

Initiation complex

▲ FIGURE 11-46 In vitro assembly of the yeast Pol I
transcription initiation complex. UAF and CF, both multimeric
general transcription factors, bind to the upstream element (UE)
and core element, respectively, in the promoter DNA. TBP and a
monomeric factor (Rrn3p) associated with RNA polymerase I (Pol
I) also participate in forming the initiation complex. [Adapted from
N. Nomura, 1998, in R. M. Paule, Transcription of Ribosomal RNA Genes
by Eukaryotic RNA Polymerase I, Landes Bioscience, pp. 157–172.]

Three general transcription factors are required for Pol
III to initiate transcription of tRNA and 5S-rRNA genes in
vitro. Two multimeric factors, TFIIIC and TFIIIB, participate
in initiation at both tRNA and 5S-rRNA promoters; a third
factor, TFIIIA, is required for initiation at 5S-rRNA promoters. As with assembly of Pol I and Pol II initiation complexes,
the Pol III general transcription factors bind to promoter
DNA in a defined sequence.
The N-terminal half of one TFIIIB subunit, called BRF
(for TFIIB-related factor), is similar in sequence to TFIIB (a
Pol II factor). This similarity suggests that BRF and TFIIB
perform a similar function in initiation, namely, to direct the
polymerase to the correct start site. Once TFIIIB has bound
to either a tRNA or 5S-rRNA gene, Pol III can bind and initiate transcription in the presence of ribonucleoside triphosphates. The BRF subunit of TFIIIB interacts specifically with
one of the polymerase subunits unique to Pol III, accounting for initiation by this specific nuclear RNA polymerase.
Another of the three subunits composing TFIIIB is TBP,
which we can now see is a component of a general transcription factor for all three eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerases. The finding that TBP participates in transcription
initiation by Pol I and Pol III was surprising, since the promoters recognized by these enzymes often do not contain
TATA boxes. Nonetheless, recent studies indicate that the
TBP subunit of TFIIIB interacts with DNA similarly to the
way it interacts with TATA boxes.

TFIIIC

TFIIIB
tRNA gene
A

Assembly of a fully active Pol I initiation complex begins
with binding of a multimeric upstream activating factor (UAF)
to the upstream element (Figure 11-46). Two of the six subunits composing UAF are histones, which probably participate
in DNA binding. Next, a trimeric core factor binds to the core
element together with TBP, which makes contact with both the
bound UAF and the core factor. Finally, a preformed complex
of Pol I and Rrn3p associates with the bound proteins, positioning Pol I near the start site. In human cells, TBP is stably
bound to three other polypeptides, forming an initiation factor
called SL1 that binds to the core promoter element and is functionally equivalent to yeast core factor plus TBP.

Initiation by Pol III Unlike protein-coding genes and prerRNA genes, the promoter regions of tRNA and 5S-rRNA
genes lie entirely within the transcribed sequence (Figure
11-47). Two such internal promoter elements, termed the A
box and B box, are present in all tRNA genes. These highly
conserved sequences not only function as promoters but also
encode two invariant portions of eukaryotic tRNAs that are
required for protein synthesis. In 5S-rRNA genes, a single internal control region, the C box, acts as a promoter.

487

B

Pol III

TFIIIC
TFIIIB

TFIIIA

5S-rRNA gene
C

Pol III

▲ FIGURE 11-47 Transcription-control elements in genes
transcribed by RNA polymerase III. Both tRNA and 5S-rRNA
genes contain internal promoter elements (yellow) located
downstream from the start site and named A-, B-, and C-boxes,
as indicated. Assembly of transcription initiation complexes on
these genes begins with the binding of Pol III-specific general
transcription factors TFIIIA, TFIIIB, and TFIIIC to these control
elements. Green arrows indicate strong, sequence-specific
protein-DNA interactions. Blue arrows indicate interactions
between general transcription factors. Purple arrows indicate
interactions between general transcription factors and Pol III.
[From L. Schramm and N. Hernandez, 2002, Genes Dev. 16:2593.]

488

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

Mitochondrial and Chloroplast DNAs
Are Transcribed by Organelle-Specific
RNA Polymerases
As discussed in Chapter 10, mitochondria and chloroplasts
probably evolved from bacteria that were endocytosed into
ancestral cells containing a eukaryotic nucleus. In modernday eukaryotes, both organelles contain distinct circular
DNAs that encode some of the proteins essential to their specific functions. The RNA polymerases that transcribe mitochondrial (mt) DNA and chloroplast DNA are similar to
polymerases from bacteria and bacteriophages.

Some chloroplast promoters are quite reminiscent of the
E. coli 70-promoter, with similar sequences in the 10 and
35 regions. Transcription from one chloroplast promoter,
however, depends on sequences from about 20 to 60,
quite different from most E. coli promoters. This promoter
may be recognized by a second RNA polymerase, which
most likely is encoded in the nuclear genome and imported
into the organelle. Analysis of chloroplast transcription is
still in its infancy, but at this point it is clear that at least
one transcription system is highly homologous to transcription in E. coli and other bacteria from which chloroplasts evolved.

Mitochondrial RNA Polymerase The RNA polymerase that
transcribes mtDNA is encoded in nuclear DNA. After synthesis of the enzyme in the cytosol, it is imported into the
mitochondrial matrix by mechanisms described in Chapter
16. The mitochondrial RNA polymerases from S. cerevisiae
and the frog Xenopus laevis both consist of a large subunit
with ribonucleotide-polymerizing activity and a small subunit, or specificity factor, essential for initiating transcription at the start sites in mtDNA used in the cell. The large
subunit of yeast mitochondrial RNA polymerase clearly
is related to the monomeric RNA polymerases of bacteriophage T7 and similar bacteriophages. However, the
mitochondrial enzyme is functionally distinct from the bacteriophage enzyme in its dependence on the small subunit
for transcription from the proper start sites. This small subunit is related to the
factors in bacterial RNA polymerases, which interact with promoter DNA and function
as initiation factors. Thus mitochondrial RNA polymerase
appears to be a hybrid of the simple bacteriophage RNA
polymerases and the multisubunit bacterial RNA polymerases of intermediate complexity.
The promoter sequences recognized by mitochondrial
RNA polymerases include the transcription start site. These
promoter sequences, which are rich in A residues, have been
characterized in the mtDNA from yeast, plants, and animals.
The circular, human mitochondrial genome contains two related 15-bp promoter sequences, one for the transcription
of each strand. Each strand is transcribed in its entirety; the
long primary transcripts are then processed to yield mitochondrial mRNAs, rRNAs, and tRNAs. A small basic protein called mtTF1, which binds immediately upstream from
the two mitochondrial promoters, greatly stimulates transcription. A homologous protein found in yeast mitochondria is required for maintenance of mtDNA and probably
performs a similar function.

Chloroplast RNA Polymerase In contrast to mitochondrial RNA polymerase, the enzyme that transcribes chloroplast DNA is encoded in the chloroplast genome itself.
This RNA polymerase has subunits with considerable homology to the E. coli RNA polymerase , , and  subunits, but apparently lacks a subunit equivalent to the E.
coli factor.

KEY CONCEPTS FOR SECTION 11.8
Other Eukaryotic Transcription Systems
The process of transcription initiation by Pol I and Pol
III is similar to that by Pol II but requires different general
transcription factors, is directed by different promoter elements, and does not require ATP hydrolysis.

■

Mitochondrial DNA is transcribed by a nuclear-encoded
RNA polymerase composed of two subunits. One subunit
is homologous to the monomeric RNA polymerase from
bacteriophage T7; the other resembles bacterial factors.

■

Chloroplast DNA is transcribed by a chloroplastencoded RNA polymerase homologous to bacterial RNA
polymerases, except that it lacks a factor.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
A great deal has been learned in recent years about transcription control in eukaryotes. Genes encoding about 2000
activators and repressors can be recognized in the human
genome. We now have a glimpse of how the astronomical
number of possible combinations of these transcription factors can generate the complexity of gene control required to
produce organisms as remarkable as those we see around us.
But very much remains to be understood. While we now
have some understanding of what processes turn a gene on
and off, we have very little understanding of how the frequency of transcription is controlled in order to provide a
cell with the appropriate amounts of its various proteins. In
a red blood cell precursor, for example, the globin genes are
transcribed at a far greater rate than the genes encoding the
enzymes of intermediary metabolism. How are the vast differences in the frequency of transcription initiation at various
genes achieved? What happens to the multiple interactions
between activation domains, co-activator complexes, general
transcription factors, and RNA polymerase II when the
polymerase initiates transcription and transcribes away from
the promoter region? Do these completely dissociate at promoters that are transcribed infrequently, so that the combination of multiple factors required for transcription must be

Review the Concepts

reassembled anew for each round of transcription? Do complexes of activators with their multiple interacting coactivators remain assembled at promoters from which reinitiation takes place at a high rate, so that the entire assembly does not have to be reconstructed each time a polymerase
initiates?
Much remains to be learned about the structure of chromatin and how that structure influences transcription. What
directs certain regions of chromatin to form heterochromatin
where transcription is repressed? Precisely how is the structure of chromatin changed by activators and repressors and
how does this promote or inhibit transcription? Once
chromatin-remodeling complexes and histone acetylase complexes become associated with a promoter region, how do
they remain associated? Do certain subunits of these complexes associate with modified histone tails so that additional
complexes associate along the length of a chromatin fiber as
additional histones are modified?
Single activation domains have been discovered to interact with several co-activator complexes. Are these interactions transient, so that the same activation domain can
interact with several co-activators sequentially? Is a specific
order of co-activator interaction required? How does the interaction of activation domains with mediator stimulate
transcription? Do these interactions simply stimulate the assembly of a preinitiation complex, or do they also influence
the rate at which RNA polymerase II initiates transcription
from an assembled preinitiation complex?
Transcriptional activation is a highly cooperative process
so that genes expressed in a specific type of cell are expressed
only when the complete set of activators that control that gene
are expressed and activated. As mentioned earlier, some of the
transcription factors that control expression of the TTR gene
in the liver are also expressed in intestinal and kidney cells. Yet
the TTR gene is not expressed in these other tissues, since its
transcription requires two additional transcription factors expressed only in the liver. What mechanisms account for this
highly cooperative action of transcription factors that is critical to cell-type-specific gene expression?
A thorough understanding of normal development and of
abnormal processes associated with disease will require answers to these and many other questions. As further understanding of the principles of transcription control are
discovered, applications of the knowledge will likely be
made. This understanding may allow fine control of the expression of therapeutic genes introduced by gene therapy
vectors as they are developed. Detailed understanding of the
molecular interactions that regulate transcription may provide new targets for the development of therapeutic drugs
that inhibit or stimulate the expression of specific genes. A
more complete understanding of the mechanisms of transcriptional control may allow improved engineering of crops
with desirable characteristics. Certainly, further advances in
the area of transcription control will help to satisfy our desire
to understand how complex organisms such as ourselves develop and function.

489

KEY TERMS
activation domain 461
activators 449
antitermination factor 485
carboxyl-terminal
domain (CTD) 452
chromatin-mediated
repression 471
co-activator 467
DNase I footprinting 458
enhancers 456
enhancesome 468
general transcription
factors 469
heat-shock genes 486
histone code 476
histone deacetylation 474
leucine zipper 464

MAT locus (in yeast) 471
mediator 471
nuclear receptors 464
promoter 449
promoter-proximal
elements 455
repression domain 462
repressors 449
RNA polymerase II 450
silencer sequences 472
TATA box 454
upstream activating
sequences (UASs) 457
yeast two-hybrid
system 480
zinc finger 463

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. What is the evidence that transcriptional initiation is the
primary mechanism of gene control in complex organisms?
2. What types of genes are transcribed by RNA polymerases I, II, and III? Design an experiment to determine
whether a specific gene is transcribed by RNA polymerase II.
3. The CTD of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II
can be phosphorylated and hyperphosphorylated at various
serine and tyrosine residues. What are the conditions that
lead to phosphorylation versus hyperphosphorylation?
4. What do TATA boxes, initiators, and CpG islands have
in common? Which was the first of these to be identified?
Why?
5. Describe the methods used to identify the location of
DNA control elements in regulatory regions of genes.
6. What is the difference between a promoter-proximal element and a distal enhancer?
7. Describe the methods used to identify the location of
DNA-binding proteins in the regulatory regions of genes.
8. Describe the structural features of transcriptional activator and repressor proteins.
9. What happens to transcription of the EGR-1 gene in patients with Wilm’s tumor? Why?
10. Using CREB and nuclear receptors as examples, compare and contrast the structural changes that take place when
these transcription factors bind to their co-activators.

490

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

11. What structural change takes place on polymerase II
promoters during preinitiation complex formation?
12. Expression of recombinant proteins in yeast is an important tool for biotechnology companies that produce new
drugs for human use. In an attempt to get a new gene X expressed in yeast, a researcher has integrated gene X into the
yeast genome near a telomere. Will this strategy result in
good expression of gene X? Why or why not? Would the
outcome of this experiment differ if the experiment had been
performed in a yeast line containing mutations in the H3 or
H4 histone tails?
13. You have isolated a new protein called STICKY. You can
predict from comparisons with other known proteins that
STICKY contains a bHLH domain and a Sin3-interacting
domain. Predict the function of STICKY and rationale for
the importance of these domains in STICKY function.
14. Describe at least one gene you would expect to be able
to clone using the following genes as bait in a yeast twohybrid experiment: alpha-globin; the catalytic subunit of
protein kinase A; and the catalytic subunit of aspartate
transcarbamylase.

a. Which tissues contain a binding activity that recognizes
the sequence upstream of gene X? Is the transcription factor
the same in each tissue?
b. If the binding activity was purified, what test could be
done to verify that this factor is in fact a transcription factor?
c. What type of assay would be performed to determine the
specific DNA sequence(s) to which the transcription factor
binds?
d. If gene X is transcribed in lung and brain tissue but not
in bone and skin tissue, what type of transcription factor is
the binding activity? Speculate as to the identity of other factors that might be complexed at the gene X promoter in bone
and skin tissue.

REFERENCES

Overview of Eukaryotic Gene Control and RNA
Polymerases
Cramer, P. 2002. Multisubunit RNA polymerases. Curr. Opin.
Struc. Biol. 12:89–97.

Regulatory Sequences in Protein-Coding Genes
A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
An electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was performed using a radiolabeled DNA fragment from the sequence upstream of gene X. This DNA probe was
incubated with () or without () nuclear extract isolated
from tissues A (bone); B (lung); C (brain); and D (skin).
The DNAprotein complexes were then fractionated on
nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels. The gels were exposed
to autoradiographic film; the results are presented in the
figure.
A
Nuclear
extract

−

B
+

−

C
+

−

D
+

−

+

Blackwood, E. M., and J. T. Kadonaga. 1998. Going the distance: a current view of enhancer action. Science 281:60–63.
Butler, J. E., and J. T. Kadonaga. 2002. The RNA polymerase II
core promoter: a key component in the regulation of gene expression. Genes Dev. 16:2583–2592.
http://www.epd.isb-sib.ch/promoter_elements

Activators and Repressors of Transcription
Brivanlou, A. H., and J. E. Darnell, Jr. 2002. Signal transduction and the control of gene expression. Science 295:813–818.
Luscombe, N. M., et al. 2000. An overview of the structures of
protein-DNA complexes. Genome Biol. 1:1–37.
Riechmann, J. L., et al. 2000. Arabidopsis transcription factors:
genome-wide comparative analysis among eukaryotes. Science
290:2105–2110.
Tupler, R., G. Perini, and M. R. Green. 2001. Expressing the human genome. Nature 409:832–833.

Transcription Initiation by RNA Polymerase II
Woychik, N. A., and M. Hampsey. 2002. The RNA polymerase
II machinery: structure illuminates function. Cell 108:453–463.

Molecular Mechanisms of Transcription Activation
and Repression
Berger, S. L. 2002. Histone modifications in transcriptional regulation. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 12:142–148.
Boube, M., et al. 2002. Evidence for a mediator of RNA polymerase II transcriptional regulation conserved from yeast to man.
Cell 110:143–151.
Courey, A. J., and S. Jia. 2001. Transcriptional repression: the
long and the short of it. Genes Dev. 15:2786–2796.
Horn, P. J., and C. L. Peterson. 2002. Chromatin Higher Order
Folding—Wrapping up Transcription. Science 297:1824–1827.
Richards, E. J., and S. C. Elgin. 2002. Epigenetic codes for heterochromatin formation and silencing: rounding up the usual suspects. Cell 108:489–500.

References

Control of Transcription-Factor Activity
Hermanson, O., C. K. Glass, and M. G. Rosenfeld. 2002. Nuclear receptor coregulators: multiple modes of modification. Trends
Endocrinol. Metab. 13:55–60.
Lin, R. J., et al. 1998. The transcriptional basis of steroid physiology. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 63:577–585.
McKenna, N. J., and B. W. O’Malley. 2002. Minireview: nuclear
receptor coactivators—an update. Endocrinol. 143:2461–2465.
Yamamoto, K. R. 1995. Multilayered control of intracellular receptor function. Harvey Lect. 91:1–19.

Regulated Elongation and Termination of Transcription
Garber, M. E., and K. A. Jones. 1999. HIV-1 Tat: coping with
negative elongation factors. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 11:460–465.

491

Kim, D. K., et al. 2001. The regulation of elongation by eukaryotic RNA polymerase II: a recent view. Mol. Cells 11:267–274.
Lis, J. 1998. Promoter-associated pausing in promoter architecture and postinitiation transcriptional regulation. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 63:347–356.
Price, D. H. 2000. P-TEFb, a cyclin-dependent kinase controlling elongation by RNA polymerase II. Mol. Cell Biol.
20:2629–2634.

Other Eukaryotic Transcription Systems
Paule, M. R., and R. J. White. 2000. Survey and summary: transcription by RNA polymerases I and III. Nucl. Acids Res. 28:
1283–1298.
Schramm, L., and N. Hernandez. 2002. Recruitment of RNA
polymerase III to its target promoters. Genes Dev. 16:2593–2620.

492

CHAPTER 11 • Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression

12
POSTTRANSCRIPTIONAL
GENE CONTROL AND
NUCLEAR TRANSPORT
Portion of a “lampbrush chromosome” from an oocyte
of the newt Nophthalmus viridescens; hnRNP protein
associated with nascent RNA transcripts fluoresces
red after staining with a monoclonal antibody. [Courtesy
of M. Roth and J. Gall.]

I

n the previous chapter, we saw that most genes are regulated at the first step in gene expression, namely, the initiation of transcription. However, once transcription has
been initiated, synthesis of the encoded RNA requires that
RNA polymerase transcribe the entire gene and not terminate prematurely. Moreover, the initial primary transcripts
produced from eukaryotic genes must undergo various processing reactions to yield the corresponding functional
RNAs. Once formed in the nucleus, mature, functional
RNAs are transported to the cytoplasm as components of ribonucleoproteins. Both processing of RNAs and their export
from the nucleus offer opportunities for further regulating
gene expression at stages subsequent to transcription initiation. Additional control of gene expression can occur in the
cytoplasm. In the case of protein-coding genes, for instance,
the amount of protein produced depends on the stability of
the corresponding mRNAs in the cytoplasm and the rate of
their translation. In addition, the cellular locations of some
mRNAs are regulated, so that newly synthesized protein is
concentrated where it is needed.
We refer to all the mechanisms that regulate gene expression following transcription as post-transcriptional gene control (Figure 12-1). Although these mechanisms generally play
a smaller overall role in gene control than activation or repression of transcription initiation, they are critical in regulating expression of some genes. In this chapter, we consider
the events that occur in the processing of mRNA following
transcription initiation and the various mechanisms that are
known to regulate these events. In the last section, we briefly
discuss the processing of primary transcripts produced from
genes encoding rRNAs and tRNAs.

12.1 Processing of Eukaryotic
Pre-mRNA
In this section, we take a closer look at how eukaryotic cells
convert the initial primary transcript synthesized by RNA
polymerase II into a functional mRNA. Three major events
occur during the process: 5 capping, 3 cleavage/polyadenylation, and RNA splicing (Figure 12-2). Processing occurs in
the nucleus as the nascent mRNA precursor is being transcribed, and the functional mRNA produced is transported
to the cytoplasm by mechanisms discussed later.

The 5 Cap Is Added to Nascent RNAs Shortly
After Initiation by RNA Polymerase II
After nascent RNA molecules produced by RNA polymerase
II reach a length of 25–30 nucleotides, 7-methylguanosine
and the other components of the 5 cap found on eukaryotic

OUTLINE
12.1 Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA
12.2 Regulation of Pre-mRNA Processing
12.3 Macromolecular Transport Across the
Nuclear Envelope
12.4 Cytoplasmic Mechanisms of Posttranscriptional Control
12.5 Processing of rRNA and tRNA
493

494

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport
MOLECULAR PROCESS

POSSIBLE REGULATION

Post-transcriptional control mechanisms

PRE-mRNA TRANSCRIPTION
Cotranscriptional RNA
splicing and cleavage/
polyadenylation

Regulation of alternative
RNA splicing and cleavage/
polyadenylation
Degradation of
improperly processed RNA

RNA editing (rare)
Nucleus

Cell-type−specific
RNA editing (rare)
Regulation of export
(rare)

Nuclear export
Cytosol

NPC

Cytoplasmic
localization (rare)

Regulation of
cytosolic localization

Translation
initiation

Regulation of
translation initiation

FPO

Decapping and
mRNA decay

Regulation of
mRNA decay

mRNAs are added to their 5 end (see Figure 4-13). This initial step in RNA processing is catalyzed by a dimeric capping
enzyme, which associates with the phosphorylated carboxylterminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. Recall that
the CTD becomes phosphorylated during transcription initiation (see Figure 11-27). Because the capping enzyme does
not associate with polymerase I or III, which do not contain
a CTD, capping is specific for transcripts produced by RNA
polymerase II.
One subunit of the capping enzyme removes the  phosphate from the 5 end of the nascent RNA emerging from the
surface of an RNA polymerase II. Another domain of this
subunit transfers the GMP moiety from GTP to the 5diphosphate of the nascent transcript, creating the unusual
guanosine 5-5-triphosphate structure. In the final steps,
separate enzymes transfer methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine to the N7 position of the guanine and the 2 oxygens of riboses at the 5 end of the nascent RNA.

Pre-mRNAs Are Associated with hnRNP Proteins
Containing Conserved RNA-Binding Domains

mRNA decay
AMOUNT OF SPECIFIC PROTEIN PRODUCED

▲ FIGURE 12-1 Overview of post-transcriptional control of
protein-coding genes. Control may be exerted as a primary
transcript is processed in the nucleus, during export of an mRNA to
the cytoplasm, or in the cytoplasm. Any one gene would likely be
regulated by only one or a few of the possible control mechanisms.

Nascent RNA transcripts from protein-coding genes and
mRNA processing intermediates, collectively referred to as
pre-mRNA, do not exist as free RNA molecules in the nuclei of eukaryotic cells. From the time nascent transcripts
first emerge from RNA polymerase II until mature mRNAs
are transported into the cytoplasm, the RNA molecules are
associated with an abundant set of nuclear proteins. These
Poly(A) Termination
site
sites

Exon Intron

Overview Animation: Life Cycle of an mRNA

Primary RNA
transcript

1 Transcription, 5' capping

Cap
5'

FPO

Endonuclease

5'

Poly(A) polymerase (PAP)
+ATP

3'

2 Cleavage at Poly(A) site
3'

3 Polyadenylation

5'

A100–250 3'
4 RNA splicing
mRNA 5'

▲ FIGURE 12-2 Overview of mRNA processing in
eukaryotes. Shortly after RNA polymerase II initiates
transcription at the first nucleotide of the first exon of a
gene, the 5 end of the nascent RNA is capped with
7-methylguanylate (step 1 ). Transcription by RNA
polymerase II terminates at any one of multiple
termination sites downstream from the poly(A) site,
which is located at the 3 end of the final exon. After the
primary transcript is cleaved at the poly(A) site (step 2 ),

A100–250 3'

Pre-mRNA processing

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

DNA

a string of adenine (A) residues is added (step 3 ). The poly(A)
tail contains ≈250 A residues in mammals, ≈150 in insects, and
≈100 in yeasts. For short primary transcripts with few introns,
splicing (step 4 ) usually follows cleavage and polyadenylation, as
shown. For large genes with multiple introns, introns often are
spliced out of the nascent RNA during its transcription, i.e.,
before transcription of the gene is complete. Note that the
5 cap and sequence adjacent to the poly(A) tail are retained in
mature mRNAs.

12.1 • Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA

proteins are the major protein components of heterogeneous
ribonucleoprotein particles (hnRNPs), which contain heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA), a collective term referring to pre-mRNA and other nuclear RNAs of various sizes.
The proteins in these ribonucleoprotein particles can be dramatically visualized with fluorescent-labeled monoclonal
antibodies (see the chapter opening figure).
Researchers identified hnRNP proteins by first exposing
cultured cells to high-dose UV irradiation, which causes covalent cross-links to form between RNA bases and closely associated proteins. Chromatography of nuclear extracts from
treated cells on an oligo-dT cellulose column, which binds
RNAs with a poly(A) tail, was used to recover the proteins that
had become cross-linked to nuclear polyadenylated RNA. Subsequent treatment of cell extracts from unirradiated cells with
monoclonal antibodies specific for the major proteins identified
by this cross-linking technique revealed a complex set of abundant hnRNP proteins ranging in size from 34 to 120 kDa.
Like transcription factors, most hnRNP proteins have a
modular structure. They contain one or more RNA-binding
domains and at least one other domain that is thought to interact with other proteins. Several different RNA-binding
motifs have been identified by constructing deletions of
hnRNP proteins and testing their ability to bind RNA.

Conserved RNA-Binding Motifs The RNA recognition
motif (RRM), also called the RNP motif and the RNA-

(a) RNA recognition motif (RRM)

495

binding domain (RBD), is the most common RNA-binding
domain in hnRNP proteins. This ≈80-residue domain, which
occurs in many other RNA-binding proteins, contains two
highly conserved sequences (RNP1 and RNP2) that allow the
motif to be recognized in newly sequenced genes. X-ray crystallographic analysis has shown that the RRM domain consists of a four-stranded  sheet flanked on one side by two 
helices. The conserved RNP1 and RNP2 sequences lie side by
side on the two central  strands, and their side chains make
multiple contacts with a single-stranded region of RNA (Figure 12-3). The single-stranded RNA lies across the surface of
the  sheet, with the central RNP1 and RNP2 strands forming a positively charged surface that interacts with the negatively charged RNA phosphates.
The RGG box, another RNA-binding motif found in
hnRNP proteins, contains five Arg-Gly-Gly (RGG) repeats
with several interspersed aromatic amino acids. Although the
structure of this motif has not yet been determined, its argininerich nature is similar to the RNA-binding domains of the HIV
Tat protein. The 45-residue KH motif is found in the hnRNP
K protein and several other RNA-binding proteins; commonly
two or more copies of the KH motif are interspersed with RGG
repeats. The three-dimensional structure of representative
KH domains is similar to that of the RRM domain but smaller,
consisting of a three-stranded  sheet supported from one side
by two  helices. RNA binds to the KH motif by interacting
with a hydrophobic surface formed by the  helices and one

(b) Sex-lethal RRM domains
RRM2

5
Pre-mRNA

β2

1

RN
P

RN
P

2

FPO

β4

β1
β3

3
RRM1

▲ FIGURE 12-3 Structure of the RRM domain and its
interaction with RNA. (a) Diagram of the RRM domain showing
the two  helices and four  strands that characterize this motif.
The conserved RNP1 and RNP2 regions are located in the two
central  strands. (b) Surface representation of the two RRM
domains in Drosophila Sex-lethal (Sxl) protein, which binds a ninebase sequence in transformer pre-mRNA (green). The two RRMs
are oriented like the two parts of an open pair of castanets, with

the  sheet of RRM1 facing upward and the  sheet of RRM2
facing downward. Positively charged regions in Sxl protein are
shown in shades of blue; negatively charged regions, in shades
of red. The pre-mRNA is bound to the surfaces of the positively
charged  sheets, making most of its contacts with the RNP1
and RNP2 regions of each RRM. [Part (a) adapted from K. Nagai et
al., 1995, Trends Biochem. Sci. 20: 235; part (b) after N. Harada et al.,
1999, Nature 398:579.]

496

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

-strand. Thus, despite the similarity in their structures, RRM
and KH domains interact differently with RNA.

Functions of hnRNP Proteins The association of premRNAs with hnRNP proteins prevents formation of short
secondary structures dependent on base-pairing of complementary regions, thereby making the pre-mRNAs accessible
for interaction with other RNA molecules or proteins. PremRNAs associated with hnRNP proteins present a more uniform substrate for further processing steps than would free,
unbound pre-mRNAs, each type of which forms a unique
secondary structure dependent on its specific sequence.
Binding studies with purified hnRNP proteins suggest
that different hnRNP proteins associate with different regions of a newly made pre-mRNA molecule. For example,
the hnRNP proteins A1, C, and D bind preferentially to the
pyrimidine-rich sequences at the 3 ends of introns (see later
discussion). This observation suggests that some hnRNP proteins may interact with the RNA sequences that specify RNA
splicing or cleavage/polyadenylation and contribute to the
structure recognized by RNA-processing factors. Finally,
cell-fusion experiments have shown that some hnRNP proteins remain localized in the nucleus, whereas others cycle
in and out of the cytoplasm, suggesting that they function in
the transport of mRNA. We discuss the role of these proteins
in nuclear transport in Section 12.3.

3 Cleavage and Polyadenylation of Pre-mRNAs
Are Tightly Coupled
In eukaryotic cells, all mRNAs, except histone mRNAs, have
a 3 poly(A) tail. Early studies of pulse-labeled adenovirus
and SV40 RNA demonstrated that the viral primary transcripts extend beyond the site in the viral mRNAs from
which the poly(A) tail extends. These results suggested that
A residues are added to a 3 hydroxyl generated by endonucleolytic cleavage of a longer transcript, but the predicted
downstream RNA fragments never were detected in vivo,
presumably because of their rapid degradation. That cleavage of a primary transcript precedes its polyadenylation was
firmly established by detection of both predicted cleavage

Poly(A)
signal Poly(A) site
5'

Poly(A)
signal

AAUAAA

3'

G/U

Pre-mRNA

CPSF, CStF, CFI, CFII

CFI
CPSF

5'

AAUAAA

CFII
G/U

CStF
3'
PAP

5'

AAUAAA

PAP
G/U

3'

FPO
AAUAAA

5'

Cleavage

OH p

G/U
3'
ATP
p

G/U
+ CStF, CFI, CFII

5'

AAUAAA

PPi

Slow
polyadenylation

AAAOH 3'

PABII

 FIGURE 12-4 Model for cleavage and polyadenylation of
pre-mRNAs in mammalian cells. Cleavage and polyadenylation
specificity factor (CPSF) binds to the upstream AAUAAA poly(A)
signal. CStF interacts with a downstream GU- or U-rich sequence
and with bound CPSF, forming a loop in the RNA; binding of CFI
and CFII help stabilize the complex. Binding of poly(A)
polymerase (PAP) then stimulates cleavage at a poly(A) site,
which usually is 10–35 nucleotides 3 of the upstream poly(A)
signal. The cleavage factors are released, as is the downstream
RNA cleavage product, which is rapidly degraded. Bound PAP
then adds ≈12 A residues at a slow rate to the 3-hydroxyl group
generated by the cleavage reaction. Binding of poly(A)-binding
protein II (PABPII) to the initial short poly(A) tail accelerates the
rate of addition by PAP. After 200–250 A residues have been
added, PABPII signals PAP to stop polymerization.

PABII
5'

AAUAAA
PABII

A10-20 AOH 3'
ATP
PPi

5'

AAUAAA

Rapid
polyadenylation

A10-20 A10-20 A10-20 A~200 OH 3'
PAP

12.1 • Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA

497

Assembly of the large, multiprotein cleavage/polyadenylation complex around the AU-rich poly(A) signal in a premRNA is analogous in many ways to formation of the
transcription-initiation complex at the AT-rich TATA box of
a template DNA molecule (see Figure 11-27). In both cases,
multiprotein complexes assemble cooperatively through a
network of specific protein–nucleic acid and protein-protein
interactions.
Following cleavage at the poly(A) site, polyadenylation
proceeds in two phases. Addition of the first 12 or so A
residues occurs slowly, followed by rapid addition of up to
200–250 more A residues. The rapid phase requires the binding of multiple copies of a poly(A)-binding protein containing the RRM motif. This protein is designated PABPII to
distinguish it from the poly(A)-binding protein present in the
cytoplasm. PABPII binds to the short A tail initially added by
PAP, stimulating polymerization of additional A residues by
PAP (see Figure 12-4). PABPII is also responsible for signaling poly(A) polymerase to terminate polymerization when
the poly(A) tail reaches a length of 200–250 residues, although the mechanism for controlling the length of the tail is
not yet understood.

products in in vitro processing reactions performed with nuclear extracts of HeLa cells.
Early sequencing of cDNA clones from animal cells
showed that nearly all mRNAs contain the sequence
AAUAAA 10–35 nucleotides upstream from the poly(A)
tail. Polyadenylation of RNA transcripts is virtually eliminated when the corresponding sequence in the template
DNA is mutated to any other sequence except one encoding a closely related sequence (AUUAAA). The unprocessed
RNA transcripts produced from such mutant templates do
not accumulate in nuclei, but are rapidly degraded. Further
mutagenesis studies revealed that a second signal downstream from the cleavage site is required for efficient cleavage and polyadenylation of most pre-mRNAs in animal
cells. This downstream signal is not a specific sequence but
rather a GU-rich or simply a U-rich region within ≈50 nucleotides of the cleavage site.
Identification and purification of the proteins required
for cleavage and polyadenylation of pre-mRNA have led to
the model shown in Figure 12-4. According to this model, a
360-kDa cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor
(CPSF), composed of four different polypeptides, first forms
an unstable complex with the upstream AAUAAA poly(A)
signal. Then at least three additional proteins bind to the
CPSF-RNA complex: a 200-kDa heterotrimer called cleavage stimulatory factor (CStF), which interacts with the Glurich sequence; a 150-kDa heterotrimer called cleavage factor
I (CFI); and a second, poorly characterized cleavage factor
(CFII). Finally, a poly(A) polymerase (PAP) binds to the complex before cleavage can occur. This requirement for PAP
binding links cleavage and polyadenylation, so that the free
3 end generated is rapidly polyadenylated.

Splicing Occurs at Short, Conserved Sequences
in Pre-mRNAs via Two Transesterification
Reactions
During formation of a mature, functional mRNA, the introns
are removed and exons are spliced together. For short transcription units, RNA splicing usually follows cleavage and
polyadenylation of the 3 end of the primary transcript, as depicted in Figure 12-2. However, for long transcription units

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 12-5 RNA(a)

5

Adenovirus hexon gene

A

B

3

C

EcoRI A
Exons

Introns

1kb

(b)
5
DNA

FPO
A

C

3
B
mRNA

DNA hybridization studies show that
introns are spliced out during pre-mRNA
processing. Electron microscopy of an RNADNA hybrid between adenovirus DNA and the
mRNA encoding hexon, a major viral protein,
reveals DNA segments (introns) that are
absent from the hexon mRNA. (a) Diagram of
the EcoRI A fragment of adenovirus DNA,
which extends from the left end of the
genome to just before the end of the final
exon of the hexon gene. The gene consists of
three short exons and one long (≈3.5 kb) exon
separated by three introns of ≈1, 2.5, and 9
kb. (b) Electron micrograph (left ) and schematic
drawing (right ) of hybrid between an EcoRI A
fragment and hexon mRNA. The loops marked
A, B, and C correspond to the introns indicated
in (a). Since these intron sequences in the viral
genomic DNA are not present in mature hexon
mRNA, they loop out between the exon
sequences that hybridize to their complementary
sequences in the mRNA. [Micrograph from S. M.
Berget et al., 1977, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 74:3171;
courtesy of P. A. Sharp.]

498

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

5' splice site
5' Exon
Pre-mRNA
Frequency of
occurrence (%)

Intron

A/C

A

G

70

60

80

G

Pyrimidine-rich
region (≈15 b)

Branch point

U

100 100

A /G
95

FPO
G U

C

U

A /G

A

C /U

70 80 45

A

80

90

80

100

80

▲ FIGURE 12-6 Consensus sequences around 5 and 3
splice sites in vertebrate pre-mRNAs. The only nearly invariant
bases are the 5 GU and the 3 AG of the intron (blue), although
the flanking bases indicated are found at frequencies higher than
expected based on a random distribution. A pyrimidine-rich region
(hatch marked) near the 3 end of the intron is found in most

containing multiple exons, splicing of exons in the nascent RNA
usually begins before transcription of the gene is complete.
Early evidence that introns are removed during splicing
came from electron microscopy of RNA-DNA hybrids between adenovirus DNA and the mRNA encoding hexon, a
major virion capsid protein (Figure 12-5). Other studies revealed nuclear viral RNAs that were colinear with the viral
DNA (primary transcripts) and RNAs with one or two of the
introns removed (processing intermediates). These results,
together with the findings that the 5 cap and 3 poly(A) tail
at each end of long mRNA precursors are retained in shorter
mature cytoplasmic mRNAs, led to the realization that introns are removed from primary transcripts as exons are
spliced together.
The location of splice sites—that is, exon-intron junctions—in a pre-mRNA can be determined by comparing the
sequence of genomic DNA with that of the cDNA prepared
from the corresponding mRNA. Sequences that are present
in the genomic DNA but absent from the cDNA represent introns and indicate the positions of splice sites. Such analysis
of a large number of different mRNAs revealed moderately
conserved, short consensus sequences at the splice sites flanking introns in eukaryotic pre-mRNAs; in higher organisms, a
pyrimidine-rich region just upstream of the 3 splice site also
is common (Figure 12-6). Studies with deletion mutants have
shown that much of the center portion of introns can be removed without affecting splicing; generally only 30–40
nucleotides at each end of an intron are necessary for splicing to occur at normal rates.
Analysis of the intermediates formed during splicing of
pre-mRNAs in vitro led to the discovery that splicing of exons
proceeds via two sequential transesterification reactions (Figure 12-7). Introns are removed as a lariat-like structure in
which the 5 G of the intron is joined in an unusual 2,5-phosphodiester bond to an adenosine near the 3 end of the intron.
This A residue is called the branch point because it forms an
RNA branch in the lariat structure. In each transesterification
reaction, one phosphoester bond is exchanged for another.
Since the number of phosphoester bonds in the molecule is not
changed in either reaction, no energy is consumed. The net result of these two reactions is that two exons are ligated and the
intervening intron is released as a branched lariat structure.

3' splice site
3' Exon

N

C

A

G

G

80 100 100 60

20–50 b

cases. The branch-point adenosine, also invariant, usually is
20–50 bases from the 3 splice site. The central region of the
intron, which may range from 40 bases to 50 kilobases in length,
generally is unnecessary for splicing to occur. [See R. A. Padgett et
al., 1986, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 55:1119, and E. B. Keller and W. A. Noon,
1984, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 81:7417.]

Intron

5'
O
5'

Exon 1

2'
HO

O

A

O−

P

−O

O
3'

O = 3' oxygen of
exon 1

O

3'

P

O
Exon 2

O
5'

3'

First transesterification

O = 2' oxygen of
branch-point A
O = 3' oxygen of
intron

5'

O

O

P

A

2'
O

FPO
O−

−O

5'

O
3'

H

O

3'

P

O

O
5'

3'

Second transesterification
O−
+
5'

O

O

P
O−

2'
O

A
3'
OH

5'

O

P

O

3'

O
Spliced exons

Excised lariat intron

▲ FIGURE 12-7 Two transesterification reactions that
result in splicing of exons in pre-mRNA. In the first reaction,
the ester bond between the 5 phosphorus of the intron and the
3 oxygen (dark red) of exon 1 is exchanged for an ester bond
with the 2 oxygen (blue) of the branch-site A residue. In the
second reaction, the ester bond between the 5 phosphorus of
exon 2 and the 3 oxygen (light red) of the intron is exchanged
for an ester bond with the 3 oxygen of exon 1, releasing the
intron as a lariat structure and joining the two exons. Arrows
show where the activated hydroxyl oxygens react with
phosphorus atoms.

12.1 • Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA

499

(a)

Sm
GUC C AUUC AUA cap 5'

3'
5'

Exon 1

C AGGUAAGU

(b)
W.-t. U1 snRNA 3'
Mutant pre-mRNA 5'

Exon 1

FPO
Pre-mRNA

GUC C AUUCAUA cap 5'

Mutant U1 snRNA 3'

C AGGUAAAU

Mutant pre-mRNA 5'

3'

Mutation in pre-mRNA 5'
blocks splicing

3'

GUC C AUUUAUA cap 5'
Exon 1

C AGGUAA AU

3'

Compensatory mutation in U1
restores splicing

▲ FIGURE 12-8 Base pairing between pre-mRNA,
U1 snRNA, and U2 snRNA early in the splicing process. (a) In
this diagram, secondary structures in the snRNAs that are not
altered during splicing are depicted schematically. The yeast
branch-point sequence is shown here. Note that U2 snRNA basepairs with a sequence that includes the branch-point A, although
this residue is not base-paired. The purple rectangles represent
sequences that bind snRNP proteins recognized by anti-Sm
antibodies. For unknown reasons, antisera from patients with
the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
contain these antibodies. Such antisera have been useful in

characterizing components of the splicing reaction. (b)
Only the 5 ends of U1 snRNAs and 5 splice sites in
pre-mRNAs are shown. (Left) A mutation (A) in a pre-mRNA
splice site that interferes with base-pairing to the 5 end of
U1 snRNA blocks splicing. Expression of a U1 snRNA with
a compensating mutation (U) that restores base-pairing also
restores splicing of the mutant pre-mRNA. [Part (a) adapted

snRNAs Base-Pair with Pre-mRNA and with One
Another During Splicing

point in pre-mRNAs (see Figure 12-6). Compensating mutation experiments, similar to those conducted with U1
snRNA and 5 splice sites, demonstrated that base pairing
between U2 snRNA and the branch-point sequence in premRNA also is critical to splicing.
Figure 12-8a illustrates the general structures of the U1
and U2 snRNAs and how they base-pair with pre-mRNA
during splicing. Significantly, the branch-point A itself,
which is not base-paired to U2 snRNA, “bulges out,” allowing its 2 hydroxyl to participate in the first transesterification reaction of RNA splicing (see Figure 12-7).
Similar studies with other snRNAs demonstrated that
base pairing between them also occurs during splicing.
Moreover, rearrangements in these RNA-RNA interactions
are critical in the splicing pathway, as we describe next.

Five U-rich small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), designated U1,
U2, U4, U5, and U6, participate in pre-mRNA splicing.
Ranging in length from 107 to 210 nucleotides, these
snRNAs are associated with 6 to 10 proteins in small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) in the nucleus of
eukaryotic cells.
Definitive evidence for the role of U1 snRNA in splicing came from experiments which indicated that base pairing between the 5 splice site of a pre-mRNA and the 5
region of U1 snRNA is required for RNA splicing (Figure
12-8a). In vitro experiments showed that a synthetic
oligonucleotide that hybridizes with the 5-end region of U1
snRNA blocks RNA splicing. In vivo experiments showed
that mutations in the pre-mRNA 5 splice site that disrupt
the base pairing block RNA splicing, but that splicing can
be restored by expression of a mutant U1 snRNA with a
compensating mutation that restores base pairing to the mutant pre-mRNA 5 splice site (Figure 12-8b). Involvement of
U2 snRNA in splicing initially was suspected when it was
found to have an internal sequence that is largely complementary to the consensus sequence flanking the branch

from M. J. Moore et al., 1993, in R. Gesteland and J. Atkins, eds.,
The RNA World, Cold Spring Harbor Press, pp. 303–357; part (b)
see Y. Zhuang and A. M. Weiner, 1986, Cell 46:827.]

Spliceosomes, Assembled from snRNPs
and a Pre-mRNA, Carry Out Splicing
According to the current model of pre-mRNA splicing, the
five splicing snRNPs are thought to assemble on the premRNA, forming a large ribonucleoprotein complex called a
spliceosome (Figure 12-9). Assembly of a spliceosome begins
with the base pairing of the snRNAs of the U1 and U2

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Sm
3'

Focus Animation: mRNA Splicing

U1 snRNA

U U
U
U
G C
U2 snRNA
G C
C G
U
U
U U
A U
G C
A U CUAAGCA cap 5'
C
U
A
GA
U
AUGAUG
Py
CAGG
Exon 2
UA CUA C
A
Branch point

500

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

snRNPs to the pre-mRNA (see Figure 12-8). Extensive base
pairing between the snRNAs in the U4 and U6 snRNPs
forms a complex that associates with U5 snRNP. The
U4/U6/U5 complex then associates with the previously
formed U1/U2/pre-mRNA complex to yield a spliceosome.
After formation of the spliceosome, extensive rearrangements in the pairing of snRNAs and the pre-mRNA lead to
release of the U1 and U4 snRNPs. The catalytically active rearranged spliceosome then mediates the first transesterification reaction that forms the 2,5-phosphodiester bond
between the 2 hydroxyl on the branch point A and the phos-

U1
pG

5'

p

A

3'

U2
U4/U6/U5

1

U4
A

U1
pG

5'

U2
p

U6

Splicesome

U5
2

U1, U4

U6

OH A

pG

5'

3'

U2
p

3'

U5

FPO

First transesterification

3

phate at the 5 end of the intron. Following another rearrangement of the snRNPs, the second transesterification
reaction ligates the two exons in a standard 3,5-phosphodiester bond, releasing the intron as a lariat structure associated with the snRNPs. This final intron-snRNP complex
rapidly dissociates, and the individual snRNPs released can
participate in a new cycle of splicing. The excised intron is
then rapidly degraded by a debranching enzyme and other
nuclear RNases discussed later.
A spliceosome is roughly the size of a small ribosomal subunit, and at least 70 proteins are thought to participate in RNA
splicing, making this process comparable in complexity to initiation of transcription and protein synthesis. Some of these
splicing factors are associated with snRNPs, but others are not.
For instance, the 65-kD subunit of the U2-associated factor
(U2AF) binds to the pyrimidine-rich region near the 3 end of
introns and to the U2 snRNP. The 35-kD subunit of U2AF
binds to the AG dinucleotide at the 3 end of the intron and
also interacts with the larger U2AF subunit bound nearby.
These two U2AF subunits act together to help specify the
3 splice site by promoting interaction of U2 snRNP with
the branch point (see Figure 12-8). Some splicing factors also
exhibit sequence homologies to known RNA helicases; these
are probably necessary for the base-pairing rearrangements
that occur in snRNAs during the spliceosomal splicing cycle.
Some pre-mRNAs contain introns whose splice sites do
not conform to the standard consensus sequence. This class
of introns begins with AU and ends with AC rather than following the usual “GU–AG rule” (see Figure 12-6). Splicing
of this special class of introns appears to occur via a splicing cycle analogous to that shown in Figure 12-9, except that
four novel, low-abundance snRNPs, together with the standard U5 snRNP, are involved.
Nearly all functional mRNAs in vertebrate, insect, and
plant cells are derived from a single molecule of the corresponding pre-mRNA by removal of internal introns and
splicing of exons. However, in two types of protozoans—trypanosomes and euglenoids—mRNAs are constructed by

U2

 FIGURE 12-9 Model of spliceosome-mediated splicing of

Gp A

Focus Animation: mRNA Splicing

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

U6

p

OH
5'

4

5'

p

3'

3'

U5
Second transesterification

Lariat intron

+

GpA

Spliced exons

OH
5

5'

pG

Debranching
enzyme

A
Linear RNA

OH 3'

+ U2, U5, U6

pre-mRNA. Step 1 : After U1 and U2 snRNPs associate with the
pre-mRNA, via base-pairing interactions shown in Figure 12-8, a
trimeric snRNP complex of U4, U5, and U6 joins the initial
complex to form the spliceosome. Step 2 : Rearrangements of
base-pairing interactions between snRNAs converts the
spliceosome into a catalytically active conformation and
destabilizes the U1 and U4 snRNPs, which are released. Step 3 :
The catalytic core, thought to be formed by U6 and U2, then
catalyzes the first transesterification reaction, forming the
intermediate containing a 2,5-phosphodiester bond shown in
Figure 12-7. Step 4 : Following further rearrangements between
the snRNPs, the second transesterification reaction joins the two
exons by a standard 3,5-phosphodiester bond and releases the
intron as a lariat structure and the remaining snRNPs. Step 5 :
The excised lariat intron is converted into a linear RNA by a
debranching enzyme. [Adapted from T. Villa et al., 2002, Cell 109:149.]

12.1 • Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA

501

RNA polymerase II

Linker

FPO

28 nm

▲ FIGURE 12-10 Schematic diagram of RNA polymerase II
with the CTD extended. The length of the fully extended yeast
RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) and the linker
region that connects it to the polymerase is shown relative to
the globular domain of the polymerase. The CTD of mammalian

splicing together separate RNA molecules. This process, referred to as trans-splicing, is also used in the synthesis of
10–15 percent of the mRNAs in the nematode (round worm)
Caenorhabditis elegans, an important model organism for
studying embryonic development. Trans-splicing is carried
out by snRNPs by a process similar to the splicing of exons
in a single pre-mRNA.

Chain Elongation by RNA Polymerase II Is
Coupled to the Presence of RNA-Processing
Factors
The carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II is
composed of multiple repeats of a seven-residue (heptapeptide)
sequence. When fully extended, the CTD domain in the yeast
enzyme is about 65 nm long (Figure 12-10); the CTD in human
polymerase is about twice as long. The remarkable length of
the CTD apparently allows multiple proteins to associate simultaneously with a single RNA polymerase II molecule. For instance, as mentioned earlier, the enzyme that adds the 5 cap to
nascent transcripts associates with the phosphorylated CTD
shortly after transcription initiation. In addition, RNA splicing
and polyadenylation factors have been found to associate with
the phosphorylated CTD. As a consequence, these processing
factors are present at high local concentrations when splice sites
and poly(A) signals are transcribed by the polymerase, enhancing the rate and specificity of RNA processing.
Recent results indicate that the association of RNA splicing factors with the phosphorylated CTD also stimulates
transcription elongation. Thus chain elongation is coupled to
the binding of RNA-processing factors to the phosphorylated CTD. This mechanism may ensure that a pre-mRNA
is not synthesized unless the machinery for processing it is
properly positioned.

SR Proteins Contribute to Exon Definition in Long
Pre-mRNAs
The average length of an exon in the human genome is ≈150
bases, whereas the average length of an intron is much longer
(≈3500 bases)! The longest introns contain upwards of 500
kb. Because the sequences of 5 and 3 splice sites and branch
points are so degenerate, multiple copies are likely to occur

CTD
65 nm

RNA polymerase II is twice as long. In its extended form, the
CTD can associate with multiple RNA-processing factors
simultaneously. [From P. Cramer, D. A. Bushnell, and R. D. Kornberg,
2001, Science 292:1863.]

randomly in long introns. Consequently, additional sequence
information is required to define the exons that should be
spliced together in higher organisms with long introns.
The more sophisticated mechanism of exon recognition
required in higher organisms entails a family of RNAbinding proteins, the SR proteins, that interact with sequences within exons called exonic splicing enhancers. SR
proteins are characterized by having one or more RRM
RNA-binding domains and several protein-protein interaction domains rich in serine and arginine residues. When
bound to exonic splicing enhancers, SR proteins mediate the
cooperative binding of U1 snRNP to a true 5 splice site and
U2 snRNP to a branch point through a network of proteinprotein interactions that span across an exon (Figure 12-11).
The complex of SR proteins, snRNPs, and other splicing factors (e.g., U2AF) that assemble across an exon, which has
been called a cross-exon recognition complex, permits precise specification of exons in long pre-mRNAs.
In the transcription units of higher organisms with
long introns, exons not only encode the amino acid
sequences of different portions of a protein but also
contain binding sites for SR proteins. Mutations that interfere
with the binding of an SR protein to an exonic splicing enhancer, even if they do not change the encoded amino acid sequence, would prevent formation of the cross-exon recognition
complex. As a result, the affected exon is “skipped” during
splicing and not included in the final processed mRNA. The
truncated mRNA produced in this case is either degraded or
translated into a mutant, abnormally functioning protein. Recent studies have implicated this type of mutation in human genetic diseases. For example, spinal muscle atrophy is one of the
most common genetic causes of childhood mortality. This disease results from mutations in a region of the genome containing two closely related genes, SMN1 and SMN2, that arose by
gene duplication. SMN2 encodes a protein identical with
SMN1, but it is expressed at much lower level because a silent
mutation in one exon interferes with the binding of an SR protein, leading to exon skipping in most of the SMN2 mRNAs.
The homologous SMN gene in the mouse, where there is only a
single copy, is essential for cell viability. Spinal muscle atrophy
in humans results from homozygous mutations that inactivate
SMN1. The low level of protein translated from the small

502

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport
Spliceosome

U2AF65 35 SR SR SR
Pre-mRNA 5'

YYYY

AG

FPO

U1
GU

ESE

Cross-exon recognition complex

▲ FIGURE 12-11 Exon recognition through cooperative
binding of SR proteins and splicing factors to pre-mRNA.
The correct 5 GU and 3 AG splice sites are recognized by
splicing factors on the basis of their proximity to exons. The
exons contain exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) that are binding
sites for SR proteins. When bound to ESEs, the SR proteins
interact with one another and promote the cooperative binding
of the U1 snRNP to the 5 splice site of the downstream intron,
the U2 snRNP to the branch point of the upstream intron, the
65- and 35-kD subunits of U2AF to the pyrimidine-rich region
and AG 3 splice site of the upstream intron, and other splicing
factors (not shown). The resulting RNA-protein cross-exon
fraction of SMN2 mRNAs that are correctly spliced is sufficient
to maintain cell viability during embryogenesis and fetal development, but it is not sufficient to maintain viability of spinal
cord motor neurons in childhood, resulting in their death and
the associated disease.
Approximately 15 percent of the single-base-pair mutations that cause human genetic diseases interfere with proper
exon definition. Some of these mutations occur in 5 or 3
splice sites, often resulting in the use of nearby alternative
“cryptic” splice sites present in the normal gene sequence.
In the absence of the normal splice site, the cross-exon recognition complex recognizes these alternative sites. Other mutations that cause abnormal splicing result in a new
consensus splice site sequence that becomes recognized in
place of the normal splice site. Finally, some mutations can
interfere with the binding of specific hnRNP proteins to premRNAs that enhance or repress splicing at normal splice
sites, as in the case of the SMN2 gene. ❚

Self-Splicing Group II Introns Provide Clues
to the Evolution of snRNAs
Under certain nonphysiological in vitro conditions, pure
preparations of some RNA transcripts slowly splice out introns in the absence of any protein. This observation led to
recognition that some introns are self-splicing. Two types of
self-splicing introns have been discovered: group I introns,
present in nuclear rRNA genes of protozoans, and group II
introns, present in protein-coding genes and some rRNA and
tRNA genes in mitochondria and chloroplasts of plants and
fungi. Discovery of the catalytic activity of self-splicing introns revolutionized concepts about the functions of RNA.
As discussed in Chapter 4, RNA is now thought to catalyze

U2

U2AF65 35 SR SR SR

A

YYYY

Branch point

AG
3' splice site

U1
GU

ESE

3'

5' splice site

Cross-exon recognition complex

recognition complex spans an exon and activates the correct
splice sites for RNA splicing. Note that the U1 and U2 snRNPs
in this unit are not part of the same spliceosome. The U2 snRNP
on the right forms a spliceosome with the U1 snRNP bound to
the 5’-end of the same intron. The U1 snRNP shown on the right
forms a spliceosome with the U2 snRNP bound to the branch
point of the downstream intron (not shown), and the U2 snRNP
on the left forms a spliceosome with a U1 snRNP bound to the
5’ splice site of the upstream intron (not shown). Double-headed
arrows indicate protein-protein interactions. [Adapted from T.
Maniatis, 2002, Nature 418:236; see also S. M. Berget, 1995, J. Biol.
Chem. 270:2411.]

peptide-bond formation during protein synthesis in ribosomes. Here we discuss the probable role of group II introns,
now found only in mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA, in
the evolution of snRNAs; the functioning of group I introns
is considered in the later section on rRNA processing.
Even though their precise sequences are not highly conserved, all group II introns fold into a conserved, complex
secondary structure containing numerous stem-loops (Figure
12-12a). Self-splicing by a group II intron occurs via two
transesterification reactions, involving intermediates and
products analogous to those found in nuclear pre-mRNA
splicing. The mechanistic similarities between group II intron
self-splicing and spliceosomal splicing led to the hypothesis
that snRNAs function analogously to the stem-loops in the
secondary structure of group II introns. According to this hypothesis, snRNAs interact with 5 and 3 splice sites of premRNAs and with each other to produce a three-dimensional
RNA structure functionally analogous to that of group II
self-splicing introns (Figure 12-12b).
An extension of this hypothesis is that introns in ancient
pre-mRNAs evolved from group II self-splicing introns
through the progressive loss of internal RNA structures,
which concurrently evolved into trans-acting snRNAs that
perform the same functions. Support for this type of evolutionary model comes from experiments with group II intron
mutants in which domain V and part of domain I are deleted.
RNA transcripts containing such mutant introns are defective in self-splicing, but when RNA molecules equivalent to
the deleted regions are added to the in vitro reaction, selfsplicing occurs. This finding demonstrates that these domains in group II introns can be trans-acting, like snRNAs.
The similarity in the mechanisms of group II intron selfsplicing and spliceosomal splicing of pre-mRNAs also

12.1 • Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA
(a) Group II intron

(b) U snRNAs in spliceosome

thought to stabilize the precise geometry of snRNAs and intron nucleotides required to catalyze pre-mRNA splicing.
The evolution of snRNAs may have been an important
step in the rapid evolution of higher eukaryotes. As internal
intron sequences were lost and their functions in RNA splicing supplanted by trans-acting snRNAs, the remaining intron
sequences would be free to diverge. This in turn likely facilitated the evolution of new genes through exon shuffling since
there are few constraints on the sequence of new introns generated in the process (see Figure 10-17). It also permitted the
increase in protein diversity that results from alternative
RNA splicing and an additional level of gene control resulting from regulated RNA splicing.

U5
III

FPO

II

U4

IV

I

V

U6

U1

A
5' 3'

VI

A

U2

5' 3'
Pre-mRNA

▲ FIGURE 12-12 Schematic diagrams comparing the
secondary structures of group II self-splicing introns (a)
and U snRNAs present in the spliceosome (b). The first
transesterification reaction is indicated by green arrows; the
second reaction, by blue arrows. The branch-point A is boldfaced.
The similarity in these structures suggests that the spliceosomal
snRNAs evolved from group II introns, with the trans-acting
snRNAs being functionally analogous to the corresponding
domains in group II introns. The colored bars flanking the introns
in (a) and (b) represent exons [Adapted from P. A. Sharp, 1991,

Most Transcription and RNA Processing Occur
in a Limited Number of Domains in Mammalian
Cell Nuclei

Science 254:663.]

suggests that the splicing reaction is catalyzed by the snRNA,
not the protein, components of spliceosomes. Although group
II introns can self-splice in vitro at elevated temperatures and
Mg2 concentrations, under in vivo conditions proteins
called maturases, which bind to group II intron RNA, are required for rapid splicing. Maturases are thought to stabilize
the precise three-dimensional interactions of the intron RNA
required to catalyze the two splicing transesterification reactions. By analogy, snRNP proteins in spliceosomes are
(a)

Several kinds of studies suggest that transcription and RNA
processing occur largely within discrete foci within the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. For instance, digital imaging microscopy of human fibroblasts reveals that most of the
nuclear polyadenylated RNA (i.e., unspliced and partially
spliced pre-mRNA and nuclear mRNA) is localized in about
100 foci (Figure 12-13). An SR protein involved in exon definition (SC-35) is localized to the center of these same loci.
These data imply that the nucleus is not simply an unorganized container for chromatin and the proteins that carry
out chromosome replication, transcription, and RNA processing. Rather, there is a highly organized underlying nuclear substructure. A poorly understood fibrillar network
comprising multiple proteins called the nuclear matrix can be

(b)

Science 259:1330.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

regions of chromatin, although not all regions containing
low levels of DNA contained detectable polyadenylated
RNA (arrow). (b) The same section shown in (a) stained
to detect polyadenylated RNA (red) and SR protein SC-35,
which was visualized with a green fluorescein-labeled
monoclonal antibody. Regions where the stains overlap
appear yellow. SC-35 is present in the center of many foci
(arrow). Nu  nucleolus. [From K. C. Carter et al., 1993,

Video: Dynamic Nature of Pre-mRNA
Splicing Factor Movement in Living Cells

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 12-13 Staining shows
that polyadenylated RNA and RNA splicing factors are
sequestered in discrete areas of the mammalian
fibroblast nucleus. Digital imaging microscopy was used
to reconstruct a 1-m-thick section of a stained human
fibroblast nucleus. (a) Section stained with red rhodaminelabeled poly(dT) to detect polyadenylated RNA (red) and with
DAPI to detect DNA (blue). Polyadenylated RNA is localized
to a limited number of discrete foci (speckles) between

503

504

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

observed in the nucleus after digestion of most DNA and
extraction with high salt. This network of fibrous proteins
probably contributes to nuclear organization just as cytoskeletal fibers contribute to the organization of the cytoplasm. Much remains to be learned about the molecular
mechanisms underlying this organization and its consequences for nuclear processes.

Nuclear Exonucleases Degrade RNA That
Is Processed out of Pre-mRNAs
Because the human genome contains long introns, only ≈5
percent of the nucleotides that are polymerized by RNA polymerase II during transcription are retained in the mature,
processed mRNA. The introns that are spliced out and the region downstream from the cleavage and polyadenylation site
are degraded by nuclear exonucleases that hydrolyze one base
at a time from either the 5 or 3 end of an RNA strand.
As mentioned earlier, the 2,5-phosphodiester bond in excised introns is hydrolyzed by a debranching enzyme, yielding
a linear molecule with unprotected ends that can be attacked
by exonucleases (see Figure 12-9). The predominant nuclear
decay pathway is 3→5 hydrolysis by 11 exonucleases that associate with one another in a large protein complex called the
exosome. Other proteins in the complex include RNA helicases that disrupt base pairing and RNA-protein interactions
that would otherwise impede the exonucleases. Exosomes also
function in the cytoplasm as discussed later. In addition the exosome appears to degrade pre-mRNAs that have not been
properly spliced or polyadenylated. It is not yet clear how the
exosome recognizes improperly processed pre-mRNAs.
To avoid being degraded by nuclear exonucleases, nascent
transcripts, pre-mRNA processing intermediates, and mature
mRNAs in the nucleus must have their ends protected. The 5
end of a nascent transcript is protected by addition of the 5
cap structure as soon as the 5 end emerges from the polymerase. Further protection is provided by interaction of the
cap with a nuclear cap-binding complex, which also functions
in export of mRNA to the cytoplasm. The 3 end of a nascent
transcript lies within the RNA polymerase and thus is inaccessible to exonucleases (see Figure 4-10). As discussed previously, the free 3 end generated by cleavage of a pre-mRNA
downstream from the poly(A) signal is rapidly polyadenylated
by the poly(A) polymerase associated with the other 3 processing factors, and the resulting poly(A) tail is bound by
PABPII (see Figure 12-4). This tight coupling of cleavage and
polyadenylation protects the 3 end from exonuclease attack.

Shortly after transcription initiation, a capping enzyme
associated with the phosphorylated CTD of RNA polymerase II adds the 5 cap to the nascent transcript.

■

In most protein-coding genes, a conserved AAUAAA
poly(A) signal lies slightly upstream from a poly(A) site
where cleavage and polyadenylation occur. A GU- or Urich sequence downstream from the poly(A) site contributes to the efficiency of cleavage and polyadenylation.

■

A multiprotein complex that includes poly(A) polymerase (PAP) carries out the cleavage and polyadenylation
of a pre-mRNA. A nuclear poly(A)-binding protein,
PABPII, stimulates addition of A residues by PAP and stops
addition once the poly(A) tail reaches 200–250 residues
(see Figure 12-4).

■

Five different snRNPs interact via base pairing with one
another and with pre-mRNA to form the spliceosome (see
Figure 12-9). This very large ribonucleoprotein complex
catalyzes two transesterification reactions that join two exons and remove the intron as a lariat structure, which is
subsequently degraded (see Figure 12-7).

■

The association of pre-mRNA processing factors with
the CTD of RNA polymerase II stimulates chain elongation. This coupling ensures that a pre-mRNA is not synthesized until the factors required for its processing are in
place to interact with splicing and cleavage and polyadenylation signals in the pre-mRNA as they emerge from the
polymerase.

■

SR proteins that bind to exonic splicing enhancer sequences in exons are critical in defining exons in the large
pre-mRNAs of higher organisms. A network of interactions between SR proteins, snRNPs, and splicing factors
forms a cross-exon recognition complex that specifies correct splice sites (see Figure 12-11).

■

The snRNAs in the spliceosome are thought to have an
overall tertiary structure similar to that of group II selfsplicing introns.

■

For long transcription units in higher organisms, splicing of exons usually begins as the pre-mRNA is still being
formed. Cleavage and polyadenylation to form the 3 end
of the mRNA occur after the poly(A) site is transcribed.

■

Excised introns are degraded primarily by exosomes,
multiprotein complexes that contain eleven 3→5 exonucleases as well as RNA helicases. Exosomes also degrade
improperly processed pre-mRNAs.

■

Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA

12.2 Regulation of Pre-mRNA
Processing

In the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, pre-mRNAs are associated with hnRNP proteins and processed by 5 capping,
3 cleavage and polyadenylation, and splicing before being
transported to the cytoplasm (see Figure 12-2).

Now that we’ve seen how pre-mRNAs are processed into mature, functional mRNAs, we consider how regulation of this
process can contribute to gene control. Recall from Chapter
10 that higher eukaryotes contain both simple and complex

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 12.1

■

12.2 • Regulation of Pre-mRNA Processing

transcription units. The primary transcripts produced from the
former contain one poly(A) site and exhibit only one pattern
of RNA splicing, even if multiple introns are present; thus
simple transcription units encode a single mRNA. In contrast,
the primary transcripts produced from complex transcription
units can be processed in alternative ways to yield different
mRNAs that encode distinct proteins (see Figure 10-2).

Alternative Splicing Is the Primary Mechanism
for Regulating mRNA Processing
The results from recent genomic studies suggest that the
number of complex transcription units may be much greater
than previously realized. Researchers estimate that up to ≈60
percent of all transcription units in the human genome are
complex. This estimate comes from comparison of the genomic DNA sequence with expressed sequence tags (ESTs),
which are randomly sequenced segments of cDNA (Chapter
9). Comparison of these cDNA sequences with genomic
DNA sequence shows the locations of exons and introns in
genomic DNA. The finding of alternative combinations of
exons expressed from a region of genomic DNA reveals the
existence of a complex transcription unit. Even though this
estimate may be elevated somewhat by inclusion in the EST
database of rare RNAs that result from mistakes in RNA
processing, it is clear that complex transcription units account for a large portion of the protein-coding sequences in
humans. This finding and the discovery of multiple examples
of regulated RNA processing indicate that alternative RNA
processing of complex pre-mRNAs produced from such
transcription units is a significant gene-control mechanism in
higher eukaryotes.
Although examples of cleavage at alternative poly(A) sites
in pre-mRNAs are known, alternative splicing of different
exons is the more common mechanism for expressing different proteins from one complex transcription unit. Such alternative processing pathways usually are regulated, often in a
cell-type-specific manner; that is, one possible mRNA is expressed in one type of cell or tissue, while another is expressed
in different cells or tissues. In Chapter 4, for example, we
mentioned that fibroblasts produce one type of the extracellular protein fibronectin, whereas hepatocytes produce another type. Both fibronectin isoforms are encoded by the same
transcription unit, which is spliced differently in the two cell
types to yield two different mRNAs (see Figure 4-15). In other
cases, alternative processing may occur in the same cell type
in response to different developmental or environmental signals. First we discuss one of the best-understood examples of
regulated RNA processing and then consider its consequences
in development of the nervous system.

A Cascade of Regulated RNA Splicing Controls
Drosophila Sexual Differentiation
One of the earliest examples of regulated alternative splicing
of pre-mRNA came from studies of sexual differentiation

505

in Drosophila. Genes required for normal Drosophila sexual differentiation were first characterized by isolating
Drosophila mutants defective in the process. When the proteins encoded by the wild-type genes were characterized biochemically, two of them were found to regulate a cascade
of alternative RNA splicing in Drosophila embryos. More
recent research has provided insight into how these proteins
regulate RNA processing.
The Sxl protein, encoded by the sex-lethal gene, is the
first protein to act in the cascade. Early in development, this
gene is transcribed from a promoter that functions only in
female embryos. Later in development, this female-specific
promoter is shut off and another promoter for sex-lethal becomes active in both male and female embryos. However, in
the absence of early Sxl protein, the sex-lethal pre-mRNA in
male embryos is spliced to produce an mRNA that contains
a stop codon early in the sequence. The net result is that male
embryos produce no functional Sxl protein either early or
later in development.
In contrast, the Sxl protein expressed in early female embryos directs splicing of the sex-lethal pre-mRNA so that a
functional sex-lethal mRNA is produced (Figure 12-14a). Sxl
accomplishes this by binding to a sequence in the pre-mRNA
near the 3 end of the intron between exon 2 and exon 3,
thereby blocking the proper association of U2AF and U2
snRNP. As a consequence, the U1 snRNP bound to the 3
end of exon 2 assembles into a spliceosome with U2 snRNP
bound to the branch point at the 3 end of the intron between exons 3 and 4, leading to splicing of exon 2 to 4 and
skipping of exon 3. The resulting female-specific sex-lethal
mRNA is translated into functional Sxl protein, which reinforces its own expression in female embryos by continuing to
cause skipping of exon 3. The absence of Sxl protein in male
embryos allows the inclusion of exon 3 and, consequently, of
the stop codon that prevents translation of functional Sxl
protein.
Sxl protein also regulates alternative RNA splicing of the
transformer gene pre-mRNA (Figure 12-14b). In male embryos, where no Sxl is expressed, exon 1 is spliced to exon
2, which contains a stop codon that prevents synthesis of a
functional protein. In female embryos, however, binding of
Sxl protein to the 3 end of the intron between exons 1 and 2
blocks binding of U2AF at this site. The interaction of Sxl
with transformer pre-mRNA is mediated by two RRM domains in the protein (see Figure 12-3). When Sxl is bound,
U2AF binds to a lower-affinity site farther 3 in the premRNA; as a result exon 1 is spliced to this alternative 3
splice site, eliminating exon 2 with its stop codon. The resulting female-specific transformer mRNA, which contains
additional constitutively spliced exons, is translated into
functional Transformer (Tra) protein.
Finally, Tra protein regulates the alternative processing of
pre-mRNA transcribed from the double-sex gene (Figure
12-14c). In female embryos, a complex of Tra and two constitutively expressed proteins, Rbp1 and Tra2, directs splicing of exon 3 to exon 4 and also promotes cleavage/

506

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport
Pre-mRNAs

mRNAs

−
2
(a) sxl

2

3

4

Sxl protein

4
3'

5'

FPO

2

3

1

3

1

2

4

−

(b) tra

1

5'

2

3'

Rbp1 + Tra2

+

3
5'

3

+

An
An

(c) dsx

Tra protein

3

4

5

3'

3

4

Dsx protein

3

5

Dsx protein

▲ FIGURE 12-14 Cascade of regulated splicing that
controls sex determination via expression of sex-lethal (sxl),
transformer (tra), and double-sex (dsx) genes in Drosophila
embryos. For clarity, only the exons (boxes) and introns (black
lines) where regulated splicing occurs are shown. Splicing is
indicated by red dashed lines above (female) and blue dashed
lines below (male) the pre-mRNAs. Vertical red lines in exons
indicate in-frame stop codons, which prevent synthesis of
functional protein. Only female embryos produce functional Sxl
protein, which represses splicing between exons 2 and 3 in sxl
pre-mRNA (a) and between exons 1 and 2 in tra pre-mRNA (b).

(c) In contrast, the cooperative binding of Tra protein and two SR
proteins, Rbp1 and Tra2, activates splicing between exons 3 and
4 and cleavage/polyadenylation An at the 3 end of exon 4 in dsx
pre-mRNA in female embryos. In male embryos, which lack
functional Tra, the SR proteins do not bind to exon 4, and
consequently exon 3 is spliced to exon 5. The distinct Dsx
proteins produced in female and male embryos as the result of
this cascade of regulated splicing repress transcription of genes
required for sexual differentiation of the opposite sex. [Adapted

polyadenylation at the alternative poly(A) site at the 3 end
of exon 4. In male embryos, which produce no Tra protein,
exon 4 is skipped, so that exon 3 is spliced to exon 5. Exon 5
is constitutively spliced to exon 6, which is polyadenylated at
its 3 end. As a result of the cascade of regulated RNA processing depicted in Figure 12-14, different Dsx proteins are
expressed in male and female embryos. The male Dsx protein is a transcriptional repressor that inhibits the expression
of genes required for female development. Conversely, the female Dsx protein represses transcription of genes required
for male development.

Figure 12-15 illustrates how the Tra/Tra2/Rbp1 complex is
thought to interact with double-sex pre-mRNA. Recent studies have shown that Rbp1 and Tra2 are SR proteins, similar
to those discussed previously. They mediate the cooperative
binding of the Tra/Tra2/Rbp1 complex to six exonic splicing
enhancers in exon 4. The bound Tra2 and Rbp1 proteins then
promote the binding of U2AF and U2 snRNP to the 3 end of
the intron between exons 3 and 4, just as other SR proteins
do for constitutively spliced exons (see Figure 12-11).
TheTra/Tra2/Rbp1 complexes may also enhance binding of
the cleavage/polyadnylation complex to the 3´ end of exon 4.

from M. J. Moore et al., 1993, in R. Gesteland and J. Atkins, eds., The
RNA World, Cold Spring Harbor Press, pp. 303–357.]

Tra

FPO

 FIGURE 12-15 Model of splicing activation by Tra protein
and the SR proteins Rbp1 and Tra2. In female Drosophila
embryos, splicing of exons 3 and 4 in dsx pre-mRNA is activated
by binding of Tra/Tra2/Rbp1 complexes to six sites in exon 4.
Because Rbp1 and Tra2 cannot bind to the pre-mRNA in the
absence of Tra, exon 4 is skipped in male embryos. See the text
for discussion. An  polyadenylation. [Adapted from T. Maniatis and
B. Tasic, 2002, Nature 418:236.]

Rbp1

Tra2

An
5'

1

2

3

4

An
5

6

3'

12.2 • Regulation of Pre-mRNA Processing

Splicing Repressors and Activators Control
Splicing at Alternative Sites
As is evident from Figure 12-14, the Drosophila Sxl protein
and Tra protein have opposite effects: Sxl prevents splicing,
causing exons to be skipped, whereas Tra promotes splicing.
The action of similar proteins may explain the cell-typespecific expression of fibronectin isoforms in humans. For instance, an Sxl-like splicing repressor expressed in hepatocytes
might bind to splice sites for the EIIIA and EIIIB exons in the
fibronectin pre-mRNA, causing them to be skipped during
RNA splicing (see Figure 4-15). Alternatively, a Tra-like splicing activator expressed in fibroblasts might activate the splice
sites associated with the fibronectin EIIIA and EIIIB exons,
leading to inclusion of these exons in the mature mRNA. Experimental examination in some systems has revealed that inclusion of an exon in some cell types versus skipping of the
same exon in other cell types results from the combined influence of several splicing repressors and enhancers.
Alternative splicing of exons is especially common in the
nervous system, generating multiple isoforms of many proteins required for neuronal development and function in
both vertebrates and invertebrates. The primary transcripts
from these genes often show quite complex splicing patterns
that can generate several different mRNAs, with different
spliced forms expressed in different anatomical locations
within the central nervous system. We consider two remarkable examples that illustrate the critical role of this process in
neural function.

Expression of Slo Isoforms in Vertebrate Hair Cells In the
inner ear of vertebrates, individual “hair cells,” which are ciliated neurons, respond most strongly to a specific frequency
of sound. Cells tuned to low frequency (≈50 Hz) are found at
one end of the tubular cochlea that makes up the inner ear;
cells responding to high frequency (≈5000 Hz) are found at
the other end (Figure 12-16a). Cells in between respond to
a gradient of frequencies between these extremes. One component in the tuning of hair cells in reptiles and birds is the
opening of K ion channels in response to increased intracellular Ca2 concentrations. The Ca2 concentration at
which the channel opens determines the frequency with
which the membrane potential oscillates, and hence the frequency to which the cell is tuned.
The gene encoding this channel (called slo, after the homologous Drosophila gene) is expressed as multiple, alternatively spliced mRNAs. The various Slo proteins encoded
by these alternative mRNAs open at different Ca2 concentrations. Hair cells with different response frequencies express different isoforms of the Slo channel protein depending
on their position along the length of the cochlea. The sequence variation in the protein is very complex: there are at
least eight regions in the mRNA where alternative exons are
utilized, permitting the expression of 576 possible isoforms
(Figure 12-16b). PCR analysis of slo mRNAs from individual
hair cells has shown that each hair cell expresses a mixture of

507

different alternative slo mRNAs, with different forms predominating in different cells according to their position
along the cochlea. This remarkable arrangement suggests
that splicing of the slo pre-mRNA is regulated in response
to extracellular signals that inform the cell of its position
along the cochlea.
Recent results have shown that splicing at one of the alternative splice sites in the slo pre-mRNA in the rat is suppressed when a specific protein kinase is activated by
depolarization of the neuron in response to synaptic activity
from interacting neurons. This observation raises the possibility that a splicing repressor specific for this site may be
activated when it is phosphorylated by this protein kinase,

(a)

Apical
hair cell
(50 Hz)

(b)

Auditory
nerve
cell body

2

Exterior
S0

Basal
hair cell
(5000 Hz)

FPO

1

N

Auditory
nerve

S1

S2

S3

S4

S5

S6

Cytosol
3

S7

8
C

4
S8
6

S10
5
S9
7

▲ FIGURE 12-16 Role of alternative splicing of slo mRNA
in the perception of sounds of different frequency. (a) The
chicken cochlea, a 5-mm-long tube, contains an epithelium of
auditory hair cells that are tuned to a gradient of vibrational
frequencies from 50 Hz at the apical end (left ) to 5000 Hz at the
basal end (right ). (b) The Slo protein contains seven
transmembrane  helices (S0–S6), which associate to form the
K channel. The cytosolic domain, which includes four
hydrophobic regions (S7–S10), regulates opening of the channel
in response to Ca2. Isoforms of the Slo channel, encoded by
alternatively spliced mRNAs produced from the same primary
transcript, open at different Ca2 concentrations and thus
respond to different frequencies. Red numbers refer to regions
where alternative splicing produces different amino acid
sequences in the various Slo isoforms. [Adapted from
K. P. Rosenblatt et al., 1997, Neuron 19:1061.]

508

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

whose activity in turn is regulated by synaptic activity. Since
hnRNP and SR proteins are extensively modified by phosphorylation and other post-translational modifications, it
seems likely that complex regulation of alternative RNA
splicing through post-translational modifications of splicing
factors plays a significant role in modulating neuron function.

Expression of Dscam Isoforms in Drosophila Retinal Neurons The most extreme example of regulated alternative
RNA processing yet uncovered occurs in expression of the
Dscam gene in Drosophila. Mutations in this gene interfere
with the normal connections made by the axons of retinal
neurons with neurons in a specific region of the brain during fly development. Analysis of the Dscam gene shows that
it contains 95 alternatively spliced exons that could be
spliced to generate over 38,000 possible isoforms! These results raise the possibility that the expression of different
Dscam isoforms through regulated RNA splicing helps to
specify the tens of thousands of different specific synaptic
connections made between retinal and brain neurons. In
other words, the correct wiring of neurons in the brain may
depend on regulated RNA splicing.

RNA Editing Alters the Sequences of Pre-mRNAs
Sequencing of numerous cDNA clones and of the corresponding genomic DNAs from multiple organisms led in the
mid-1980s to the unexpected discovery of a previously unrecognized type of pre-mRNA processing. In this type of processing, called RNA editing, the sequence of a pre-mRNA is
altered; as a result, the sequence of the corresponding mature
mRNA differs from the exons encoding it in genomic DNA.
RNA editing is widespread in the mitochondria of protozoans and plants and also in chloroplasts; in these organelles, more than half the sequence of some mRNAs is
altered from the sequence of the corresponding primary tran-

scripts. In higher eukaryotes, RNA editing is much rarer, and
thus far only single-base changes have been observed. Such
minor editing, however, turns out to have important functional consequences in some cases.
An important example of RNA editing in mammals involves the apoB gene, which encodes two alternative forms of
the serum protein apolipoprotein B (apoB): apoB-100 expressed in hepatocytes and apoB-48 expressed in intestinal epithelial cells. The ≈240-kDa apoB-48 corresponds to the
N-terminal region of the ≈500-kDa apoB-100. As we detail in
Chapter 18, both apoB proteins are components of large
lipoprotein complexes that transport lipids in the serum. However, only low-density lipoprotein (LDL) complexes, which
contain apoB-100 on their surface, deliver cholesterol to body
tissues by binding to the LDL receptor present on all cells.
The cell-type-specific expression of the two forms of apoB
results from editing of apoB pre-mRNA so as to change the
nucleotide at position 6666 in the sequence from a C to a U.
This alteration, which occurs only in intestinal cells, converts
a CAA codon for glutamine to a UAA stop codon, leading to
synthesis of the shorter apoB-48 (Figure 12-17). Studies with
the partially purified enzyme that performs the posttranscriptional deamination of C6666 to U shows that it can
recognize and edit an RNA as short as 26 nucleotides with the
sequence surrounding C6666 in the apoB primary transcript.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 12.2
Regulation of Pre-mRNA Processing
Because of alternative splicing of primary transcripts and
cleavage at different poly(A) sites, different mRNAs may
be expressed from the same gene in different cell types or
at different developmental stages (see Figure 12-14).

■

Alternative splicing can be regulated by RNA-binding
proteins that bind to specific sequences near regulated

■

TAA

CAA

apoB
gene

Exon 26
Liver

apoB
mRNA

CAA
5'
1

Proteins

Intestine

FPO

CAA

UAA

An

5'

COOH

NH2

4536

NH2

3'

ApoB-100

▲ FIGURE 12-17 RNA editing of apo-B pre-mRNA. The apoB
mRNA produced in the liver has the same sequence as the
exons in the primary transcript. This mRNA is translated into
apoB-100, which has two functional domains: an N-terminal
domain (green) that associates with lipids and a C-terminal
domain (orange) that binds to LDL receptors on cell membranes.

UAA

UAA
An

1

2152
COOH
ApoB-48

In the apo-B mRNA produced in the intestine, the CAA codon in
exon 26 is edited to a UAA stop codon. As a result, intestinal
cells produce apoB-48, which corresponds to the N-terminal
domain of apoB-100. [Adapted from P. Hodges and J. Scott, 1992,
Trends Biochem. Sci. 17:77.]

12.3 • Macromolecular Transport Across the Nuclear Envelope

splice sites. Splicing repressors may sterically block the
binding of splicing factors to specific sites in pre-mRNAs
or inhibit their function. Splicing activators enhance splicing by interacting with splicing factors, thus promoting
their association with a regulated splice site.
In RNA editing the nucleotide sequence of a pre-mRNA
is altered in the nucleus. In vertebrates, this process is fairly
rare and entails deamination of a single base in the mRNA
sequence, resulting in a change in the amino acid specified
by the corresponding codon and production of a functionally different protein (see Figure 12-17).

■

509

ous associated proteins. Transport of macromolecules including mRNPs, tRNAs, and ribosomal subunits out of the
nucleus and transport of all nuclear proteins translated in the
cytoplasm into the nucleus occur through nuclear pores in a
process that differs fundamentally from the transport of
small molecules and ions across other cellular membranes
(Chapter 7). Insight into the mechanisms of transport
through nuclear pores first came from studies of the nuclear
pores and of import and export of individual proteins, which
we consider first, before returning to the export of mRNPs.

Large and Small Molecules Enter and Leave
the Nucleus via Nuclear Pore Complexes

12.3 Macromolecular Transport
Across the Nuclear Envelope
Once the processing of an mRNA is completed in the nucleus, it remains associated with specific hnRNP proteins in
a messenger ribonuclear protein complex, or mRNP. Before
it can be translated into the encoded protein, it must be exported out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm. The nucleus is
separated from the cytoplasm by two membranes, which
form the nuclear envelope (see Figure 5-19). Like the plasma
membrane surrounding cells, each nuclear membrane consists of a water-impermeable phospholipid bilayer and vari-

(a)

Numerous pores perforate the nuclear envelope in all eukaryotic cells. Each nuclear pore is formed from an elaborate
structure termed the nuclear pore complex (NPC), which is
immense by molecular standards, ≈125 million daltons in
vertebrates, or about 30 times larger than a ribosome. An
NPC is made up of multiple copies of some 50 (in yeast) to
100 (in vertebrates) different proteins called nucleoporins.
Electron micrographs of nuclear pore complexes reveal a
roughly octagonal, membrane-embedded structure from
which eight ≈100-nm-long filaments extend into the nucleoplasm (Figure 12-18). The distal ends of these filaments are
joined by the terminal ring, forming a structure called the

(b)

FPO

Cytoplasm

Cytoplasmic
filaments
Proximal filaments
Central transporter

Spoke

Cytoplasmic ring

Outer nuclear
membrane

Outer spoke ring

Nuclear
envelope

Lumen
Inner spoke ring
Nucleoplasmic ring

Inner nuclear
membrane

Nucleoplasm

Nuclear basket

▲ FIGURE 12-18 Nuclear pore complex. (a) Nuclear envelopes microdissected from the
large nuclei of Xenopus oocytes visualized by field emission in-lens scanning electron
microscopy. Top: View of the cytoplasmic face reveals octagonal shape of membraneembedded portion of nuclear pore complexes. Bottom: View of the nucleoplasmic face shows
the nuclear basket that extends from the membrane portion. (b) Cut-away model of the pore
complex. [Part (a) from V. Doye and E. Hurt, 1997, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9:401; courtesy of M. W. Goldberg
and T. D. Allen. Part (b) adapted from M. P. Rout and J. D. Atchison, 2001, J. Biol. Chem. 276:16593.]

510

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

nuclear basket. The membrane-embedded portion also is
attached directly to the nuclear lamina, a network of lamin
intermediate filaments that extends over the inner surface of
the nuclear envelope (see Figure 21-16). Cytoplasmic filaments extend from the cytoplasmic side of the NPC into the
cytosol.
Ions, small metabolites, and globular proteins up to ≈60
kDa can diffuse through a water-filled channel in the nuclear
pore complex; these channels behave as if they are ≈0.9 nm
in diameter. However, large proteins and ribonucleoprotein
complexes cannot diffuse in and out of the nucleus. Rather,
these macromolecules are selectively transported in and out
of the nucleus with the assistance of soluble transporter proteins that bind macromolecules and also interact with certain
nucleoporins. The principles underlying macromolecular
transport through nuclear pore complexes were first determined for the import of individual proteins into the nucleus,
which we discuss first before turning to the question of how
fully processed mRNAs are transported into the cytoplasm.

Importins Transport Proteins Containing
Nuclear-Localization Signals into the Nucleus
All proteins found in the nucleus are synthesized in the cytoplasm and imported into the nucleus through nuclear pore
complexes. Such proteins contain a nuclear-localization signal (NLS) that directs their selective transport into the nucleus. NLSs were first discovered through the analysis of
mutants of simian virus 40 (SV40) that produced an abnormal form of the viral protein called large T-antigen. The
wild-type form of this protein is localized to the nucleus in
virus-infected cells, whereas some mutated forms of large Tantigen accumulate in the cytoplasm. The mutations responsible for this altered cellular localization all occur within a
specific seven-residue sequence rich in basic amino acids near
the C-terminus of the protein: Pro-Lys-Lys-Lys-Arg-Lys-Val.
Experiments with engineered hybrid proteins in which this
sequence was fused to a cytosolic protein demonstrated that
it directs transport into the nucleus, and consequently functions as an NLS (Figure 12-19). NLS sequences subsequently
were identified in numerous other proteins imported into the
nucleus. Many of these are similar to the basic NLS in SV40
large T-antigen, whereas other NLSs are chemically quite different. For instance, an NLS in the hnRNP A1 protein is
hydrophobic.
Early work on the mechanism of nuclear import focused on proteins containing a basic NLS, similar to the
one in SV40 large T-antigen. A digitonin-permeabilized cell
system provided an in vitro assay for analyzing soluble
cytosolic components required for nuclear import (Figure
12-20). Using this assay system, four required proteins
were purified: Ran, nuclear transport factor 2 (NTF2), importin , and importin . Ran is a monomeric G protein
that exists in two conformations, one when complexed
with GTP and an alternative one when the GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP (see Figure 3-29). The two importins

(a)

(b)

FPO
▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 12-19 Fusion of a nuclearlocalization signal (NLS) to a cytoplasmic protein causes the
protein to enter the cell nucleus. (a) Normal pyruvate kinase,
visualized by immunofluorescence after treating cultured cells
with a specific antibody (yellow), is localized to the cytoplasm.
This very large cytosolic protein functions in carbohydrate
metabolism. (b) When a chimeric pyruvate kinase protein
containing the SV40 NLS at its N-terminus was expressed in
cells, it was localized to the nucleus. The chimeric protein was
expressed from a transfected engineered gene produced by
fusing a viral gene fragment encoding the SV40 NLS to the
pyruvate kinase gene. [From D. Kalderon et al., 1984, Cell 39:499;
courtesy of Dr. Alan Smith.]

form a heterodimeric nuclear-import receptor: the  subunit binds to a basic NLS in a “cargo” protein to be transported into the nucleus, and the  subunit interacts with a
class of nucleoporins called FG-nucleoporins. These nucleoporins, which line the channel of the nuclear pore complex and also are found in the nuclear basket and the
cytoplasmic filaments, contain multiple repeats of short hydrophobic sequences rich in phenylalanine (F) and glycine
(G) residues (FG-repeats). More recently, several importin 
homologs have been found that function in the nuclear import
of proteins with other classes of NLSs. These importins interact directly with their cognate NLSs without the need for an
adapter protein like importin .
A current model for the import of cytoplasmic cargo
proteins mediated by a monomeric importin is shown in
Figure 12-21. Free importin in the cytoplasm binds to its
cognate NLS in a cargo protein, forming a bimolecular
cargo complex. The cargo complex then translocates
through the NPC channel as the importin binds transiently
to successive individual FG-repeats in the FG-nucleoporins
that line the channel. The FG-repeats are thought to act
like “stepping stones” as the cargo complex diffuses from
one FG-nucleoporin to another on its way through the
channel by a process that does not require a direct input of
energy from ATP hydrolysis or other mechanisms. The

12.3 • Macromolecular Transport Across the Nuclear Envelope
(a) Effect of digitonin

− Digitonin

FPO

+ Digitonin

(b) Nuclear import by permeabilized cells

The importin-Ran·GTP complex then diffuses back
through the NPC, again, through transient interactions of
the importin with FG repeats. Once the importin-Ran·GTP
complex reaches the cytoplasmic side of the NPC, Ran interacts with a specific GTPase-accelerating protein (RanGAP) that is a component of the NPC cytoplasmic
filaments. This stimulates Ran to hydrolyze its bound GTP
to GDP, causing it to convert to a conformation that has
low affinity for the importin, so that the free importin is
released into the cytoplasm, where it can participate in another cycle of import.
Ran is returned to the nucleus by NTF2. The NTF2 dimer
binds specifically to Ran·GDP and also interacts with the
FG repeats of FG-nucleoporins. Consequently, the NTF2Ran·GDP complex can diffuse through the pore via transient

Ran . GDP Ran . GTP
G
D
P

− Lysate

Importin

NLS

G
T
P

G
T
P

GEF

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 12-20 The failure of nuclear

[From S. Adam et al., 1990, J. Cell. Biol. 111:807; courtesy of
Dr. Larry Gerace.]

hydrophobic FG-repeats are thought to occur in regions
of extended, otherwise hydrophilic polypeptide chains
that fill the central channel. The extended chains are proposed to form a meshwork of hydrophilic strands associated through hydrophobic interactions between the
FG-repeats. This molecular meshwork is thought to restrict the diffusion of proteins larger than ≈ 60 kD. However, importins carrying cargo proteins are thought to
penetrate the molecular meshwork by making successive
interactions with the FG-repeats.
When the cargo complex reaches the nucleoplasm, the
importin interacts with Ran·GTP, causing a conformational change in the importin that decreases its affinity for
the NLS, releasing the cargo protein into the nucleoplasm.

Cytoplasm

Cargo
complex

GDP
GTP

G
D
P

Nucleoplasm

Cargo

G
T
P

+

+ Lysate

transport to occur in permeabilized cultured cells in the
absence of lysate demonstrates the involvement of soluble
cytosolic components in the process. (a) Phase-contrast
micrographs of untreated and digitonin-permeabilized HeLa cells.
Treatment of a monolayer of cultured cells with the mild,
nonionic detergent digitonin permeabilizes the plasma membrane
so that cytosolic constituents leak out, but leaves the nuclear
envelope and NPCs intact. (b) Fluorescence micrographs of
digitonin-permeabilized HeLa cells incubated with a fluorescent
protein chemically coupled to a synthetic SV40 T-antigen NLS
peptide in the presence and absence of cytosol (lysate).
Accumulation of this transport substrate in the nucleus occurred
only when cytosol was included in the incubation (lower right ).

511

NPC

FPO
Pi
G
D
P

H2O
GAP

G
T
P

+

▲ FIGURE 12-21 Mechanism for nuclear import of “cargo”
proteins. In the cytoplasm (bottom ), a free importin binds to the
NLS of a cargo protein, forming a bimolecular cargo complex. In
the case of a basic NLS, the adapter protein importin  bridges
the NLS and importin , forming a trimolecular cargo complex
(not shown). The cargo complex diffuses through the NPC by
interacting with successive FG-nucleoporins. In the nucleoplasm,
interaction of Ran·GTP with the importin causes a conformational
change that decreases its affinity for the NLS, releasing the
cargo. To support another cycle of import, the importin-Ran·GTP
complex is transported back to the cytoplasm. A GTPaseaccelerating protein (GAP) associated with the cytoplasmic
filaments of the NPC stimulates Ran to hydrolyze the bound GTP.
This generates a conformational change causing dissociation
from the importin, which can then initiate another round of
import. Ran·GDP is bound by NTF2 (not shown) and returned to
the nucleoplasm, where a guanine nucleotide–exchange factor
(GEF) causes release of GDP and rebinding of GTP.

512

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

interactions between NTF2 and the FG repeats. When this
complex reaches the nucleoplasm, it encounters a specific
guanine nucleotide–exchange factor (Ran-GEF) that causes
Ran to release its bound GDP and rebind GTP that is present
at much higher concentration. The resulting conformational
change in Ran decreases its affinity for NTF2 so that free
Ran·GTP is released into the nucleoplasm and NTF2 is free
to diffuse back through the pore.
The import complex travels through the pore by diffusion, a random process. Yet transport is unidirectional.
The direction of transport is a consequence of the rapid
dissociation of the import complex when it reaches the nucleoplasm. As a result, there is a concentration gradient of
the importin-cargo complex across the NPC: high in the
cytoplasm where the complex assembles and low in the
nucleoplasm where it dissociates. This concentration gradient is responsible for the unidirectional nature of nuclear
import. A similar concentration gradient is responsible for
driving the importin in the nucleus back into the cytoplasm. The concentration of the importin-Ran·GTP complex is higher in the nucleoplasm, where it assembles, than
on the cytoplasmic side of the NPC, where it dissociates.
Ultimately, the direction of the transport processes is dependent on the asymmetric distribution of the Ran-GEF
and the Ran-GAP. Ran-GEF in the nucleoplasm maintains
Ran in the Ran·GTP state, where it promotes dissociation
of the cargo complex. Ran-GAP on the cytoplasmic side of
the NPC converts Ran·GTP to Ran·GDP, dissociating the
importin-Ran·GTP complex and releasing free importin
into the cytosol.
(b)

(a)

Exportins Transport Proteins Containing
Nuclear-Export Signals out of the Nucleus
A very similar mechanism is used to export proteins, tRNAs,
and ribosomal subunits from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
This mechanism initially was elucidated from studies of certain hnRNP proteins that “shuttle” between the nucleus and
cytoplasm. For instance, the cell-fusion experiments described in Figure 12-22 first showed that some hnRNP proteins cycle in and out of the cytoplasm, whereas others
remain localized in the nucleus. Such “shuttling” proteins
contain a nuclear-export signal (NES) that stimulates their
export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm through nuclear
pores, in addition to an NLS that results in their reuptake
into the nucleus. Experiments with engineered hybrid genes
encoding a nucleus-restricted protein fused to various segments of a protein that shuttles in and out of the nucleus
have identified at least three different classes of NESs: a
leucine-rich sequence found in PKI (an inhibitor of protein
kinase A) and in the Rev protein of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a 38-residue sequence in hnRNP A1, and
a sequence in hnRNP K. To date, no functionally significant
structural features (e.g., repeated amino acids) have been
identified in the latter two classes.
The mechanism whereby shuttling proteins are exported
from the nucleus is best understood for those containing a
leucine-rich NES. According to the current model shown in
Figure 12-23, a specific nuclear-export receptor in the nucleus, exportin 1, first forms a complex with Ran·GTP and
then binds the NES in a cargo protein. Binding of exportin 1
(c)

FPO
▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 12-22 The movement of
human hnRNP A1 protein between nuclei in a heterokaryon
shows that it can cycle in and out of the cytoplasm, but
human hnRNP C protein, which showed no such movement,
cannot. Cultured HeLa cells and Xenopus cells were fused by
treatment with polyethylene glycol, producing heterokaryons
containing nuclei from each cell type. The hybrid cells were
treated with cycloheximide immediately after fusion to prevent
protein synthesis. After 2 hours, the cells were fixed and stained
with fluorescent-labeled antibodies specific for human hnRNP C
and A1 proteins. These antibodies do not bind to the homologous
Xenopus proteins. (a) A fixed preparation viewed by phasecontrast microscopy includes unfused HeLa cells (arrowhead) and
Xenopus cells (dotted arrow), as well as fused heterokaryons

(solid arrow). In the heterokaryon in this micrograph, the round
HeLa-cell nucleus is to the right of the oval-shaped Xenopus
nucleus. (b, c) When the same preparation was viewed by
fluorescence microscopy, the stained hnRNP C protein appeared
green and the stained hnRNP A1 protein appeared red. Note that
the unfused Xenopus cell on the left is unstained, confirming
that the antibodies are specific for the human proteins. In the
heterokaryon, hnRNP C protein appears only in HeLa-cell nuclei
(b), whereas the A1 protein appears in both nuclei (c). Since
protein synthesis was blocked after cell fusion, some of the
human hnRNP A1 protein must have left the HeLa-cell nucleus,
moved through the cytoplasm, and entered the Xenopus nucleus
in the heterokaryon. [See S. Pinol-Roma and G. Dreyfuss, 1992, Nature
355:730; courtesy of G. Dreyfuss.]

12.3 • Macromolecular Transport Across the Nuclear Envelope
Ran . GDP Ran . GTP

Exportin 1 Cargo

G
T
P

G
D
P

GTP

G
D
P

Cargo complex
NES

GDP

GEF

G
T
P

+

+

G
T
P

NPC

Nucleoplasm

FPO

Cytoplasm

GAP

G
D
P

Pi

H2O

G
T
P

▲ FIGURE 12-23 Mechanism for nuclear export of cargo
proteins containing a leucine-rich nuclear-export signal
(NES). In the nucleoplasm, the protein exportin 1 binds
cooperatively to the NES of the cargo protein to be transported
and to Ran·GTP. After the resulting cargo complex diffuses
through an NPC via transient interactions with FG repeats in FGnucleoporins, the Ran GAP associated with the NPC cytoplasmic
filaments stimulates conversion of Ran·GTP to Ran·GDP. The
accompanying conformational change in Ran leads to dissociation
of the complex. The NES-containing cargo protein is released into
the cytosol, while exportin 1 and Ran·GDP are transported back
into the nucleus through NPCs. Ran·GDP is transported through
its interaction with NTF2. Ran-GEF in the nucleoplasm then
stimulates conversion of Ran·GDP to Ran·GTP.

to Ran·GTP causes a conformational change in exportin 1
that increases its affinity for the NES so that a trimolecular
cargo complex is formed. Like importins, exportin 1 interacts
transiently with FG repeats in FG-nucleoporins and diffuses
through the NPC. The cargo complex dissociates when it encounters the Ran-GAP in the NPC cytoplasmic filaments that
stimulates Ran to hydrolyze the bound GTP, shifting it into a
conformation that has low affinity for exportin 1. The released exportin 1 changes conformation to a structure that
has low affinity for the NES, releasing the cargo into the cytosol. The direction of the export process is driven by this dissociation of the cargo from exportin 1 in the cytoplasm that
causes a concentration gradient of the cargo complex across
the NPC so that it is high in the nucleoplasm and low in the
cytoplasm. Exportin 1 and the Ran·GDP are then transported
back into the nucleus through an NPC. Ran . GDP is transported by NTF2, as discussed earlier in regard to nuclear import. It is then converted into Ran . GTP by the Ran-GEF in
the nucleoplasm.
By comparing this model for nuclear export with that in
Figure 12-21 for nuclear import, we can see one obvious dif-

513

ference: Ran·GTP is part of the cargo complex during export
but not during import. Apart from this difference, the two
transport processes are remarkably similar. In both
processes, association of a transport signal receptor with
Ran·GTP in the nucleoplasm causes a conformational
change that affects its affinity for the transport signal. During import, the interaction causes release of the cargo,
whereas, during export, the interaction promotes association
with the cargo. In both export and import, stimulation of
Ran·GTP hydrolysis in the cytoplasm by the Ran-GAP associated with NPC cytoplasmic filaments produces a conformational change in Ran that releases the transport signal
receptor. During nuclear export, the cargo is also released.
Importins and exportins both are thought to diffuse through
the NPC channel by successive interactions with FG-repeats
in FG-nucleoporins. Localization of the Ran-GAP and -GEF
to the cytoplasm and nucleus, respectively, is the basis for the
unidirectional transport of cargo proteins across the NPC.
In keeping with the similarity in function of importins
and exportins, the two types of transport proteins are highly
homologous in sequence and structure. The entire family is
called the importin ( family, or karyopherins. There are 14
karyopherins in yeast and more than 20 in mammalian cells.
The NESs or NLSs to which they bind have been determined
for only a fraction of them. Remarkably, some individual
karyopherins function as both an importin and an exportin.
A similar shuttling mechanism has been shown to export
other cargoes from the nucleus. For example, exportin-t
functions to export tRNAs. Exportin-t binds fully processed
tRNAs in a complex with Ran·GTP that diffuses through
NPCs and dissociates when it interacts with Ran-GAP in the
NPC cytoplasmic filaments, releasing the tRNA into the
cytosol. A Ran-dependent process is also required for the
nuclear export of ribosomal subunits through NPCs. Likewise, certain specific mRNAs that associate with particular
hnRNP proteins (e.g., HIV Rev discussed later) can be exported by a Ran-dependent mechanism. However, most
mRNAs are exported from the nucleus by another type of
transporter that does not interact with Ran. This will be discussed after we examine gene regulation through control of
transcription-factor import and export.

Control of Some Genes Is Achieved by Regulating
Transport of Transcription Factors
Regulation of some genes is achieved by regulating the nuclear transport of specific transcription factors that control
their transcription. For example, in Chapter 11 we learned
that homodimeric nuclear receptors such as the glucocorticoid receptor are sequestered in the cytoplasm in the absence
of ligand. Binding of ligand stimulates their translocation
into the nucleus, where they can bind to hormone response
elements in target genes and activate transcription (see Figures 11-43 and 11-44). The ligand-binding domain of these
transcription factors contains an NLS, but in the absence of
ligand, the NLS is masked by interactions with a cytoplasmic
tethering complex. The conformational change that results

514

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

from binding hormone releases the domain from the tethering complex, exposing the NLS so that it is free to interact
with its cognate importin and undergo nuclear import, as
discussed above. Other examples of regulated nuclear import
of transcription factors through controlled masking and exposure of their associated NLS are discussed in subsequent
chapters on signal transduction.
In some cases, regulated nuclear transport of transcription
factors is achieved by expressing them as fusions to domains
that localize them to cytoplasmic membranes, such as the
plasma membrane or ER. In response to specific signals, specific proteases are activated that cleave them, releasing the
transcription-factor domains so that they can be transported
into the nucleus by an importin. In other cases, transcriptionfactor nuclear export is regulated by post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation that increase their affinity for
a specific exportin. Regulation of nuclear import or export is
a powerful mechanism for controlling transcription-factor activity, since a transcription factor can bind to its cognate sites in
the genes it regulates only when it is in the nucleus.

Most mRNPs Are Exported from the Nucleus
with the Aid of an mRNA-Exporter
Recent studies of temperature-sensitive yeast mutants defective in nuclear transport identified a heterodimeric mRNAexporter protein that appears to direct most mRNPs through
nuclear pores. Yeast cells with mutations in the subunits of
this protein accumulate polyadenylated RNA in the nucleus
at the nonpermissive temperature, indicating that the protein
is required for the transport of most mRNPs. Highly conserved homologs of the large and small subunits of the yeast
mRNA-exporter are found in all eukaryotes, and several
lines of evidence indicate that the mRNA-exporter is required for the export of most mRNPs in vertebrate cells as
well as in yeast cells. Surprisingly, as mentioned earlier, experiments in both yeast and vertebrate cells indicate that Ran
is not required for export of the vast majority of mRNPs.
The small subunit of the mRNA-exporter is homologous
to NTF2 and interacts with a region of the larger subunit that
also shares homology to NTF2. Together they form a domain
that interacts with FG repeats in FG-nucleoporins similarly to
NTF2, which is a dimer. A C-terminal domain of the large
subunit also interacts with FG repeats. Although several other
proteins are also required for mRNP transport, researchers
consider this mRNP-exporter to be the primary transport
protein because of the importance of FG-repeat binding for
the mechanism of cargo transport by karyopherins. The large
mRNA exporter subunit also contains RNA-binding domains
that appear to bind to RNA cooperatively with specific
mRNP proteins. The finding that the mRNA-exporter is associated with mRNPs and binds directly to FG repeats led to
the model of mRNP transport depicted in Figure 12-24. This
model proposes that the mRNA-exporter translocates
mRNPs through the nuclear pore channel similarly to the
karyopherins, that is, by binding transiently to successive individual FG-repeats as it diffuses through the channel.

FG repeats of
FG nucleoporins

AAA

mRNA
exporter

FPO
N

M

C

mRNA

5' Cap

mRNP proteins
Nuclear
basket
Nucleoplasm

Cytoplasmic filaments
Cytoplasm

▲ FIGURE 12-24 Proposed mechanism of mRNP transport
from the nucleus via the mRNA-exporter. The large subunit
(light purple) of the mRNA-exporter contains three key domains:
a middle domain (M) and a carboxyl domain (C), both of which
bind to hydrophobic phenylalanine-glycine (FG) repeats in FGnucleoporins, and an N-terminal region that has weak RNAbinding activity for most sequences. Binding to most mRNPs
requires cooperative binding with other specific hnRNP proteins.
The small subunit (dark purple) binds to the middle domain of the
large subunit and contributes to the binding of FG repeats. For
simplicity, FG repeats are not shown on the lower half of the
nuclear pore complex. Note that the mRNA-exporter is not drawn
to scale; it is far smaller than the nuclear pore complex. The
mRNA-exporter is proposed to diffuse through the pore by
making transient interactions with adjacent FG-nucleoporins as it
progresses. [Adapted from R. Reed and E. Hurt, 2002, Cell 108:523.]
Currently, it is not clear what provides directionality to
this mechanism of mRNP transport through nuclear pores.
By analogy with the karyopherin transport, one hypothesis is
that the mRNA-exporter-mRNP complex dissociates as it
reaches the cytoplasm. This would result in a high concentration of the mRNA-exporter-mRNP complex at the nuclear basket, where it associates with FG-nucleoporins, and a
low concentration of the complex in the cytoplasm, where
it dissociates. As for karyopherin transport, such a concentration gradient could drive vectorial mRNP translocation.
However, much remains to be learned about the hnRNP proteins associated with mRNPs during transport through the
pore and the mechanism by which they dissociate from the
mRNP on the cytoplasmic side of the pore.

Other Proteins That Assist in mRNP Export In addition to
the mRNA-exporter and FG-nucleoporins, several other
types of proteins are involved in the transport of mRNPs by
this mechanism. As mentioned earlier, the mRNA-exporter
is thought to bind to mRNAs cooperatively with specific
mRNP proteins. For example, SR proteins associated with
exons appear to stimulate the binding of the mRNA-exporter
to processed mRNAs in mRNPs. Thus SR proteins not only

12.3 • Macromolecular Transport Across the Nuclear Envelope

function to define exons during RNA splicing (see Figure
12-11) but also participate in the export process that translocates most mRNPs into the cytoplasm.
Other nuclear RNA-binding proteins that probably function in transport of mRNPs recently have been identified.
These proteins, which initially were found associated with
mRNAs spliced in vitro, bind to a region about 20 bases 5
of the exon sequences joined by splicing. Analysis of the proteins present in these exon-junction complexes revealed that
several are homologous to yeast proteins that are altered in
mutants defective in mRNP export. Moreover, one of these
proteins has been shown to bind directly to the large subunit of the mRNA-exporter. These results suggest that exonjunction complexes deposited on mRNAs during RNA
splicing stimulate mRNP transport through nuclear pores.
Some of the proteins in exon-junction complexes also function as splicing factors. As we discuss in the next section, on
mechanisms of cytoplasmic post-transcriptional control, the
exon-junction complex also participates in a type of posttranscriptional control that prevents translation of improperly spliced mRNAs.
Another participant in mRNP transport to the cytoplasm
is the nuclear cap-binding complex, mentioned earlier as protection against exonuclease attack on the 5 end of nascent
transcripts and pre-mRNAs. Electron microscopy experiments discussed below have demonstrated that the 5 end of
mRNAs lead the way through the nuclear pore complex. Recent experiments in yeast indicate that the 3 poly(A) tail
plays an important role in mRNP transport, suggesting that
a poly(A)-binding protein participates. Nucleoporins associated with the NPC cytoplasmic filaments in addition to FGnucleoporins are required for mRNA export and may
function to dissociate the mRNA-exporter and other mRNP
proteins that accompany the mRNP through the pore.
Once the mRNP reaches the cytoplasm, most of the
mRNP proteins that associated with the mRNA in the nucleus, the nuclear cap-binding complex, and the nuclear
poly(A)-binding protein (PABPII) dissociate and are shuttled
back to the nucleus. In the cytoplasm, the 5 cap of an exported mRNA is bound by the eIF4E translation initiation
factor, the poly(A) tail is bound by multiple copies of the
cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein (PABPI), and other
RNA-binding proteins associate with the body of the
mRNA, forming a cytoplasmic mRNP that has a lower ratio
of protein to RNA than nuclear mRNPs.

Nuclear Export of Balbiani Ring mRNPs The salivary glands
of larvae of the insect Chironomous tentans have provided a
good model system for EM studies of the formation of
hnRNPs and the export of mRNPs. In these larvae, genes in
large chromosomal puffs called Balbiani rings are abundantly
transcribed into nascent pre-mRNAs that associate with
hnRNP proteins and are processed into coiled mRNPs with
an mRNA of ≈75 kb (Figure 12-25a, b). These giant mRNAs
encode large glue proteins that adhere the developing larvae
to a leaf. After processing of the pre-mRNA in Balbiani ring
hnRNPs, the resulting mRNPs move through nuclear pores to

515

the cytoplasm. Electron micrographs of sections of these cells
show mRNPs that appear to uncoil during their passage
through nuclear pores and then bind to ribosomes as they
enter the cytoplasm. The observation that mRNPs become associated with ribosomes during transport indicates that the 5
end leads the way through the nuclear pore complex, as mentioned earlier. Detailed electron microscopic studies of the
transport of Balbiani ring mRNPs through nuclear pore complexes led to the model depicted in Figure 12-25c.

Pre-mRNAs in Spliceosomes Are Not Exported
from the Nucleus
It is critical that only fully processed mature mRNAs be exported from the nucleus because translation of incompletely
processed pre-mRNAs containing introns would produce defective proteins that might interfere with the functioning of
the cell. By mechanisms that are not fully understood, premRNAs associated with snRNPs in spliceosomes usually are
prevented from being transported to the cytoplasm.
In one type of experiment demonstrating this restriction,
a gene encoding a pre-mRNA with a single intron that normally is spliced out was mutated to introduce deviations
from the consensus splice-site sequences. Mutation of either
the 5 or the 3 invariant splice-site bases at the ends of the
intron resulted in pre-mRNAs that were bound by snRNPs
to form spliceosomes; however, RNA splicing was blocked,
and the pre-mRNA was retained in the nucleus. In contrast,
mutation of both the 5 and 3 splice sites in the same premRNA resulted in export of the unspliced pre-mRNA, although less efficiently than for the spliced mRNA. When
both splice sites were mutated, the pre-mRNAs were not efficiently bound by snRNPs, and, consequently, their export
was not blocked.
Many cases of thalassemia, an inherited disease
that results in abnormally low levels of globin proteins, are due to mutations in globin-gene splice
sites that decrease the efficiency of splicing but do not prevent association of the pre-mRNA with snRNPs. The resulting unspliced globin pre-mRNAs are retained in reticulocyte
nuclei and are rapidly degraded. ❚

HIV Rev Protein Regulates the Transport
of Unspliced Viral mRNAs
As discussed earlier, transport of mRNPs containing mature,
functional mRNAs from the nucleus to the cytoplasm entails
a complex mechanism that is crucial to gene expression (see
Figures 12-24 and 12-25). Regulation of this transport theoretically could provide another means of gene control, although it appears to be relatively rare. Indeed, the only
examples of regulated mRNA export discovered to date
occur during the cellular response to conditions (e.g., heat
shock) that cause protein denaturation and during viral infection when virus-induced alterations in nuclear transport
maximize viral replication. Here we describe the regulation

516

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

 FIGURE 12-25 Formation of heterogeneous

(b)

(a)

ribonucleoprotein particles (hnRNPs) and export of mRNPs
from the nucleus. (a) Model of a single chromatin transcription
loop and assembly of Balbiani ring (BR) mRNP in Chironomous
tentans. Nascent RNA transcripts produced from the template
DNA rapidly associate with proteins, forming hnRNPs. The gradual
increase in size of the hnRNPs reflects the increasing length of
RNA transcripts at greater distances from the transcription start
site. The model was reconstructed from electron micrographs of
serial thin sections of salivary gland cells. (b) Schematic diagram of
the biogenesis of hnRNPs. Following processing of the pre-mRNA,
the resulting ribonucleoprotein particle is referred to as an mRNP.
(c) Model for the transport of BR mRNPs through the nuclear pore
complex (NPC) based on electron microscopic studies. Note that
the curved mRNPs appear to uncoil as they pass through nuclear
pores. As the mRNA enters the cytoplasm, it rapidly associates
with ribosomes, indicating that the 5 end passes through the
NPC first. [Part (a) from C. Erricson et al., 1989, Cell 56:631; courtesy of

hnRNP

Template
DNA

(c)

Nuclear envelope

Nucleoplasm

Cytoplasm

mRNP

B. Daneholt. Parts (b) and (c) adapted from B. Daneholt, 1997, Cell 88:585.
See also B. Daneholt, 2001, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 98:7012.]

FPO

mRNP

mRNA

NPC

of mRNP export mediated by a protein encoded by human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
A retrovirus, HIV integrates a DNA copy of its RNA
genome into the host-cell DNA (see Figure 4-43). The integrated viral DNA, or provirus, contains a single transcription
unit, which is transcribed into a single primary transcript by
cellular RNA polymerase II. The HIV transcript can be
spliced in alternative ways to yield three classes of mRNAs: a
9-kb unspliced mRNA; ≈4-kb mRNAs formed by removal of
one intron; and ≈2-kb mRNAs formed by removal of two or
more introns (Figure 12-26). After their synthesis in the hostcell nucleus, all three classes of HIV mRNAs are transported
to the cytoplasm and translated into viral proteins; some of
the 9-kb unspliced RNA is used as the viral genome in progeny virions that bud from the cell surface.
Since the 9-kb and 4-kb HIV mRNAs contain splice sites,
they can be viewed as incompletely spliced mRNAs. However,
as discussed earlier, association of such incompletely spliced
mRNAs with snRNPs in spliceosomes normally blocks their
export from the nucleus. Thus HIV, as well as other retroviruses, must have some mechanism for overcoming this block,
permitting export of the longer viral mRNAs. Some retroviruses have evolved a sequence called the constitutive transport element (CTE) that binds to the mRNA-exporter with

high affinity, thereby permitting export of unspliced retroviral
RNA into the cytoplasm. HIV solved the problem differently.
Studies with HIV mutants showed that transport of unspliced 9-kb and singly spliced 4-kb viral mRNAs from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm requires the virus-encoded Rev protein. Subsequent biochemical experiments demonstrated that
Rev binds to a specific Rev-response element (RRE) present
in HIV RNA. In cells infected with HIV mutants lacking the
RRE, unspliced and singly spliced viral mRNAs remain in
the nucleus, demonstrating that the RRE is required for Revmediated stimulation of transport. Rev contains a leucinerich NES that interacts with exportin 1 complexed with
Ran·GTP. As a result, Rev exports unspliced and singly
spliced HIV mRNAs through interactions with exportin 1
and the nuclear pore complex.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 12.3
Macromolecular Transport Across the Nuclear Envelope
The nuclear envelope contains numerous nuclear pore
complexes (NPCs), large, complicated structures composed
of multiple copies of ≈50–100 proteins called nucleoporins
(see Figure 12-18). FG-nucleoporins, which contain multiple
■

12.3 • Macromolecular Transport Across the Nuclear Envelope

517

HIV provirus

RRE

Transport

Transcription, splicing

CYTOPLASMIC mRNAs

NUCLEAR mRNAs
+Rev

9-kb
Unspliced

4-kb
Singly spliced

−Rev

FPO

2-kb
Multiply spliced

+Rev
−Rev

repeats of a short hydrophobic sequence (FG-repeats), line
the channel and play a role in transport of all macromolecules through nuclear pores.
Transport of macromolecules larger than ≈60 kDa
through nuclear pores requires the assistance of proteins
that interact with both the transported molecule and with
FG-repeats of FG-nucleoporins.

■

Proteins imported to or exported from the nucleus contain a specific amino acid sequence that functions as a
nuclear-localization signal (NLS) or a nuclear-export signal (NES). Nucleus-restricted proteins contain an NLS but
not an NES, whereas proteins that shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm contain both signals.

■

Several different types of NES and NLS have been identified. Each type of nuclear-transport signal is thought to
interact with a specific receptor protein (exportin or importin) belonging to a family of homologous proteins
termed karyopharins.

■

A “cargo” protein bearing an NES or NLS translocates
through nuclear pores bound to its cognate receptor protein
(karyopharin), which also interacts with FG-nucleoporins.
Importins and exportins are thought to diffuse through the
channel by binding transiently to different FG-repeats that
act like “stepping stones” through the pore. Both transport
processes also require participation of Ran, a monomeric
G protein that exists in different conformations when bound
to GTP or GDP.

■

4 kb

−Rev

Rev protein
2 kb

Nucleoplasm

▲ FIGURE 12-26 Role of Rev protein in transport of HIV
mRNAs from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The HIV genome,
which contains overlapping coding regions, is transcribed into a
single 9-kb primary transcript. Several ≈4-kb mRNAs result
from alternative splicing out of any one of several introns (angled
lines), and several ≈2-kb mRNAs from splicing out of two or

9 kb

Translation

Cytoplasm

more alternative introns. After transport to the cytoplasm, the
various RNA species are translated into different viral proteins.
Rev protein, encoded by a 2-kb mRNA, interacts with the Revresponse element (RRE) in the unspliced and singly spliced
mRNAs, stimulating their transport to the cytoplasm. [Adapted
from B. R. Cullen and M. H. Malim, 1991, Trends Biochem. Sci. 16:346.]

After a cargo complex reaches its destination (the cytoplasm during export and the nucleus during import), it dissociates, freeing the cargo protein and other components.
The latter then are transported through nuclear pores in
the reverse direction to participate in transporting additional molecules of cargo protein (see Figures 12-21 and
12-23).

■

The unidirectional nature of protein export and import through nuclear pores results from localization of
the Ran guanine nucleotide–exchange factor (GEF) in the
nucleus and of Ran GTPase-accelerating protein (GAP)
in the cytoplasm. The interaction of import cargo complexes with the Ran-GEF in the nucleoplasm causes dissociation of the complex, releasing the cargo into the nucleoplasm (see Figure 12-21). Export cargo complexes
dissociate in the cytoplasm when they interact with Ran
GAP localized to the NPC cytoplasmic filaments (see
Figure 12-23).

■

Most mRNPs are exported from the nucleus by a heterodimeric mRNA-exporter that interacts with FG-repeats
(see Figure 12-24). The direction of transport (nucleus →
cytoplasm) may result from dissociation of the exportermRNP complex in the cytoplasm by an as yet uncharacterized mechanism that does not depend on Ran.

■

■ The mRNA-exporter binds to most mRNAs cooperatively with SR proteins bound to exons, to exon-junction
complexes that associate with mRNAs following RNA

518

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

splicing, and to additional mRNP proteins that remain to
be characterized.
■ Pre-mRNAs bound by a spliceosome normally are not exported from the nucleus, assuring that only fully processed,
functional mRNAs reach the cytoplasm for translation.

12.4 Cytoplasmic Mechanisms
of Post-transcriptional Control
Before proceeding, let’s quickly review the steps in gene expression at which control is exerted. We saw in the previous
chapter that regulation of transcription initiation is the principal mechanism for controlling expression of genes. In preceding sections of this chapter we learned that transcription
of some genes is regulated by controlling the transport into
and out of the nucleus of transcription factors that regulate
them. We also learned that expression of protein isoforms is
controlled by regulating alternative RNA splicing. Although
transport of fully processed mRNAs to the cytoplasm rarely
is regulated, the transport of unspliced retroviral RNAs is
specifically controlled.
In this section we consider other mechanisms of posttranscriptional control that contribute to regulating the expression of some genes. Most of these mechanisms operate in
the cytoplasm, controlling the stability or localization of
mRNA or its translation into protein. We begin by discussing
two recently discovered and related mechanisms of gene
control.

Some Micro RNAs Repress Translation of Specific
mRNAs
Micro RNAs (miRNAs) were first discovered during analysis
of mutations in the lin-4 and let-7 genes of the nematode
C. elegans. Cloning and analysis of wild-type lin-4 and let-7
revealed that they encode no protein products, but rather
RNAs only 21 and 22 nucleotides long, respectively, that hybridize to the 3 untranslated regions of specific target
mRNAs. For example, the lin-4 miRNA, which is expressed
early in embryogenesis, hybridizes to the 3 untranslated regions of both the lin-14 and lin-28 mRNAs, thereby repressing translation of these mRNAs by an as yet unknown
mechanism. Expression of lin-4 miRNA ceases later in development, allowing translation of newly synthesized lin-14
and lin-28 mRNAs at that time. Expression of let-7 miRNA
occurs at comparable times during embryogenesis of all bilaterally symmetric animals. The role of lin-4 and let-7
miRNAs in coordinating the timing of early developmental
events in C. elegans is discussed in Chapter 22. Here we
focus on what is currently understood about how miRNAs
repress translation.
This form of translational regulation is probably not limited to the lin-4 and let-7 miRNAs in C. elegans; about 100
different miRNAs have been found in C. elegans, and at least

as many in humans. All miRNAs appear to be formed by
processing of ≈70-nucleotide precursor RNAs that form
hairpin structures with a few base-pair mismatches in the
stem of the hairpin. A ribonuclease called Dicer, which
cleaves double-stranded RNA, is required for production of
miRNAs from these precursors. The base pairing between a
miRNA and the 3 untranslated region of its target mRNAs
is not precisely complementary, so that some base-pair mismatches occur in the hybridized region. This mismatching
distinguishes miRNA-mediated translational repression from
the related phenomenon of RNA interference, which we describe next.

RNA Interference Induces Degradation of mRNAs
with Sequences Complementary to DoubleStranded RNAs
RNA interference (RNAi) was discovered unexpectedly during attempts to experimentally manipulate the expression of
specific genes. Researchers tried to inhibit the expression of
a gene in C. elegans by microinjecting a single-stranded,
complementary RNA that would hybridize to the encoded
mRNA and prevent its translation, a method called antisense
inhibition. But in control experiments, perfectly base-paired
double-stranded RNA a few hundred base pairs long was
much more effective at inhibiting expression of the gene than
the antisense strand alone. Similar inhibition of gene expression by an introduced double-stranded RNA soon was observed in plants. In each case, the double-stranded RNA
induced degradation of all cellular RNAs containing a
sequence that was exactly the same as one strand of the
double-stranded RNA. Because of the specificity of RNA interference in targeting mRNAs for destruction, it has become
a powerful experimental tool for studying gene function (see
Figure 9-43).
Subsequent biochemical studies with extracts of
Drosophila embryos showed that a long double-stranded
RNA that mediates interference is initially processed into a
double-stranded intermediate referred to as short interfering RNA (siRNA). The strands in siRNA contain 21–23
nucleotides hybridized to each other so that the two bases
at the 3 end of each strand are single-stranded. The finding
that Dicer ribonuclease is required for formation of siRNAs
suggested that RNA interference and miRNA-mediated
translational repression are related processes.
Recent studies indicate that double-stranded siRNAs and
miRNAs are further processed into a multiprotein complex
containing only one of the RNA strands (Figure 12-27). This
RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) then cleaves target
RNAs that are precisely complementary to their corresponding single-stranded siRNAs. These complexes also appear
to function in the inhibition of translation by miRNAs. The
human let-7 miRNA, for instance, is found in an RNAinduced silencing complex that can cleave a synthetic target
RNA that is precisely complementary to let-7 miRNA. However, the same complex does not cleave an RNA whose

12.4 • Cytoplasmic Mechanisms of Post-transcriptional Control

miRNA precursor

OR

Double-stranded RNA

Dicer
Double-stranded 5' p
mi/siRNA 3' OH

RISC

OH 3'
p 5'

5' p

OH 3'

FPO

siRNA function

3' OH

p 5'

An

miRNA function

Perfect base pairing;
target cleavage
−

3' OH

p 5'

An

Incomplete base pairing;
translation repression

▲ FIGURE 12-27 Model for miRNA translational repression
and RNA interference mediated by the RNA-induced
interfering complex (RISC). Processing of both miRNA
precursors into miRNAs and long double-stranded RNAs into
short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) requires the Dicer ribonuclease.
In both cases, cleavage by Dicer yields a double-stranded RNA
intermediate containing 21–23 nucleotides per strand with twonucleotide 3 single-stranded tails. One strand of this
intermediate assembles with multiple proteins to form an RNAinduced silencing complex (RISC). In siRNA function, the target
mRNA hybridizes perfectly with the RISC RNA, leading to
cleavage of the target. In miRNA function, the RISC RNA forms a
hybrid with the target mRNA that contains some base-pair
mismatches; in this case translation of the target mRNA is
blocked. This is the situation for the lin-4 and let-7 miRNAs in
C. elegans. [Adapted from G. Hutvagner and P. D. Zamore, 2002,

519

Consequently, the mental retardation associated with FMR1
mutations may result from a defect in translational repression of specific target mRNAs during development of the
central nervous system. ❚
RNA interference is believed to be an ancient cellular defense against certain viruses and mobile genetic elements in
both plants and animals. Plants with mutations in the genes
encoding Dicer and RISC proteins exhibit increased sensitivity to infection by RNA viruses and increased movement
of transposons within their genomes. The double-stranded
RNA intermediates generated during replication of RNA
viruses are thought to be recognized by the Dicer ribonuclease, inducing an RNAi response that ultimately degrades
viral mRNAs. During transposition, transposons are inserted
into cellular genes in a random orientation, and their transcription from different promoters produces complementary
RNAs that can hybridize with each other, initiating the RNAi
system that then interferes with the expression of transposon
proteins required for additional transpositions.
In plants and C. elegans the RNAi response can be induced in all cells of the organism by introduction of doublestranded RNA into just a few cells. Such organism-wide
induction requires a protein produced in plants and in C. elegans that is homologous to the RNA replicases of RNA
viruses. This finding suggests that double-stranded siRNAs
are replicated and then transferred to other cells in these organisms. In plants, transfer of siRNAs might occur through
plasmodesmata, the cytoplasmic connections between plant
cells that traverse the cell walls between them (see Figure 6-34).
Organism-wide induction of RNA interference does not
occur in Drosophila or mammals, presumably because their
genomes do not encode RNA replicase homologs. In plants,
double-stranded RNA also induces the DNA-methylation of
genes with the same sequence by an unknown mechanism.
Such gene methylation in response to RNAi inhibits transcription of the gene, probably through the binding of histone
deacetylases. This type of RNAi-induced gene methylation
does not occur in animals.

Science 297:2056; see also V. Ambrose, 2001, Cell 107:823.]

Cytoplasmic Polyadenylation Promotes
Translation of Some mRNAs
sequence differs at a few bases from the let-7 sequence. This
finding has led to the hypothesis that RISC complexes have
two distinct functions: (1) an siRNA function (i.e., RNA interference) leading to cleavage of precisely complementary
mRNAs and (2) an miRNA function leading to translational
repression of mRNAs with a few base-pair mismatches (see
Figure 12-27).
Mutations in the fragile-X gene (FMR1), which encodes a protein containing a KH RNA-binding
motif, are associated with the most common form
of heritable mental retardation. Recent results indicate that
the FMR1 protein is a subunit of human RISC complexes.

In addition to repression of translation by micro RNAs,
protein-mediated translational control helps regulate expression of some genes. Regulatory sequences, or elements, in
mRNAs that interact with specific proteins to control translation generally are present in the untranslated region (UTR) at
the 3 or 5 end of an mRNA. Here we discuss a type of protein-mediated translational control involving 3 regulatory elements. A different mechanism involving RNA-binding proteins
that interact with 5 regulatory elements is discussed later.
Sequence-specific translation-control proteins may bind
cooperatively to neighboring sites in 3 UTRs and function in
a combinatorial manner, similar to the cooperative binding
of transcription factors to regulatory sites in an enhancer

520

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport
Translationally dormant

Translationally active
40S

FPO

Maskin
CPEB

ding regio
n
Co

ding regio
n
Co

Cap elF4E

UUUUAU AAUAAA-A
mRNA

CPE

elF3

Cap elF4E
elF4G

Maskin
CPEB

CPSF

PABI

PABI

PAP

UUUUAU AAUAAA-AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA

Poly(A)
signal

▲ FIGURE 12-28 Model for control of cytoplasmic
polyadenylation and translation initiation. Left: In immature
oocytes, mRNAs containing the U-rich cytoplasmic
polyadenylation element (CPE) have short poly(A) tails. CPEbinding protein (CPEB) mediates repression of translation through
the interactions depicted, which prevent assembly of an initiation
complex at the 5 end of the mRNA. Right: Hormone stimulation
of oocytes activates a protein kinase that phosphorylates CPEB,
causing it to release Maskin. The cleavage/polyadenylation
region of a gene. In most cases studied, translation is repressed by protein binding to 3 regulatory elements. The
mechanism of such repression is best understood for mRNAs
that must undergo cytoplasmic polyadenylation before they
can be translated.
Cytoplasmic polyadenylation is a critical aspect of gene
expression in the early embryo. The egg cells (oocytes) of
multicellular organisms contain many mRNAs, encoding numerous different proteins, that are not translated until after
the egg is fertilized by a sperm cell. Some of these “stored”
mRNAs have a short poly(A) tail, consisting of only ≈20–40
A residues, to which just a few molecules of cytoplasmic
poly(A)-binding protein (PABPI) can bind. As discussed in
Chapter 4, multiple PABPI molecules bound to the long
poly(A) tail of an mRNA interact with the eIF4G initiation
factor, thereby stabilizing the interaction of the mRNA 5
cap with eIF4E, which is required for translation initiation
(see Figure 4-31). Because this stabilization cannot occur
with mRNAs that have short poly(A) tails, such mRNAs
stored in oocytes are not translated efficiently. At the appropriate time during oocyte maturation or after fertilization of
an egg cell, usually in response to an external signal, approximately 150 A residues are added to the short poly(A)
tails on these mRNAs in the cytoplasm, stimulating their
translation.
Recent studies with mRNAs stored in Xenopus oocytes
have helped elucidate the mechanism of this type of translational control. Experiments in which short-tailed mRNAs
are injected into oocytes have shown that two sequences in
their 3 UTR are required for their polyadenylation in the cytoplasm: the AAUAAA poly(A) signal that is also required
for the nuclear polyadenylation of pre-mRNAs, and one or
more copies of an upstream U-rich cytoplasmic polyadenyla-

specificity factor (CPSF) then binds to the poly(A) site, interacting
with both bound CPEB and the cytoplasmic form of poly(A)
polymerase (PAP). After the poly(A) tail is lengthened, multiple
copies of the cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein I (PABPI) can
bind to it and interact with eIF4G, which functions with other
initiation factors to bind the 40S ribosome subunit and initiate
translation. [Adapted from R. Mendez and J. D. Richter, 2001, Nature
Rev. Molec. Cell Biol. 2:521.]

tion element (CPE). This regulatory element is bound by a
highly conserved CPE-binding protein (CPEB) that contains
an RRM domain and a zinc-finger domain.
According to the current model, in the absence of a stimulatory signal, CPEB bound to the U-rich CPE interacts with
the protein Maskin, which in turn binds to eIF4E associated
with the mRNA 5 cap (Figure 12-28, left). As a result, eIF4E
cannot interact with other initiation factors and the 40S ribosomal subunit, so translation initiation is blocked. Signalinduced phosphorylation of CPEB at a specific serine causes
the displacement of Maskin, allowing cytoplasmic forms of
the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF)
and poly(A) polymerase to bind to the mRNA. Once the
poly(A) polymerase catalyzes the addition of A residues,
PABPI can bind to the lengthened poly(A) tail, leading to the
stabilized interaction of all the participants needed to initiate
translation (see Figure 12-28, right). In the case of Xenopus
oocyte maturation, the protein kinase that phosphorylates
CPEB is activated in response to the hormone progesterone.
Thus timing of the translation of stored mRNAs encoding
proteins needed for oocyte maturation is regulated by this
external signal.
Considerable evidence indicates that a similar mechanism
of translational control plays a role in learning and memory.
In the central nervous system, the axons from a thousand or
so neurons can make connections (synapses) with the dendrites of a single postsynaptic neuron (see Figure 7-48).
When one of these axons is stimulated, the postsynaptic neuron “remembers” which synapse was stimulated. The next
time that synapse is stimulated, the strength of the response
triggered in the postsynaptic cell differs from the first time.
This change in response has been shown to result largely
from the translational activation of mRNAs stored in the

12.4 • Cytoplasmic Mechanisms of Post-transcriptional Control

tokines, which are involved in the immune response of mammals, are synthesized and secreted in short bursts. Similarly,
many of the transcription factors that regulate the onset of
the S phase of the cell cycle, such as c-Fos and c-Jun, are synthesized for brief periods only (Chapter 21). Expression of
such proteins occurs in short bursts because transcription of
their genes can be rapidly turned on and off and their
mRNAs have unusually short half-lives, on the order of 30
minutes or less.
Cytoplasmic mRNAs are degraded by one of the pathways shown in Figure 12-29. For most mRNAs, the length of
the poly(A) tail gradually decreases with time through the action of a deadenylating nuclease. When it is shortened sufficiently, PABPI molecules can no longer bind and stabilize
interaction of the 5 cap and initiation factors. The exposed
cap then is removed by a decapping enzyme, and the unprotected mRNA is degraded by a 5 → 3 exonuclease. Removal of the poly(A) tail also makes mRNAs susceptible to
degradation by cytoplasmic exosomes containing 3 → 5 exonucleases. The 5 → 3 exonucleases predominate in yeast,
and the 3 → 5 exosome apparently predominates in mammalian cells.
For mRNAs degraded in these deadenylation-dependent
pathways, the rate at which they are deadenylated controls
the rate at which they are degraded. The rate of deadenylation
varies inversely with the frequency of translation initiation for
an mRNA: the higher the frequency of initiation, the slower
the rate of deadenylation. This relation probably is due to the
reciprocal interactions between initiation factors and PABPI
that stabilize the binding of PABPI to the poly(A) tail, thereby
protecting it from the deadenylation exonuclease.
Many short-lived mRNAs in mammalian cells contain
multiple, sometimes overlapping, copies of the sequence
AUUUA in their 3 untranslated region. Specific RNA-binding

region of the synapse, leading to the local synthesis of new
proteins that increase the size and alter the neurophysiological characteristics of the synapse. The finding that CPEB is
present in neuronal dendrites has led to the proposal that cytoplasmic polyadenylation stimulates translation of specific
mRNAs in dendrites, much as it does in oocytes. In this case,
presumably, synaptic activity (rather than a hormone) is the
signal that induces phosphorylation of CPEB and subsequent
activation of translation.

mRNAs Are Degraded by Several Mechanisms
in the Cytoplasm
The concentration of an mRNA is a function of both its rate
of synthesis and its rate of degradation. For this reason, if
two genes are transcribed at the same rate, the steady-state
concentration of the corresponding mRNA that is more stable will be higher than the concentration of the other. The
stability of an mRNA also determines how rapidly synthesis
of the encoded protein can be shut down. For a stable
mRNA, synthesis of the encoded protein persists long after
transcription of the gene is repressed. Most bacterial mRNAs
are unstable, decaying exponentially with a typical half-life
of a few minutes. For this reason, a bacterial cell can rapidly
adjust the synthesis of proteins to accommodate changes in
the cellular environment. Most cells in multicellular organisms, on the other hand, exist in a fairly constant environment and carry out a specific set of functions over periods
of days to months or even the lifetime of the organism (nerve
cells, for example). Accordingly, most mRNAs of higher
eukaryotes have half-lives of many hours.
However, some proteins in eukaryotic cells are required
only for short periods of time and must be expressed in
bursts. For example, certain signaling molecules called cyDecapping pathway
(deadenylation-independent)

Deadenylation-dependent
pathways

AAAAAA

Decapping

Endonucleolytic
pathway

AAAAAA

AAAAAA
Endonucleolytic
cleavage

Poly(A) shortening

FPO

A

AAAAAA
3' → 5'
Exonucleolytic
decay

Decapping

AAAAAA

521

A

5' → 3'
Exonucleolytic
decay

Exosome
A

▲ FIGURE 12-29 Pathways for degradation of eukaryotic
mRNAs. In the deadenylation-dependent (middle) pathways, the
poly(A) tail is progressively shortened by a deadenylase (orange)
until it reaches a length 20 or fewer A residues at which the
interaction with PABI is destabilized, leading to weakened
interactions between the 5 cap and translation initiation factors.
The deadenylated mRNA then may either (1) be decapped and

degraded by a 5 → 3 exonuclease, or (2) be degraded by a
3 → 5 exonuclease in cytoplasmic exosomes. Some mRNAs
(right ) are cleaved internally by an endonuclease, and the
fragments degraded by an exosome. Other mRNAs (left ) are
decapped before they are deadenylated, and then degraded by
the 5 → 3 exonuclease. [Adapted from M. Tucker and R. Parker,
2000, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 69:571.]

522

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

proteins have been found to bind to these 3 AU-rich sequences.
Recent experiments suggest that the bound proteins interact
with a deadenylating enzyme and with the exosome, thereby
promoting the rapid deadenylation and subsequent 3 → 5
degradation of these mRNAs. In this mechanism, the rate of
mRNA degradation is uncoupled from the frequency of translation. Thus mRNAs containing the AUUUA sequence can be
translated at high frequency, yet also degraded rapidly, allowing the encoded proteins to be expressed in short bursts.
As shown in Figure 12-29, some mRNAs are degraded
in pathways that do not involve significant deadenylation. In
one of these, mRNAs are decapped before the poly(A) tail is
shortened extensively. It appears that certain mRNA sequences make the cap sensitive to the decapping enzyme, but
the precise mechanism is unclear. In the other alternative
pathway, mRNAs first are cleaved internally by endonucleases. The RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) discussed
earlier is an example of such an endonuclease (see Figure
12-27). The fragments generated by internal cleavage then
are degraded by exonucleases.

(a) Ferritin mRNA
COOH

IREs
High iron
5'

Coding region

H2N
An
Translated
ferritin

Inactive IRE-BP
Active IRE-BP

Low iron
5'

Coding region

(b) TfR mRNA

IREs

An

No translation
initiation

FPO

AU-rich region

High iron
5'

Coding region

An

Inactive IRE-BP

An Iron-Sensitive RNA-Binding Protein Regulates
mRNA Translation and Degradation
Control of intracellular iron concentrations by the ironresponse element–binding protein (IRE-BP) is an elegant example of a single protein that regulates the translation of one
mRNA and the degradation of another. When intracellular
iron stores are low, this dual control system operates to increase the level of free iron ions available for iron-requiring
enzymes; when iron is in excess, the system operates to prevent accumulation of toxic levels of free ions. It is one of the
simplest and best-understood examples of protein-mediated
translational control.
One component in this system is the regulation of production of ferritin, an intracellular iron-binding protein. The
5 untranslated region of ferritin mRNA contains ironresponse elements (IREs) that have a stem-loop structure.
IRE-BP recognizes five specific bases in the IRE loop and the
duplex nature of the stem. At low iron concentrations, IREBP is in an active conformation that binds to the IREs (Figure 12-30a). The bound IRE-BP blocks the 40S ribosomal
subunit from scanning for the AUG start codon (see Figure
4-25), thereby inhibiting translation initiation. The resulting decrease in ferritin means less iron is complexed with the
ferritin and is therefore available to iron-requiring enzymes.
At high iron concentrations, IRE-BP is in an inactive conformation that does not bind to the 5 IREs, so translation initiation can proceed. The newly synthesized ferritin then
binds free iron ions, preventing their accumulation to harmful levels.
The other part of this regulatory system controls the import of iron into cells. In vertebrates, ingested iron is carried
through the circulation bound to a protein called transferrin.
After binding to the transferrin receptor (TfR) in the plasma
membrane, the transferrin-iron complex is brought into cells

Degraded
mononucleotides

Active IRE-BP

Low iron
5'

Coding region

An

Little
degradation

▲ FIGURE 12-30 Iron-dependent regulation of mRNA
translation and degradation. The iron response
element–binding protein (IRE-BP) controls translation of ferritin
mRNA (a) and degradation of transferrin-receptor (TfR) mRNA (b).
At low intracellular iron concentrations IRE-BP binds to ironresponse elements (IREs) in the 5 or 3 untranslated region of
these mRNAs. At high iron concentrations, IRE-BP undergoes a
conformational change and cannot bind either mRNA. The dual
control by IRE-BP precisely regulates the level of free iron ions
within cells. See the text for discussion.
by receptor-mediated endocytosis (Chapter 17). The 3untranslated region of TfR mRNA contains IREs whose
stems have AU-rich destabilizing sequences (Figure 12-30b).
At high iron concentrations, when the IRE-BP is in the inactive, nonbinding conformation, these AU-rich sequences are
thought to promote degradation of TfR mRNA by the same
mechanism that leads to rapid degradation of other shortlived mRNAs, as described previously. The resulting decrease
in production of the transferrin receptor quickly reduces iron
import, thus protecting the cell. At low iron concentrations,
however, IRE-BP can bind to the 3 IREs in TfR mRNA. The
bound IRE-BP is thought to block recognition of the destabilizing AU-rich sequences by the proteins that would otherwise rapidly degrade the mRNAs. As a result, production
of the transferrin receptor increases and more iron is brought
into the cell.

12.4 • Cytoplasmic Mechanisms of Post-transcriptional Control

Other regulated RNA-binding proteins may also function
to control mRNA translation or degradation, much like the
dual-acting IRE-BP. For example, a heme-sensitive RNAbinding protein controls translation of the mRNA encoding
aminolevulinate (ALA) synthase, a key enzyme in the synthesis of heme. And in vitro studies have shown that the
mRNA encoding the milk protein casein is stabilized by the
hormone prolactin and rapidly degraded in its absence.

Nonsense-Mediated Decay and Other mRNA
Surveillance Mechanisms Prevent Translation
of Improperly Processed mRNAs
Translation of an improperly processed mRNA could lead to
production of an abnormal protein that interferes with functioning of the normal protein encoded by the mRNA. (This
effect is equivalent to that resulting from dominant-negative
mutations, discussed in Chapter 9, although the cause is different.) Several mechanisms collectively termed mRNA surveillance help cells avoid the translation of improperly
processed mRNA molecules. We have previously mentioned
two such surveillance mechanisms: the recognition of improperly processed pre-mRNAs in the nucleus and their
degradation by the exosome, and the general restriction
against nuclear export of incompletely spliced pre-mRNAs
that remain associated with a spliceosome.
Another mechanism called nonsense-mediated decay
causes degradation of mRNAs in which one or more exons
have been skipped during splicing. Except for pre-mRNAs that
normally undergo alternative splicing, such exon skipping
often will alter the open reading frame of the mRNA 3 to the
improper exon junction, resulting in introduction of an incorrect stop codon. For nearly all properly spliced mRNAs, the
stop codon is in the last exon. Nonsense-mediated decay results in the rapid degradation of mRNAs with stop codons
that occur before the last splice junction in the mRNA.
A search for possible molecular signals that might indicate the positions of splice junctions in a processed mRNA
led to the discovery of exon-junction complexes. As noted already, these complexes stimulate export of mRNPs from the
nucleus. Analysis of yeast mutants suggests that some of the
proteins in exon-junction complexes function in nonsensemediated decay. One proposal based on these and other findings is that exon-junction complexes interact with a
deadenylase that rapidly removes the poly(A) tail from an associated mRNA, leading to its rapid decapping and degradation by a 5 → 3 exonuclease (see Figure 12-29). In the case
of properly spliced mRNAs, the exon-junction complexes are
thought to be dislodged from the mRNA by passage of the
first “pioneer” ribosome to translate the mRNA, thereby
protecting the mRNA from degradation. For mRNAs with
a stop codon before the final exon junction, however, one or
more exon-junction complexes remain associated with the
mRNA, resulting in nonsense-mediated decay.
Nonsense-mediated decay occurs in the cytoplasm of
yeast cells. Remarkably, in mammalian cells, there is evi-

523

dence that the pioneer ribosome translates the mRNA while
its 5 end is associated with the nuclear cap-binding complex and its poly(A) tail is associated with nuclear PABPII.
This finding and other results raise the possibility that in cells
of higher organisms, the first round of translation may occur
in the nucleus as part of the nonsense-mediated decay mechanism of mRNA surveillance.

Localization of mRNAs Permits Production
of Proteins at Specific Regions Within
the Cytoplasm
Many cellular processes depend on localization of particular proteins to specific structures or regions of the cell. In
later chapters we examine how some proteins are transported after their synthesis to their proper cellular location.
Alternatively, protein localization might be achieved by localization of mRNAs to specific regions of the cell cytoplasm
in which their encoded proteins function. In most cases examined thus far, such mRNA localization is specified by sequences in the 3 untranslated region of the mRNA.
A well-documented example of mRNA localization occurs in mammalian myoblasts (muscle precursor cells) as they
differentiate into myotubes, the fused, multinucleated cells
that make up muscle fibers. Myoblasts are motile cells that
extend cytoplasmic regions, called lamellipodia, from the
leading edge in the direction of movement. Extension of
lamellipodia during cell movement requires polymerization of
-actin (Chapter 19). Sensibly, -actin mRNA is concentrated
in the leading edges of myoblasts, the region of the cell cytoplasm where the encoded protein is needed for motility. When
myoblasts fuse into syncytial myotubes, -actin expression is
repressed and the muscle-specific -actin is induced. In contrast to -actin mRNA, -actin mRNA is restricted to the perinuclear regions of myotubes. When cultured myoblasts in the
process of differentiating are stained with fluorescent probes
specific for - or -actin mRNA, both mRNAs are localized
to their respective cellular regions.
To test the ability of actin mRNA sequences to direct the
cytoplasmic localization of an mRNA, fragments of - and
-actin cDNAs were inserted into separate plasmid vectors
that express -galactosidase from a strong viral promoter.
The resulting plasmids then were transfected into cultured
cells, which were assayed for -galactosidase activity. These
experiments showed that inclusion of the 3 untranslated end
of - or -actin cDNAs directs localization of the expressed
-galactosidase, whereas the 5 untranslated and coding regions do not (Figure 12-31).
Treatment of cultured myoblasts with cytochalasin D,
which disrupts actin microfilaments, leads to rapid delocalization of actin mRNAs, indicating that cytoskeletal actin
microfilaments participate in the localization process. Disruption of other cytoskeletal components, however, does not
alter the localization of actin mRNAs. Other types of evidence also implicate the actin cytoskeleton in mRNA localization. Presumably certain RNA-binding proteins interact

524

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport
TRANSFECTED ACTIN SEQUENCES
(a)

–Actin

–Actin

5

(b)

3

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 12-31 Insertion of various
sections of the actin genes in the 3 untranslated position of
an expression vector showed that the 3 UTRs of - and actin mRNAs direct localization of the reporter mRNA.
Plasmid expression vectors were constructed encoding galactosidase mRNAs containing as their 3 untranslated
sequence either the 5’ untranslated sequence and coding region
of the - or -actin mRNAs (top panels), or the 3’ untranslated
sequence of these mRNAs (bottom panels), as indicated at the
left. The recombinant plasmids were transfected separately into
differentiating myoblasts. After a period of expression, the cells
were fixed and then assayed for -galactosidase activity by
incubating them with X-gal, a substrate that is hydrolyzed by with specific sequences in the 3 untranslated regions of an
mRNA and with specific components of microfilaments, including motor proteins that move cargo along the length of
microfilaments. The best-understood example of this mechanism of mRNA localization occurs during cell division in
S. cerevisiae, as we describe in Chapter 22.

galactosidase to yield a blue product. (a) Transfected cells that
expressed engineered -galactosidase mRNAs whose 3
untranslated region corresponded to the 5 untranslated
sequence and coding region of - or -actin mRNA. These actin
sequences did not cause localization of the -galactosidase
mRNA, as evidenced by the diffuse blue staining. (b) Transfected
cells that expressed engineered -galactosidase mRNAs whose
3 untranslated region corresponded to the 3 untranslated
sequences of - or -actin mRNA. These sequences led to
localization of -galactosidase mRNA to lamellipodia in myoblasts
(-actin) or perinuclear regions in myotubes (-actin), as
evidenced by the deep staining in these regions. [Micrographs from
E. H. Kislaukis et al., 1993, J. Cell. Biol. 123:165.]

and transposons, leads to degradation of mRNAs that form
perfect hybrids with short interfering RNAs (siRNAs).
■ Both miRNAs and siRNAs contain 21–23 nucleotides, are
generated from longer precursor molecules, and are assembled into a multiprotein RNA-induced silencing complex
(RISC) that either represses translation of target mRNAs or
cleaves them (see Figure 12-27).

Translation can be repressed by micro RNAs (miRNAs),
which form imperfect hybrids with sequences in the 3 untranslated region (UTR) of specific target mRNAs.

Cytoplasmic polyadenylation is required for translation
of mRNAs with a short poly(A) tail. Binding of a specific
protein to regulatory elements in their 3 UTRs represses
translation of these mRNAs. Phosphorylation of this RNAbinding protein, induced by an external signal, leads to
lengthening of the 3 poly(A) tail and translation (see Figure 12-28).

The related phenomenon of RNA interference, which
probably evolved as an early defense system against viruses

■ Most mRNAs are degraded as the result of the gradual
shortening of their poly(A) tail (deadenylation) followed by

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 12.4
Cytoplasmic Mechanisms of Post-transcriptional
Control
■

■

■

12.5 • Processing of rRNA and tRNA

525

exosome-mediated 3 → 5 digestion or removal of the 5 cap
and digestion by a 5 → 3 exonuclease (see Figure 12-29).
Eukaryotic mRNAs encoding proteins that are expressed
in short bursts generally have repeated copies of an AUrich sequence in their 3 UTR. Specific proteins that bind
to these elements also interact with the deadenylating enzyme and cytoplasmic exosomes, promoting rapid RNA
degradation.

■

Binding of various proteins to regulatory elements in the
3 or 5 UTRs of mRNAs regulates the translation or degradation of many mRNAs in the cytoplasm.

Nascent
pre-rRNP
Transcription
unit

Translation of ferritin mRNA and degradation of transferrin receptor (TfR) mRNA are both regulated by the same
iron-sensitive RNA-binding protein. At low iron concentrations, this protein is in a conformation that binds to specific
elements in the mRNAs, inhibiting ferritin mRNA translation or degradation of TfR mRNA (see Figure 12-30). This
dual control precisely regulates the iron level within cells.
■

Nonsense-mediated decay and other mRNA surveillance
mechanisms prevent the translation of improperly
processed mRNAs encoding abnormal proteins that might
interfere with functioning of the corresponding normal
proteins.

■

Some mRNAs are directed to specific subcellular locations by sequences usually found in the 3 UTR, leading
to localization of the encoded proteins.

Direction of transcription

■

Nucleolar
chromatin
Nontranscribed
spacer

Transcription
unit

■

12.5

Processing of rRNA and tRNA

Approximately 80 percent of the total RNA in rapidly growing mammalian cells (e.g., cultured HeLa cells) is rRNA, and
15 percent is tRNA; protein-coding mRNA thus constitutes
only a small portion of the total RNA. The primary transcripts produced from most rRNA genes and from tRNA
genes, like pre-mRNAs, are extensively processed to yield the
mature, functional forms of these RNAs.

Pre-rRNA Genes Are Similar in All Eukaryotes
and Function as Nucleolar Organizers
The 28S and 5.8S rRNAs associated with the large (60S) ribosomal subunit and the 18S rRNA associated with the
small (40S) ribosomal subunit in higher eukaryotes (and the
smaller, functionally equivalent rRNAs in all other eukaryotes) are encoded by a single type of pre-rRNA transcription
unit. Transcription by RNA polymerase I yields a 45S primary transcript (pre-rRNA), which is processed into the mature 28S, 18S, and 5.8S rRNAs found in cytoplasmic
ribosomes. Sequencing of the DNA encoding pre-rRNA from
many species showed that this DNA shares several properties
in all eukaryotes. First, the pre-rRNA genes are arranged in
long tandem arrays separated by nontranscribed spacer regions ranging in length from ≈2 kb in frogs to ≈30 kb in hu-

▲ FIGURE 12-32 Electron micrograph of pre-rRNA
transcription units from nucleolus of a frog oocyte. Each
“feather” represents a pre-rRNA molecule associated with
protein in a pre-ribonucleoprotein particle (pre-RNP) emerging
from a transcription unit. Pre-rRNA transcription units are
arranged in tandem, separated by nontranscribed spacer regions
of nucleolar chromatin. [Courtesy of Y. Osheim and O. J. Miller, Jr.]
mans (Figure 12-32). Second, the genomic regions corresponding to the three mature rRNAs are always arranged in
the same 5→3 order: 18S, 5.8S, and 28S. Third, in all eukaryotic cells (and even in bacteria), the pre-rRNA gene
codes for, and the corresponding primary transcript contains,
regions that are removed during processing and rapidly degraded. The general structure of pre-rRNAs is diagrammed
in Figure 12-33.
Both the synthesis and processing of pre-rRNA occurs in
the nucleolus. When pre-rRNA genes initially were identified
in the nucleolus by in situ hybridization, it was not known
whether any other DNA was required to form the nucleolus. Subsequent experiments with transgenic Drosophila
strains demonstrated that a single complete pre-rRNA transcription unit induces formation of a small nucleolus. Thus
a single pre-rRNA gene is sufficient to be a nucleolar organizer, and all the other components of the ribosome diffuse to
the newly formed pre-rRNA. The structure of the nucleolus
observed by light and electron microscopy results from the
processing of pre-RNA and the assembly of ribosomal
subunits.

526

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport
18S

5.8S

28S

Human, ≈13.7 kb
5

3

X. laevis (frog), ≈7.9 kb
D. melanogaster (fruit fly), ≈7.7 kb
S. cerevisiae (yeast), ≈6.6 kb
Transcribed spacer
Region preserved in ribosomes

▲ FIGURE 12-33 General structure of eukaryotic pre-rRNA
transcription units. The three coding regions (blue) encode the
18S, 5.8S, and 28S rRNAs found in ribosomes of higher
eukaryotes or their equivalents in other species. The order of
these coding regions in the genome is always 5 → 3. Variations
in the lengths of the transcribed spacer regions (tan) account for
the major difference in the lengths of pre-rRNA transcription
units in different organisms.

Small Nucleolar RNAs Assist in Processing
Pre-rRNAs and Assembling Ribosome Subunits
Following their synthesis in the nucleolus, nascent pre-rRNA
transcripts are immediately bound by proteins, forming preribosomal ribonucleoprotein particles (pre-rRNPs). The
largest of these (80S) contains an intact 45S pre-rRNA molecule, which is cut in a series of cleavage and exonucleolytic
steps that ultimately yield the mature rRNAs found in ribosomes (Figure 12-34). During processing, pre-rRNA also is extensively modified, mostly by methylation of the 2-hydroxyl
group of specific riboses and conversion of specific uridine
residues to pseudouridine. Some of the proteins in the prerRNPs found in nucleoli remain associated with the mature
ribosomal subunits, whereas others are restricted to the nucleolus and assist in assembly of the subunits.
The positions of cleavage sites in pre-rRNA and the
specific sites of 2-O-methylation and pseudouridine formation are determined by approximately 150 different
small nucleolus-restricted RNA species, called small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), which hybridize transiently to prerRNA molecules. Like the snRNAs that function in
pre-mRNA processing, snoRNAs associate with proteins,
forming ribonucleoprotein particles called snoRNPs. One
large class of snoRNPs helps position a methyltransferase
enzyme near methylation sites in the pre-mRNA. Another
positions the enzyme that converts uridine to pseudouridine. Others function in the cleavage reactions that remove
transcribed spacer regions. Once cleaved from pre-rRNAs,
these sequences are degraded by the same exosomeassociated 3 → 5 nuclear exonucleases that degrade introns spliced from pre-mRNAs.
Some snoRNAs are expressed from their own promoters
by RNA polymerase II or III. Remarkably, however, the large

majority of snoRNAs are spliced-out introns of genes encoding functional mRNAs encoding proteins involved in ribosome
synthesis or translation. Some snoRNAs are introns spliced
from apparently nonfunctional mRNAs. The genes encoding
these mRNAs seem to exist only to express snoRNAs from
excised introns.
Unlike pre-rRNA genes, 5S rRNA genes are transcribed
by RNA polymerase III in the nucleoplasm outside the nucleolus. Without further processing, 5S RNA diffuses to the
nucleolus, where it assembles with the 28S and 5.8S rRNAs
and proteins into large ribosomal subunits (see Figure 12-34
and Figure 4-28). When assembly of ribosomal subunits in
the nucleolus is complete, they are transported through nuclear pore complexes to the cytoplasm, where they appear
first as free subunits. The ribosomal subunits are the largest
cellular structures known to be transported through nuclear
pore complexes.

(From different
transcription
unit)

Nucleus

5S
Nucleolus

Pre-rRNP
(80S)
Proteins

32S
5.8S

5–10 min
45S
pre-rRNA

28S

FPO
20S

18S

30 min
5 min
Cytoplasm

5S
28S
18S

5.8S
40S ribosomal 60S ribosomal
subunit
subunit

▲ FIGURE 12-34 Processing of pre-rRNA and assembly
of ribosomes in higher eukaryotes. Ribosomal and nucleolar
proteins associate with 45S pre-RNA as it is synthesized, forming
an 80S pre-rRNP. Sites of cleavage and chemical modifications
are determined by small nucleolar RNAs (not shown). Note that
synthesis of 5S rRNA occurs outside the nucleolus.

12.5 • Processing of rRNA and tRNA

Self-Splicing Group I Introns Were the First
Examples of Catalytic RNA
The DNA in the protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila contains an intervening intron in the region that encodes the
large pre-rRNA molecule. Careful searches failed to uncover
even one pre-rRNA gene without the extra sequence, indicating that splicing is required to produce mature rRNA in
these organisms. In vitro studies showing that the pre-rRNA
was spliced at the correct sites in the absence of any protein
provided the first indication that RNA can function as a catalyst, like enzymes.
A whole raft of self-splicing sequences subsequently
were found in pre-rRNAs from other single-celled organisms, in mitochondrial and chloroplast pre-rRNAs, in
several pre-mRNAs from certain E. coli bacteriophages,
and in some bacterial tRNA primary transcripts. The
self-splicing sequences in all these precursors, referred to
as group I introns, use guanosine as a cofactor and can
fold by internal base pairing to juxtapose closely the two
exons that must be joined. As discussed earlier, certain

527

mitochondrial and chloroplast pre-mRNAs and tRNAs
contain a second type of self-splicing intron, designated
group II.
The splicing mechanisms used by group I introns, group
II introns, and spliceosomes are generally similar, involving two transesterification reactions, which require no
input of energy (Figure 12-35). Structural studies of the
group I intron from Tetrahymena pre-rRNA combined
with mutational and biochemical experiments have revealed that the RNA folds into a precise three-dimensional
structure that, like protein enzymes, contains deep grooves
for binding substrates and solvent-inaccessible regions that
function in catalysis. The group I intron functions like a
metalloenzyme to precisely orient the atoms that participate in the two transesterification reactions adjacent to catalytic Mg2 ions. Considerable evidence now indicates that
splicing by group II introns and by snRNAs in the spliceosome also involves bound catalytic Mg2 ions. In both the
groups I and II self-splicing introns and probably in the
spliceosome, RNA functions as a ribozyme, an RNA sequence with catalytic ability.

Spliceosome-catalyzed splicing
of pre-mRNA

Self-splicing introns
Group I

Group II
Spliceosome

3'
G
HO
P

5'

P

2'

2'
HO A
3'

5'

P

P

A

3'

5'

P

FPO

PG
3'
OH

3'
P
OH
P

P

3'
HO

3'

A

P

P
HO

▲ FIGURE 12-35 Splicing mechanisms in group I and group
II self-splicing introns and spliceosome-catalyzed splicing of
pre-mRNA. The intron is shown in gray, the exons to be joined in
red. In group I introns, a guanosine cofactor (G) that is not part
of the RNA chain associates with the active site. The 3-hydroxyl
group of this guanosine participates in a transesterification
reaction with the phosphate at the 5 end of the intron; this

A
3'

3'

A

PG
P

HO
P

P

OH

P
P

A
P
HO 3'

reaction is analogous to that involving the 2-hydroxyl groups of
the branch-site A in group II introns and pre-mRNA introns
spliced in spliceosomes (see Figure 12-7). The subsequent
transesterification that links the 5 and 3 exons is similar in all
three splicing mechanisms. Note that spliced-out group I introns
are linear structures, unlike the branched intron products in the
other two cases. [Adapted from P. A. Sharp, 1987, Science 235:769.]

528

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

 FIGURE 12-36 Changes that
occur during processing of tyrosine
pre-tRNA. A 14-nucleotide intron (blue)
in the anticodon loop is removed by
splicing. A 16-nucleotide sequence
(green) at the 5 end is cleaved by
RNase P. U residues at the 3 end are
replaced by the CCA sequence (red)
found in all mature tRNAs. Numerous
bases in the stem-loops are converted
to characteristic modified bases
(yellow). Not all pre-tRNAs contain
introns that are spliced out during
processing, but they all undergo the
other types of changes shown here.
D  dihydrouridine;   pseudouridine.

5'

G U U A U C A GU U A A U UG A

C
U
C
U
C
G
G
U
A

3'
OH

3'
OH

U
U
A
G
A
G
G
G
C
C

A
C
C
A
G
A
G
G
G
C
C

5' P

FPO

C
U
C
U
C
G
G
U
A
m

U C A
C C C G C
U C Am
G
UGA
C C C G C
G
G
G
C
U
G
G
G
A C CG
D A
C
U UC
G GG C G
D
G
C
A C CG
m
U
m
T
C
ψ
A
G
G
AGGC
DA
G
G
U
G
AGGC m
TψCG
UUA
G
C GA
G
D
DD A
loop
C GA
A U
A U
D loop
A U
A U
G C
G C
A UA
Processing
A
C
A ψ
A Anticodon
A
C
U
A
G CG
U
loop
U A
G ψ A
A U
C
A
Mature tRNATyr
U
A
C
U
U A C
Pre-tRNATyr

Pre-tRNAs Undergo Cleavage, Base Modification,
and Sometimes Protein-Catalyzed Splicing
Mature cytosolic tRNAs, which average 75–80 nucleotides
in length, are produced from larger precursors (pre-tRNAs)
synthesized by RNA polymerase III in the nucleoplasm. Mature tRNAs also contain numerous modified bases that are
not present in tRNA primary transcripts. Cleavage and base
modification occur during processing of all pre-tRNAs; some
pre-tRNAs also are spliced during processing.
A 5 sequence of variable length that is absent from mature tRNAs is present in all pre-tRNAs (Figure 12-36). These
extra 5 nucleotides are removed by ribonuclease P (RNase P),
a ribonucleoprotein endonuclease. Studies with E. coli RNase
P indicate that at high Mg2 concentrations, the RNA component alone can recognize and cleave E. coli pre-tRNAs. The
RNase P polypeptide increases the rate of cleavage by the
RNA, allowing it to proceed at physiological Mg2 concentrations. A comparable RNase P functions in eukaryotes.
About 10 percent of the bases in pre-tRNAs are modified
enzymatically during processing. Three classes of base modifications occur (see Figure 12-36): replacement of U residues
at the 3 end of pre-tRNA with a CCA sequence, which is
found at the 3 end of all tRNAs and is required for their
charging by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases during protein
synthesis; addition of methyl and isopentenyl groups to the
heterocyclic ring of purine bases and methylation of the 2OH group in the ribose of any residue; and conversion of
specific uridines to dihydrouridine, pseudouridine, or ribothymidine residues.
As shown in Figure 12-36, the pre-tRNA expressed
from the yeast tyrosine tRNA (tRNATyr) gene contains a

14-base intron that is not present in mature tRNATyr. Some
other eukaryotic tRNA genes and some archaeal tRNA
genes also contain introns. The introns in nuclear pretRNAs are shorter than those in pre-mRNAs and lack the
consensus splice-site sequences found in pre-mRNAs (see
Figure 12-6). Pre-tRNA introns also are clearly distinct
from the much longer self-splicing group I and group II introns found in chloroplast and mitochondrial pre-rRNAs.
The mechanism of pre-tRNA splicing differs in three fundamental ways from the mechanisms utilized by self-splicing introns and spliceosomes (see Figure 12-35). First,
splicing of pre-tRNAs is catalyzed by proteins, not by
RNAs. Second, a pre-tRNA intron is excised in one step
that entails simultaneous cleavage at both ends of the intron. Finally, hydrolysis of GTP and ATP is required to join
the two tRNA halves generated by cleavage on either side
of the intron.
After pre-tRNAs are processed in the nucleoplasm, the
mature tRNAs are transported to the cytoplasm through nuclear pore complexes by exportin-t, as discussed previously.
In the cytoplasm, tRNAs are passed between aminoacyltRNA synthetases, elongation factors, and ribosomes during protein synthesis (Chapter 4). Thus tRNAs generally are
associated with proteins and spend little time free in the cell,
as is also the case for mRNAs and rRNAs.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 12.5
Processing of rRNA and tRNA
A large precursor pre-rRNA (45S in humans) synthesized by RNA polymerase I undergoes cleavage, exonucle-

■

Perspectives for the Future

olytic digestion, and base modifications to yield mature
28S, 18S, and 5.8S rRNAs, which associate with ribosomal proteins into ribosomal subunits (see Figure 12-34).
Synthesis and processing of pre-rRNA occur in the nucleolus. The 5S rRNA component of the large ribosomal
subunit is synthesized in the nucleoplasm by RNA polymerase III and is not processed.

■

Group I and group II self-splicing introns and snRNAs
in spliceosomes all function as ribozymes, or catalytically
active RNA sequences, that carry out splicing by analogous transesterification reactions requiring bound Mg2
ions (see Figure 12-35).
■

Pre-tRNAs synthesized by RNA polymerase III in the
nucleoplasm are processed by removal of the 5-end
sequence, addition of CCA to the 3 end, and modification of multiple internal bases (see Figure 12-36).

■

Some pre-tRNAs contain a short intron that is removed
by a protein-catalyzed mechanism distinct from the splicing of pre-mRNA and self-splicing introns.

■

All species of RNA molecules are associated with proteins in various types of ribonucleoprotein particles both
in the nucleus and after export to the cytoplasm.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
In this and the previous chapter, we have seen that in eukaryotic cells, mRNAs are synthesized and processed in the
nucleus, transported through nuclear pore complexes to the
cytoplasm, and then, in some cases, transported to specific
areas of the cytoplasm before being translated by ribosomes.
Each of these fundamental processes is carried out by complex macromolecular machines composed of scores of proteins and in many cases RNAs, as well. The complexity of
these macromolecular machines ensures accuracy in finding
promoters and splice sites in the long length of DNA and
RNA sequences and provides various avenues for regulating
synthesis of a polypeptide chain. Much remains to be learned
about the structure, operation, and regulation of such complex machines as spliceosomes and the cleavage/polyadenylation apparatus.
Recent examples of the regulation of pre-RNA splicing
raise the question of how extracellular signals might control
such events, especially in the nervous system of vertebrates.
A case in point is the remarkable situation in the chick inner
ear where multiple isoforms of the Ca2-activated K channel called Slo are produced by alternative RNA splicing. Cellcell interactions appear to inform cells of their position in the
cochlea, leading to alternative splicing of Slo pre-mRNA.
The challenging task facing researchers is to discover how
such cell-cell interactions regulate the activity of RNAprocessing factors.

529

The mechanism of mRNP transport through nuclear pore
complexes poses many intriguing questions. Future research
will likely reveal additional activities of hnRNP and nuclear
mRNP proteins and clarify their mechanisms of action. For instance, there is a small gene family encoding proteins homologous to the large subunit of the mRNA-exporter. What are
the functions of these related proteins? Do they participate in
the transport of overlapping sets of mRNPs? Some hnRNP
proteins contain nuclear-retention signals that prevent nuclear
export when fused to hnRNP proteins with nuclear-export
signals (NESs). How are these hnRNP proteins selectively removed from processed mRNAs in the nucleus, allowing the
mRNAs to be transported to the cytoplasm?
The localization of certain mRNAs to specific subcellular
locations is fundamental to the development of multicellular organisms. As discussed in Chapter 22, during development an individual cell frequently divides into daughter cells
that function differently from each other. In the language of
developmental biology, the two daughter cells are said to
have different developmental fates. In many cases, this difference in developmental fate results from the localization
of an mRNA to one region of the cell before mitosis so that
after cell division, it is present in one daughter cell and not
the other. Much exciting work remains to be done to fully
understand the molecular mechanisms controlling mRNA
localization that are critical for the normal development of
multicellular organisms.
Some of the most exciting and unanticipated discoveries
in molecular cell biology in recent years concern the existence and function of miRNAs and the process of RNA interference. RNA interference (RNAi) provides molecular
cell biologists with a powerful method for studying gene
function. The discovery of more than a hundred miRNAs
in humans and other organisms suggests that multiple significant examples of translational control by this mechanism await to be characterized. Recent studies in plants link
similar short nuclear RNAs to the control of DNA methylation and the formation of heterochromatin. Will similar
processes control gene expression through the assembly of
heterochromatin in humans and other animals? What other
regulatory processes might be directed by micro RNAs?
Since control by these mechanisms depends on base pairing between miRNAs and target mRNAs or genes, genomic
and bioinformatic methods will probably suggest genes
that may be controlled by these mechanisms. What other
processes in addition to translation control, mRNA degradation, and heterochromatin assembly might be controlled
by miRNAs?
These are just a few of the fascinating questions concerning RNA processing, post-transcriptional control, and nuclear transport that will challenge molecular cell biologists in
the coming decades. The astounding discoveries of entirely
unanticipated mechanisms of gene control by miRNAs
remind us that there will likely be many more surprises in
the future.

530

CHAPTER 12 • Post-Transcriptional Gene Control and Nuclear Transport

KEY TERMS
5 cap (00)
alternative splicing (00)
cargo complex (00)
cleavage/polyadenylation
complex (00)
cross-exon recognition
complex (00)
exosome (00)
exportin 1 (00)
FG-nucleoporins (00)
group I introns (00)
group II introns (00)
importins (00)
iron-response
element–binding
protein (IRE-BP) (00)
karyopherins (00)
micro RNAs
(miRNAs) (00)

mRNA-exporter (00)
mRNA surveillance (00)
nuclear pore complex
(NPC) (00)
poly(A) tail (00)
pre-mRNA (00)
pre-rRNA (00)
Ran protein (00)
Ribozyme (00)
RNA editing (00)
RNA recognition
motif (RRM) (00)
RNA splicing (00)
RNA-induced silencing
complex (RISC) (00)
small nuclear
RNAs (snRNAs) (00)
spliceosome (00)
SR proteins (00)

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Describe three types of post-transcriptional regulation of
protein-coding genes.
2. What is the evidence that transcription termination by
RNA polymerase II is coupled to polyadenylation?
3. It has been suggested that manipulation of HIV antitermination might provide for effective therapies in combatting AIDS. What effect would a mutation in the TAR sequence that abolishes Tat binding have on HIV transcription
after HIV infection and why? A mutation in Cdk9 that abolishes activity?
4. Some heat shock genes encode proteins that act rapidly
to protect other proteins from harsh conditions. Describe the
mechanism that has evolved to regulate the expression of
such genes.
5. You are investigating the transcriptional regulation of
genes from a recently discovered eukaryotic organism. You
find that this organism has three RNA polymerase–like enzymes and that genes encoding proteins are transcribed using
an RNA polymerase II–like enzyme. When examining the
full-length mRNAs produced, you find that there is no 5
structure (i.e., cap). Are you surprised? Why/why not?
6. Why do researchers believe that the fragile-X disorder
involves an aberration in RNA binding?
7. What is the difference between hnRNAs, snRNAs,
miRNAs, siRNAs, and snoRNAs?

8. Describe how the discovery that introns are removed
during splicing was made. How are the locations of exonintron junctions predicted?
9. What are the mechanistic similarities between Group II
intron self-splicing and spliceosomal splicing? What is the evidence that there may be an evolutionary relationship between the two?
10. Where do researchers believe most transcription and
RNA-processing events occur? What is the evidence to support this?
11. You obtain the sequence of a gene containing 10 exons,
9 introns, and a 3 UTR containing a polyadenylation consensus sequence. The fifth intron also contains a polyadenylation site. To test whether both polyadenylation sites are
used, you isolate mRNA and find a longer transcript from
muscle tissue and a shorter mRNA transcript from all other
tissues. Speculate about the mechanism involved in the production of these two transcripts.
12. What is the evidence that an mRNA exporter directs
mRNPs through nuclear pores? What is the evidence that
most vertebrates also utilize such an exporter?
13. Why is localization of Ran GAP in the nucleus and Ran
nucleotide exchange factor (RCC1) in the cytoplasm necessary for unidirectional transport of cargo proteins containing
an NES?
14. Speculate about why plants deficient in Dicer activity
show increased sensitivity to infection by RNA viruses.
15. What is the evidence that some mRNAs are directed to
accumulate in specific subcellular locations?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
A specific protein kinase (PK) gene is speculated to be differentially spliced in muscle tissue. This gene comprises
three exons and two intron sequences and in fibroblast
cells encodes a 38.5-kD protein. Investigators have transfected various portions of a genomic or cDNA copy of the
PK gene into both muscle and fibroblast cells (see the constructs in part (a) of the figure). The expression system utilizes a promoter active in both cell types and a C-terminal
fusion to a small epitope tag called V5, which contributes
~5.5 kD to the fusion protein. Part (b) of the figure shows
the results of an immunoprecipitation experiment designed
to analyze the expression products of the transfected cells.
A negative control (Neg) of untransfected muscle cells is
included. Molecular weight markers in kD are indicated
on the left. Immunoprecipitated proteins as shown in part
(b) were then placed in protein kinase assays with two different substrates, A and B, to discern activity of the expressed proteins.

References

531

Dreyfuss, G., V. N. Kim, and N. Kataoka. 2002. MessengerRNA-binding proteins and the messages they carry. Nature Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 3:195–205.
Moore, M. J. 2002. Nuclear RNA turnover. Cell 108:431–434.
Shatkin, A. J., and J. L. Manley. 2000. The ends of the affair:
capping and polyadenylation. Nature Struct. Biol. 7:838–842.
Villa, T., J. A. Pleiss, and C. Guthrie. 2002. Spliceosomal
snRNAs: Mg(2+)-dependent chemistry at the catalytic core? Cell
109:149–152.

Regulation of Pre-mRNA Processing
Black, D. L. 2003. Mechanisms of alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 72:291–336.
Blanc, V., and N. O. Davidson. 2003. C-to-U RNA editing: mechanisms leading to genetic diversity. J. Biol. Chem. 278:1395–1398.
Faustino, N. A., and T. A. Cooper. 2003. Pre-mRNA splicing
and human disease. Genes Devel. 17:419–437.
Maas, S., A. Rich, and K. Nishikura. 2003. A-to-I RNA editing:
recent news and residual mysteries. J. Biol. Chem. 278:1391–1394.
Maniatis, T., and B. Tasic. 2002. Alternative pre-mRNA
splicing and proteome expansion in metazoans. Nature 418:
236–243.

Macromolecular Transport Across the Nuclear Envelope
Chook, Y. M., and G. Blobel. 2001. Karyopherins and nuclear
import. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11:703–715.
Conti, E., and E. Izaurralde. 2001. Nucleocytoplasmic transport
enters the atomic age. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:310–319.
Johnson, A. W., E. Lund, and J. Dahlberg. 2002. Nuclear export
of ribosomal subunits. Trends Biochem Sci. 27:580–585.
Reed, R., and E. Hurt. 2002. A conserved mRNA export machinery coupled to pre-mRNA splicing. Cell 108:523–531.
Ribbeck, K., and D. Gorlich. 2001. Kinetic analysis of translocation through nuclear pore complexes. Embo. J. 20:1320–1330.
Rout, M. P., and J. D. Aitchison. 2001. The nuclear pore complex as a transport machine. J. Biol. Chem. 276:16593–16596.

a. What can be concluded about differential splicing of the
PK gene in fibroblast versus muscle cells? Are there other experiments that could confirm these results?
b. What sequence or sequences contribute to regulation of
alternative splicing?
c. How does the presence or absence of exon 3 alter the catalytic activity of the encoded PK protein? Which data support your conclusions?

REFERENCES

Processing of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNA
Bentley, D. 2002. The mRNA assembly line: transcription and
processing machines in the same factory. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
14:336–342.
Bonen, L., and J. Vogel. 2001. The ins and outs of group II introns. Trends Genet. 17:322–331.
Butler, J. S. 2002. The yin and yang of the exosome. Trends Cell
Biol. 12:90–96.

Cytoplasmic Mechanisms of Post-transcriptional Control
Ambros, V. 2001. MicroRNAs: tiny regulators with great potential. Cell 107:823–826.
Cerutti, H. 2003. RNA interference: traveling in the cell and
gaining functions? Trends Genet. 19:39–46.
Hannon, G. J. 2002. RNA interference. Nature 418:244–251.
Kloc, M., N. R. Zearfoss, and L. D. Etkin. 2002. Mechanisms
of subcellular mRNA localization. Cell 108:533–544.
Maquat, L. E., and G. G. Carmichael. 2001. Quality control of
mRNA function. Cell 104:173–176.
Mendez, R., and J. D. Richter. 2001. Translational control by
CPEB: a means to the end. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:521–529.
Van Hoof, A., and R. Parker. 2002. Messenger RNA degradation: beginning at the end. Curr. Biol. 12:R285–R287.
Wilkinson, M. F., and A. B. Shyu. 2002. RNA surveillance by
nuclear scanning? Nature Cell Biol. 4:E144–E147.

Processing of rRNA and tRNA
Fatica, A., and D. Tollervey. 2002. Making ribosomes. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 14:313–318.
Hopper, A. K., and E. M. Phizicky. 2003. tRNA transfers to the
limelight. Genes Devel. 17:162–180.

13
SIGNALING AT
THE CELL SURFACE

Three-dimensional structure of the G protein  (blue) and 
(purple) complex as obtained by x-ray crystallography.

N

o cell lives in isolation. In eukaryotic microorganisms such as yeast, slime molds, and protozoans, secreted molecules called pheromones coordinate the
aggregation of free-living cells for sexual mating or differentiation under certain environmental conditions. Yeast
mating-type factors are a well-understood example of
pheromone-mediated cell-to-cell signaling (Chapter 22).
More important in plants and animals are extracellular signaling molecules that function within an organism to control
metabolic processes within cells, the growth and differentiation of tissues, the synthesis and secretion of proteins, and
the composition of intracellular and extracellular fluids. Adjacent cells often communicate by direct cell-cell contact. For
example, gap junctions in the plasma membranes of adjacent
cells permit them to exchange small molecules and to coordinate metabolic responses. Other junctions between adjacent cells determine the shape and rigidity of many tissues;
other interactions adhere cells to the extracellular matrix.
Such cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, which are covered
in Chapter 6, may also initiate intracellular signaling via
pathways similar to those discussed in this and subsequent
chapters.
Extracellular signaling molecules are synthesized and released by signaling cells and produce a specific response only
in target cells that have receptors for the signaling molecules.
In multicellular organisms, an enormous variety of chemicals, including small molecules (e.g., amino acid or lipid derivatives, acetylcholine), peptides, and proteins, are used in
this type of cell-to-cell communication. Some signaling molecules, especially hydrophobic molecules such as steroids,
retinoids, and thyroxine, spontaneously diffuse through the

plasma membrane and bind to intracellular receptors. Signaling from such intracellular receptors is discussed in
Chapter 11.
In this and the next two chapters, we focus on signaling
from a diverse group of receptor proteins located in the
plasma membrane (Figure 13-1). The signaling molecule
acts as a ligand, which binds to a structurally complementary site on the extracellular or membrane-spanning domains of the receptor. Binding of a ligand to its receptor
causes a conformational change in the cytosolic domain or
domains of the receptor that ultimately induces specific cellular responses. The overall process of converting signals
into cellular responses, as well as the individual steps in this

OUTLINE
13.1 Signaling Molecules and Cell-Surface
Receptors
13.2 Intracellular Signal Transduction
13.3 G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate
or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase
13.4 G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Regulate
Ion Channels
13.5 G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate
Phospholipase C
13.6 Activation of Gene Transcription
by G Protein–Coupled Receptors
533

534

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

Exterior

P

P

Cytosol

P

P

Nucleus
P

G protein-coupled
receptors

P

P

Cytokine receptors

P

Receptor tyrosine
kinases

P

TGFβ receptors

Hedgehog (Hh)
receptors

Wnt receptors

Notch receptor

Linked to a trimeric G Associated with
Cytosolic domain
protein that controls cytosolic JAK kinases with tyrosine kinase
the activity of an
activity
effector protein (here
adenylyl cyclase)

Cytosolic domain
Hh ligand tethered to
with serine/threonine membrane of
kinase activity
signaling cell by
cholesterol anchor

Palmitoylated Wnt
ligand binds seven
transmembrane
protein receptor
complex

Ligand, Delta, is a
transmembrane
protein on signaling
cell

Activate cytosolic or
nuclear transcription
factors via several
pathways (here one
involving protein
kinase A)

Activate Smad
transcription factors
in the cytosol by
phosphorylation

Release an activated
transcription factor
from a multiprotein
complex in the
cytosol

Cytosolic domain of
Notch released by
proteolysis acts in
association with
nuclear transcription
factors

Activate cytosolic
STAT transcription
factors by
phosphorylation

Activate cytosolic
kinases (here MAP
kinase) that translocate to the nucleus
and activate nuclear
transcription factors
by phosphorylation

Control processing
of transcription factor
by proteolysis;
Hh binding causes
release from
cytosolic complex

▲ FIGURE 13-1 Overview of seven major classes of cellsurface receptors discussed in this book. In many signaling
pathways, ligand binding to a receptor leads to activation of
transcription factors in the cytosol, permitting them to translocate
into the nucleus and stimulate (or occasionally repress)
transcription of their target genes. Alternatively, receptor

stimulation may lead to activation of cytosolic protein kinases
that then translocate into the nucleus and regulate the activity of
nuclear transcription factors. Some activated receptors,
particularly certain G protein–coupled receptors, also can induce
changes in the activity of preexisting proteins. [After A. H. Brivanlou

process, is termed signal transduction. As we will see, signaltransduction pathways may involve relatively few or many
components.
We begin this chapter with two sections that describe
general principles and techniques that are relevant to most
signaling systems. In the remainder of the chapter, we concentrate on the huge class of cell-surface receptors that activate trimeric G proteins. Receptors of this type,
commonly called G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs),
are found in all eukaryotic cells from yeast to man. The
human genome, for instance, encodes several thousand
G protein–coupled receptors. These include receptors in the
visual, olfactory (smell), and gustatory (taste) systems,
many neurotransmitter receptors, and most of the receptors
for hormones that control carbohydrate, amino acid, and
fat metabolism.

13.1 Signaling Molecules
and Cell-Surface Receptors

and J. Darnell, 2002, Science 295:813.]

Communication by extracellular signals usually involves the
following steps: (1) synthesis and (2) release of the signaling
molecule by the signaling cell; (3) transport of the signal to
the target cell; (4) binding of the signal by a specific receptor protein leading to its activation; (5) initiation of one or
more intracellular signal-transduction pathways by the activated receptor; (6) specific changes in cellular function,
metabolism, or development; and (7) removal of the signal,
which often terminates the cellular response (see Figure
13-1). The vast majority of receptors are activated by binding of secreted or membrane-bound molecules (e.g., hormones, growth factors, neurotransmitters, and pheromones).

13.1 • Signaling Molecules and Cell-Surface Receptors

Some receptors, however, are activated by changes in the
concentration of a metabolite (e.g., oxygen or nutrients) or
by physical stimuli (e.g., light, touch, heat). In E. coli, for
instance, receptors in the cell-surface membrane trigger signaling pathways that help the cell respond to changes
in the external level of phosphate and other nutrients (see
Figure 4-18).

Signaling Molecules in Animals Operate
over Various Distances
In animals, signaling by soluble extracellular molecules can
be classified into three types—endocrine, paracrine, or autocrine—based on the distance over which the signal acts.
In addition, certain membrane-bound proteins act as signals.
In endocrine signaling, the signaling molecules, called
hormones, act on target cells distant from their site of synthesis by cells of the various endocrine organs. In animals, an
endocrine hormone usually is carried by the blood or by
other extracellular fluids from its site of release to its target.
In paracrine signaling, the signaling molecules released
by a cell affect target cells only in close proximity. The conduction by a neurotransmitter of a signal from one nerve cell
to another or from a nerve cell to a muscle cell (inducing or
inhibiting muscle contraction) occurs via paracrine signaling (Chapter 7). Many growth factors regulating development in multicellular organisms also act at short range. Some
of these molecules bind tightly to the extracellular matrix,
unable to signal, but subsequently can be released in an active form. Many developmentally important signals diffuse
away from the signaling cell, forming a concentration gradient and inducing various cellular responses depending on
their concentration at a particular target cell (Chapter 15).
In autocrine signaling, cells respond to substances that
they themselves release. Some growth factors act in this fashion, and cultured cells often secrete growth factors that stimulate their own growth and proliferation. This type of
signaling is particularly common in tumor cells, many of
which overproduce and release growth factors that stimulate
inappropriate, unregulated proliferation of themselves as
well as adjacent nontumor cells; this process may lead to formation of a tumor mass.
Signaling molecules that are integral membrane proteins
located on the cell surface also play an important role in development. In some cases, such membrane-bound signals on
one cell bind receptors on the surface of an adjacent target
cell to trigger its differentiation. In other cases, proteolytic
cleavage of a membrane-bound signaling protein releases the
exoplasmic region, which functions as a soluble signaling
protein.
Some signaling molecules can act both short range and
long range. Epinephrine, for example, functions as a neurotransmitter (paracrine signaling) and as a systemic hormone
(endocrine signaling). Another example is epidermal growth
factor (EGF), which is synthesized as an integral plasmamembrane protein. Membrane-bound EGF can bind to and

535

signal an adjacent cell by direct contact. Cleavage by an extracellular protease releases a soluble form of EGF, which
can signal in either an autocrine or a paracrine manner.

Receptors Activate a Limited Number
of Signaling Pathways
The number of receptors and signaling pathways that we discuss throughout this book initially may seem overwhelming.
Moreover, the terminology for designating pathways can be
confusing. Pathways commonly are named based on the
general class of receptor involved (e.g., GPCRs, receptor tyrosine kinases), the type of ligand (e.g., TGF, Wnt, Hedgehog), or a key intracellular signal transduction component
(e.g., NF-B). In some cases, the same pathway may be
referred to by different names. Fortunately, as researchers
have discovered the molecular details of more and more receptors and pathways, some principles and mechanisms are
beginning to emerge. These shared features can help us make
sense of the wealth of new information concerning cell-tocell signaling.
First, external signals induce two major types of cellular
responses: (1) changes in the activity or function of specific
pre-existing proteins and (2) changes in the amounts of specific proteins produced by a cell, most commonly as the result
of modification of transcription factors leading to activation
or repression of gene transcription. In general, the first type of
response occurs more rapidly than the second type. Signaling
from G protein–coupled receptors, described in later sections,
often results in changes in the activity of preexisting proteins,
although activation of these receptors on some cells also can
induce changes in gene expression.
The other classes of receptors depicted in Figure 13-1
operate primarily to modulate gene expression. In some
cases, the activated receptor directly activates a transcription
factor in the cytosol (e.g., TGF and cytokine receptor pathways) or assembles an intracellular signaling complex that
activates a cytosolic transcription factor (e.g., Wnt pathways). In yet other pathways, specific proteolytic cleavage
of an activated cell-surface receptor or cytosolic protein
releases a transcription factor (e.g., Hedgehog, Notch, and
NF-B pathways). Transcription factors activated in the cytosol by these pathways move into the nucleus, where they
stimulate (or occasionally inhibit) transcription of specific
target genes. Signaling from receptor tyrosine kinases leads
to activation of several cytosolic protein kinases that translocate into the nucleus and regulate the activity of nuclear transcription factors. We consider these signaling pathways,
which regulate transcription of many genes essential for cell
division and for many cell differentiation processes, in the
following two chapters.
Second, some classes of receptors can initiate signaling
via more than one intracellular signal-transduction pathway,
leading to different cellular responses. This complication is
typical of G protein–coupled receptors, receptor tyrosine
kinases, and cytokine receptors.

536

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

Third, despite the huge number of different kinds of ligands and their specific receptors, a relatively small number of
signal-transduction mechanisms and highly conserved intracellular proteins play a major role in intracellular signaling
pathways. Our knowledge of these common themes has advanced greatly in recent years. For instance, we can trace the
entire signaling pathway from binding of ligand to receptors
in several classes to the final cellular response.
Before delving into the particulars of individual signaling pathways, we discuss the basic properties of cell-surface
receptors, as well as methods for identifying and studying
them, in the remainder of this section; important general features of intracellular signal transduction are presented in
Section 13.2.

Receptor Proteins Exhibit Ligand-Binding
and Effector Specificity
The response of a cell or tissue to specific external signals
is dictated by the particular receptors it possesses, by the
signal-transduction pathways they activate, and by the intracellular processes ultimately affected. Each receptor generally binds only a single signaling molecule or a group of very

(a)

Residues essential to
tight binding with receptor

(b)

closely related molecules (Figure 13-2). In contrast, many signaling molecules bind to multiple types of receptors, each of
which can activate different intracellular signaling pathways
and thus induce different cellular responses. For instance, different types of acetylcholine receptors are found on the surface of striated muscle cells, heart muscle cells, and pancreatic
acinar cells. Release of acetylcholine from a neuron adjacent
to a striated muscle cell triggers contraction by activating
a ligand-gated ion channel, whereas release adjacent to a
heart muscle slows the rate of contraction via activation of a
G protein–coupled receptor. Release adjacent to a pancreatic
acinar cell triggers exocytosis of secretory granules that contain digestive enzymes. Similarly, epinephrine binds to several different G protein–coupled receptors, each of which
induces a distinct cellular response. Thus each receptor protein is characterized by binding specificity for a particular ligand, and the resulting receptor-ligand complex exhibits
effector specificity (i.e., mediates a specific cellular response).
On the other hand, different receptors of the same class
that bind different ligands often induce the same cellular
responses in a cell. In liver cells, for instance, the hormones
epinephrine, glucagon, and ACTH bind to different members
of the G protein–coupled receptor family, but all these

(c)

Growth
hormone

Residues essential
to tight binding with
hormone

NH3+
Growth
hormone
receptor

− OOC

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-2 Mutational studies have
identified the patches of amino acids in growth hormone
and its receptor that determine their highly specific mutual
interaction. The outer surface of the plasma membrane is toward
the bottom of the figure, and each receptor is anchored to the
membrane by a hydrophobic membrane-spanning alpha helix that is
not shown. As determined from the three-dimensional structure of
the growth hormone–growth hormone receptor complex,
28 amino acids in the hormone are at the binding interface with
one receptor. Each of these amino acids was mutated, one at a
time, to alanine, and the effect on receptor binding was determined.
(a) From this study it was found that only eight amino acids on
growth hormone (pink) contribute 85 percent of the binding energy;

these amino acids are distant in the primary sequence but adjacent
in the folded protein. Similar studies showed that two tryptophan
residues (blue) in the receptor contribute most of the energy
for binding growth hormone, although other amino acids at the
interface with the hormone (yellow) are also important. (b) Binding
of growth hormone to one receptor molecule is followed by
(c) binding of a second receptor to the opposing side of the
hormone; this involves the same set of yellow and blue amino
acids on the receptor but different residues on the hormone.
As we see in the following chapter, such hormone-induced receptor
dimerization is a common mechanism for receptor activation.
[After B. Cunningham and J. Wells, 1993, J. Mol. Biol. 234:554, and
T. Clackson and J. Wells, 1995, Science 267:383.]

13.1 • Signaling Molecules and Cell-Surface Receptors

Maximal Cellular Response to a Signaling
Molecule May Not Require Activation
of All Receptors
As we’ve seen, activation of a cell-surface receptor and subsequent signal transduction are triggered by binding of a signaling molecule (ligand) to the receptor. This binding depends
on weak, noncovalent forces (i.e., ionic, van der Waals, and
hydrophobic interactions) and molecular complementarity
between the interacting surfaces of a receptor and ligand
(Chapter 2). The specificity of a receptor refers to its ability to
distinguish closely related substances. The insulin receptor,
for example, binds insulin and a related hormone called
insulinlike growth factor 1, but no other peptide hormones.
Ligand binding usually can be viewed as a simple reversible reaction,
kon
RL

RL
koff

which can be described by the equation
Kd 

3 R4 3 L4
3 RL4

(13-1)

where [R] and [L] are the concentrations of free receptor and
ligand, respectively, at equilibrium, and [RL] is the concentration of the receptor-ligand complex. Kd, the dissociation
constant of the receptor-ligand complex, measures the affinity of the receptor for the ligand. This equilibrium binding
equation can be rewritten as
3RL4
RT



1
1

Kd
3 L4

(13-2)

where RT  [R]  [RL], the total concentration of free and
bound receptors; therefore, [RL]/RT is the fraction of receptors that have a bound ligand. The lower the Kd value, the
higher the affinity of a receptor for its ligand. The Kd value is
equivalent to the concentration of ligand at which half the
receptors contain bound ligand. If [L]  Kd, then from Equation 13-2 we can see that [RL]  0.5 RT. Equation 13-2 has
the same general form as the Michaelis-Menten equation,
which describes simple one-substrate enzymatic reactions
(Chapter 3). The Kd for a binding reaction is equivalent to
the Michaelis constant Km, which reflects the affinity of an
enzyme for its substrate.
For a simple binding reaction, Kd  koff/kon, where koff is
the rate constant for dissociation of a ligand from its receptor, and kon is the rate constant for formation of a receptor-

ligand complex from free ligand and receptor. The lower koff
is relative to kon, the more stable the RL complex, and thus
the lower the value of Kd. Like all equilibrium constants,
however, the value of Kd does not depend on the absolute
values of koff and kon, only on their ratio. For this reason,
binding of ligand by two different receptors can have the
same Kd values but very different rate constants.
In general, the Kd value of a cell-surface receptor for a
circulating hormone is greater than the normal (unstimulated) blood level of that hormone. Under this circumstance,
changes in hormone concentration are reflected in proportional changes in the fraction of receptors occupied. Suppose,
for instance, that the normal concentration of a hormone in
the blood is 109 M and that the Kd for its receptor is
107 M; by substituting these values into Equation 13-2, we
can calculate the fraction of receptors with bound hormone,
[RL]/RT, at equilibrium as 0.0099. Thus about 1 percent of
the total receptors will be filled with hormone. If the hormone concentration rises tenfold to 108 M, the concentration of receptor-hormone complex will rise proportionately,
so that about 10 percent of the total receptors would have
bound hormone. If the extent of the induced cellular response parallels the amount of RL, as is often the case, then
the cellular responses also will increase tenfold.
In many cases, however, the maximal cellular response to
a particular ligand is induced when less than 100 percent of
its receptors are bound to the ligand. This phenomenon can
be revealed by determining the extent of the response and of
receptor-ligand binding at different concentrations of ligand
(Figure 13-3). For example, a typical erythroid progenitor cell

Fraction of maximal binding
or cellular response

receptors activate the same signal-transduction pathway, one
that promotes synthesis of cyclic AMP (cAMP). This small
signaling molecule in turn regulates various metabolic
functions, including glycogen breakdown. As a result, all
three hormones have the same effect on liver-cell metabolism.

537

1.0

Physiological response

0.8
Fraction of surface receptors
with bound ligand

0.6
0.4

Ligand concentration
for 50% physiological response

0.2

Kd for ligand binding
0

1

2

3

4

Relative concentration of ligand

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-3 The maximal
physiological response to many external signals occurs when
only a fraction of the receptor molecules are occupied by
ligand. In this situation, plots of the extent of ligand binding and
of physiological response at different ligand concentrations differ.
In the example shown here, 50 percent of the maximal
physiological response is induced at a ligand concentration at
which only 18 percent of the receptors are occupied. Likewise,
80 percent of the maximal response is induced when the ligand
concentration equals the Kd value, at which 50 percent of the
receptors are occupied.

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

has ≈1000 surface receptors for erythropoietin, which induces
progenitor cells to proliferate and differentiate into red blood
cells. Because only 100 of these receptors need to bind erythropoietin to induce division of a target cell, the ligand concentration needed to induce 50 percent of the maximal cellular
response is proportionally lower than the Kd value for binding.
In such cases, a plot of the percentage of maximal binding versus ligand concentration differs from a plot of the percentage
of maximal cellular response versus ligand concentration.

Sensitivity of a Cell to External Signals
Is Determined by the Number of
Surface Receptors
Because the cellular response to a particular signaling molecule
depends on the number of receptor-ligand complexes, the fewer
receptors present on the surface of a cell, the less sensitive the
cell is to that ligand. As a consequence, a higher ligand concentration is necessary to induce the usual physiological response than would be the case if more receptors were present.
To illustrate this important point, let’s extend our example
of a typical erythroid progenitor cell. The Kd for binding of
erythropoietin (Epo) to its receptor is about 1010 M. As we
noted above, only 10 percent of the ≈1000 cell-surface erythropoietin receptors on the surface of a cell must be bound
to ligand to induce the maximal cellular response. We can determine the ligand concentration, [L], needed to induce the
maximal response by rewriting Equation 13-2 as follows:

3L4 

Kd
RT
1
3RL4

(13-3)

If RT  1000 (the total number of Epo receptors per cell),
Kd  1010 M, and [RL]  100 (the number of Epo-occupied
receptors needed to induce the maximal response), then an Epo
concentration of 1.1  1011 M will elicit the maximal
response. If RT is reduced to 200/cell, then a ninefold higher
Epo concentration (1010 M) is required to occupy 100 receptors and induce the maximal response. If RT is further reduced
to 120/cell, an Epo concentration of 5  1010 M, a 50-fold
increase, is necessary to generate the same cellular response.
Regulation of the number of receptors for a given signaling molecule expressed by a cell and thus its sensitivity to
that signal plays a key role in directing physiological and developmental events. Alternatively, endocytosis of receptors
on the cell surface can sufficiently reduce the number present
to terminate the usual cellular response at the prevailing signal concentration.

Binding Assays Are Used to Detect Receptors
and Determine Their Kd Values
Cell-surface receptors are difficult to identify and purify,
mainly because they are present in such minute amounts. The
receptor for a particular signaling molecule commonly con-

stitutes only ≈106 of the total protein in the cell, or ≈104
of the plasma-membrane protein. Purification is also difficult
because these integral membrane proteins first must be solubilized with a nonionic detergent so they can be separated
from other proteins (see Figure 5-40).
Usually, receptors are detected and measured by their
ability to bind radioactive ligands to cells or to cell fragments.
The results of such a binding assay are illustrated and explained in Figure 13-4. Both the number of ligand-binding
sites per cell and the Kd value are easily determined from the
specific binding curve (Figure 13-4, curve B), which is described by Equation 13-2. Since each receptor generally binds
just one ligand molecule, the number of ligand-binding sites
equals the number of active receptors per cell. Straight binding assays like the one in Figure 13-4 are feasible with receptors that have a strong affinity for their ligands, such as the
erythropoietin receptor (Kd  1  1010 M) and the insulin
receptor on liver cells (Kd  1.4  108 M).

[125I] insulin bound (molecules per cell)

538

40,000

Total binding
A

Total
receptors
per cell

Specific binding
B

30,000

20,000

10,000

0

Nonspecific binding
C

Kd for
insulin
binding

20

40

60

80

100

[125I] insulin (nM)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-4 Binding assays for
cell-surface receptors can determine the Kd for high-affinity
ligands and the number of receptors per cell. Shown here are
data for insulin-specific receptors on the surface of liver cells. A
suspension of cells is incubated for 1 hour at 4 C with increasing
concentrations of 125I-labeled insulin; the low temperature is used
to prevent endocytosis of the cell-surface receptors. The cells are
separated from unbound insulin, usually by centrifugation, and the
amount of radioactivity bound to them is measured. The total
binding curve A represents insulin specifically bound to high-affinity
receptors as well as insulin nonspecifically bound with low affinity
to other molecules on the cell surface. The contribution of
nonspecific binding to total binding is determined by repeating
the binding assay in the presence of a 100-fold excess of unlabeled
insulin, which saturates all the specific high-affinity sites. In this
case, all the labeled insulin binds to nonspecific sites, yielding curve
C. The specific binding curve B is calculated as the difference
between curves A and C. From curve B, the Kd for insulin binding
(≈1.4  108 M, or 14 nM) and the number of receptor molecules
per cell (≈33,000) can be determined. [Adapted from A. Ciechanover
et al., 1983, Cell 32:267.]

13.1 • Signaling Molecules and Cell-Surface Receptors

539

HO
OH

100
Inhibition of alprenolol binding (%)

+

CH

HO

CH2

NH2

CH3

Epinephrine (EP)

80
HO
IP

60

+

CH

HO
40
CH2
20

CH3

OH

EP

CH

CH2

NH2

Isoproterenol (IP)

CH3

OH

CH3
+

O

CH2

CH

CH2

NH2

CH2
0

10 −8

10 −6

10 −4

CH

CH
CH3

Alprenolol (AP)

Competitor concentration (M)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-5 Binding of low-affinity
ligands to cell-surface receptors can be detected in competition
assays. In this example, the synthetic ligand alprenolol, which
binds with high affinity to the epinephrine receptor on liver cells
(Kd ≅ 3  109 M), is used to detect the binding of two low-affinity
ligands, the natural hormone epinephrine (EP) and a synthetic ligand
called isoproterenol (IP). Assays are performed as described in
Figure 13-4 but with a constant amount of [3H]alprenolol to which
increasing amounts of unlabeled epinephrine or isoproterenol are
added. At each competitor concentration, the amount of bound

labeled alprenolol is determined. In a plot of the inhibition of
[3H]alprenolol binding versus epinephrine or isoproterenol
concentration, such as shown here, the concentration of the
competitor that inhibits alprenolol binding by 50 percent approximates
the Kd value for competitor binding. Note that the concentrations
of competitors are plotted on a logarithmic scale. The Kd for binding
of epinephrine to its receptor on liver cells is only ≈5  105 M
and would not be measurable by a direct binding assay with
[3H]epinephrine. The Kd for binding of isoproterenol, which induces
the normal cellular response, is more than tenfold lower.

Many ligands, however, bind to their receptors with
much lower affinity. If the Kd for binding is greater than
≈1  107 M, any ligand bound to receptors is likely to dissociate in the few seconds it takes to separate the cells (e.g.,
by centrifugation) from free (unbound) ligand and measure
the amount of bound ligand. One way to detect weak binding of a ligand to its receptor is in a competition assay with
another ligand that binds to the same receptor with high
affinity (low Kd value). In this type of assay, increasing
amounts of an unlabeled, low-affinity ligand (the competitor) are added to a cell sample with a constant amount of
the radiolabeled, high-affinity ligand (Figure 13-5). Binding of unlabeled competitor blocks binding of the radioactive ligand to the receptor; the concentration of competitor
required to inhibit binding of half the radioactive ligand approximates the Kd value for binding of the competitor to the
receptor.

For instance, addition of two methyl groups to epinephrine generates isoproterenol, an agonist that binds to epinephrine receptors on bronchial smooth muscle cells about
tenfold more strongly than does epinephrine (see Figure
13-5). Because ligand binding to these receptors promotes
relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle and thus opening of
the air passages in the lungs, isoproterenol is used in treating bronchial asthma, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema.
Activation of epinephrine receptors on cardiac muscle cells
increases the contraction rate. The antagonist alprenolol and
related compounds, referred to as beta-blockers, have a very
high affinity for these epinephrine receptors. Such antagonists are used to slow heart contractions in the treatment of
cardiac arrhythmias and angina. ❚

Synthetic analogs of natural hormones are widely
used in research on cell-surface receptors and as
drugs. These analogs fall into two classes: agonists,
which mimic the function of a natural hormone by binding
to its receptor and inducing the normal response, and antagonists, which bind to the receptor but induce no response. By
occupying ligand-binding sites on a receptor, an antagonist
can block binding of the natural hormone (or agonist) and
thus reduce the usual physiological activity of the hormone.

Cell-surface receptors often can be identified and followed
through isolation procedures by affinity labeling. In this
technique, cells are mixed with an excess of a radiolabeled
ligand for the receptor of interest. After unbound ligand is
washed away, the cells are treated with a chemical agent that
covalently cross-links bound labeled ligand molecules and receptors on the cell surface. Once a radiolabeled ligand is covalently cross-linked to its receptor, it remains bound even
in the presence of detergents and other denaturing agents

Receptors Can Be Purified by Affinity Techniques
or Expressed from Cloned Genes

540

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

that are used to solubilize receptor proteins from the cell
membrane. The labeled ligand provides a means for detecting the receptor during purification procedures.
Another technique often used in purifying cell-surface
receptors that retain their ligand-binding ability when solubilized by detergents is similar to affinity chromatography
using antibodies (see Figure 3-34). To purify a receptor by
this technique, a ligand for the receptor of interest, rather
than an antibody, is chemically linked to the beads used to
form a column. A crude, detergent-solubilized preparation
of membrane proteins is passed through the column; only
the receptor binds, and other proteins are washed away.
Passage of an excess of the soluble ligand through the column causes the bound receptor to be displaced from the
beads and eluted from the column. In some cases, a receptor
can be purified as much as 100,000-fold in a single affinity
chromatographic step.
Once a receptor is purified, its properties can be studied
and its gene cloned. A functional expression assay of the
cloned cDNA in a mammalian cell that normally lacks the
encoded receptor can provide definitive proof that the proper
protein indeed has been obtained (Figure 13-6). Such expression assays also permit investigators to study the effects
of mutating specific amino acids on ligand binding or on
“downstream” signal transduction, thereby pinpointing the
receptor amino acids responsible for interacting with the ligand or with critical signal-transduction proteins.
The cell-surface receptors for many signaling molecules
are present in such small amounts that they cannot be purified by affinity chromatography and other conventional biochemical techniques. These low-abundance receptor proteins
can now be identified and cloned by various recombinant
DNA techniques, eliminating the need to isolate and purify
them from cell extracts. In one technique, cloned cDNAs prepared from the entire mRNA extracted from cells that produce the receptor are inserted into expression vectors by
techniques described in Chapter 9. The recombinant vectors
then are transfected into cells that normally do not synthesize
the receptor of interest, as in Figure 13-6. Only the very few
transfected cells that contain the cDNA encoding the desired
receptor synthesize it; other transfected cells produce irrelevant proteins. The rare cells expressing the desired receptor
can be detected and purified by various techniques such as
fluorescence-activated cell sorting using a fluorescent-labeled
ligand for the receptor of interest (see Figure 5-34). Once a
cDNA clone encoding the receptor is identified, the sequence
of the cDNA can be determined and that of the receptor protein deduced from the cDNA sequence.
Genomics studies coupled with functional expression assays are now being used to identify genes for previously unknown receptors. In this approach, stored DNA sequences
are analyzed for similarities with sequences known to encode
receptor proteins (Chapter 9). Any putative receptor genes
that are identified in such a search then can be tested for their
ability to bind a signaling molecule or induce a response in
cultured cells by a functional expression assay.

Receptor for
ligand other
than X

Ligand X

No binding of X; no cellular response
Transfection with cDNA
expression vector and
selection of transformed cells
Ligand X

mRNA

Ligand X
receptor

cDNA for receptor
for ligand X

Binding of X; normal cellular response

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-6 Functional expression
assay can identify a cDNA encoding a cell-surface receptor.
Target cells lacking receptors for a particular ligand (X) are
stably transfected with a cDNA expression vector encoding the
receptor. The design of the expression vector permits selection
of transformed cells from those that do not incorporate the
vector into their genome (see Figure 9-29b). Providing that these
cells already express all the relevant signal-transduction proteins,
the transfected cells exhibit the normal cellular response to X if
the cDNA in fact encodes the functional receptor.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 13.1
Signaling Molecules and Cell-Surface Receptors
Extracellular signaling molecules regulate interactions
between unicellular organisms and are critical regulators
of physiology and development in multicellular organisms.

■

■ Binding of extracellular signaling molecules to cell-surface
receptors triggers intracellular signal-transduction pathways
that ultimately modulate cellular metabolism, function, or
gene expression (Figure 13-1).

External signals include membrane-anchored and secreted proteins and peptides, small lipophilic molecules
(e.g., steroid hormones, thyroxine), small hydrophilic mol-

■

13.2 • Intracellular Signal Transduction

ecules derived from amino acids (e.g., epinephrine), gases
(e.g., nitric oxide), and physical stimuli (e.g., light).
Signals from one cell can act on nearby cells (paracrine),
on distant cells (endocrine), or on the signaling cell itself
(autocrine).

■

Receptors bind ligands with considerable specificity,
which is determined by noncovalent interactions between
a ligand and specific amino acids in the receptor protein
(see Figure 13-2).

■

more enzymes or nonenzymatic proteins. In muscle, a signalinduced rise in cytosolic Ca2 triggers contraction (see
Figure 19-28); a similar increase in Ca2 induces exocytosis
of secretory vesicles in endocrine cells and of neurotransmitter-containing vesicles in nerve cells (see Figure 7-43). Similarly, a rise in cAMP induces various changes in cell
metabolism that differ in different types of human cells. The
NH2
N
N

The concentration of ligand at which half its receptors
are occupied, the Kd, can be determined experimentally and
is a measure of the affinity of the receptor for the ligand
(see Figure 13-4).
■

1

4
2

3

O

P

O

OH



Because the amount of a particular receptor expressed
is generally quite low (ranging from ≈2000 to 20,000 molecules per cell), biochemical purification may not be feasible. Genes encoding low-abundance receptors for specific
ligands often can be isolated from cDNA libraries transfected into cultured cells.

O

■

3,5-Cyclic AMP
(cAMP)

Activates protein kinase A (PKA)
O
N

Functional expression assays can determine if a cDNA
encodes a particular receptor and are useful in studying
the effects on receptor function of specific mutations in its
sequence (see Figure 13-6).

■

5

NH

N

CH2

O

N

NH2

O
1

4
3

13.2 Intracellular Signal Transduction

O

P

O

O

The various intracellular pathways that transduce signals
downstream from activated cell-surface receptors differ in
their complexity and in the way they transduce signals. We
describe the components and operation of many individual
pathways later in this chapter and in other chapters. Some
general principles of signal transduction, applicable to different pathways, are covered in this section.

2

OH



3,5-Cyclic GMP
(cGMP)

Activates protein kinase G (PKG)
and opens cation channels in
rod cells
PO32

1

CH3

The binding of ligands (“first messengers”) to many cellsurface receptors leads to a short-lived increase (or decrease)
in the concentration of certain low-molecular-weight
intracellular signaling molecules termed second messengers.
These molecules include 3,5-cyclic AMP (cAMP), 3,5cyclic GMP (cGMP), 1,2-diacylglycerol (DAG), and inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), whose structures are shown in Figure 13-7. Other important second messengers are Ca2 and
various inositol phospholipids, also called phosphoinositides, which are embedded in cellular membranes.
The elevated intracellular concentration of one or more
second messengers following binding of an external signaling
molecule triggers a rapid alteration in the activity of one or

N

O

(CH2)n

C

O

CH2

O

O
2

CH3

(CH2)n

C

O

CH

O
3

Fatty acyl groups

6

OPO32
5

OH

4

1

OH HO
2

2

OPO3

3

CH2OH
Glycerol

1,2-Diacylglycerol
(DAG)

Inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate
(IP3)

Activates protein kinase C
(PKC)

Opens Ca2+ channels in
the endoplasmic reticulum

▲ FIGURE 13-7 Four common intracellular second
messengers. The major direct effect or effects of each
compound are indicated below its structural formula.
Calcium ion (Ca2) and several membrane-bound
phosphoinositides also act as second messengers.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

5

CH2

O

N

Focus Animation: Second Messengers in
Signaling Pathways

The maximal response of a cell to a particular ligand
generally occurs at ligand concentrations at which most of
its receptors are still not occupied (see Figure 13-3).

■

Second Messengers Carry Signals
from Many Receptors

541

542

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

mode of action of cAMP and other second messengers is discussed in later sections.

Many Conserved Intracellular Proteins
Function in Signal Transduction
In addition to cell-surface receptors and second messengers,
two groups of evolutionary conserved proteins function in
signal-transduction pathways stimulated by extracellular signals. Here we briefly consider these intracellular signaling
proteins; their role in specific pathways is described elsewhere.

GTPase Switch Proteins We introduced the large group of
intracellular switch proteins that form the GTPase superfamily in Chapter 3. These guanine nucleotide–binding proteins are turned “on” when bound to GTP and turned “off”
when bound to GDP (see Figure 3-29). Signal-induced conversion of the inactive to active state is mediated by a
guanine nucleotide–exchange factor (GEF), which causes release of GDP from the switch protein. Subsequent binding

of GTP, favored by its high intracellular concentration, induces a conformational change in two segments of the protein, termed switch I and switch II, allowing the protein to
bind to and activate other downstream signaling proteins
(Figure 13-8). The intrinsic GTPase activity of the switch
proteins then hydrolyzes the bound GTP to GDP and Pi, thus
changing the conformation of switch I and switch II from the
active form back to the inactive form. The rate of GTP hydrolysis frequently is enhanced by a GTPase-accelerating
protein (GAP), whose activity also may be controlled by extracellular signals. The rate of GTP hydrolysis regulates the
length of time the switch protein remains in the active conformation and able to signal downstream.
There are two classes of GTPase switch proteins: trimeric
(large) G proteins, which as noted already directly bind to
and are activated by certain receptors, and monomeric
(small) G proteins such as Ras and various Ras-like proteins.
Ras is linked indirectly to receptors via adapter proteins and
GEF proteins discussed in the next chapter. All G proteins
contain regions like switch I and switch II that modulate the

(a) GTP-bound "on" state
Gly-60

(b) GDP-bound "off" state

Thr-35
Switch I

Switch II
P
GTP
GDP

GDP

Gly-60
Thr-35
Switch II
γ

Switch I

GTP

 FIGURE 13-8 Switching mechanism for monomeric
and trimeric G proteins. The ability of a G protein to interact
with other proteins and thus transduce a signal differs in the
GTP-bound “on” state and GDP-bound “off” state. (a) In the
active “on” state, two domains, termed switch I (green) and
switch II (blue), are bound to the terminal phosphate of GTP
through interactions with the backbone amide groups of a
conserved threonine and glycine residue. (b) Release of the

GDP

phosphate by GTPase-catalyzed hydrolysis causes switch I and
switch II to relax into a different conformation, the inactive “off”
state. Shown here as ribbon models are both conformations of
Ras, a monomeric G protein. A similar spring-loaded mechanism
switches the subunit in trimeric G proteins between the
active and inactive conformations. [Adapted from I. Vetter and
A. Wittinghofer, 2001, Science 294:1299.]

13.2 • Intracellular Signal Transduction

activity of specific effector proteins by direct protein-protein
interactions when the G protein is bound to GTP. Despite
these similarities, these two classes of GTP-binding proteins
are regulated in very different ways.

Protein Kinases and Phosphatases Activation of all cellsurface receptors leads directly or indirectly to changes in
protein phosphorylation through the activation of protein
kinases or protein phosphatases. Animal cells contain two
types of protein kinases: those that add phosphate to the hydroxyl group on tyrosine residues and those that add phosphate to the hydroxyl group on serine or threonine (or both)
residues. Phosphatases, which remove phosphate groups, can
act in concert with kinases to switch the function of various
proteins on or off (see Figure 3-30). At last count the human
genome encodes 500 protein kinases and 100 different phosphatases. In some signaling pathways, the receptor itself possesses intrinsic kinase or phosphatase activity; in other
pathways, the receptor interacts with cytosolic or membraneassociated kinases.
In general, each protein kinase phosphorylates specific
residues in a set of target proteins whose patterns of expression generally differ in different cell types. Many proteins are
substrates for multiple kinases, and each phosphorylation
event, on a different amino acid, modifies the activity of a
particular target protein in different ways, some activating its
function, others inhibiting it. The catalytic activity of a protein kinase itself commonly is modulated by phosphorylation
by other kinases, by direct binding to other proteins, or by
changes in the levels of various second messengers. The activity of all protein kinases is opposed by the activity of protein phosphatases, some of which are themselves regulated
by extracellular signals. Thus the activity of a protein in a
cell can be a complex function of the activities of the usually
multiple kinases and phosphatases that act on it. Several examples of this phenomenon that occur in regulation of the
cell cycle are described in Chapter 21.

543

tors and other membrane proteins is the chemical synapse.
Recall that synaptic junctions are highly specialized structures at which chemical signals (neurotransmitters) are released from a presynaptic cell and bind receptors on an
adjacent postsynaptic cell (see Figure 7-31). Clustering of
neurotransmitter receptors in the region of the postsynaptic plasma membrane adjacent to the presynaptic cell promotes rapid and efficient signal transmission. Other
proteins in the membrane of the postsynaptic cell interact
with proteins in the extracellular matrix in order to “lock”
the cell into the synapse.
Proteins containing PDZ domains play a fundamental
role in organizing the plasma membrane of the postsynaptic
cell. The PDZ domain was identified as a common element
in several cytosolic proteins that bind to integral plasmamembrane proteins. It is a relatively small domain, containing about 90 amino acid residues, that binds to three-residue
sequences at the C-terminus of target proteins (Figure
13-9a). Some PDZ domains bind to the sequence Ser/Thr-X, where X denotes any amino acid and
denotes a
hydrophobic amino acid; others bind to the sequence -X- .
Most cell-surface receptors and transporters contain multiple subunits, each of which can bind to a PDZ domain.
Likewise, many cytosolic proteins contain multiple PDZ domains as well as other types of domains that participate in
protein-protein interactions, and thus can bind to multiple
membrane proteins at the same time. These interactions permit the clustering of different membrane proteins into large
complexes (Figure 13-9b). Other protein-protein interactions
enable these complexes to bind to actin filaments that line
the underside of the plasma membrane. Since a single actin
filament can bind many clusters of the type depicted in Figure 13-9b, even larger numbers of plasma-membrane proteins can be clustered together specifically. This is one of the
mechanisms by which many receptors, binding the same or
different ligands, are localized to a specific region of the
membrane in postsynaptic cells and other cells as well.

Protein Clustering in Lipid Rafts In Chapter 5, we saw that

Some Receptors and Signal-Transduction
Proteins Are Localized
Although the epinephrine receptors expressed by adipose
(fat-storage) cells appear to be uniformly distributed on the
surface of these spherical cells, such a uniform distribution
probably is rare. More common is the clustering of receptors and other membrane-associated signaling proteins to a
particular region of the cell surface. In this section, we show
how multiple protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions
can cluster signaling proteins in the plasma membrane and
discuss some advantages conferred by such clustering. Other
instances of localization of signaling proteins are described
elsewhere.

Clustering of Membrane Proteins Mediated by Adapter
Domains Perhaps the best example of clustering of recep-

certain lipids in the plasma membrane, particularly cholesterol and sphingolipids, are organized into aggregates, called
lipid rafts, that also contain specific proteins (see Figure 5-10).
In mammalian cells, lipid rafts termed caveolae are of particular interest because they have been found to contain several different receptors and other signal-transducing
proteins. These rafts are marked by the presence of caveolin,
a family of ≈25-kDa proteins. Caveolin proteins have a central hydrophobic segment that is thought to span the membrane twice, and both the N- and C-termini face the cytosol.
Large oligomers of caveolin form a proteinaceous coat that is
visible on the cytosolic surface of caveolae in the electron microscope. Precisely how certain signaling proteins are anchored in caveolae is unclear. Nonetheless, the proximity of
signaling proteins to one another within caveolae may facilitate their interaction, thereby promoting certain signaling
pathways that otherwise would operate inefficiently.

544

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface
(b)

(a)
Carboxylatebinding
loop

Neuroligin
NMDA-type
glutamate
receptor

P0-binding pocket

Kainate-type
glutamate
receptor

P−2-binding pocket

Synaptic cleft
Postsynaptic
membrane

Cytosol
PDZ

PDZ

PDZ

SH3

GuK

PSD-95

SH3

PDZ

SH3

Ank
PSD-95 PDZ domain

Actin

▲ FIGURE 13-9 Clustering of membrane proteins mediated
by cytosolic adapter proteins containing multiple proteinbinding domains. The PDZ domain, which binds to certain
C-terminal sequences, and the SH3 domain, which binds to
proline-rich sequences, are two of several conserved domains
that participate in protein-protein interactions. (a) Threedimensional surface structure of a PDZ domain showing the
backbone of the bound target peptide in red. Regions in the
PDZ domain that bind the COO- group and side chain of the
C-terminal residue are colored yellow and blue, respectively. The
binding pocket for the residue two distant from the C-terminus
(P-2) is green. (b) Schematic diagram of protein-protein
interactions that cluster several different membrane proteins in a
postsynaptic segment of a nerve cell and anchor the resulting

Appropriate Cellular Responses Depend
on Interaction and Regulation of
Signaling Pathways
In this chapter and the next, we focus primarily on simple
signal-transduction pathways triggered by ligand binding to
a single type of receptor. Activation of a single type of receptor, however, often leads to production of multiple second
messengers, which have different effects. Moreover, the same
cellular response (e.g., glycogen breakdown) may be induced
by activation of multiple signaling pathways. Such interaction of different signaling pathways permits the fine-tuning
of cellular activities required to carry out complex developmental and physiological processes.
The ability of cells to respond appropriately to extracellular signals also depends on regulation of signaling pathways
themselves. For example, once the concentration of an external signal decreases, signaling via some intracellular pathways
is terminated by degradation of a second messenger; in other
pathways, signaling is terminated by deactivation of a signaltransduction protein. Another important mechanism for as-

complex to cytoskeletal actin filaments. Within the adapter
protein PSD-95, two of the three PDZ domains shown and one
SH3 domain bind three different membrane proteins into one
complex. The guanylate kinase (GuK) domain of the PSD-95
protein links the complex, via several intervening adapter proteins
(including one also containing PDZ and SH3 domains), to fibrous
actin underlying the plasma membrane. Neuroligin is an adhesive
protein that interacts with components of the extracellular matrix.
Ank  ankyrin repeats. Other multibinding adapter proteins
localize and cluster different receptors in the synaptic region of
the plasma membrane. [Part (a) adapted from B. Harris and W. A. Lim,
2001, J. Cell Sci. 114:3219; part (b) adapted from C. Garner, J. Nash, and
R. Huganir, 2000, Trends Cell Biol. 10:274.]

suring appropriate cellular responses is desensitization of receptors at high signal concentrations or after prolonged exposure to a signal. The sensitivity of a cell to a particular
signaling molecule can be down-regulated by endocytosis of
its receptors, thus decreasing the number on the cell surface,
or by modifying their activity so that the receptors either cannot bind ligand or form a receptor-ligand complex that does
not induce the normal cellular response. Such modulation of
receptor activity often results from phosphorylation of the receptor, binding of other proteins to it, or both. We examine
the details of various mechanisms for regulating signaling
pathways in our discussion of individual pathways.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 13.2
Intracellular Signal Transduction
The level of second messengers, such as Ca2, cAMP,
and IP3, increases or occasionally decreases in response
to binding of ligand to cell-surface receptors (see Figure
13-7). These nonprotein intracellular signaling molecules,

■

13.3 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase

in turn, regulate the activities of enzymes and nonenzymatic proteins.
Conserved proteins that act in many signal-transduction
pathways include monomeric and trimeric G proteins (see
Figure 13-8) and protein kinases and phosphatases.

■

Cytosolic proteins that contain multiple PDZ or other
protein-binding domains cluster receptors and other proteins within the plasma membrane, as occurs in postsynaptic cells (see Figure 13-9).

■

Many receptors and signal-transduction proteins cluster
in caveolin-containing lipid rafts. Such clustering may facilitate interaction between signaling proteins, thus enhancing signal transduction.

(GPCRs) contain seven membrane-spanning regions with
their N-terminal segment on the exoplasmic face and their
C-terminal segment on the cytosolic face of the plasma
membrane (Figure 13-10). The GPCR family includes receptors for numerous hormones and neurotransmitters, lightactivated receptors (rhodopsins) in the eye, and literally
thousands of odorant receptors in the mammalian nose.

NH3+
E1

■

Rapid termination of signaling once a particular ligand
is withdrawn and receptor desensitization at high ligand
concentrations or after prolonged exposure help cells respond appropriately under different circumstances.

545

E2

E3

E4

Exterior

H1 H2 H3 H4 H5 H6 H7

■

−

Cytosol
C1

C4

C2
C3

13.3 G Protein–Coupled
Receptors That Activate
or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase
We now turn our attention to the very large group of cellsurface receptors that are coupled to signal-transducing
trimeric G proteins. All G protein–coupled receptors

COO

G protein
interaction

▲ FIGURE 13-10 Schematic diagram of the general
structure of G protein–coupled receptors. All receptors of
this type have the same orientation in the membrane and
contain seven transmembrane -helical regions (H1–H7), four
extracellular segments (E1–E4), and four cytosolic segments
(C1–C4). The carboxyl-terminal segment (C4), the C3 loop, and,
in some receptors, also the C2 loop are involved in interactions
with a coupled trimeric G protein.

TABLE 13-1 Major Classes of Mammalian Trimeric G Proteins and Their Effectors*
G Class

Associated Effector

2nd Messenger

Receptor Examples

Gs

Adenylyl cyclase

cAMP (increased)

-Adrenergic (epinephrine)
receptor; receptors for
glucagon, serotonin,
vasopressin

Gi

Adenylyl cyclase
K channel (G activates
effector)

cAMP (decreased)
Change in membrane
potential

1-Adrenergic receptor
Muscarinic acetylcholine
receptor

Golf

Adenylyl cyclase

cAMP (increased)

Odorant receptors in nose

Gq

Phospholipase C

IP3, DAG (increased)

Go

Phospholipase C

IP3, DAG (increased)

Acetylcholine receptor in
endothelial cells

Gt

cGMP phosphodiesterase

cGMP (decreased)

Rhodopsin (light receptor) in
rod cells

2-Adrenergic

receptor

*A given G subclass may be associated with more than one effector protein. To date, only one major Gs has been identified, but multiple Gq and
Gi proteins have been described. Effector proteins commonly are regulated by G but in some cases by G or the combined action of G and G .
IP3  inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; DAG  1,2-diacylglycerol.
SOURCES:

See L. Birnbaumer, 1992, Cell 71:1069; Z. Farfel et al., 1999, New Eng. J. Med. 340:1012; and K. Pierce et al., 2002, Nature Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 3:639.

546

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

The signal-transducing G proteins contain three subunits
designated , , and . During intracellular signaling the 
and subunits remain bound together and are usually referred to as the G subunit. The G subunit is a GTPase
switch protein that alternates between an active (on) state
with bound GTP and an inactive (off) state with bound GDP
(see Figure 13-8). Stimulation of a coupled receptor causes
activation of the G protein, which in turn modulates the activity of an associated effector protein. Although the effector protein most commonly is activated by G ·GTP, in some
cases it is inhibited. Moreover, depending on the cell and ligand, the G subunit, rather than G ·GTP, may transduce the
signal to the effector protein. In addition, the activity of several different effector proteins is controlled by different
GPCR-ligand complexes. All effector proteins, however, are
either membrane-bound ion channels or enzymes that catalyze formation of second messengers (e.g., cAMP, DAG,
and IP3). These variations on the theme of GPCR signaling
arise because multiple G proteins are encoded in eukaryotic
genomes. The human genome, for example, encodes 27 different G , 5 G, and 13 G subunits. So far as is known, the
different G subunits function similarly. Table 13-1 summarizes the functions of the major classes of G proteins with
different G subunits.
In this section, we first discuss how GPCR signals are
transduced to an effector protein, a process that is similar for
all receptors of this type. Then we focus on pathways in
which cAMP is the second messenger, using the epinephrinestimulated degradation of glycogen as an example.

Hormone
Exterior
Inactive
effector

Cytosol
RESTING
STATE

Gγ

G
D
P

Gβ

Gα

Active
receptor

Gβγ
G
D
P

1

G
D
P

2

Gα

Binding of hormone induces a conformational
change in receptor

Gβγ

The G Subunit of G Proteins Cycles
Between Active and Inactive Forms
Figure 13-11 illustrates how G protein–coupled receptors
transduce signals from extracellular hormones to associated
effector proteins. Both the G and G subunits are linked to
the membrane by covalently attached lipids. In the resting
state, when no ligand is bound to the receptor, the G subunit is bound to GDP and complexed with G . Binding of
the normal hormonal ligand (e.g., epinephrine) or an ago-

Trimeric Gs protein

Inactive
receptor

Gα

Activated receptor binds to Gα subunit

Gβγ

Gα
G
T
P

3

Binding induces conformational change in Gα; bound GDP
dissociates and is replaced by GTP; Gα dissociates from Gβγ

Active
effector

Gα

Gβγ

G
T
P

 FIGURE 13-11 Operational model for ligand-induced
activation of effector proteins associated with G protein–
coupled receptors. The G and G subunits of trimeric G proteins
are tethered to the membrane by covalently attached lipid
molecules (wiggly black lines). Following ligand binding, dissociation
of the G protein, and exchange of GDP with GTP (steps 1 – 3 ),
the free G ·GTP binds to and activates an effector protein (step 4 ).
Hydrolysis of GTP terminates signaling and leads to reassembly
of the trimeric form, returning the system to the resting state
(step 5 ). Binding of another ligand molecule causes repetition of
the cycle. In some pathways, the effector protein is activated by
the free G subunit.

4

Hormone dissociates from receptor; Gα binds to effector,
activating it

Gβγ
G
D
P

5

Gα

Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP causes Gα to dissociate
from effector and reassociate with Gβγ

13.3 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase
(b)

cAMP

YFP
CFP

YFP

Gβγ
G
D
P

Gα

Fluorescence
527 nm
Fluorescence
(yellow)
energy
transfer
Excitation light
440 nm

Gβγ

Gα

CFP

Fluorescence
490 nm
(cyan)

G
T
P

Excitation light
440 nm

cAMP
added
1.0

0.8

0

15

30

45

60

Time (s)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-12 Receptor-mediated
activation of coupled G proteins occurs within a few seconds
of ligand binding in living cells. The amoeba Dictyostelium
discoideum was transfected with genes encoding two fusion
proteins: a G fused to cyan fluorescent protein (CFP), a mutant
form of green fluorescent protein (GFP), and a G fused to another GFP variant, yellow fluorescent protein (YFP). CFP normally
fluoresces 490-nm light; YFP, 527-nm light. (a) When CFP and YFP
are nearby, as in the resting G ·G complex, fluorescence energy
transfer can occur between CFP and YFP (left). As a result, irradiation of resting cells with 440-nm light (which directly excites
CFP but not YFP) causes emission of 527-nm (yellow) light, char-

acteristic of YFP. However, if ligand binding leads to
dissociation of the G and G subunits, then fluorescence
energy transfer cannot occur. In this case, irradiation of
cells at 440 nm causes emission of 490-nm light (cyan)
characteristic of CFP (right). (b) Plot of the emission of
yellow light (527 nm) from a single transfected amoeba
cell before and after addition of cyclic AMP (arrows), the
extracellular ligand for the GPCR in these cells. The drop
in fluorescence, which results from the dissociation of
the G -CFP fusion protein from the G -YFP fusion
protein, occurs within seconds of cAMP addition. [Adapted

nist (e.g., isoproterenol) to the receptor changes its conformation, causing it to bind to the G subunit in such a way
that GDP is displaced from G and GTP becomes bound.
Thus the activated ligand-bound receptor functions as a GEF
for the G subunit (see Figure 3-29).
Once the exchange of nucleotides has occurred, the
G ·GTP complex dissociates from the G subunit, but both
remain anchored in the membrane. In most cases, G ·GTP
then interacts with and activates an associated effector protein, as depicted in Figure 13-11. This activation is shortlived, however, because GTP bound to G is hydrolyzed to
GDP in seconds, catalyzed by a GTPase enzyme that is an intrinsic part of the G subunit. The resulting G ·GDP quickly
reassociates with G , thus terminating effector activation. In
many cases, a protein termed RGS (regulator of G protein
signaling) accelerates GTP hydrolysis by the G subunit, reducing the time during which the effector remains activated.
Early evidence supporting the model shown in Figure
13-11 came from studies with compounds that can bind to
G subunits as well as GTP does, but cannot be hydrolyzed
by the intrinsic GTPase. In these compounds the P–O–P
phosphodiester linkage connecting the  and phosphates of
GTP is replaced by a nonhydrolyzable P–CH2–P or P–NH–P
linkage. Addition of such a GTP analog to a plasmamembrane preparation in the presence of the natural ligand
or an agonist for a particular receptor results in a much
longer-lived activation of the associated effector protein than

occurs with GTP. That is because once the GDP bound to G
is displaced by the nonhydrolyzable GTP analog, it remains
permanently bound to G . Because this complex is as functional as the normal G ·GTP complex in activating the effector protein, the effector remains permanently active.
The GPCR-mediated dissociation of trimeric G proteins
recently has been detected in living cells. These studies have
exploited the phenomenon of fluorescence energy transfer,
which can change the wavelength of emitted fluorescence
when two fluorescent proteins interact. Figure 13-12 shows
how this experimental approach has demonstrated the
dissociation of the G ·G complex within a few seconds of
ligand addition, providing further evidence for the model of
G protein cycling. This general experimental protocol can
be used to follow the formation and dissociation of other
protein-protein complexes in living cells.

from C. Janetopoulos et al., 2001, Science 291:2408.]

Epinephrine Binds to Several Different
G Protein–Coupled Receptors
Epinephrine is particularly important in mediating the body’s
response to stress, such as fright or heavy exercise, when all
tissues have an increased need to catabolize glucose and fatty
acids to produce ATP. These principal metabolic fuels can
be supplied to the blood in seconds by the rapid breakdown
of glycogen to glucose in the liver (glycogenolysis) and of triacylglycerols to fatty acids in adipose cells (lipolysis).

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Active
receptor

Video: Chemotaxis of a Single Dictyostelium Cell to the
Chemoattractant cAMP

Inactive
receptor

Fluorescence of yellow light
(fraction of maximum)

(a)

547

548

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

In mammals, the liberation of glucose and fatty acids can
be triggered by binding of epinephrine (or norepinephrine) to
-adrenergic receptors on the surface of hepatic (liver) and adipose cells. Epinephrine bound to -adrenergic receptors on
heart muscle cells increases the contraction rate, which increases the blood supply to the tissues. In contrast, epinephrine
stimulation of -adrenergic receptors on smooth muscle cells
of the intestine causes them to relax. Another type of epinephrine receptor, the 2-adrenergic receptor, is found on smooth
muscle cells lining the blood vessels in the intestinal tract, skin,
and kidneys. Binding of epinephrine to these receptors causes
the arteries to constrict, cutting off circulation to these peripheral organs. These diverse effects of epinephrine are directed to
a common end: supplying energy for the rapid movement of
major locomotor muscles in response to bodily stress.
Although all epinephrine receptors are G protein–
coupled receptors, the different types are coupled to different G
proteins. Thus in addition to their physiological importance,
these receptors are of interest because they trigger different intracellular signal-transduction pathways. Both subtypes of adrenergic receptors, termed 1 and 2, are coupled to a
stimulatory G protein (Gs ) that activates the membrane-bound
enzyme adenylyl cyclase (see Table 13-1). Once activated,
adenylyl cyclase catalyzes synthesis of the second messenger
cAMP. That binding of epinephrine to -adrenergic receptors
induces a rise in cAMP has been demonstrated in functional
expression assays like that depicted in Figure 13-6. When
cloned cDNA encoding the -adrenergic receptor is transfected
into receptor-negative cells, the transfected cells accumulate
cAMP in response to epinephrine stimulation. Similar experiments in which mutant receptors are expressed have helped to
define the functions of specific amino acids in binding hormones and activating different G proteins.
The two subtypes of -adrenergic receptors, 1 and 2,
are coupled to different G proteins. The 1-adrenergic receptor is coupled to a Gi protein that inhibits adenylyl cyclase,
the same effector enzyme associated with -adrenergic receptors. In contrast, the Gq protein coupled to the 2-adrenergic
receptor activates a different effector enzyme that generates
different second messengers (see Section 13.5).
Some bacterial toxins contain a subunit that penetrates the plasma membrane of cells and catalyzes
a chemical modification of Gs ·GTP that prevents
hydrolysis of bound GTP to GDP. As a result, Gs remains
in the active state, continuously activating adenylyl cyclase in
the absence of hormonal stimulation. Cholera toxin produced by the bacterium Vibrio cholera and enterotoxins produced by certain strains of E. coli act in this way on intestinal
epithelial cells. The resulting excessive rise in intracellular
cAMP leads to the loss of electrolytes and water into the intestinal lumen, producing the watery diarrhea characteristic
of infection by these bacteria.
Bordetella pertussis, a bacterium that commonly infects
the respiratory tract, is the cause of whooping cough. Pertussis toxin catalyzes a modification of Gi that prevents re-

lease of bound GDP, thus locking Gi in the inactive state.
This inactivation of Gi leads to an increase in cAMP in epithelial cells of the airways, promoting loss of fluids and electrolytes and mucus secretion. ❚

Critical Functional Domains in Receptors and
Coupled G Proteins Have Been Identified
As noted already, all G protein–coupled receptors contain seven
transmembrane helices and presumably have a similar threedimensional structure. Studies with chimeric adrenergic receptors, like those outlined in Figure 13-13, suggest that the long
C3 loop between helices 5 and 6 is important for interactions
between a receptor and its coupled G protein. Presumably, ligand binding causes these helices to move relative to each other.
As a result, the conformation of the C3 loop connecting these
two helices changes in a way that allows the loop to bind and
Effect on
adenylyl cyclase

NH3+

Exterior
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Inhibits (binds Gi)

Cytosol

COO−
α 2-Adrenergic receptor (wild type)
NH3+
1

2

3

4

5

6

Activates (binds Gs)

7

COO−
β 2-Adrenergic receptor (wild type)
NH3+
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Activates (binds Gs)

6

7

Inhibits (binds Gi)

COO−
Chimeric receptor 1
NH3+
1

2

3

4

5

COO−
Chimeric receptor 2
NH3+
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

CONCLUSION

COO−
Region determining specificity of G protein binding
(compare chimeras 1 and 2)

13.3 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase

activate the transducing G subunit. Specific regions within the
C3 loop are thought to assume a unique three-dimensional
structure in all receptors that bind the same G protein (e.g., Gs
or Gi). Other evidence indicates that the C2 loop, joining helices 3 and 4, also contributes to the interaction of some receptors with a G protein and that residues in at least four
transmembrane helices participate in ligand binding.
X-ray crystallographic analysis has pinpointed the regions
in Gs ·GTP that interact with adenylyl cyclase. This enzyme is
a multipass transmembrane protein with two large cytosolic
segments containing the catalytic domains (Figure 13-14a).
Because such transmembrane proteins are notoriously difficult to crystallize, scientists prepared two protein fragments
encompassing the catalytic domains of adenylyl cyclase and
allowed them to associate in the presence of Gs ·GTP and
forskolin, which stabilizes the catalytic adenylyl cyclase fragments in their active conformations. The complex that
formed was catalytically active and showed pharmacological
and biochemical properties similar to those of intact fulllength adenylyl cyclase. In this complex, two regions of
Gs ·GTP, the switch II helix and the 3-5 loop, contact the
adenylyl cyclase fragments (Figure 13-14b). Recall that switch
II is one of the segments of a G protein whose conformation
is different in the GTP-bound and GDP-bound states (see Figure 13-8). The GTP-induced conformation of Gs that favors
its dissociation from G is precisely the conformation essential for binding of Gs to adenylyl cyclase. Other studies indicate that Gi binds to a different region of adenylyl cyclase,
accounting for its different effect on the effector.
To understand how binding of Gs ·GTP promotes adenylyl cyclase activity, scientists will first have to solve the structure of the adenylyl cyclase catalytic domains in their
unactivated conformations (i.e., in the absence of bound
Gs ·GTP). One hypothesis is that binding of the switch II
helix to a cleft in one catalytic domain of adenylyl cyclase
leads to rotation of the other catalytic domain. This rotation
is proposed to lead to a stabilization of the transition state,
thereby stimulating catalytic activity.

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-13 Studies with chimeric
adrenergic receptors identify the long C3 loop as critical
to interaction with G proteins. Xenopus oocytes were
microinjected with mRNA encoding a wild-type 2-adrenergic,
2-adrenergic, or chimeric - receptor. Although Xenopus
oocytes do not normally express adrenergic receptors, they
do express G proteins that can couple to the foreign receptors
expressed on the surface of microinjected oocytes. The adenylyl
cyclase activity of the injected cells in the presence of
epinephrine agonists was determined and indicated whether
the adrenergic receptor bound to the stimulatory (Gs) or
inhibitory (Gi) type of oocyte G protein. Comparison of chimeric
receptor 1, which interacts with Gs, and chimeric receptor 2,
which interacts with Gi, shows that the G protein specificity is
determined primarily by the source of the cytosol-facing C3 loop
(yellow) between helices 5 and 6. [See B. Kobilka et al., 1988,
Science 240:1310.]

(a)

549

Adenylyl cyclase

Exterior

COO−

Cytosol
+

NH3

Catalytic
domains

(b)
3 – 5

GTP

Switch II

Gs

Forskolin

Adenylyl cyclase
catalytic fragments

▲ FIGURE 13-14 Structure of mammalian adenylyl cyclases
and their interaction with Gs ·GTP. (a) Schematic diagram of
mammalian adenylyl cyclases. The membrane-bound enzyme
contains two similar catalytic domains on the cytosolic face of
the membrane and two integral membrane domains, each of
which is thought to contain six transmembrane helices.
(b) Three-dimensional structure of Gs ·GTP complexed with two
fragments encompassing the catalytic domain of adenylyl cyclase
determined by x-ray crystallography. The 3-5 loop and the helix
in the switch II region (blue) of Gs ·GTP interact simultaneously
with a specific region of adenylyl cyclase. The darker-colored
portion of Gs is the GTPase domain, which is similar in structure
to Ras (see Figure 13-8); the lighter portion is a helical domain.
The two adenylyl cyclase fragments are shown in orange and
yellow. Forskolin (green) locks the cyclase fragments in their active
conformations. [Part (a) see W.-J. Tang and A. G. Gilman, 1992, Cell 70:869;
part (b) adapted from J. J. G. Tesmer et al., 1997, Science 278:1907.]

Adenylyl Cyclase Is Stimulated and Inhibited
by Different Receptor-Ligand Complexes
The versatile trimeric G proteins enable different receptorhormone complexes to modulate the activity of the same effector protein. In the liver, for instance, glucagon and
epinephrine bind to different receptors, but both receptors
interact with and activate the same Gs, which activates
adenylyl cyclase, thereby triggering the same metabolic responses. Activation of adenylyl cyclase, and thus the cAMP
level, is proportional to the total concentration of Gs ·GTP
resulting from binding of both hormones to their respective
receptors.

550

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface
Stimulatory
hormone

Epinephrine
Glucagon
ACTH

Exterior

Cytosol

Receptor for
stimulatory
hormone

Ac

tiv

atio

Inhibitory
hormone

Adenylyl
cyclase
(E)

n of
E

Gβγ
G
D
P

ion

G
D
P

cAMP

of E

Gβγ

Giα

Gsα

Stimulatory
G protein
complex

it
Inhib

PGE1
Adenosine

Inhibitory
G protein
complex

Receptor for
inhibitory
hormone

▲ FIGURE 13-15 Hormone-induced activation and
inhibition of adenylyl cyclase in adipose cells. Ligand binding
to Gs-coupled receptors causes activation of adenylyl cyclase,
whereas ligand binding to Gi-coupled receptors causes inhibition
of the enzyme. The G subunit in both stimulatory and inhibitory
G proteins is identical; the G subunits and their corresponding

receptors differ. Ligand-stimulated formation of active G ·GTP
complexes occurs by the same mechanism in both Gs and
Gi proteins (see Figure 13-11). However, Gs ·GTP and Gi ·GTP
interact differently with adenylyl cyclase, so that one stimulates
and the other inhibits its catalytic activity. [See A. G. Gilman,

Positive and negative regulation of adenylyl cyclase activity occurs in some cell types, providing fine-tuned control of
the cAMP level. For example, stimulation of adipose cells by
epinephrine, glucagon, or ACTH activates adenylyl cyclase,
whereas prostaglandin PGE1 or adenosine inhibits the enzyme (Figure 13-15). The receptors for PGE1 and adenosine
interact with inhibitory Gi, which contains the same  and
subunits as stimulatory Gs but a different subunit (Gi ). In
response to binding of an inhibitory ligand to its receptor, the
associated Gi protein releases its bound GDP and binds GTP;
the active Gi ·GTP complex then dissociates from G and inhibits (rather than stimulates) adenylyl cyclase.

Most mammalian cells express receptors coupled to Gs
protein. Stimulation of these receptors by various hormones
leads to activation of PKA, but the resulting cellular response
depends on the particular PKA isoform and on the PKA substrates expressed by the cell. For instance, the effects of epinephrine on glycogen metabolism, which are mediated via
cAMP and PKA, are confined mainly to liver and muscle
cells, which express enzymes for making and degrading
glycogen. In adipose cells, epinephrine-induced activation of
PKA promotes phosphorylation and activation of the phospholipase that catalyzes hydrolysis of stored triglycerides to
yield free fatty acids and glycerol. These fatty acids are released into the blood and taken up as an energy source by
cells in other tissues such as the kidney, heart, and muscles.
Likewise, stimulation of G protein–coupled receptors on
ovarian cells by certain pituitary hormones leads to activation of PKA, which in turn promotes synthesis of two steroid
hormones, estrogen and progesterone, crucial to the development of female sex characteristics.
Although PKA acts on different substrates in different
types of cells, it always phosphorylates a serine or threonine
residue that occurs within the same sequence motif: X-Arg(Arg/Lys)-X-(Ser/Thr)- , where X denotes any amino acid
and
denotes a hydrophobic amino acid. Other serine/
threonine kinases phosphorylate target residues within different sequence motifs.

cAMP-Activated Protein Kinase A Mediates
Various Responses in Different Cells
In multicellular animals virtually all the diverse effects of
cAMP are mediated through protein kinase A (PKA), also
called cAMP-dependent protein kinase. As discussed in
Chapter 3, inactive PKA is a tetramer consisting of two regulatory (R) subunits and two catalytic (C) subunits. Each R
subunit has two distinct cAMP-binding sites; binding of
cAMP to both sites in an R subunit leads to release of the
associated C subunit, unmasking its catalytic site and activating its kinase activity (see Figure 3-27a). Binding of cAMP
by an R subunit occurs in a cooperative fashion; that is,
binding of the first cAMP molecule lowers the Kd for binding
of the second. Thus small changes in the level of cytosolic
cAMP can cause proportionately large changes in the
amount of dissociated C subunits and, hence, in kinase activity. Rapid activation of an enzyme by hormone-triggered
dissociation of an inhibitor is a common feature of various
signaling pathways.

1984, Cell 36:577.]

Glycogen Metabolism Is Regulated by HormoneInduced Activation of Protein Kinase A
The first cAMP-mediated cellular response to be discovered—the release of glucose from glycogen—occurs in muscle and liver cells stimulated by epinephrine or other

13.3 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase

contain a phosphatase that hydrolyzes glucose 6-phosphate
to glucose, which is exported from these cells in part by a
glucose transporter (GLUT2) in the plasma membrane
(Chapter 7). Thus glycogen stores in the liver are primarily
broken down to glucose, which is immediately released into
the blood and transported to other tissues, particularly the
muscles and brain.
The epinephrine-stimulated increase in cAMP and subsequent activation of PKA enhance the conversion of glycogen to glucose 1-phosphate in two ways: by inhibiting
glycogen synthesis and by stimulating glycogen degradation
(Figure 13-17a). PKA phosphorylates and thus inactivates
glycogen synthase, the enzyme that synthesizes glycogen.
PKA promotes glycogen degradation indirectly by phosphorylating and thus activating an intermediate kinase, glycogen
phosphorylase kinase (GPK), that in turn phosphorylates
and activates glycogen phosphorylase, the enzyme that degrades glycogen. The entire process is reversed when epinephrine is removed and the level of cAMP drops,
inactivating PKA. This reversal is mediated by phosphoprotein phosphatase, which removes the phosphate residues

hormones whose receptors are coupled to Gs protein. This
response exemplifies how activation of PKA can coordinate
the activity of a group of intracellular enzymes toward a
common purpose.
Glycogen, a large glucose polymer, is the major storage
form of glucose in animals. Like all biopolymers, glycogen
is synthesized by one set of enzymes and degraded by another (Figure 13-16). Three enzymes convert glucose into
uridine diphosphoglucose (UDP-glucose), the primary intermediate in glycogen synthesis. The glucose residue of UDPglucose is transferred by glycogen synthase to the free
hydroxyl group on carbon 4 of a glucose residue at the end
of a growing glycogen chain. Degradation of glycogen involves the stepwise removal of glucose residues from the
same end by a phosphorolysis reaction, catalyzed by glycogen phosphorylase, yielding glucose 1-phosphate.
In both muscle and liver cells, glucose 1-phosphate produced from glycogen is converted to glucose 6-phosphate.
In muscle cells, this metabolite enters the glycolytic pathway
and is metabolized to generate ATP for use in powering muscle contraction (Chapter 8). Unlike muscle cells, liver cells

HOCH2

HOCH2

HOCH2
O

4

O

O
O

1

OH

HO

O
OH

O

P
O

O




P
O

O

Uridine

551

4

1

OH

OH

HO

O...

O



OH

OH
Glycogen (n residues)

UDP-glucose
Glycogen
synthase

HOCH2
O


O

P
O

O
O

P


O

Uridine

4

HOCH2

HOCH2
O

O

O
1

OH

4

HO

1

OH

OH

O

O

O...

O

OH

OH

OH
Glycogen (n  1 residues)

UDP
Pi

HOCH2

Glycogen
phosphorylase

HOCH2

HOCH2
O
O



OH
O

HO
OH

O

O
O

P
O

OH

OH

HO



Glucose 1-phosphate

▲ FIGURE 13-16 Synthesis and degradation of glycogen.
Incorporation of glucose from UDP-glucose into glycogen is
catalyzed by glycogen synthase. Removal of glucose units from

O...

O
OH

OH

Glycogen (n residues)

glycogen is catalyzed by glycogen phosphorylase. Because two
different enzymes catalyze the formation and degradation of
glycogen, the two reactions can be independently regulated.

552

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

(a) Increased cAMP
Stimulation of
glycogen breakdown

GPK

GPK

GP

GP

Glycogen + n Pi

PKA
(active)

Inhibition of
glycogen synthesis

P

GS

GS

P

P

Inhibition of
phosphoprotein
phosphatase

IP

IP

PP
(active)

n Glucose 1-phosphate

(b) Decreased cAMP
Inhibition of
glycogen breakdown

GPK

P

GPK

GP

P

GP

PP
(active)

P

IP
P
PP
(inactive)

Stimulation of
glycogen synthesis

Abbreviations:

GS

P

UDP-glucose

GS

Glycogen + UDP

PKA
PP
GPK
GP
GS
!P

Protein kinase A
Phosphoprotein phosphatase
Glycogen phosphorylase kinase
Glycogen phosphorylase
Glycogen synthase
Inhibitor of phosphoprotein
phosphatase

▲ FIGURE 13-17 Regulation of glycogen metabolism
by cAMP in liver and muscle cells. Active enzymes are
highlighted in darker shades; inactive forms, in lighter shades.
(a) An increase in cytosolic cAMP activates PKA, which
inhibits glycogen synthesis directly and promotes glycogen
degradation via a protein kinase cascade. At high cAMP, PKA
also phosphorylates an inhibitor of phosphoprotein phosphatase

(PP). Binding of the phosphorylated inhibitor to PP prevents
this phosphatase from dephosphorylating the activated enzymes
in the kinase cascade or the inactive glycogen synthase.
(b) A decrease in cAMP inactivates PKA, leading to release of
the active form of phosphoprotein phosphatase. The action of
this enzyme promotes glycogen synthesis and inhibits glycogen
degradation.

from the inactive form of glycogen synthase, thereby activating it, and from the active forms of glycogen phosphorylase kinase and glycogen phosphorylase, thereby inactivating
them (Figure 13-17b).
Phosphoprotein phosphatase itself is regulated by PKA.
Activated PKA phosphorylates an inhibitor of phosphoprotein phosphatase; the phosphorylated inhibitor then binds
to phosphoprotein phosphatase, inhibiting its activity (see
Figure 13-17a). At low cAMP levels, when PKA is inactive,
the inhibitor is not phosphorylated and phosphoprotein
phosphatase is active. As a result, the synthesis of glycogen
by glycogen synthase is enhanced and the degradation of
glycogen by glycogen phosphorylase is inhibited.
Epinephrine-induced glycogenolysis thus exhibits dual
regulation: activation of the enzymes catalyzing glycogen
degradation and inhibition of enzymes promoting glycogen
synthesis. Such coordinate regulation of stimulatory and inhibitory pathways provides an efficient mechanism for
achieving a particular cellular response and is a common
phenomenon in regulatory biology.

Signal Amplification Commonly Occurs
Downstream from Cell-Surface Receptors
The cellular responses induced by G protein–coupled receptors that activate adenylyl cyclase may require tens of thousands or even millions of cAMP molecules per cell. Thus the
hormone signal must be amplified in order to generate sufficient second messenger from the few thousand receptors for
a particular hormone present on a cell. Signal amplification
is possible because both receptors and G proteins can diffuse rapidly in the plasma membrane. A single receptorhormone complex causes conversion of up to 100 inactive
Gs molecules to the active form. Each active Gs ·GTP, in
turn, probably activates a single adenylyl cyclase molecule,
which then catalyzes synthesis of many cAMP molecules during the time Gs ·GTP is bound to it. Although the exact extent of this amplification is difficult to measure, binding of
a single hormone molecule to one receptor molecule can result in the synthesis of at least several hundred cAMP molecules before the receptor-hormone complex dissociates and

13.3 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase

activation of adenylyl cyclase ceases. Similar amplification
probably occurs in signaling from receptors coupled to other
G proteins and some other types of receptors whose activation induces synthesis of second messengers.
A second level of amplification is illustrated by the
cAMP-mediated stimulation of glycogenolysis. As we just
discussed, cAMP promotes glycogen degradation via a threestage cascade, that is, a series of reactions in which the enzyme catalyzing one step is activated (or inhibited) by the
product of a previous step (see Figure 13-17a). The amplification that occurs in such a cascade depends on the number
of steps in it.
Both levels of amplification are depicted in Figure 13-18.
For example, blood levels of epinephrine as low as 1010 M
can stimulate liver glycogenolysis and release of glucose. An
epinephrine stimulus of this magnitude generates an intracellular cAMP concentration of 106 M, an amplification of
104. Because three more catalytic steps precede the release
of glucose, another 104 amplification can occur. In striated
muscle, the concentrations of the three successive enzymes in
the glycogenolytic cascade—protein kinase A, glycogen
phosphorylase kinase, and glycogen phosphorylase—are in a
1:10:240 ratio, which dramatically illustrates the amplification of the effects of epinephrine and cAMP.

Epinephrine

(1010 M)

Amplification
Adenylyl
cyclase
Amplification
cAMP (106 M)
Protein
kinase A
Amplification
Activated
enzyme
Amplification
Product

▲ FIGURE 13-18 Amplification of an external signal
downstream from a cell-surface receptor. In this example,
binding of a single epinephrine molecule to one Gs protein–
coupled receptor molecule induces synthesis of a large number
of cAMP molecules, the first level of amplification. Four
molecules of cAMP activate two molecules of protein kinase
A (PKA), but each activated PKA phosphorylates and activates
multiple product molecules. This second level of amplification
may involve several sequential reactions in which the product of
one reaction activates the enzyme catalyzing the next reaction.
The more steps in such a cascade, the greater the signal
amplification possible.

553

Although such a cascade may seem overcomplicated, it
not only greatly amplifies an external signal but also allows
an entire group of enzyme-catalyzed reactions to be coordinately regulated by a single type of signaling molecule. In addition, the multiple steps between stimulus and final
response offer possibilities for regulation by other signaling
pathways, thereby fine-tuning the cellular response. We will
encounter other examples of cascades in signaling pathways
discussed in the next chapter.

Several Mechanisms Regulate Signaling
from G Protein–Coupled Receptors
Several factors contribute to termination of the response to
hormones recognized by -adrenergic receptors and other receptors coupled to Gs. First, the affinity of the receptor for
hormone decreases when the GDP bound to Gs is replaced
with a GTP following hormone binding. This increase in the
Kd of the receptor-hormone complex enhances dissociation of
the hormone from the receptor. Second, the GTP bound to Gs
is quickly hydrolyzed, reversing the activation of adenylyl cyclase and production of cAMP (see Figure 13-11). Third,
cAMP phosphodiesterase acts to hydrolyze cAMP to 5-AMP,
terminating the cellular response. Thus the continuous presence of hormone at a high enough concentration is required
for continuous activation of adenylyl cyclase and maintenance
of an elevated cAMP level. Once the hormone concentration
falls sufficiently, the cellular response quickly terminates.
When a Gs protein–coupled receptor is exposed to hormonal stimulation for several hours, several serine and threonine residues in the cytosolic domain of the receptor
become phosphorylated by protein kinase A (PKA). The
phosphorylated receptor can bind its ligand, but ligand binding leads to reduced activation of adenylyl cyclase; thus the
receptor is desensitized. This is an example of feedback suppression, in which the end product of a pathway (here activated PKA) blocks an early step in the pathway (here,
receptor activation). Because the activity of PKA is enhanced
by the high cAMP level induced by any hormone that activates Gs, prolonged exposure to one such hormone, say, epinephrine, causes desensitization not only of -adrenergic
receptors but also of Gs protein–coupled receptors that bind
different ligands (e.g., glucagon). This cross-regulation is
called heterologous desensitization.
Additional residues in the cytosolic domain of the adrenergic receptor are phosphorylated by a receptor-specific
enzyme called -adrenergic receptor kinase (BARK), but only
when epinephrine or an agonist is bound to the receptor. Because BARK phosphorylates only activated -adrenergic receptors, this process is called homologous desensitization.
Prolonged treatment of cells with epinephrine results in extensive phosphorylation and hence desensitization of the adrenergic receptor by both PKA and BARK.
Phosphorylated (desensitized) receptors are constantly
being resensitized owing to dephosphorylation by constitutive

554

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

phosphatases. Thus the number of phosphates per receptor
molecule reflects how much ligand has been bound in the
recent past (e.g., 1–10 minutes). This means that if a cell is
constantly being exposed to a certain concentration of a
hormone, that hormone concentration will eventually cease
to stimulate the receptor. If the hormone concentration is
now increased to a new value, the receptor will activate
downstream signaling pathways but to a lesser extent than
would occur if the cell were switched from a medium without hormone to one with this hormone level. If the hormone
is then completely removed, the receptor becomes completely dephosphorylated and “reset” to its maximum sensitivity, in which case it can respond to very low levels of
hormone. Thus a feedback loop involving receptor phosphorylation and dephosphorylation modulates the activity
of -adrenergic and related Gs protein–coupled receptors,
permitting a cell to adjust receptor sensitivity to the hormone level at which it is being stimulated.
Another key participant in regulation of -adrenergic receptors is -arrestin. This cytosolic protein binds to receptors
extensively phosphorylated by BARK and completely inhibits their interaction with and ability to activate Gs. An

NH3

additional function of -arrestin in regulating cell-surface receptors initially was suggested by the observation that loss of
cell surface -adrenergic receptors in response to ligand
binding is stimulated by overexpression of BARK and arrestin. Subsequent studies revealed that -arrestin binds
not only to phosphorylated receptors but also to clathrin and
an associated protein termed AP2, two essential components
of the coated vesicles that are involved in one type of endocytosis. These interactions promote the formation of coated
pits and endocytosis of the associated receptors, thereby decreasing the number of receptors exposed on the cell surface
(Figure 13-19). Eventually the internalized receptors become
dephosphorylated in endosomes, -arrestin dissociates, and
the resensitized receptors recycle to the cell surface, similar to
recycling of the LDL receptor (Chapter 17). Regulation of
other G protein–coupled receptors also is thought to involve
endocytosis of ligand-occupied receptors and their sequestration inside the cell.
As we discuss later, -arrestin also functions as an
adapter protein in transducing signals from Gs protein–
coupled receptors to the nucleus. The multiple functions of
-arrestin illustrate the importance of adapter proteins in
both regulating signaling and transducing signals from cellsurface receptors.

+

G protein–coupled receptor
Exterior

Cytosol
−

OOC
P

Activation of
c-Jun kinase
cascade

AJK-1

P

-Arrestin

MKKY
JNK-1

AP2
Clathrin

Endocytosis

c-Src

Activation of MAP
kinase cascade

▲ FIGURE 13-19 Role of -arrestin in GPCR desensitization

and signal transduction. -Arrestin binds to phosphorylated
serine and tyrosine residues in the C-terminal segment of
G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs). Clathrin and AP2, two
other proteins bound by -arrestin, promote endocytosis of the
receptor. -Arrestin also functions in transducing signals from
activated receptors by binding to and activating several cytosolic
protein kinases. c-Src activates the MAP kinase pathway, leading
to phosphorylation of key transcription factors (Chapter 14).
Interaction of -arrestin with three other proteins, including
JNK-1 (a Jun N-terminal kinase), results in phosphorylation and
activation of the c-Jun transcription factor. [Adapted from W. Miller
and R. J. Lefkowitz, 2001, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:139, and K. Pierce
et al., 2002, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:639.]

Anchoring Proteins Localize Effects
of cAMP to Specific Subcellular Regions
In many cell types, a rise in the cAMP level may produce a
response that is required in one part of the cell but is unwanted, perhaps deleterious, in another part. A family of anchoring proteins localizes PKA isoforms to specific
subcellular locations, thereby restricting cAMP-dependent
responses to these locations. These proteins, referred to as
A kinase–associated proteins (AKAPs), have a two-domain
structure with one domain conferring a specific subcellular
location and another that binds to the regulatory subunit of
protein kinase A.
One anchoring protein (AKAP15) is tethered to the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane near a particular type of
gated Ca2 channel in certain heart muscle cells. In the heart,
activation of -adrenergic receptors by epinephrine (as part
of the fight-or-flight response) leads to PKA-catalyzed phosphorylation of these Ca2 channels, causing them to open;
the resulting influx of Ca2 increases the rate of heart muscle contraction. The interaction of AKAP15 with PKA localizes PKA next to these channels, thereby reducing the time
that otherwise would be required for diffusion of PKA catalytic subunits from their sites of generation to their Ca2channel substrate.
Another A kinase–associated protein (mAKAP) in heart
muscle anchors both PKA and cAMP phosphodiesterase
(PDE) to the outer nuclear membrane. Because of the close
proximity of PDE to PKA, a negative feedback loop provides

13.4 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Regulate Ion Channels
1
Basal PDE activity =
resting state
cAMP

PDE

R R

3
PDE phosphorylation
and activation; reduction
in cAMP level
P

PDE

mAKAP

Cytosol C

2
Increased cAMP:
PKA activation

C
C PKA

mAKAP

R R

C

555

C

PDE
mAKAP

P
C

R R

Outer
nuclear
membrane

4 Return to resting state

▲ FIGURE 13-20 Localization of protein kinase A (PKA)
to the nuclear membrane in heart muscle. This A kinase–
associated protein mAKAP anchors both PKA and cAMP
phosphodiesterase (PDE) to the nuclear membrane, maintaining
them in a negative feedback loop that provides close local control
of the cAMP level. Step 1 : The basal level of PDE activity in
the absence of hormone (resting state) keeps cAMP levels
below those necessary for PKA activation. Step 2 : Activation of
-adrenergic receptors causes an increase in cAMP level in

close local control of the cAMP level and hence PKA activity (Figure 13-20). The localization of PKA near the nuclear
membrane also facilitates entry of the catalytic subunits into
the nucleus, where they phosphorylate and activate certain
transcription factors (Section 13.6).

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 13.3

excess of that which can be degraded by PDE. The resulting
binding of cAMP to the regulatory (R) subunits of PKA
releases the active catalytic (C) subunits. Step 3 : Subsequent
phosphorylation of PDE by PKA stimulates its catalytic activity,
thereby driving cAMP levels back to basal and causing
reformation of the inactive PKA. Subsequent dephosphorylation
of PDE (step 4 ) returns the complex to the resting state.
[Adapted from K. L. Dodge et al., 2001, EMBO J. 20:1921.]

cAMP-dependent activation of protein kinase A (PKA)
mediates the diverse effects of cAMP in different cells. The
substrates for PKA and thus the cellular response to
hormone-induced activation of PKA vary among cell types.

■

In liver and muscle cells, activation of PKA induced by
epinephrine and other hormones exerts a dual effect, inhibiting glycogen synthesis and stimulating glycogen breakdown via a kinase cascade (see Figure 13-17).

■

Signaling pathways involving second messengers and kinase cascades amplify an external signal tremendously (see
Figure 13-18).

■

G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate
or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase
Trimeric G proteins transduce signals from coupled cellsurface receptors to associated effector proteins, which are
either enzymes that form second messengers or cation
channel proteins (see Table 13-1).

■

Signals most commonly are transduced by G , a GTPase
switch protein that alternates between an active (“on”)
state with bound GTP and inactive (“off”) state with GDP.
The  and subunits, which remain bound together, occasionally transduce signals.
■

■ Hormone-occupied receptors act as GEFs for G proteins, catalyzing dissociation of GDP and enabling GTP to
bind. The resulting change in conformation of switch regions in G causes it to dissociate from the G subunit
and interact with an effector protein (see Figure 13-11).

Gs , which is activated by multiple types of GPCRs,
binds to and activates adenylyl cyclase, enhancing the synthesis of 3,5-cyclic AMP (cAMP).
■

■ BARK phosphorylates ligand-bound -adrenergic receptors, leading to the binding of -arrestin and endocytosis of the receptors. The consequent reduction in cellsurface-receptor numbers renders the cell less sensitive to
additional hormone.

Localization of PKA to specific regions of the cell by anchoring proteins restricts the effects of cAMP to particular subcellular locations.

■

13.4 G Protein–Coupled Receptors
That Regulate Ion Channels
As we learned in Chapter 7, many neurotransmitter receptors are ligand-gated ion channels. These include some types
of glutamate and serotonin receptors, as well as the nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor found at nerve-muscle synapses. Many

556

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

neurotransmitter receptors, however, are G protein–coupled
receptors. The effector protein for some of these is a Na or
K channel; neurotransmitter binding to these receptors
causes the associated ion channel to open or close, leading to
changes in the membrane potential. Other neurotransmitter
receptors, as well as odorant receptors in the nose and photoreceptors in the eye, are G protein–coupled receptors that
indirectly modulate the activity of ion channels via the
action of second messengers. In this section, we consider two
G protein–coupled receptors that illustrate the direct and indirect mechanisms for regulating ion channels: the muscarinic
acetylcholine and Gt-coupled receptors.

Cardiac Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors
Activate a G Protein That Opens K Channels
Binding of acetylcholine to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
in striated muscle cells generates an action potential that triggers muscle contraction (see Figure 7-45). In contrast, the
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in cardiac muscle are inhibitory. Binding of acetylcholine to these receptors slows the

Acetylcholine

K+ channel
+ +

Exterior

Cytosol

− −

Gβγ

Giα
G
D
P

Active muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor

GDP

GTP

K+
+ + + + +

G
T
P

Giα

Gβγ

− − − − −

▲ FIGURE 13-21 Operational model of muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor in the heart muscle plasma membrane.
These receptors are linked via a trimeric G protein to K channels.
Binding of acetylcholine triggers activation of the Gi subunit and
its dissociation from the G subunit in the usual way (see Figure
13-11). In this case, the released G subunit (rather than Gi ·GTP)
binds to and opens the associated effector, a K channel. The
increase in K permeability hyperpolarizes the membrane, which
reduces the frequency of heart muscle contraction. Though not
shown here, activation is terminated when the GTP bound to
Gi is hydrolyzed to GDP and Gi ·GDP recombines with G .
[See K. Ho et al., 1993, Nature 362:31, and Y. Kubo et al., 1993, Nature
362:127.]

rate of heart muscle contraction by causing a long-lived (several seconds) hyperpolarization of the muscle cell membrane.
This can be studied experimentally by direct addition of
acetylcholine to heart muscle in culture.
Activation of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor,
which is coupled to a Gi protein, leads to opening of associated K channels; the subsequent efflux of K ions causes
hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane. As depicted in
Figure 13-21, the signal from activated receptors is transduced to the effector protein by the released G subunit
rather than by G ·GTP. That G directly activates the K
channel was demonstrated by patch-clamping experiments,
which can measure ion flow through a single ion channel in
a small patch of membrane (see Figure 7-17). When purified
G protein was added to the cytosolic face of a patch of
heart muscle plasma membrane, K channels opened immediately, even in the absence of acetylcholine or other neurotransmitters.

Gt-Coupled Receptors Are Activated by Light
The human retina contains two types of photoreceptors, rods
and cones, that are the primary recipients of visual stimulation. Cones are involved in color vision, while rods are
stimulated by weak light like moonlight over a range of
wavelengths. The photoreceptors synapse on layer upon
layer of interneurons that are innervated by different combinations of photoreceptor cells. All these signals are
processed and interpreted by the part of the brain called the
visual cortex.
Rhodopsin, a G protein–coupled receptor that is activated by light, is localized to the thousand or so flattened
membrane disks that make up the outer segment of rod cells
(Figure 13-22). The trimeric G protein coupled to rhodopsin,
often called transducin (Gt), is found only in rod cells.
A human rod cell contains about 4  107 molecules of
rhodopsin, which consists of the seven-spanning protein
opsin to which is covalently bound the light-absorbing pigment 11-cis-retinal. Upon absorption of a photon, the retinal
moiety of rhodopsin is very rapidly converted to the all-trans
isomer, causing a conformational change in the opsin portion
that activates it (Figure 13-23). This is equivalent to the conformational change that occurs upon ligand binding by other
G protein–coupled receptors. The resulting form in which
opsin is covalently bound to all-trans-retinal is called metarhodopsin II, or activated opsin. Analogous to other G
protein–coupled receptors, this light-activated form of
rhodopsin interacts with and activates an associated G protein (i.e., Gt). Activated opsin is unstable and spontaneously
dissociates into its component parts, releasing opsin and alltrans-retinal, thereby terminating visual signaling. In the
dark, free all-trans-retinal is converted back to 11-cis-retinal,
which can then rebind to opsin, re-forming rhodopsin.
In the dark, the membrane potential of a rod cell is about
30 mV, considerably less than the resting potential (60 to

13.4 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Regulate Ion Channels
(a)

557

(b)

Outer
segment

Disks
containing
rhodopsin

Microtubules

Mitochondria
Golgi

Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Cilium

Inner
segment

Nucleus

Basal
body

Synaptic
body
Human rod cell

▲ FIGURE 13-22 Human rod cell. (a) Schematic diagram of an
entire rod cell. At the synaptic body, the rod cell forms a synapse
with one or more bipolar interneurons. Rhodopsin, a light-sensitive
G protein–coupled receptor, is located in the flattened membrane
disks of the outer segment. (b) Electron micrograph of the region
90 mV) typical of neurons and other electrically active
cells. As a consequence of this depolarization, rod cells in the
dark are constantly secreting neurotransmitters, and the
bipolar interneurons with which they synapse are continually
being stimulated. The depolarized state of the plasma membrane of resting rod cells is due to the presence of a large
number of open nonselective ion channels that admit Na
and Ca2, as well as K. Absorption of light by rhodopsin
leads to closing of these channels, causing the membrane
potential to become more negative.

0.5 m

of the rod cell indicated by the bracket in (a). This region includes
the junction of the inner and outer segments. [Part (b) from R. G.
Kessel and R. H. Kardon, 1979, Tissues and Organs: A Text-Atlas of
Scanning Electron Microscopy, W. H. Freeman and Company, p. 91.]

The more photons absorbed by rhodopsin, the more
channels are closed, the fewer Na ions cross the membrane
from the outside, the more negative the membrane potential
becomes, and the less neurotransmitter is released. This
change is transmitted to the brain where it is perceived as
light. Remarkably, a single photon absorbed by a resting rod
cell produces a measurable response, a decrease in the membrane potential of about 1 mV, which in amphibians lasts a
second or two. Humans are able to detect a flash of as few as
five photons.

558

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface
11-cis -Retinal moiety

H3C CH3

Activation of Rhodopsin Induces Closing
of cGMP-Gated Cation Channels

CH3

cis

The key transducing molecule linking activated opsin to the
closing of cation channels in the rod-cell plasma membrane
is the second messenger cyclic GMP (cGMP). Rod outer segments contain an unusually high concentration (≈0.07 mM)
of cGMP, which is continuously formed from GTP in a reaction catalyzed by guanylyl cyclase that appears to be unaffected by light. However, light absorption by rhodopsin
induces activation of a cGMP phosphodiesterase, which hydrolyzes cGMP to 5-GMP. As a result, the cGMP concentration decreases upon illumination. The high level of cGMP

11
12

Lysine side chain
CH3

H3C
C

+
N

H

H

Opsin

(CH2)4

Rhodopsin
Light-induced
isomerization
(<10−2 s)

H+

 FIGURE 13-23 The light-triggered step in vision. The

all-trans -Retinal moiety
trans
H3C CH3

CH3

CH3
11

C
12

N

(CH2)4

Opsin*

H

CH3

Meta-rhodopsin II
(activated opsin)

light-absorbing pigment 11-cis-retinal is covalently bound to the
amino group of a lysine residue in opsin, the protein portion of
rhodopsin. Absorption of light causes rapid photoisomerization of
the cis-retinal to the all-trans isomer, forming the unstable
intermediate meta-rhodopsin II, or activated opsin, which
activates Gt proteins. Within seconds all-trans-retinal dissociates
from opsin and is converted by an enzyme back to the cis
isomer, which then rebinds to another opsin molecule.
[See J. Nathans, 1992, Biochemistry 31:4923.]

Light
Cytosol
Disk membrane
Disk lumen

1

O

2

O*

Inactive
PDE

3

Gβγ
G
T
P

Gtα G
D
P
G
T
P

γ

β
α

γ

4

G
T
P

G
D
P

γ

Active
PDE
β
α

γ

Rod
plasma
membrane
G
T
P

5
cGMP

GMP
6

▲ FIGURE 13-24 Operational model for rhodopsin-induced closing of
cation channels in rod cells. In dark-adapted rod cells, a high level of cGMP keeps
nucleotide-gated nonselective cation channels open. Light absorption generates
activated opsin, O* (step 1 ), which binds inactive GDP-bound Gt protein and mediates
replacement of GDP with GTP (step 2 ). The free Gt ·GTP generated then activates
cGMP phosphodiesterase (PDE) by binding to its inhibitory subunits (step 3 ) and
dissociating them from the catalytic and  subunits (step 4 ). Relieved of their inhibition,
the and  subunits convert cGMP to GMP (step 5 ). The resulting decrease in
cytosolic cGMP leads to dissociation of cGMP from the nucleotide-gated channels in the
plasma membrane and closing of the channels (step 6 ). The membrane then becomes
transiently hyperpolarized. [Adapted from V. Arshavsky and E. Pugh, 1998, Neuron 20:11.]

Low
cytosolic
cGMP ( )

Na+
Ca2+

Closed cGMP-gated
ion channel
High
cytosolic
cGMP
( )

Dark-adapted
state

Na+
Ca2+

Open cGMP-gated
ion channel

13.4 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Regulate Ion Channels

present in the dark acts to keep cGMP-gated cation channels
open; the light-induced decrease in cGMP leads to channel
closing, membrane hyperpolarization, and reduced neurotransmitter release.
As depicted in Figure 13-24, cGMP phosphodiesterase is
the effector protein for Gt. The free Gt ·GTP complex that
is generated after light absorption by rhodopsin binds to the
two inhibitory subunits of cGMP phosphodiesterase, releasing the active catalytic and  subunits, which then convert cGMP to GMP. This is another example of how
signal-induced removal of an inhibitor can quickly activate
an enzyme, a common mechanism in signaling pathways. A
single molecule of activated opsin in the disk membrane can
activate 500 Gt molecules, each of which in turn activates
cGMP phosphodiesterase; this is the primary stage of signal
amplification in the visual system. Even though activation
of cGMP phosphodiesterase leads to a decrease in a second
messenger, cGMP, this activation occurs by the same general
mechanism described earlier except that absorption of light
by rhodopsin rather than ligand binding is the activating signal (see Figure 13-11).
Conversion of active Gt ·GTP back to inactive Gt ·GDP
is accelerated by a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) specific
for Gt ·GTP. In mammals Gt normally remains in the active GTP-bound state for only a fraction of a second. Thus
cGMP phosphodiesterase rapidly becomes inactivated, and
the cGMP level gradually rises to its original level when the
light stimulus is removed. This allows rapid responses of the
eye toward moving or changing objects.
Recent x-ray crystallographic studies reveal how the subunits of Gt protein interact with each other and with lightactivated rhodopsin and provide clues about how binding
of GTP leads to dissociation of G from G (Figure 13-25).
Two surfaces of Gt interact with G: an N-terminal region
near the membrane surface and the two adjacent switch I
and switch II regions, which are found in all G proteins. Although G and G also contact each other, G does not contact Gt .
Studies with adrenergic receptors discussed earlier indicate that ligand binding to a G protein–coupled receptor
causes the transmembrane helices in the receptor to slide relative to one another, resulting in conformational changes in
the cytosolic loops that create a binding site for the coupled
trimeric G protein. The crystallographic structures in Figure
13-25 suggest that the nucleotide-binding domain of Gt , together with the lipid anchors at the C-terminus of G and the
N-terminus of Gt , form a surface that binds to lightactivated rhodopsin (O* in Figure 13-24), promoting the release of GDP from Gt and the subsequent binding of GTP.
The subsequent conformational changes in Gt , particularly
those within switches I and II, disrupt the molecular interactions between Gt and G , leading to their dissociation.
The structural studies with rhodopsin and Gt are consistent
with data concerning other G protein–coupled receptors and
are thought to be generally applicable to all receptors of this
type.

559

N

Rhodopsin
Exterior

Cytosol
Sites of lipid
attachment

C
C

N

GTPase
domain

C

Gγ

GDP
Gtα
Helical
domain

Gβ
N
N

▲ FIGURE 13-25 Structural models of rhodopsin and its
associated Gt protein. The structures of rhodopsin and the Gt
and G subunits were obtained by x-ray crystallography. The
C-terminal segment of rhodopsin is not shown in this model. The
orientation of Gt with respect to rhodopsin and the membrane
is hypothetical; it is based on the charge and hydrophobicity of
the protein surfaces and the known rhodopsin-binding sites on
Gt . As in other trimeric G proteins, the Gt and G subunits
contain covalently attached lipids that are thought to be inserted
into the membrane. In the GDP-bound form shown here (GDP,
red), the subunit (gray) and the  subunit (light blue) interact
with each other, as do the  and (purple) subunits, but the
small subunit, which contains just two helices, does not
contact the subunit. Several segments of the subunit are
thought to interact with an activated receptor, causing a
conformational change that promotes release of GDP and binding
of GTP. Binding of GTP, in turn, induces large conformational
changes in the switch regions of Gt , leading to dissociation of
Gt from G . The structure of a Gs subunit in the GTP-bound
form, which interacts with an effector protein, is shown in Figure
13-14b. [Adapted from H. Hamm, 2001, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA
98:4819, and D. G. Lambright et al., 1996, Nature 379:311.]

Direct support for the role of cGMP in rod-cell activity
has been obtained in patch-clamping studies using isolated
patches of rod outer-segment plasma membrane, which contains abundant cGMP-gated cation channels. When cGMP is
added to the cytosolic surface of these patches, there is a
rapid increase in the number of open ion channels. The effect
occurs in the absence of protein kinases or phosphatases, and

560

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

cGMP acts directly on the channels to keep them open, indicating that these are nucleotide-gated channels. Like the
voltage-gated K  channels discussed in Chapter 7, the
cGMP-gated channel protein contains four subunits, each
of which is able to bind a cGMP molecule (see Figure
7-36a). Three or four cGMP molecules must bind per
channel in order to open it; this allosteric interaction
makes channel opening very sensitive to small changes in
cGMP levels.

Rod Cells Adapt to Varying
Levels of Ambient Light

Overview Animation: Extracellular Signaling

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Cone cells are insensitive to low levels of illumination, and
the activity of rod cells is inhibited at high light levels. Thus
when we move from daylight into a dimly lighted room, we
are initially blinded. As the rod cells slowly become sensitive to the dim light, we gradually are able to see and distinguish objects. This process of visual adaptation permits a rod
cell to perceive contrast over a 100,000-fold range of ambient light levels; as a result, differences in light levels, rather
than the absolute amount of absorbed light, are used to form
visual images.
One process contributing to visual adaptation involves
phosphorylation of activated opsin (O*) by rhodopsin kinase (Figure 13-26). This rod-cell enzyme is analogous to
-adrenergic receptor kinase (BARK) discussed previously.
Each opsin molecule has three principal serine phosphorylation sites; the more sites that are phosphorylated, the less
able O* is to activate Gt and thus induce closing of cGMPgated cation channels. Indeed, rod cells from mice with mutant rhodopsins bearing zero or only one of these serine
residues show a much slower than normal rate of deacti-

vation in bright light. Because the extent of opsin phosphorylation is proportional to the amount of time each
opsin molecule spends in the light-activated form, it is a
measure of the background (ambient) level of light. Under
high-light conditions, phosphorylated opsin is abundant
and activation of Gt is reduced; thus, a greater increase in
light level will be necessary to generate a visual signal.
When the level of ambient light is reduced, the opsins become dephosphorylated and the ability to activate Gt increases; in this case, fewer additional photons will be
necessary to generate a visual signal.
At high ambient light (such as noontime outdoors), the
level of opsin phosphorylation is such that the protein arrestin binds to the C-terminal segment of opsin. The bound
-arrestin prevents interaction of Gt with O*, totally blocking formation of the active Gt ·GTP complex and causing a
shutdown of all rod-cell activity. The mechanism by which
rod-cell activity is controlled by rhodopsin kinase and arrestin is similar to adaptation (or desensitization) of other
G protein–coupled receptors to high ligand levels.
A second mechanism of visual adaptation appears unique
to rod cells. In dark-adapted cells virtually all the Gt and
G subunits are in the outer segments. But exposure for
10 minutes to moderate daytime intensities of light causes
over 80 percent of the Gt and G subunits to move out of
the outer segments into other cellular compartments (Figure
13-27). The mechanism by which these proteins move is not
yet known, but as a result of this adaptation Gt proteins are
physically unable to bind activated opsin. As occurs in other
signaling pathways, multiple mechanisms are thus used to inactivate signaling during visual adaptation, presumably to
allow strict control of activation of the signaling pathway
over broad ranges of illumination.

Activated
opsin

Rhodopsin
(dark adapted)
Low light

O*

ATP

ADP

High
light

O*

Very high
light

O*

Rhodopsin
kinase

Arrestin
P

Cytosol
Activation of
Gtα

O*

Slightly reduced
Gtα activation

▲ FIGURE 13-26 Role of opsin phosphorylation in
adaptation of rod cells to changes in ambient light
levels. Light-activated opsin (O*), but not dark-adapted
rhodopsin, is a substrate for rhodopsin kinase. The extent
of opsin phosphorylation is directly proportional to the
amount of time each opsin molecule spends in the lightactivated form and thus to the average ambient light level
over the previous few minutes. The ability of O* to activate

P

P

P

Greatly reduced
Gtα activation

P P P
Arrestin
No
Gtα activation

Gt is inversely proportional to the number of phosphorylated
residues. Thus the higher the ambient light level, the greater the
extent of opsin phosphorylation and the larger the increase
in light level needed to activate the same number of Gt
(transducin) molecules. At very high light levels, arrestin binds to
the completely phosphorylated opsin, forming a complex that
cannot activate transducin at all. [See L. Lagnado and D. Baylor, 1992,
Neuron 8:995, and A. Mendez et al., 2000, Neuron 28:153.]

13.5 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate Phospholipase C

561

The effector protein activated by Gt ·GTP is cGMP
phosphodiesterase. Reduction in the cGMP level by this
enzyme leads to closing of cGMP-gated Na/Ca2 channels, hyperpolarization of the membrane, and decreased release of neurotransmitter (see Figure 13-24).

■

■ As with other G
proteins, binding of GTP to
Gt causes conformational changes in the protein that
disrupt its molecular interactions with G and
enable Gt ·GTP to bind to its downstream effector (see
Figure 13-25).

Phosphorylation of light-activated opsin by rhodopsin
kinase and subsequent binding of arrestin to phosphorylated opsin inhibit its ability to activate transducin (see
Figure 13-26). This general mechanism of adaptation, or
desensitization, is utilized by other GPCRs at high ligand
levels.

■

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 13-27 Movement of Gt from
outer segments of rod cells contributes to visual adaptation.
As shown by immunofluorescence staining of retinas of darkadapted rats, both the and  subunits of transducin (G t and
Gt) are localized to the outer segments (OS) of rod cells, where
they can be activated by rhodopsin photoreceptors in the
membrane disks (see Figure 13-22). After several minutes of
bright light most of the transducin and  subunits have moved
to the inner segment (IS) of the rod cells, where they cannot
interact with active opsin; this contributes to desensitization of
rod cells at high light intensities. [From M. Sokolov et al., 2002,
Neuron 33:95. Courtesy of Vadim Arshavsky, Harvard Medical School.]

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 13.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Regulate
Ion Channels
The cardiac muscarinic acetylcholine receptor is a GPCR
whose effector protein is a K channel. Receptor activation causes release of the G subunit, which opens K
channels (see Figure 13-21). The resulting hyperpolarization of the cell membrane slows the rate of heart muscle
contraction.
■

Rhodopsin, the photosensitive GPCR in rod cells,
comprises the opsin protein linked to 11-cis-retinal. The
light-induced isomerization of the 11-cis-retinal moiety
produces activated opsin, which then activates the coupled trimeric G protein transducin (Gt) by catalyzing exchange of free GTP for bound GDP on the Gt subunit.
■

13.5 G Protein–Coupled Receptors
That Activate Phospholipase C
In this section, we discuss GPCR-triggered signal-transduction
pathways involving several other second messengers and
the mechanisms by which they regulate various cellular activities. A number of these second messengers are derived
from phosphatidylinositol (PI). The inositol group in this
phospholipid, which extends into the cytosol adjacent to
the membrane, can be reversibly phosphorylated at several
positions by the combined actions of various kinases
and phosphatases. These reactions yield several different
membrane-bound phosphoinositides, two of which are depicted in Figure 13-28.
The levels of many phosphoinositides in cells are dynamically regulated by extracellular signals, especially
those that bind to receptor tyrosine kinases or cytokine receptors, which we cover in the next chapter. The phosphoinositide PIP2 (PI 4,5-bisphosphate) binds many cytosolic
proteins to the plasma membrane. Some of these proteins
are required for forming and remodeling the actin cytoskeleton (Chapter 19); others are required for binding of
proteins important for endocytosis and vesicle fusions
(Chapter 17).
PIP2 is also cleaved by the plasma-membrane – associated
enzyme phospholipase C (PLC) to generate two important
second messengers: 1,2-diacylglycerol (DAG), a lipophilic
molecule that remains associated with the membrane, and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), which diffuses in the cytosol
(see Figure 13-28). We refer to downstream events involving these two second messengers collectively as the IP3/DAG
pathway. Hormone binding to receptors coupled to either a
Go or a Gq protein (see Table 13-1) induces activation of the
 isoform of phospholipase C (PLC) by the general mechanism outlined in Figure 13-11.

562

Cytosolic leaflet

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

1,2-Diacylglycerol
(DAG)
C

O

O

C

C

O

O

CH2 CH

ATP

P

O

Inositol

5

OH
OH HO
2

C

O

ATP

P

OH

O

P

OH

P

CH2 CH

CH2

O

PI 4-phosphate
(PIP)

O

CH2

5

OH HO

4

P

3

Phosphatidylinositol
(PI)

C
O

Phospholipase C

P

OH
4

O

O

OH

O
OH HO

C

O

O
−

OH

C
O

CH2 CH

O
4

ADP

PIP-5 kinase

O

O

O

CH2

O
−O

OH
6

C
O

CH2 CH
PI-4 kinase

O
1

ADP

CH2

O
−O

O

O

PI 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2)

P
5

P
1

OH
OH HO

4

P

Inositol 1,4,5trisphosphate
(IP3)

▲ FIGURE 13-28 Synthesis of DAG and IP3 from
membrane-bound phosphatidylinositol (PI). Each membranebound PI kinase places a phosphate (yellow circles) on a specific
hydroxyl group on the inositol ring, producing the phosphoinositides

PIP and PIP2. Cleavage of PIP2 by phospholipase C (PLC) yields
the two important second messengers DAG and IP3. [See A. Toker

Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate (IP3) Triggers Release
of Ca2 from the Endoplasmic Reticulum

brane and ER membrane actively pump Ca2 from the cytosol
to the cell exterior and ER lumen, respectively. Furthermore,
within a second of its generation, one specific phosphate
on IP3 is hydrolyzed, yielding inositol 1,4-bisphosphate, which
does not stimulate Ca2 release from the ER.
Without some means for replenishing depleted stores of
intracellular Ca2, a cell would soon be unable to increase
the cytosolic Ca2 level in response to hormone-induced
IP3. Patch-clamping studies have revealed that a plasmamembrane Ca2 channel, called the TRP channel or the
store-operated channel, opens in response to depletion of ER
Ca2 stores (see Figure 13-29). In a way that is not understood, depletion of Ca2 in the ER lumen leads to a conformational change in the IP3-gated Ca2 channel that allows
it to bind to the TRP Ca2 channel in the plasma membrane,
causing the latter to open. Indeed, expression in cells of a
specific fragment of the ER membrane IP3-gated Ca2 channel prevents opening of the TRP channel upon depletion of
ER Ca2 stores, implicating an interaction between the two
Ca2 channels in opening the TRP channel.
Opening of IP3-gated Ca2 channels is potentiated by cytosolic Ca2 ions, which increase the affinity of these channel receptors for IP3, resulting in greater release of stored
Ca2. Higher concentrations of cytosolic Ca2, however, inhibit IP3-induced release of Ca2 from intracellular stores
by decreasing the affinity of the receptor for IP3. This complex regulation of IP3-gated Ca2 channels in ER membranes
by cytosolic Ca2 can lead to rapid oscillations in the cytosolic Ca2 level when the IP3 pathway in cells is stimu-

Most intracellular Ca2 ions are sequestered in the mitochondria and in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
other vesicles. Cells employ various mechanisms for regulating
the concentration of Ca2 ions in the cytosol, which usually is
kept below 0.2 M. For instance, Ca2 ATPases pump cytosolic Ca2 ions across the plasma membrane to the cell exterior
or into the lumens of intracellular Ca2-storing compartments
(see Figure 7-7). As we discuss below, a small rise in cytosolic
Ca2 induces a variety of cellular responses, and thus the cytosolic concentration of Ca2 is carefully controlled.
Binding of many hormones to their cell-surface receptors
on liver, fat, and other cells induces an elevation in cytosolic
Ca2 even when Ca2 ions are absent from the surrounding
extracellular fluid. In this situation, Ca2 is released into the
cytosol from the ER lumen through operation of the IP3gated Ca2 channel in the ER membrane. This large protein
is composed of four identical subunits, each containing an
IP3-binding site in the N-terminal cytosolic domain. IP3 binding induces opening of the channel, allowing Ca2 ions to
exit from the ER into the cytosol (Figure 13-29). When various phosphorylated inositols found in cells are added to
preparations of ER vesicles, only IP3 causes release of Ca2
ions from the vesicles. This simple experiment demonstrates
the specificity of the IP3 effect.
The IP3-mediated rise in the cytosolic Ca2 level is only
transient because Ca2 ATPases located in the plasma mem-

and L. C. Cantley, 1997, Nature 387:673, and C. L. Carpenter and L. C.
Cantley, 1996, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 8:153.]

13.5 • G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate Phospholipase C

Exterior
Plasma
membrane

DAG

1

5
7

Cytosol

PKC
IP3

PIP2

4
6
PKC

Phosphorylation
of substrates

Protein
kinase C

IP3

3
2

Ca2+

IP3-gated
Ca2+ channel

Endoplasmic reticulum

 FIGURE 13-29 IP3/DAG pathway

and the elevation of cytosolic Ca2.
This pathway can be triggered by ligand
binding to certain G protein–coupled
receptors and several other receptor
types, leading to activation of
phospholipase C. Cleavage of PIP2 by
phospholipase C yields IP3 and DAG
(step 1 ). After diffusing through the
cytosol, IP3 interacts with and opens
Ca2 channels in the membrane of the
endoplasmic reticulum (step 2 ), causing
release of stored Ca2 ions into the
cytosol (step 3 ). One of various cellular
responses induced by a rise in cytosolic
Ca2 is recruitment of protein kinase C
(PKC) to the plasma membrane (step 4 ),
where it is activated by DAG (step 5 ).
The activated kinase can phosphorylate
various cellular enzymes and receptors,
thereby altering their activity (step 6 ). As
endoplasmic reticulum Ca2 stores are
depleted, the IP3-gated Ca2 channels
bind to and open store-operated TRP
Ca2 channels in the plasma membrane,
allowing influx of extracellular Ca2
(step 7 ). [Adapted from J. W. Putney, 1999,
Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 96:14669.]

lated. For example, stimulation of hormone-secreting cells in
the pituitary by luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone
(LHRH) causes rapid, repeated spikes in the cytosolic Ca2
level; each spike is associated with a burst in secretion of
luteinizing hormone (LH). The purpose of the fluctuations of
Ca2, rather than a sustained rise in cytosolic Ca2, is not
understood. One possibility is that a sustained rise in Ca2
may be toxic to cells.

Diacylglycerol (DAG) Activates Protein Kinase C,
Which Regulates Many Other Proteins
After its formation by hydrolysis of PIP2 or other phosphoinositides, DAG remains associated with the plasma membrane. The principal function of DAG is to activate a family of
protein kinases collectively termed protein kinase C (PKC). In
the absence of hormone stimulation, protein kinase C is present as a soluble cytosolic protein that is catalytically inactive.
A rise in the cytosolic Ca2 level causes protein kinase C to
bind to the cytosolic leaflet of the plasma membrane, where
the membrane-associated DAG can activate it. Thus activation
of protein kinase C depends on an increase of both Ca2 ions
and DAG, suggesting an interaction between the two branches
of the IP3/DAG pathway (see Figure 13-29).
The activation of protein kinase C in different cells results in a varied array of cellular responses, indicating that
it plays a key role in many aspects of cellular growth and metabolism. In liver cells, for instance, protein kinase C helps

regulate glycogen metabolism by phosphorylating and thus
inhibiting glycogen synthase. Protein kinase C also phosphorylates various transcription factors; depending on the cell
type; these induce synthesis of mRNAs that trigger cell
proliferation.

Ca2/Calmodulin Complex Mediates Many
Cellular Responses to External Signals
Ligand binding to several types of receptors, in addition to
G protein–coupled receptors, can activate a phospholipase C
isoform, leading to an IP3-mediated increase in the cytosolic
level of free Ca2. Such localized increases in cytosolic Ca2
in specific cell types are critical to its function as a second messenger. For example, acetylcholine stimulation of G protein–
coupled receptors in secretory cells of the pancreas and
parotid gland induces an IP3-mediated rise in Ca2 that triggers the fusion of secretory vesicles with the plasma membrane and release of their contents into the extracellular
space. In blood platelets, the rise in Ca2 induced by thrombin stimulation triggers a conformational change in these cell
fragments leading to their aggregation, an important step in
plugging holes in blood vessels. Secretion of insulin from pancreatic  cells also is triggered by Ca2, although the increase
in Ca2 occurs by a different mechanism (see Figure 15-7).
A small cytosolic protein called calmodulin, which is
ubiquitous in eukaryotic cells, functions as a multipurpose
switch protein that mediates many cellular effects of Ca2

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Phospholipase C

Ca2+

Focus Animation: Second Messengers in
Signaling Pathways

Store-operated
TRP Ca2+
channel

563

564

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

ions. Binding of Ca2 to four sites on calmodulin yields a
complex that interacts with and modulates the activity of
many enzymes and other proteins (see Figure 3-28). Because
Ca2 binds to calmodulin in a cooperative fashion, a small
change in the level of cytosolic Ca2 leads to a large change
in the level of active calmodulin. One well-studied enzyme
activated by the Ca2/calmodulin complex is myosin lightchain kinase, which regulates the activity of myosin in muscle cells (Chapter 19). Another is cAMP phosphodiesterase,
the enzyme that degrades cAMP to 5-AMP and terminates
its effects. This reaction thus links Ca2 and cAMP, one of
many examples in which two second messengers interact to
fine-tune certain aspects of cell regulation.
In certain cells, the rise in cytosolic Ca2 following receptor signaling via PLC-generated IP3 leads to activation of
specific transcription factors. In some cases, Ca2/calmodulin activates protein kinases that, in turn, phosphorylate
transcription factors, thereby modifying their activity and
regulating gene expression. In other cases, Ca2/calmodulin
activates a phosphatase that removes phosphate groups from
a transcription factor. An important example of this mechanism involves T cells of the immune system in which Ca2
ions enhance the activity of an essential transcription factor,
NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells). In unstimulated
cells, phosphorylated NFAT is located in the cytosol. Following receptor stimulation and elevation of cytosolic Ca2,
the Ca2/calmodulin complex binds to and activates calcineurin, a protein-serine phosphatase. Activated calcineurin
then dephosphorylates key phosphate residues on cytosolic
NFAT, exposing a nuclear localization sequence that allows
NFAT to move into the nucleus and stimulate expression of
genes essential for activation of T cells.
The Ca2/calmodulin complex also plays a key role in
controlling the diameter of blood vessels and thus their ability to deliver oxygen to tissues. This pathway involves a

 FIGURE 13-30 Regulation of
contractility of arterial smooth muscle
by nitric oxide (NO) and cGMP. Nitric
oxide is synthesized in endothelial cells
in response to acetylcholine and the
subsequent elevation in cytosolic Ca2.
NO diffuses locally through tissues and
activates an intracellular NO receptor
with guanylyl cyclase activity in nearby
smooth muscle cells. The resulting rise
in cGMP leads to activation of protein
kinase G (PKG), relaxation of the muscle,
and thus vasodilation. The cell-surface
receptor for atrial natriuretic factor (ANF)
also has intrinsic guanylyl cyclase activity
(not shown); stimulation of this receptor
on smooth muscle cells also leads to
increased cGMP and subsequent muscle
relaxation. PPi  pyrophosphate. [See
C. S. Lowenstein et al., 1994, Ann. Intern.
Med. 120:227.]

Lumen of
blood vessel

novel signaling molecule and provides another example of
cGMP functioning as a second messenger.

Signal-Induced Relaxation of Vascular
Smooth Muscle Is Mediated by cGMPActivated Protein Kinase G
Nitroglycerin has been used for over a century as
a treatment for the intense chest pain of angina. It
was known to slowly decompose in the body to nitric oxide (NO), which causes relaxation of the smooth muscle cells surrounding the blood vessels that “feed” the heart
muscle itself, thereby increasing the diameter of the blood
vessels and increasing the flow of oxygen-bearing blood to
the heart muscle. One of the most intriguing discoveries in
modern medicine is that NO, a toxic gas found in car exhaust, is in fact a natural signaling molecule. ❚
Definitive evidence for the role of NO in inducing relaxation of smooth muscle came from a set of experiments in
which acetylcholine was added to experimental preparations
of the smooth muscle cells that surround blood vessels. Direct application of acetylcholine to these cells caused them to
contract, the expected effect of acetylcholine on these muscle
cells. But addition of acetylcholine to the lumen of small isolated blood vessels caused the underlying smooth muscles to
relax, not contract. Subsequent studies showed that in response to acetylcholine the endothelial cells that line the
lumen of blood vessels were releasing some substance that
in turn triggered muscle cell relaxation. That substance
turned out to be NO.
We now know that endothelial cells contain a Go
protein–coupled receptor that binds acetylcholine and activates phospholipase C, leading to an increase in the level of

Acetylcholine

Acetylcholine
GPCR

Phospholipase
C

IP3

Endothelial
cells

Ca2+/Calmodulin

NO synthase

Arginine + O2

Citrulline + NO

NO

NO
NO
receptor

Smooth muscle cells

GTP
cGMP
PPi

Protein
kinase G

RELAXATION
OF MUSCLE CELL

13.6 • Activation of Gene Transcription by G Protein–Coupled Receptors

cytosolic Ca2. After Ca2 binds to calmodulin, the resulting
complex stimulates the activity of NO synthase, an enzyme
that catalyzes formation of NO from O2 and the amino acid
arginine. Because NO has a short half-life (2–30 seconds), it
can diffuse only locally in tissues from its site of synthesis.
In particular NO diffuses from the endothelial cell into
neighboring smooth muscle cells, where it triggers muscle relaxation (Figure 13-30).
The effect of NO on smooth muscle is mediated by the
second messenger cGMP, which can be formed by an intracellular NO receptor expressed by smooth muscle cells. Binding of NO to the heme group in this receptor leads to a
conformational change that increases its intrinsic guanylyl
cyclase activity, leading to a rise in the cGMP level. Most of
the effects of cGMP are mediated by a cGMP-dependent protein kinase, also known as protein kinase G (PKG). In vascular smooth muscle, protein kinase G activates a signaling
pathway that results in inhibition of the actin-myosin complex, relaxation of the cell, and dilation of the blood vessel.
In this case, cGMP acts indirectly via protein kinase G,
whereas in rod cells cGMP acts directly by binding to and
thus opening cation channels in the plasma membrane.
Relaxation of vascular smooth muscle also is triggered by
binding of atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and some other
peptide hormones to their receptors on smooth muscle cells.
The cytosolic domain of these cell-surface receptors, like the
intracellular NO receptor, possesses intrinsic guanylyl cyclase
activity. When an increased blood volume stretches cardiac
muscle cells in the heart atrium, they release ANF. Circulating ANF binds to ANF receptors in smooth muscle cells surrounding blood vessels, inducing activation of guanylyl
cyclase activity and formation of cGMP. Subsequent activation of protein kinase G causes dilation of the vessel by the
mechanism described above. This vasodilation reduces blood
pressure and counters the stimulus that provoked the initial
release of ANF.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 13.5
G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate
Phospholipase C
Simulation of some GPCRs and other cell-surface receptors leads to activation of phospholipase C, which generates two second messengers: diffusible IP3 and membrane-bound DAG (see Figure 13-28).

■

IP3 triggers opening of IP3-gated Ca2 channels in the
endoplasmic reticulum and elevation of cytosolic free
Ca2. In response to elevated cytosolic Ca2, protein kinase C is recruited to the plasma membrane, where it is
activated by DAG (see Figure 13-29).
■

The Ca2/calmodulin complex regulates the activity of
many different proteins, including cAMP phosphodiesterase, nitric oxide synthase, and protein kinases or phosphatases that control the activity of various transcription
factors.
■

565

Stimulation of the acetylcholine GPCR on endothelial
cells induces an increase in cytosolic Ca2 and subsequent
synthesis of NO. After diffusing into surrounding smooth
muscle cells, NO activates intracellular guanylate cyclase
to synthesize cGMP (see Figure 13-30).

■

Synthesis of cGMP in vascular smooth muscle cells leads
to activation of protein kinase G, which triggers a pathway leading to muscle relaxation and vasodilation.

■

cGMP is also produced in vascular smooth muscle cells
by stimulation of cell-surface receptors that have intrinsic
guanylate cyclase activity. These include receptors for atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF).

■

13.6 Activation of Gene Transcription
by G Protein–Coupled Receptors
As mentioned early in this chapter, intracellular signaltransduction pathways can have short-term and long-term
effects on the cell. Short-term effects (seconds to minutes)
result from modulation of the activity of preexisting enzymes
or other proteins, leading to changes in cell metabolism or
function. Most of the pathways activated by G protein–
coupled receptors fall into this category. However, GPCR signaling pathways also can have long-term effects (hours to
days) owing to activation or repression of gene transcription,
leading in some cases to cell proliferation or to differentiation into a different type of cell. Earlier we discussed how a
signal-induced rise in cytosolic Ca2 can lead to activation of
transcription factors. Here we consider other mechanisms
by which some G protein–coupled receptors regulate gene
expression.

Membrane-Localized Tubby Transcription Factor
Is Released by Activation of Phospholipase C
The tubby gene, which is expressed primarily in
certain areas of the brain involved in control of
eating behavior, first attracted attention because of
its involvement in obesity. Mice bearing mutations in the
tubby gene develop adult-onset obesity, and certain aspects
of their metabolism resemble that of obese humans.
Sequencing of the cloned tubby gene suggested that its encoded protein contains both a DNA-binding domain and a
transcription-activation domain (Chapter 11). However, the
Tubby protein was found to be localized near the plasma
membrane, making it an unlikely candidate as a transcription
factor. Subsequent studies revealed that Tubby binds tightly
to PIP2, anchoring the protein to the plasma membrane (Figure 13-31). Hormone binding to Go- or Gq-coupled receptors,
which activate phospholipase C, leads to hydrolysis of PIP2
and release of Tubby into the cytosol. Tubby then enters the
nucleus and activates transcription of a still unknown gene or
genes. Identification of these genes should provide clues about
how their encoded proteins relate to obesity. ❚

566

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface
Phospholipase C

 FIGURE 13-31 Activation of the Tubby transcription
DAG

Exterior

PIP2
IP3

1

Cytosol
Transcriptional
activation
domain

Tubby

factor following ligand binding to receptors coupled to Go or
Gq. In resting cells, Tubby is bound tightly to PIP2 in the plasma
membrane. Receptor stimulation (not shown) leads to activation
of phospholipase C, hydrolysis of PIP2, and release of Tubby into
the cytosol ( 1 ). Directed by two functional nuclear localization
sequences (NLS) in its N-terminal domain, Tubby translocates into
the nucleus ( 2 ) and activates transcription of target genes ( 3 ). It
is not known whether IP3 remains bound to Tubby. [Adapted from
S. Santagata et al., 2001, Science 292:2041.]

DNA binding
domain

2

Nucleus
3

Transcription

 FIGURE 13-32 Activation of gene expression
following ligand binding to Gs protein–coupled
receptors. Receptor stimulation ( 1 ) leads to activation of
PKA ( 2 ). Catalytic subunits of PKA translocate to the
nucleus ( 3 ) and there phosphorylate and activate the
transcription factor CREB ( 4 ). Phosphorylated CREB
associates with the co-activator CBP/P300 ( 5 ) to
stimulate various target genes controlled by the CRE
regulatory element. See the text for details. [See K. A. Lee

Gs protein–coupled
receptor
Exterior
1
Cytosol

PKA

Overview Animation: Extracellular Signaling

R

C

and N. Masson, 1993, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1174:221, and
D. Parker et al., 1996, Mol. Cell Biol. 16(2):694.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Adenylyl
cyclase

R

2

C

cAMP
R

R
C

C
3

ATP
C

CREB

ADP
4

Nucleus

CBP/P300

P
5

P

P

Basal transcription
machinery

CRE

Transcription

Perspectives for the Future

CREB Links cAMP Signals to Transcription
In mammalian cells, an elevation in the cytosolic cAMP level
stimulates the expression of many genes. For instance, increased cAMP in certain endocrine cells induces production
of somatostatin, a peptide that inhibits release of various
hormones; in liver cells, cAMP induces synthesis of several
enzymes involved in converting three-carbon compounds to
glucose.
All genes regulated by cAMP contain a cis-acting DNA
sequence, the cAMP-response element (CRE), that binds the
phosphorylated form of a transcription factor called CREbinding (CREB) protein, which is found only in the nucleus.
As discussed previously, binding of neurotransmitters and
hormones to Gs protein–coupled receptors activates adenylyl
cyclase, leading to an increase in cAMP and subsequent release of the active catalytic subunit of PKA. Some of the catalytic subunits then translocate to the nucleus and
phosphorylate serine-133 on CREB protein.
Phosphorylated CREB protein binds to CRE-containing
target genes and also interacts with a co-activator termed
CBP/300, which links CREB to the basal transcriptional machinery, thereby permitting CREB to stimulate transcription
(Figure 13-32). Earlier studies suggested that phosphorylation induced a conformational change in CREB protein, but
more recent work indicates that CBP/P300 binds specifically
to phosphoserine-133 in activated CREB. As discussed in
Chapter 11, other signal-regulated transcription factors rely
on CBP/P300 to exert their activating effect. Thus this coactivator plays an important role in integrating signals from
multiple signaling pathways that regulate gene transcription.

GPCR-Bound Arrestin Activates Several Kinase
Cascades That Control Gene Expression
We saw earlier that binding of -arrestin to phosphorylated
serines in the cytosolic domain of G protein–coupled receptors both blocks activation of G and mediates endocytosis
of the GPCR-arrestin complex. Perhaps surprisingly, the
GPCR-arrestin complex also acts as a scaffold for binding
and activating several cytosolic kinases (see Figure 13-19).
These include c-Src, which activates the MAP kinase pathway and other pathways leading to transcription of genes
needed for cell division. A complex of three arrestin-bound
proteins, including a Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK-1), initiates
a kinase cascade that ultimately activates the c-Jun transcription factor. Activated c-Jun promotes expression of certain growth-promoting enzymes and other proteins that help
cells respond to some stresses.
Binding of epinephrine to the -adrenergic receptors
in heart muscle stimulates glycogenolysis and enhances the rate of muscle contraction. Prolonged
treatment with epinephrine, however, induces proliferation of
these cardiac muscle cells. In extreme cases, such cardiac hypertrophy causes failure of the heart muscle, a major cause of
heart disease. This epinephrine-induced cell proliferation results

567

in part from activation of the MAP kinase cascade. As just described, the GPCR-arrestin complex can trigger this cascade.
Another, perhaps more important, way that activation
of -adrenergic receptors promotes cardiac hypertrophy involves another type of receptor. The Gs protein activated
by -adrenergic receptors can somehow lead to activation
of a specific extracellular metal-containing protease that, in
turn, cleaves the transmembrane precursor of epidermal
growth factor (EGF). The soluble EGF released into the extracellular space binds to and activates EGF receptors on the
same cell in an autocrine fashion. As we learn in the next
chapter, the EGF receptor belongs to the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) class of receptors, which commonly trigger the
MAP kinase cascade leading to cell proliferation. Similar
cross-talk between two types of receptors occurs in many
other signaling systems. Just as no cell lives in isolation, no
receptor and no signal-transduction pathway function by
themselves. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 13.6
Activation of Gene Transcription by G Protein–Coupled
Receptors
Activation of phospholipase C by receptors coupled to
Go or Gq proteins releases the Tubby transcription factor,
which is bound to PIP2 embedded in the plasma membrane
of resting cells (see Figure 13-31).
■

Signal-induced activation of protein kinase A (PKA) often leads to phosphorylation of CREB protein, which together with the CBP/300 co-activator stimulates transcription of many target genes (see Figure 13-32).

■

The GPCR-arrestin complex activates several cytosolic
kinases, initiating cascades that lead to transcriptional activation of many genes controlling cell growth.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
Very soon we will know the identity of all the pieces in many
signal-transduction pathways, but putting the puzzle together to predict cellular responses remains elusive. For
instance, we can enumerate the G proteins, kinases, phosphatases, arrestins, and other proteins that participate in signaling from -adrenergic receptors in liver cells, but we are
still far from being able to predict, quantitatively, how liver
cells react over time to a given dose of adrenaline. In part this
is because complex feedback (and in some cases feed-forward) loops regulate the activity of multiple enzymes and
other components in the pathway. Although biochemical and
cell biological experiments tell us how these interactions
occur, we cannot describe quantitatively the rates or extent
of these reactions in living cells.
The emerging field of biological systems analysis attempts
to develop an integrated view of a cell’s response to external

568

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

signals. Mathematical equations are formulated that incorporate rate constants for enzyme catalysis, formation of proteinprotein complexes, and concentrations and diffusion rates of
all the various signal-transduction proteins. These models incorporate information about changes in the subcellular localization of proteins with time (e.g., movement of transcription
factors into the nucleus or endocytosis of surface receptors)
and the effect on the activity of any given protein (e.g., glycogen phosphorylase) of the local Ca2 concentration and the
presence of multiple kinases and phosphatases. By comparing
the results of such calculations with actual experimental results (say, by increasing or decreasing selectively the concentration of one component of the pathway) we can determine,
in principle, whether we have accounted for all of the components of the pathway. Such mathematical modeling will also
help the pharmaceutical industry develop new drugs that
might activate or inhibit specific pathways. Modeling can enable one to extrapolate the results of experiments on drugs on
proteins in test tubes or on cultured cells in order to predict
their efficacy and side effects in living organisms.
In this chapter we focused primarily on signal-transduction
pathways activated by individual G protein–coupled receptors.
However, even these relatively simple pathways presage the
more complex situation within living cells. As we’ve seen, activation of a single type of receptor often leads to production
of multiple second messengers or activation of several types
of downstream transducing proteins. Moreover, the same cellular response (e.g., glycogen breakdown) is affected by multiple signaling pathways activated by multiple types of
receptors. Interaction of different signaling pathways permits
the fine-tuning of cellular activities required to carry out complex developmental and physiological processes, and the ability of cells to respond appropriately to extracellular signals
also depends on regulation of signaling pathways themselves.

KEY TERMS
adenylyl cyclase 548
adrenergic receptors 548
agonist 539
autocrine signaling 535
calmodulin 563
cAMP 537
competition assay 539
desensitization 544
endocrine signaling 535
functional expression
assay 540
G protein–coupled
receptors 534
IP3/DAG pathway 561
muscarinic acetylcholine
receptors 556

paracrine signaling 535
PDZ domains 543
phospholipase C ( isoform)
561
protein kinase A 550
protein kinase C 563
rhodopsin 556
second messengers 541
signal amplification 552
signal transduction 534
stimulatory G protein 548
transducin 556
trimeric G proteins 534
visual adaptation 560

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Signaling by soluble extracellular molecules can be
classified into three types: endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine. Describe how these three methods of cellular signaling differ. Growth hormone is secreted from the
pituitary, which is located at the base of the brain, and acts
through growth hormone receptors located on the liver. Is
this an example of endocrine, paracrine, or autocrine signaling? Why?
2. A ligand binds two different receptors with a Kd value of
107 M for receptor 1 and a Kd value of 109 M for receptor 2. For which receptor does the ligand show the greater
affinity? Calculate the fraction of receptors that have a
bound ligand ([RL]/RT) for ligand with receptor 1 and for
ligand with receptor 2, if the concentration of free ligand is
108 M.
3. A study of the properties of cell-surface receptors can
be greatly enhanced by isolation or cloning of the cell-surface
receptor. Describe how a cell-surface receptor can be isolated
by affinity chromatography. How can you clone a cell surface receptor using a functional-expression assay?
4. Signal-transducing trimeric G proteins consist of three
subunits designated , , . The G subunit is a GTPase
switch protein that cycles between active and inactive states
depending upon whether it is bound to GTP or to GDP. Review the steps for ligand-induced activation of effector proteins mediated by the trimeric-G-protein complex. Suppose
that you have isolated a mutant G subunit that has an increased GTPase activity. What effect would this mutation
have on the G protein and the effector protein?
5. Membrane proteins are often found clustered. Describe
how protein clustering can be mediated by adapter proteins
or by specialized lipid rafts termed caveolae. What advantage
might there be to having a cluster of membrane proteins involved in a signaling pathway rather than spread out in the
membrane?
6. Epinephrine binds to both -adrenergic and -adrenergic receptors. Describe the opposite actions on the effector
protein, adenylyl cyclase, elicited by the binding of epinephrine to these two types of receptors. Describe the effect of
adding an agonist or antagonist to a -adrenergic receptor
on the activity of adenylyl cyclase.
7. In liver and muscle cells, epinephrine stimulates the release of glucose from glycogen by inhibiting glycogen synthesis and stimulating glycogen breakdown. Outline the
molecular events that occur after epinephrine binds to its receptor and the resultant increase in the concentration of intracellular cAMP. How are the cAMP levels returned to
normal? Describe the events that occur after cAMP levels
decline.

References

9. A number of different molecules act as second messengers. Activation of rhodopsin by light induces the closing of
gated cation channels with cyclic GMP as a second messenger. Describe the effect of light on rhodopsin. On what effector protein does the trimeric G protein act? What type of
trimeric G protein is involved in this event?
10. Visual adaptation and receptor desensitization involve
similar phosphorylation mechanisms. Describe how the adrenergic receptor kinase (BARK) and rhodopsin kinase
play important roles in these processes. What role does dephosphorylation play in these reactions?
11. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol
(DAG) are second messenger molecules derived from the
cleavage of the phosphoinositide PIP2 (phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate) by activated phospholipase C. Describe
the role of IP3 in the release of Ca2 from the endoplasmic
reticulum. How do cells replenish the endoplasmic reticulum
stores of Ca2? What is the principal function of DAG?
12. In 1992, the journal Science named nitric oxide the Molecule of the Year. Describe how this important second messenger is synthesized. How does nitric oxide cause relaxation
of smooth muscle cells?
13. Ligand binding to G protein–coupled receptors can result
in activation of gene transcription. Describe how the second
messengers PIP2 and cAMP can activate transcription of genes.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Mutations in the trimeric G proteins can cause many diseases
in humans. Patients with acromegaly often have pituitary tumors that oversecrete the pituitary hormone called growth
hormone (GH). A subset of these growth hormone (GH)–
secreting pituitary tumors result from mutations in G proteins. GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) stimulates GH release
from the pituitary by binding to GHRH receptors and stimulating adenylyl cyclase. Cloning and sequencing of the wildtype and mutant Gs gene from normal individuals and
patients with the pituitary tumors revealed a missense mutation in the Gs gene sequence.
a. To investigate the effect of the mutation on Gs activity,
wild-type and mutant Gs cDNA were transfected into cells
that lack the Gs gene. These cells express a 2-adrenergic receptor, which can be activated by isoproterenol, a 2-adrenergic
receptor agonist. Membranes were isolated from transfected
cells and assayed for adenylyl cyclase activity in the presence of
GTP or the hydrolysis-resistant GTP analog, GTP- S. From the

250
Adenylyl cyclase activity

8. Continuous exposure of a Gs protein–coupled receptor
to its ligand leads to a phenomenon known as desensitization. Describe several molecular mechanisms for receptor desensitization. How can a receptor be reset to its original
sensitized state? What effect would a mutant receptor lacking serine or threonine phosphorylation sites have on a cell?

569

200
150
100
50
0
GTP

GTP+iso

GTPγS

Wild type

GTP

GTP+iso

GTPγS

Mutant

figure above, what do you conclude about the effect of the mutation on Gs activity in the presence of GTP alone compared
with GTP- S alone or GTP plus isoproterenol (iso)?
b. In the transfected cells described in part a, what would
you predict would be the cAMP levels in cells transfected
with the wild-type Gs and the mutant Gs ? What effect
might this have on the cells?
c. To further characterize the molecular defect caused by this
mutation, the intrinsic GTPase activity present in both wildtype and mutant Gs was assayed. Assays for GTPase activity showed that the mutation reduced the Kcat-GTP (catalysis
rate constant for GTP hydrolysis) from a wild-type value of
4.1 min1 to the mutant value of 0.1 min1. What do you
conclude about the effect of the mutation on the GTPase
activity present in the mutant Gs subunit? How do these
GTPase results explain the adenylyl cyclase results shown in
part a?

REFERENCES

Signaling Molecules and Cell-Surface Receptors
Coughlin, S. R. 2000. Thrombin signaling and proteaseactivated receptors. Nature 407:258–264.
Farfel, Z., H. Bourne, and T. Iiri. 1999. The expanding
spectrum of G protein diseases. New Eng. J. Med. 340:1012–1020.
Simonsen, H., and H. F. Lodish. 1994. Cloning by function: expression cloning in mammalian cells. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
15:437–441.
Stadel, J. M., S. Wilson, and D. J. Bergsma. 1997. Orphan G
protein–coupled receptors: a neglected opportunity for pioneer drug
discovery. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 18:430–437.
Wilson, J. D., D. W. Foster, H. M. Kronenberg, and R. H.
Williams. 1998. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 9th ed.
W. B. Saunders.

Intracellular Signal Transduction
Anderson, R. G., and K. Jacobson. 2002. A role for lipid shells
in targeting proteins to caveolae, rafts, and other lipid
domains. Science 296:1821–1825.
Bourne, H. R. 1997. How receptors talk to trimeric
G proteins. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9:134–142.

570

CHAPTER 13 • Signaling at the Cell Surface

Galbiati, F., B. Razani, and M. P. Lisanti. 2001. Emerging themes
in lipid rafts and caveolae. Cell 106:403–411.
Garner, C. C., J. Nash, and R. L. Huganir. 2000. PDZ
domains in synapse assembly and signaling. Trends Cell Biol.
10:274–280.
Harris, B. Z., and W. A. Lim. 2001. Mechanism and role of PDZ
domains in signaling complex assembly. J. Cell Sci. 114:3219–3231.
Rebecchi, M. J., and S. Scarlata. 1998. Pleckstrin homology domains: a common fold with diverse functions. Ann. Rev.
Biophys. Biomol. Struc. 27:503–528.
Van Deurs, B., K. Roepstorff, A. Hommelgaard, and K. Sandvig.
2003. Caveolae: anchored multifunctional platforms in the lipid ocean.
Trends Cell Biol. 13:92–100.
Vetter, I. R., and A. Wittinghofer. 2001. The guanine nucleotidebinding switch in three dimensions. Science 294:1299–1304.

G Protein–Coupled Receptors That Activate
or Inhibit Adenylyl Cyclase
Browner, M., and R. Fletterick. 1992. Phosphorylase: a
biological transducer. Trends Biochem. Sci. 17:66–71.
Diviani, D., and J. D. Scott. 2001. AKAP signaling complexes
at the cytoskeleton. J. Cell Sci. 114:1431–1437.
Ferguson, S. S., and M. G. Caron. 1998. G protein–coupled receptor adaptation mechanisms. Semin. Cell Develop. Biol.
9:119–127.
Hurley, J. H. 1999. Structure, mechanism, and regulation of
mammalian adenylyl cyclase. J. Biol. Chem. 274:7599–7602.
Johnson, L. N. 1992. Glycogen phosphorylase: control by phosphorylation and allosteric effectors. FASEB J. 6:2274–2282.
Luttrell, L. M., and R. J. Lefkowitz. 2002. The role of betaarrestins in the termination and transduction of G-protein-coupled
receptor signals. J. Cell Sci. 115:455–465.
Michel, J. J., and J. D. Scott. 2002. AKAP mediated signal transduction. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 42:235–257.
Perry, S. J., and R. J. Lefkowitz. 2002. Arresting developments
in heptahelical receptor signaling and regulation. Trends Cell Biol.
12:130–138.
Pierce, K. L., R. T. Premont, and R. J. Lefkowitz. 2002.
Seven-transmembrane receptors. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
3:639–652.
Sprang, S. R. 1997. G protein mechanisms: insights from structural analysis. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 66:639–678.
Tesmer, J. J., R. K. Sunahara, A. G. Gilman, and S. R. Sprang.
1997. Crystal structure of the catalytic domains of adenylyl cyclase
in a complex with Gs ·GTP S. Science 278:1907–1916.

G Protein–Coupled Receptors That
Regulate Ion Channels
Borhan, B., et al. 2000. Movement of retinal along the visual
transduction path. Science 288:2209–2212.
Bourne, H. R., and E. C. Meng. 2000. Structure. Rhodopsin sees
the light. Science 289:733–734.
Hamm, H. E. 2001. How activated receptors couple to G
proteins. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 98:4819–4821.
Hurley, J. H., and J. A. Grobler. 1997. Protein kinase C and
phospholipase C: Bilayer interactions and regulation. Curr. Opin.
Struc. Biol. 7:557–565.

Mendez, A., et al. 2000. Rapid and reproducible deactivation of
rhodopsin requires multiple phosphorylation sites. Neuron
28:153–164.
Nathans, J. 1999. The evolution and physiology of human color
vision: insights from molecular genetic studies of visual
pigments. Neuron 24:299–312.
Palczewski, K., et al. 2000. Crystal structure of rhodopsin: a G
protein-coupled receptor. Science 289:739–745.
Sokolov, M., et al. 2002. Massive light-driven translocation of
transducin between the two compartments of rod cells: a novel mechanism of light adaptation. Neuron 33:95–106.

G Protein–Coupled Receptors That
Activate Phospholipase C
Berridge, M. J. 1997. Elementary and global aspects of
calcium signaling. J. Exp. Biol. 200:315–319.
Chin, D., and A. R. Means. 2000. Calmodulin: a prototypical
calcium sensor. Trends Cell Biol. 10:322–328.
Czech, M. P. 2000. PIP2 and PIP3: complex roles at the cell surface. Cell 100:603–606.
Delmas, P., and D. Brown. 2002. Junctional signaling microdomains: bridging the gap between neuronal cell surface and Ca2
stores. Neuron 36:787–790.
Hobbs, A. J. 1997. Soluble guanylate cyclase: the forgotten sibling. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 18:484–491.
Jaken, S. 1996. Protein kinase C isozymes and substrates. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 8:168–173.
Putney, J. W. 2001. Cell biology: channeling calcium. Nature
410:648–649.
Singer, W. D., H. A. Brown, and P. C. Sternweis. 1997.
Regulation of eukaryotic phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase
C and phospholipase D. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 66:475–509.
Toker, A., and L. C. Cantley. 1997. Signaling through the
lipid products of phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase. Nature
387:673–676.
Wedel, B. J., and D. L. Garbers. 1997. New insights on the functions of the guanylyl cyclase receptors. FEBS Lett. 410:29–33.

Activation of Gene Transcription
by G Protein–Coupled Receptors
Cantley, L. C. 2001. Transcription. Translocating tubby.
Science 292:2019–2021.
Luttrell, L. M., Y. Daaka, and R. J. Lefkowitz. 1999.
Regulation of tyrosine kinase cascades by G-protein-coupled
receptors. Curr Opin. Cell Biol. 11:177–183.
Mayr, B., and M. Montminy. 2001. Transcriptional regulation
by the phosphorylation-dependent factor CREB. Nature Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 2:599–609.
Pierce, K. L., L. M. Luttrell, and R. J. Lefkowitz. 2001. New
mechanisms in heptahelical receptor signaling to mitogen activated
protein kinase cascades. Oncogene 20:1532–1539.
Santagata, S., et al. 2001. G-protein signaling through tubby proteins. Science 292:2041–2050.
Shaywitz, A., and M. Greenberg. 1999. CREB: a stimulusinduced transcription factor activated by a diverse array of
extracellular signals. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 68:821–861.
Vo, N., and R. Goodman. 2001. CREB-binding protein and p300
in transcriptional regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 276:13505–13508.

14
SIGNALING
PATHWAYS THAT
CONTROL GENE
ACTIVITY

high

low

Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) detects time
and location of activation of Ras protein in live cells triggered
by epidermal growth factor. [Michiyuki Matsuda, Research Institute
for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University.]

T

he development of all organisms requires execution of
a complex program whereby specific genes are activated and repressed in specific sets of cells and in a precise time sequence. Many developmental changes in gene
expression are generated by extracellular signaling molecules
that act on cell-surface receptors. Most of these signals are
soluble, secreted factors that act in a paracrine fashion on receiving (target) cells near the releasing cell. However, some
signaling proteins are themselves attached to the cell surface,
where they interact with cell-surface receptors on adjacent
cells to alter the receiving cell’s pattern of gene expression.
Even mature cells that are part of a differentiated tissue
constantly change their patterns of gene expression. In large
measure this occurs because of many different cell-surface receptors that continually receive information from extracellular signals and transduce this information into activation of
specific transcription factors that stimulate or repress expression of specific target genes. Many such signaling pathways lead to alterations in the cell’s metabolic activities.
Liver, for example, responds to fluctuations in the levels of
many hormones (e.g., insulin, glucagon, and epinephrine) by
altering expression of many genes encoding enzymes of glucose and fat metabolism. Other signaling pathways influence
the levels of proteins that affect the ability of cells to progress
through the cell cycle and divide.
A typical mammalian cell often expresses cell-surface receptors for more than 100 different types of extracellular signaling molecules that function primarily to regulate the
activity of transcription factors (see Figure 13-1). The signalinduced activation of transcription factors occurs by several
mechanisms. In the last chapter, for instance, we saw that

stimulation of some G protein–coupled receptors leads to a
rise in cAMP and the cAMP-dependent activation of protein
kinase A. After translocating to the nucleus, protein kinase A
phosphorylates and thereby activates the CREB transcription
factor.
In this chapter, we focus on five other classes of cellsurface receptors that illustrate additional signal-induced
mechanisms of activating transcription factors. Stimulation
of transforming growth factor  (TGF) receptors and cytokine receptors leads directly to activation of cytosolic transcription factors as the result of phosphorylation by a kinase
that is part of the receptor or associated with it. The activated transcription factors then translocate into the nucleus
and act on specific target genes. In the case of receptor

OUTLINE
14.1 TGF Receptors and the Direct Activation
of Smads
14.2 Cytokine Receptors and the JAK-STAT Pathway
14.3 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases and Activation
of Ras
14.4 MAP Kinase Pathways
14.5 Phosphoinositides as Signal Transducers
14.6 Pathways That Involve Signal-Induced
Protein Cleavage
14.7 Down-Modulation of Receptor Signaling
571

572

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

TABLE 14-1 Overview of Major Receptor Classes and Signaling Pathways
Receptor Class/Pathway*

Distinguishing Characteristics

RECEPTORS LINKED TO TRIMERIC G PROTEINS
G protein–coupled receptors (13)

Ligands: Epinephrine, glucagon, serotonin, vasopressin, ACTH, adenosine, and many
others (mammals); odorant molecules, light; mating factors (yeast)
Receptors: Seven transmembrane  helices; cytosolic domain associated with a
membrane-tethered trimeric G protein
Signal transduction: (1) Second-messenger pathways involving cAMP or IP3/DAG;
(2) linked ion channels; (3) MAP kinase pathway

RECEPTORS WITH INTRINSIC OR ASSOCIATED ENZYMATIC ACTIVITY
TGF receptors (14, 15)

Ligands: Transforming growth factor  superfamily (TGF, BMPs), activin, inhibins
(mammals); Dpp (Drosophila)
Receptors: Intrinsic protein serine/threonine kinase activity in cytosolic domain (type I
and II)
Signal transduction: Direct activation of cytosolic Smad transcription factors

Cytokine receptors (14, 15)

Ligands: Interferons, erythropoietin, growth hormone, some interleukins (IL-2, IL-4),
other cytokines
Receptors: Single transmembrane  helix; conserved multi- strand fold in
extracellular domain; JAK kinase associated with intracellular domain
Signal transduction: (1) Direct activation of cytosolic STAT transcription factors;
(2) PI-3 kinase pathway; (3) IP3/DAG pathway; (4) Ras-MAP kinase pathway

Receptor tyrosine kinases (14)

Ligands: Insulin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF),
neurotrophins, other growth factors
Receptor: Single transmembrane  helix; intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase activity in
cytosolic domain
Signal transduction: (1) Ras–MAP kinase pathway; (2) IP3/DAG pathway; (3) PI-3
kinase pathway

Receptor guanylyl cyclases (13)

Ligands: Atrial natriuretic factor and related peptide hormones
Receptor: Single transmembrane  helix; intrinsic guanylate cyclase activity in
cytosolic domain
Signal transduction: Generation of cGMP

Receptor phosphotyrosine
phosphatases

Ligands: Pleiotrophins, other protein hormones
Receptors: Intrinsic phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity in cytosolic domain
inhibited by ligand binding
Signal transduction: Hydrolysis of activating phosphotyrosine residue on cytosolic
protein tyrosine kinases

T-cell receptors

Ligands: Small peptides associated with major histocompatability (MHC) proteins in
the plasma membrane of macrophages and other antigen-presenting cells
Receptors: Single transmembrane  helix; several protein kinases associated with
cytosolic domain; found only on T lymphocytes
Signal transduction: (1) Activation of cytosolic protein tyrosine kinases; (2) PI-3
kinase pathway; (3) IP3/DAG pathway; (4) Ras–MAP kinase pathway

14.1 • TGFb Receptors and the Direct Activation of Smads

573

TABLE 14-1 Overview of Major Receptor Classes and Signaling Pathways
Receptor Class/Pathway*

Distinguishing Characteristics

RECEPTORS THAT ARE ION CHANNELS
Ligand-gated ion channels (7, 13)

Ligands: Neurotransmitters (e.g., acetylcholine, glutamate), cGMP, physical stimuli
(e.g., touch, stretching), IP3 (receptor in ER membrane)
Receptors: Four or five subunits with a homologous segment in each subunit lining
the ion channel
Signal transduction: (1) Localized change in membrane potential due to ion influx,
(2) elevation of cytosolic Ca2+

PATHWAYS INVOLVING PROTEOLYSIS
Wnt pathway (15)

Ligands: Secreted Wnt (mammals); Wg (Drosophila)
Receptors: Frizzled (Fz) with seven transmembrane  helices; associated membranebound LDL receptor–related protein (Lrp) required for receptor activity
Signal transduction: Assembly of multiprotein complex at membrane that inhibits the
proteasome-mediated proteolysis of cytosolic -catenin transcription factor, resulting
in its accumulation

Hedgehog (Hh) pathway (15)

Ligands: Cell-tethered Hedgehog
Receptors: Binding of Hh to Patched (Ptc), which has 12 transmembrane  helices;
activation of signaling from Smoothened (Smo), with 7 transmembrane  helices
Signal transduction: Proteolytic release of a transcriptional activator from
multiprotein complex in the cytosol

Notch/Delta pathway (14, 15)

Ligands: Membrane-bound Delta or Serrate protein
Receptors: Extracellular subunit of Notch receptor noncovalently associated with
transmembrane-cytosolic subunit
Signal transduction: Intramembrane proteolytic cleavage of receptor transmembrane
domain with release of cytosolic segment that functions as co-activator for nuclear
trascription factors

NF-B pathways (14, 15)

Ligands: Tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-), interleukin 1 (mammals); Spätzle
(Drosophila)
Receptors: Various in mammals; Toll and Toll-like receptors in Drosophila
Signal transduction: Phosphorylation-dependent degradation of inhibitor protein with
release of active NF-B transcription factor (Dorsal in Drosophila) in the cytosol

INTRACELLULAR RECEPTORS PATHWAYS
Nitric oxide pathway (13)

Ligands: Nitric oxide (NO)
Receptor: Cytosolic guanylyl cyclase
Signal transduction: Generation of cGMP

Nuclear receptor pathways (11)

Ligands: Lipophilic molecules including steroid hormones, thyroxine, retinoids, and
fatty acids in mammals and ecdysone in Drosophila
Receptors: Highly conserved DNA-binding domain, somewhat conserved
hormone-binding domain, and a variable domain; located within nucleus or cytosol
Signal transduction: Activation of receptor’s transcription factor activity by ligand binding

*Unless indicated otherwise, receptors are located in the plasma membrane. Numbers in parentheses
indicate chapters in which a receptor/pathway is discussed in depth.
SOURCES:

J. Gerhart, 1999, Teratology 60:226, and A. Brivanlou and J. E. Darnell, 2002, Science 295:813.

574

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

tyrosine kinases, binding of a ligand to its receptor sets into
motion a cascade of intracellular events leading to activation of a cytosolic kinase that moves into the nucleus and
activates one or more transcription factors by phosphorylation. Signaling from tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-) receptors generates an active NF-B transcription factor by
proteolytic cleavage of a cytosolic inhibitor protein, and proteolytic cleavage of a Notch receptor releases the receptor’s
cytosolic domain that then functions as a co-activator for
transcription factors in the nucleus. Proteolysis also plays a
role in the signaling pathways triggered by binding of protein
ligands called Wnt and Hedgehog (Hh) to their receptors. We
cover these two pathways, which play a major role during
development and differentiation, in Chapter 15.
For simplicity, we often describe the various receptor
classes independently, concentrating on the major pathway
of signal transduction initiated by each class of receptor.
However, as shown in Table 14-1, several classes of receptors
can transduce signals by more than one pathway. Moreover,
many genes are regulated by multiple transcription factors,
each of which can be activated by one or more extracellular
signals. Especially during early development, such cross talk
between signaling pathways and the resultant sequential alterations in the pattern of gene expression eventually can
become so extensive that the cell assumes a different developmental fate.
Researchers have employed a variety of experimental approaches and systems to identify and study the function of
extracellular signaling molecules, receptors, and intracellular
signal-transduction proteins. For instance, the secreted signaling protein Hedgehog (Hh) and its receptor were first identified in Drosophila mutants with developmental defects.
Subsequently the human and mouse homologs of these proteins were cloned and shown to participate in a number of
important signaling events during differentiation. Some
signal-transduction proteins were first identified when gain-offunction mutations in the genes encoding them or overexpression of the normal protein caused abnormal cell proliferation
leading to malignancy. A mutant Ras protein exhibiting unregulated (i.e., constitutive) activity was identified in this way;
wild-type Ras later was found to be a key player in many signaling pathways. Numerous extracellular signaling molecules
initially were purified from cell extracts based on their ability
to stimulate growth and proliferation of specific cell types.
These few examples illustrate the importance of studying signaling pathways both genetically—in flies, mice, worms,
yeasts, and other organisms—and biochemically.

14.1 TGF Receptors and the Direct
Activation of Smads
A number of related extracellular signaling molecules that
play widespread roles in regulating development in both invertebrates and vertebrates constitute the transforming

growth factor  (TGF) superfamily. One member of this superfamily, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), initially was
identified by its ability to induce bone formation in cultured
cells. Now called BMP7, it is used clinically to strengthen
bone after severe fractures. Of the numerous BMP proteins
subsequently recognized, many help induce key steps in development, including formation of mesoderm and the earliest blood-forming cells.
Another member of the TGF superfamily, now called
TGF-1, was identified on the basis of its ability to induce a
transformed phenotype of certain cells in culture. However,
the three human TGF isoforms that are known all have potent antiproliferative effects on many types of mammalian
cells. Loss of TGF receptors or certain intracellular signaltransduction proteins in the TGF pathway, thereby releasing cells from this growth inhibition, frequently occurs
in human tumors. TGF proteins also promote expression of
cell-adhesion molecules and extracellular-matrix molecules.
TGF signals certain types of cells to synthesize and secrete
growth factors that can, on balance, overcome the normal
TFG-induced growth inhibition; this explains why TGF
was originally detected as a growth factor. A Drosophila
homolog of TGF, called Dpp protein, controls dorsoventral
patterning in fly embryos, as we detail in Chapter 15. Other
mammalian members of the TGF superfamily, the activins
and inhibins, affect early development of the genital tract.
Despite the complexity of cellular effects induced by various members of the TGF superfamily, the signaling pathway is basically a simple one. Once activated, receptors for
these ligands directly phosphorylate and activate a particular
type of transcription factor. The response of a given cell to
this activated transcription factor depends on the constellation of other transcription factors it already contains.

TGF Is Formed by Cleavage of a Secreted
Inactive Precursor
In humans TGF consists of three protein isoforms, TGF-1,
TGF-2, and TGF-3, each encoded by a unique gene and
expressed in both a tissue-specific and developmentally regulated fashion. Each TGF isoform is synthesized as part of
a larger precursor that contains a pro-domain. This domain
is cleaved from but remains noncovalently associated with
the mature domain after the protein is secreted. Most secreted TGF is stored in the extracellular matrix as a latent,
inactive complex containing the cleaved TGF precursor and
a covalently bound TGF-binding protein called Latent
TGF Binding Protein, or LTBP. Binding of LTBP by the
matrix protein thrombospondin or by certain cell-surface integrins triggers a conformational change in LTBP that causes
release of the mature, active dimeric TGF. Alternatively, digestion of the binding proteins by matrix metalloproteases
can result in activation of TGF (Figure 14-1a).
The monomeric form of TGF growth factors contains
110–140 amino acids and has a compact structure with four
antiparallel  strands and three conserved intramolecular

14.1 • TGFb Receptors and the Direct Activation of Smads

575

(a) Formation of mature, dimeric TGFβ

 FIGURE 14-1 Formation and structure of TGF

Secreted TGFβ precursor

superfamily of signaling molecules. (a) TGF precursors are
cleaved soon after being secreted. The pro-domain and mature
domain are stored in the extracellular matrix in a complex that
also contains latent TGF-binding protein (LTBP). The mature
domain contains six conserved cysteine residues (yellow circles),
which form three intrachain disulfide bonds and also a single
disulfide bond connecting two monomers. Following proteolysis
or a conformational change in LTBP, the active homo- or
heterodimeric protein is released. (b) In this ribbon diagram
of mature TGF dimer, the two subunits are shown in green
and blue. Disulfide-linked cysteine residues are shown in
ball-and-stick form. The three intrachain disulfide linkages (red) in
each monomer form a cystine-knot domain, which is resistant to
degradation. [Part (a) see J. Massagué and Y.-G. Chen, 2000, Genes and

110–140 aa

50–375 aa
+H N
3

COO−

Pro-domain
SH

Mature domain

Proteolytic cleavage
Binding by LTBP
Pro-domain
Latent complex

S
S

S
S

Devel. 14:627; part (b) from S. Daopin et al., 1992, Science 257:369.]

Pro-domain

S S

LTBP
Conformational change or
proteolysis of LTBP;
release of mature TGFβ
COO−

+H N
3

Mature form
(homo- or heterodimer)
+H N
3

S
S
COO−

(b) Dimeric TGFβ

disulfide linkages (Figure 14-1b). These form a structure,
called a cystine knot, that is relatively resistant to denaturation. An additional N-terminal cysteine in each monomer
links TGF monomers into functional homodimers and heterodimers. Much of the sequence variation among different
TGF proteins is observed in the N-terminal regions, the
loops joining the  strands, and the  helices. Different heterodimeric combinations may increase the functional diversity of these proteins beyond that generated by differences
in the primary sequence of the monomer.

TGF Signaling Receptors Have Serine/Threonine
Kinase Activity
To identify the cell-surface TGF receptors, investigators
first reacted the purified growth factor with the radioisotope
iodine-125 (125I) under conditions such that the radioisotope
covalently binds to exposed tyrosine residues. The 125Ilabeled TGF protein was incubated with cultured cells, and
the incubation mixture then was treated with a chemical
agent that covalently cross-linked the labeled TGF to its receptors on the cell surface. Purification of the labeled receptors revealed three different polypeptides with apparent
molecular weights of 55, 85, and 280 kDa, referred to as
types RI, RII, and RIII TGF receptors, respectively.
The most abundant TGF receptor, RIII, is a cell-surface
proteoglycan, also called -glycan, which binds and concentrates TGF near the cell surface. The type I and type II
receptors are dimeric transmembrane proteins with serine/
threonine kinases as part of their cytosolic domains. RII is a
constitutively active kinase that phosphorylates itself in the
absence of TGF. Binding of TGF induces the formation
of complexes containing two copies each of RI and RII. An
RII subunit then phosphorylates serine and threonine
residues in a highly conserved sequence of the RI subunit adjacent to the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane, thereby
activating the RI kinase activity.

Activated Type I TGF Receptors Phosphorylate
Smad Transcription Factors
Researchers identified the transcription factors downstream
from TGF receptors in Drosophila from genetic studies similar to those used to dissect receptor tyrosine kinase pathways
(see Section 14.3). These transcription factors in Drosophila
and the related vertebrate proteins are now called Smads.
Three types of Smad proteins function in the TGF signaling
pathway: receptor-regulated Smads (R-Smads), co-Smads,
and inhibitory or antagonistic Smads (I-Smads).

576

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

As depicted in Figure 14-2, R-Smads contain two domains, MH1 and MH2, separated by a flexible linker region.
The N-terminal MH1 domain contains the specific DNAbinding segment and also a sequence called the nuclearlocalization signal (NLS) that is required for protein
transport into the nucleus (Chapter 12). When R-Smads are
in their inactive, nonphosphorylated state, the NLS is
masked and the MH1 and MH2 domains associate in such
a way that they cannot bind to DNA or to a co-Smad. Phosphorylation of three serine residues near the C-terminus of
an R-Smad (Smad2 or Smad3) by activated type I TGF re-

Exterior
TGFβ

TGFβ

RII

RIII

RI
1a

1b
2
P
P
P

P

P

P

P

3

Cytosol

ceptors separates the domains, permitting binding of importin  to the NLS. Simultaneously a complex containing
two molecules of Smad3 (or Smad2) and one molecule of a
co-Smad (Smad4) forms in the cytosol. This complex is stabilized by binding of two phosphorylated serines in each
Smad3 to phosphoserine-binding sites in both the Smad3 and
the Smad4 MH2 domains. The bound importin  then mediates translocation of the heteromeric R-Smad/co-Smad
complexes into the nucleus. After importin  dissociates inside the nucleus, the Smad2/Smad4 or Smad3/Smad4 complexes cooperate with other transcription factors to activate
transcription of specific target genes.
Within the nucleus R-Smads are continuously being dephosphorylated, which results in the dissociation of the
R-Smad/co-Smad complex and export of these Smads from
the nucleus. Because of this continuous nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling of the Smads, the concentration of active Smads
within the nucleus closely reflects the levels of activated
TGF receptors on the cell surface.
Virtually all mammalian cells secrete at least one TGF
isoform, and most have TGF receptors on their surface.
However, because different types of cells contain different
sets of transcription factors with which the activated Smads
can bind, the cellular responses induced by TGF vary
among cell types. In epithelial cells and fibroblasts, for example, TGF induces expression not only of extracellular-

MH2
NL

NLS

Smad3-P

S

Smad3

P

MH1

Smad4
4

Imp-β

Smad4
NLS

P

Focus Animation: TGF Signaling Pathway

NLS

5
Ran
G
T
P

6
Nucleus
TFE3

Ran
G
T
P

7

Smad3-P
AGAC AGAC

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

P

Smad4
P

+

TFE3

P
Transcription

AGAC

CACGTG

3-bp spacer

PAI-1

 FIGURE 14-2 TGF-Smad signaling pathway. Step 1a :
In some cells, TGF binds to the type III TGF receptor (RIII),
which presents it to the type II receptor (RII). Step 1b : In other
cells, TGF binds directly to RII, a constitutively phosphorylated
and active kinase. Step 2 : Ligand-bound RII recruits and
phosphorylates the juxtamembrane segment of the type I
receptor (RI), which does not directly bind TGF. This releases
the inhibition of RI kinase activity that otherwise is imposed by
the segment of RI between the membrane and kinase domain.
Step 3 : Activated RI then phosphorylates Smad3 (shown here)
or another R-Smad, causing a conformational change that
unmasks its nuclear-localization signal (NLS). Step 4 : Two
phosphorylated molecules of Smad3 interact with a co-Smad
(Smad4), which is not phosphorylated, and with importin 
(Imp-), forming a large cytosolic complex. Steps 5 and 6 :
After the entire complex translocates into the nucleus, RanGTP
causes dissociation of Imp- as discussed in Chapter 12.
Step 7 : A nuclear transcription factor (e.g., TFE3) then associates
with the Smad3/Smad4 complex, forming an activation complex
that cooperatively binds in a precise geometry to regulatory
sequences of a target gene. Shown at the bottom is the
activation complex for the gene encoding plasminogen activator
inhibitor (PAI-1). See the text for additional details. [See Z. Xiao
et al., 2000, J. Biol. Chem. 275:23425; J. Massagué and D. Wotton,
2000, EMBO J. 19:1745; X. Hua et al., 1999, Proc. Nat'l. Acad. Sci. USA
96:13130; and A. Moustakas and C.-H. Heldin, 2002, Genes Devel.
16:1867.]

14.1 • TGFb Receptors and the Direct Activation of Smads

Oncoproteins and I-Smads Regulate Smad
Signaling via Negative Feedback Loops
Smad signaling is regulated by additional intracellular proteins, including two cytosolic proteins called SnoN and Ski
(Ski stands for “Sloan-Kettering Cancer Institute”). These
proteins were originally identified as oncoproteins because
they cause abnormal cell proliferation when overexpressed in
cultured fibroblasts. How they accomplish this was not understood until years later when SnoN and Ski were found to
bind to the Smad2/Smad4 or Smad3/Smad4 complexes
formed after TGF stimulation. SnoN and Ski do not affect
the ability of the Smad complexes to bind to DNA control regions. Rather, they block transcription activation by the
bound Smad complexes, thereby rendering cells resistant to
the growth-inhibitory actions normally induced by TGF
(Figure 14-3). Interestingly, stimulation by TGF causes the
rapid degradation of Ski and SnoN, but after a few hours,
expression of both Ski and SnoN becomes strongly induced.
The increased levels of these proteins are thought to dampen
long-term signaling effects due to continued exposure to
TGF.

Histone
deacetylation
HDAC
Smad3-P
AGAC AGAC

matrix proteins (e.g., collagens) but also of proteins that inhibit serum proteases, which otherwise would degrade the
matrix. The latter category includes plasminogen activator
inhibitor 1 (PAI-1). Transcription of the PAI-1 gene requires
formation of a complex of the transcription factor TFE3
with the Smad3/Smad4 complex and binding of all these proteins to specific sequences within the regulatory region of the
PAI-1 gene (see Figure 14-2, bottom). By partnering with
other transcription factors, Smad2/Smad4 and Smad3/
Smad4 complexes induce expression of proteins such as p15,
which arrests the cell cycle at the G1 stage and thus blocks
cell proliferation (Chapter 21). These Smad complexes also
repress transcription of the myc gene, thereby reducing expression of many growth-promoting genes whose transcription normally is activated by Myc.
The various growth factors in the TGF superfamily bind
to their own receptors and activate different sets of Smad
proteins, resulting in different cellular responses. The specificity exhibited by these related receptors is a common phenomenon in intercellular signaling, and the TGF signaling
pathway provides an excellent example of one strategy for
achieving such response specificity. As just discussed, for instance, binding of any one TGF isoform to its specific receptors leads to phosphorylation of Smad2 or Smad3,
formation of Smad2/Smad4 or Smad3/Smad4 complexes,
and eventually transcriptional activation of specific target
genes (e.g., the PAI-1 gene). On the other hand, BMP proteins, which also belong to the TGF superfamily, bind to
and activate a different set of receptors, leading to phosphorylation of Smad1, its dimerization with Smad4, and activation of specific transcriptional responses by Smad1/Smad4.
These responses are distinct from those induced by Smad2/
Smad4 or Smad3/Smad4.

577

mSin3A
N-CoR
Ski

−

P
P

Smad4
Transcription

AGAC

CACGTG

PAI-1

3-bp spacer

▲ FIGURE 14-3 Schematic model of Ski-mediated
down-regulation of the response to TGF stimulation. Ski
binds to Smad4 in Smad3/Smad4 or Smad2/Smad4 (not shown)
signaling complexes and may partially disrupt interactions
between the Smad proteins. Ski also recruits a protein termed
N-CoR that binds directly to mSin3A, which in turn interacts with
histone deacetylase (HDAC), an enzyme that promotes histone
deacetylation (Chapter 11). As a result, transcription activation
induced by TGF and mediated by Smad complexes is shut
down. [See S. Stroschein et al., 1999, Science 286:771; X. Liu et al.,
2001, Cytokine and Growth Factor Rev. 12:1; and J.-W. Wu et al., 2002,
Cell 111:357.]

Among the proteins induced after TGF stimulation are
the I-Smads, especially Smad7. Smad7 blocks the ability of
activated type I receptors to phosphorylate R-Smad proteins. In this way Smad7, like Ski and SnoN, participates
in a negative feedback loop; its induction serves to inhibit
intracellular signaling by long-term exposure to the stimulating hormone. In later sections we see how signaling by
other cell-surface receptors is also controlled by negative
feedback loops.

Loss of TGF Signaling Contributes to Abnormal
Cell Proliferation and Malignancy
Many human tumors contain inactivating mutations in either TGF receptors or Smad proteins,
and thus are resistant to growth inhibition by
TGF (see Figure 23-20). Most human pancreatic cancers,
for instance, contain a deletion in the gene encoding Smad4
and thus cannot induce p15 and other cell-cycle inhibitors
in response to TGF. This mutation-defined gene originally
was called DPC (deleted in pancreatic cancer). Retinoblastoma, colon and gastric cancer, hepatoma, and some T- and
B-cell malignancies are also unresponsive to TGF growth
inhibition. This loss of responsiveness correlates with loss of
type I or type II TGF receptors; responsiveness to TGF can
be restored by recombinant expression of the “missing” protein. Mutations in Smad2 also commonly occur in several
types of human tumors. Not only is TGF signaling essential

578

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

for controlling cell proliferation, as these examples show, but
it also causes some cells to differentiate along specific pathways, as discussed in Chapter 15. ❚

(a)

Exterior
EGF

EGFbinding
domains

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 14.1

Membrane

TGF Receptors and the Direct Activation of Smads
■ TGF is produced as an inactive precursor that is stored in
the extracellular matrix. Several mechanisms can release the
active, mature dimeric growth factor (see Figure 14-1).

(b)

Stimulation by TGF leads to activation of the intrinsic
serine/threonine kinase activity in the cytosolic domain of
the type I (RI) receptor, which then phosphorylates an
R-Smad, exposing a nuclear-localization signal.

■

After phosphorylated R-Smad binds a co-Smad, the resulting complex translocates into the nucleus, where it interacts with various transcription factors to induce expression of target genes (see Figure 14-2).

■

Oncoproteins (e.g., Ski and SnoN) and I-Smads (e.g.,
Smad7) act as negative regulators of TGF signaling.

■

TGF signaling generally inhibits cell proliferation. Loss
of various components of the signaling pathway contributes to abnormal cell proliferation and malignancy.

■

14.2 Cytokine Receptors and
the JAK-STAT Pathway
We turn now to a second important class of cell-surface receptors, the cytokine receptors, whose cytosolic domains
are closely associated with a member of a family of cytosolic protein tyrosine kinases, the JAK kinases. A third
class of receptors, the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs),
contain intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase activity in their
cytosolic domains. The mechanisms by which cytokine receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases become activated by
ligands are very similar, and there is considerable overlap
in the intracellular signal-transduction pathways triggered
by activation of receptors in both classes. In this section,
we first describe some similarities in signaling from these
two receptor classes. We then discuss the JAK-STAT pathway, which is initiated mainly by activation of cytokine
receptors.

Cytokine Receptors and Receptor Tyrosine
Kinases Share Many Signaling Features
Ligand binding to both cytokine receptors and RTKs triggers formation of functional dimeric receptors. In some
cases, the ligand induces association of two monomeric

−OOC

COO−

Membrane surface

▲ FIGURE 14-4 Dimerization of the receptor for epidermal
growth factor (EGF), a receptor tyrosine kinase. (a) Schematic
depiction of the extracellular and transmembrane domains of
the EGF receptor. Binding of one EGF molecule to a monomeric
receptor causes an alteration in the structure of a loop located
between the two EGF-binding domains. Dimerization of two
identical ligand-bound receptor monomers in the plane of the
membrane occurs primarily through interactions between the
two “activated” loop segments. (b) Structure of the dimeric EGF
receptor’s extracellular domain bound to transforming growth
factor  (TGF), a homolog of EGF. The EGF receptor extracellular
domains are shown in white (left) and blue (right). The two
smaller TGF molecules are colored green. Note the interaction
between the “activated” loop segments in the two receptors.
[Part (a) adapted from J. Schlessinger, 2002, Cell 110:669; part (b) from
T. Garrett et al., 2002, Cell 110:763.]

receptor subunits diffusing in the plane of the plasma
membrane (Figure 14-4). In others, the receptor is a dimer
in the absence of ligand, and ligand binding alters the conformation of the extracellular domains of the two subunits. In either case, formation of a functional dimeric
receptor causes one of the poorly active cytosolic kinases
to phosphorylate a particular tyrosine residue in the activation lip of the second kinase. This phosphorylation activates kinase activity and leads to phosphorylation of the
second kinase in the dimer, as well as several tyrosine

14.2 • Cytokine Receptors and the JAK-STAT Pathway

Ligand

Ligandbinding sites

Bound ligand

Transmembrane
α helix

Exterior

P
ATP

Activation
lip

P
ADP

ATP

ATP

P

P

ADP

1

2
Dimerization and
phosphorylation of
activation lip tyrosines

Receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs)

Ligandbinding sites

P
ATP

P

ADP

Active protein
tyrosine kinase

Poorly active
protein tyrosine
kinase

Cytosol

Ligand

579

ADP

P

P

P

P

3
Phosphorylation
of additional
tyrosine residues

Bound ligand

Transmembrane
α helix

Exterior

Lip

P

P
ATP

ATP

JAK

Kinase

ADP

Active
JAK

Cytosol

1

Cytokine receptors

ADP

2
Dimerization and
phosphorylation of
activation lip tyrosines

P
ATP

P
ADP P

P
P

P ADP
P
P

ATP

3
Phosphorylation
of additional
tyrosine residues

▲ FIGURE 14-5 General structure and ligand-induced
activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and cytokine
receptors. The cytosolic domain of RTKs contains a protein
tyrosine kinase catalytic site, whereas the cytosolic domain of
cytokine receptors associates with a separate JAK kinase
(step 1 ). In both types of receptor, ligand binding causes a
conformational change that promotes formation of a functional
dimeric receptor, bringing together two intrinsic or associated

kinases, which then phosphorylate each other on a tyrosine
residue in the activation lip (step 2 ). Phosphorylation causes
the lip to move out of the kinase catalytic site, thus allowing
ATP or a protein substrate to bind. The activated kinase then
phosphorylates other tyrosine residues in the receptor’s cytosolic
domain (step 3 ). The resulting phosphotyrosines function as
docking sites for various signal-transduction proteins (see
Figure 14-6).

residues in the cytosolic domain of the receptor (Figure
14-5). As we see later, phosphorylation of residues in the activation loop is a general mechanism by which many kinases
are activated.
Certain phosphotyrosine residues formed in activated cytokine receptors and RTKs serve as binding, or “docking,”
sites for SH2 domains or PTB domains, which are present
in a large array of intracellular signal-transduction proteins.

Once they are bound to an activated receptor, some signaltransduction proteins are phosphorylated by the receptor’s
intrinsic or associated kinase to achieve their active form.
Binding of other signal-transduction proteins, present in the
cytosol in unstimulated cells, positions them near their substrates localized in the plasma membrane. Both mechanisms
can trigger downstream signaling. Several cytokine receptors
(e.g., the IL-4 receptor) and RTKs (e.g., the insulin receptor)

580

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

bind IRS1 or other multidocking proteins via a PTB domain
in the docking protein (Figure 14-6).The activated receptor
then phosphorylates the bound docking protein, forming
many phosphotyrosines that in turn serve as docking sites for
SH2-containing signaling proteins. Some of these proteins
in turn may also be phosphorylated by the activated receptor.

Activated RTK

Exterior
P

Cytosol

P

P

IRS-1
P

P

P

P
P

Kinase

Cytokines Influence Development of Many
Cell Types

P
P

P

P

P
P

PTB
domain

SH2
domain

Signaling proteins

▲ FIGURE 14-6 Recruitment of signal-transduction proteins
to the cell membrane by binding to phosphotyrosine
residues in activated receptors. Cytosolic proteins with
SH2 (purple) or PTB (maroon) domains can bind to specific
phosphotyrosine residues in activated RTKs (shown here) or
cytokine receptors. In some cases, these signal-transduction
proteins then are phosphorylated by the receptor’s intrinsic or
associated protein tyrosine kinase, enhancing their activity.
Certain RTKs and cytokine receptors utilize multidocking proteins
such as IRS-1 to increase the number of signaling proteins that
are recruited and activated. Subsequent phosphorylation of the
IRS-1 by receptor kinase activity creates additional docking sites
for SH2-containing signaling proteins.

The cytokines form a family of relatively small, secreted
proteins (generally containing about 160 amino acids) that
control many aspects of growth and differentiation of specific types of cells. During pregnancy prolactin, for example,
induces epithelial cells lining the immature ductules of the
mammary gland to differentiate into the acinar cells that
produce milk proteins and secrete them into the ducts. Another cytokine, interleukin 2 (IL-2), is essential for proliferation and functioning of the T cells of the immune system;
its close relative IL-4 is essential for formation of functional
antibody-producing B cells. Some cytokines, such as interferon , are produced and secreted by many types of cells folHematopoietic stem cell

Epo
receptors
Progenitors of other
types of blood cells

Erythroid progenitor (CFU-E)

 FIGURE 14-7 Role of erythropoietin in
formation of red blood cells (erythrocytes). Erythroid
progenitor cells, called colony-forming units erythroid
(CFU-E), are derived from hematopoietic stem cells,
which also give rise to progenitors of other blood cell
types. In the absence of erythropoietin (Epo), CFU-E
cells undergo apoptosis. Binding of erythropoietin to its
receptors on a CFU-E induces transcription of several
genes whose encoded proteins prevent programmed
cell death (apoptosis), allowing the cell to survive and
undergo a program of three to five terminal cell
divisions. Epo stimulation also induces expression of
erythrocyte-specific proteins such as the globins, which
form hemoglobin, and the membrane proteins
glycophorin and anion-exchange protein. The Epo
receptor and other membrane proteins are lost from
these cells as they undergo differentiation. If CFU-E
cells are cultured with erythropoietin in a semisolid
medium (e.g., containing methylcellulose), daughter
cells cannot move away, and thus each CFU-E produces
a colony of 30–100 erythroid cells, hence its name.
[See M. Socolovsky et al., 2001, Blood 98:3261.]

No Epo

Epo

Apoptosis
(cell death)

Mature red cells

14.2 • Cytokine Receptors and the JAK-STAT Pathway

lowing virus infection. The secreted interferons act on nearby
cells to induce enzymes that render these cells more resistant to virus infection.
Many cytokines induce formation of important
types of blood cells. For instance, granulocyte
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) induces a particular type of progenitor cell in the bone marrow to divide
several times and then differentiate into granulocytes, the
type of white blood cell that inactivates bacteria and other
pathogens. Because many cancer therapies reduce granulocyte formation by the body, G-CSF often is administered to
patients to stimulate proliferation and differentiation of
granulocyte progenitor cells, thus restoring the normal level
of granulocytes in the blood. Thrombopoietin, a “cousin”
of G-CSF, similarly acts on megakaryocyte progenitors to divide and differentiate into megakaryocytes. These then fragment into the cell pieces called platelets, which are critical for
blood clotting. ❚
Another related cytokine, erythropoietin (Epo), triggers
production of red blood cells by inducing the proliferation
and differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells in the bone
marrow (Figure 14-7). Erythropoietin is synthesized by kidney cells that monitor the concentration of oxygen in the
blood. A drop in blood oxygen signifies a lower than optimal
level of erythrocytes (red blood cells), whose major function
is to transport oxygen complexed to hemoglobin. By means
of the oxygen-sensitive transcription factor HIF-1, the kidney cells respond to low oxygen by synthesizing more erythropoietin and secreting it into the blood (see Figure 15-9).
As the level of erythropoietin rises, more and more erythroid
progenitors are saved from death, allowing each to produce
≈50 or so red blood cells in a period of only two days. In this
way, the body can respond to the loss of blood by accelerating the production of red blood cells.

All Cytokines and Their Receptors Have Similar
Structures and Activate Similar Signaling
Pathways
Strikingly, all cytokines have a similar tertiary structure, consisting of four long conserved  helices folded together in a
specific orientation. Similarly, the structures of all cytokine
receptors are quite similar, with their extracellular domains
constructed of two subdomains, each of which contains
seven conserved  strands folded together in a characteristic
fashion. The interaction of erythropoietin with the dimeric
erythropoietin receptor (EpoR), depicted in Figure 14-8, exemplifies the binding of a cytokine to its receptor. The structural homology among cytokines is evidence that they all
evolved from a common ancestral protein. Likewise, the various receptors undoubtedly evolved from a single common
ancestor.

581

Erythropoietin

EpoR
(monomer)

EpoR
(monomer)

COO−

COO−

Membrane surface

▲ FIGURE 14-8 Structure of erythropoietin bound to the
extracellular domains of a dimeric erythropoietin receptor
(EpoR). Erythropoietin contains four conserved long  helices
that are folded in a particular arrangement. The extracellular
domain of an EpoR monomer is constructed of two subdomains,
each of which contains seven conserved  strands folded in a
characteristic fashion. Side chains of residues on two of the
helices in erythropoietin contact loops on one EpoR monomer,
while residues on the two other Epo helices bind to the same
loop segments in a second receptor monomer, thereby stabilizing
the dimeric receptor. The structures of other cytokines and their
receptors are similar to erythropoietin and EpoR. [Adapted from
R. S. Syed et al., 1998, Nature 395:511.]

Whether or not a cell responds to a particular cytokine
depends simply on whether or not it expresses the corresponding (cognate) receptor. Although all cytokine receptors
activate similar intracellular signaling pathways, the response of any particular cell to a cytokine signal depends on
the cell’s constellation of transcription factors, chromatin
structures, and other proteins relating to the developmental
history of the cell. If receptors for prolactin or thrombopoietin, for example, are expressed experimentally in an erythroid progenitor cell, the cell will respond to these cytokines
by dividing and differentiating into red blood cells, not into
mammary cells or megakaryocytes.
Figure 14-9 summarizes the intracellular signaling pathways activated when the EpoR binds erythropoietin. Stimulation of other cytokine receptors by their specific ligands
activates similar pathways. All these pathways eventually
lead to activation of transcription factors, causing an increase or decrease in expression of particular target genes.
Here we focus on the JAK-STAT pathway; the other pathways are discussed in later sections.

582

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity
(a) STAT5

Epo

EpoR

Transcriptional activation

Transcriptional activation or repression

(b) GRB2 or Shc

Ras

MAP kinase

(c) Phospholipase Cγ

Elevation of Ca2+

Transcriptional activation or repression;
modification of other cellular proteins

(d) PI-3 kinase

Protein kinase B

Transcriptional activation or repression;
modification of other cellular proteins

JAK2

▲ FIGURE 14-9 Overview of signal-transduction pathways
triggered by ligand binding to the erythropoietin receptor
(EpoR), a typical cytokine receptor. Four major pathways can
transduce a signal from the activated, phosphorylated EpoR-JAK
complex (see Figure 14-5, bottom). Each pathway ultimately
regulates transcription of different sets of genes. (a) In the most
direct pathway, the transcription factor STAT5 is phosphorylated

and activated directly in the cytosol. (b) Binding of linker proteins
(GRB2 or Shc) to an activated EpoR leads to activation of the
Ras–MAP kinase pathway. (c, d) Two phosphoinositide pathways
are triggered by recruitment of phospholipase C and PI-3 kinase
to the membrane following activation of EpoR. Elevated levels of
Ca2 and activated protein kinase B also modulate the activity of
cytosolic proteins that are not involved in control of transcription.

Somatic Cell Genetics Revealed JAKs and STATs
as Essential Signal-Transduction Proteins

ment of new types of genetic approaches using cultured mammalian cells. In these studies, a bacterial reporter gene encoding guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (GPRT) was linked to
an upstream interferon-responsive promoter. The resulting
construct was introduced into cultured mammalian cells that
were genetically deficient in the human homolog HGPRT.
GPRT or HGPRT is necessary for incorporation of purines

Soon after the discovery and cloning of cytokines, most of
their receptors were isolated by expression cloning or other
strategies. Elucidation of the essential components of their intracellular signaling pathways, however, awaited develop-

Interferon-responsive
promoter
GPRT
Reporter gene construct
− Interferon

(a)
HGPRT− cells (+ reporter gene)

+ Interferon

GPRT
expressed

Growth
in HAT
medium

Killed by
6-thioguanine

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Mutagen

(b)
HGPRT− cells (+ reporter gene)
defective for interferon
signaling

+ Interferon

+ Interferon
+ Wild-type gene
that restores
interferon
responsiveness

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 14-10 Mutagenized cells
carrying an interferon-responsive reporter gene were used to
identify JAKs and STATs as essential signal-transduction
proteins. A reporter gene was constructed consisting of an
interferon-responsive promoter upstream of the bacterial gene
encoding GPRT, a key enzyme in the purine salvage pathway (see
Figure 6-39). (a) Introduction of this construct into mammalian
cells lacking the mammalian homolog HGPRT yielded reporter
cells that grew in HAT medium and were killed by 6-thioguanine
in the presence but not the absence of interferon. (b) Following

treatment of reporter cells with a mutagen, cells with defects in
the signaling pathway initiated by interferon do not induce GPRT
in response to interferon and thus cannot incorporate the toxic
purine 6-thioguanine. Restoration of interferon responsiveness by
functional complementation with wild-type DNA clones identified
genes encoding JAKs and STATs. See the text for details. [See
R. McKendry et al., 1991, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 88:11455; D. Watling
et al., 1993, Nature 366:166; and G. Stark and A. Gudkov, 1999, Human
Mol. Genet. 8:1925.]

14.2 • Cytokine Receptors and the JAK-STAT Pathway

in the culture medium into ribonucleotides and then into
DNA or RNA. As shown in Figure 14-10a, HGPRT-negative
cells carrying the reporter gene responded to interferon treatment by expressing GPRT and thus acquiring the ability to
grow in HAT medium. This medium does not allow growth
of cells lacking GPRT or HGPRT, since synthesis of purines
by the cells is blocked by aminopterin (the A in HAT), and
thus DNA synthesis is dependent on incorporation of purines
from the culture medium (see Figure 6-39). Simultaneously
the cells acquired sensitivity to killing by the purine analog
6-thioguanine, which is converted into the corresponding
ribonucleotide by GPRT; incorporation of this purine into
DNA in place of guanosine eventually causes cell death.
The reporter cells were then heavily treated with mutagens in an attempt to inactivate both alleles of the genes encoding critical signal-transduction proteins in the interferon
signaling pathway. Researchers looked for mutant cells that
expressed the interferon receptor (as evidenced by the cell’s
ability to bind radioactive interferon) but did not express
GPRT in response to interferon and thus survived killing
by 6-thioguanine when cells were cultured in the presence
of interferon (Figure 14-10b). After many such interferonnonresponding mutant cell lines were obtained, they were
used to screen a genomic or cDNA library for the wild-type
genes that complemented the mutated genes in nonresponding cells, a technique called functional complementation (see
Figure 9-20). In this case, mutant cells expressing the corresponding recombinant wild-type gene grew on HAT medium
and were sensitive to killing by 6-thioguanine in the presence
of interferon. That is, they acted like wild-type cells.
Cloning of the genes identified by this procedure led to
recognition of two key signal-transduction proteins: a JAK
tyrosine kinase and a STAT transcription factor. Subsequent
work showed that one (sometimes two) of the four human
EpoR

583

JAK proteins and at least one of several STAT proteins are
involved in signaling downstream from all cytokine receptors. To understand how JAK and STAT proteins function,
we examine one of the best-understood cytokine signaling
pathways, that downstream of the erythropoietin receptor.

Receptor-Associated JAK Kinases Activate STAT
Transcription Factors Bound to a Cytokine
Receptor
The JAK2 kinase is tightly bound to the cytosolic domain of
the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR). Like the three other
members of the JAK family of kinases, JAK2 contains an Nterminal receptor-binding domain, a C-terminal kinase domain that is normally poorly active catalytically, and a
middle domain of unknown function. JAK2, erythropoietin,
and the EpoR are all required for formation of adult-type
erythrocytes, which normally begins at day 12 of embryonic
development in mice. As Figure 14-11 shows, embryonic
mice lacking functional genes encoding either the EpoR or
JAK2 cannot form adult-type erythrocytes and eventually die
owing to the inability to transport oxygen to the fetal organs.
As already noted, erythropoietin binds simultaneously to
the extracellular domains of two EpoR monomers on the cell
surface (see Figure 14-8). As a result, the associated JAKs are
brought close enough together that one can phosphorylate
the other on a critical tyrosine in the activation lip. As with
other kinases, phosphorylation of the activation lip leads to
a conformational change that reduces the Km for ATP or the
substrate to be phosphorylated, thus increasing the kinase
activity. One piece of evidence for this activation mechanism
comes from study of a mutant JAK2 in which the critical tyrosine is mutated to phenylalanine. The mutant JAK2 binds
normally to the EpoR but cannot be phosphorylated.
JAK2

+/+

–/–

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 14-11 Studies with mutant
mice reveal that both the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) and
JAK2 are essential for development of erythrocytes. Mice in
which both alleles of the EpoR or JAK2 gene are “knocked out”
develop normally until embryonic day 13, at which time they
begin to die of anemia due to the lack of erythrocyte-mediated
transport of oxygen to the fetal organs. The red organ in the
wild-type embryos (/) is the fetal liver, the major site of

+/+

–/–

erythrocyte production at this developmental stage. The absence
of color in the mutant embryos (/) indicates the absence of
erythrocytes containing hemoglobin. Otherwise the mutant
embryos appear normal, indicating that the main function of the
EpoR and JAK2 in early mouse development is to support
production of erythrocytes. [EpoR images from H. Wu et al., 1995,
Cell 83:59; JAK2 images from H. Neubauer et al., 1998, Cell 93:307.]

584

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

Expression of this mutant JAK2 in erythroid cells in greater
than normal amounts totally blocks EpoR signaling, as the
mutant JAK2 blocks the function of the wild-type protein.
This type of mutation, referred to as a dominant negative,
causes loss of function even in cells that carry copies of the
wild-type gene (Chapter 9).
Once the JAK kinases become activated, they phosphorylate several tyrosine residues on the cytosolic domain of the
receptor. Certain of these phosphotyrosine residues then
serve as binding sites for a group of transcription factors collectively termed STATs. All STAT proteins contain an Nterminal SH2 domain that binds to a phosphotyrosine in the
receptor’s cytosolic domain, a central DNA-binding domain,
and a C-terminal domain with a critical tyrosine residue.
Once a STAT is bound to the receptor, the C-terminal tyro-

Epo

Epo
receptor

P

JAK
kinase

P
P

P

SH2 and PTB Domains Bind to Specific
Sequences Surrounding Phosphotyrosine
Residues

STAT

P
P

P

SH2
domain

P

Dimerization
NLS

P
P
NLS

Into nucleus;
binds DNA
and activates
transcription

sine is phosphorylated by an associated JAK kinase (Figure 14-12). This arrangement ensures that in a particular
cell only those STAT proteins with an SH2 domain that can
bind to a particular receptor protein will be activated. A
phosphorylated STAT dissociates spontaneously from the
receptor, and two phosphorylated STAT proteins form a
dimer in which the SH2 domain on each binds to the phosphotyrosine in the other. Because dimerization exposes the
nuclear-localization signal (NLS), STAT dimers move into
the nucleus, where they bind to specific enhancer sequences
controlling target genes.
Different STATs activate different genes in different cells.
In erythroid progenitors, for instance, stimulation by erythropoietin leads to activation of STAT5. The major protein
induced by active STAT5 is Bcl-xL, which prevents the programmed cell death, or apoptosis, of these progenitors, allowing them to proliferate and differentiate into erythroid
cells (see Figure 14-7). Indeed, mice lacking STAT5 are
highly anemic because many of the erythroid progenitors undergo apoptosis even in the presence of high erythropoietin
levels. Such mutant mice produce some erythrocytes and thus
survive, because the erythropoietin receptor is linked to other
anti-apoptotic pathways that do not involve STAT proteins
(see Figure 14-9).

Nuclearlocalization
signal

▲ FIGURE 14-12 JAK-STAT signaling pathway. Following
ligand binding to a cytokine receptor and activation of an
associated JAK kinase, JAK phosphorylates several tyrosine
residues on the receptor’s cytosolic domain (see Figure 14-5,
bottom). After an inactive monomeric STAT transcription factor
binds to a phosphotyrosine in the receptor, it is phosphorylated
by active JAK. Phosphorylated STATs spontaneously dissociate
from the receptor and spontaneously dimerize. Because the
STAT homodimer has two phosphotyrosine–SH2 domain
interactions, whereas the receptor-STAT complex is stabilized by
only one such interaction, phosphorylated STATs tend not to
rebind to the receptor. The STAT dimer, which has two exposed
nuclear-localization signals (NLS), moves into the nucleus, where
it can bind to promoter sequences and activate transcription of
target genes.

As noted earlier, many intracellular signal-transduction proteins contain an SH2 or PTB domain by which they bind to
an activated receptor or other component of a signaling pathway containing a phosphotyrosine residue (see Figure 14-6).
The SH2 domain derived its full name, the Src homology 2
domain, from its homology with a region in the prototypical
cytosolic tyrosine kinase encoded by the src gene. The threedimensional structures of SH2 domains in different proteins
are very similar, but each binds to a distinct sequence of
amino acids surrounding a phosphotyrosine residue. The
unique amino acid sequence of each SH2 domain determines
the specific phosphotyrosine residues it binds.
The SH2 domain of the Src tyrosine kinase, for example,
binds strongly to any peptide containing a critical four-residue
core sequence: phosphotyrosine–glutamic acid–glutamic acid–
isoleucine (Figure 14-13). These four amino acids make intimate contact with the peptide-binding site in the Src SH2 domain. Binding resembles the insertion of a two-pronged
“plug”—the phosphotyrosine and isoleucine side chains of
the peptide—into a two-pronged “socket” in the SH2 domain. The two glutamic acids fit snugly onto the surface of
the SH2 domain between the phosphotyrosine socket and the
hydrophobic socket that accepts the isoleucine residue.
Variations in the hydrophobic socket in the SH2 domains
of different STATs and other signal-transduction proteins
allow them to bind to phosphotyrosines adjacent to different
sequences, accounting for differences in their binding partners.

14.2 • Cytokine Receptors and the JAK-STAT Pathway
Ile3

Glu2 Glu1

Tyr0

OPO3−

585

(a) JAK2 deactivation induced by SHP1 phosphatase
Epo
EpoR

Active JAK2
kinase

Active
SHP1

P

Inactive
SHP1
SH2 domain

▲ FIGURE 14-13 Surface model of the SH2 domain from Src
kinase bound to a phosphotyrosine-containing peptide. The
peptide bound by this SH2 domain (gray) is shown in spacefill. The
phosphotyrosine (Tyr0 and OPO3, orange) and isoleucine (Ile3,
orange) residues fit into a two-pronged socket on the surface of the
SH2 domain; the two glutamate residues (Glu1, dark blue; Glu2,
light blue) are bound to sites on the surface of the SH2 domain
between the two sockets. Nonbinding residues on the target
peptide are colored green. [See G. Waksman et al., 1993, Cell 72:779.]
The binding specificity of SH2 domains is largely determined
by residues C-terminal to the phosphotyrosine in a target peptide. In contrast, the binding specificity of PTB domains is determined by specific residues five to eight residues N-terminal
to a phosphotyrosine residue. Sometimes a PTB domain binds
to a target peptide even if the tyrosine is not phosphorylated.

Signaling from Cytokine Receptors Is Modulated
by Negative Signals
Signal-induced transcription of target genes for too long a period can be as dangerous for the cell as too little induction.
Thus cells must be able to turn off a signaling pathway quickly
unless the extracellular signal remains continuously present. In
various progenitor cells, two classes of proteins serve to
dampen signaling from cytokine receptors, one over the short
term (minutes) and the other over longer periods of time.

Short-Term Regulation by SHP1 Phosphatase Mutant mice
lacking SHP1 phosphatase die because of excess production
of erythrocytes and several other types of blood cells. Analysis of these mutant mice offered the first suggestion that
SHP1, a phosphotyrosine phosphatase, negatively regulates
signaling from several types of cytokine receptors in several
types of progenitor cells.
How SHP1 dampens cytokine signaling is depicted in Figure 14-14a. In addition to a phosphatase catalytic domain,
SHP1 has two SH2 domains. When cells are not stimulated

SH2
domains

Inactive JAK2
kinase

P

P

P

P

Phosphatase
domain

(b) Signal blocking and protein degradation
induced by SOCS proteins

P

SOCS
protein
SH2
domain

SOCS
box

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Recruitment
of E3
ubiquitin
ligase

▲ FIGURE 14-14 Two mechanisms for terminating signal
transduction from the erythropoietin receptor (EpoR).
(a) SHP1, a protein tyrosine phosphatase, is present in an
inactive form in unstimulated cells. Binding of an SH2 domain in
SHP1 to a particular phosphotyrosine in the activated receptor
unmasks its phosphatase catalytic site and positions it near the
phosphorylated tyrosine in the lip region of JAK2. Removal of
the phosphate from this tyrosine inactivates the JAK kinase.
(b) SOCS proteins, whose expression is induced in
erythropoietin-stimulated erythroid cells, inhibit or permanently
terminate signaling over longer time periods. Binding of SOCS to
phosphotyrosine residues on the EpoR or JAK2 blocks binding of
other signaling proteins (left). The SOCS box can also target
proteins such as JAK2 for degradation by the ubiquitinproteasome pathway (right). Similar mechanisms regulate
signaling from other cytokine receptors. [Part (a) adapted from
S. Constantinescu et al., 1999, Trends Endocrin. Metabol. 10:18;
part (b) adapted from B. T. Kile and W. S. Alexander, 2001, Cell. Mol. Life
Sci. 58:1.]

586

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

by a cytokine (are in the resting state), one of the SH2 domains physically binds to and inactivates the catalytic site in
SHP1. In the stimulated state, however, this blocking SH2
domain binds to a specific phosphotyrosine residue in the activated receptor. The conformational change that accompanies this binding unmasks the SHP1 catalytic site and also
brings it adjacent to the phosphotyrosine residue in the activation lip of the JAK associated with the receptor. By removing this phosphate, SHP1 inactivates the JAK, so that it
can no longer phosphorylate the receptor or other substrates
(e.g., STATs) unless additional cytokine molecules bind to
cell-surface receptors, initiating a new round of signaling.

Long-Term Regulation by SOCS Proteins Among the genes
whose transcription is induced by STAT proteins are those
encoding a class of small proteins, termed SOCS proteins,
that terminate signaling from cytokine receptors. These negative regulators, also known as CIS proteins, act in two ways
(Figure 14-14b). First, the SH2 domain in several SOCS proteins binds to phosphotyrosines on an activated receptor,
preventing binding of other SH2-containing signaling proteins (e.g., STATs) and thus inhibiting receptor signaling.
One SOCS protein, SOCS-1, also binds to the critical phosphotyrosine in the activation lip of activated JAK2 kinase,
thereby inhibiting its catalytic activity. Second, all SOCS proteins contain a domain, called the SOCS box, that recruits
components of E3 ubiquitin ligases (see Figure 3-13). As a result of binding SOCS-1, for instance, JAK2 becomes polyubiquitinated and then degraded in proteasomes, thus
permanently turning off all JAK2-mediated signaling pathways. The observation that proteasome inhibitors prolong
JAK2 signal transduction supports this mechanism.
Studies with cultured mammalian cells have shown that
the receptor for growth hormone, which belongs to the cytokine receptor superfamily, is down-regulated by another
SOCS protein, SOCS-2. Strikingly, mice deficient in this
SOCS protein grow significantly larger than their wild-type
counterparts and have long bone lengths and proportionate
enlargement of most organs. Thus SOCS proteins play an
essential negative role in regulating intracellular signaling
from the receptors for erythropoietin, growth hormone, and
other cytokines.

Mutant Erythropoietin Receptor That Cannot Be
Down-Regulated Leads to Increased Hematocrit
In normal adult men and women, the percentage of erythrocytes in the blood (the hematocrit) is maintained very close to
45 – 47 percent. A drop in the hematocrit results in increased
production of erythropoietin by the kidney. The elevated erythropoietin level causes more erythroid progenitors to undergo terminal proliferation and differentiation into mature
erythrocytes, soon restoring the hematocrit to its normal
level. In endurance sports, such as cross-country skiing,
where oxygen transport to the muscles may become limiting,

an excess of red blood cells may confer a competitive advantage. For this reason, use of supplemental erythropoietin to
increase the hematocrit above the normal level is banned in
many athletic competitions, and athletes are regularly tested
for the presence of commercial recombinant erythropoietin
in their blood and urine.
Supplemental erythropoietin not only confers a
possible competitive advantage but also can be
dangerous. Too many red cells can cause the blood
to become sluggish and clot in small blood vessels, especially
in the brain. Several athletes who doped themselves with erythropoietin have died of a stroke while exercising.
Discovery of a mutant, unregulated erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) explained a suspicious situation in which a winner of three gold medals in Olympic cross-country skiing was
found to have a hematocrit above 60 percent. Testing for erythropoietin in his blood and urine, however, revealed lowerthan-normal amounts. Subsequent DNA analysis showed
that the athlete was heterozygous for a mutation in the gene
encoding the erythropoietin receptor. The mutant allele encoded a truncated receptor missing several of the tyrosines
that normally become phosphorylated after stimulation by
erythropoietin. As a consequence, the mutant receptor was
able to activate STAT5 and other signaling proteins normally, but was unable to bind the negatively acting SHP1
phosphatase, which usually terminates signaling (see Figure
14-14a). Thus the very low level of erythropoietin produced
by this athlete induced prolonged intracellular signaling in
his erythroid progenitor cells, resulting in production of
higher-than-normal numbers of erythrocytes. This example
vividly illustrates the fine level of control over signaling from
the erythropoietin receptor in the human body. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 14.2
Cytokine Receptors and the JAK-STAT Pathway
Two receptor classes, cytokine receptors and receptor
tyrosine kinases, transduce signals via their associated or
intrinsic protein tyrosine kinases. Ligand binding triggers
formation of functional dimeric receptors and phosphorylation of the activation lip in the kinases, enhancing their
catalytic activity (see Figure 14-5).

■

■ All cytokines are constructed of four  helices that are
folded in a characteristic arrangement.

Erythropoietin, a cytokine secreted by kidney cells, prevents apoptosis and promotes proliferation and differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells in the bone marrow. An
excess of erythropoietin or mutations in its receptor that
prevent down-regulation result in production of elevated
numbers of red blood cells.

■

All cytokine receptors are closely associated with a JAK
protein tyrosine kinase, which can activate several down-

■

14.3 • Receptor Tyrosine Kinases and Activation of Ras

stream signaling pathways leading to changes in transcription of target genes or in the activity of proteins that
do not regulate transcription (see Figure 14-9).
The JAK-STAT pathway operates downstream of all cytokine receptors. STAT monomers bound to receptors are
phosphorylated by receptor-associated JAKs, then dimerize and move to the nucleus, where they activate transcription (see Figure 14-12).

■

Short peptide sequences containing phosphotyrosine
residues are bound by SH2 and PTB domains, which
are found in many signal-transducing proteins. Such
protein-protein interactions are important in many signaling pathways.

■

Signaling from cytokine receptors is terminated by the
phosphotyrosine phosphatase SHP1 and several SOCS proteins (see Figure 14-14).

■

14.3 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
and Activation of Ras
We return now to the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs),
which have intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase activity in
their cytosolic domains. The ligands for RTKs are soluble or
membrane-bound peptide or protein hormones including
nerve growth factor (NGF), platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), epidermal growth
factor (EGF), and insulin. Ligand-induced activation of an
RTK stimulates its tyrosine kinase activity, which subsequently stimulates the Ras–MAP kinase pathway and several
other signal-transduction pathways. RTK signaling pathways have a wide spectrum of functions including regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation, promotion of
cell survival, and modulation of cellular metabolism.
Some RTKs have been identified in studies on
human cancers associated with mutant forms of
growth-factor receptors, which send a proliferative
signal to cells even in the absence of growth factor. For example, a constitutively active mutant form of Her2, a receptor for EGF-like proteins, enables uncontrolled proliferation
of cancer cells even in the absence of EGF, which is required
for proliferation of normal cells (see Figure 23-14). Alternatively, overproduction of the wild-type receptor for EGF in
certain human breast cancers results in proliferation at low
EGF levels that do not stimulate normal cells; monoclonal
antibodies targeted to the EGF receptor have proved therapeutically useful in these patients. Other RTKs have been uncovered during analysis of developmental mutations that
lead to blocks in differentiation of certain cell types in
C. elegans, Drosophila, and the mouse. ❚
Here we discuss how ligand binding leads to activation of
RTKs and how activated receptors transmit a signal to the

587

Ras protein, the GTPase switch protein that functions in
transducing signals from many different RTKs. The transduction of signals downstream from Ras to a common
cascade of serine/threonine kinases, leading ultimately to
activation of MAP kinase and certain transcription factors, is
covered in the following section.

Ligand Binding Leads to Transphosphorylation
of Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
All RTKs constitute an extracellular domain containing a
ligand-binding site, a single hydrophobic transmembrane
 helix, and a cytosolic domain that includes a region with
protein tyrosine kinase activity. Most RTKs are monomeric, and ligand binding to the extracellular domain induces formation of receptor dimers, as depicted in Figure
14-4 for the EGF receptor. Some monomeric ligands, including FGF, bind tightly to heparan sulfate, a negatively
charged polysaccharide component of the extracellular
matrix (Chapter 6); this association enhances ligand binding to the monomeric receptor and formation of a dimeric
receptor-ligand complex (Figure 14-15). The ligands for
some RTKs are dimeric; their binding brings two receptor
monomers together directly. Yet other RTKs, such as the insulin receptor, form disulfide-linked dimers in the absence
of hormone; binding of ligand to this type of RTK alters
its conformation in such a way that the receptor becomes
activated.
Regardless of the mechanism by which ligand binds and
locks an RTK into a functional dimeric state, the next step
is universal. In the resting, unstimulated state, the intrinsic
kinase activity of an RTK is very low. In the dimeric receptor,
however, the kinase in one subunit can phosphorylate one
or more tyrosine residues in the activation lip near the catalytic site in the other subunit. This leads to a conformational change that facilitates binding of ATP in some
receptors (e.g., insulin receptor) and binding of protein substrates in other receptors (e.g., FGF receptor). The resulting
enhanced kinase activity then phosphorylates other sites in
the cytosolic domain of the receptor. This ligand-induced activation of RTK kinase activity is analogous to the activation
of the JAK kinases associated with cytokine receptors (see
Figure 14-5). The difference resides in the location of the
kinase catalytic site, which is within the cytosolic domain of
RTKs, but within a separate JAK kinase in the case of
cytokine receptors.
As in signaling by cytokine receptors, phosphotyrosine
residues in activated RTKs serve as docking sites for proteins
involved in downstream signal transduction. Many phosphotyrosine residues in activated RTKs interact with adapter
proteins, small proteins that contain SH2, PTB, or SH3 domains but have no intrinsic enzymatic or signaling activities
(see Figure 14-6). These proteins couple activated RTKs to
other components of signal-transduction pathways such as
the one involving Ras activation.

588

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

Heparan
sulfate

Heparan
sulfate

FGF

FGF

FGFR

FGFR

Membrane surface

Heparan
sulfate

Heparan
sulfate

▲ FIGURE 14-15 Structure of the dimerized ligand-bound
receptor for fibroblast growth factor (FGF), which is
stabilized by heparan sulfate. Shown here are side and top
views of the complex comprising the extracellular domains of
two FGF receptor (FGFR) monomers (green and blue), two
bound FGF molecules (white), and two short heparan sulfate
chains (purple), which bind tightly to FGF. In the side view, the
upper domain of one receptor (blue) is situated behind that of
the other (green). In the top view, the heparan sulfate chains
thread between and make numerous contacts with the upper
domains of both receptor monomers. These interactions promote
binding of the ligand to the receptor and receptor dimerization.
[Adapted from J. Schlessinger et al., 2000, Mol. Cell 6:743.]

Ras, a GTPase Switch Protein, Cycles Between
Active and Inactive States
Ras is a monomeric GTP-binding switch protein that, like
the G subunits in trimeric G proteins, alternates between an
active on state with a bound GTP and an inactive off state

with a bound GDP. As discussed in Chapter 13, trimeric G
proteins are directly linked to cell-surface receptors and
transduce signals, via the G subunit, to various effectors
such as adenylyl cyclase. In contrast, Ras is not directly
linked to cell-surface receptors.
Ras activation is accelerated by a guanine nucleotide–
exchange factor (GEF), which binds to the RasGDP complex,
causing dissociation of the bound GDP (see Figure 3-29).
Because GTP is present in cells at a higher concentration than
GDP, GTP binds spontaneously to “empty” Ras molecules,
with release of GEF and formation of the active RasGTP. Subsequent hydrolysis of the bound GTP to GDP deactivates Ras.
Unlike the deactivation of GGTP, deactivation of RasGTP
requires the assistance of another protein, a GTPase-activating
protein (GAP) that binds to RasGTP and accelerates its intrinsic GTPase activity by more than a hundredfold. Thus the
average lifetime of a GTP bound to Ras is about 1 minute,
which is much longer than the average lifetime of GGTP. In
cells, GAP binds to specific phosphotyrosines in activated
RTKs, bringing it close enough to membrane-bound RasGTP
to exert its accelerating effect on GTP hydrolysis. The actual
hydrolysis of GTP is catalyzed by amino acids from both Ras
and GAP. In particular, insertion of an arginine side chain on
GAP into the Ras active site stabilizes an intermediate in the
hydrolysis reaction.
The differences in the cycling mechanisms of Ras and G
are reflected in their structures. Ras (≈170 amino acids) is
smaller than G proteins (≈300 amino acids), but its threedimensional structure is similar to that of the GTPase domain
of G (see Figure 13-8). Recent structural and biochemical
studies show that G also contains another domain that apparently functions like GAP to increase the rate of GTP hydrolysis by G. In addition, the direct interaction between an
activated receptor and inactive G protein promotes release of
GDP and binding of GTP, so that a separate nucleotide exchange factor is not required.
Both the trimeric G proteins and Ras are members of a
family of intracellular GTP-binding switch proteins collectively referred to as the GTPase superfamily, which we introduced in Chapter 3. The many similarities between the
structure and function of Ras and G and the identification
of both proteins in all eukaryotic cells indicate that a single
type of signal-transducing GTPase originated very early in
evolution. In fact, their structures are similar to those of the
GTP-binding factors involved in protein synthesis, which are
found in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. The gene encoding this ancestral protein subsequently duplicated and
evolved to the extent that the human genome encodes a superfamily of such GTPases, comprising perhaps a hundred
different intracellular switch proteins. These related proteins
control many aspects of cellular growth and metabolism.
Mammalian Ras proteins have been studied in
great detail because mutant Ras proteins are associated with many types of human cancer. These
mutant proteins, which bind but cannot hydrolyze GTP, are

14.3 • Receptor Tyrosine Kinases and Activation of Ras

permanently in the “on” state and contribute to neoplastic
transformation (Chapter 23). Determination of the threedimensional structure of the Ras-GAP complex explained
the puzzling observation that most oncogenic, constitutively active Ras proteins (RasD) contain a mutation at position 12. Replacement of the normal glycine-12 with any
other amino acid (except proline) blocks the functional
binding of GAP, and in essence “locks” Ras in the active
GTP-bound state. ❚

An Adapter Protein and Guanine
Nucleotide–Exchange Factor Link Most
Activated Receptor Tyrosine Kinases to Ras
The first indication that Ras functions downstream from
RTKs in a common signaling pathway came from experiments in which cultured fibroblast cells were induced to proliferate by treatment with a mixture of PDGF and EGF.
Microinjection of anti-Ras antibodies into these cells blocked
cell proliferation. Conversely, injection of RasD, a constitutively active mutant Ras protein that hydrolyzes GTP very inefficiently and thus persists in the active state, caused the
cells to proliferate in the absence of the growth factors. These
findings are consistent with studies showing that addition of
FGF to fibroblasts leads to a rapid increase in the proportion
of Ras present in the GTP-bound active form.
How does binding of a growth factor (e.g., EGF) to an
RTK (e.g., the EGF receptor) lead to activation of Ras? Two
cytosolic proteins—GRB2 and Sos—provide the key links
(Figure 14-16). An SH2 domain in GRB2 binds to a specific
phosphotyrosine residue in the activated receptor. GRB2 also
contains two SH3 domains, which bind to and activate Sos.
GRB2 thus functions as an adapter protein for the EGF receptor. Sos is a guanine nucleotide–exchange protein (GEF),
which catalyzes conversion of inactive GDP-bound Ras to
the active GTP-bound form. Genetic analyses of mutants in
the worm C. elegans and in the fly Drosophila blocked at
particular stages of differentiation were critical in elucidating
the roles of these two proteins in linking an RTK to Ras activation. To illustrate the power of this experimental approach, we consider development of a particular type of cell
in the compound eye of Drosophila.

 FIGURE 14-16 Activation of Ras following ligand
binding to receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). The receptors for
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and many other growth factors are
RTKs. The cytosolic adapter protein GRB2 binds to a specific
phosphotyrosine on an activated, ligand-bound receptor and to
the cytosolic Sos protein, bringing it near its substrate, the
inactive RasGDP. The guanine nucleotide–exchange factor (GEF)
activity of Sos then promotes formation of active RasGTP. Note
that Ras is tethered to the membrane by a hydrophobic farnesyl
anchor (see Figure 5-15). [See J. Schlessinger, 2000, Cell 103:211, and
M. A. Simon, 2000, Cell 103:13.]

EGF
EGF
monomers
Exterior
Cytosol
Inactive Ras

G
D
P

Binding of hormone causes dimer- 1
ization and phosphorylation of
cytosolic receptor tyrosine residues

Active
EGF
dimer
P
G
D
P

Sos

P

P

SH2

P
P

P

GRB2
SH3
Binding of GRB2 and Sos couples
receptor to inactive Ras

2

GRB2
Sos

SH2

G
D
P

GTP

P

P

GRB2
Sos

Signaling

P

Sos promotes dissociation of GDP
3 from Ras; GTP binds and active
Ras dissociates from Sos

Active
Ras

G
T
P

P

P

SH3

GDP

P

SH2

P

P

P

SH3

P
P

P

589

590

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

Genetic Studies in Drosophila Identify Key SignalTransducing Proteins Downstream from Receptor
Tyrosine Kinases
The compound eye of the fly is composed of some 800 individual eyes called ommatidia (Figure 14-17a). Each ommatidium consists of 22 cells, eight of which are photosensitive
neurons called retinula, or R cells, designated R1–R8 (Figure
14-17b). An RTK called Sevenless (Sev) specifically regulates
development of the R7 cell and is not essential for any other
known function. In flies with a mutant sevenless (sev) gene,
the R7 cell in each ommatidium does not form (Figure
14-17c). Since the R7 photoreceptor is necessary for flies to
see in ultraviolet light, mutants that lack functional R7 cells
but are otherwise normal are easily isolated.
During development of each ommatidium, a protein
called Boss (Bride of Sevenless) is expressed on the surface of
the R8 cell. This membrane-tethered protein is the ligand for
the Sev RTK on the surface of the neighboring R7 precursor
cell, signaling it to develop into a photosensitive neuron (Figure 14-18a). In mutant flies that do not express a functional
Boss protein or Sev RTK, interaction between the Boss and
Sev proteins cannot occur, and no R7 cells develop (Figure
14-18b).
To identify intracellular signal-transducing proteins in the
Sev RTK pathway, investigators produced mutant flies expressing a temperature-sensitive Sev protein. When these flies
were maintained at a permissive temperature, all their ommatidia contained R7 cells; when they were maintained at a
nonpermissive temperature, no R7 cells developed. At a par-

(a)

ticular intermediate temperature, however, just enough of the
Sev RTK was functional to mediate normal R7 development.
The investigators reasoned that at this intermediate temperature, the signaling pathway would become defective (and
thus no R7 cells would develop) if the level of another protein involved in the pathway was reduced, thus reducing the
activity of the overall pathway below the level required to
form an R7 cell. A recessive mutation affecting such a protein would have this effect because, in diploid organisms like
Drosophila, a heterozygote containing one wild-type and
one mutant allele of a gene will produce half the normal
amount of the gene product; hence, even if such a recessive
mutation is in an essential gene, the organism will be viable.
However, a fly carrying a temperature-sensitive mutation in
the sev gene and a second mutation affecting another protein
in the signaling pathway would be expected to lack R7 cells
at the intermediate temperature.
By use of this screen, researchers identified the genes encoding three important proteins in the Sev pathway (see Figure 14-16): an SH2-containing adapter protein exhibiting 64
percent identity to human GRB2; a guanine nucleotide–
exchange factor called Sos (Son of Sevenless) exhibiting 45
percent identity with its mouse counterpart; and a Ras protein exhibiting 80 percent identity with its mammalian counterparts. These three proteins later were found to function
in other signaling pathways initiated by ligand binding to different RTK receptors and used at different times and places
in the developing fly.
In subsequent studies, researchers introduced a mutant
rasD gene into fly embryos carrying the sevenless mutation.

(b)

(c)
R7

R7

R6
R5
R1
R2
Axons to
brain

R8

▲ FIGURE 14-17 The compound eye of Drosophila
melanogaster. (a) Scanning electron micrograph showing
individual ommatidia that compose the fruit fly eye.
(b) Longitudinal and cutaway views of a single ommatidium.
Each of these tubular structures contains eight photoreceptors,
designated R1–R8, which are long, cylindrically shaped
light-sensitive cells. R1–R6 (yellow) extend throughout the depth
of the retina, whereas R7 (brown) is located toward the surface
of the eye, and R8 (blue) toward the backside, where the axons
exit. (c) Comparison of eyes from wild-type and sevenless

R6
R7
R1

R4 R2
R3
Toward
eye
surface

mutant flies viewed by a special technique that can distinguish
the photoreceptors in an ommatidium. The plane of sectioning is
indicated by the blue arrows in (b), and the R8 cell is out of the
plane of these images. The seven photoreceptors in this plane
are easily seen in the wild-type ommatidia (top), whereas only
six are visible in the mutant ommatidia (bottom). Flies with the
sevenless mutation lack the R7 cell in their eyes. [Part (a) from
E. Hafen and K. Basler, 1991, Development 1 (suppl.):123; part (b) adapted
from R. Reinke and S. L. Zipursky, 1988, Cell 55:321; part (c) courtesy of
U. Banerjee.]

14.3 • Receptor Tyrosine Kinases and Activation of Ras
(a) Wild type

(b) Single mutant
(sev−)

(c) Double mutant
(sev−; Ras D)

R8 cell
Boss
Sev

Active
Ras

R7 precursor
Induction

R7 neuron

No
induction

Cone cell

R7 neuron

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 14-18 Genetic studies reveal
that activation of Ras induces development of R7
photoreceptors in the Drosophila eye. (a) During larval
development of wild-type flies, the R8 cell in each developing
ommatidium expresses a cell-surface protein, called Boss, that
binds to the Sev RTK on the surface of its neighboring R7
precursor cell. This interaction induces changes in gene
expression that result in differentiation of the precursor cell into a
functional R7 neuron. (b) In fly embryos with a mutation in the
sevenless (sev) gene, R7 precursor cells cannot bind Boss and
therefore do not differentiate normally into R7 cells. Rather the
precursor cell enters an alternative developmental pathway and
eventually becomes a cone cell. (c) Double-mutant larvae (sev;
RasD) express a constitutively active Ras (RasD) in the R7
precursor cell, which induces differentiation of R7 precursor cells
in the absence of the Boss-mediated signal. This finding shows
that activated Ras is sufficient to mediate induction of an R7 cell.

591

addition to an SH2 domain, which binds to phosphotyrosine
residues in RTKs. Like phosphotyrosine-binding SH2 and
PTB domains, SH3 domains are present in a large number
of proteins involved in intracellular signaling. Although the
three-dimensional structures of various SH3 domains are
similar, their specific amino acid sequences differ. The SH3
domains in GRB2 selectively bind to proline-rich sequences
in Sos; different SH3 domains in other proteins bind to
proline-rich sequences distinct from those in Sos.
Proline residues play two roles in the interaction between
an SH3 domain in an adapter protein (e.g., GRB2) and a proline-rich sequence in another protein (e.g., Sos). First, the proline-rich sequence assumes an extended conformation that
permits extensive contacts with the SH3 domain, thereby facilitating interaction. Second, a subset of these prolines fit into
binding “pockets” on the surface of the SH3 domain (Figure
14-19). Several nonproline residues also interact with the SH3
domain and are responsible for determining the binding specificity. Hence the binding of proteins to SH3 and to SH2 domains follows a similar strategy: certain residues provide the
overall structural motif necessary for binding, and neighboring residues confer specificity to the binding.
Following activation of an RTK (e.g., Sevenless or the
EGF receptor), a complex containing the activated receptor,
GRB2, and Sos is formed on the cytosolic face of the plasma
membrane (see Figure 14-16). Formation of this complex
depends on the ability of GRB2 to bind simultaneously to
the receptor and to Sos. Thus receptor activation leads to

Arg1
Pro7
Pro4

[See M. A. Simon et al., 1991, Cell 67:701, and M. E. Fortini et al., 1992,
Nature 355:559.]

As noted earlier, the rasD gene encodes a constitutive Ras
protein that is present in the active GTP-bound form even
in the absence of a hormone signal. Although no functional
Sev RTK was expressed in these double-mutants (sev; rasD),
R7 cells formed normally, indicating that activation of Ras is
sufficient for induction of R7-cell development (Figure
14-18c). This finding, which is consistent with the results
with cultured fibroblasts described earlier, supports the conclusion that activation of Ras is a principal step in intracellular signaling by most if not all RTKs.

Binding of Sos Protein to Inactive Ras Causes
a Conformational Change That Activates Ras
The adapter protein GRB2 contains two SH3 domains,
which bind to Sos, a guanine nucleotide–exchange factor, in

SH3 domain

▲ FIGURE 14-19 Surface model of an SH3 domain bound
to a short, proline-rich target peptide. The target peptide is
shown as a space-filling model. In this target peptide, two
prolines (Pro4 and Pro7, dark blue) fit into binding pockets on the
surface of the SH3 domain. Interactions involving an arginine
(Arg1, red), two other prolines (light blue), and other residues in
the target peptide (green) determine the specificity of binding.
[After H. Yu et al., 1994, Cell 76:933.]

592

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity
(a) Ras.GDP

(b) Ras-Sos

GDP

(c) Ras.GTP

GTP

Switch I

Sos α
helix

Switch II

G
D
P

GTP α, β
phosphates

▲ FIGURE 14-20 Structures of Ras bound to GDP, Sos
protein, and GTP. (a) In RasGDP, the Switch I and Switch II
segments do not directly interact with GDP (see Figure 13-8).
(b) One  helix (orange) in Sos binds to both switch regions of
RasGDP, leading to a massive conformational change in Ras. In
effect, Sos pries Ras open by displacing the Switch I region,
thereby allowing GDP to diffuse out. (c) GTP is thought to bind to
relocalization of Sos from the cytosol to the membrane,
bringing Sos near to its substrate, namely, membrane-bound
RasGDP. Biochemical and genetic studies indicate that the
C-terminus of Sos inhibits its nucleotide-exchange activity
and that GRB2 binding relieves this inhibition.
Binding of Sos to RasGDP leads to conformational
changes in the Switch I and Switch II segments of Ras,
thereby opening the binding pocket for GDP so it can diffuse
out (Figure 14-20). Because GTP is present in cells at a concentration some 10 times higher than GDP, GTP binding
occurs preferentially, leading to activation of Ras. The activation of Ras and G thus occurs by similar mechanisms: a
conformational change induced by binding of a protein—Sos
and an activated G protein–coupled receptor, respectively—
that opens the protein structure so bound GDP is released
to be replaced by GTP. Binding of GTP to Ras, in turn, induces a specific conformation of Switch I and Switch II that
allows RasGTP to activate downstream effector molecules,
as we discuss in the next section.

G
T
P

GTP γ
phosphate

Ras-Sos first through its base; subsequent binding of the GTP
phosphates completes the interaction. The resulting
conformational change in Switch I and Switch II segments of
Ras, allowing both to bind to the GTP  phosphate (see Figure
13-8), displaces Sos and promotes interaction of RasGTP with
its effectors (discussed later). [Adapted from P. A. Boriack-Sjodin and
J. Kuriyan, 1998, Nature 394:341.]

Ras is an intracellular GTPase switch protein that acts
downstream from most RTKs. Like G, Ras cycles between
an inactive GDP-bound form and an active GTP-bound
form. Ras cycling requires the assistance of two proteins,
a guanine nucleotide–exchange factor (GEF) and a
GTPase-activating protein (GAP).

■

■ RTKs are linked indirectly to Ras via two proteins:
GRB2, an adapter protein, and Sos, which has GEF activity (see Figure 14-16).

The SH2 domain in GRB2 binds to a phosphotyrosine
in activated RTKs, while its two SH3 domains bind Sos,
thereby bringing Sos close to membrane-bound RasGDP
and activating its nucleotide exchange activity.

■

Binding of Sos to inactive Ras causes a large conformational change that permits release of GDP and binding of
GTP, forming active Ras (see Figure 14-20). GAP, which
accelerates GTP hydrolysis, is localized near RasGTP by
binding to activated RTKs.

■

Normally, Ras activation and the subsequent cellular response require ligand binding to an RTK or a cytokine receptor. In cells that contain a constitutively active Ras, the
cellular response occurs in the absence of ligand binding.

■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 14.3
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases and Activation of Ras
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), which bind to peptide and protein hormones, may exist as preformed dimers
or dimerize during binding to ligands.

■

Ligand binding leads to activation of the intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor and phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in its cytosolic domain (see
Figure 14-5, top). The activated receptor also can phosphorylate other protein substrates.

■

14.4

MAP Kinase Pathways

In mammalian cells all receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), as
well as most cytokine receptors, appear to utilize a highly
conserved signal-transduction pathway in which the signal induced by ligand binding is carried via GRB2 and Sos to Ras,
leading to its activation (see Figure 14-16). Activated Ras pro-

593

14.4 • MAP Kinase Pathways

motes formation at the membrane of signaling complexes
containing three sequentially acting protein kinases that are
associated with a scaffold protein. This kinase cascade culminates in activation of MAP kinase, a serine/threonine kinase also known as ERK. After translocating into the nucleus,
MAP kinase can phosphorylate many different proteins, including transcription factors that regulate expression of important cell-cycle and differentiation-specific proteins.
Activation of MAP kinase in two different cells can lead to
similar or different cellular responses, as can its activation in
the same cell following stimulation by different hormones.
In this section, we first examine the components of the
kinase cascade downstream from Ras in RTK-Ras signaling
pathways in mammalian cells. Then we discuss the linkage of
other signaling pathways to similar kinase cascades, and we
examine recent studies indicating that both yeasts and cells
of higher eukaryotes contain multiple MAP kinase pathways.

Signals Pass from Activated Ras to a Cascade
of Protein Kinases
A remarkable convergence of biochemical and genetic studies
in yeast, C. elegans, Drosophila, and mammals has revealed
a highly conserved cascade of protein kinases that operates

Exterior

in sequential fashion downstream from activated Ras (Figure
14-21). Active RasGTP binds to the N-terminal regulatory domain of Raf, a serine/threonine kinase, thereby activating it
(step 2 ). Hydrolysis of RasGTP to RasGDP releases active
Raf (step 3 ), which phosphorylates and thereby activates MEK
(step 4 ). Active MEK then phosphorylates and activates MAP
kinase, another serine/threonine kinase (step 5 ). (A dualspecificity protein kinase, MEK phosphorylates its target proteins on both tyrosine and serine or threonine residues.) MAP kinase phosphorylates many different proteins, including nuclear
transcription factors, that mediate cellular responses (step 6 ).
Several types of experiments have demonstrated that Raf,
MEK, and MAP kinase lie downstream from Ras and have
revealed the sequential order of these proteins in the pathway. For example, mutant Raf proteins missing the Nterminal regulatory domain are constitutively active and
induce quiescent cultured cells to proliferate in the absence of
stimulation by growth factors. These mutant Raf proteins
were initially identified in tumor cells; like the constitutively
active RasD protein, such mutant Raf proteins are said to be
encoded by oncogenes (Chapter 23). Conversely, cultured
mammalian cells that express a mutant, nonfunctional Raf
protein cannot be stimulated to proliferate uncontrollably by
a constitutively active RasD protein. This finding established

GTP hydrolysis
leads to dissociation
of Ras from Raf

Active Ras recruits,
binds, and activates
Raf

Ras activated
by exchange of
GDP for GTP
1

2

3
ATP

G
D
P

Inactive Ras

GDP GTP

Active
Raf

G
T
P

G
T
P

Active Ras

P

G
D
P

Pi

P
P

P

P
P

ADP

Cytosol
Inactive Raf
N-terminal
regulatory
domain

C-terminal
kinase
domain

P

ATP

4 Raf
activates
MEK

P

MEK

P

14-3-3

ADP

5 MEK
activates
MAPK

▲ FIGURE 14-21 Kinase cascade that transmits signals downstream from
activated Ras protein to MAP kinase. In unstimulated cells, most Ras is in the inactive
form with bound GDP; binding of a ligand to its RTK or cytokine receptor leads to
formation of the active RasGTP complex (step 1 ; see also Figure 14-16). Activated
Ras triggers the downstream kinase cascade depicted in steps 2 – 6 , culminating in
activation of MAP kinase (MAPK). In unstimulated cells, binding of the 14-3-3 protein to
Raf stabilizes it in an inactive conformation. Interaction of the Raf N-terminal regulatory
domain with RasGTP relieves this inhibition, results in dephosphorylation of one of the
serines that bind Raf to 14-3-3, and leads to activation of Raf kinase activity (steps 2
and 3 ). Note that in contrast to many other protein kinases, activation of Raf does not
depend on phosphorylation of the activation lip. After inactive RasGDP dissociates
from Raf, it presumably can be reactivated by signals from activated receptors, thereby
recruiting additional Raf molecules to the membrane. See the text for details. [See
E. Kerkhoff and U. Rapp, 2001, Adv. Enzyme Regul. 41:261; J. Avruch et al., 2001, Recent Prog.
Hormone Res. 56:127; and M. Yip-Schneider et al., 2000, Biochem. J. 351:151.]

P
P

MAP kinase

6
Dimeric form of active MAP kinase
translocates to nucleus; activates
many transcription factors

594

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

a link between the Raf and Ras proteins. In vitro binding
studies further showed that the purified RasGTP complex
binds directly to the N-terminal regulatory domain of Raf
and activates its catalytic activity. An interaction between the
mammalian Ras and Raf proteins also was demonstrated in
the yeast two-hybrid system, a genetic system in yeast used to
select cDNAs encoding proteins that bind to target, or
“bait,” proteins (see Figure 11-39).
That MAP kinase is activated in response to Ras activation was demonstrated in quiescent cultured cells expressing
a constitutively active RasD protein. In these cells activated
MAP kinase is generated in the absence of stimulation by
growth-promoting hormones. More importantly, R7 photoreceptors develop normally in the developing eye of
Drosophila mutants that lack a functional Ras or Raf protein
but express a constitutively active MAP kinase. This finding
indicates that activation of MAP kinase is sufficient to transmit a proliferation or differentiation signal normally initiated
by ligand binding to a receptor tyrosine kinase such as Sevenless (see Figure 14-18). Biochemical studies showed, however, that Raf cannot directly phosphorylate MAP kinase or
otherwise activate its activity.
The final link in the kinase cascade activated by RasGTP
emerged from studies in which scientists fractionated extracts of cultured cells searching for a kinase activity that
could phosphorylate MAP kinase and that was present only
in cells stimulated with growth factors, not quiescent cells.
This work led to identification of MEK, a kinase that specifically phosphorylates one threonine and one tyrosine residue
on MAP kinase, thereby activating its catalytic activity. (The
acronym MEK comes from MAP and ERK kinase.) Later
studies showed that MEK binds to the C-terminal catalytic
domain of Raf and is phosphorylated by the Raf serine/
threonine kinase; this phosphorylation activates the catalytic
activity of MEK. Hence, activation of Ras induces a kinase
cascade that includes Raf, MEK, and MAP kinase: activated
RTK → Ras → Raf → MEK → MAP kinase.

14-3-3. Raf phosphoserine-259 then is dephosphorylated (by
an unknown phosphatase) and other serine or threonine
residues on Raf become phosphorylated by yet other kinases.
These reactions incrementally increase the Raf kinase activity by mechanisms that are not fully understood.

Activation of MAP Kinase Biochemical and x-ray crystallographic studies have provided a detailed picture of how
phosphorylation activates MAP kinase. As in JAK kinases
and the cytosolic domain of receptor tyrosine kinases, the
catalytic site in the inactive, unphosphorylated form of MAP
kinase is blocked by a stretch of amino acids, the activation
lip (Figure 14-22a). Binding of MEK to MAP kinase destabilizes the lip structure, resulting in exposure of tyrosine185, which is buried in the inactive conformation. Following
phosphorylation of this critical tyrosine, MEK phosphorylates the neighboring threonine-183 (Figure 14-22b).
Both the phosphorylated tyrosine and the phosphorylated threonine residues in MAP kinase interact with
additional amino acids, thereby conferring an altered conformation to the lip region, which in turn permits binding
of ATP to the catalytic site. The phosphotyrosine residue
(pY185) also plays a key role in binding specific substrate
proteins to the surface of MAP kinase. Phosphorylation promotes not only the catalytic activity of MAP kinase but also

(a) Inactive MAP kinase

(b) Active MAP kinase

pT183
Y185
T183
pY185

Activation of Raf Kinase The mechanism for activating Raf
differs from that used to activate many other protein kinases
including MEK and MAP kinase. In a resting cell prior to
hormonal stimulation, Raf is present in the cytosol in a conformation in which the N-terminal regulatory domain is
bound to the kinase domain, thereby inhibiting its activity.
This inactive conformation is stabilized by a dimer of the 143-3 protein, which binds phosphoserine residues in a number
of important signaling proteins. Each 14-3-3 monomer binds
to a phosphoserine residue in Raf, one to phosphoserine-259
in the N-terminal domain and the other to phosphoserine621 (see Figure 14-21). These interactions are thought to be
essential for Raf to achieve a conformational state such that
it can bind to activated Ras.
The binding of RasGTP, which is anchored to the
membrane, to the N-terminal domain of Raf relieves the inhibition of Raf’s kinase activity and also induces a conformational change in Raf that disrupts its association with

Activation
lip

P
P

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 14-22 Molecular structures
of MAP kinase in its inactive, unphosphorylated form (a) and
active, phosphorylated form (b). Phosphorylation of MAP kinase
by MEK at tyrosine-185 (Y185) and threonine-183 (T183) leads to
a marked conformational change in the activation lip. This change
promotes dimerization of MAP kinase and binding of its
substrates, ATP and certain proteins. A similar phosphorylationdependent mechanism activates JAK kinases, the intrinsic kinase
activity of RTKs, and MEK. [After B. J. Canagarajah et al., 1997,
Cell 90:859.]

14.4 • MAP Kinase Pathways

its dimerization. The dimeric form of MAP kinase (but not
the monomeric form) can be translocated to the nucleus,
where it regulates the activity of many nuclear transcription
factors.

Active, dimeric MAP kinase
ATP

ATP

Addition of a growth factor (e.g., EGF or PDGF) to quiescent cultured mammalian cells in G0 causes a rapid increase
in the expression of as many as 100 different genes. These
are called early-response genes because they are induced well
before cells enter the S phase and replicate their DNA (see
Figure 21-29). One important early-response gene encodes
the transcription factor c-Fos. Together with other transcription factors, such as c-Jun, c-Fos induces expression of many
genes encoding proteins necessary for cells to progress
through the cell cycle. Most RTKs that bind growth factors
utilize the MAP kinase pathway to activate genes encoding
proteins like c-Fos that propel the cell through the cell cycle.
The enhancer that regulates the c-fos gene contains a serumresponse element (SRE), so named because it is activated by
many growth factors in serum. This complex enhancer contains
DNA sequences that bind multiple transcription factors. Some
of these are activated by MAP kinase, others by different protein
kinases that function in other signaling pathways (e.g., protein
kinase A in cAMP pathways and protein kinase C in phosphoinositide pathways).
As depicted in Figure 14-23, activated (phosphorylated)
dimeric MAP kinase induces transcription of the c-fos gene
by modifying two transcription factors, ternary complex factor (TCF) and serum response factor (SRF). In the cytosol,
MAP kinase phosphorylates and activates another kinase,
p90RSK, which translocates to the nucleus, where it phosphorylates a specific serine in SRF. After also translocating to
the nucleus, MAP kinase directly phosphorylates specific serines in TCF. Association of phosphorylated TCF with two
molecules of phosphorylated SRF forms an active trimeric
factor that binds strongly to the SRE DNA segment. As evidence for this model, abundant expression in cultured mammalian cells of a mutant dominant negative TCF that lacks
the serine residues phosphorylated by MAP kinase blocks the
ability of MAP kinase to activate gene expression driven by
the SRE enhancer. Moreover, biochemical studies showed directly that phosphorylation of SRF by active p90RSK increases the rate and affinity of its binding to SRE sequences
in DNA, accounting for the increase in the frequency of transcription initiation. Thus both transcription factors are required for maximal growth factor–induced stimulation of
gene expression via the MAP kinase pathway, although only
TCF is directly activated by MAP kinase.
Phosphorylation of transcription factors by MAP kinase
can produce multiple effects on gene expression. For instance, two related Drosophila transcription factors, Pointed

ADP

P

Inactive p90RSK

Cytosol

Active p90RSK

Nucleus
ATP

ATP

P
P

P
P

ATP

ADP

ADP

P

TCF

P P

ADP

TCF

P

SRF

SRF
P

P

TCF P P
SRF SRF
SRE

Transcription
Coding sequence

c-fos gene

▲ FIGURE 14-23 Induction of gene transcription
by activated MAP kinase. In the cytosol, MAP kinase
phosphorylates and activates the kinase p90RSK, which
then moves into the nucleus and phosphorylates the SRF
transcription factor. After translocating into the nucleus,
MAP kinase directly phosphorylates the transcription
factor TCF. Together, these phosphorylation events stimulate
transcription of genes (e.g., c-fos) that contain an SRE
sequence in their promoter. See the text for details. [See
R. Marais et al., 1993, Cell 73:381, and V. M. Rivera et al., 1993,
Mol. Cell Biol. 13:6260.]

and Yan, which are directly phosphorylated by MAP kinase,
are crucial effectors of RTK signaling in the eye and other
tissues. Phosphorylation enhances the activity of Pointed, a
transcriptional activator. In contrast, unphosphorylated Yan
is a transcriptional repressor that accumulates in the nucleus
and inhibits development of R7 cells in the eye. Following
signal-induced phosphorylation, Yan accumulates in the cytosol and does not have access to the genes it controls,
thereby relieving their repression. Mutant forms of Yan that
cannot be phosphorylated by MAP kinase are constitutive
repressors of R7 development. This example suggests that
a complex interplay among multiple transcription factors,
regulated by signal-activated kinases, is critical to cellular
development.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

P
P

Overview Animation: Extracellular Signaling

P
P

ADP

MAP Kinase Regulates the Activity of Many
Transcription Factors Controlling
Early-Response Genes

595

596

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

duces transcription of genes that inhibit progression of the
cell cycle and others that enable cells of opposite mating type
to fuse together and ultimately form a diploid cell.
Ligand binding to either of the two yeast pheromone receptors triggers the exchange of GTP for GDP on the single
G subunit and dissociation of GGTP from the G complex. This activation process is identical to that for the
GPCRs discussed in the previous chapter (see Figure 13-11).
In most, but not all, mammalian GPCR-initiated pathways,
the active G transduces the signal. In contrast, mutant studies have shown that the dissociated G complex mediates all
the physiological responses induced by activation of the yeast
pheromone receptors. For instance, in yeast cells that lack
G, the G subunit is always free. Such cells can mate in the
absence of mating factors; that is, the mating response is constitutively on. However, in cells defective for the G or G
subunit, the mating pathway cannot be induced at all. If dissociated G were the transducer, the pathway would be expected to be constitutively active in these mutant cells.
In yeast mating pathways, G functions by triggering a
kinase cascade that is analogous to the one downstream from

G Protein–Coupled Receptors Transmit Signals
to MAP Kinase in Yeast Mating Pathways
Although many MAP kinase pathways are initiated by RTKs
or cytokine receptors, signaling from other receptors can activate MAP kinase in different cell types of higher eukaryotes. Moreover, yeasts and other single-celled eukaryotes,
which lack cytokine receptors or RTKs, do possess several
MAP kinase pathways. To illustrate, we consider the mating
pathway in S. cerevisiae, a well-studied example of a MAP
kinase cascade linked to G protein–coupled receptors
(GPCRs), in this case for two secreted peptide pheromones,
the a and  factors.
As discussed in Chapter 22, these pheromones control
mating between haploid yeast cells of the opposite mating
type, a or . An a haploid cell secretes the a mating factor
and has cell-surface receptors for the  factor; an  cell secretes the  factor and has cell-surface receptors for the a factor (see Figure 22-13). Thus each type of cell recognizes the
mating factor produced by the opposite type. Activation of
the MAP kinase pathway by either the a or  receptors in-

Exterior
Mating
factor
Receptor

Activation
of G protein

γ

Gβγ

Cytosol

Gα
G
D
P

R. Davis, 1998, Trends Biochem. Sci. 23:481,
and H. Dohlman and J. Thorner, 2001, Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 70:703.]

Gα
Ste20

Serine/
threonine
kinase

P

Ste11

 FIGURE 14-24 Kinase cascade
that transmits signals downstream from
mating factor receptors in S. cerevisiae.
The receptors for yeast a and  mating
factors are coupled to the same trimeric
G protein. Ligand binding leads to
activation and dissociation of the G protein
(see Figure 13-10). In the yeast mating
pathway, the dissociated G activates a
protein kinase cascade analogous to the
cascade downstream of Ras that leads
to activation of MAP kinase (see Figure
14-21). The final component, Fus3, is
functionally equivalent to MAP kinase
(MAPK) in higher eukaryotes. Association
of several kinases with the Ste5 scaffold
contributes to specificity of the signaling
pathway by preventing phosphorylation of
other substrates. [See A. Whitmarsh and

β

Ste5
scaffold
protein

P

MEKK,
serine/threonine
kinase

P

MEK,
threonine/tyrosine
dual-specificity kinase

P
P

MAPK,
serine/threonine
kinase

Ste7

Fus3

Fus3 to nucleus
P

Ste 12

Transcription factor

Activation of genes
required for mating

G
T
P

14.4 • MAP Kinase Pathways

Ras. The components of this cascade were uncovered mainly
through analyses of mutants that possess functional a and 
receptors and G proteins but are sterile (Ste), or defective in
mating responses. The physical interactions between the
components were assessed through immunoprecipitation
experiments with extracts of yeast cells and other types of
studies. Based on these studies, scientists have proposed the kinase cascade depicted in Figure 14-24. G, which is tethered
to the membrane via the  subunit, binds to and activates
Ste20, a protein kinase that in turn phosphorylates and activates Ste11, a serine/threonine kinase analogous to Raf and
other mammalian MEKK proteins. Activated Ste11 then phosphorylates Ste7, a dual-specificity MEK that then phosphorylates and activates Fus3, a serine/threonine kinase equivalent
to MAP kinase. After translocation to the nucleus, Fus3 promotes expression of target genes by phosphorylating and thus
activating nuclear transcription factors (e.g., Ste12) that control expression of proteins involved in mating-specific cellular
responses. The other component of the yeast mating cascade,
Ste5, interacts with G as well as Ste11, Ste7, and Fus3. Ste5
has no obvious catalytic function and acts as a scaffold for assembling other components in the cascade.

Scaffold Proteins Isolate Multiple MAP Kinase
Pathways in Eukaryotic Cells
In addition to the MAP kinases discussed above, both yeasts
and higher eukaryotic cells contain other members of the
MAP kinase superfamily. These include mammalian Jun Nterminal kinases (JNKs) and p38 kinases, which become activated by various types of stresses, and six yeast kinases
described below. Collectively referred to as MAP kinases, all
these proteins are serine/threonine kinases that are activated
in the cytosol in response to specific extracellular signals and
then translocate to the nucleus. Activation of all known MAP
kinases requires phosphorylation of both a tyrosine and a

Extracellular
signal

Pheromone

MAP kinase

Fus3

Mating

Cell response

threonine residue in the lip region (see Figure 14-22). Similarly, all eukaryotic cells contain several members of the dualspecificity MEK kinase superfamily that phosphorylate
different members of the MAP kinase superfamily. Thus in all
eukaryotic cells, binding of a wide variety of extracellular signaling molecules triggers highly conserved kinase cascades
culminating in activation of a particular MAP kinase. The different MAP kinases mediate specific cellular responses, including morphogenesis, cell death, and stress responses.
Current genetic and biochemical studies in the mouse and
Drosophila are aimed at determining which MAP kinases are
required for mediating the response to which signals in
higher eukaryotes. This has already been accomplished in
large part for the simpler organism S. cerevisiae. Each of the
six MAP kinases encoded in the S. cerevisiae genome has
been assigned by genetic analyses to specific signaling pathways triggered by various extracellular signals, such as
pheromones, starvation, high osmolarity, hypotonic shock,
and carbon/nitrogen deprivation. Each of these MAP kinases
mediates very specific cellular responses (Figure 14-25).
In both yeasts and higher eukaryotic cells, different MAP
kinase cascades share some common components. For instance, Ste11 functions in the yeast signaling pathways that
regulate mating, filamentous growth, and osmoregulation.
Nevertheless, each pathway activates its own MAP kinase:
Fus3 in the mating pathway, Kss1 in the filamentation pathway, and Hog1 in the osmoregulation pathway. Similarly, in
mammalian cells, common upstream signal-transducing proteins participate in activating multiple JNK kinases.
Once the sharing of components among different MAP
kinase pathways was recognized, researchers wondered how
the specificity of the cellular responses to particular signals
could be achieved. Studies with yeast provided the initial
evidence that pathway-specific scaffold proteins enable the
signal-transducing kinases in a particular pathway to interact
with one another but not with kinases in other pathways.

High
osmolarity

Hypotonic
shock

Carbon and
nitrogen
deprivation

Kss1

Hog1

Mpk1

Smk1

Filamentation

Osmolyte
synthesis

Cell-wall
remodeling

Sporulation

Starvation

▲ FIGURE 14-25 Overview of five MAP kinase pathways in
S. cerevisiae. Each pathway is triggered by a specific
extracellular signal and leads to activation of a single different
MAP kinase, which mediates characteristic cellular responses.
Formation of pathway-specific complexes of MAP kinases and

597

scaffold proteins prevents “cross talk” between pathways
containing a common component such as the MEKK Ste11,
which occurs in the mating, filamentation, and osmoregulatory
pathways (see Figure 14-24). [Adapted from H. D. Madhani and
G. R. Fink, 1998, Trends Genet. 14(4):152.]

598

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

For example, the scaffold protein Ste5 stabilizes a large complex that includes Ste11 and other kinases in the mating
pathway (see Figure 14-24). Different Ste11-binding scaffold
proteins, however, stabilize signaling complexes containing
the components of the filamentation and osmoregulation
pathways. In each pathway in which Ste11 participates, it is
constrained within a large complex that forms in response
to a specific extracellular signal, and signaling downstream
from Ste11 is restricted to the complex in which it is localized. As a result, exposure of yeast cells to mating factors induces activation of a single MAP kinase, Fus3, whereas
exposure to a high osmolarity or starvation induces activation of different MAP kinases (see Figure 14-25).
Scaffolds for MAP kinase pathways are well documented
in yeast, fly, and worm cells, but their presence in mammalian cells has been difficult to demonstrate. Perhaps the
best documented scaffold protein is Ksr (kinase suppressor of
Ras), which binds both MEK and MAP kinase. Loss of the
Drosophila Ksr homolog blocks signaling by a constitutively
active Ras protein, suggesting a positive role for Ksr in
Ras–MAP kinase signaling in fly cells. Although knockout
mice that lack Ksr are grossly normal, activation of MAP kinase by growth factors or cytokines is lower than normal in
several types of cells in these animals. This finding suggests
that Ksr functions as a scaffold that enhances but is not essential for Ras–MAP kinase signaling in mammalian cells.
Other proteins also have been found to bind to specific mammalian MAP kinases. Thus the signal specificity of different
MAP kinases in animal cells may arise from their association with various scaffold-like proteins, but much additional
research is needed to test this possibility.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 14.4
MAP Kinase Pathways
Activated Ras triggers a kinase cascade in which Raf,
MEK, and MAP kinase are sequentially phosphorylated
and thus activated. Activated MAP kinase dimerizes and
translocates to the nucleus (see Figure 14-21).

■

Phosphorylation of one or more residues in a conserved
lip region activates MAP kinases and many other protein
kinases involved in signal-transduction pathways.

■

Activation of MAP kinase following stimulation of a
growth factor receptor leads to phosphorylation and activation of two transcription factors, TCF and SRF. These
associate into a trimeric complex that promotes transcription of various early-response genes (see Figure 14-23).

■

The upstream components of MAP kinase cascades assemble into large pathway-specific complexes stabilized by
scaffold proteins (see Figure 14-24). This assures that activation of one pathway by a particular extracellular signal does not lead to activation of other pathways containing shared components.

■

14.5 Phosphoinositides as Signal
Transducers
In previous sections, we have seen how signal transduction
from cytokine receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) begins with formation of multiprotein complexes
associated with the plasma membrane. Here we discuss how
these receptors initiate signaling pathways that involve
membrane-bound phosphorylated inositol lipids, collectively referred to as phosphoinositides. We begin with the
branch of the phosphoinositide pathway that also is mediated by G protein–coupled receptors and then consider another branch that is not shared with these receptors.

Phospholipase C Is Activated by Some RTKs
and Cytokine Receptors
As discussed in Chapter 13, hormonal stimulation of some G
protein–coupled receptors leads to activation of the  isoform of phospholipase C (PLC). This membrane-associated
enzyme then cleaves phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2) to generate two important second messengers, 1,2diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3).
Signaling via the IP3/DAG pathway leads to an increase in
cytosolic Ca2 and to activation of protein kinase C (see Figure 13-29).
Many RTKs and cytokine receptors also can initiate the
IP3/DAG pathway by activating another isoform of phospholipase C, the  isoform (PLC). The SH2 domains of
PLC bind to specific phosphotyrosines of the activated receptors, thus positioning the enzyme close to its membranebound substrate PIP2 (see Figure 13-28). In addition, the
receptor kinase activity phosphorylates tyrosine residues on
the bound PLC, enhancing its hydrolase activity. Thus activated RTKs and cytokine receptors promote PLC activity in
two ways: by localizing the enzyme to the membrane and by
phosphorylating it.

Yeast and higher eukaryotes contain multiple MAP kinase pathways that are triggered by activation of various
receptor classes including G protein–coupled receptors.

Recruitment of PI-3 Kinase to HormoneStimulated Receptors Leads to Activation
of Protein Kinase B

Different extracellular signals induce activation of different MAP kinases, which regulate diverse cellular
processes (see Figure 14-25).

In addition to initiating the IP3/DAG pathway, some activated RTKs and cytokine receptors can initiate another
phosphoinositide pathway, the PI-3 kinase pathway, by re-

■

■

Cytosolic leaflet

14.5 • Phosphoinositides as Signal Transducers

C

O

O

C

C

O

O

O
ATP

CH2 CH

Inositol

O

O

6

−

O

OH
5

CH2

P

O

P
5

O
OH

4

OH HO

OH HO

P

3

2

O

CH2 CH

OH

1

O

O

PIP-5 kinase

P

C

ADP

CH2

O
−O

O

PI 4-phosphate
(PIP)

PI 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2)

ATP

ATP
PI-3 kinase

PI-3 kinase
ADP

C

O

O

C

ADP

C

O

O

O

OH

O

6

5

1

2

O

CH2 CH

CH2

−

O

P

O

P
5

O
OH

OH
OH

O

O

PIP-5 kinase

P

C

ADP

CH2

O
−O

O

O
ATP

CH2 CH

4

P

4

P
3

P

PI 3,4-bisphosphate

OH

P

4

P
3

PI 3,4,5-trisphosphate

▲ FIGURE 14-26 Generation of phosphatidylinositol
3-phosphates. The enzyme phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3
kinase) is recruited to the membrane by many activated receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and cytokine receptors. The 3-phosphate
added by this enzyme is a binding site for various signaltransduction proteins. [See L. Rameh and L. C. Cantley, 1999, J. Biol.
Chem. 274:8347.]

599

cruiting the enzyme phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase to the
membrane. PI-3 kinase was first identified as a kinase that
copurifies with several viral oncoproteins such as the “middle T” protein encoded by polyoma virus. When inactive,
dominant negative, versions of PI-3 kinase are expressed in
virus-transformed cells, they inhibit the uncontrolled cell
proliferation characteristic of virus-transformed cells. This
finding suggested that the normal kinase is important in certain signaling pathways essential for cell proliferation or for
the prevention of apoptosis. Subsequent work showed that
PI-3 kinases participate in many signaling pathways related
to cell growth and apoptosis. Of the nine PI-3 kinase homologs encoded by the human genome, the best characterized contains a p110 subunit with catalytic activity and a
p85 subunit with an SH2 domain.
The SH2 domain in PI-3 kinase binds to phosphotyrosine residues in the cytosolic domain of many activated
RTKs and cytokine receptors. The recruitment of PI-3
kinase to the plasma membrane by activated receptors positions its catalytic domain near its phosphoinositide substrates on the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane,
leading to formation of PI 3,4-bisphosphate or PI 3,4,5trisphosphate (Figure 14-26). By acting as docking sites for
various signal-transducing proteins, these membrane-bound
PI 3-phosphates in turn transduce signals downstream in
several important pathways.
A primary binding target of PI 3-phosphates is protein
kinase B (PKB), a serine/threonine kinase. Besides its kinase
domain, PKB contains a PH domain that tightly binds the
3-phosphate in both PI 3,4-bisphosphate and PI 3,4,5trisphosphate. In unstimulated, resting cells, the level of
both these compounds is low, and protein kinase B is present in the cytosol in an inactive form. Following hormone
stimulation and the resulting rise in PI 3-phosphates, protein kinase B binds to them and is localized at the cell surface membrane.
Binding of protein kinase B to PI 3-phosphates not only
recruits the enzyme to the plasma membrane but also releases inhibition of the catalytic site by the PH domain in the
cytosol. Maximal activation of protein kinase B, however,
depends on recruitment of another kinase, PDK1, to the
plasma membrane via binding of its PH domain to PI 3phosphates. Both membrane-associated protein kinase B
and PDK1 can diffuse in the plane of the membrane, bringing them close enough so that PDK1 can phosphorylate protein kinase B (Figure 14-27). PDK1 phosphorylates one
serine residue in the activation lip of protein kinase B, providing yet another example of kinase activation by phosphorylation in this segment. Phosphorylation of a second
serine, not in the lip segment, is necessary for maximal protein kinase B activity. Thus, as with Raf, an inhibitory domain and phosphorylation by other kinases regulate the
activity of protein kinase B. Once fully activated, protein kinase B can dissociate from the plasma membrane and phosphorylate its many target proteins.

600

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

Video: Protein Dynamics in Response to cAMP
Stimulation of a Dictyostelium Cell

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Exterior

3

P
4

3

P
4

3

P

P

P
4

3

P

P
4

P

PI 3,4-bisphosphate
Cytosol
PH domain

P

Kinase
domain
Partially
active PKB

Activation
lip

P

PDK1

Fully active PKB

Inactive PKB

▲ FIGURE 14-27 Recruitment and activation of
protein kinase B (PKB) in PI-3 kinase pathways. In
unstimulated cells, PKB is in the cytosol with its PH
domain bound to the catalytic domain, inhibiting its
activity. Hormone stimulation leads to activation of PI-3
kinase and subsequent formation of phosphatidylinositol

The Insulin Receptor Acts Through the PI-3
Kinase Pathway to Lower Blood Glucose
The insulin receptor is a dimeric receptor tyrosine kinase
that can initiate the Ras–MAP kinase pathway, leading to
changes in gene expression. Insulin stimulation also can initiate the PI-3 kinase pathway just described, leading to activation of protein kinase B. In insulin-stimulated liver, muscle,
and fat cells, activated protein kinase B acts in several ways
to lower blood glucose and promote glycogen synthesis.
The principal mechanism by which insulin causes a reduction of the blood glucose level is by increasing import of
glucose by fat and muscle cells. This effect is mediated by
protein kinase B, which through mechanisms that are not
fully understood causes movement of the GLUT4 glucose
transporter from intracellular membranes to the cell surface
(Chapter 15). The resulting increased influx of glucose into
these cells lowers blood glucose levels.
In both liver and muscle, insulin stimulation also leads
to activation of glycogen synthase (GS), which synthesizes
glycogen from UDP-glucose (see Figure 13-16). This represents another mechanism for reducing glucose concentration
in the circulation. In resting cells (i.e., in the absence of insulin), glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) is active and phosphorylates glycogen synthase, thereby blocking its activity.
Activated protein kinase B phosphorylates and thereby inactivates GSK3. As a result, GSK3-mediated inhibition of
glycogen synthase is relieved, promoting glycogen synthesis.

Activated Protein Kinase B Promotes Cell Survival
by Several Pathways
In many cells activated protein kinase B directly phosphorylates pro-apoptotic proteins such as Bad, thereby preventing

(PI) 3-phosphates (see Figure 14-26). The 3-phosphate groups
serve as docking sites on the plasma membrane for the PH
domain of PKB and another kinase, PDK1. Full activation of PKB
requires phosphorylation both in the activation lip and at the
C-terminus by PDK1. [Adapted from A. Toker and A. Newton, 2000, Cell
103:185, and M. Scheid et al., 2002, Mol. Cell Biol. 22:6247.]

activation of an apoptotic pathway leading to cell death
(Chapter 22). Activated protein kinase B also promotes
survival of many cultured cells by phosphorylating the
transcription factor Forkhead-1 on as many as three serine
or threonine residues. In the absence of growth factors,
Forkhead-1 is unphosphorylated and localizes to the nucleus,
where it activates transcription of several genes encoding proapoptotic proteins. When growth factors are added to the
cells, protein kinase B becomes active and phosphorylates
Forkhead-1. This allows the cytosolic phosphoserinebinding protein 14-3-3 to bind Forkhead-1 and thus sequester
it in the cytosol. (14-3-3 is the same protein that retains phosphorylated Raf protein in the cytosol; see Figure 14-21.)
Withdrawal of growth factor leads to inactivation of protein
kinase B and dephosphorylation of Forkhead-1, thus favoring
apoptosis. A Forkhead-1 mutant in which the three serine target residues for protein kinase B are mutated is “constitutively
active” and initiates apoptosis even in the presence of activated protein kinase B. This finding demonstrates the importance of Forkhead-1 in controlling apoptosis of cultured cells.

PTEN Phosphatase Terminates Signaling via
the PI-3 Kinase Pathway
Like virtually all intracellular signaling events, phosphorylation by PI-3 kinase is reversible. The relevant phosphatase,
termed PTEN phosphatase, has an unusually broad specificity.
Although PTEN can remove phosphate groups attached to
serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues in proteins, its ability
to remove the 3-phosphate from PI 3,4,5-trisphosphate is
thought to be its major function in cells. Overexpression of
PTEN in cultured mammalian cells promotes apoptosis by reducing the level of PI 3,4,5-trisphosphate and hence the activation and anti-apoptotic effect of protein kinase B.

14.6 • Pathways That Involve Signal-Induced Protein Cleavage

The gene encoding PTEN is deleted in multiple types
of advanced human cancers, and its loss is thought
to lead to uncontrolled growth. Indeed, cells lacking
PTEN have elevated levels of PI 3,4,5-trisphosphate and PKB
activity. Since protein kinase B exerts an anti-apoptotic effect,
loss of PTEN indirectly reduces the programmed cell death
that is the normal fate of abnormally controlled cells. In
certain cells, such as neuronal stem cells, absence of PTEN
not only prevents apoptosis but also leads to stimulation of
cell-cycle progression and an enhanced rate of proliferation.
Thus knockout mice that cannot express PTEN have big
brains with excess numbers of neurons, attesting to PTEN’s
importance in control of normal development. ❚

The Receptor for a Particular Growth Factor
Often Is Linked to Multiple Signaling Pathways
Interaction of different signaling pathways permits the finetuning of cellular activities required to carry out complex developmental and physiological processes. As we have noted
previously, both RTKs and cytokine receptors can initiate
signaling via the Ras–MAP kinase pathway, DAG/IP3 pathway, and PI-3 kinase pathway (see Table 14-1). In addition,
cytokine receptors can act through their associated JAK
kinases to directly activate STAT transcription factors.
Activation of multiple signal-transduction pathways by
many receptors allows different sets of genes to be independently controlled by the same or different receptors. Occasionally these pathways can induce opposite effects. For
example, genetic manipulation of the Ras–MAP kinase and
PI-3 kinase pathways during muscle differentiation indicates
that these pathways have opposite phenotypic effects: activation of the Ras–MAP kinase pathway inhibits myocyte differentiation into myotubes, whereas activation of the PI-3
kinase pathway promotes it.
The initiation of tissue-specific signaling pathways by stimulation of the same receptor in different cells is exemplified
by the EGF receptor. Genetic studies analogous to those described earlier for development of R7 cells in Drosophila
demonstrated the central importance of EGF-stimulated signaling via the Ras–MAP pathway in development of the vulva
in C. elegans. Other genetic studies, however, showed that
stimulation of the EGF receptor triggers a Ras-independent
pathway in some tissues. For example, one of the many functions of EGF in C. elegans is to control contractility of smooth
muscle, which in turn regulates the extrusion of oocytes from
one compartment of the hermaphrodite gonad to another,
where they are fertilized. Coupling of the EGF receptor to Ras
is not required for the EGF-induced contractions of the gonad.
Analysis of several different types of mutations led researchers
to conclude that in C. elegans smooth muscle, the EGF receptor is linked to the IP3/DAG pathway. Ligand binding to the
receptor leads to activation of PLC activity, an increase in IP3,
and release of intracellular Ca2 stores. The increased cytosolic Ca2 level then promotes muscle contraction.

601

In Chapter 15 we will encounter several other examples
of how stimulation of the same receptor in different cell types
activates different signaling pathways that produce very diverse effects on the metabolism and fate of the cell.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 14.5
Phosphoinositides as Signal Transducers
Many RTKs and cytokine receptors can initiate the
IP3/DAG signaling pathway by activating phospholipase
C (PLC), a different PLC isoform than the one activated
by G protein–coupled receptors.

■

■ Activated RTKs and cytokine receptors can initiate another phosphoinositide pathway by binding PI-3 kinases,
thereby allowing the catalytic subunit access to its membranebound phosphoinositide (PI) substrates, which are phosphorylated at the 3 position (see Figure 14-26).
■ The PH domain in various proteins binds to PI 3-phosphates,
forming signaling complexes associated with the plasma
membrane.

Protein kinase B (PKB) becomes partially activated by
binding to PI 3-phosphates. Its full activation requires
phosphorylation by another kinase (PDK1), which also is
recruited to the membrane by binding to PI 3-phosphates
(see Figure 14-27).

■

Activated protein kinase B promotes survival of many
cells by directly inactivating several pro-apoptotic proteins
and down-regulating expression of others.

■

Signaling via the PI-3 kinase pathway is terminated by
the PTEN phosphatase, which hydrolyzes the 3-phosphate
in PI 3-phosphates. Loss of PTEN, a common occurrence
in human tumors, promotes cell survival and proliferation.

■

A single RTK or cytokine receptor often initiates different signaling pathways in multiple cell types. Different
pathways may be essential in certain cell signaling events
but not in others.

■

14.6 Pathways That Involve
Signal-Induced Protein Cleavage
Up to now we have discussed reversible signaling pathways,
where inactivation is as important as the initial activation. In
contrast are essentially irreversible pathways in which a component is proteolytically cleaved. Here we consider two such
pathways: the NF-B pathway, which enables cells to respond
immediately and vigorously to a number of stress-inducing
conditions, and the Notch/Delta pathway, which determines
the fates of many types of cells during development. Proteolytic activation of the cell-surface receptor Notch is facilitated by presenilin 1, a membrane protein that also has been
implicated in the pathology of Alzheimer’s disease.

602

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

Biochemical studies in mammalian cells and genetic studies in flies have provided important insights into the operation
of the NF-B pathway (Figure 14-28). The two subunits of heterodimeric NF-B (p65 and p50) share a region of homology
at their N-termini that is required for their dimerization and
binding to DNA. In resting cells, NF-B is sequestered in an
inactive state in the cytosol by direct binding to an inhibitor
called I-B. A single molecule of I-B binds to the N-terminal
domains of each subunit in the p50/p65 heterodimer, thereby
masking the nuclear-localization signals. A protein kinase
complex termed I-B kinase is the point of convergence of all
of the extracellular signals that activate NF-B. Within minutes of stimulation, I-B kinase becomes activated and phosphorylates two N-terminal serine residues on I-B. An E3
ubiquitin ligase then binds to these phosphoserines and
polyubiquitinates I-B, triggering its immediate degradation
by a proteasome (see Figure 3-13). In cells expressing mutant
forms of I-B in which these two serines have been changed
to alanine, and thus cannot be phosphorylated, NF-B is permanently repressed, demonstrating that phosphorylation of
I-B is essential for pathway activation.
The degradation of I-B exposes the nuclear-localization
signals on NF-B, which then translocates into the nucleus
and activates transcription of a multitude of target genes.
Despite its activation by proteolysis, NF-B signaling eventually is turned off by a negative feedback loop, since one
of the genes whose transcription is immediately induced by
NF-B encodes I-B. The resulting increased levels of the

Signal-Induced Degradation of a Cytosolic
Inhibitor Protein Activates the NF-B
Transcription Factor
The examples in previous sections have demonstrated the importance of signal-induced phosphorylation in modulating
the activity of many transcription factors. Another mechanism for regulating transcription factor activity in response to
extracellular signals was revealed in studies with both mammalian cells and Drosophila. This mechanism, which involves
phosphorylation and subsequent ubiquitin-mediated degradation of an inhibitor protein, is exemplified by the NF-B
transcription factor.
Originally discovered on the basis of its transcriptional activation of the gene encoding the  light-chain of antibodies
(immunoglobulins) in B cells, NF-B is now thought to be the
master transcriptional regulator of the immune system in mammals. Although flies do not make antibodies, NF-B homologs
in Drosophila mediate the immune response to bacterial and
viral infection by inducing synthesis of a large number of antimicrobial peptides that are secreted from cells. This indicates
that the NF-B regulatory system is more than half a billion
years old. NF-B is rapidly activated in mammalian immunesystem cells in response to infection, inflammation, and a number of other stressful situations, such as ionizing radiation. It
also is activated by so-called inflammatory cytokines such as
tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-) and interleukin 1 (IL-1),
which are released by nearby cells in response to infection.

 FIGURE 14-28 NF-B signaling
pathway. In resting cells, the dimeric
transcription factor NF-B, composed of
p50 and p65, is sequestered in the
cytosol, bound to the inhibitor I-B.
Stimulation by TNF- or IL-1 induces
activation of TAK1 kinase (step 1 ), leading
to activation of the trimeric I-B kinase
(step 2a ). Ionizing radiation and other
stresses can directly activate I-B kinase
by an unknown mechanism (step 2b ).
Following phosphorylation of I-B by I-B
kinase and binding of E3 ubiquitin ligase
(step 3 ), polyubiquitination of I-B (step
4 ) targets it for degradation by
proteasomes (step 5 ). The removal of
I-B unmasks the nuclear-localization
signals (NLS) in both subunits of NF-B,
allowing their translocation to the nucleus
(step 6 ). Here NF-B activates
transcription of numerous target genes
(step 7 ), including the gene encoding
the  subunit of I-B, which acts to
terminate signaling. [See M. Karin and
Y. Ben-Neriah, 2000, Ann. Rev. Immunol.
18:621, and R. Khush, F. Leulier, and
B. Lemaitre, 2001, Trends Immunol. 22:260.]

Ionizing
radiation

IL-1

TNF-α TNF-α
receptor

IL-1 receptor

Exterior
1
Unknown
mechanism
2b

Cytosol
3

TAK1

p65 p50
I-κBα

2a

P

α
β

p65 p50

γ

P

E3 ligase

P

Sequestered
NF-κB

Free NF-κB
p65 p50
6

7
Induces transcription
of target genes

Nucleus

p65 p50

p65

p50

I-κBα

I-κBα

I-κB
kinase

Polyubiquitin

4

Nuclearlocalization
signals

P

5
Proteasomal
degradation
of I-κBα

14.6 • Pathways That Involve Signal-Induced Protein Cleavage

603

Regulated Intramembrane Proteolysis Catalyzed
by Presenilin 1 Activates Notch Receptor

I-B protein bind active NF-B in the nucleus and return it
to the cytosol.
NF-B stimulates transcription of more than 150 genes,
including those encoding cytokines and chemokines that attract other immune-system cells and fibroblasts to sites of infection. It also promotes expression of receptor proteins that
enable neutrophils (a type of white blood cell) to migrate
from the blood into the underlying tissue (see Figure 6-30).
In addition, NF-B stimulates expression of iNOS, the inducible isoform of the enzyme that produces nitric oxide,
which is toxic to bacterial cells, and of several anti-apoptotic
proteins, which prevent cell death. Thus this single transcription factor coordinates and activates the body’s defense
either directly by responding to pathogens and stress or indirectly by responding to signaling molecules released from
other infected or wounded tissues and cells.
Besides its roles in inflammation and immunity, NF-B
plays a key role during mammalian development. For instance, mouse embryos that cannot express one of the I-B
kinase subunits die at mid-gestation of liver degeneration
caused by excessive apoptosis of cells that would normally
survive; thus NF-B is essential for normal development of
this tissue. As we will see in Chapter 21, phosphorylationdependent degradation of a cyclin kinase–dependent inhibitor plays a central role in regulating progression
through the cell cycle in S. cerevisiae. It seems likely that
phosphorylation-dependent protein degradation may emerge
as a common regulatory mechanism in many different cellular processes.

Both Notch and its ligand Delta are transmembrane proteins
with numerous EGF-like repeats in their extracellular domains. They participate in a highly conserved and important
type of cell differentiation in both invertebrates and vertebrates, called lateral inhibition, in which adjacent and developmentally equivalent cells assume completely different fates.
This process, discussed in detail in Chapter 15, is particularly
important in preventing too many nerve precursor cells forming from an undifferentiated layer of epithelial cells.
Notch protein is synthesized as a monomeric membrane
protein in the endoplasmic reticulum, where it binds presenilin 1, a multispanning membrane protein; the complex travels first to the Golgi and then on to the plasma membrane.
In the Golgi, Notch undergoes a proteolytic cleavage that
generates an extracellular subunit and a transmembranecytosolic subunit; the two subunits remain noncovalently associated with each other in the absence of interaction with
Delta residing on another cell. Binding of Notch to Delta triggers two proteolytic cleavages in the responding cell (Figure
14-29). The second cleavage, within the hydrophobic
membrane-spanning region of Notch, is catalyzed by presenilin
1 and releases the Notch cytosolic segment, which immediately
translocates to the nucleus. Such signal-induced regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) also occurs in the response of
cells to high cholesterol (Chapter 18) and to the presence of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (Chapter 16).

SIGNALING CELL

 FIGURE 14-29 Notch/Delta
Cytosol

Delta
Notchbinding
domain

Deltabinding
domain
1
Notch
2

Extracellular
space

TACE

3
Cytosol
Presenilin 1

RESPONDING CELL

To nucleus;
activation of
transcription
factors

4

signaling pathway. The extracellular
subunit of Notch on the responding
cell is noncovalently associated with its
transmembrane-cytosolic subunit.
Binding of Notch to its ligand Delta on
an adjacent signaling cell (step 1 ) first
triggers cleavage of Notch by the
membrane-bound metalloprotease
TACE (tumor necrosis factor alpha
converting enzyme), releasing the
extracellular segment (step 2 ).
Presenilin 1, an integral membrane
protein, then catalyzes an
intramembrane cleavage that releases
the cytosolic segment of Notch (step
3 ). Following translocation to the
nucleus, this Notch segment interacts
with several transcription factors that
act to affect expression of genes that
in turn influence the determination of
cell fate during development (step 4 ).
[See M. S. Brown et al., 2000, Cell 100:391,
and Y.-M. Chan and Y. Jan, 1999, Neuron
23:201.]

604

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity
Extracellular
space

APP
γ-Secretase
(presenilin 1)

α-Secretase
(TACE)

β-Secretase

Alzheimer's
disease
28 aa

12 aa
14 aa

Aβ42
2

1

1

14 aa

2

Cytosol

▲ FIGURE 14-30 Proteolytic cleavage of APP, a neuronal
plasma membrane protein. (Left ) Sequential proteolytic
cleavage by -secretase (step 1 ) and -secretase (step 2 )
produces an innocuous membrane-embedded peptide of 26
amino acids. -Secretase is a complex of several proteins, but
the proteolytic site that catalyzes intramembrane cleavage
probably resides within presenilin 1. (Right ) Cleavage in the

extracellular domain by -secretase (step 1 ) followed by
cleavage within the membrane by -secretase generates the
42-residue A42 peptide that has been implicated in formation of
amyloid plaques in Alzheimer’s disease. In both pathways the
cytosolic segment of APP is released into the cytosol, but its
function is not known. [See W. Esler and M. Wolfe, 2001, Science

In Drosophila the released intracellular segment of Notch
forms a complex with a DNA-binding protein called Suppressor of Hairless, or Su(H), and stimulates transcription
of many genes whose net effect is to influence the determination of cell fate during development. One of the proteins
increased in this manner is Notch itself, and Delta production is correspondingly reduced (see Figure 15-38). As we see
in Chapter 15, reciprocal regulation of the receptor and ligand in this fashion is an essential feature of the interaction
between initially equivalent cells that causes them to assume
different cell fates.

Evidence supporting the involvement of presenilin 1 in
Notch signaling (see Figure 14-29) came from genetic studies
in the roundworm C. elegans. Mutations in the worm homolog of presenilin 1 caused developmental defects similar
to those caused by Notch mutations. Later work showed
that mammalian Notch does not undergo signal-induced intramembrane proteolysis in mouse neuronal cells genetically
missing presenilin 1. But whether presenilin 1 is the actual
-secretase protease or an essential cofactor of the “real”
protease is not yet certain, since presenilin 1 is part of a large
complex containing several other integral membrane proteins. Within its membrane-spanning segments, presenilin 1
has two aspartate residues in a configuration that resembles
that of the two aspartates in the active site of water-soluble
“aspartyl proteases,” and mutation of either of these aspartate residues in presenilin 1 abolishes its ability to stimulate
cleavage of Notch. Similarly, a battery of chemical protease
inhibitors blocks cleavage of Notch and -secretase cleavage of APP with the same potency, suggesting that the same
protease is involved. Current data are thus consistent with
the notion that presenilin 1 is the protease that cleaves both
Notch and APP within their transmembrane segments. However, cleavage of both Notch and APP occurs at or near the
plasma membrane, whereas the majority of presenilin is
found in the endoplasmic reticulum. This finding suggests
that presenilin may act in conjunction with other proteins in
the unusual intramembrane proteolysis of Notch and APP. ❚

Presenilin 1 (PS1) was first identified as the product of a gene that commonly is mutated in patients with an early-onset autosomal dominant
form of Alzheimer’s disease. A major pathologic change associated with Alzheimer’s disease is accumulation in the
brain of amyloid plaques containing aggregates of a small
peptide containing 42 residues termed A42. This peptide is
derived by proteolytic cleavage of APP (amyloid precursor
protein), a cell-surface protein of unknown function expressed by neurons. APP actually undergoes cleavage by
two pathways (Figure 14-30). In each pathway the initial
cleavage occurs within the extracellular domain, catalyzed
by - or -secretase; -secretase then catalyzes a second
cleavage at the same intramembrane site in both pathways.
The pathway initiated by -secretase, which involves the
same membrane-bound metalloprotease TACE that cleaves
Notch, generates a 26-residue peptide that apparently does
no harm. The pathway initiated by -secretase generates
the pathologic A42. The missense mutations in presenilin
1 involved in Alzheimer’s disease enhance the formation of
the A42 peptide, leading to plaque formation and eventually to the death of neurons.

293:1449, and C. Haass and H. Steiner, 2002, Trends Cell Biol. 12:556.]

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 14.6
Pathways That Involve Signal-Induced Protein Cleavage
The NF-B transcription factor regulates many genes
that permit cells to respond to infection and inflammation.

■

14.7 • Down-Modulation of Receptor Signaling
■ In unstimulated cells, NF-B is localized to the cytosol,
bound to an inhibitor protein, I-B. In response to extracellular signals, phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination
and degradation of I-B in proteasomes releases active NFB, which translocates to the nucleus (see Figure 14-28).

Upon binding to its ligand Delta on the surface of an
adjacent cell, the Notch receptor protein undergoes two
proteolytic cleavages. The released Notch cytosolic segment then translocates into the nucleus and modulates gene
transcription (see Figure 14-29).

■

Presenilin 1, which catalyzes the regulated intramembrane cleavage of Notch, also participates in the cleavage
of amyloid precursor protein (APP) into a peptide that
forms plaques characteristic of Alzheimer’s disease.

■

14.7 Down-Modulation of Receptor
Signaling
We have already seen several ways that signal-transduction
pathways can be regulated. The levels of hormones produced
and released from signaling cells are adjusted constantly to
meet the needs of the organism. For example, kidney cells
make and secrete more erythropoietin when the oxygen level
is low and more red blood cells are needed. Intracellular proteins such as Ski and SOCS are induced following stimulation by TGF or cytokines, and then negatively regulate their
respective signal-transduction pathways. Phosphorylation of
receptors and downstream signaling proteins are reversed by
the carefully controlled action of phosphatases. Here we discuss two other mechanisms by which signaling pathways are
down-regulated: removal of receptors from the cell surface
by endocytosis, and secretion of proteins that bind and sequester hormones, thus preventing their interaction with cellsurface receptors.

Endocytosis of Cell-Surface Receptors
Desensitizes Cells to Many Hormones
In previous sections we discussed several signal-transduction
pathways activated immediately after stimulation of cytokine
receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). If the level of
hormone in the environment remains high for several hours,
cells usually undergo desensitization, such that they no longer
respond to that concentration of hormone. This prevents
inappropriate prolonged receptor activity, but under these
conditions cells usually will respond if the hormone level
is increased further. Ligand-dependent receptor-mediated
endocytosis, which reduces the number of available cellsurface receptors, is a principal way that cells are desensitized
to many peptides and other hormones.
In the absence of EGF ligand, for instance, the EGF receptor is internalized at a relatively slow rate by bulk mem-

605

brane flow. Besides activating the receptor’s protein tyrosine
kinase, binding to EGF induces a conformational change in
the cytosolic tail of the receptor. This exposes a sorting motif
that facilitates receptor recruitment into clathrin-coated pits
and subsequent internalization. After internalization, some
cell-surface receptors (e.g., the LDL receptor) are efficiently
recycled to the surface (see Figure 17-28). In contrast, internalized receptors for many peptide hormones, together with
their bound hormone ligands, commonly are transported to
lysosomes wherein they are degraded, rather than being recycled to the cell surface.
For example, each time an EGF receptor is internalized
with bound EGF, it has about a 50 percent chance of being
degraded. Exposure of a fibroblast cell to high levels of
EGF for 1 hour induces several rounds of endocytosis, resulting in degradation of most receptor molecules. If the
concentration of extracellular EGF is then reduced, the
number of EGF receptors on the cell surface recovers by
synthesis of new receptor molecules, a slow process that
may take more than a day. In this way a cell can become desensitized to a continual high level of hormone and, after
hormone removal, reestablish its initial level of cell-surface
receptors, thereby becoming sensitive again to a low level
of hormone.
Experiments with mutant cell lines demonstrate that internalization of RTKs plays an important role in regulating cellular responses to EGF and other growth factors. For
instance, a mutation in the EGF receptor that prevents it
from being incorporated into coated pits, and thus makes
it resistant to ligand-induced endocytosis, substantially increases the sensitivity of cells to EGF as a mitogenic signal.
Such mutant cells are prone to EGF-induced cell transformation. Interestingly, internalized receptors can continue
to signal from intracellular compartments prior to their
degradation.
In most cases, peptide hormones that are internalized bound to their receptors are degraded intracellularly. If the initial extracellular hormone level
is relatively low, this process may reduce the hormone level
sufficiently to terminate cell signaling after a few hours or so.
For instance, IL-2, a cytokine that stimulates growth of immune T cells, normally is depleted from the extracellular environment by this mechanism, leading to cessation of
signaling. Mutant forms of IL-2 have been obtained that
bind to the IL-2 receptor normally at pH 7.5, that of the extracellular medium, but poorly at pH 6, that of the initial endocytic vesicle, or endosome. These mutant IL-2 proteins
dissociate from the receptor in the endosome and are “recycled”; that is, they are secreted back into the extracellular
medium rather than accompanying the receptor to the lysosome for degradation. Because the lifetime of these mutant
IL-2 proteins is longer than normal, they are more potent
than their normal counterparts and may be useful therapeutically for stimulating production of T cells. ❚

606

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

Secreted Decoy Receptors Bind Hormone
and Prevent Receptor Activation
Another way of reducing the activity of cell-surface receptors
is secretion of a protein that contains a hormone-binding segment but no signal-transducing activity. As might be expected, hormone binding to such proteins, called decoy
receptors, reduces the amount of hormone available to bind
to receptors capable of signaling. This type of regulation is
important in controlling bone resorption, a complex physiological process that integrates several molecular mechanisms.
Net bone growth in mammals subsides just after puberty,
but a finely balanced, highly dynamic process of disassembly (resorption) and reassembly (bone formation), called remodeling, goes on throughout adulthood. Remodeling
permits the repair of damaged bones and can release calcium,
phosphate, and other ions from mineralized bone into the
blood for use elsewhere in the body.
Osteoclasts, the bone-dissolving cells, are a type of
macrophage that contain highly dynamic integrin-containing
adhesive structures, called podosomes, in the plasma membrane (see Figure 6-27). The v3 integrin in podosomes is
crucial to the initial binding of osteoclasts to the surface of
bone, since antibodies that bind to and block the activity of
this integrin block bone resorption. Following their initial
adhesion to bone, osteoclasts form specialized, very tight
seals between themselves and bone, creating an enclosed extracellular space (Figure 14-31). An adhered osteoclast then
secretes into this space a corrosive mixture of HCl and proteases that dissolves the inorganic components of the bone
and digests its protein components. The mechanism of HCl
generation and secretion is reminiscent of that used by the
stomach to generate digestive juice (see Figure 7-28). As in
gastric HCl secretion, carbonic anhydrase and an anion
antiport protein are used to generate H ions within osteoclasts. However, osteoclasts employ a V-type proton pump to
export H ions into the bone-facing space rather than the
P-class ATP-powered H/K pump used by gastric epithelial cells (see Figure 7-6).
Bone resorption by osteoclasts is carefully regulated by
cell-cell interactions with neighboring osteoblasts. These
bone-forming cells secrete type I collagen, the major organic
component of bones. Osteoblasts express a trimeric cellsurface signaling protein termed RANKL that is a member
of the TNF- superfamily of trimeric signaling proteins.
RANKL is the ligand for RANK, a cell-surface receptor expressed by osteoclasts. Interaction of RANK with RANKL
initiates multiple intracellular signaling pathways in osteoclasts, including the NF-B pathway that also is initiated by
stimulation of TNF- receptors (see Figure 14-28). Collectively, these signals induce the differentiation of osteoclasts
and changes in their shape that promote tight binding to
bone and thus bone resorption.
Osteoblasts also produce and secrete a soluble decoy receptor protein called osteoprotegerin (OPG), named for its
ability to “protect bone.” Secreted OPG binds to RANKL on

OPG

HCO3−

Cl−

4
Osteoblast
Cl−

OH

RANKL

CO2

HCO3−
CO2

H2O

Osteoclast

1

ATP
H+

RANK

ADP + Pi
Digestive
enzymes

3
Bone

Tight
seal
2

Ca2+

HPO42−

Tight
seal

▲ FIGURE 14-31 Bone resorption and its regulation.
Osteoclasts initially bind to bone via integrin-mediated
podosomes. The subsequent activation of an osteoclast by
interaction with neighboring osteoblasts via the trimeric
membrane proteins RANKL and RANK 1 induces cytoskeletal
reorganization, leading to formation of a specialized tight seal
with bone 2 . The activated osteoclast secretes into the
extracellular space generated by this seal a corrosive mixture of
HCl and proteases that resorbs the bone 3 . Osteoblasts can
suppress bone resorption by secreting osteoprotegerin (OPG).
Binding of this decoy receptor to RANKL 4 blocks RANKL
binding to RANK on osteoclasts and thus their activation. See the
text for discussion. [Adapted from N. Takahashi et al., 1999, Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Comm. 256:449.]

the surface of osteoblasts, thereby preventing the RANKLRANK interaction and inhibiting osteoclast activation and
bone resorption (see Figure 14-31). Mice deleted for the
OPG gene have weak, porous bones characteristic of excessive resorption. This finding supports the essential function
of OPG in reducing bone resorption.
The rare hereditary disease osteopetrosis, marked
by increased bone density, is due to abnormally
low resorption. Far more common is osteoporosis,
which is most prevalent among postmenopausal women.
This metabolic disorder results from disproportionate bone
resorption, leading to porous, less dense bones that are readily broken or fractured.
Many steroid hormones (e.g., estrogen, glucocorticoids),
vitamin D, polypeptide hormones, and drugs influence bone
metabolism by directly interacting with osteoblasts and altering the RANKL/RANK signaling system. Estrogen, for example, normally induces secretion of OPG and thus inhibits
bone resorption. When estrogen is low, as it is in many post-

Perspectives for the Future

menopausal women, resorption increases and the bones
weaken. It may be possible to develop new treatments for osteoporosis based on altering the signaling system that controls bone resorption. ❚
Because they bind their ligands so tightly, soluble
extracellular domains of cell-surface hormone receptors are finding increasing use as therapeutics.
Many cell-surface receptors are oriented in the plasma membrane such that the C-terminal signal-transducing domain
extends into the cytosol and the N-terminal ligand-binding
domain extends into the extracellular space. With recombinant DNA techniques a stop codon can be placed in the
cDNA encoding such a receptor so that translation in an appropriate expression system generates a truncated protein
corresponding to the receptor’s extracellular domain, which
will be secreted and can function as a decoy receptor. For example, local increases in TNF- are frequent in rheumatoid
arthritis, an inflammatory joint disease. Injection of the
recombinant-produced extracellular domain of the TNF-
receptor, which “soaks up” some of the excess TNF- and
reduces inflammation, is now one of the major therapies for
severe cases of this disease. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 14.7
Down-Modulation of Receptor Signaling
Endocytosis of receptor-hormone complexes and their
degradation in lysosomes is a principal way of reducing
the number of receptor tyrosine kinases and cytokine receptors on the cell surface, thus decreasing the sensitivity
of cells to many peptide hormones.

■

Bone resorption is triggered by binding of RANKL on
osteoblasts to its receptor, RANK, on osteoclasts.
RANKL/RANK signaling promotes tight adhesion of osteoclasts to bone and secretion of a bone-dissolving mixture of HCl and proteases by osteoclasts (see Figure
14-31).

■

Osteoprotegerin, a decoy receptor for RANKL, inhibits
osteoclast activation and bone resorption.

■

The extracellular domains of many cell-surface receptors
can be produced by recombinant DNA techniques and have
potential as therapeutic decoy receptors. Already in use is
such a decoy receptor for TNF-, which binds excess TNF associated with rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
The confluence of genetics, biochemistry, and structural biology has given us an increasingly detailed view of how signals
are transmitted from the cell surface and transduced into

607

changes in cellular behavior. The multitude of different extracellular signals, receptors for them, and intracellular signaltransduction pathways fall into a relatively small number
of classes, and one major goal is to understand how similar
signaling pathways often regulate very different cellular
processes. For instance, STAT5 activates very different sets of
genes in erythroid precursor cells, following stimulation of
the erythropoietin receptor, than in mammary epithelial cells,
following stimulation of the prolactin receptor. Presumably
STAT5 binds to different groups of transcription factors in
these and other cell types, but the nature of these proteins and
how they collaborate to induce cell-specific patterns of gene
expression remain to be uncovered.
Conversely, activation of the same signal-transduction
component in the same cell through different receptors often
elicits different cellular responses. One commonly held view
is that the duration of activation of the MAP kinase and
other signaling pathways affects the pattern of gene expression. But how this specificity is determined remains an outstanding question in signal transduction. Genetic and
molecular studies in flies, worms, and mice will contribute to
our understanding of the interplay between different pathway components and the underlying regulatory principles
controlling specificity in multicellular organisms.
Researchers have determined the three-dimensional structures of various signaling proteins during the past several
years, permitting more detailed analysis of several signaltransduction pathways. The molecular structures of different
kinases, for example, exhibit striking similarities and important variations that impart to them novel regulatory features.
The activity of several kinases, such as Raf and protein kinase
B (PKB), is controlled by inhibitory domains as well as by multiple phosphorylations catalyzed by several other kinases. But
our understanding of how the activity of these and other kinases is precisely regulated to meet the cell’s needs will require
additional structural and cell biological studies.
Abnormalities in signal transduction underlie many different diseases, including the majority of cancers and many
inflammatory conditions. Detailed knowledge of the signaling pathways involved and the structure of their constituent
proteins will continue to provide important molecular clues
for the design of specific therapies. Despite the close structural relationship between different signaling molecules (e.g.,
kinases), recent studies suggest that inhibitors selective
for specific subclasses can be designed. In many tumors
of epithelial origin, the EGF receptor exhibits constitutive
(signal-independent) protein tyrosine kinase activity, and a
specific inhibitor of this kinase (Iressa™) has proved useful
in the treatment of several such cancers. Similarly, monoclonal antibodies or decoy receptors that prevent proinflammatory cytokines like IL-1 and TNF- from binding to
their cognate receptors are now being used in treatment of
several inflammatory diseases such as arthritis.
Drugs that target other signal-transducing proteins may
be useful in controlling their abnormal activities. One example is Ras, which is anchored to cell membranes by farnesyl

608

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

groups that are linked to Ras by farnesyl transferase. Inhibitors of this enzyme are being tested as therapeutic agents
in cancers caused by expression of constitutively active Ras
proteins. Detailed structural studies of the interaction between signal-transducing proteins offer exciting possibilities
for designing new types of highly specific drugs. For instance,
knowledge of the interface between the Sos and Ras proteins
or between Ras and Raf could provide the basis of a drug that
blocks activation of MAP kinase. As more signaling pathways
become understood at a molecular level, additional targets for
drug development will undoubtedly emerge.

KEY TERMS
activation lip 578
constitutive 574
cytokines 580
decoy receptors 606
erythropoietin 581
JAK-STAT pathway 581
kinase cascade 593
MAP kinase 593
NF-B pathway 601
Notch/Delta pathway 601
nuclear-localization
signal 576

PI-3 kinase pathway 598
presenilin 1 603
protein kinase B 599
PTEN phosphatase 600
Ras protein 587
receptor tyrosine kinases 578
regulated intramembrane
proteolysis 603
scaffold proteins 597
SH2 domains 579
Smads 575
TGF superfamily 574

phosphoinositides 598

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Binding of TGF to its receptors can elicit a variety of
responses in different cell types. For example, TGF induces
plasminogen activator inhibitor in epithelial cells and specific
immunoglobulins in B cells. In both cell types, Smad3 is activated. Given the conservation of the signaling pathway,
what accounts for the diversity of the response to TGF in
various cell types?
2. How is the signal generated by binding of TGF to cellsurface receptors transmitted to the nucleus where changes in
target gene expression occur?

5. Once an activated signaling pathway has elicited the
proper changes in target gene expression, the pathway must
be inactivated. Otherwise, pathologic consequences may result, as exemplified by persistent growth factor pathway signaling in many cancers. Many signaling pathways possess
intrinsic negative feedback by which a downstream event in
a pathway turns off an upstream event. Describe the negative
feedback that down-regulates signals induced by (a) TGF
and (b) erythropoietin.
6. GRB2 is an essential component of the epidermal
growth factor (EGF) signaling pathway even though GRB2
lacks intrinsic enzymatic activity. What is the function of
GRB2? What role do the SH2 and SH3 domains play in the
function of GRB2? Many other signaling proteins possess
SH2 domains. What determines the specificity of SH2 interactions with other molecules?
7. A mutation in the Ras protein renders Ras constitutively
active (RasD). What is constitutive activation? How is constitutively active Ras cancer-promoting? What type of mutation might render the following proteins constitutively
active: (a) Smad3; (b) MAP kinase; and (c) NF-B?
8. The enzyme Ste11 participates in several distinct MAP
kinase signaling pathways in the budding yeast S. cerevisiae.
What is the substrate for Ste11 in the mating factor signaling
pathway? When a yeast cell is stimulated by mating factor,
what prevents the induction of filamentation since Ste11 also
participates in the MAP kinase signaling pathway induced by
starvation?
9. Describe the events required for full activation of protein kinase B. Name two effects of insulin mediated by protein kinase B in muscle cells.
10. Describe the function of the PTEN phosphatase in the
PI-3 kinase signaling pathway. Why is a loss-of-function mutation in PTEN cancer-promoting? Predict the effect of constitutively active PTEN on cell growth and survival.
11. Why is the signaling pathway that activates NF-B considered to be relatively irreversible compared to cytokine or
receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways? Nonetheless,
NF-B signaling must be downregulated eventually. How is
the NF-B signaling pathway turned off?

3. Name three features common to the activation of cytokine receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases. Name one
difference with respect to the enzymatic activity of these
receptors.

12. What biochemical reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme
presenilin 1? What is the role of presenilin 1 in transducing
the signal induced by the binding of Delta to its receptor?
How are mutations in presenilin 1 thought to contribute to
Alzheimer’s disease?

4. The intracellular events that proceed when erythropoietin binds to its cell-surface receptor are well-characterized
examples of cell-signaling pathways that activate gene expression. What molecule translocates from the cytosol to the
nucleus after (a) JAK2 activates STAT5 and (b) GRB2 binds
to the Epo receptor?

13. What is a decoy receptor? How does the decoy receptor osteoprotegerin block bone resorption? Some tumors are
characterized by excess production of platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF). How might a recombinant decoy
receptor function as a chemotherapeutic agent for such a
cancer?

References

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA

609

REFERENCES

G. Johnson and colleagues have analyzed the kinase cascade
in which MEKK2, a MAP kinase kinase kinase, participates
in mammalian cells. By a yeast two-hybrid screen (see Chapter 11), MEKK2 was found to bind MEK5, a MAP kinase
kinase. To elucidate the signaling pathway transduced by
MEKK2 in vivo, the following studies were performed in
human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells in culture.
a. HEK293 cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding
recombinant, tagged MEKK2, along with a plasmid encoding MEK5 or a control vector that did not encode a protein
(mock). Recombinant MEK5 was precipitated from the cell
extract by absorption to a specific antibody. The immunoprecipitated material was then resolved by polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, transferred to a membrane, and examined by Western blotting with an antibody that recognized
tagged MEKK2. The results are shown in the figure below,
part a. What information about the MEKK2 kinase cascade
do we learn from this experiment? Do the data in part a of
the figure prove that MEKK2 activates MEK5, or vice versa?

TGF Receptors and the Direct Activation of Smads
Blobe, G., W. Schiemann, and H. Lodish. 2000. Role of transforming growth factor beta in human disease. N. Eng. J. Med.
342:1350–1358.
Liu, X., Y. Sun, R. Weinberg, and H. Lodish. 2001. Ski/Sno and
TGF-beta signaling. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 12:1–8.
Massagué, J. 2000. How cells read TGF-beta signals. Nature
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1:169–178.
Massagué, J., S. Blain, and R. Lo. 2000. TGFbeta signaling in
growth control, cancer, and heritable disorders. Cell 103:295–309.
Moustakas, A., S. Souchelnytskyi, and C. Heldin. 2001. Smad
regulation in TGF-beta signal transduction. J. Cell Sci.
114:4359–4369.
Shi, Y. 2001. Structural insights on Smad function in TGFbeta
signaling. Bioessays 23:223–232.
ten Dijke, P., K. Miyazono, and C. Heldin. 2000. Signaling inputs converge on nuclear effectors in TGF-beta signaling. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 25:64–70.
Wotton, D., and J. Massagué. 2001. Smad transcriptional corepressors in TGF beta family signaling. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 254:45–164.

Cytokine Receptors and the JAK-STAT Pathway
k

(a)

c
Mo

K
ME

5

MEKK2

E
(b) M

K5

A
K5
K5
ME + ME
+
2
2
2
KK
KK
KK
ME
ME
ME

A

Phosphorylated ERK5
ERK5

b. ERK5 is a MAP kinase previously shown to be activated
when phosphorylated by MEK5. When ERK5 is phosphorylated by MEK5, its migration on a polyacrylamide gel is
retarded. In the experiment shown in part b of the figure,
HEK293 cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding
ERK5 along with plasmids encoding MEK5, MEKK2,
MEKK2 and MEK5, or MEKK2 and MEK5AA. MEK5AA
is a mutant, inactive version of MEK5 that functions as a
dominant-negative. Expression of MEK5AA in HEK293
cells prevents signaling through active, endogenous MEK5.
Lysates of transfected cells were analyzed by Western blotting with an antibody against recombinant ERK5. From the
data in part b of the figure, what can we conclude about the
role of MEKK2 in the activation of ERK5? How do the data
obtained when cells are cotransfected with ERK5, MEKK2,
and MEK5AA help to elucidate the order of participants in
this kinase cascade?

Alexander, W. 2002. Suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS)
in the immune system. Nature Rev. Immunol. 2:410–416.
Chatterjee-Kishore, M., F. van den Akker, and G. Stark. 2000.
Association of STATs with relatives and friends. Trends Cell Biol.
10:106–111.
Constantinescu, S. N., S. Ghaffari, and H. F. Lodish. 1999. The
erythropoietin receptor: structure, activation, and intracellular signal
transduction. Trends Endocrin. Metab. 10:8–23.
Kile, B. T., et al. 2002. The SOCS box: a tale of destruction and
degradation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27:235–41.
Leonard, W. 2001. Role of Jak kinases and STATs in cytokine
signal transduction. Int. J. Hematol. 73:271–277.
Levy, D. E., and J. E. Darnell, Jr. 2002. Stats: transcriptional control and biological impact. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:651–62.
Ozaki, K., and W. Leonard. 2002. Cytokine and cytokine receptor
pleiotropy and redundancy. J. Biol. Chem. 277:29355–29358.
Ward, A., I. Touw, and A. Yoshimura. 2000. The Jak-Stat pathway in normal and perturbed hematopoiesis. Blood 95:19–29.
Yasukawa, H., A. Sasaki, and A. Yoshimura. 2000. Negative regulation of cytokine signaling pathways. Ann. Rev. Immunol. 18:43–164.

Receptor Tyrosine Kinases and Activation of Ras
Gschwind, A., et al. 2001. Cell communication networks: epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation as the paradigm for
interreceptor signal transmission. Oncogene 20:1594–1600.
Harari, D., and Y. Yarden. 2000. Molecular mechanisms underlying ErbB2/HER2 action in breast cancer. Oncogene 19:6102–6114.
Hubbard, S. 1999. Structural analysis of receptor tyrosine kinases. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 71:343–358.
Huse, M., and J. Kuriyan. 2002. The conformational plasticity
of protein kinases. Cell 109:275–282.
Schlessinger, J. 2002. Ligand-induced, receptor-mediated dimerization and activation of EGF receptor. Cell 110:669–672.
Shawver, L., D. Slamon, and A. Ullrich. 2002. Smart drugs: tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 1:117–123.

610

CHAPTER 14 • Signaling Pathways That Control Gene Activity

Simon, M. 2000. Receptor tyrosine kinases: specific outcomes
from general signals. Cell 103:13–15.
Vetter, I., and A. Wittinghofer. 2001. The guanine nucleotidebinding switch in three dimensions. Science 294:1299–1304.

Wishart, M., and J. Dixon. 2002. PTEN and myotubularin phosphatases: from 3-phosphoinositide dephosphorylation to disease.
Trends Cell. Biol. 12:579–584.

Pathways That Involve Signal-Induced Protein Cleavage
MAP Kinase Pathways
Avruch, J., et al. 2001. Ras activation of the Raf kinase: tyrosine kinase recruitment of the MAP kinase cascade. Recent Prog.
Horm. Res. 56:127–155.
Chang, L., and M. Karin. 2001. Mammalian MAP kinase signalling cascades. Nature 410:37–40.
Cobb, M., and E. Goldsmith. 2000. Dimerization in MAPkinase signaling. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25:7–9.
Garrington, T., and G. Johnson. 1999. Organization and regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 11:211–218.
Kerkhoff, E., and U. Rapp. 2001. The Ras-Raf relationship: an
unfinished puzzle. Adv. Enz. Regul. 41:261–267.
Martin-Blanco, E. 2000. p38 MAPK signalling cascades: ancient
roles and new functions. Bioessays 22:637–645.
Tzivion, G., and J. Avruch. 2002. 14-3-3 proteins: active cofactors in cellular regulation by serine/threonine phosphorylation. J.
Biol. Chem. 277:3061–3064.
Widmann, C., S. Gibson, M. Jarpe, and G. Johnson. 1999. Mitogen-activated protein kinase: conservation of a three-kinase module from yeast to human. Physiol. Rev. 79:143–180.

Phosphoinositides as Signal Transducers
Belham, C., S. Wu, and J. Avruch. 1999. Intracellular signalling:
PDK1—a kinase at the hub of things. Curr. Biol. 9:R93–R96.
Cantley, L. 2002. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. Science 296:1655–1657.
Cantley, L., and B. Neel. 1999. New insights into tumor suppression: PTEN suppresses tumor formation by restraining the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA
96:4240–4245.
Chung, C., S. Funamoto, and R. Firtel. 2001. Signaling pathways controlling cell polarity and chemotaxis. Trends Biochem. Sci.
26:557–566.
Toker, A., and A. Newton. 2000. Cellular signaling: pivoting
around PDK-1. Cell 103:185–188.

Brown, M., J. Ye, R. Rawson, and J. Goldstein. 2000. Regulated
intramembrane proteolysis: a control mechanism conserved from
bacteria to humans. Cell 100:391–398.
Esler, W., and M. Wolfe. 2001. A portrait of Alzheimer secretases—new features and familiar faces. Science 293:1449–1454.
Ghosh, S., and M. Karin. 2002. Missing pieces in the NFkappaB puzzle. Cell 109 (suppl.): S81–S96.
Haass, C., and H. Steiner. 2002. Alzheimer disease gsecretase: a complex story of GxGD-type presenilin proteases. Trends
Cell Biol. 12:556–561.
Karin, M., and Y. Ben-Neriah. 2000. Phosphorylation meets
ubiquitination: the control of NF-[kappa]B activity. Ann. Rev. Immunol. 18:621–663.
Khush, R., and B. Lemaitre. 2000. Genes that fight infection:
what the Drosophila genome says about animal immunity. Trends
Genet. 16:442–449.
Silverman, N., and T. Maniatis. 2001. NF-kappaB signaling
pathways in mammalian and insect innate immunity. Genes Devel.
15:2321–2342.
Sisodia, S., W. Annaert, S. Kim, and B. De Strooper. 2001.
Gamma-secretase: never more enigmatic. Trends Neurosci. 24:S2–S6.
Weihofen, A., and B. Martoglio. 2003. Intramembrane-cleaving
proteases. Trends Cell Biol. 13:71–78.

Down-Modulation of Receptor Signaling
Lauffenburger, D., E. Fallon, and J. Haugh. 1998. Scratching the
(cell) surface: cytokine engineering for improved ligand/receptor trafficking dynamics. Chem. Biol. 5:R257–R263.
Theill, L., W. Boyle, and J. Penninger. 2002. RANK-L and
RANK: T cells, bone loss, and mammalian evolution. Ann. Rev. Immunol. 20:795–823.
Waterman, H., and Y. Yarden. 2001. Molecular mechanisms underlying endocytosis and sorting of ErbB receptor tyrosine kinases.
FEBS Lett. 490:142–152.

15
INTEGRATION
OF SIGNALS AND
GENE CONTROLS

Caption TO Come

I

nherent in the full genome contained in most cells is the potential to form vastly diverse cell types, which perform an
enormous variety of tasks. Each individual cell, however,
employs only part of an organism’s complete genetic repertoire. An array of external hormonal, metabolic, developmental, and environmental signals influence which genes a cell uses
at any given time in its life span. Infections also can trigger
many responses. A cell’s response to an external signal largely
depends on its properties including (1) the inventory, locations,
and associations of its proteins and other molecules; (2) its
shape and attachments to other cells; and (3) its chromatin
structure, which facilitates or blocks access to particular genes.
We can think of these properties as a cell’s “memory” determined by its history and response to previous signals. Thus,
for instance, a cell can respond to a signal only if it possesses
a receptor for that signal. In addition, a cell typically receives
more than one signal at a time: for example, a combination
of transforming growth factor  (TGF) and fibroblast
growth factor (FGF), a hormone signal that is interpreted in
light of the ambient temperature, or an electrical pulse that is
modulated by local ionic conditions. The response to each signal, or condition, is often influenced by another one. This integration of signals can prevent inappropriate responses and
permit more nuanced responses to multiple signals.
To understand a cell’s response to one or more signals
and the effect of its memory on this response, it is useful to
monitor changes in the expression of all genes and changes in
the locations of organelles, proteins, or other molecules.
Signal-induced changes in the intracellular ionic environment, membrane potential, and cell shape also may be rele-

vant to a cell’s response. Two serious limitations have hampered efforts to obtain such a comprehensive view of the nature of cell responses to external signals. First, usually only
one or a few aspects of a cell’s response to a signal is easily
monitored; second, determining responses in living cells in
“real time” poses many technical difficulties. Technological
advances are beginning to solve these problems, although
neither has been completely overcome.
The major question posed in this chapter is how a cell
integrates multiple signals and responds in the context of
its memory, especially in the course of development and cell

OUTLINE
15.1 Experimental Approaches for Building
a Comprehensive View of SignalInduced Responses
15.2 Responses of Cells to Environmental
Influences
15.3 Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts
of Regulators
15.4 Boundary Creation by Different Combinations
of Transcription Factors
15.5 Boundary Creation by Extracellular Signals
15.6 Reciprocal Induction and Lateral Inhibition
15.7 Integrating and Controlling Signals
1

2

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

Food

FPO
TF1

1

2

3

4

5

TF2

Cells adjust to their
particular environmental
inputs (e.g., oxygen,
sugar, and temperature)

Graded signals create
different cell types

Combined actions of
transcription factors
create different cell
types

▲ FIGURE 15-1 Signaling systems and cell responses. Cells
are vibrantly alert detectors, sensing and interpreting information
constantly to adjust to the environment ( 1 ) and coordinate
activities with surrounding cells. A cell can respond to signals by
changing the genes that it transcribes, altering the cell surface,
modifying proteins and enzyme activities, moving materials
between compartments, revamping its cytoskeleton, migrating,
or dying. A modest number of signaling systems constitutes a
core toolbox. Each system is used repeatedly in different
organisms, in different tissues, and at different times. Signals are
crucial in building multicellular organisms, where different cell

differentiation (Figure 15-1). We begin by looking at various
techniques that are beginning to provide a global view of
signal-induced responses. In particular, we describe how the
determination of whole-genome transcription patterns is a
source of new insights into responses to signals. We then consider cell responses to certain environmental perturbations in
Section 15.2. The next section introduces the concept of
graded regulators that cause different cell responses, depending on their concentration. This type of system allows cells at
different distances from the source of a regulatory molecule
to become different types of cells. We examine how such regulation creates boundaries within an epithelium in early
Drosophila development, with cells on one side of the border
taking one path of differentiation and those on the other side
taking another. The creation of other boundaries by graded
transcriptional activators and graded extracellular signals is
discussed in Sections 15.4 and 15.5, respectively. As borders
form, cells reinforce their decisions by signaling across the borders so that compatible adjacent structures form. As illustrated
by the examples in Section 15.6, such signaling can either promote or inhibit particular developmental changes in adjacent
cells. In the final section, we take a closer look at how signals
are integrated and controlled in different cells.
Although the number of signaling pathways encountered
in this chapter and others may seem overwhelming, there are
actually a relatively small number of distinct pathways for
transducing external signals. Primary among them are the intracellular signal-transduction pathways activated by the

Lateral inhibition signals
prevent duplication of
unique cell types

Integration of signals
allows cells to adjust to
their neighbors and to
change with time

types are created by controlled signal transmission and
reception. Cells can become different, depending on the amount
of a signal ( 2 ), with a larger amount giving rise to one cell fate
and a smaller amount to another. New boundaries form between
cells of different types, creating tissues and demarcations within
tissues. Different cell types are created by combinations of
transcription factors ( 3 ). Inhibitory signals emitted by cells
undergoing a differentiation step can prevent nearby cells from
making the same decision ( 4 ), thus preventing duplication of
structures. Cells generally integrate many signals in deciding how
to proceed ( 5 ).

various receptor classes listed in Table 14-1. In addition,
cell–cell and cell–matrix adhesions mediated by cadherins
and integrins can initiate intracellular signaling pathways
(Chapter 6). The informational complexity needed to create
many cell types and cell properties comes from combining
signals. Elucidation of the underlying principles and mechanisms relevant to all signaling pathways forms the foundation for understanding how cells integrate signals to achieve
a particular identity or other response.

15.1 Experimental Approaches
for Building a Comprehensive View
of Signal-Induced Responses
Several technical advances are helping investigators to discern the totality of the cellular response to signals. Perhaps
the most significant advance is the sequencing of whole
genomes from various organisms and subsequent analysis
to identify individual genes and analyze their functions.
The data amassed in these genome projects have led to the
development of techniques for monitoring the effects of a
signal on the expression of the entire gene set. Using geneinactivation methods discussed in Chapter 9, researchers can
mutate specific genes encoding various components of signaling pathways. The phenotypic effects of such mutations
often provide clues about the functions of pathway compo-

15.1 • Experimental Approaches for Building a Comprehensive View of Signal-Induced Responses

nents and the order in which they function. In vitro studies on
signaling in a variety of differentiated cell types and even complex tissues are now possible because of recent improvements
in cell- and tissue-culture methods. Certain signal-induced
responses can be monitored in living cells with the use of various fluorescent agents and the observation of cells in a fluorescence microscope. For instance, this technique can reveal
changes in the amounts and localization of specific proteins,
as well as fluctuations in H or Ca2 concentrations in the
cytosol (see Figures 5-46 and 5-47). Development of additional fluorescent indicator dyes will allow monitoring of
other molecules in living cells.

Genomic Analyses Show Evolutionary
Conservation and Proliferation of Genes
Encoding Signals and Regulators
In Chapter 9, we considered the difficulty and ambiguity in
identifying genes within genomic sequences, especially in
higher organisms. Despite the limitations, genomic analyses
have been sources of exciting and sometimes surprising insights or have confirmed earlier conclusions based on the results of other types of studies.
First, the total number of protein-coding genes does not
correlate in any simple way with standard conceptions about
animal complexity (see Figure 9-34). Humans, for instance,
have only about 1.75 times as many genes as the roundworm
Caenorhabditis elegans. Likewise, C. elegans has about 1.4
times as many genes as the fruit fly Drosophila, which exhibits
a much more complex body plan and more complex behavior.
Second, genomic comparisons support the conclusion
based on two decades of developmental genetics research
that many regulatory genes whose encoded proteins control
tissue differentiation, organogenesis, and the body plan have
been conserved for hundreds of millions of years. For example, the Pax6 gene is employed in eye development in enormously diverse organisms, such as clams, flies, and humans,
and the tinman gene is necessary for heart development in
flies and humans. As discussed in Section 15.4, the Hox gene
cluster controls head-to-tail organization of the body in all
animals examined to date. Because of the conservation of
genes and proteins, the results of experiments on one organism are useful guides for research on other organisms. Indeed
much of human biology and medicine has been and continues to be built on knowledge gained from a broad spectrum
of experimental systems.
Third, despite the considerable commonality of genes
and proteins among different animals, genomic analyses suggest that about 30 percent of the genes of each animal
organism are unique to that animal. The invertebrates
Drosophila and C. elegans have in common certain genes
that are not recognizable in any of the other genomes analyzed to date. Flies and worms are believed to have a common ancestor that arose from an even more ancient ancestor
in common with vertebrates. If this view is correct, any genes
present in flies and humans would be expected to be present

3

in worms; likewise, any genes common to worms and humans would presumably be carried by flies. Recent work has
revealed that all three species have about 1500 genes in common, as expected (Figure 15-2). Contrary to expectations,
however, about 1250 genes common to humans and flies
are not found in worms, and about 500 genes common to
humans and worms are not found in flies. Thus organismspecific gene loss occurred in the evolution of C. elegans and
Drosophila subsequent to the time when the invertebrate and
vertebrate lineages diverged.
Fourth, as noted in preceding chapters, duplication of
certain protein-coding genes and subsequent divergence in
the course of evolution have given rise to gene families. The
members of a gene family and corresponding protein family
have close but nonidentical sequences. Genomic analysis and
findings from other studies show that the number of members in a particular protein family varies in different species.
For instance, the transforming growth factor  family of
secreted signaling proteins has 28 members in humans but
only 6 in flies and 4 in worms. The semaphorins, which are
signals for neural development, form a 22-member family in
humans; flies have 6 members and worms have 2. Such proliferation of genes could give rise to signaling proteins that
can move different distances through tissue or differ in other
properties. Alternatively, the members of a gene family may
be differently regulated, thus allowing rather similar proteins
to be produced at different times and places. Both types of
variation exist, and both allow a moderate number of types
of signals to serve a multitude of purposes.

Unknown
Miscellaneous function
Cell and tissue structure
Motility

FPO

Transport and trafficking
Protein folding
Signaling and regulation
DNA transcription
Metabolism

▲ FIGURE 15-2 Evolutionary conservation of core
processes in human, fruit fly (Drosophila), and roundworm
(C. elegans) genomes. On the basis of fairly stringent criteria for
protein similarity, humans, flies, and worms have in common
about 1500 genes distributed among the functional classes
shown in this pie chart. About 28 percent of this common set of
genes encode proteins that function in signaling or gene control.
The molecular function of about one-third of the genes and
proteins common to these species is not yet known. [Adapted
from J. C. Venter et al., 2001, Science 291:1304.]

4

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

In Situ Hybridization Can Detect
Transcription Changes in Intact Tissues
and Permeabilized Embryos
A common effect of external signals is to alter the pattern of
gene expression by a cell. Signal-induced changes in the expression of particular genes is usually monitored by measuring
the corresponding mRNAs or proteins in the presence and absence of a signal. The total cellular mRNA can be extracted,
separated by gel electrophoresis, and subjected to Northern
blotting, which detects individual mRNAs by hybridization
to labeled complementary DNA probes (see Figure 9-26).
Likewise, cellular proteins can be extracted, separated electrophoretically, and subjected to Western blotting, a procedure
in which individual proteins separated on the blot are detected
with specific antibodies (see Figure 3-35). These blotting methods are generally not sensitive enough to determine changes
within a single cell. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
however, can amplify a specific mRNA from a single cell so
that it is detectable (see Figure 9-24).
Both Northern blotting and PCR amplification require
extracting the mRNA from a cell or mixture of cells, which
means that the cells are removed from their normal location
within an organism or tissue. As a result, the location of a
cell and its relation to its neighbors is lost. To retain such
positional information, a whole or sectioned tissue or even
a whole permeabilized embryo may be subjected to in situ
(a)

hybridization to detect the mRNA encoded by a particular
gene (Figure 15-3). This technique allows gene transcription to be monitored in both time and space. Immunohistochemistry, the related technique of staining tissue with
fluorescence-labeled antibodies against a particular protein,
provides similar information for proteins, an important advantage if the distribution of a protein differs from that of
its mRNA (see Figures 5-33 and 5-45).

DNA Microarray Analysis Can Assess Expression
of Multiple Genes Simultaneously
A major limitation of in situ hybridization and blotting
techniques is that the mRNA or protein product of only
one or two genes can be examined at a time. Thus monitoring the activity of many genes by these methods requires
multiple assays. In contrast, researchers can monitor the
expression of thousands of genes at one time with DNA
microarrays (see Figure 9-35). In this technique, cDNAs labeled with a fluorescent dye are made from the total
mRNA extracted from the cells under study. The labeled
cDNAs are then hybridized to a microscope slide dotted
with spots of DNA. Each DNA spot contains a unique sequence from a particular gene, and tens of thousands of
genes can be represented on a standard slide. The fluorescence of spots that hybridize to a cDNA species is measured
with an instrument that scans the slide. Fluorescing spots
(c)

(b)
Dorsal

Head
NT

FPO

15
picas

Ventral

Head

Notochord

Notochord

Endoderm

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-3 In situ hybridization can
detect activity of specific genes in whole and sectioned
embryos. The specimen is permeabilized by treatment with
detergent and a protease to expose the mRNA to the probe. A
DNA or RNA probe, specific for the mRNA of interest, is made
with nucleotide analogs containing chemical groups that can be
recognized by antibodies. After the permeabilized specimen has
been incubated with the probe under conditions that promote
hybridization, the excess probe is removed with a series of
washes. The specimen is then incubated in a solution containing
an antibody that binds to the probe. This antibody is covalently
joined to a reporter enzyme (e.g., horseradish peroxidase or
alkaline phosphatase) that produces a colored reaction product.
After excess antibody has been removed, substrate for the

reporter enzyme is added. A colored precipitate forms where the
probe has hybridized to the mRNA being detected. (a) A whole
mouse embryo at about 10 days of development probed for
Sonic hedgehog mRNA. The stain marks the notochord (red
arrow), a rod of mesoderm running along the future spinal cord.
(b) A section of a mouse embryo similar to that in part (a). The
dorsal/ventral axis of the neural tube (NT) can be seen, with the
Sonic hedgehog – expressing notochord (red arrow) below it and
the endoderm (blue arrow) still farther ventral. (c) A whole
Drosophila embryo probed for an mRNA in trachea development.
The repeating pattern of body segments is visible. Anterior (head)
is up; ventral is to the left. [Courtesy of L. Milenkovic and
M. P. Scott.]

15.1 • Experimental Approaches for Building a Comprehensive View of Signal-Induced Responses

thus represent active genes, which have been transcribed
into their mRNAs (see Figure 1-23).
Microarray experiments are commonly used to compare
the mRNAs produced by two different populations of cells:
for example, two distinct cell types, the same cell type before and after some treatment, or mutant and normal cells.
An example of a microarray-based discovery comes from the
results of studies of cultured fibroblast cells, which have long
been known to initiate cell division when serum containing
growth factors is added to the medium. Microarray analysis
of gene expression at different times after treatment of fibroblasts with serum showed that transcription of about 500
of the 8613 genes examined changed substantially over time
(see Figure 9-36). Transcriptional changes were detected
within 15 minutes, with genes encoding proteins that control
progression through the cell cycle becoming active first.
Later, genes encoding proteins with roles in wound healing,
such as clotting factors and attractants for immune-system
cells, became active. The production of these proteins suggests that proliferating fibroblasts are stimulated by serum to
participate in wound healing, something that had not been
known. In retrospect, it makes sense, because the time during
which fibroblasts are exposed to serum in an intact organism
is when there is a wound. The results show the usefulness of
microarrays in revealing unexpected responses by cells.
In the future, microarray analysis will be a powerful diagnostic tool in medicine. For instance, particular sets of mRNAs have been found to
distinguish tumors with a poor prognosis from those with a
good prognosis (Chapter 23). Previously indistinguishable
disease variations are now detectable. Analysis of tumor
biopsies for these distinguishing mRNAs will help physicians
to select the most appropriate treatment. As more patterns of
gene expression characteristic of various diseased tissues are
recognized, the diagnostic use of DNA microarrays will be
extended to other conditions. ❚

+ Protein probe

+ Calmodulin probe

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-4 Protein microarray
analysis can reveal protein–protein interactions. High-level
expression cloning was used to produce 5800 yeast proteins,
which were purified and then spotted in duplicate on microscope
slides. Some 13,000 protein samples can be spotted in half the
area of a standard microscope slide. A probe for calmodulinbinding proteins was prepared by covalently attaching biotin to
calmodulin. The yeast proteome chips were incubated with the
biotinylated calmodulin, and then excess probe was washed off.

5

Protein Microarrays Are Promising Tools
for Monitoring Cell Responses That Include
Changes in Protein-Binding Patterns
A cell’s response to signals can include not only changes
in gene expression, but also alterations in the modifications of proteins and the associations between proteins. As
discussed in other chapters, the activities of many proteins
depend on their association with other proteins or with
small intracellular signaling molecules (e.g., cAMP or
phosphoinositides). Two common examples are the activation of adenylyl cyclase by interaction with G s  GTP
(see Figure 13-11) and the activation of protein kinase A
by binding of cAMP (see Figure 3-27). The activity of
some transcriptional regulators (e.g., CREB) also depend
on their associating with another protein (see Figure 1332). The results of systematic studies are beginning to reveal protein–protein associations that are critical for cell
functioning and how these associations change in response
to signals. For example, scientists have produced large
quantities of 5800 yeast proteins (≈80 percent of the total
proteins) by cloning them in high-level expression vectors
in yeast and purifying the individual proteins. In a technique analogous to DNA microarrays, small samples of
the purified yeast proteins can be spotted on microscope
slides to produce a protein microarray, also called a proteome chip.
To test the efficacy of assaying protein–protein associations on such arrays, researchers exposed the yeast protein
microarray to biotin-labeled calmodulin, a calcium-binding
protein. After excess calmodulin was removed from the
microarray, binding of calmodulin to proteins in the array
was detected with a fluorescent reagent specific for biotin
(Figure 15-4). This experiment succeeded in detecting six
proteins already known to bind calmodulin. Six other known
calmodulin-binding proteins were not detected, two because
they were not included in the array and four that may have

+ Protein probe

+ Pl(3)P probe

Calmodulin bound to proteins in the microarray was detected
with fluorescence-labeled streptavidin, a bacterial protein that
strongly and specifically binds biotin. The left panel shows a part
of a proteome chip probed to reveal the location and approximate
amounts of all proteins, which are spotted in duplicate columns.
The right panel shows the same preparation probed with
biotinylated calmodulin. The two green signals correspond to a
calmodulin-binding protein spotted in duplicate. [From A. Zhu et al.,
2001, Science 293:2101.]

6

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls
P

AM

AF

FPO
<0.25 0.33 0.5 1 2 3
Expression level

Cyt/Neur

The developmental time course of gene transcription has
been assessed with DNA microarrays for the nematode C.
elegans and the fly Drosophila. In recent experiments,
microarrays representing about 94 percent of the C. elegans
genes were used to monitor transcription at different stages
of development and in both sexes. The results showed that
expression of about 58 percent of the monitored genes
changes more than twofold during development, and another 12 percent are transcribed in sex-specific patterns.
Findings from a similar study assessing about one-third of all
Drosophila genes showed that transcription of more than 90
percent of them changes by twofold or more during development and that most genes are used repeatedly during development (Figure 15-5). These results clearly show that
development is marked by extensive changes in transcription, with few genes exhibiting a monotonous pattern of unchanging transcription.
Changes in transcription at various developmental stages
provide one criterion for identifying genes that play a critical
role in cell regulation and differentiation. A more important
criterion, however, is the phenotype of cells or animals lacking the gene. Knowledge of the functions of genes and relations among them during development can be obtained by
systematically eliminating the function of each gene that is
normally expressed in a tissue, one at a time, and observing
what goes wrong. This procedure is now theoretically possible in C. elegans, which is particularly susceptible to RNA
interference (RNAi). In this technique, injection of doublestranded RNA into worm embryos leads to the destruction of
the corresponding endogenous mRNA (see Figure 9-43). The
phenotype of worms that develop from RNAi-treated
embryos is often similar to the one that would result from inactivation of the corresponding gene itself. In initial studies
with C. elegans, RNA interference of 6375 genes (about 33
percent of the genome) yielded 888 visibly abnormal phenotypes. The genes whose functional inactivation cause particular abnormal phenotypes can be grouped into sets; each
member of a set presumably controls the same signals or

L

Ribo

Drastic Changes in Gene Expression
in Development Are Revealed by DNA
Microarrays and RNA Interference Studies

E

Mito

been underproduced. In principle, others could be missed because proteins associate only as part of a complex of more
than two proteins or because the protein fastened to the chip
is in the wrong conformation for binding. Despite these possible problems, 33 other calmodulin-binding yeast proteins
not previously recognized also were detected. The gene sequences corresponding to the 39 calmodulin-binding proteins detected indicate that 14 of these proteins have a
common motif that may form the binding surface. The results of such experiments show that protein arrays will be a
useful, if not completely comprehensive and accurate, tool
for monitoring associations of proteins as indicators of cell
responses.

>4

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-5 DNA microarray cluster
analysis detects global changes in transcription in Drosophila
development. The life cycle was divided into about 70 periods
from early embryos through aged adults. The mRNA was
extracted from animals at each period, converted into
fluorescence-labeled cDNA, and hybridized to microarrays
representing about 5000 genes. Computer analysis of the original
microarray data grouped genes showing similar changes in
expression relative to a standard reference sample. (See Figure
9-35 for general protocol of DNA microarray experiments.) The
three panels shown represent only a small fraction of the genes
in the microarray. Each very narrow row in a panel represents a
different gene. General periods are labeled E (embryogenesis),
L (larval), M (metamorphosis), and A (adult, male or female).
Each vertical line represents one of the 70 developmental
periods. Yellow indicates an increase in transcription compared
with the reference sample; blue, a decrease in expression; and
black, no significant change in expression. Genes are grouped,
or “clustered,” because they have similar rises and falls in RNA
abundance during development. Clusters often reveal genes
involved in similar processes. The three clusters here are
mitochondrial protein genes (top), ribosomal protein genes
(middle), and genes involved in the cytoskeleton and neural
development (bottom). The clustering of a gene of unknown
function with some of known function provides a hypothesis
about the function of the former. [Adapted from M. Arbeitman et al.,
2002, Science 297:2270.]

events. The regulatory relations among the genes in the set—for
example, the genes that control muscle development—can then
be worked out.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 15.1
Experimental Approaches for Building a
Comprehensive View of Signal-Induced Responses
About one-third of the genes in humans, flies (Drosophila), and roundworms (C. elegans) are unique to each
animal.

■

15.2 • Responses of Cells to Environmental Influences

The presence and distribution of specific mRNAs and
proteins can be detected in living cells by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical staining.

7

tissues never stop developing. The mature cells of other tissues, such as the brain, are long lived; after such tissues reach
maturation, there is little additional differentiation. Mature
cells in all tissues, however, are changing constantly in response to metabolic or behavioral demands as well as to injury or infection. In this section, we consider several ways
that cells respond to variations in the demand for two environmental inputs—glucose and oxygen—or in their levels.

■

DNA microarray analysis allows the full complement of
genes to be examined for transcriptional changes that occur in response to environmental changes or extracellular
signals and in development (see Figure 15-5).

■

Protein microarrays are proving useful in detecting and
monitoring changes in protein–protein associations (see
Figure 15-4).

■

Integration of Multiple Second Messengers
Regulates Glycogenolysis

The function of a gene found to be activated under certain
conditions can be tested by inactivating it and observing
the resulting phenotype.

■

One way for cells to respond appropriately to current physiological conditions is to sense and integrate more than one
signal. A good example comes from glycogenolysis, the hydrolysis of glycogen to yield glucose 1-phosphate. In Chapter
13, we saw that a rise in cAMP induced by epinephrine stimulation of -adrenergic receptors promotes glycogen breakdown in muscle and liver cells (see Figure 13-17). In both
muscle and liver cells, other second messengers also produce
the same cellular response.
In muscle cells, stimulation by nerve impulses causes the
release of Ca2 ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum and an
increase in the cytosolic Ca2 concentration, which triggers
muscle contraction. The rise in cytosolic Ca2 also activates
glycogen phosphorylase kinase (GPK), thereby stimulating
the degradation of glycogen to glucose 1-phosphate, which
fuels prolonged contraction. Recall that phosphorylation by
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A also activates glycogen
phosphorylase kinase. Thus this key regulatory enzyme in
glycogenolysis is subject to both neural and hormonal regulation in muscle (Figure 15-6a).

Signals, altered environmental conditions, or infection generally evoke not a single response by cells but multiple
changes in the pattern of gene transcription, protein modifications, and associations between proteins. By monitoring
the totality of these individual responses, researchers are developing comprehensive views of how and why cells respond.

■

15.2 Responses of Cells
to Environmental Influences
Much of this chapter deals with signaling pathways that control how cells change in the course of development. The mature cells of some tissues (e.g., blood and skin) have a
relatively short life span compared with that of other types of
cells and are constantly being replaced by the differentiation
and proliferation of stem cells (Chapter 22). In a sense, such
(a) Muscle cells

(b) Liver cells

Neural
stimulation

Hormonal
stimulation

Ca2+

cAMP

DAG







PKA

PKC







GP

GS

GS



GPK

Hormonal
stimulation

cAMP

IP3





Ca2+

PKA






GPK


FPO
Increased
glycogen
degradation

Decreased
glycogen
synthesis

Decreased
glycogen
synthesis

Abbreviations:
PKA Protein kinase A
GPK Glycogen phosphorylase kinase

GP
GS

GP

Increased
glycogen
degradation

Glycogen phosphorylase
Glycogen synthase

 FIGURE 15-6 Integrated regulation
of glycogenolysis mediated by several
second messengers. (a) Neuronal
stimulation of striated muscle cells or
epinephrine binding to -adrenergic
receptors on their surfaces leads to
increased cytosolic concentrations of the
second messengers Ca2 or cAMP,
respectively. The key regulatory enzyme,
glycogen phosphorylase kinase (GPK), is
activated by Ca2 ions and by a cAMPdependent protein kinase A (PKA). (b) In
liver cells, -adrenergic stimulation leads
to increased cytosolic concentrations of
cAMP and two other second messengers,
diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5trisphosphate (IP3). Enzymes are marked
by white boxes. ()  activation of enzyme
activity, ()  inhibition.

8

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

In liver cells, hormone-induced activation of phospholipase C also regulates glycogen breakdown and synthesis by
the two branches of the inositol-lipid signaling pathway.
Phospholipase C generates two second messengers, diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) (see
Figure 13-28). DAG activates protein kinase C, which phosphorylates glycogen synthase, yielding the phosphorylated
inactive form and thus inhibiting glycogen synthesis. IP3
induces an increase in cytosolic Ca2, which activates glycogen phosphorylase kinase as in muscle cells, leading to glycogen degradation. In this case, multiple intracellular signaltransduction pathways are activated by the same signal (Figure 15-6b).
The dual regulation of glycogen phosphorylase kinase results from its multimeric subunit structure ()4. The 
subunit is the catalytic protein; the regulatory  and  subunits, which are similar in structure, are phosphorylated by
protein kinase A; and the  subunit is the Ca2-binding
switch protein calmodulin. Glycogen phosphorylase kinase is
maximally active when Ca2 ions are bound to the calmodulin subunit and at least the  subunit is phosphorylated. In
fact, the binding of Ca2 to the calmodulin subunit may be
essential to the enzymatic activity of glycogen phosphorylase
kinase. Phosphorylation of the  and  subunits increases the
affinity of the calmodulin subunit for Ca2, enabling Ca2
ions to bind to the enzyme at the submicromolar Ca2 concentrations found in cells not stimulated by nerves. Thus increases in the cytosolic concentration of Ca2 or of cAMP or
of both induce incremental increases in the activity of glycogen phosphorylase kinase. As a result of the elevated level
of cytosolic Ca2 after neuron stimulation of muscle cells,
glycogen phosphorylase kinase will be active even if it is unphosphorylated; thus glycogen can be hydrolyzed to fuel
continued muscle contraction in the absence of hormone
stimulation.

Insulin and Glucagon Work Together to Maintain
a Stable Blood Glucose Level
In the regulation of glycogenolysis, neural and hormonal
signals regulate the same key multimeric enzyme. In contrast,
the maintenance of normal blood glucose concentrations
depends on the balance between two hormones that elicit different cell responses. During periods of stress, the epinephrine-induced increase in glycogenolysis in liver cells leads to
a rise in blood glucose. During normal daily living, however,
the blood glucose level is under the dynamic control of insulin and glucagon.
Insulin and glucagon are peptide hormones produced by
cells within the islets of Langerhans, cell clusters scattered
throughout the pancreas. Insulin, which contains two
polypeptide chains linked by disulfide bonds, is synthesized
by the  cells in the islets; glucagon, a monomeric peptide,
is produced by the  cells in the islets. Insulin reduces the
level of blood glucose, whereas glucagon increases blood glucose. The availability of glucose for cellular metabolism is
regulated during periods of abundance (following a meal) or

Glucose

Insulin-containing
secretory vesicle

GLUT2
1

FPO

Glucose

ADP

2

6

ATP

β pancreatic
islet cell

Pyruvate

Ca2+
3
−−−−−−

5
ATP

++++++

++++++

++++++

−−−−−−

−−−−−−

4
K+
ATP-sensitive
K+ channels

Voltage-sensitive
Ca2+ channels

▲ FIGURE 15-7 Secretion of insulin from pancreatic  cells
in response to a rise in blood glucose. The entry of glucose
into  cells is mediated by the GLUT2 glucose transporter ( 1 ).
Because the Km for glucose of GLUT2 is ≈20 mM, a rise in
extracellular glucose from 5 mM, characteristic of the fasting
state, causes a proportionate increase in the rate of glucose
entry (see Figure 7-3). The conversion of glucose into pyruvate is
thus accelerated, resulting in an increase in the concentration of
ATP in the cytosol ( 2 ). The binding of ATP to ATP-sensitive K
channels closes these channels ( 3 ), thus reducing the efflux of
K ions from the cell. The resulting small depolarization of the
plasma membrane ( 4 ) triggers the opening of voltage-sensitive
Ca2 channels ( 5 ). The influx of Ca2 ions raises the cytosolic
Ca2 concentration, triggering the fusion of insulin-containing
secretory vesicles with the plasma membrane and the secretion
of insulin ( 6 ). Steps 5 and 6 are similar to those that take
place at nerve terminals, where a membrane depolarization
induced by the arrival of an action potential causes the opening
of voltage-sensitive Ca2 channels and exocytosis of vesicles
containing neurotransmitters (see Figure 7-43). [Adapted from
J.-Q. Henquin, 2000, Diabetes 49:1751.]

scarcity (following fasting) by the adjustment of insulin and
glucagon concentrations in the blood.
After a meal, when blood glucose rises above its normal
level of 5 mM, the pancreatic  cells respond to the rise in
glucose or amino acids by releasing insulin into the blood
(Figure 15-7). The released insulin circulates in the blood
and binds to insulin receptors on muscle cells and
adipocytes (fat-storing cells). The insulin receptor, a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), can transduce signals through a
phosphoinositide pathway leading to the activation of protein kinase B (see Figure 14-27). By an unknown mechanism, protein kinase B triggers the fusion of intracellular
vesicles containing GLUT4 glucose transporters with the
plasma membrane (Figure 15-8). The resulting increased
number of GLUT4 on the cell surface increases glucose influx, thus lowering blood glucose. When insulin is removed,
cell-surface GLUT4 is internalized by endocytosis, lower-

15.2 • Responses of Cells to Environmental Influences
(a) Resting cell

(b) 2.5 min

(c) 5 min

(d) 10 min

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-8 Insulin stimulation of
fat cells induces translocation of GLUT4 from intracellular
vesicles to the plasma membrane. In this experiment, fat cells
were engineered to express a chimeric protein whose N-terminal
end corresponded to the GLUT4 sequence, followed by the
entirety of the GFP sequence. When a cell is exposed to light of
the exciting wavelength, GFP fluoresces yellow-green, indicating
the position of GLUT4 within the cell. In resting cells (a), most

GLUT4 is in internal membranes that are not connected to the
plasma membrane. Successive images of the same cell after
treatment with insulin for 2.5, 5, and 10 minutes show that,
with time, increasing numbers of these GLUT4-containing
membranes fuse with the plasma membrane, thereby moving
GLUT4 to the cell surface (arrows) and enabling it to transport
glucose from the blood into the cell. Muscle cells also contain
insulin-responsive GLUT4 transporters. [Courtesy of J. Bogan.]

ing the level of cell-surface GLUT4 and thus glucose import.
Insulin stimulation of muscle cells also promotes the uptake
of glucose and its conversion into glycogen, and it reduces
the degradation of glucose to pyruvate. Insulin also acts on
hepatocytes to inhibit glucose synthesis from smaller molecules, such as lactate and acetate, and to enhance glycogen
synthesis from glucose. The net effect of all these actions is
to lower blood glucose back to the fasting concentration of
about 5 mM.
If the blood glucose level falls below about 5 mM,
pancreatic  cells start secreting glucagon. The glucagon receptor, found primarily on liver cells, is coupled to Gs protein, like the epinephrine receptor (Chapter 13). Glucagon
stimulation of liver cells activates adenylyl cyclase, leading
to the cAMP-mediated cascade that inhibits glycogen
synthesis and promotes glycogenolysis, yielding glucose
1-phosphate (see Figure 15-6b). Liver cells can convert glucose 1-phosphate into glucose, which is released into the
blood, thus raising blood glucose back toward its normal
fasting level.

Oxygen Deprivation Induces a Program
of Cellular Responses
In glycogenolysis, the activity of preexisting proteins was
regulated by the integration of multiple signals. Organisms
that require oxygen respond to oxygen deprivation, a single
stimulus, in multiple ways, some occurring rapidly and others taking longer to develop. In addition, over evolutionary
time, animals that live at high altitude (e.g., llamas, guanacos, alpacas) became adapted to low oxygen. This adaptation entailed single amino acid changes in the -globin chain
that increased the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin in these animals compared with that of hemoglobin in other animals.
Among the rapid responses to low oxygen (hypoxia) is
dilation of blood vessels, permitting increased blood flow.
This response is regulated by nitric oxide, cyclic cGMP, and
protein kinase G (see Figure 13-30). A rapid shift in metabolism, called the Pasteur effect, also occurs when cells are deprived of adequate oxygen. First observed in yeast cells, this
response accelerates the anaerobic metabolism of glucose
when aerobic metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation
slows owing to low oxygen. Burning more carbohydrates
compensates for the reduced ATP yield from anaerobic metabolism. Phosphofructokinase 1, the third enzyme in glycolysis, is inhibited by ATP and stimulated by AMP; so,
when the cell is short on energy, glycolysis increases (see Figure 8-12). The adjustment is rapid, inasmuch as it does not
require the synthesis of new molecules.
Slow adaptive responses to low oxygen at the level of the
whole organism include increasing the production of erythrocytes, which is stimulated by erythropoietin produced in
the kidney (see Figure 14-7). Transcription of the erythropoietin gene is regulated primarily by hypoxia-induced factor 1 (HIF-1), a transcriptional activator. The amount of
HIF-1 increases drastically as the partial pressure of oxygen

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

5 µm

Technique Annimation: Reporter Constructs

FPO

Diabetes mellitus results from a deficiency in the
amount of insulin released from the pancreas in response to glucose (type I) or from a decrease in the
ability of muscle and fat cells to respond to insulin (type II).
In both types, the regulation of blood glucose is impaired,
leading to persisent hyperglycemia and numerous other possible complications in untreated patients. Type I diabetes is
caused by an autoimmune process that destroys the insulinproducing  cells in the pancreas. Also called insulindependent diabetes, this form of the disease is generally responsive to insulin therapy. Most Americans with diabetes
mellitus have type II, but the underlying cause of this form of
the disease is not well understood. ❚

9

10

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

decreases from 35 mm Hg to zero, a range typical of normal
fluctuations. The nature of the oxygen sensor that causes
the increased expression of HIF-1 is not yet known, but
it probably requires a protein that has a heme-containing
oxygen-binding site somewhat like that in hemoglobin. In
addition to regulating the erythropoietin gene, HIF-1 coordinately activates the transcription of several other genes
whose encoded proteins help cells respond to hypoxia (Figure 15-9). One of these proteins, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), is secreted by cells lacking oxygen
and promotes local angiogenesis, the branching growth of
blood vessels. Expression of VEGF requires not only HIF-1
but also a Smad transcription factor, which is activated by
a TGF signal. The ability of HIF-1 to control different
genes in different cell types presumably results from this
type of combinatorial action.
The results of recent studies revealed that the degradation
of HIF-1 is controlled by an oxygen-responsive prolyl hydroxylase. HIF-1 is a dimer composed of two subunits,  and
. The  subunit is abundant in the cytosol under high or
low oxygen conditions but, when oxygen is plentiful, the 
subunit (HIF) is ubiquitinated and degraded in proteasomes
(Chapter 3). Ubiquitination is promoted by the von HippelLindau protein (pVHL), which binds to a conserved “degradation domain” of HIF-1. The binding of pVHL in turn is
facilitated by hydroxylation of a proline in the pVHLbinding site on HIF-1. The prolyl hydroxylase catalyzing
this reaction requires iron and is most active at high oxygen,
leading to degradation of the  subunit and no transcriptional activation by HIF-1. At low oxygen, when hydroxylation does not occur, active dimeric HIF-1 forms and is
translocated to the nucleus. The hypoxia-response pathway
mediated by HIF-1 and its regulation by pVHL have been

conserved for more than half a billion years, given that it is
the same in mammals, worms, and insects.
Hypoxia affects the growth of blood vessels, particularly the small capillaries, whose exact pattern, unlike that of major blood vessels like the aorta, is not
genetically determined. Angiogenesis, the branching growth of
the vasculature, is stimulated by hypoxia, thus ensuring that
all cells are in adequate proximity to the oxygenated blood
supply (Chapter 23). Growing tumors stimulate angiogenesis
to ensure their own blood supply. Understanding the signals
that control angiogenesis could potentially lead to the development of therapeutic agents that stimulate angiogenesis in a
transplanted or diseased organ that is receiving insufficient
blood or that inhibit angiogenesis in developing tumors,
thereby suffocating them. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 15.2
Responses of Cells to Environmental Influences
Glycogen breakdown and synthesis is regulated by multiple second messengers induced by neural or hormonal
stimulation (see Figure 15-6).

■

A rise in blood glucose stimulates the release of insulin
from pancreatic  cells (see Figure 15-7). Subsequent binding of insulin to its receptor on muscle cells and adipocytes
leads to the activation of protein kinase B, which promotes
glucose uptake and glycogen synthesis, resulting in a decrease in blood glucose.

■

The binding of glucagon to its G protein–coupled receptor on liver cells promotes glycogenolysis and an increase

■

 FIGURE 15-9 Model of hypoxia
response pathway mediated by hypoxiainduced factor 1 (HIF-1). The local oxygen
concentration is sensed by an unknown
mechanism probably requiring a hemeassociated protein (S-heme). The oxygendeprived form of the sensor activates
intermediates (X), which in turn stimulate
increased production of both subunits of
hypoxia-induced factor 1 (HIF-1). HIF-1
activates transcription of genes whose
encoded proteins mediate short-term and
long-term responses to an oxygen deficit.
HIF-1 activates different target genes in
different cells, indicating that it probably acts
in combination with other gene-regulating
proteins. VEGF  vascular endothelial growth
factor; I-NOS  inducible nitric oxide
synthase; HO-1 heme oxygenase-1; EPO 
erythropoietin. [Adapted from H. Zhu and H. F.
Bunn, 2001, Science 292:449; see also
W. G. Kaelin, Jr., 2002, Genes & Dev. 16:1441.]

S-heme•O2
O2

O2

S-heme

FPO

Protein
phosphorylation

X

HIF-1α/β











Glycolytic
enzyme genes

VEGF
gene

i-NOS and HO-1
genes

EPO
gene

Tyrosine hydroxylase
gene

Anaerobic
metabolism

Angiogenesis

Vasodilation

Erythropoiesis

Increased
breathing

15.3 • Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators

11

these properties of cells are coordinated by integrating signals in the developing organism, and each cell interprets the
signals that it receives in light of its previous experience and
state of differentiation.
Some extracellular inductive signals move through tissue and hence can act at a distance from the signaling cell;
some signals are tethered to the surface of the signaling cell
and thus can influence only the immediate neighboring
cells. Still other signals are highly localized by their tight
binding to components of the extracellular matrix. At least
one signaling protein appears to move through tissue by
being endocytosed and then secreted again by intervening
cells, eventually reaching cells that are capable of responding to the signal. The transmission rate of a signal depends
on the chemical properties of the signal, the properties of
the tissue through which it passes, and the ability of cells
along the way to take up or inactivate the signal. The distance that an inductive signal can move influences the size
and shape of an organ. For instance, the farther a signal
that induces neuron formation can move, the more neurons
will form. In this section and those that follow, we will see
how quantitative differences in external signals and transcription factors can determine cell fates and properties. We
begin by distinguishing two basic mechanisms of inductive
signaling and then, by way of example, examine in some
detail early stages of Drosophila development. To learn
how signals work during cell interactions in development,
transgenic animals are used to observe the effects of increasing or decreasing gene function in specific cells. For
example, if a cell can send a signal even if a certain gene
function is removed, the gene is not required for sending
the signal. Removing the same gene function from a cell
that normally receives the signal may reveal a requirement
of the gene for signal reception or transduction. In this way,
even when a novel protein is being studied, it is possible to
deduce its place in a signaling pathway. These gene manipulation methods are especially advanced in Drosophila
(Figure 15-11) but are increasingly being adapted for other
experimental organisms.

in blood glucose by the cAMP-triggered kinase cascade
(similar to epinephrine stimulation under stress conditions).
Two oxygen-sensing mechanisms help cells respond to
oxygen deprivation: one mechanism activates transcription
of hypoxia-induced factor 1 (HIF-1), and the other promotes stabilization of HIF-1 by inhibiting its proteasomal
degradation.

■

When cellular oxygen is low, HIF-1 acts with tissuespecific transcription factors to activate the expression of
various target genes in different tissues (see Figure 15-9).
One protein induced by this pathway is vascular endothelial growth factor, which stimulates local angiogenesis to
increase the blood supply and thereby oxygen to oxygendeprived cells.

■

15.3 Control of Cell Fates by Graded
Amounts of Regulators
In a developing tissue, each cell must learn how to contribute
to the overall organization of the tissue. Frequently, cells in
a particular position within the developing embryo must divide, move, change shape, or make specialized products,
whereas other nearby cells do not. In modern developmental biology, the term induction refers to events where one cell
population influences the fate of neighboring cells. Figure
15-10 schematically depicts how a series of inductive signals
can create several cell types, starting from a population of
initially equivalent cells. Induction may create tissue types
at specific sites (e.g., formation of a lens near the site at
which the retina will grow) or cause changes in the shape of
cells at a specific location. For example, changes in the shape
of cells in the center but not at the periphery of the neural
plate gives rise to the neural tube from which our central
nervous system develops. Cell orientation is critical, too. If
an epithelium produces appendages, such as feathers or bristles, all of them may need to point in the same direction. All
Initial population

1

2

FPO

▲ FIGURE 15-10 Simplified model of sequential induction
of cell types in an epithelium. Step 1 : Starting from a
population of equivalent cells (white), an initial event (e.g., cell
movements or a polarized signal) creates a second population of
cells (tan) that secretes a signal (red arrows). This signal reaches
only some of the cells in the adjacent field of cells. Step 2 : The

3

cells capable of receiving and interpreting the red signal now
form a new cell type (red) that secretes a different signal (blue
arrows) that moves away from the red cells in both directions.
Step 3 : The blue signal induces still more cell types (purple and
blue). Note that the effect of the blue signal differs, depending
on whether it acts on white cells or on tan cells.

12

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

Figure 15-11 TK—full Page

15.3 • Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators

 FIGURE 15-11 Gene manipulation in analysis of
signaling systems. (a) In the simplest case, a gene is activated
with the use of a promoter that is specific to certain cells or, as
with “heat shock” promoters, that is inducible in all cells. This
procedure has the limitation that the transgene may be
detrimental and transgenic animals cannot be isolated. (b) An
improvement is to make two lines of flies transgenic, one
carrying the gene of interest under the control of an upstream
activating sequence (UAS, X-ref) from yeast. The UAS is activated
when the yeast transcription factor GAL4 is present, as it is
when the UAS-bearing flies are crossed with flies having GAL4
expressed in certain cells. (c) The opposite goal is to remove a
gene’s function selectively from certain cells. The yeast
recombinase FLP acts on FRT sequences that have been
inserted near the base of a chromosome. Starting from a fly that
is heterozygous for a mutation of interest, mutant/wild-type, one
can obtain clones of cells that are homozygous for either the
mutant or the wild-type allele. (d) It is difficult to recognize and
analyze small clones of cells obtained as in part (c) if the cells
are not marked. In this refinement, the recombination removes
GAL80, a protein that inhibits GAL4 function, at the same time
as the mutant allele is made homozygous. The unleashed GAL4
then activates a UAS that drives the production of a fluorescent
protein. A mutant cell, like the neuron shown, can be analyzed to
see the effect of the mutation on, for example, wiring the brain.
(e) To activate a gene in small, randomly generated clones of
cells, FLP is again used but this time to remove an intervening
transcriptional termination sequence that prevents the gene of
interest from being active. At the same time, a lacZ or other
marker gene is removed; so the clone of cells with the gene
turned on is identifiable by the lack of marker gene expression.

Inductive Signaling Operates by Gradient
and Relay Mechanisms
In some cases, the induction of cell fates includes a binary
choice: in the presence of a signal, the cell is directed down
one developmental pathway; in the absence of the signal, the
cell assumes a different developmental fate or fails to develop
at all. Such signals often work in a relay mode. That is, an
initial signal induces a cascade of induction in which cells
close to the signal source are induced to assume specific fates;
they, in turn, produce other signals to organize their neighbors (Figure 15-12a). Alternatively, a signal may induce different cell fates, depending on its concentration. In this
gradient mode, the fate of a receiving cell is determined by
the amount of the signal that reaches it, which is related to its
distance from the signal source (Figure 15-12b). Any substance that can induce different responses depending on its
concentration is often referred to as a morphogen.
The concentration at which a signal induces a specific
cellular response is called a threshold. A graded signal, or
morphogen, exhibits several thresholds, each one corresponding to a specific response in receiving cells. For instance, a low concentration of an inductive signal causes a
cell to assume fate A, but a higher signal concentration
causes the cell to assume fate B. In the gradient mode of

13

(a) Relay signaling

FPO

(b) Gradient signaling

▲ FIGURE 15-12 Two modes of inductive signaling. In the
relay mode (a), a short-range signal (red arrow) stimulates the
receiving cell to send another signal (purple), and so on for one
or more rounds. In the gradient mode (b), a signal produced in
localized source cells (red arrows) reaches nearby cells in larger
amounts than the amounts reaching distant cells. If the receiving
cells respond differently to different concentrations of the signal
(indicated by width of the arrows), then a single signal may
create multiple cell types.

signaling, the signal is newly created, and so it has not built
up to equal levels everywhere. Alternatively, the signal could
be produced at one end of a field of cells and destroyed or
inactivated at the other (the “source and sink” idea), so a
graded distribution is maintained.

Mesoderm Cell Fates in Xenopus Blastula Studies with activin, a TGF-type signaling protein that determines cell fate
in early Xenopus embryos, have been sources of insight into
how cells determine the concentration of a graded inductive
signal. Activin helps organize the mesoderm along the
dorsal/ventral (back/front) axis of an animal. The endoderm
and ectoderm form first after fertilization of a Xenopus
oocyte; the mesoderm forms slightly later. These three distinct cell populations (germ layers) make up the blastula, a
hollow ball of cells.
Specific genes are used as indicators of the tissue-creating
effects of signals such as activin. For instance, a low concentration of activin induces expression of the Xenopus
brachyury (Xbra) gene throughout the early mesoderm.
Xbra is a transcription factor necessary for mesoderm development. Higher concentrations of activin induce expression
of the Xenopus goosecoid (Xgsc) gene. Xgsc protein is able
to transform ventral into dorsal mesoderm; so the local induction of Xgsc by activin causes the formation of dorsal,
rather than ventral, mesodermal cells near the activin source.
Using 35S-labeled activin, scientists demonstrated that Xenopus blastula cells each express some 5000 type II TGF-like
receptors that bind activin. Findings from additional experiments showed that maximal Xbra expression was achieved
when about 100 receptors were occupied. At a concentration
of activin at which 300 receptors were occupied, cells began
expressing higher levels of Xgsc and lower levels of Xbra.

14

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

Similar results were obtained with blastula cells experimentally manipulated to express sevenfold higher levels of the activin type II receptor. These findings indicate that blastula
cells measure the absolute number of ligand-bound receptors
rather than the ratio of bound to unbound receptors, and
confirm the importance of signal concentration.

Vulva Development in C. elegans An example of cell-fate determination by a combination of graded and relayed signals
is the development of the vulva of the nematode worm C. elegans. This structure develops from a group of epidermal P cells
whose fates are controlled by an inductive signal from a
nearby cell called the anchor cell. All the P cells have the potential to become any of three different cell types: 1 and 2,
which refer to different vulval cell types, and 3, which is a
nonvulval type. A set of cells, such as the P cells, is called an
equivalence group if each cell in the set has equal capacity to
form more than one cell type. The inductive signal secreted by
the anchor cell is LIN-3, which is similar to vertebrate epidermal growth factor (EGF). Like the EGF receptor, the receptor
for LIN-3 is a receptor tyrosine kinase, called LET-23, that
acts through a Ras–MAP kinase pathway (see Figure 14-21).
The results of early studies suggested that LIN-3 was a
graded signal inducing the 1 fate in the nearest P cell (nor-

GRADIENT
MODEL

3°

2°

P3.p

P4.p

P5.p

Morphogens Control Cell Fates in Early
Drosophila Development

ac

FPO

3°

1°

2°

3°

P6.p

P7.p

P8.p

RELAY MODEL
LIN-12

LET-23

Inductive signal
(LIN-3)

Lateral signal

▲ FIGURE 15-13 Gradient and relay signaling in C. elegans
vulva development. The anchor cell (ac) sends a signal to the
vulval precursor cells (P3.p–P8.p), all of which have equivalent
potential to form any of three cell types—1, 2, 3. The EGFrelated signal, LIN-3, is received by the LET-23 receptor. Cells
receiving the highest amount of signal form 1, cells receiving a
moderate amount form 2, and cells receiving little or none form
3. The three cell fates are distinguished by following their
subsequent patterns of cell division. The effects of the graded
LIN-3 signal are further controlled by a signal relay. After the
anchor cell sends LIN-3 to the nearest cell, normally P6.p, the
P6.p cell then sends a different signal to its neighbors, which
turns out to be a ligand for LIN-12. The demonstration of the
relay effect came from genetically removing LET-23 receptor
from just the P5.p and P7.p cells, which prevents them from
responding to the LIN-3 signal. If direct LIN-3 graded signal
accounted for all the cell types, P5.p and P7.p should take on the
3 fate. However, they still manage to form 2 cells; so another
system must operate. This other system is the signal for LIN-12
from the P6.p cell. [Adapted from J. S. Simske and S. K. Kim, 1995,
Nature 375:142.]

mally P6.p) and the 2 fate in P5.p and P7.p, which are
located slightly farther away from the anchor cell (Figure
15-13a). If determination of the 2 fate depended solely on
a graded LIN-3 signal, then mutant P5.p and P7.p cells lacking the receptor for LIN-3 would be expected to assume the
nonvulval 3 fate. Surprisingly, when this experiment was
done, the mutant cells took on their normal 2 fate (Figure
15-13b). The most likely explanation of these results is that,
when the P6.p cell takes on the 1 fate, it sends out a different signal that normally works with moderate levels of LIN3 to ensure the production of 2 cells. This second, relayed
signal appears to be a ligand for LIN-12, a Notch-type receptor. Stimulation of LIN-12 on the P5.p and P7.p cells induces expression of a phosphatase that inactivates MAP
kinase, thus preventing the 1 fate choice.
In glycogenolysis, signal integration is at the level of a
two-subunit protein, with each signal acting on one of the
subunits. In vulval cell-fate determination, the activity of a
single kinase, MAP kinase, is controlled by two pathways:
signaling from an EGF-type receptor activates MAP kinase;
signaling from a Notch-type receptor deactivates it. The convergence of these two pathways on MAP kinase elegantly allows the formation of multiple adjacent cell types.

Drosophila has been particularly useful in studying morphogens for three reasons. First, graded regulatory molecules
are used extensively in the development of the early
Drosophila embryo and in growth of the legs and wings. Second, a fertilized egg develops into an adult fly in only about
10 days. Third, powerful genetic screens have identified
many developmental mutants with dramatic abnormal phenotypes. Some of these defects have been found to arise from
mutations in genes encoding morphogens; others arise in
genes encoding signal-transduction proteins.
To understand how morphogens determine cell fates in
the early fly embryo, we first need to set the scene. Oogenesis begins with a stem cell that divides asymmetrically to generate a single germ cell, which divides four times to generate
16 cells. One of these cells completes meiosis (see Figure 9-3),
becoming an oocyte; the other 15 cells become nurse cells,
which synthesize proteins and mRNAs that are transported
through cytoplasmic bridges to the oocyte (Figure 15-14).
These molecules are necessary for maturation of the oocyte
and for the early stages of embryogenesis. Roughly one-third
of the genome is represented in the mRNA contributed by
the mother to the oocyte, a substantial dowry. Each group
of 16 cells is surrounded by a single layer of somatic cells
called the follicle, which deposits the eggshell. The mature
oocyte, or egg, is released into the oviduct, where it is fertilized; the fertilized egg, or zygote, is then laid.
The first 13 nuclear divisions of the Drosophila zygote
are synchronous and rapid, each division occurring about
every 10 minutes. This DNA replication is the most rapid

15.3 • Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators

15

Dorsal appendage
Nascent
eggshell

Nurse
cells
Oocyte
Follicle
(somatic) cells
1
Early oogenesis

Egg membrane
Egg shell

FPO
2
Mid-oogenesis

▲ FIGURE 15-14 Development of a Drosophila oocyte into
a mature egg. A single germ cell gives rise to fifteen nurse cells
(green) and a single oocyte (yellow) ( 1 ). The early oocyte is
about the same size as the neighboring nurse cells; the follicle, a
layer of somatic cells, surrounds the oocyte and nurse cells The
nurse cells begin to synthesize mRNAs and proteins necessary
for oocyte maturation, and the follicle cells begin to form the egg
shell. Midway through oogenesis ( 2 ), the oocyte has increased
in size considerably. The mature egg ( 3 ) is surrounded by the
completed eggshell (gray). The nurse cells have been discarded,

known for a eukaryote, with the entire 120 Mb of chromosomal DNA copied in a cell-cycle S phase that lasts only 3
minutes. Because these nuclear divisions are not accompanied by cell divisions, they generate a multinucleated egg cell,
a syncytium, with a common cytoplasm and plasma membrane (Figure 15-15a). As the nuclei divide, they begin to migrate outward toward the plasma membrane. From about 2
to 3 hours after fertilization, the nuclei reach the surface,
forming the syncytial blastoderm; during the next hour or so,
cell membranes form around the nuclei, generating the cellular blastoderm, or blastula (Figure 15-15b). All future tissues are derived from the 6000 or so epithelial cells on the
surface of the blastula. Soon some of these cells move inside,
a process termed gastrulation, and eventually develop into
the internal tissues.
The syncytial fly embryo is about 100 cells long, head
to tail, and about 60 cells around. Within 1 day of fertilization, the zygote develops into a larva, a segmented form
that lacks wings and legs. Development continues through
three larval stages (≈4 days) and the ≈5-day pupal stage
during which metamorphosis takes place and adult structures are created (Figure 15-16). At the end of pupation,
about 10 days after fertilization, the shell splits and an
adult fly emerges.
The initially equivalent cells of the syncytial embryo
rapidly begin to assume different fates, leading to a wellordered pattern of distinct cell identities. These early patterning events set the stage for the later development and
proper placement of different tissues (e.g., muscle, nerve,
epidermis) and body parts, as well as the shapes of the appendages and the organization of cell types within them.
Because the early embryo is initially symmetric side to side,
the creation of differences among cells is a two-axis prob-

3
Mature egg

Polar granules
Dorsal
Posterior

Anterior
Ventral

Vitelline membrane
Perivitelline space

but mRNAs synthesized and translocated to the oocyte by the
nurse cells function in the early embryo. Polar granules located in
the posterior region of the egg cytoplasm mark the region in
which germ-line cells will arise. The asymmetry of the mature
egg (e.g., the off-center position of the nucleus) sets the stage
for the initial cell-fate determination in the embryo. After its
release into the oviduct, fertilization of the egg triggers
embryogenesis. [Adapted from A. J. F. Griffiths et al., 1993, An
Introduction to Genetic Analysis, 5th ed., W. H. Freeman and Company,
p. 643.]

lem: dorsal/ventral (back/front) and anterior/posterior
(head/tail). Different sets of genes act on each axis; so every
cell learns its initial fate by responding to input from both
dorsoventral-acting and anterioposterior-acting regulators
in a kind of two-dimensional grid. As we will see, both regulatory systems begin with information and molecules contributed to the oocyte as a dowry from the mother. When
the mature egg is laid, it is asymmetric along both axes (see
Figure 15-14).
Because the early fly embryo is a syncytium, regulatory
molecules can move in the common cytoplasm without having to cross plasma membranes. Some molecules form gradients, which are used in the earliest stages of cell-fate
determination in Drosophila before subdivision of the syncytium into individual cells. Thus transcription factors, as
well as secreted molecules, can function as morphogens in
the syncytial fly embryo. Syncytia are less common in the
early development of other animals and in later stages of fly
development; in these stages, patterning events are controlled
largely by interactions between cells mediated by extracellular signals, which may act in a graded or relay mode.
To decipher the molecular basis of cell-fate determination and global patterning, investigators have (1) carried
out massive genetic screens to identify all the genes having
roles in the organizing process, (2) cloned mutation-defined
genes; (3) determined the spatial and temporal patterns of
mRNA for each gene and the distribution of the encoded
proteins in the embryo; and (4) assessed the effects of mutations on cell differentiation, tissue patterning, and the expression of other regulatory genes. The principles of
cell-fate determination and tissue patterning learned from
Drosophila have proved to have broad applicability to animal development.

16

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

(a) NUCLEAR DIVISION AND MIGRATION

Plasma
membrane
Nuclei
with surrounding
cytoplasm

Cleavage
furrows

Yolk

FPO
Yolk

Pole
cells

Pole
cells

Figure TK
21p (wide) X 39p (deep)

Yolk

Syncytial blastoderm
(b) CELLULARIZATION

Yolk
Yolk

Nuclear elongation and extension
of cleavage furrows between cells

Cellular blastoderm

▲ FIGURE 15-15 Formation of the cellular during early
Drosophila embryogenesis. Stages from syncytium (a) to
cellular blastoderm (b) are illustrated in diagrams and electron
micrographs. Nuclear division is not accompanied by cell
division until about 6000 nuclei have formed and migrated
outward to the plasma membrane. Before cellularization, the
embryo displays surface bulges overlying individual nuclei,
which remain within a common cytoplasm. No membranes
other than that surrounding the entire embryo are present.
After cellularization, cell membranes are evident around individual
nuclei. Note the segregation of the nuclei of so-called pole
cells, which give rise to germ-line cells, at the posterior end of
the syncytial blastoderm. [See R. R. Turner and A. P. Mahowald,
1976, Devel. Biol. 50:95; photographs courtesy of A. P. Mahowald;
diagrams after P. A. Lawrence, The Making of a Fly, 1992, Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford.]

▲ FIGURE 15-16 Major stages in the development of
Drosophila. (a) The fertilized egg develops into a blastoderm
and undergoes cellularization in a few hours. The larva, a
segmented form, appears in about 1 day and passes through
three stages (instars) over a 4-day period, developing into a
prepupa. Pupation takes ≈4–5 days, ending with the emergence
of the adult fly from the pupal case. (b) Groups of ectodermal
cells called imaginal discs are set aside at specific sites in the
larval body cavity. During pupation, these give rise to the various
body parts indicated. Other precursor cells give rise to adult
muscle, the nervous system, and other internal structures.
[Part (a) from M. W. Strickberger, 1985, Genetics, 3d ed., Macmillan,
p. 38; reprinted with permission of Macmillan Publishing Company.
Part (b) Adapted from same source and J. W. Fristrom et al., 1969, in
E. W. Hanly, ed., Park City Symposium on Problems in Biology, University
of Utah Press, p. 381.]

15.3 • Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators

Reciprocal Signaling Between the Oocyte
and Follicle Cells Establishes Initial
Dorsoventral Patterning in Drosophila
Initial dorsal/ventral patterning in Drosophila is controlled
by the events of oogenesis. Indeed, the shape of the mature
oocyte is an accurate predictor of the dorsal/ventral orientation of the embryo. The process begins when the nucleus of
the early oocyte moves slightly, perhaps randomly, toward
what will become the anterior and dorsal side of the mature
egg (Figure 15-17a). That loss of symmetry triggers the polarization of signals that coordinate the dorsal/ventral axes
of the oocyte, embryo, and surrounding eggshell. Such coordination is necessary so that the structures on the eggshell
become aligned properly with structures of the growing embryo. For example, breathing tubes in the eggshell must connect with appropriate regions of the embryo.
About midway through Drosophila oogenesis, the production of Gurken, a signal similar to epidermal growth factor, begins. Because of the off-center location of the nucleus,

17

Gurken is produced on the dorsal side of the oocyte (Figure
15-17b). The receptor for Gurken, a receptor tyrosine kinase
like the EGF receptor, is present on the surfaces of all the follicle cells that abut the oocyte. The dorsal Gurken signal activates its receptors only in dorsal follicle cells, leading to
changes in their appearance and to repression of the pipe
gene within them. Because of this dorsal repression, Pipe protein is produced only in ventral follicle cells. Pipe is an enzyme that catalyzes sulfation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs),
the polysaccharide chains that are added to proteins to form
proteoglycans (Chapter 6).
Pipe protein promotes ventral cell fates, probably by activating a still unknown signal that triggers a series of proteolytic cleavages in the perivitelline space on the ventral side
of the by now mature egg. The ensuing chain of events has
some similarity to the blood-clotting cascade, each protein
cleaving and thereby activating the next one in the series. The
outcome of the cleavages is the production of a ligand called
Spätzle only on the ventral side (Figure 15-17c). By this time,
the egg has been fertilized and early nuclear division is

Figure TK
35p (wide) X 22p (deep)

▲ FIGURE 15-17 Dorsoventral axis determination in
Drosophila. This process relies on two signal systems, one
in follicle cells and the other in the oocyte or embryo or
both, plus a proteolytic cascade within the perivitelline space.
(a, b) Movement of the oocyte nucleus creates an initial
asymmetry ( 1 ). The dorsal location of the oocyte nucleus
ultimately results in the production of Pipe protein only in ventral
follicle cells ( 2 – 5 ). (c) Subsequent events in the perivitelline
space along the ventral surface generate a gradient of active
Spätzle ( 6 – 9 ). By this time, the egg has been fertilized and the
embryo is a syncytium with many nuclei; the region around only
one nucleus is shown. Activation of Toll on the embryo’s surface

by Spätzle causes Dorsal protein to enter the nucleus ( 10 and 11 )
where it activates transcription of specific target genes,
depending on its concentration. (d) The concentration of
Spätzle — hence Toll activation and nuclear localization of Dorsal—
is greatest along the ventral midline, conferring ventral fates
(e.g., muscle) on cells in this region. More laterally, less
Dorsal enters the nuclei, and in consequence the cell fates are
different (e.g., neural). Dorsal cell fates arise where no Dorsal
enters the nucleus. Mutants lacking Toll receptor, or Dorsal, form
only dorsal cell types. [Adapted from Gilbert and Hashimoto, 1999,
Trends Cell Biol. 9:102.]

18

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

underway. Spätzle binds to its transmembrane receptor,
called Toll, on the ventral embryo surface. Thus the signaling has come full circle: Gurken ligand produced dorsally in
oocyte → activation of its EGF-like receptor on dorsal follicle cells, and then back through the protease cascade on the
ventral side → Spätzle ligand → activation of its receptor,
Toll, on the ventral side of the embryo. The net effect is to coordinate the eggshell structures produced by the follicle cells
with the embryo structures produced inside.
Within the embryo, association of the cytosolic domain
of activated Toll with two proteins (Tube and Pelle) leads to
phosphorylation of Cactus protein. In the absence of Toll signaling, Cactus binds to a transcription factor called Dorsal
and traps it, but phosphorylated Cactus is rapidly degraded
by the proteasome. The newly freed Dorsal is able to enter
the nuclei of the embryo’s cells and activate the transcription of different target genes, depending on its concentration
(see Figure 15-17c). Spätzle and Dorsal thus function as
graded regulators, inducing ventral fates where their concentration is highest and other fates laterally as their concentration diminishes (Figure 15-17d). Dorsal function reaches its
peak after cellularization has taken place.
The central features of the Toll-Dorsal pathway in flies,
which are analogous to those of the mammalian NF-kB
pathway discussed in Chapter 14, exist in mammals and
probably in all animals. Dorsal is similar to the NF- B transcription factor; Cactus, to its inhibitor, I- B; and the Toll receptor, to the receptor for interleukin 1, which acts through
Tube and Pelle equivalents to cause the phosphorylation of
I- B and the release of NF-kB (see Figure 14-28). NF- B is
a critical regulator of genes required for immune responses in
mammals and appears to function in mammalian development as well. It nicely exemplifies the utilization of one signal-transduction pathway to accomplish multiple tasks, such
as patterning in development and the immune response to infection or injury. This phenomenon appears to be fairly common and partly explains the small number of signaling
pathways that have evolved over biological time despite the
increasing complexity of organisms.

Nuclear Dorsal and Decapentaplegic, a Secreted
Signal, Specify Ventral and Dorsal Cell Fates
The remarkable series of steps depicted in Figure 15-17 results
in a gradient in the nuclear localization of the transcription
factor Dorsal. The concentration of nuclear Dorsal decreases
gradually from highest in cells at the ventral midline to lower
values in lateral cells and eventually to none in dorsal cells.
Mutants lacking dorsal function cannot make cells with ventral character; so the entire embryo develops dorsal structures.
(Note that fly genes are named according to their mutant phenotypes; thus the dorsal gene controls ventral fates.) Once inside the nucleus, Dorsal controls the transcription of specific
target genes by binding to distinct high- and low-affinity regulatory sites and by interacting in a combinatorial fashion with
other transcription factors. Dorsal represses the transcription

of decapentaplegic (dpp), tolloid, short gastrulation, and
zerknüllt and activates the transcription of twist, snail, singleminded, and rhomboid. Each of these genes contains a unique
combination of cis-acting regulatory sequences to which Dorsal and other transcription factors bind.
Figure 15-18 illustrates how nuclear Dorsal specifies different target-gene expression patterns, depending on its con-

Dorsal protein

Snail

Low-affinity dorsalbinding sites

Twist protein

bHLH

High-affinity dorsalbinding sites

(a) Ventral cell (high [Dorsal])

twist gene

twist
protein-coding
sequence

snail gene

rhomboid gene

snail

FPO

rhomboid

(b) Lateral cell (low [Dorsal])

twist gene

snail gene

twist

snail

rhomboid
rhomboid gene

▲ FIGURE 15-18 Activation of different target genes by
Dorsal subsequent to Toll signaling. Activation of Toll by
Spätzle leads to a graded nuclear localization of Dorsal protein
(see Figure 15-17d). The resulting Dorsal concentration gradient
(ventrally high and dorsally low) can lead to different patterns of
gene expression. Shown here are three target genes that have
either high-affinity (dark blue) or low-affinity (light blue) Dorsalbinding sites. (a) In ventral regions where the concentration of
Dorsal (purple) is high, it can bind to low-affinity sites in twist and
snail, activating the transcription of these genes. Twist protein
(orange) also activates the transcription of snail, which encodes
a repressor (yellow) that prevents the transcription of rhomboid in
this region. (b) In lateral regions, the Dorsal concentration is not
high enough for the binding of Dorsal to the low-affinity sites
regulating twist and snail. The binding of Dorsal to rhomboid is
facilitated by the presence of high-affinity sites and the synergistic
binding of bHLH heterodimeric activators (green) to neighboring
sites. The sharp boundary in the expression of Rhomboid
leads to distinct cell types in the ventral and lateral regions.
[See A. M. Huang et al., 1997, Genes & Dev. 11:1963.]

15.3 • Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators

ing pathway, including Smad transcription factors, appear to
be present and participating in development in all animals
(see Figure 14-2). As discussed in Section 15.5, the vertebrate
proteins also control patterning along the dorsal/ventral axis,
although the axis is flipped in vertebrates compared with invertebrates. Loss of TGF signaling, owing to mutations in
TGF receptors or Smad proteins, contributes to the onset of
cancer (Chapter 23).

Transcriptional Control by Maternally Derived
Bicoid Protein Specifies the Embryo’s Anterior
We turn now to determination of the anterior/posterior axis
in the early fly embryo while it is still a syncytium. As in
determination of the dorsal/ventral axis, specification of
anterior/posterior cell fate begins during oogenesis. In this
case, the initial asymmetry involves so-called maternal
mRNAs, which are produced by nurse cells and transported
into the oocyte where they become localized in discrete spatial domains (see Figure 15-14). For example, bicoid mRNA
is trapped at the most anterior region, or anterior pole, of the
early fly embryo (Figure 15-19). The anterior localization of

160 min

FPO

180 min

210 min

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-19 Maternally derived
bicoid mRNA is localized to the anterior region of early
Drosophila embryos. All embryos shown are positioned
with anterior to the left and dorsal at the top. In this
experiment, in situ hybridization with a radioactively labeled
RNA probe specific for bicoid mRNA was performed on
whole-embryo sections 2.5 – 3.5 hours after fertilization.
This time period covers the transition from the syncytial
blastoderm to the beginning of gastrulation. After excess
probe was removed, probe hybridized to maternal bicoid
mRNA (dark silver grains) was detected by autoradiography.
Bicoid protein is a transcription factor that acts alone and
with other regulators to control the expression of certain
genes in the embryo’s anterior region. [From P. W. Ingham,
1988, Nature 335:25; photographs courtesy of P. W. Ingham.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

150 min

Overview Animation: Gene Control in Embryonic Development

centration. For instance, the twist gene, which contains three
low-affinity Dorsal-binding sites, is expressed most ventrally
where the Dorsal concentration is highest. As the Dorsal concentration decreases, it falls beneath the threshold necessary
to activate the transcription of twist, whose encoded protein
is a transcriptional activator of the snail and rhomboid
genes. The rhomboid gene, which is expressed only in lateral regions, is controlled through a complex cis-acting
regulatory region that contains three high-affinity Dorsalbinding sites. Two of these sites are adjacent to regulatory
sequences that bind proteins containing the basic helixloop-helix (bHLH) motif, which is present in numerous transcription factors. These bHLH proteins are produced only
in lateral regions of the early fly embryo and act cooperatively with Dorsal to induce transcription of the rhomboid
gene in lateral cells. The rhomboid control region also contains four binding sites for Snail, a transcriptional repressor.
The production of Snail is induced only at high concentrations of Dorsal because the snail gene contains only lowaffinity Dorsal-binding sites within its control region.
Because Snail is localized ventrally, its repressor activity defines a sharp ventral-lateral boundary in the transcription of
rhomboid. This example nicely illustrates how two transcriptional regulators can collaborate to create a sharp
boundary between cell types, something to be discussed further in Sections 15.4 and 15.5.
The dorsal/ventral patterning produced by Dorsal is reinforced by Decapentaplegic (Dpp). This secreted signaling
protein belongs to the TGF  family, which is found in all animals (Chapter 14). Because transcription of the dpp gene is
repressed by Dorsal, Dpp is produced only in the dorsalmost cells of the early fly embryo, which lack Dorsal in their
nuclei. A combination of genetic and molecular genetic evidence suggests that Dpp acts as a morphogen to induce the
establishment of different ectoderm cell types in the dorsal
region of the embryo. For instance, complete removal of Dpp
function leads to a loss of all dorsal structures and their conversion into more-ventral ones. Embryos carrying only one
wild-type dpp allele show an increase in the number of cells
assuming a ventral fate, whereas embryos with three copies
of dpp form more dorsal cells.
Thus two graded secreted signals, Spätzle and Dpp, play
critical roles in determining the dorsal/ventral axis in
Drosophila and in inducing further patterning within the
dorsal and ventral regions. Spätzle, acting through nuclearlocalized Dorsal, a transcription factor, induces ventral fates
and controls the production of Dpp, which induces dorsal
fates. Unlike Dorsal, which functions only in early development, the Dpp signal is used repeatedly in later development,
participating in many processes such as appendage development, gut formation, and eye development. The Spätzle signal also has other functions, which are discussed later.
The frog TGF family members called BMP2 and BMP4
have inductive effects similar to those of Dpp protein and
indeed are the vertebrate proteins most closely related in sequence to Dpp. Most or all components of the TGF signal-

19

20

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

bicoid mRNA depends on its 3 -untranslated end and three
maternally derived proteins. Embryos produced by female
flies that are homozygous for bicoid mutations lack anterior
body parts, attesting to the importance of Bicoid protein in
specifying anterior cell fates.
Bicoid protein, a homeodomain-type transcription factor,
activates expression of certain anterior-specific genes discussed later. In the syncytial fly embryo, Bicoid protein
spreads through the common cytoplasm away from the anterior end where it is produced from the localized mRNA. As
a result, a Bicoid protein gradient is established along the anteroposterior axis of the syncytial embryo. Evidence that the
Bicoid protein
gradient in
embryo

(a)

0

Promoter

[Bicoid]

Copies of
bicoid gene
in mother

Expression pattern

P

A

Anterior

Posterior

hunchback
(b)

1
Highaffinity
Bicoidbinding
site

(c)

2

(d)

2

Lowaffinity
Bicoidbinding
site

Hunchback
protein

FPO
Synthetic

High-affinity Bicoidbinding sites

Reporter-gene
product

Synthetic
(e)

2
Low-affinity Bicoidbinding sites

Bicoid protein gradient determines anterior structures was
obtained through injection of synthetic bicoid mRNA at different locations in the embryo. This treatment led to the formation of anterior structures at the site of injection, with
progressively more posterior structures forming at increasing
distances from the injection site. Another test was to make
flies that produced extra anterior Bicoid protein; in these
flies, the anterior structures expanded to occupy a greater
proportion of the embryo.
Bicoid protein promotes transcription of the hunchback
(hb) gene from the embryo’s genome. Transcription of hunchback is greatest in the anterior of the embryo where the Bicoid
concentration is highest. Mutations in hunchback and several
other genes in the embryo’s genome lead to large gaps in the anteroposterior pattern of the early embryo; hence these genes are
collectively called gap genes. Several types of evidence indicate
that Bicoid protein directly regulates transcription of hunchback. For example, increasing the number of copies of the bicoid gene expands the Bicoid and Hunchback (Hb) protein
gradients posteriorly in parallel (Figure 15-20a–c). Analysis of
the hunchback gene revealed that it contains three low-affinity
and three high-affinity binding sites for Bicoid protein. The results of studies with synthetic genes containing either all highaffinity or all low-affinity Bicoid-binding sites demonstrated
that the affinity of the site determines the threshold concentration of Bicoid at which gene transcription is activated (Figure
15-20d, e). In addition, the number of Bicoid-binding sites occupied at a given concentration has been shown to determine
the amplitude, or level, of the transcription response.
Findings from studies of Bicoid’s ability to regulate transcription of the hunchback gene show that variations in the
levels of transcription factors, as well as in the number or
affinity of specific regulatory sequences controlling different
target genes, or both, contribute to generating diverse patterns of gene expression in development. These findings thus
parallel those on the Dorsal transcription factor discussed
previously. Similar mechanisms are employed in other developing organisms.

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-20 Maternally derived
Bicoid controls anterior/posterior expression of the
embryonic hunchback (hb) gene. (a–c) Increasing the number
of bicoid genes in mother flies changed the Bicoid gradient in the
early embryo, leading to a corresponding change in the gradient
of Hunchback protein produced from the hunchback gene in the
embryo’s genome. The hunchback promoter contains three highaffinity and three low-affinity Bicoid-binding sites. Transgenic flies
carrying a reporter gene linked to a synthetic promoter
containing either four high-affinity sites (d) or four low-affinity
sites (e) were prepared. In response to the same Bicoid protein
gradient in the embryo, expression of the reporter gene
controlled by a promoter carrying high-affinity Bicoid-binding sites
extended more posteriorly than did transcription of a reporter
gene carrying low-affinity sites. This result indicates that the
threshold concentration of Bicoid that activates hunchback
transcription depends on the affinity of the Bicoid-binding site.
Bicoid regulates other target genes in a similar fashion. [Adapted
from D. St. Johnston and C. Nüsslein-Volhard, 1992, Cell 68:201.]

Maternally Derived Translation Inhibitors
Reinforce Bicoid-Mediated Anterioposterior
Patterning
Cell types at the posterior end of the fly embryo are controlled by a different mechanism—one in which control is at
the translational level rather than the transcriptional level.
As just discussed, transcription of the embryo’s hunchback
gene, which promotes anterior cell fates, produces an anteriorly located band of hunchback mRNA and Hunchback
protein because of the anterior → posterior gradient of maternally derived Bicoid protein. In addition, however, hunchback mRNA synthesized by nurse cells also is present in the
early embryo. Even though this maternal hunchback mRNA
is uniformly distributed throughout the embryo, its translation is prevented in the posterior region by another maternally derived protein called Nanos, which is localized to the

15.3 • Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators

posterior end of the embryo. Nanos protein not only blocks
translation of maternal hunchback mRNA in the posterior
region but also is required for germ-line cells to form at the
posterior end of the embryo. The evolutionary conservation
of this Nanos function in flies and in worms may indicate
an ancient system for forming germ-line cells. Related proteins exist in vertebrates, but their functions are not yet
known.
Figure 15-21 illustrates how translational regulation by
Nanos helps to establish the anterior → posterior Hunchback gradient needed for normal development. Translational
repression of hunchback mRNA by Nanos depends on specific sequences in the 3 -untranslated region of the mRNA,
called Nanos-response elements (NREs). Along with two
other RNA-binding proteins, Nanos binds to the NRE in
hunchback mRNA. Although the precise mechanism by
which repression is achieved is not known, repression inversely correlates with the length of the poly(A) tail in
hunchback mRNA, which is determined by the balance between the opposite processes of polyadenylation and deadenylation. In wild-type embryos, the length of the poly(A)
tail increases immediately before translation of hunchback
mRNA. The results of genetic and molecular studies suggest
that Nanos promotes deadenylation of hunchback mRNA
and thereby decreases its translation. In the absence of
Nanos, an accumulation of maternal Hb protein in the posterior region leads to the failure of the posterior structures to
form normally, and the embryo dies. Conversely, if Nanos is
produced in the anterior, thereby inhibiting the production of
Hb from both maternal and embryonic hunchback mRNA,
anterior body parts fail to form, again a lethal consequence.
How is Nanos protein localized to the posterior region of
the embryo even though maternal nanos mRNA is uniformly
distributed throughout the fertilized egg and early embryo?
The results of recent studies have revealed that localization
of Nanos traces back to the transport of another maternally
derived mRNA by kinesin, a motor protein that moves along
microtubules (Chapter 20). First, a protein called Smaug,
which is uniformly distributed in early fly embryos, turns off
translation of nanos mRNA in anterior regions only, much as
Nanos turns off translation of hunchback mRNA in posterior regions. (Smaug is present in mammals, but its function
in these animals is unknown.) Second, a protein called Oskar
binds to Smaug and blocks its activity in the posterior region,
allowing the translation of nanos mRNA. Third, maternal
oskar mRNA, which is present throughout the early embryo,
is moved to the posterior pole by kinesin-dependent transport before it is translated there. Thus we come at last to a
motor protein that controls, after several intervening steps,
the localized activity of a transcription factor (Hunchback).
Translational control due to the action of an inhibitor,
mRNA localization, or both, may be widely used strategies
for regulating development. For instance, specific mRNAs
are localized during the development of muscle cells (see
Figure 12-31) and during cell division in the budding yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (see Figure 22-22). Similar mech-

21

(a)
Fertilized egg

Early embryo

Hunchback
protein (maternal
and embryonic)

nanos
mRNA

Maternal
hunchback
mRNA

Nanos
protein

(b)
Nanos
protein

hb mRNA (maternal)

Anterior

FPO

Posterior

Nanos
protein

5
hb
mRNA

NRE

AAAAAAA 3

Translation of hb mRNA

NRE AA
Nanos promotes
deadenylation

No hb translation

Anterior
development

Abdominal
development

Hb protein

hb mRNA (maternal)

Anterior

Posterior

▲ FIGURE 15-21 Role of Nanos protein in excluding
maternally derived Hunchback (Hb) protein from the
posterior region of Drosophila embryos. (a) Both nanos (red)
and hunchback (hb) (blue) mRNAs derived from the mother are
distributed uniformly in the fertilized egg and early embryo.
Nanos protein, which is produced only in the posterior region,
subsequently inhibits translation of maternal hb (blue) mRNA
posteriorly. (b) Diffusion of Nanos protein from its site of
synthesis in the posterior region establishes a posterior →
anterior Nanos gradient. A complex of Nanos and two other
proteins inhibits translation of maternal hb mRNA. As a
consequence, maternally derived Hb protein is expressed in
a graded fashion that parallels and reinforces the Hb protein
gradient resulting from Bicoid-controlled transcription of the
embryo’s hb gene (see Figure 15-20). [See C. Wreden et al., 1997,
Development 124:3015.]

22

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

anisms operate during the development of C. elegans. Even
more intriguing is the discovery that Bicoid protein binds
not only to DNA to promote transcription of the embryonic
hunchback gene but also to caudal mRNA (which encodes
another Drosophila protein having a role in early-patterning
events) and regulates its translation.

Toll-like Signaling Activates an Ancient Defense
System in Plants and Animals
Before continuing our account of signaling and gene control
in development, we digress briefly to consider the connection
between innate immunity and the Toll-Dorsal signaling pathway discussed previously (see Figure 15-17c). Recall that this
pathway has many parallels with the NF- B pathway in
mammals, which is intimately involved in immune responses.
Discovery of these parallels was the first hint that Toll signaling might function in nondevelopmental contexts. More
recently, researchers have found that the Toll receptor, its ligand Spätzle, and other pathway components are required for
the expression of an antifungal peptide (drosomycin) in fly
larvae and adults. Stimulation of a different Toll-like receptor triggers the production of an antibacterial peptide
(diptericin) in flies. Discovery of a mammalian Toll-like receptor that controls the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines stimulated exploration of the whole set of
similarities.
Toll signaling now appears to be one of the most evolutionarily conserved processes known. All the components between Toll and the activation of Dorsal have been largely
conserved. There are 8 Drosophila proteins related to Toll
plus Toll itself and 10 Toll-related human proteins that control the production of a wide variety of antimicrobial peptides in flies and cytokines in mammals. These molecules
provide a rapid, nonspecific defense against infection by a
wide array of pathogens. The adaptive immune response
mounted by vertebrates, involving antibodies and T cells, is
directed against specific pathogens but is slower to develop
than the innate, nonspecific response.
Most remarkably, parts of the Toll pathway and its function in immunity are readily recognizable in plants. For instance, Arabidopsis has about 100 proteins containing
domains similar to the cytosolic domains of Toll that transduce the intracellular signal. At least some of these proteins
are required for resistance to tobacco mosaic virus, and an
Arabidopsis protein similar in sequence to I- B is required
for resistance to downy mildew fungus. However, the Tolllike signaling in Arabidopsis appears to act through transcription factors that are unrelated to Dorsal or NF- B.
Because the Toll-based innate immunity system appears
to be present in both plants and animals, it may be more than
a billion years old. In the course of their long evolution, at
least some of the genes having roles in the basic survival
function of immunity have been adapted to serve as developmental regulators—a nice example of biological parsimony in the use of genetic resources.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 15.3
Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators
The influence of one cell population on the developmental fate of another one nearby is called induction. Both
diffusible signaling molecules and direct cell–cell contacts
mediate induction.

■

Morphogens are signals that act in a graded fashion: a
cell that receives more of a signal takes on one fate, a cell
that receives less takes on a different fate, and so forth.
Other signals act in a relay fashion: a signal induces one
cell to produce a different signal that instructs cells farther
away from the original signal source (see Figure 15-11).

■

■ In Drosophila syncytial embryos, morphogens are used
at several stages to induce different cell types along both
axes. Asymmetries created in the fly egg during oogenesis
trigger events that determine both the dorsoventral and the
anterioposterior axes in fly embryos.

Two signal systems—one acting during oogenesis and
the other acting in the early fly embryo—plus a proteolytic
cascade within the perivitelline space lead to the graded
nuclear localization of Dorsal, a transcription factor: ventral nuclei receive the most Dorsal; lateral nuclei, less; and
dorsal nuclei, none (see Figure 15-17). These early events
determine the dorsoventral axis.

■

In ventral cells, Dorsal turns off genes (e.g., decapentaplegic, or dpp) needed to make dorsal structures.
Dpp, a TGF-type signal produced in dorsal cells, functions in graded fashion to specify dorsal cell types. Dpp
homologs in vertebrates (BMP proteins) also act in dorsoventral patterning.
■

Early anterioposterior patterning in Drosophila produces an anterior → posterior gradient of Hunchback (Hb),
a transcription factor that promotes anterior cell fates.
Transcription of the embryonic hb gene is activated by maternally derived Bicoid protein, which is localized to the
anterior (see Figure 15-20).
■

■ Nanos protein inhibits the translation of maternal hb mRNA
in the posterior of the fly embryo (see Figure 15-21). Synthesis of Nanos from maternal nanos mRNA is restricted to the
posterior by translational control linked to motor protein–
mediated transport of other regulators to the posterior pole.

15.4 Boundary Creation by Different
Combinations of Transcription Factors
In Section 15.3, we saw that maternally derived Bicoid plays
a key role in initiating the transcription of gap genes (e.g.,
hunchback) in the anterior region of the early fly embryo;
other maternal factors prevent the translation of hunchback
mRNA in the posterior. Further specification of cell fates in
Drosophila is controlled by transcription cascades in which

15.4 • Boundary Creation by Different Combinations of Transcription Factors

one transcription factor activates a gene encoding another
transcription factor, which in turn acts to promote the expression of a third transcription factor. Such a transcription
cascade can generate a population of cells that may all look
alike but differ at the transcriptional level.
Transcription cascades have both a temporal and a spatial dimension. At each step in a cascade, for instance, RNA
polymerase and ribosomes can take more than an hour to
produce a protein, depending on the length of the corresponding gene. Spatial factors come into play when cells at
different positions within an embryo synthesize different
transcription factors. In this section, we continue the story of
early patterning in Drosophila, which illustrates both the
spatial and the temporal aspects of transcription cascades.
The principles learned from the study of Drosophila development broadly apply to the creation of form and pattern
in all organisms including plants, as discussed at the end of
this section. Errors in the genes that control organization,
boundary formation, and cell type are associated with many
human diseases.

Drosophila Gap Genes Are Transcribed in Broad
Bands of Cells and Regulate One Another
The rough outline of cell fates that is laid down in the syncytial fly embryo is refined into a system for precisely controlling the fates of individual cells. The discovery of the
relevant regulators came from a genetic screen for mutants with altered embryo body segments. The embryonic
body segments go on to grow into the familiar striped pat(a) Gap-gene proteins

Hunchback

Krüppel

Knirps

Giant

23

tern seen on any passing hornet. In addition to hunchback, four other gap genes—Krüppel, knirps, giant, and
tailless—are transcribed in specific spatial domains, beginning about 2 hours after fertilization and just before
cellularization of the embryo is complete (Figure 15-22a).
Perhaps because their movement is impeded by cytoskeletal attachments or the forming cell membranes, gap-gene
protein products seem to move little, if at all, in the cytoplasm; thus they remain localized near the nuclei from
which they were expressed.
All the gap-gene proteins are transcription factors. Because these proteins are distributed in broad overlapping
peaks (Figure 15-22b), each cell along the anterior/posterior
axis contains a particular combination of gap-gene proteins
that activates or represses specific genes within that cell. Indeed, something like a battle ensues, because some gap proteins repress the transcription of genes encoding other gap
proteins. Although they have no known extracellular ligands, some gap proteins resemble nuclear receptors, which
are intracellular proteins that bind lipophilic ligands (e.g.,
steroid hormones) capable of crossing the plasma membrane.
Most ligand–nuclear receptor complexes function as transcription factors (see Figure 11-50). The sequence similarity
between gap proteins and nuclear receptors suggests that gap
genes may have evolved from genes whose transcription was
controlled by signals that could cross membranes, such as the
steroid hormones. The use of such signal-controlled genes,
rather than transcription cascades, could explain how early
cell-fate specification operates in animals that do not have a
syncytial stage.

(b) Hunchback and Krüppel

(c) Even-skipped and fushi tarazu

FPO
▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-22 Gap genes and pair-rule genes are
expressed in characteristic spatial patterns in early Drosophila embryos.
Fixed, permeabilized embryos were stained with fluorescence-labeled antibodies
specific for a particular protein. All embryos shown are positioned with anterior
to the left and dorsal at the top. (a) These syncytial embryos were stained
individually for the indicated gap-gene-encoded proteins. Transcription of the
Krüppel, knirps, and giant gap genes is regulated by Hunchback, Bicoid, and
Caudal. (b) This syncytial embryo was doubly stained to visualize Hunchback
protein (red) and Krüppel protein (green). The yellow band identifies the region
in which expression of these two gap proteins overlaps. (c) Double staining
of an embryo at the beginning of gastrulation reveals even-skipped protein
(yellow) and Fushi tarazu protein (orange). These two pair-rule gene products
are expressed in alternating stripes. See text for discussion. [Part (a) adapted
from G. Struhl et al., 1992, Cell 69:237. Parts (b) and (c) courtesy of M. Levine.]

24

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

The fates of cells distributed along the anterior/posterior
axis are specified early in fly development. At the same time,
cells are responding to the dorsal/ventral control system.
Each cell is thus uniquely specified along both axes, in a twodimensional grid. If each of the five gap genes were expressed
in its own section of the embryo, at just one concentration,
only five cell types could be formed. The actual situation permits far greater diversity among the cells. As noted earlier,
the amount of each gap protein varies from low to high to
low along the anterior/posterior axis, and the expression domains of different gap genes overlap. This complexity creates
combinations of transcription factors that lead to the creation of many more than five cell types. Remarkably, the
next step in the Drosophila development process generates
a repeating pattern of cell types from the rather chaotic nonrepeating pattern of gap-gene expression domains.

(a) eve-gene transcription regulation
Giant ( )

Kruppel ( )

Bicoid ( )

Repressors ( )
Activators ( )

Hunchback ( )

FPO

(b) Eve stripe 2 expression regulation
Hunchback ( )

Giant ( )

Eve stripe 2

Kruppel ( )

Bicoid ( )

Combinations of Gap Proteins Direct
Transcription of Pair-Rule Genes in Stripes
Our vertebrae and the body segments of an insect are both
examples of a commonly employed tactic in animal structure
and music: repeats with variations. The first sign of such repeats in fly embryos is a pattern of repeating stripes of transcription of eight genes collectively called pair-rule genes.
The body of a larval fly consists of 14 segments, and each
pair-rule gene is transcribed in half of its primordia, or seven
stripes, separated by “interstripes” where that pair-rule gene
is not transcribed (Figure 15-22c). Mutant embryos that lack
the function of a pair-rule gene have their body segments
fused together in pair-wise fashion—hence the name of this
class of genes. The expression stripes for each pair-rule gene
partly overlap with those of other pair-rule genes; so each
gene must be responding in a unique way to gap-gene and
other earlier regulators.
The transcription of three “primary” pair-rule genes is
controlled by transcription factors encoded by gap and maternal genes. Because these gap and maternal genes are expressed in broad, nonrepeating bands, the question arises:
How can such a nonrepeating pattern of gene activities confer
a repeating pattern such as the striped expression of pair-rule
genes? To answer this question, we consider the transcription
of the even-skipped (eve) gene in stripe 2, which is controlled
by the maternally derived Bicoid protein and the gap proteins
Hunchback, Krüppel, and Giant. All four of these transcription factors bind to a clustered set of regulatory sites, or
enhancer, located upstream of the eve promoter (Figure
15-23a). Hunchback and Bicoid activate the transcription of
eve in a broad spatial domain, whereas Krüppel and Giant repress eve transcription, thus creating sharp posterior and anterior boundaries. The combined effects of these proteins,
each of which has a unique concentration gradient along the
anteroposterior axis, initially demarcates the boundaries of
stripe 2 expression (Figure 15-23b).
The initial pattern of pair-rule stripes, which is not very
sharp or precise, is sharpened by autoregulation. The Eve

1

2
3
Parasegments

4

5

▲ FIGURE 15-23 Expression of the Even-skipped (Eve)
stripe 2 in the Drosophila embryo. (a) Diagram of an 815-bp
enhancer controlling transcription of the pair-rule gene eve. This
regulatory region contains binding sites for Bicoid and Hunchback
proteins, which activate the transcription of eve, and for Giant
and Krüppel proteins, which repress its transcription. Enhancer is
shown with all binding sites occupied, but in an embryo
occupation of sites will vary with position along the anterior/
posterior axis. (b) Concentration gradients and of the four
proteins that regulate eve stripe 2. The coordinated effect of the
two repressors (↓) and two activators (↑) determine the precise
boundaries of the second anterior eve stripe. Only in the orange
region is the combination of regulators correct for the eve gene
to be transcribed in response to the stripe 2 control element.
Further anterior Giant turns it off; further posterior Krüppel turns
it off and the level of Bicoid activator is too low. Expression of
other stripes is regulated independently by other combinations of
transcription factors that bind to enhancers not depicted in part
(a). [See S. Small et al., 1991, Genes & Devel. 8:827.]

protein, for instance, binds to its own gene and increases
transcription in the stripes, a positive autoregulatory loop.
This enhancement does not occur at the edges of stripes
where the Eve protein concentration is low; so the boundary between stripe and interstripe is fine-tuned.
Each primary pair-rule gene is regulated by multiple enhancers, which are present in the DNA of every cell. Each stripe
is formed in response to a different combination of transcriptional regulators, so the nonrepeating distributions of regulators can create repeating patterns of pair-rule gene repression
and activation. If even one enhancer is bound by an activating
combination of transcriptional regulators, the presence of other
enhancers in an inactive, “off” state (not bound to a regulator) will not prevent transcription. For instance, in Eve stripe 2,
the right combination and amounts of Hunchback and Bicoid

15.4 • Boundary Creation by Different Combinations of Transcription Factors

create an “on” state that activates transcription even though
other enhancers are present in the inactive state. In each stripe,
at least one enhancer is bound by an activating combination
of regulators. Note that this system of gene control is flexible
and could be used to produce nonrepeating patterns of transcription if that were useful to an animal.
Similar responses to gap and maternal proteins govern
the striped patterns of transcription of the two other primary
pair-rule genes, runt and hairy. Because the enhancers of runt
and hairy respond to different combinations of regulators,
the eve, runt, and hairy expression stripes partly overlap one
another, with each stripe for any one gene offset from a stripe
(a)

bicoid mRNA

Time after
fertilization
0h

A

P

Bicoid
1.25 h
(128 nuclei)

Maternal

Hunchback

Knirps

2h
(2000 nuclei)

Gap

Krüuppel
Fushi tarazu
Ultrabithorax
Pair
rule

Even skipped

FPO

Hox

Antennapedia

Segment
polarity

Engrailed

(b)
Protein
expressed
Fushi
tarazu

4th
5th
6th
parasegment parasegment parasegment

Pair
rule

Even
skipped
Paired

Segment
polarity

Engrailed
Wingless

Antennapedia
2d thoracic

Ultrabithorax
3d thoracic

for another gene. Subsequently, other (secondary) pair-rule
genes, including fushi tarazu (ftz) and paired, become active
in response to the Eve, Runt, and Hairy proteins, which are
transcription factors, as well as to maternal and gap proteins.
The outcome is a complex pattern of overlapping stripes.
In early embryos each segment primordium is about four
cells wide along the anterioposterior axis, which corresponds
to the approximate width of pair-rule expression stripes.
With pair-rule genes active in alternating four-on four-off
patterns, the repeat unit is about eight cells. Each cell expresses a combination of transcription factors that can potentially distinguish it from any of the other seven cells in the
repeat unit. Complete segmentation of the embryo into repeat units in which each cell exhibits a unique transcriptional
pattern depends on activation of a third set of genes, the
segment-polarity genes. These genes, which include engrailed
(en) and wingless (wg), also are expressed in stripes, but the
stripes are narrower and appear once in each segment primordium. Because some segment-polarity genes encode components of cell–cell signaling systems, they are discussed in
Section 15.5.
Figure 15-24a schematically depicts the distribution of
several key regulators in the Drosophila embryo during the
first few hours after fertilization. When all the segmentation
genes have been turned on, the resulting single-cell accuracy
of cell-fate specification is impressive, as the example in Figure 15-24b illustrates.

 FIGURE 15-24 Summary of sequential, spatially localized

2.5 h

4.5 h
(5000 cells)

25

1st abdominal

expression of selected genes in early development of the
Drosophila embryo. (a) Maternal bicoid mRNA is localized at the
anterior pole of the egg, but Bicoid protein, which is synthesized
soon after fertilization, diffuses to form a gradient in the fly
syncytium. In most cases, an mRNA and its corresponding protein
are present in the same regions of the embryo. Specific
combinations of Bicoid and various gap-gene products, including
Hunchback, Krüppel, and Knirps, control transcription of the pairrule genes such as fushi tarazu (ftz) and even-skipped (eve). Gap
gene products are shown in discrete bands but actually they
overlap. The pair-rule proteins demarcate 14 stripes corresponding
to the parasegments (an offset form of the segment primordia).
The segment-polarity gene engrailed (en) is expressed at the
anterior end of each parasegment; it and other segment-polarity
genes participate in patterning of each parasegment. Cellularization
occurs after 2.5 hours, and gastrulation occurs at about 4.5 hours.
By this time, each parasegment consists of four belts of cells.
(b) Within a parasegment, each belt of cells (represented by a
circle) is characterized by expression of a unique set of proteins
encoded by pair-rule and segment-polarity genes. Shown here are
the locations of three pair-rule proteins and two segment-polarity
proteins in three parasegments (4–6). These expression patterns
act as positional values that uniquely characterize each cell belt in a
parasegment and determine where Hox genes such as
Antennapedia (Antp) and Ultrabithorax (Ubx) are transcribed. Hox
genes give the repeating body segments their distinct shapes and
appendages (indicated at the bottom). Hox gene expression is
regulated by gap, pair-rule, and segment polarity genes.

26

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

Maternal, Gap, and Pair-Rule Proteins Regulate
Expression of Homeotic (Hox) Genes
As we have just seen, the spatially controlled transcription of
pair-rule genes sets up repeating units within the initial sheet
of cells composing the early Drosophila embryo. Later, these
repeating units must diversify: only some of them will produce appendages, and they will specialize internally as well.
This early diversification of body segments depends on the
Hox genes, which are important switches that control cell
identities and indeed the identities of whole parts of an animal.
Mutations in Hox genes often cause homeosis—that is,
the formation of a body part having the characteristics normally found in another part at a different site. For example,
flies develop legs on their heads instead of antennae. Loss of
function of a particular Hox gene in a location where it is
normally active leads to homeosis if a different Hox gene becomes derepressed there; the result is the formation of cells
and structures characteristic of the derepressed gene. A Hox
gene that is abnormally expressed where it is normally inactive can take over and impose its own favorite developmental pathway on its new location (Figure 15-25).
Hox genes encode highly related transcription factors
containing the homeodomain motif. Classical genetic studies
in Drosophila led to the discovery of the first Hox genes
(e.g., Antennapedia and Ultrabithorax). Corresponding
genes with similar functions (orthologs) have since been
identified in many other organisms. In most animals, each
Hox gene is transcribed in a particular region along the anterioposterior axis, although expression of Hox-gene domains can overlap (see Figure 15-24). In Drosophila, the
spatial pattern of Hox-gene transcription is regulated by maternal, gap, and pair-rule transcription factors. The protein
encoded by a particular Hox gene controls the organization
of cells within the region in which that Hox gene is expressed. For example, a Hox protein can direct or prevent
the local production of a secreted signaling protein, cell-

surface receptor, or transcription factor that is needed to
build an appendage on a particular body segment.
Drosophila Hox proteins control the transcription of
target genes whose encoded proteins determine the diverse
morphologies of body segments. Vertebrate Hox proteins
similarly control the different morphologies of vertebrae, of
repeated segments of the hindbrain, and of the digits of the
limbs. The association of Hox proteins with their binding
sites on DNA is assisted by cofactors that bind to both Hox
proteins and DNA, adding specificity and affinity to these
interactions.
When Hox genes are turned on, their transcription must
continue to maintain cell properties in specific locations. As
in the even-skipped gene, the regulatory regions of some Hox
genes contain binding sites for their encoded proteins. Thus
Hox proteins can help to maintain their own expression
through an autoregulatory loop.
Another mechanism for maintaining normal patterns of
Hox-gene expression requires proteins that modulate chromatin structure. These proteins are encoded by two classes of
genes referred to as the Trithorax group and Polycomb
group. The pattern of Hox-gene expression is initially normal in Polycomb-group mutants, but eventually Hox-gene
expression is derepressed in places where the genes should be
inactive. The result is multiple homeotic transformations.
This observation indicates that the normal function of Polycomb proteins is to keep Hox genes in a transcriptionally
inactive state. The results of immunohistological and biochemical studies have shown that Polycomb proteins bind
to multiple chromosomal locations and form large complexes containing different proteins of the Polycomb group.
The current view is that the transient repression of genes mediated by patterning proteins expressed earlier in development is “locked in” by Polycomb proteins. This stable
Polycomb-dependent repression may result from the ability
of these proteins to assemble inactive chromatin structures
(Chapter 11). Polycomb complexes contain many proteins,

FPO
Normal

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-25 Misexpression of the
Ultrabithorax (Ubx) gene leads to development of a second
pair of wings in Drosophila. Like other Hox genes, Ubx
controls the organization of cells within the region in which it is
expressed (see Figure 15-24b). Mutations in Hox genes often
lead to the formation of a body part where it does not normally

Ubx mutant

exist. In this case the loss of Ubx function from the third thoracic
segment allows wings to form where normally there are only
balancer organs called halteres. [From E. B. Lewis, 1978, Nature
276:565; photographs courtesy of E. B. Lewis. Reprinted by permission
from Nature, copyright 1978, Macmillan Journals Limited.]

15.4 • Boundary Creation by Different Combinations of Transcription Factors

including histone deacetylases, and appear to inactivate transcription by modifying histones to promote gene silencing.
Whereas Polycomb proteins repress the expression of certain Hox genes, proteins encoded by the Trithorax group of
genes are necessary for maintaining the expression of Hox
genes. Like Polycomb proteins, Trithorax proteins bind to
multiple chromosomal sites and form large multiprotein
complexes, some with a mass of ≈2 106 Da, about half the
size of a ribosome. Some Trithorax-group proteins are homologous to the yeast Swi/Snf proteins, which are crucial for
transcriptional activation of many yeast genes. Trithorax
proteins stimulate gene expression by selectively remodeling
the chromatin structure of certain loci to a transcriptionally
active form (see Figure 11-44). The core of each complex is
an ATPase, often of the Brm class of proteins. There is evidence that many or most genes require such complexes for
transcription to take place.

Flower Development Also Requires Spatially
Regulated Production of Transcription Factors
The basic mechanisms controlling development in
plants are much like those in Drosophila: differential production of transcription factors, controlled
in space and time, specifies cell identities. Our understanding
of cell-identity control in plants benefited greatly from the
choice of Arabidopsis thaliana as a model organism. This
plant has many of the same advantages as flies and worms
for use as a model system: it is easy to grow, mutants can be
obtained, and transgenic plants can be made. We will focus
on certain transcription-control mechanisms regulating the
formation of cell identity in flowers. These mechanisms are
strikingly similar to those controlling cell-type and anteroposterior regional specification in yeast and animals.

Floral Organs A flower comprises four different organs called
sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels, which are arranged in con(a)

(b)

27

centric circles called whorls. Whorl 1 is the outermost; whorl
4, the innermost. Arabidopsis has a complete set of floral organs, including four sepals in whorl 1, four petals in whorl 2,
six stamens in whorl 3, and two carpels containing ovaries in
whorl 4 (Figure 15-26a). These organs grow from a collection
of undifferentiated, morphologically indistinguishable cells
called the floral meristem. As cells within the center of the floral meristem divide, four concentric rings of primordia form
sequentially. The outer-ring primordium, which gives rise to
the sepals, forms first, followed by the primordium giving rise
to the petals, then the stamen and carpel primordia.

Floral Organ–Identity Genes Genetic studies have shown
that normal flower development requires three classes of
floral organ–identity genes, designated A, B, and C genes.
Mutations in these genes produce phenotypes equivalent to
those associated with homeotic mutations in flies and mammals; that is, one part of the body is replaced by another. In
plants lacking all A, B, and C function, the floral organs develop as leaves (Figure 15-26b).
Figure 15-27 summarizes the loss-of-function mutations
that led to the identification of the A, B, and C gene classes.
On the basis of these homeotic phenotypes, scientists proposed a model to explain how three classes of genes control
floral-organ identity. According to this ABC model for specifying floral organs, class A genes specify sepal identity in
whorl 1 and do not require either class B or class C genes to
do so. Similarly, class C genes specify carpel identity in whorl
4 and, again, do so independently of class A and B genes. In
contrast with these structures, which are specified by only a
single class of genes, the petals in whorl 2 are specified by
class A and B genes, and the stamens in whorl 3 are specified by class B and C genes. To account for the observed effects of removing A genes or C genes, the model also
postulates that A genes repress C genes in whorls 1 and 2
and, conversely, C genes repress A genes in whorls 3 and 4.
To determine if the actual expression patterns of class A,
B, and C genes are consistent with this model, researchers

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-26
Mutations in floral organ–identity
genes produce homeotic phenotypes.
(a) Flowers of wild-type Arabidopsis
thaliana have four sepals in whorl 1,
four petals in whorl 2, six stamens in
whorl 3, and two carpels in whorl 4.
(b) In Arabidopsis with mutations in all
three classes of floral organ–identity genes,
the four floral organs are transformed into
leaf-like structures. [From D. Weigel and E. M.
Meyerowitz, 1994, Cell 78:203; courtesy of E. M.
Meyerowitz.]

28

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls
(a) Wild-type floral organs

(b) Loss-of-function homeotic mutations
Whorl

Sepals (whorl 1)
1

Petals
(whorl 2)

2

3

4

Wild type

Stamens
(whorl 3)

FPO
Class A
mutants

Carpels
(whorl 4)

Class B
mutants
Class C
mutants

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-27 Phenotypic analysis
identified three classes of genes that control specification of
floral organs in Arabidopsis. (a) Diagram of the arrangement of
wild-type floral organs, which are found in concentric whorls.
(b) Effect of loss-of-function mutations leading to transformations
of one organ into another. Class A mutations affect organ identity

in whorls 1 and 2: sepals (green) become carpels (blue) and
petals (orange) become stamens (pink). Class B mutations cause
transformation of whorls 2 and 3: petals become sepals and
stamens become carpels. In class C mutations, whorls 3 and 4
are transformed: stamens become petals and carpels become
sepals. [See D. Wiegel and E. M. Meyerowitz, 1994, Cell 78:203.]

cloned these genes and assessed the expression patterns of
their mRNAs in the four whorls in wild-type Arabidopsis
plants and in loss-of-function mutants (Figure 15-28a, b).
Consistent with the ABC model, A genes are expressed in
whorls 1 and 2, B genes in whorls 2 and 3, and C genes in
whorls 3 and 4. Furthermore, in class A mutants, class C
genes are also expressed in organ primordia of whorls 1 and
2; similarly, in class C mutants, class A genes are also expressed in whorls 3 and 4. These findings are consistent with
the homeotic transformations observed in these mutants.
To test whether these patterns of expression are functionally important, scientists produced transgenic Arabidopsis plants in which floral organ–identity genes were
expressed in inappropriate whorls. For instance, the introduction of a transgene carrying class B genes linked to an A-

class promoter leads to the ubiquitous expression of class B
genes in all whorls (Figure 15-28c). In such transgenics,
whorl 1, now under the control of class A and B genes, develops into petals instead of sepals; likewise, whorl 4, under
the control of both class B and class C genes, gives rise to stamens instead of carpels. These results support the functional
importance of the ABC model for specifying floral identity.
Sequencing of floral organ–identity genes has revealed
that many encode proteins belonging to the MADS family
of transcription factors, which form homo- and heterodimers. Thus floral-organ identity may be specified by a
combinatorial mechanism in which differences in the activities of different homo- and heterodimeric forms of various A,
B, and C proteins regulate the expression of subordinate
downstream genes necessary for the formation of the differ-

(a) Wild-type
W1

W2

(b) Loss-of-function

W3

W4

B

A−

A
se

W1

C
pe

st

W2

W3

W4

(c) B-gene transgenic
W1

B−

FPO
st

st

se

ca

ca

pe

se

A

se

W3

W4

B

C

ca

ca

W2

B
ca

A
pe

C
pe

st

st

C

B

C−

A
se

pe

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 15-28 Expression patterns of
class A, B, and C genes support the ABC model of floral
organ specification. Depicted here are the observed expression
patterns of the floral organ–identity genes in wild-type, mutant,
and transgenic Arabidopsis. Colored bars represent the A, B, and

C mRNAs in each whorl (W1, W2, W3, W4). The observed floral
organ in each whorl is indicated as follows: sepal  se; petals 
pe; stamens  st; and carpels  ca. See text for discussion.
[See D. Wiegel and E. M. Meyerowitz, 1994, Cell 78:203, and B. A. Krizek
and E. M. Meyerowitz, 1996, Development 122:11.]

15.5 • Boundary Creation by Extracellular Signals

ent cell types in each organ. Other MADS transcription factors function in cell-type specification in yeast and muscle
(Chapter 22). ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 15.4
Boundary Creation by Different Combinations
of Transcription Factors
Gradients of transcription factors, produced from maternal mRNAs in the early Drosophila embryo, control the
patterned expression of embryonic genes, leading to segmentation of the embryo along the anteroposterior axis.

■

Target genes whose regulatory regions contain multiple
enhancers are expressed preferentially in specific regions
of the embryo, depending on the amounts and combinations of the transcription factors that control them (see Figure 15-23).

■

Early patterning events, utilizing maternal, gap, pairrule, and segment-polarity genes, generate a unique pattern of transcription factors in different regions along the
anteroposterior axis of Drosophila embryos (see Figure
15-24). These transcription factors are expressed transiently and play an essential role in establishing the domains in which different Hox genes are expressed.

■

Hox genes, which encode transcription factors, control
the unique morphologic characteristics of different regions
along the anteroposterior axis in most or all animals.

■

Misexpression of Hox genes causes homeotic transformations—the development of body parts in abnormal
positions.

■

Hox expression patterns are sometimes maintained
through positive autoregulatory loops, and through modulation of chromatin by proteins encoded by Polycombgroup and Trithorax-group genes.

■

Three classes of genes (A, B, and C) participate in specifying the identity of the four organs constituting a flower
(see Figure 15-27). The patterns of expression of these
genes, many of which encode transcription factors, are consistent with the ABC genetic model.

■

15.5 Boundary Creation
by Extracellular Signals
As the syncytial fly embryo becomes cellular and undergoes
gastrulation, the movement of proteins and mRNAs through
the common cytoplasm of a syncytium is over. Further cellfate specification is controlled primarily by cells communicating with one another through secreted extracellular
signals. In this section, we examine how three signaling pathways, activated by Hedgehog (Hh), Wingless (Wg, a member
of the Wnt family), and TGF, create boundaries between

29

cell types during Drosophila development. The Wingless and
Hedgehog proteins are encoded by segment-polarity genes,
so named because they affect the orientation of surface features of the cuticle, such as bristles. The events discussed here
are representative of what happens in virtually all tissues and
all animals to specify cell types and create boundaries between different types.

Two Secreted Signals, Wingless and Hedgehog,
Create Additional Boundaries Within Segments
of Cellular Fly Embryos
As we saw in Section 15.4, the 14 segment primordia in the
early Drosophila embryo are defined by various pair-rule
proteins, with each protein located in seven stripes that alternate with stripes of cells that do not make the protein. The
segment-polarity gene engrailed, which encodes a transcription factor, is expressed in the most anterior cell in each primordium, forming 14 Engrailed stripes. Transcription of
engrailed is activated and repressed by various pair-rule proteins. In each eight-cell repeat unit established by the pairrule proteins, engrailed is transcribed in cells 1 and 5. Recall
that the pair-rule proteins produced in cells 1 through 4 differ from those produced in cells 5 through 8 (see Figure 15-24b).
Although the transcriptional regulation of engrailed is the
same in cell 1 in all the eight-cell repeats, it cannot be the
same in cells 1 and 5 of a repeat. Thus two different combinations of pair-rule proteins must activate transcription of
engrailed; so a seemingly simple repeating pattern masks a
striking difference in regulation.
Another segment-polarity gene called wingless becomes
active at about the same time as engrailed. It also is expressed in single-cell-wide stripes, adjacent to the Engrailed
stripes and just one cell farther anterior (see Figure 15-24b).
Wingless is a secreted signaling protein, a member of the
Wnt protein family found in most or all animals. With the
production of Wingless, the cells of the fly embryo stop ignoring one another and begin communicating through signals. In adjacent Engrailed-producing cells, the Wingless
signal maintains the expression of another segment-polarity
gene called hedgehog (hh), which also encodes an external
signal. Expression of hedgehog is initially activated by Engrailed, a transcription factor that has both activating and repressing abilities. Engrailed activates hedgehog directly and
represses a gene encoding a repressor of hedgehog, thereby
indirectly promoting hedgehog expression. In the fly embryo,
the Wingless and Hedgehog signals, produced in adjacent
stripes of cells, form a positive feedback loop, with each
maintaining expression of the other across the boundary (Figure 15-29).
The Wingless and Hedgehog signals control which cell
types form in which positions, creating additional boundaries beyond those established by pair-rule proteins. Even before Wingless- or Hedgehog-induced morphological features
are evident, the prospective cell fates can be detected by the
production of specific transcription factors. Both Hedgehog

30

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls
Primordium of
future body segment

Wg

FPO
wg

Anterior

Hh

Parasegment

hh

Posterior

Parasegment

▲ FIGURE 15-29 Role of Hedgehog (Hh) and Wingless (Wg)
in boundary creation between parasegments in Drosophila
embryo. Hedgehog is necessary to maintain wingless
transcription, and, conversely, Wingless is required to maintain
hedgehog. These two secreted signals play a key role in
patterning the epidermis. Both signaling proteins act on cells in
addition to those indicated by the arrows.They act through the
signal-transduction pathways shown in Figures 15-31 and 15-32.

demonstrated how the N-terminal Hedgehog fragment,
which does not contain any hydrophobic sequences, becomes
tethered to the membrane. As depicted in Figure 15-30, this
process includes adding cholesterol to a glycine residue, splitting the molecule into two fragments, and leaving the Nterminal signaling fragment with an attached hydrophobic
cholesterol moiety. The C-terminal domain of the precursor,
which catalyzes this reaction, is found in other proteins and
may promote the linkage of these proteins to membranes by
the same autoproteolytic mechanism. A second modification
to Hedgehog, the addition of a palmitoyl group to the Nterminus, makes the protein even more hydrophobic.
Together, the two modifications may tether Hedgehog to
cells, thereby affecting its range of action in tissue. Spatial
Hh precursor

83

20 kDa

N

471

45 kDa

C

[See M. Hammerschmidt et al., 1997, Trends Genet. 13:14.]

Gly-257

and Wingless can act as morphogens, with different concentrations inducing different fates in receiving cells (see Figure
15-11b). Cells that receive a large amount of Wingless turn
on certain genes and form certain structures; cells that receive a smaller amount turn on different genes and thus form
different structures. The same idea applies to the effects of
different amounts of Hedgehog on receiving cells. As Wingless and Hedgehog are secreted from their source cells, they
theoretically could move and signal in both directions. Recent work, however, shows that a signal can act mostly in
one direction, anterior in the case of Wingless. This directional preference results from active destruction of much of
the Wingless protein that moves posteriorly.
The three Drosophila segment-polarity genes engrailed,
wingless, and hedgehog are all transcribed from the embryo’s
genome. The mRNAs produced from some other segmentpolarity genes, similarly to bicoid mRNA, are present in the
mature Drosophila egg. Translation of these maternally derived mRNAs initially provides the embryo with other components of the Hedgehog and Wnt signal-transduction
pathways. Having seen when the Drosophila Hedgehog and
Wnt-type signals first begin to act in fly development, we
take a closer look at the operation of these pathways. Both
pathways participate in the development of many different
tissues in Drosophila and most other animals.

Hedgehog Signaling, Which Requires
Two Transmembrane Proteins, Relieves
Repression of Target Genes
The Hedgehog signal is secreted from cells as a 45-kDa precursor protein. Cleavage of this secreted precursor produces
a 20-kDa N-terminal fragment, which is associated with the
plasma membrane and contains the inductive activity, and a
25-kDa C-terminal fragment. A series of elegant experiments

Cys-258

O
N

S

FPO

Formation of thioester

O

N

Autocleavage

S

OH

Cholesterol

O
N
Membrane-tethered Hh

O

▲ FIGURE 15-30 Processing of Hedgehog (Hh) precursor
protein. Removal of the N-terminal signal peptide from the initial
translation product yields the 45-kDa Hh precursor consisting of
residues 83–471 in the original protein. Nucleophilic attack by the
thiol side chain of cysteine 258 (Cys-258) on the carbonyl carbon
of glycine 257 (Gly-257) forms a thioester intermediate. The
C-terminal domain then catalyzes the formation of an ester bond
between the -3 hydroxyl group of cholesterol and glycine 257,
cleaving the precursor into two fragments. The N-terminal
signaling fragment (tan) retains the cholesterol moiety and is
modified by the addition of a palmitoyl group to the N-terminus.
These two hydrophobic anchors tether the signaling fragment to
the membrane. [Adapted from J. A. Porter et al., 1996, Science
274:255.]

15.5 • Boundary Creation by Extracellular Signals

the pathway. The binding of Hedgehog evidently prevents
Patched from blocking Smoothened action, thus activating
the transcription of target genes.
The results of recent studies have shown that, in the absence of Hedgehog, Patched is enriched in the plasma membrane, but Smoothened is in internal vesicle membranes.
When cells receive a Hedgehog signal, both Patched and
Hedgehog move from the cell surface into internal vesicles,
whereas Smoothened moves from internal vesicles to the surface. The similarity of Patched to Niemann-Pick C1 protein,
the covalent joining of cholesterol to Hedgehog, and the ability of cholesterol analogs such as cyclopamine to block reception of a Hedgehog signal all suggest a possible link
between sterol metabolism and Hedgehog signaling. Indeed,
one interesting idea is that developmental regulation by the
Hedgehog system evolved from earlier cell components
needed to control vesicle composition and movement.
Figure 15-31 depicts a current model of the Hedgehog
pathway. Although the signal-transduction mechanisms are
only partly understood, findings from genetic studies indicate that the pathway includes a cytoplasmic complex of
proteins consisting of Fused (Fu), a serine-threonine kinase;
Costal-2 (Cos-2), a microtubule-associated kinesin-like
protein; and Cubitis interruptus (Ci), a transcription factor.
In the absence of Hedgehog, when Patched inhibits Smoothened, these three proteins form a complex that binds to microtubules in the cytoplasm. Proteolytic cleavage of Ci in this
complex generates a Ci fragment that translocates to the nucleus and represses target-gene expression. In the presence

restriction plays a crucial role in constraining the effects of
powerful inductive signals.
Findings from genetic studies in Drosophila indicate that
two membrane proteins, Smoothened (Smo) and Patched
(Ptc), are required to receive and transduce a Hedgehog
signal to the cell interior. Smoothened has 7 membranespanning  helices, similarly to G protein–coupled receptors
(Chapter 13). Patched is predicted to contain 12 transmembrane  helices and is most similar to Niemann-Pick C1
protein (NPC1). These proteins may act as pumps or transporters. As discussed in Chapter 18, NPC1 protein is necessary for normal intracellular movement of sterols through
vesicle-trafficking pathways. In humans, mutations in the
NPC1 gene cause a rare, autosomal recessive disorder
marked by defects in the lysosomal handling of cholesterol.
Drosophila embryos with loss-of-function mutations in
the smoothened or hedgehog genes have very similar phenotypes. Moreover, both genes are required to activate transcription of the same target genes (e.g., wingless) during
embryonic development. Loss-of-function mutations in
patched produce a quite different phenotype, one similar to
the effect of flooding the embryo with Hedgehog. Thus
Patched appears to antagonize the actions of Hedgehog and
vice versa. These findings and analyses of double mutants
suggest that, in the absence of Hedgehog, Patched represses
target genes by inhibiting a signaling pathway needed for
gene activation. The additional observation that Smoothened
is required for the transcription of target genes in mutants
lacking patched function places Smoothened downstream in
(a) −Hh

 FIGURE 15-31 Operational model of the

(b) +Hh
Hh

Exterior

−

Smo

Ptc

Ptc

Smo





Cytosol

PKA
P
P

Slimb

P

Cos2

P

P

FPO

Proteasomal
cleavage

Microtubules
Ci75

Nucleus

Fu

P

Ci

Ci
P

P

Cos2

Fu

P P

P

P

Ci

Ci75

31

Ci





Target genes

Target genes

CBP

P

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. (a) In the
absence of Hh, Patched (Ptc) protein inhibits
Smoothened (Smo) protein by an unknown
mechanism.In the absence of Smo signaling, a
complex containing the Fused (Fu), Costal-2
(Cos2), and Cubitis interuptus (Ci) proteins binds
to microtubules. Ci is cleaved in a process
requring the ubiquitin/proteasome-related protein
Slimb, generating the fragment Ci75, which
functions as a transcriptional repressor. (b) In the
presence of Hh, inhibition of Smo by Ptc is
relieved. Signaling from Smo causes
hyperphosphorylation of Fu and Cos2, and
disassociation of the Fu/Cos2/Ci complex from
microtubules. This leads to the stabilization of a
full-length, alternately modified Ci, which
functions as a transcriptional activator in
conjunction with CREB binding protein (CBP).
The exact membrane compartments in which Ptc
and Smo respond to Hh and function are
unknown; Hh signal causes Ptc to move from
the surface to internal compartments while Smo
does the opposite. [After K. Nybakken and
N. Perrimon, 2002, Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 12:503.]

32

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

of Hedgehog, which relieves the inhibition of Smoothened,
the complex of Fu, Cos-2, and Ci is not associated with microtubules, cleavage of Ci is blocked, and an alternatively
modified form of Ci is generated. After translocating to the
nucleus, this Ci form binds to the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP), promoting the expression
of target genes. In addition to these components, protein kinase A participates in controlling Hedgehog-responsive target genes, which become inappropriately active when protein
kinase A is inactivated. Phosphorylation of Ci by protein kinase A appears to stimulate the proteolytic cleavage of Ci.

ure 15-29). The first vertebrate Wnt gene to be discovered
was a mouse gene called Wnt-1 (formerly int-1). Activation
of int-1 by insertion of a mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV) provirus leads to mammary cancer. Hence Wnt-1
is a proto-oncogene, a normal cellular gene whose inappropriate expression promotes the onset of cancer (Chapter 23).
The word Wnt is an amalgamation of wingless, the corresponding fly gene, with int for MMTV integration.
Genetic studies in Drosophila and C. elegans, studies of
mouse proto-oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes, and
studies of cell junction components have all contributed to
identifying many components of the Wnt signal-transduction
pathway. Like Hedgehog signals, Wnt signals are modified by
the addition of a hydrophobic palmitate group near their
N termini, which may tether them to the plasma membrane
of secreting cells and limit their range of action. Wnt signals
act through two cell-surface receptor proteins: Frizzled (Fz),
which contains seven transmembrane  helices and directly
binds Wnt; and Lrp, which appears to associate with Frizzled
in a Wnt signal–dependent manner, at least in frog embryos.
Mutations in the genes encoding Wingless, Frizzled, or Lrp
(called Arrow in Drosophila) all have similar effects on the development of embryos. Frizzled protein and the Smoothened
protein in Hedgehog signaling have sequence similarities, and
both bear some resemblance to the G protein–coupled receptors discussed in Chapter 13. To date, however, evidence for
G protein involvement downstream of Smoothened or Frizzled
remains indirect and not compelling.
A current model of the Wnt pathway is shown in Figure
15-32. The central player in intracellular Wnt signal transduction is called -catenin in vertebrates and Armadillo in

Hedgehog signaling, which is conserved throughout the animal kingdom, functions in the formation of many tissues and organs. Mutations in
components of the Hedgehog signaling pathway have been
implicated in birth defects such as cyclopia, a single eye resulting from union of the right and left brain primordia, and
in multiple forms of human cancer. ❚

Wnt Signals Trigger Disassembly
of an Intracellular Complex, Releasing
a Transcription Factor
As noted previously, the Drosophila segment-polarity gene
wingless encodes a protein that belongs to the Wnt family
of secreted signals. Inactivation of wingless causes segmentpolarity defects very similar to those caused by the loss of
hedgehog function. This observation is logical because
Hedgehog and Wingless form a positive feedback loop, with
each protein maintaining production of the other (see Fig-

Science 296:644; see also The Wnt Gene Homepage,
www.stanford.edu/~rnusse/wntwindow.html.]

(a) −Wnt

(b) +Wnt
Frizzled (Fz)

Frizzled (Fz)

Wnt

Exterior

LRP

the Wnt signaling pathway. (a) In the absence
of Wnt, the kinase GSK3 constitutively
phosphorylates -catenin. Phosphorylated
-catenin is degraded and hence does not
accumulate in cells. Axin is a scaffolding protein
that forms a complex with GSK3, -catenin, and
APC, which facilitates phosphorylation of -catenin
by GSK3 by an estimated factor of >20,000. The
TCF transcription factor in the nucleus acts as a
repressor of target genes unless altered by Wnt
signal transduction. (b) Binding of Wnt to its
receptor Frizzled (Fz) recruits Dishevelled (Dsh) to
the membrane. Activation of Dsh by Fz inhibits
GSK3, permitting unphosphorylated -catenin to
accumulate in the cytosol. After translocation to
the nucleus, -catenin may act with TCF to
activate target genes or, alternatively cause the
export of TCF from the nucleus and perhaps its
activation in cytosol. [After R. T. Moon et al., 2002,

LRP

 FIGURE 15-32 Operational model of

Cytosol

Dishevelled

Dishevelled


GSK3



APC Axin

β-Catenin
P

P

P

FPO

Proteasomal
degradation

GSK3
APC Axin

β-Catenin

β-Catenin

Nucleus

TCF

Target genes

TCF

Target genes

15.5 • Boundary Creation by Extracellular Signals

Drosophila. This remarkable protein functions both as a
transcriptional activator and as a membrane–cytoskeleton
linker protein (see Figure 6-7). In the absence of a Wnt signal, -catenin is phosphorylated by a complex containing
GSK3, a protein kinase; the adenomatosis polyposis coli
(APC) protein, an important human tumor suppressor; and
Axin, a scaffolding protein. Phosphorylated -catenin is
ubiquitinated and then degraded in proteasomes. In the presence of Wnt, -catenin is stabilized and translocates to the
nucleus. There, it is believed to associate with the TCF transcription factor to activate expression of particular target
genes (e.g., wg, cyclin D1, myc, and metalloprotease genes),
depending on cell type. Recent evidence suggests that catenin acts by a different mechanism in which it controls the
export of TCF from the nucleus and perhaps its activation
in the cytosol.
Findings from genetic studies have shown that Wntinduced stabilization of -catenin depends on Dishevelled
(Dsh) protein. In the presence of Wnt, Dsh and the Lrp membrane protein appear to interact with components of the phosphorylation complex, thereby inhibiting the phosphorylation
and subsequent degradation of -catenin (see Figure 15-32b).
The importance of -catenin stability and location means that
Wnt signals affect a critical balance between the three pools
of -catenin in the cytoskeleton, cytosol, and nucleus.
Wnt signals help control numerous critical developmental
events, such as gastrulation, brain development, limb patterning, and organogenesis. The regulated movement of Wnts
through tissue is critical to establishing properly placed
boundaries between different cell types. As is discussed in
Chapter 23, disturbances in signal transduction through the
Wnt pathway and many other developmentally important signaling pathways are associated with various human cancers.

Gradients of Hedgehog and Transforming Growth
Factor  Specify Cell Types in the Neural Tube
As we have seen in Drosophila, many developmental signals
act in a graded fashion, inducing different cell fates depending on their concentration. The same phenomenon exists in
vertebrates, for example, in the development of the mammalian central nervous system from the neural tube, which
forms early in embryogenesis. The neural tube is a simple
rolled-up sheet of cells, initially one cell thick. Cells in the
ventral part will form motor neurons; lateral cells will form
a variety of interneurons. The different cell types can be distinguished prior to morphological differentiation by the proteins that they produce.
Graded concentrations of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a vertebrate equivalent of Drosophila Hedgehog, determine the
fates of at least four cell types in the chick ventral neural
tube. These cells are found at different positions along the
dorsoventral axis in the following order from ventral to dorsal: floor-plate cells, motor neurons, V2 interneurons, and
V1 interneurons. During development, Shh is initially expressed at high levels in the notochord, a mesoderm structure

33

in direct contact with the ventralmost region of the neural
tube (Figure 15-33). On induction, floor-plate cells also produce Shh, forming a Shh-signaling center in the ventral-most
region of the neural tube. Antibodies to Shh protein block
the formation of the different ventral neural-tube cells in the
chick, and these cell types fail to form in mice homozygous
for mutations in the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene.
To determine whether Shh-triggered induction of ventral
neural-tube cells is through a graded or a relay mechanism,
scientists added different concentrations of Shh to chick neuraltube explants. In the absence of Shh, no ventral cells formed.
In the presence of very high concentrations of Shh, floorplate cells formed; whereas, at a slightly lower concentration,
motor neurons formed. When the level of Shh was decreased
another twofold, only V2 neurons formed. And, finally, only
V1 neurons developed when the Shh concentration was decreased another twofold. These data strongly suggest that in
the developing neural tube different cell types are formed in
response to a ventral → dorsal gradient of Shh.
Cell fates in the dorsal region of the neural tube are determined by BMP proteins (e.g., BMP4 and BMP7), which
belong to the TGF family. Recall that Dpp protein, a
Drosophila TGF signal, is critical in determining dorsal cell
fates in early fly embryos. Indeed, TGF signaling appears to
be an evolutionarily ancient regulator of dorsoventral patterning. In vertebrate embryos, BMP proteins secreted from
ectoderm cells overlying the dorsal side of the neural tube
promote the formation of dorsal cells such as sensory neurons (see Figure 15-33). Thus cells in the neural tube sense
multiple signals, originating at opposite positions on the
dorsoventral axis, and measure the signals from both origins
to decide on a course of differentiation.

Dorsal
Roof plate

Epidermis
BMP
Neural tube

FPO
Shh

Somites

Sensory
neurons
V1 neurons
V2 neurons
Motor neurons

Floor plate
Notochord
Ventral

▲ FIGURE 15-33 Graded induction of different cell types in
the neural tube by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and BMP signaling.
Shh produced in the notochord induces floor-plate development.
The floor plate, in turn, produces Shh, which forms a ventral →
dorsal gradient that induces additional cell fates. In the dorsal
region, BMP proteins secreted from the overlying ectoderm cells
act in a similar fashion to create dorsal cell fates. [See
J. M. Jessell, 2000, Nature Rev. Genet. 1:20.]

34

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

Cell-Surface Proteoglycans Influence
Signaling by Some Pathways
How do signals move through or around cells embedded in
tissues? The full answer is not known, but the distance that a
signal can move has important implications for the size and
shape of organs. A signal that causes neurons to form, for example, will create more neurons if its range of movement increases. The binding of signaling proteins to cell-surface
proteoglycans not only affects the range of signal action but
also facilitates signaling in some cases. A proteoglycan consists of a core protein to which is bound glycosaminoglycan
chains such as heparin sulfate and chondroitin sulfate (see
Figure 6-22). Proteoglycans are important components of
the extracellular matrix. Some are embedded in the plasma
membrane by a hydrophobic transmembrane domain or
tethered to the membrane by a lipid anchor.
Evidence for the participation of proteoglycans in signaling comes from Drosophila sugarless (sgl) mutants, which
lack a key enzyme needed to synthesize heparin (and chondroitin) sulfate. These mutants exhibit the phenotypes associated with defects in Wingless signaling and have greatly
depressed levels of extracellular Wingless protein, a Wnt signal. Mutations in dally and dally-like, both of which encode
core proteins of cell-surface proteoglycans, also are associated with defective Wingless signaling.
The Wnt pathway is not the only signaling pathway affected in sugarless and other Drosophila mutants with defective proteoglycan synthesis. For instance, such mutants
have phenotypes (e.g., absence of a heart or trachea) that are
associated with loss-of-function of Heartless and Breathless,
which are receptor tyrosine kinases that bind FGF-like signaling proteins. These mutants also appear to have defective
TGF signaling in metamorphosis, though not in embryos,
suggesting specific actions of the proteoglycans. In Chapter
14, we saw that the type III TGF receptor is a cell-surface
proteoglycan. Although not absolutely required for TGF
signaling, the type III receptor binds and concentrates TGF
near the surface of a cell in which it is produced, thereby facilitating signaling from the type I and type II receptors (see
Figure 14-2).

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 15.5
Boundary Creation by Extracellular Signals
Three Drosophila segment-polarity genes, engrailed,
wingless, and hedgehog, are expressed in one-cell-wide
stripes in each of the 14 body-segment primordia.

■

Engrailed, a transcription factor, activates transcription
of Hedgehog, which encodes a secreted signaling protein.

Both Hedgehog and Wingless/Wnt contain lipid anchors
that can tether them to cell membranes, thereby reducing
their signaling range.

■

The Hedgehog signal acts through two cell-surface proteins, Smoothened and Patched, and an intracellular complex containing the Cubitis interruptus (Ci) transcription
factor (see Figure 15-31). An activating form of Ci is generated in the presence of Hedgehog; a repressing form is
generated in the absence of Hedgehog. Both Patched and
Smoothened change their subcellular location in response
to Hedgehog binding to Patched.

■

Wingless and other Wnt signals act through two cellsurface proteins, the receptor Frizzled and coreceptor Lrp,
and an intracellular complex containing -catenin (see Figure 15-32). Wnt signaling promotes the stability and nuclear localization of -catenin, which either directly or indirectly promotes activation of the TCF transcription
factor.
■

Gradients of two external signals, a ventralizing Sonic
hedgehog signal and a dorsalizing TGF signal, induce different cell types in the vertebrate neural tube (see Figure
15-33).

■

Cell-surface proteoglycans bind some extracellular signaling proteins, restricting their range of action and presenting them to nearby receptor proteins.

■

Cancer and birth defects occur when Hh, TGF, or Wnt
signaling systems do not work properly.

■

15.6 Reciprocal Induction
and Lateral Inhibition
In the development of an organism, cells must “talk” with
one another to ensure a proper division of labor. The outcome of these cell–cell conversations can be an agreement
about which cell should follow what differentiation pathway.
For instance, negotiation between two initially equivalent
cells can send each down distinct developmental paths. One
cell preventing the other from following a particular path is
called lateral inhibition, a process that prevents the duplication of structures at the expense of something not forming.
Alternatively, two cells with distinct fates can send and receive signals between themselves, inducing further differentiation. Such reciprocal induction is common in the formation
of internal organs. In this section, we consider two signaling
systems that mediate such dialogues between cells.

■

Wingless, a secreted signaling protein in the Wnt family,
is produced in stripes adjacent to the Engrailed/Hedgehog
stripes. Wingless and Hedgehog maintain expression of
each other’s genes in a positive feedback loop (see Figure
15-29).

■

Cell-Surface Ephrin Ligands and Receptors
Mediate Reciprocal Induction
During Angiogenesis
Perhaps the simplest type of reciprocal induction is between
cells that interact through two cell-surface proteins, each of

15.6 • Reciprocal Induction and Lateral Inhibition
Ephrin-B ligands
Ephrin-A
ligands

P

CELL 2

Core

Ligand-binding

FPO
Exterior

CELL 1

P

Cysteine-rich
Type III
fibronectin
repeats

P
ATP

P
ADP

Tyrosine
kinase
domain

of vessels is remodeled during angiogenesis as larger
branches assemble from smaller ones and vessels become surrounded by support cells. Knockout mice lacking ephrin-B2
exhibit striking defects in angiogenesis. This finding led scientists to explore the pattern of expression of ephrin-B2 and
its receptor, EphB4, in the developing embryo (Figure 15-35).
In normal embryos, ephrin-B2 is expressed only in arteries;
EphB4, only on veins. Although ephrin-B2 is expressed only
on arterial capillaries, venous capillaries also fail to undergo
angiogenesis in ephrin-b2 knockouts. These data suggest that
interaction between an arterial cell producing ephrin-B2 and
a venous cell producing EphB4 causes the induction of both
cells (see Figure 15-35c). In other words, ephrin-B2 and
EphB4 each functions as both a ligand and a receptor to control the development of both veins and arteries.

Umbilical a.
Allantoic stalk

(a)

P

EphA
receptors

Dorsal aorta

Vitelline
a.
Umbilical v.
v.

Yolk sac
Vitelline
vascular
plexus

Ephrin-B2
EphB4
(b)

[Adapted from V. Dodelet and E. Pasquale, 2000, Oncogene 19:5614; see
J. G. Flanagan and P. Vanderhaegen, 1998, Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 21:309.]

Primary plexus

which can act as a receptor and ligand. To illustrate this phenomenon, we consider the role of the ephrins, a family of
cell-surface ligands, and the Eph receptors in the development of mammalian blood vessels.
The Eph receptors, a novel type of receptor tyrosine kinase, have two classes of ligands (Figure 15-34). Ephrin-A
ligands are tethered to the plasma membrane by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. These ephrin ligands
play a crucial role in forming connections between neurons
in the developing nervous system. Ephrin-B ligands are
single-pass transmembrane proteins. The results of biochemical experiments showed that ephrin-B ligands stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of EphB receptors and of
their own cytosolic domain. These observations led to the
intriguing notion that ephrin-B ligand/EphB receptor complexes promote bidirectional reciprocal interactions. Strong
support for this hypothesis has come from the study of
blood vessel formation.
Blood vessels, arteries and veins, form a complex network of branched structures in the adult. An early network

Atrium
Ventricle

EphB
receptors

▲ FIGURE 15-34 General structure of Eph receptors and
their ligands. The cytosolic domain of Eph receptors has
tyrosine kinase activity. Within the Eph receptor family, the
receptors exhibit some 30 –70 percent homology in their
extracellular domains and 65–90 percent homology in their kinase
domains. Their ligands, the ephrins, either are linked to the
membrane through a hydrophobic GPI anchor (class A) or are
single-pass transmembrane proteins (class B). The core domains
of various ephrin ligands show 30–70 percent homology. Ephrin-B
ligands and their receptors can mediate reciprocal signaling.

35

(c)

Arterial
endothelial
cell

FPO
Juvenile
vascular system

Ephrin-B2

Mature
vascular system

Venous
endothelial
cell

EphB4

▲ FIGURE 15-35 Reciprocal induction mediated by ephrinB2 and its receptor, EphB4, in angiogenesis in the yolk sac.
(a) Ephrin-B2 (red) is expressed on arteries and EphB4 (blue) on
veins in the early mouse embryo. (b) The early vascular network
is remodeled during angiogenesis. In ephrin-B2 knockout mice,
angiogenesis is blocked at the primary plexus stage. The absence
of ephrin-B2 thus interrupts the development of both arteries and
veins. (c) Formation of intercalating arteries and veins results
from interactions between developing arterial and venous
endothelial cells mediated by ephrin-B2 (arterial) and EphB4
(venous). These reciprocal interactions induce the development of
both cell types. [Adapted from H. U. Wang et al., 1998, Cell 93:741.]

36

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

The Conserved Notch Signaling Pathway
Mediates Lateral Inhibition
Now we shift our attention to lateral inhibition, which
causes adjacent developmentally equivalent or nearequivalent cells to assume different fates. Genetic analyses
in Drosophila and C. elegans revealed the role of the highly
conserved Notch/Delta pathway in lateral inhibition. The
Drosophila proteins Notch and Delta are the prototype receptor and ligand, respectively, in this signaling pathway.
Both proteins are large transmembrane proteins whose extracellular domains contain multiple EGF-like repeats and
binding sites for the other protein. Although Delta is cleaved
to make an apparently soluble version of its extracellular domain, findings from studies with genetically mosaic
Drosophila have shown that the Delta signal reaches only
adjacent cells.
Interaction between Delta and Notch triggers the proteolytic cleavage of Notch, releasing its cytosolic segment,

(a)

Intrinsically
biased

Equivalent
N Dl

N Dl

N Dl

N

Extrinsically
biased

N Dl

N Dl

N Dl

Dl

FPO
N

Dl

N

which translocates to the nucleus and regulates the transcription of specific target genes (see Figure 14-29). In particular, Notch signaling activates the transcription of Notch
itself and represses the transcription of Delta, thereby intensifying the difference between the interacting cells (Figure
15-36a). Notch-mediated signaling can give rise to a sharp
boundary between two cell populations or can single out one
cell from a cluster of cells (Figure 15-36b). Notch signaling
controls cell fates in most tissues and has consequences for
differentiation, proliferation, the creation of cell asymmetry,
and apoptosis. In the immune system, for instance, Notch
signaling helps prevent the formation of T cells that attack an
individual’s own proteins. Here, we describe two examples
of Notch signaling in cell-fate determination.

Determination of AC and VU Cell Fates in C. elegans Two
equivalent cells, designated Z1.ppp and Z4.aaa, in roundworms can give rise to an anchor (AC) cell or a ventral uterine (VU) precursor cell. The results of laser ablation studies
showed that, if either the Z1.ppp or Z4.aaa cell is removed,
the remaining cell always becomes AC. In worms lacking
functional LIN-12, the C. elegans homolog of Notch, both
cells become AC. Conversely, constitutive activation of LIN12 in both Z1.ppp and Z4.aaa results in both cells becoming VU. Thus LIN-12 activity levels specify AC and VU
cell fates.
Both Z1.ppp and Z4.aaa produce the receptor, LIN-12,
and its ligand, the Delta homolog LAG-2, at similar levels
(Figure 15-37). As development proceeds, one cell begins to
express more receptor through random fluctuations in pro-

Dl

Receptor (LIN-12)

Ligand (LAG-2)

(b)
Z1.ppp

Field

Z4.aaa

Random difference in
expression of LIN-12 and LAG-2

Cluster

FPO

▲ FIGURE 15-36 Amplification of an initial bias to create
different cell types by Notch-mediated lateral inhibition.
(a) A difference between two initially equivalent cells may arise
randomly (left ). Alternatively, interacting cells may have an
intrinsic bias (center ) or an extrinsic bias (right ). For instance,
cells that have received different proteins in an asymmetric cell
division will be intrinsically biased; those that have received
different signals (orange) will be extrinsically biased. Regardless
of how the small initial bias arises, Notch becomes predominant
in one of the two cells, promoting its own expression and
repressing production of its ligand Delta in that cell. In the other
cell, Delta predominates. The outcome is reinforcement of the
small initial difference. (b) Notch-mediated lateral inhibition may
create a sharp boundary in an initial field of cells, such as along
the edge of the developing Drosophila wing, or distinguish a
central cell from a surrounding cluster of cells, as in neural
precursor establishment. [Adapted from S. Artavanis-Tsakonas et al.,

▲ FIGURE 15-37 Determination of different cell fates by
lateral inhibition in C. elegans development. LIN-12, a Notch
homolog, and LAG-2, a Delta homolog, regulate interactions
between two equivalent cells, designated Z1.ppp and Z4.aaa.
Either cell can assume a ventral uterine (VU) or anchor (AC) fate.
See text for discussion. [Adapted from I. Greenwald, 1998, Genes &

1999, Science 284:770.]

Dev. 12:1751.]

Amplification of differences
by feedback mechanism

Pre-VU

Pre-AC

15.6 • Reciprocal Induction and Lateral Inhibition

tein levels or differences in the ambient level of signaling
through the pathway. The cell receiving a slightly higher signal begins to increase its expression of the receptor and decrease its expression of the ligand. In the neighboring cell,
now exposed to a reduced level of ligand, expression of the
receptor falls and that of the ligand increases. In this way, the
initial asymmetry resulting from a random event is amplified,
finally leading to the commitment of one cell as a pre-VU cell
and its partner as a pre-AC cell. When formed, the AC cell
begins sending out a LIN-3 signal that functions in vulva development. Notch-mediated lateral inhibition also operates
in that process when the P6.p cell inhibits the neighboring
P5.p and P7.p cells (see Figure 15-12b).

Neuronal Development in Drosophila and Vertebrates
Loss-of-function mutations in the Notch or Delta genes produce a wide spectrum of phenotypes in Drosophila. One
consequence of such mutations in either gene is an increase
in the number of neuroblasts in the central nervous system.
In Drosophila embryogenesis, a sheet of ectoderm cells becomes divided into two populations of cells: those that move
inside the embryo eventually develop into neuroblasts; those
that remain external form the epidermis and cuticle. As some
of the cells enlarge and then loosen from the ectodermal
sheet to become neuroblasts, they signal to surrounding cells
to prevent their neighbors from becoming neuroblasts—a
case of lateral inhibition. Notch signaling is used for this in-

37

hibition; in embryos lacking the Notch receptor or its ligand,
all the ectoderm precursor cells become neural.
The role of Notch signaling in specifying neural cell fates
has been studied extensively in the developing Drosophila peripheral nervous system. In flies, various sensory organs arise
from proneural cell clusters, which produce bHLH transcription factors, such as Achaete and Scute, that promote neural
cell fates. In normal development, one cell within a proneural
cluster is anointed to become a sensory organ precursor
(SOP). In the other cells of a cluster, Notch signaling leads to
the repression of proneural genes, and so the neural fate is
inhibited; these nonselected cells give rise to epidermis (Figure
15-38). Temperature-sensitive mutations that cause functional loss of either Notch or Delta lead to the development of
additional SOPs from a proneural cluster. In contrast, in developing flies that produce a constitutively active form of
Notch (i.e., active in the absence of a ligand), all the cells in
a proneural cluster develop into epidermal cells.
To assess the role of the Notch pathway during primary
neurogenesis in Xenopus, scientists injected mRNA encoding
different forms of Notch and Delta into embryos. Injection of
mRNA encoding the constitutively active cytosolic segment of
Notch inhibited the formation of neurons. In contrast, injection
of mRNA encoding an altered form of Delta that prevents
Notch activation led to the formation of too many neurons.
These findings indicate that in vertebrates, as in Drosophila,
Notch signaling controls neural precursor cell fates.

(b)

(a)
Induction of
proneural cluster

Determination

Differentiation


FPO

Patterning
genes

Lower level
of Emc

SOP



Su(H)



Delta

E(spl)





ac

ac
Delta
Cell fate: Epidermal cells

▲ FIGURE 15-38 Role of Notch-mediated lateral inhibition
in formation of sensory organ precursors (SOPs) in
Drosophila. (a) Extracellular signaling molecules and transcription
factors, encoded by early-patterning genes, control the precise
spatiotemporal pattern of proneural bHLH proteins such as
Achaete and Scute (yellow). Most cells within the field express
EMC (orange), a related protein that antagonizes Achaete and
Scute. A small group of cells, a proneural cluster, produce
proneural bHLH proteins. The region of a proneural cluster from
which an SOP will form expresses lower levels of Emc, giving
these cells a bias toward SOP formation. Interactions between
these cells, leading to accumulation of E(spl) repressor proteins
in neighboring cells (blue), then restrict SOP formation to a single
cell (green). (b) Initially, achaete (ac) and other proneural genes
are transcribed in all the cells within a proneural cluster, as are

Notch

Cell fate: SOP

Notch and Delta. Achaete and other proneural bHLH proteins
promote expression of Delta. When one cell at random begins
to produce slightly more Achaete (left), its production of Delta
increases, leading to stronger Notch signaling in all its
neighboring cells (right). In the receiving cells, the Notch
signaling pathway activates a transcription factor designated
Su(H), which in turn stimulates expression of E(spl) genes. The
E(spl) proteins specifically repress transcription of ac and other
proneural genes. The resulting decrease in Achaete leads to a
decrease in Delta, thus amplifying the initial random difference
among the cells. As a consequence of these interactions and
others, one cell of a proneural cluster is selected as a SOP; all
the others lose their neural potential and develop into epidermal
cells.

38

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 15.6
Reciprocal Induction and Lateral Inhibition
Ephrins are cell-surface signaling ligands whose receptors (Ephs) are receptor tyrosine kinases.

to control the availability of active signals. The examples of
signal integration and modulation described in this section illustrate some general mechanisms used in a wide variety of
contexts.

■

B-class ephrins and their receptors (EphB), each acting
as both a ligand and a receptor, can mediate reciprocal induction in adjacent cells (see Figure 15-35).

■

Interactions between the Notch receptor and its transmembrane ligand Delta are used in lateral inhibition, which
can control the choice between two alternative cell fates.

■

An initial random or biased fluctuation in signaling between two adjacent equivalent cells can trigger a regulatory circuit that amplifies the initial difference, leading
eventually to one cell expressing only Delta ligand and the
other expressing only Notch receptor (see Figure 15-36).

■

In C. elegans, Notch-mediated lateral inhibition causes
two initially equal cells to follow different developmental
paths.

■

■ In Drosophila, newly formed neural precursor cells (neuroblasts and sensory organ precursors) express high levels
of Delta and use Notch signaling to prevent their neighbors from becoming neural precursors (see Figure 15-38).
Similar Notch-mediated lateral inhibition controls the balance between neural and non-neural cells in the development of Xenopus laevis.

Competence Depends on Properties of Cells That
Enable Them to Respond to Inductive Signals
Early embryologists noted that cells differ in their ability to
respond to various inductive signals. The ability to respond
to a particular signaling molecule, referred to as competence,
depends on several properties of the receiving cell: the presence of receptors specific for the signal, the ability of these receptors to activate specific intracellular pathways, the
presence of transcription factors that stimulate the expression of the genes required to implement the appropriate response, and a chromatin structure that makes these genes
accessible for transcription.
In some cases, the reception of one signal may make cells
competent to receive another. After a part of the liver is damaged or removed surgically, increased amounts of two signals, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6),
are produced as part of the response to liver damage. These
signals cause hepatocytes to enter a “primed” state in which
the cells increase their production of certain transcription
factors (e.g., NF- B, Stat3, AP1, and CEBP) but do not di-

Resting hepatocytes

15.7 Integrating and Controlling
Signals
Cells change their properties rapidly in response to signals,
both during and after development. The segregation and progressive restriction of cell potential during development are
changes that take place as an organism grows and generates
vast numbers of new cells that must be organized into new
tissues and shapes. The cells in some adult tissues (e.g.,
blood, gut epithelia, and skin) also continue to proliferate
and differentiate. These cells build on a substantial preexisting framework and have less “original” construction of tissues to do. Both dividing and nondividing cells in adult
tissues remain highly responsive to hormones and other signaling molecules and to environmental changes.
Discussion in this chapter and in Chapters 13 and 14
calls attention to the enormous scientific effort that has been
made in identifying the components of signaling pathways,
how they transduce signals, and the resulting cellular responses. Many current projects are aimed at learning how
multiple signaling pathways are mustered to control normal
tissue growth and function in embryonic and adult tissues. In
many circumstances, the appropriate response depends on
the ability of receiving cells to integrate multiple signals and

TNF, IL-6
Liver regeneration

"Priming" with TNF and IL-6
allows a response to growth
factors. TNF effect can be
apoptotic or proliferative,
depending on glutathione
content and reactive oxygen
species.

Primed hepatocytes
NF-κB, Stat3, AP1,
CEBP

FPO

HGF + EGF, TGFα

Growing
hepatocytes
Cyclin D

▲ FIGURE 15-39 Priming of resting hepatocytes for later
responses to signaling molecules that induce growth. Injury
to the liver or removal of part of the liver leads to priming of cells
in response to interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
signals. Primed cells increase their production of the indicated
transcription factors but do not divide. Subsequent increase in
the blood level of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) induces
primed cells to express cyclin D, which is required for cell
division (Chapter 21). HGF acts in conjunction with epidermal
growth factor (EGF) and transforming growth factor  (TGF).

15.7 • Integrating and Controlling Signals

vide. Primed cells are competent to respond to a combination
of three signals that together induce the synthesis of cyclin
D and mitosis (Figure 15-39).
Liver regeneration is an important survival tactic after a
part of the liver is damaged or poisoned, but unregulated
liver growth would lead to an unduly large organ or possibly
cancer. In the primed state, hepatocytes can measure their
own physiological state, their location within a tissue, their
proximity to other cells, the need for healing, and the spatial organization of cells within a structure. On the basis of
this assessment, the cells can respond most appropriately to
subsequent signals.

Some Signals Can Induce Diverse
Cellular Responses
Several classes of cell-surface receptors discussed in Chapters
13 and 14 are linked to more than one intracellular signaltransduction pathway (see Table 14-1). Multiple intracellular signaling possibilities are most evident with G
protein–coupled receptors, cytokine receptors, and receptor
tyrosine kinases. This phenomenon raises a general question:
What governs how a cell responds to a signal that can be
transduced by multiple pathways? Conversely, if the signaling pathway is the same in many cell types, why does one cell
respond by dividing, another by differentiating, and still
another by dying? For instance, signaling through the RTKRas–MAP kinase pathway (see Figure 14-16) is used repeatedly in the course of development, yet the outcome in regard
to cell-fate specification varies in different tissues. If there is
no specificity beyond the ligand and receptor, an activated
Ras might substitute for any signal. In fact, activated Ras can
do so in many cell types. In one DNA microarray study of
fibroblasts, for instance, the same set of genes was transcriptionally induced by platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
and by fibroblast growth factor (FGF), suggesting that exposure to either signaling molecule had similar effects. The
PDGF receptor and the FGF receptor are both receptor tyrosine kinases, and the binding of ligand to either receptor
can activate Ras.
Several mechanisms for producing diverse cellular responses to a particular signaling molecule seem possible in
principle: (1) the strength or duration of the signal governs
the nature of the response; (2) the pathway downstream of
the receptor is not really the same in different cell types; and
(3) converging inputs from other pathways modify the response to the signal.

Differences in Signal Strength or Duration Evidence supporting the use of the first mechanism comes from studies
with PC12 cells, a cultured cell line capable of differentiating
into adipocytes or neurons. Nerve growth factor (NGF)
promotes the formation of neurons, whereas epidermal
growth factor (EGF) promotes the formation of adipocytes.

39

Strengthening the EGF signal by prolonging exposure to it
causes neuronal differentiation. Although both NGF and
EGF are RTK ligands, NGF is a much stronger activator of
the Ras–MAP kinasetransduction pathway than is EGF. The
EGF receptor can apparently activate this pathway only after
prolonged stimulation.

Differences in Downstream Pathways Signaling through
cell type–specific pathways downstream of an RTK has been
demonstrated in C. elegans. In worms, EGF signals induce
at least five distinct responses, each one in a different type
of cell. Four of the five responses are mediated by the common Ras–MAP kinase pathway; the fifth, hermaphrodite
ovulation, employs a different downstream pathway in
which the second messenger inositol trisphosphate is generated. Binding of IP3 to its receptor (IP3R) in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane leads to the release of stored Ca2
from the ER (see Figure 13-29). The rise in cytosolic Ca2
then triggers ovulation. This alternative pathway was discovered with a genetic screen that implicated IP3R, a Ca2
channel, in EGF signaling—a good example of how a mutation in an unexpected gene can lead to a discovery.
Integration of Signals The third way that the same signaling
ligand/receptor pair can produce diverse effects on cells is to
integrate more than one signal, as occurs in Drosophila muscle development. Figure 15-40 depicts the convergence of signal inputs that leads to the formation of a single muscle
precursor cell, which is defined by its ability to transcribe
the even-skipped gene. Early in muscle development, the
Drosophila Wnt signal Wingless (Wg) and the TGF signal
Decapentaplegic (Dpp) prime a cell to make it competent to
receive a subsequent signal that is transduced through the
MAP kinase pathway downstream of Ras. The Wingless signal is produced in circumferential belts, and the Dpp signal is
produced in two longitudinal bands at right angles to the
Wnt belts.
One group of cells in each body segment receives both
the Wingless and the Dpp signals and thus become competent to respond to an unidentified RTK signal that activates
Ras. In these cells, signal integration takes place during
transcription of the eve gene. The transcription of eve is activated when a short 312-bp eve enhancer (not the same one
described in Figure 15-32) is bound by two muscle-specific
transcription factors and by three signal-induced transcription factors: TCF factor by Wingless, Mad by Dpp, and Pnt
by an RTK acting through Ras. Thus tissue-specific and
signal-responsive information is integrated through the action of five regulators on one short piece of DNA in specifying a type of cell. As the result of lateral inhibition,
eventually only one eve-expressing cell in each initial group
of competent cells is left (see Figure 15-40). That single cell
will develop into a particular muscle fiber by recruiting
other cells and fusing with them.

40

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls
Competence
domain

Equivalence
group

Dorsal
Wg
Dpp

Ras

Ras

Ras

FPO

Ventral
Pre-pattern

Pre-cluster
Dpp

Wg

Dpp + Wg

Notch/
Delta

L'sc cluster

L'sc

L'sc + Eve cluster

L'sc + Eve

Eve progenitor

Lateral inhibition

Eve

▲ FIGURE 15-40 Sequential action of critical signals in
Drosophila muscle development. Signal transduction through
the RTK pathway is governed by Wnt and TGF signals. Wingless
(Wg) is produced in a stripe of cells running in a belt around part
of each body segment of the embryo (purple). Decapentaplegic
(Dpp) is produced in a band of dorsal cells running from head to
tail on each side of the embryo (blue), a band that is created by
the dorsal/ventral signaling system described in Section 15.3. A
patch of cells in each body segment will receive both signals;
only these cells (green) are competent to respond to the
(unidentified) RTK signal that activates intracellular signaling from
Ras. All the cells in the patch activate a gene called L’sc, though

further signaling restricts L’sc and then eve transcription to a
more restricted set of cells called the pre-cluster (orange). Within
the pre-cluster, a central cell begins to use Notch signaling to
surrounding cells to repress L’sc and eve transcription there until
only one cell is left making eve products (red). That single cell
will develop into a particular muscle by recruiting other cells and
fusing with them; two such cells are created in each body
segment by this elaborate process. Both require RTK-mediated
signaling; one cell uses the Drosophila EGF receptor (DER) and
the EGF-type receptor called Heartless (Htl), and the second cell
uses only Htl.

Limb Development Depends on Integration
of Multiple Extracellular Signal Gradients

bryo’s flank. Implantation of a bead soaked in FGF10 into
places in the flank where a limb does not normally form
causes an extra limb to grow; so FGF has remarkable inductive capabilities.
There are three dimensions to a limb: anterior/posterior
(thumb to little finger), dorsal/ventral (palm versus back of
hand) and proximal/distal (shoulder to fingers). An embryonic cell that knows its position along each of these dimensions is well along toward knowing what to do. A different
signaling system operates in each of the three dimensions; so,

Vertebrate limbs grow from small “buds” composed of an
inner mass of mesoderm cells surrounded by a sheath of ectoderm. Secreted signals from both cell layers coordinate
limb development and instruct cells about their proper fates
within limbs. The first signal, fibroblast growth factor 10
(FGF10) is secreted from the lateral trunk mesoderm and initiates outgrowth of a limb from specific regions of the em-

(a)

(b)

 FIGURE 15-41 Integration of three signals in vertebrate
limb development along proximal/distal and anterior/
posterior axes. Each limb bud grows out of the flank of the
embryo. (a) A fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signal, probably
FGF10, comes from the mesoderm in specific regions of the
embryo’s flank, one region for each limb. FGF10 acts on a local
region of surface ectoderm called the apical ectodermal ridge
(AER) because it will form a prominent ridge. (b) The ectoderm
that receives a FGF10 signal is induced to produce FGF8, another
secreted signal. At the posterior end of the limb bud, FGF8
induces transcription of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene. (c) Shh
signaling induces transcription of the gene encoding FGF4 in
the AER. FGF8 and FGF4 promote continued proliferation of
the mesoderm cells, causing outgrowth of the limb bud. Shh
also stimulates this outgrowth and confers posterior
characteristics on the posterior part of the limb. Development
along the dorsal/ventral axis depends on a Wnt signal that is
not shown here.

Fgf8
induced
by FGF10
FGF10
Anterior
Posterior

Lateral plate
mesoderm

Fgf10

(c)

FPO
Proliferation
maintained
by FGF8

Proliferation
maintained by
FGF8 + FGF4

shh
induced by
FGF8

shh
maintained
by FGF8 +
FGF4

Surface ectoderm

Fgf8

shh

Fgf4 + Fgf8

AER

Fgf4
induced
by Shh

15.7 • Integrating and Controlling Signals

by reading the three signals, a cell appears to learn where it
is within the limb bud and to act accordingly.
In response to FGF10, a local region of surface ectoderm
becomes a signaling center, the apical ectodermal ridge
(AER), at the tip of emerging limb bud (Figure 15-41). This
region secretes FGF8 and later FGF4, both of which drive
persistent division of mesoderm cells and therefore continued
limb outgrowth. The FGF8 signal also induces the production of Sonic hedgehog in the posterior limb bud. The FGF
signals tell cells their distance from the distal limb bud, and
Shh tells cells that they are posterior. If Shh is added to the
anterior part of the bud, the limb that eventually forms will
have two posterior patterns of bones and no anterior. Along
the dorsal/ventral axis, a Wnt signal instructs cells to form
ventral cell types. The Wnt, FGF4, and FGF8 signals promote the transcription of Shh, and Shh signaling promotes
the transcription of the Fgf4 and Fgf8 genes. Thus the signals
are mutually reinforcing in cells that are close enough; cells
too far from one of the reinforcing signals will cease making their own signal. In this way, the strength and movement
of signals is tied to the eventual size and shape of the limb.
A cell in the midst of the limb bud, wondering what to
do, is assailed by this brew of signals. By integrating the information from all of them, each cell begins to learn how to
proceed. The main developmental task in the formation of
limbs and organs is to organize a few cell types (e.g., mesenchyme, vascular, epithelial) into complex multicellular
structures. The signals discussed herein provide the initial
guidelines for this building process, instructing cells about
their location relative to the coordinates of the limb and
causing specific transcription factors to become active in
proper parts of the limb.

Signals Are Buffered by Intracellular
and Extracellular Antagonists
In real life, organisms experience wide variations in their environments and must adapt or die. Most multicellular organisms have highly variable numbers of cells, experience a
wide range of temperatures, and must endure periods of nutritional deprivation, environmental toxicity, injury, and
competition with their own and other species. Signal systems
with rigid requirements for temperature and physiological
conditions would be ill adapted to the real world. Scientists
are beginning to recognize ways in which signals are regulated so that the outcome in regard to cell fates is correct.

Inducible Antagonists One way that cells can modulate signal activity is by producing inducible antagonists. The idea is
that a signal induces the transcription of genes in the receiving cells. Among the induced genes is one encoding an antagonist that reduces the effect of the signal. If, by chance,
too low an amount of signal gets through, the amount of antagonist also is diminished and the net target-gene induction
is preserved. Similarly, too much signal, or signal transduction, will be corrected by greater production of antagonist.

41

Examples of both intracellular and extracellular (secreted)
inducible antagonists are known. Such inducible antagonists
have been found for the Hedgehog, Wnt, TGF, RTK, and
cytokine receptor signaling pathways.
In Chapter 14, we describe how inducible intracellular
antagonists modulate signaling from TGF receptors (see
Figure 14-3) and from cytokine receptors (see Figure 14-14).
The Hedgehog pathway, discussed in Section 15.5, also is
regulated by an intracellular antagonist. Recall that, in the
absence of a Hedgehog signal, Patched inhibits Smoothened
and prevents intracellular signaling (see Figure 15-31). One
of the target genes transcriptionally activated by Hedgehog
signaling is patched; the resulting increased level of Patched
in the plasma membrane reduces downstream signaling and
turns off the transcription of Hedgehog target genes.
In other cases, a signal is controlled by an inducible secreted antagonist that binds the signal’s receptor without activating it. For instance, the secreted protein encoded by the
Drosophila argos gene competes with signals that activate
the EGF receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase. Transcription of argos is stimulated by EGFR ligands, making
Argos a type of inducible antagonist. When bound, Argos
blocks dimerization of the EGF receptor, which is necessary
for subsequent signal transduction.
The Argos buffering system is used to create different cell
types during dorsal/ventral patterning in early fly embryos.
Recall that Gurken is a ligand for the EGF receptor on dorsal follicle cells (see Figure 15-17). A consequence of Gurken
binding to the EGF receptor is transcriptional activation of
the spitz and vein genes, both of which encode ligands that
also bind to the EGF receptor and activate it. In this way,
the effect of Gurken is amplified. In dorsal midline cells
where the Gurken concentration is highest and EGFR signaling is strongest, the transcription of argos is also induced.
Argos protein reduces signal transduction from EGF receptors in the midline; only in the two flanking regions does
EGFR activity continue at high levels. This system creates
two distinct populations of cells: those in which the EGF receptor is active flanking a central population of cells in which
the EGF receptor is turned off. The highest level of the
Gurken signal leads to the lowest level of signal transduction
from the EGF receptor.

Noninducible Antagonists Signaling pathways are also controlled by secreted antagonists that are not induced by the
signal itself. One effect of such an antagonist can be to
sharpen or move a boundary between cell types. A signal
coming from source cells is progressively less potent with distance; at some point, it falls below a threshold amount and is
without effect. If a secreted antagonist comes from the opposite direction, it will block the action of the signal even in
cells receiving above-threshold amounts.
We see an example of this effect in the formation of neural cells in vertebrate development. Normally, secreted TGF
proteins prevent the formation of neural cells in a part of early
vertebrate embryos called the animal cap. In Xenopus

42

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

 FIGURE 15-42 Modulation of BMP4

(a) Inhibition by chordin

signaling in Xenopus by chordin and
Xolloid. (a) Chordin binds BMP4, a TGFclass secreted protein signal, and prevents
it from binding to its receptor. (b) Xolloid
specifically cleaves chordin in the
chordin–BMP4 complex, releasing BMP4 in
a form that can bind to its receptor and
trigger signaling. Similar regulation of Dpp
(related to BMP) signaling in Drosophila is
by Sog (related to chordin) and Tolloid
(related to Xolloid). [See S. Piccolo et al., 1997,

No chordin

+ Chordin

Chordin

BMP4
Exterior

Cytosol
Type II
receptor
Phosphorylation and
activation of Smads

Cell 91:407.]

(b) Release of inhibition by xolloid

No signaling

embryos, the animal cap produces BMP4, a member of the
TGF family of signals, and will therefore not produce neural tissue. The effect of signals and other regulators on neural
induction can be tested by exposing parts of the animal cap
in Xenopus embryos to individual proteins and seeing whether
neural cells form. This type of experiment revealed the ability
of chordin protein to antagonize BMP4 and induce neural cell
identity, an indication of the presence of dorsal mesoderm. The
addition of chordin to Xenopus animal caps induces the formation of neural cells; this neural induction by chordin is reversed by the addition of an excess of BMP4 protein. On this
basis, neural cell fate is looked on as the default state. Only
when BMP signaling is successful can other cell types form.
Together, these data led to a simple model in which chordin
prevents BMP from binding to its receptor. In principle, inhibition could occur by the direct binding of chordin to BMP
receptors or to BMP molecules themselves. The results of a series of biochemical studies demonstrated that chordin binds
BMP2 and BMP4 homodimers or BMP4/BMP7 heterodimers
with high affinity (KD  3 1010 M) and prevents them
from binding to their receptors (Figure 15-42). Chordinmediated inhibition of BMP signaling is relieved by Xolloid
protein, a protease that specifically cleaves chordin in
chordin–BMP complexes, releasing active BMP.
Wnt signaling also is modulated by secreted antagonists,
including a special group of secreted proteins, called
Frizbees, that are related to the Frizzled receptor in this pathway. Wnt signals bind to a cysteine-rich domain in the extracellular domain of Frizzled receptors, thus activating
downstream signaling (see Figure 15-32). Frizbee proteins
have the extracellular domain of Frizzled but lack its transmembrane and cytosolic domains. By tightly binding Wnt
signals, Frizbees soak up the signal, so less is available to activate Frizzled receptors.

No signaling

FPO

Xolloid
(proteolysis)

Inactive
BMP4

Type I
receptor

Active
BMP4

+

Chordin
fragments

Signaling

We conclude by mentioning Cerberus, a champion secreted antagonist discovered in frog embryos. This protein
is called Cerberus, after the mythological guardian dog
with three heads, because it has binding sites for three different types of powerful signals—Wnt, Nodal, and BMP.
The binding of these signals by Cerberus prevents activation of their respective receptors. By inactivating Wnt,
Nodal, and BMP signals having roles in the development
of the trunk and tail of the body, Cerberus promotes head
development.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 15.7
Integrating and Controlling Signals
In liver regeneration, early signals change cells into a
primed state in which they are competent to respond to
subsequent signals that cause growth and mitosis.

■

Most components of the RTK-Ras–MAP kinase signaling pathway are used repeatedly in the course of development and are evolutionarily conserved in a broad spectrum
of animals.

■

In embryonic muscle development in Drosophila, three
types of signals converge to promote differentiation (see
Figure 15-40). These signals induce the production of three
transcription factors that combine with two tissue-specific
transcription factors to activate transcription of the evenskipped gene, which marks a muscle precursor cell.

■

At least one signaling protein acts along each axis of the
developing limb bud. Cells respond to the combination of
signals, and the signals reinforce the production of other
signals to coordinate growth and patterning in three dimensions (see Figure 15-41).

■

Review the Concepts

Inducible antagonists include intracellular and secreted
proteins whose production is induced by a particular signal. The antagonist protein then feeds back, opposing the
ongoing action of the signal. Inducible antagonists provide
buffering in most signaling pathways to compensate for
excess or inadequate signals.

■

Signals can also be controlled by antagonists that are
not induced by the signal itself. By binding to signals, these
antagonists prevent the signals from binding to their specific receptors and activating them (see Figure 15-42).

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
The remarkable interplay of signals and gene controls during
development is a process of pattern formation. Simple masses
of cells become startlingly beautiful, functional structures
such as eyes, lungs, hearts, and wings. For this transformation
to happen, cells must respond to a rich mix of short-range
and long-range signals and integrate the information to make
the right decisions. Only a few signaling systems are used
repeatedly to organize cells into tissues. For the most part,
the signaling systems are common to all animals, thus vastly
simplifying the problem of learning the underlying molecular mechanisms. This manifestation of our common evolutionary origins reduces the problem of understanding biological regulation—but the remaining challenges are still
enormous.
To more fully understand how cells acquire their fates
and participate in morphogenesis will require a comprehensive view of their molecular responses in vivo. The advent
of DNA microarray technology for simultaneously monitoring the transcription of thousands of genes—indeed all of the
transcription units in a genome—is a major step forward in
“reading the minds” of cells. A signal can now be assessed
for its ability to redirect a cell’s activities by measuring all the
signal-induced changes in gene expression. Exciting as these
new insights are, their limitations also are apparent. For instance, transcripts are currently measured in extracts that
represent an average of many cells isolated without great
temporal precision—from embryos that change in seconds or
minutes. Therefore we can look forward to continuing advances as methods improve for observing responses in living
cells. Moreover, DNA microarray analysis measures only
transcription, not RNA splicing or translation into protein;
nor are protein localization and modification and
protein–protein associations assessed by this technology.
These other levels of gene control are still measured mostly
on a gene-by-gene basis. Advances in protein microarray
technology that enable monitoring of all proteins at once, as
well as protein–protein interactions, will contribute tremendously to our understanding.
The rapid fluxes in cell responses that occur during signaling events, the integration of information from multiple
signals, and the dynamic feedback control loops are all dif-

43

ficult to comprehend without precise measurements of signal
concentrations, reaction rates, and equilibrium states. More
precise quantitation will be necessary to understand signaling circuitry properly. Crude statements of genes being on
or off or of proteins being phosphorylated or not will have to
be replaced by more precise information, because in fact the
changes entail gradations over orders of magnitude, not simply all-or-none phenomena.
The elaborate switching systems in cells, usually many
of them working at the same time, have a degree of complexity that requires computer modeling. This field, sometimes referred to as systems biology, aims to produce models
that successfully describe the normal responses of cells to
stimuli and that predict how cells will respond to additional
or different perturbations. An engineering approach of this
sort holds the exciting promise that cells could be directed
to perform tasks, such as improved immunity or healing, that
are useful. The field of molecular cell biology increasingly is
becoming a computational science, but with the special fascination that the signals are building life.

KEY TERMS
angiogenesis 000
chordin protein 000
competence 000
development 000
equivalence group 000
floral organ–identity
gene 000
gap gene 000
Hedgehog pathway 000
homeosis 000
Hox gene 000
inducible antagonist 000
induction 000
in situ hybridization 000

lateral inhibition 000
maternal mRNA 000
morphogen 000
pair-rule gene 000
protein microarray
(proteome chip) 000
reciprocal induction 000
segment-polarity gene 000
sensory organ
precursor (SOP) 000
syncytium 000
Toll-Dorsal pathway 000
transcription cascade 000
Wnt pathway 000

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Describe three different pathways in which EGF-type
receptors participate.
2. What enzyme catalyzes the degradation of glycogen to
glucose 1-phosphate? Describe how the subunit structure of
this enzyme allows for integration of multiple signals.
3. People with Type 1 diabetes do not produce insulin. Describe what happens to GLUT4 glucose transporters in Type
1 diabetics just after a meal. Most patients with Type 2 diabetes produce normal amounts of insulin and have insulin receptors present on insulin-responsive cells. Yet these patients
are defective in glucose uptake, and hence have abnormally

44

CHAPTER 15 • Integration of Signals and Gene Controls

high blood glucose levels. Speculate on the nature of the defect in these patients.
4. Compare and contrast the action of morphogens involved in dorsal-ventral specification in Xenopus laevis and
Drosophila melanogaster.
5. Using in situ hybridization with a dorsal-specific probe,
where in the syncytial Drosophila embryo would one expect
to find dorsal expressed? Using immunohistochemistry with
an anti-dorsal antibody, where would you expect to find
Dorsal protein expressed?
6. A microarray analysis of wildtype vs. dorsal mutant embryos could be expected to yield information on all genes
regulated by the Dorsal protein. Why? Other than new genes
regulated by Dorsal, one would expect to see changes in regulation of previously identified genes. Which genes would
be increased or decreased in expression in dorsal mutants?
7. Deleting the 3 UTR of the bicoid gene would yield what
phenotype in a mutant fly? Why?
8. How does the motor protein kinesin ensure that proper
post-translational controls take place in the anterior end of
the Drosophila embryo? If kinesin functioned only during
embryo development, what would the phenotype of a kinesin
mutant embryo be?
9. What is the evidence that the Toll-based innate immunity system may be more than a billion years old?
10. How can the group of five gap genes specify more than
five types of cells in Drosophila embryos?
11. What is homeosis? Give an example of a floral homeotic
mutation and describe the phenotype of the mutant and the
normal function of the wild-type gene product.
12. Compare and contrast the receptor systems responsible
for recognition of the Hedgehog and Wnt secreted ligands.
13. What is the evidence that a gradient of Sonic hedgehog
leads to development of different cell types within the avian
neural tube?
14. The finding that ephrin b2 knockouts contain striking
defects in both arterial and venous capillaries supports the
idea that ephrin B2 and its receptor, EphB4, are involved in a
reciprocal induction. How?
15. Give a specific example of a signal-buffering inducible
antagonist, and describe how its actions lead to signal
buffering.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
The entire genome sequence of rice (Oryza sativa) has been
determined, allowing investigators to search the rice genome
for gene sequences homologous to Drosophila genes
involved in developmental processes. A putative bicoid

homolog was found in the rice genome that encodes a homeodomain-type transcription factor. This rice gene was used as
a probe against rice embryos in an in situ hybridization experiment, shown below. Plant embryos are contained within
seeds. The rice embryos used in these experiments were in
the globular stage of development. At this stage, the apical
and basal ends of the future plant are being specified.

Apical end

FPO
Basal end

a. What is the expression pattern of the putative rice bicoid
gene?
b. Speculate as to the function of the putative rice bicoid
gene.
c. From the above results, what phenotype do you think
might develop if one microinjected mRNA molecules transcribed from the putative rice bicoid gene into the basal end
of the embryo?
d. From the above results, what would the expected expression pattern be in rice if one could identify a putative nanos
homolog from rice?

REFERENCES

Experimental Approaches for Building a Comprehensive
View of Signal-Induced Responses
Arbeitman, M. N., et al. 2002. Gene expression during the life
cycle of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 297:2270–2275.
Cutler, P. 2003. Protein arrays: the current state-of-the-art. Proteomics 3:3–18.
Kamath, R. S., et al. 2003. Systematic functional analysis of the
Caenorhabditis elegans genome using RNAi. Nature 421:231–237.
Kim, S. K., et al. 2001. A gene expression map for Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 293:2087–2092.
Stathopoulos, A., et al. 2002. Whole-genome analysis of dorsalventral patterning in the Drosophila embryo. Cell 111:687–701.
Tomancak, P., et al. 2002. Systematic determination of patterns
of gene expression during Drosophila embryogenesis. Genome Biol.
3:RESEARCH0088–0088.

Responses of Cells to Environmental Influences
Downward, J. 1998. Mechanisms and consequences of activation of protein kinase B/Akt. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 10:262–267.
Kaelin, W. G., Jr. 2002. How oxygen makes its presence felt.
Genes & Dev. 16:1441–1445.

Control of Cell Fates by Graded Amounts of Regulators
Chang, A. J., and D. Morisato. 2002. Regulation of Easter activity is required for shaping the Dorsal gradient in the Drosophila
embryo. Development 129:5635–5645.

References
Freeman, M., and J. B. Gurdon. 2002. Regulatory principles of
developmental signaling. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 18:515–539.
Johnstone, O., and P. Lasko. 2001. Translational regulation and
RNA localization in Drosophila oocytes and embryos. Ann. Rev.
Genet. 35:365–406.
Kornfeld, K. 1997. Vulval development in Caenorhabditis elegans. Trends Genet. 13:55–61.
Stathopoulos, A., and M. Levine. 2002. Dorsal gradient networks in the Drosophila embryo. Devel. Biol. 246:57–67.
Takeda, K., T. Kaisho, and S. Akira. 2003. Toll-like receptors.
Ann. Rev. Immunol. 21:335–376.

Boundary Creation by Different Combinations
of Transcription Factors
Akam, M. 1987. The molecular basis for metameric pattern in
the Drosophila embryo. Development 101:1–22.
Andrioli, L. P., et al. 2002. Anterior repression of a Drosophila
stripe enhancer requires three position-specific mechanisms. Development 129:4931–4940.
Fujioka, M., et al. 1999. Analysis of an even-skipped rescue
transgene reveals both composite and discrete neuronal and early
blastoderm enhancers, and multi-stripe positioning by gap gene repressor gradients. Development 126:2527–2538.
Houchmandzadeh, B., E. Wieschaus, and S. Leibler. 2002. Establishment of developmental precision and proportions in the early
Drosophila embryo. Nature 415:798–802.

Boundary Creation by Extracellular Signals
Jessell, T. M. 2000. Neuronal specification in the spinal cord:
inductive signals and transcriptional codes. Nature Rev. Genet.
1:20–29.
Moon, R. T., B. Bowerman, M. Boutros, and N. Perrimon. 2002.
The promise and perils of Wnt signaling through beta-catenin. Science 296:1644–1646. Review.
Nybakken, K., and N. Perrimon. 2002. Hedgehog signal transduction: recent findings. Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 12:503–511.
Pandur, P., D. Maurus, and M. Kuhl. 2002. Increasingly complex: new players enter the Wnt signaling network. Bioessays
24:881–884.
Pires-daSilva, A., and R. J. Sommer. 2003. The evolution of signalling pathways in animal development. Nature Rev. Genet.
4:39–49.
Sanson, B. 2001. Generating patterns from fields of cells: examples from Drosophila segmentation. EMBO Rep. 2:1083–1088.
Wilkie, G. S., and I. Davis. 2001. Drosophila wingless and pairrule transcripts localize apically by dynein-mediated transport of
RNA particles. Cell 105:209–219.

45

Reciprocal Induction and Lateral Inhibition
Artavanis-Tsakonas, S., M. D. Rand, and R. J. Lake. 1999.
Notch signaling: cell fate control and signal integration in development. Science 284:770–776.
Cooke, J. E., and C. B. Moens. 2002. Boundary formation in
the hindbrain: Eph only it were simple. Trends Neurosci.
25:260–267.
Grandbarbe, L., et al. 2003. Delta-Notch signaling controls the
generation of neurons/glia from neural stem cells in a stepwise
process. Development 130:1391–1402.
Ju, B. G., et al. 2000. Fringe forms a complex with Notch. Nature 405:191–195.
Miao, H., et al. 2001. Activation of EphA receptor tyrosine kinase inhibits the Ras/MAPK pathway. Nature Cell Biol. 3:527–530.
Santiago, A., and C. A. Erickson. 2002. Ephrin-B ligands play a
dual role in the control of neural crest cell migration. Development
129:3621–3632.
Shaye, D. D., and I. Greenwald. 2002. Endocytosis-mediated
downregulation of LIN-12/Notch upon Ras activation in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 420:686–690.

Integrating and Controlling Signals
Brzozowski, A. M., et al. 1997. Molecular basis of agonism and
antagonism in the oestrogen receptor. Nature 389:753–758.
Fambrough, D., K. McClure, A. Kazlauskas, and E. S. Lander.
1999. Diverse signaling pathways activated by growth factor receptors induce broadly overlapping, rather than independent, sets of
genes. Cell 97:727–741.
Gerlitz, O., and K. Basler. 2002. Wingful, an extracellular feedback inhibitor of Wingless. Genes & Dev. 16:1055–1059.
Grimm, O. H., and J. B. Gurdon. 2002. Nuclear exclusion of
Smad2 is a mechanism leading to loss of competence. Nature Cell
Biol. 4:519–522.
Halfon, M. S., et al. 2000. Ras pathway specificity is determined
by the integration of multiple signal-activated and tissue-restricted
transcription factors. Cell 103:63–74.
Martin, G. 2001. Making a vertebrate limb: new players enter
from the wings. Bioessays 23:865–868.
Rubin, C., et al. 2003. Sprouty fine-tunes EGF signaling through
interlinked positive and negative feedback loops. Curr. Biol.
13:297–307.
Tickle, C., and A. Munsterberg. 2001. Vertebrate limb development: the early stages in chick and mouse. Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 11:476–481.

16
MOVING PROTEINS
INTO MEMBRANES
AND ORGANELLES

A live bovine endothelial cell stained to reveal
different intracellular compartments. The lacelike
membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum were
stained with a green fluorescent dye, and the
wormlike mitochondria were stained with an orange
fluorescent dye. [Molecular Probes, Inc.]

A

typical mammalian cell contains up to 10,000 different kinds of proteins; a yeast cell, about 5000. The
vast majority of these proteins are synthesized by cytosolic ribosomes, and many remain within the cytosol. However, as many as half the different kinds of proteins produced
in a typical cell are delivered to a particular cell membrane,
an aqueous compartment other than the cytosol, or to the
cell surface for secretion. For example, many hormone receptor proteins and transporter proteins must be delivered to
the plasma membrane, some water-soluble enzymes such as
RNA and DNA polymerases must be targeted to the nucleus,
and components of the extracellular matrix as well as
polypeptide signaling molecules must be directed to the cell
surface for secretion from the cell. These and all the other
proteins produced by a cell must reach their correct locations
for the cell to function properly.
The delivery of newly synthesized proteins to their proper
cellular destinations, usually referred to as protein targeting
or protein sorting, encompasses two very different kinds of
processes. The first general process involves targeting of a
protein to the membrane of an intracellular organelle and
can occur either during or soon after synthesis of the pro-

tein by translation at the ribosome. For membrane proteins,
targeting leads to insertion of the protein into the lipid bilayer of the membrane, whereas for water-soluble proteins,
targeting leads to translocation of the entire protein across
the membrane into the aqueous interior of the organelle.

OUTLINE
16.1 Translocation of Secretory Proteins Across
the ER Membrane
16.2 Insertion of Proteins into the ER Membrane
16.3 Protein Modifications, Folding, and Quality
Control in the ER
16.4 Export of Bacterial Proteins
16.5 Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria
and Chloroplasts
16.6 Sorting of Peroxisomal Proteins
1

2

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

Overview Animation: Protein Sorting

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Proteins are sorted to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), mitochondria, chloroplasts, peroxisomes, and the nucleus by this
general process (Figure 16-1).
A second general sorting process applies to proteins that
initially are targeted to the ER membrane, thereby entering

the secretory pathway. These proteins include not only soluble and membrane proteins that reside in the ER itself but
also proteins that are secreted from the cell, enzymes and
other resident proteins in the lumen of the Golgi complex
and lysosomes, and integral proteins in the membranes of
Outer nuclear
membrane

Ribosomes

Inner nuclear
membrane

mRNA

1

Nucleus

Nuclear
pore

1

mRNA
Cytosol
ER signal
sequence

6

2

2
Cytosolic
protein
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum

Membrane

5

Matrix

Targeting
sequence

Peroxisome
4

Outer membrane

Intermembrane space

Matrix

3

Golgi
complex

3
Inner
membrane
Stroma

Thylakoids

Inner
membrane
Mitochondrion
Outer
membrane
Chloroplast

4a
Plasma
membrane

4b
Lysosome

SECRETORY PATHWAY

▲ FIGURE 16-1 Overview of major protein-sorting
pathways in eukaryotic cells. All nuclear-encoded mRNAs are
translated on cytosolic ribosomes. Left (secretory pathway):
Ribosomes synthesizing nascent proteins in the secretory
pathway are directed to the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
by an ER signal sequence (pink; steps 1 , 2 ). After translation is
completed on the ER, these proteins can move via transport
vesicles to the Golgi complex (step 3 ). Further sorting delivers
proteins either to the plasma membrane or to lysosomes (steps
4a , 4b ). Right (nonsecretory pathways): Synthesis of proteins
lacking an ER signal sequence is completed on free ribosomes

(step 1 ). Those proteins that contain no targeting sequence are
released into the cytosol and remain there (step 2 ). Proteins
with an organelle-specific targeting sequence (pink) first are
released into the cytosol (step 2 ) but then are imported into
mitochondria, chloroplasts, peroxisomes, or the nucleus (steps
3 – 6 ). Mitochondrial and chloroplast proteins typically pass
through the outer and inner membranes to enter the matrix or
stromal space, respectively. Some remain there, and some are
sorted further to other subcompartments of these organelles.
Nuclear proteins enter through visible nuclear pores by
processes discussed in Chapter 12.

16-1 Translocation of Secretory Proteins Across the ER Membrane

these organelles and the plasma membrane. Targeting to the
ER generally involves nascent proteins still in the process of
being synthesized. Proteins whose final destination is the
Golgi, lysosome, or cell surface are transported along the secretory pathway by small vesicles that bud from the membrane of one organelle and then fuse with the membrane of
the next organelle in the pathway (see Figure 16-1, left). We
discuss vesicle-based protein sorting in the next chapter because mechanistically it differs significantly from protein targeting to the membranes of intracellular organelles.
In this chapter, we examine how proteins are targeted to
the membrane of intracellular organelles and subsequently
inserted into the organelle membrane or moved into the interior. Two features of this protein-sorting process initially
were quite baffling: how a given protein could be targeted
to only one specific membrane, and how relatively large protein molecules could be translocated across a membrane
without disrupting the bilayer as a barrier to ions and small
molecules. Using a combination of biochemical purification
methods and genetic screens for identifying mutants unable
to execute particular translocation steps, cell biologists have
identified many of the cellular components required for
translocation across each of the different intracellular membranes. In addition, many of the major translocation
processes in the cell have been reconstituted using in vitro
systems, which can be freely manipulated experimentally.
These studies have shown that despite some variations,
the same basic mechanisms govern protein sorting to all the
various intracellular organelles. We now know, for instance,
that the information to target a protein to a particular organelle destination is encoded within the amino acid sequence of the protein itself, usually within sequences of
20–50 amino acids, known generically as signal sequences,
or uptake-targeting sequences (see Figure 16-1). Each organelle carries a set of receptor proteins that bind only to
specific kinds of signal sequences, thus assuring that the information encoded in a signal sequence governs the specificity of targeting. Once a protein containing a signal
sequence has interacted with the corresponding receptor, the
protein chain is transferred to some kind of translocation
channel that allows the protein to pass through the membrane bilayer. The unidirectional transfer of a protein into an
organelle, without sliding back out into the cytoplasm, is
usually achieved by coupling translocation to an energetically favorable process such as hydrolysis of ATP. Some
proteins are subsequently sorted further to reach a subcompartment within the target organelle; such sorting depends
on yet other signal sequences and other receptor proteins.
Finally, signal sequences often are removed from the mature
protein by specific proteases once translocation across the
membrane is completed.
For each of the protein-targeting events discussed in this
chapter, we will seek to answer four fundamental questions:
1. What is the nature of the signal sequence, and what distinguishes it from other types of signal sequences?

3

2. What is the receptor for the signal sequence?
3. What is the structure of the translocation channel that
allows transfer of proteins across the membrane bilayer? In
particular, is the channel so narrow that proteins can pass
through only in an unfolded state, or will it accommodate
folded protein domains?
4. What is the source of energy that drives unidirectional
transfer across the membrane?
In the first part of the chapter, we cover targeting of proteins to the ER, including the post-translational modifications that occur to proteins as they enter the secretory
pathway. We then look at several mechanisms for exporting
proteins from bacteria, some of which are similar to protein
sorting in eukaryotic cells. The last two sections describe targeting of proteins to mitochondria, chloroplasts, and peroxisomes. We cover the transport of proteins in and out of the
nucleus through nuclear pores in Chapter 12 because nuclear
transport is intimately related to post-transcriptional events
and involves several nucleus-specific variations on the mechanisms discussed in this chapter.

16-1 Translocation of Secretory
Proteins Across the ER Membrane
All eukaryotic cells use essentially the same secretory pathway for synthesizing and sorting secreted proteins and soluble luminal proteins in the ER, Golgi, and lysosomes (see
Figure 16-1, left). For simplicity, we refer to these proteins
collectively as secretory proteins. Although all cells secrete a
variety of proteins (e.g., extracellular matrix proteins), certain types of cells are specialized for secretion of large

▲ FIGURE 16-2 Electron micrograph of ribosomes attached
to the rough ER in a pancreatic acinar cell. Most of the
proteins synthesized by this type of cell are to be secreted and
are formed on membrane-attached ribosomes. A few membraneunattached (free) ribosomes are evident; presumably, these are
synthesizing cytosolic or other nonsecretory proteins. [Courtesy
of G. Palade.]

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-3 Labeling experiments

▲

4

mRNA

demonstrate that secretory proteins are localized to the
ER lumen shortly after synthesis. Cells are incubated for a
brief time with radiolabeled amino acids, so that only newly
synthesized proteins become labeled. The cells then are
homogenized, fracturing the plasma membrane and shearing the
rough ER into small vesicles called microsomes. Because they
have bound ribosomes, microsomes have a much greater
buoyant density than other membranous organelles and can
be separated from them by a combination of differential and
sucrose density-gradient centrifugation (Chapter 5). The purified
microsomes are treated with a protease in the presence or
absence of a detergent. The labeled secretory proteins
associated with the microsomes are digested by added
proteases only if the permeability barrier of the microsomal
membrane is first destroyed by treatment with detergent. This
finding indicates that the newly made proteins are inside the
microsomes, equivalent to the lumen of the rough ER.

Labeled
secretory
protein
Rough ER

Homogenization
Microsomes
with attached
ribosomes

in the intact cell. The experiments depicted in Figure 16-3, in
which microsomes isolated from pulse-labeled cells are
treated with a protease, demonstrate that although secretory
proteins are synthesized on ribosomes bound to the cytosolic
face of the ER membrane, they become localized in the
lumen of ER vesicles very soon after their synthesis.

Treat with
detergent

Add
protease

Digestion of
secretory protein

Add
protease

No digestion of
secretory protein

amounts of specific proteins. Pancreatic acinar cells, for instance, synthesize large quantities of several digestive enzymes that are secreted into ductules that lead to the intestine
(see Figure 5-21). Because such secretory cells contain the organelles of the secretory pathway (e.g., ER and Golgi) in
great abundance, they have been widely used in studying this
pathway.
Early pulse-labeling experiments with pancreatic acinar
cells showed that radioactively labeled amino acids are incorporated primarily into newly synthesized secretory proteins. The ribosomes synthesizing these proteins are actually
bound to the surface of the ER. As a consequence, the portion of the ER that receives proteins entering the secretory
pathway is known as the rough ER because these membranes are densely studded with ribosomes (Figure 16-2).
When cells are homogenized, the rough ER breaks up into
small closed vesicles, termed rough microsomes, with the
same orientation (ribosomes on the outside) as that found

A Hydrophobic N-Terminal Signal Sequence
Targets Nascent Secretory Proteins to the ER
After synthesis of a secretory protein begins on free ribosomes in the cytosol, a 16- to 30-residue ER signal sequence
in the nascent protein directs the ribosome to the ER membrane and initiates translocation of the growing polypeptide
across the ER membrane (see Figure 16-1, left). An ER signal
sequence typically is located at the N-terminus of the protein,
the first part of the protein to be synthesized. The signal sequences of different secretory proteins contain one or more
positively charged amino acids adjacent to a continuous
stretch of 6–12 hydrophobic residues (the core), but otherwise they have little in common. For most secretory proteins,
the signal sequence is cleaved from the protein while it is still
growing on the ribosome; thus, signal sequences are usually
not present in the “mature” proteins found in cells.
The hydrophobic core of ER signal sequences is essential
for their function. For instance, the specific deletion of several of the hydrophobic amino acids from a signal sequence,
or the introduction of charged amino acids into the hydrophobic core by mutation, can abolish the ability of the Nterminus of a protein to function as a signal sequence. As a
consequence, the modified protein remains in the cytosol,
unable to cross the ER membrane into the lumen. Using recombinant DNA techniques, researchers have produced cytosolic proteins with added N-terminal amino acid
sequences. Provided the added sequence is sufficiently long
and hydrophobic, such a modified cytosolic protein is
translocated to the ER lumen. Thus the hydrophobic residues

16-1 Translocation of Secretory Proteins Across the ER Membrane

Add microsome
membranes

N-terminal
signal sequence

Completed proteins
with signal sequences
No incorporation
into microsomes;
no removal of
signal sequence

(b) Cell-free protein synthesis; microsomes present

Cotranslational transport
of protein into microsome
and removal of signal
sequence

Mature protein
chain without
signal sequence

in the core of ER signal sequences form a binding site that is
critical for the interaction of signal sequences with receptor
proteins on the ER membrane.
Biochemical studies utilizing a cell-free protein-synthesizing
system, mRNA encoding a secretory protein, and microsomes stripped of their own bound ribosomes have clarified
the function and fate of ER signal sequences. Initial experiments with this system demonstrated that a typical secretory
protein is incorporated into microsomes and has its signal sequence removed only if the microsomes are present during
protein synthesis (Figure 16-4). Subsequent experiments
were designed to determine the precise stage of protein synthesis at which microsomes must be present in order for
translocation to occur. In these experiments, a drug that
prevents initiation of translation was added to proteinsynthesizing reactions at different times after protein synthesis had begun, and then stripped microsomes were added to
the reaction mixtures. These experiments showed that microsomes must be added before the first 70 or so amino acids
are linked together in order for the completed secretory protein to be localized in the microsomal lumen. At this point,
the first 40 amino acids or so protrude from the ribosome,
including the signal sequence that later will be cleaved off,
and the next 30 or so amino acids are still buried within a
channel in the ribosome. Thus the transport of most secretory proteins into the ER lumen occurs while the nascent
protein is still bound to the ribosome and being elongated,
a process referred to as cotranslational translocation.

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-4 Cell-free experiments
demonstrate that translocation of secretory proteins into
microsomes is coupled to translation. Treatment of
microsomes with EDTA, which chelates Mg2 ions, strips them
of associated ribosomes, allowing isolation of ribosome-free
microsomes, which are equivalent to ER membranes (see Figure
16-3). Synthesis is carried out in a cell-free system containing
functional ribosomes, tRNAs, ATP, GTP, and cytosolic enzymes to
which mRNA encoding a secretory protein is added. The
secretory protein is synthesized in the absence of microsomes
(a), but is translocated across the vesicle membrane and loses its
signal sequence only if microsomes are present during protein
synthesis (b).

▲

(a) Cell-free protein synthesis; no microsomes present

5

Cotranslational Translocation Is Initiated by Two
GTP-Hydrolyzing Proteins
Since secretory proteins are synthesized in association with
the ER membrane but not with any other cellular membrane,
a signal-sequence recognition mechanism must target them
there. The two key components in this targeting are the
signal-recognition particle (SRP) and its receptor located in
the ER membrane. The SRP is a cytosolic ribonucleoprotein
particle that transiently binds simultaneously to the ER signal sequence in a nascent protein, to the large ribosomal
unit, and to the SRP receptor.
Six discrete polypeptides and a 300-nucleotide RNA
compose the SRP (Figure 16-5a). One of the SRP proteins
(P54) can be chemically cross-linked to ER signal sequences,
evidence that this particular protein is the subunit that binds
to the signal sequence in a nascent secretory protein. A region of P54 containing many amino acid residues with hydrophobic side chains is homologous to a bacterial protein
known as Ffh, which performs an analogous function to P54
in the translocation of proteins across the inner membrane of
bacterial cells. The structure of Ffh contains a cleft whose
inner surface is lined by hydrophobic side chains (Figure
16-5b). The hydrophobic region of P54 is thought to contain
an analogous cleft that interacts with the hydrophobic Ntermini of nascent secretory proteins and selectively targets
them to the ER membrane. Two of the SRP proteins, P9 and
P14, interact with the ribosome, while P68 and P72 are required for protein translocation.
In the cell-free translation system described previously,
the presence of SRP slows elongation of a secretory protein
when microsomes are absent, thereby inhibiting synthesis of
the complete protein (see Figure 16-4). This finding suggests
that interaction of the SRP with both the nascent chain of a
secretory protein and with the free ribosome prevents the
nascent chain from becoming too long for translocation into
the ER. Only after the SRP/nascent chain/ribosome complex
has bound to the SRP receptor in the ER membrane does
SRP release the nascent chain, allowing elongation at the
normal rate.
Figure 16-6 summarizes our current understanding of
secretory protein synthesis and the role of the SRP and its

6

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲

▲ FIGURE 16-5 Structure of the signal-recognition particle
(SRP). (a) The SRP comprises one 300-nucleotide RNA and six
proteins designated P9, P14, P19, P54, P68, and P72. (The
numeral indicates the molecular weight  103.) All proteins
except P54 bind directly to the RNA. (b) The bacterial Ffh protein
is homologous to the portion of P54 that binds ER signal
sequences. This surface model shows the binding domain in
Ffh, which contains a large cleft lined with hydrophobic amino
acids (purple) whose side chains interact with signal sequences.

[Part (a) see K. Strub et al., 1991, Mol. Cell Biol. 11:3949; and S. High and
B. Dobberstein, 1991, J. Cell Biol. 113:229. Part (b) adapted from
R. J. Keenan et al., 1998, Cell 94:181.]

secretory protein with the ER membrane but also act together to permit elongation and synthesis of complete proteins only when ER membranes are present.
Ultimately, the SRP and SRP receptor function to bring
ribosomes that are synthesizing secretory proteins to the ER
membrane. The coupling of GTP hydrolysis to this targeting process is thought to contribute to the fidelity by which
signal sequences are recognized. Probably the energy from
GTP hydrolysis is used to release proteins lacking proper signal sequences from the SRP and SRP receptor complex,
thereby preventing their mistargeting to the ER membrane.
(A similar coupling of GTP hydrolysis with binding of translation elongation factors to ribosomes increases the fidelity
of translation by ejecting aminoacyl-tRNA molecules that
cannot form correct base pairs with the codons in mRNA.)
Interaction of the SRP/nascent chain/ribosome complex with
the SRP receptor is promoted when GTP is bound by both
the P54 subunit of SRP and the  subunit of the SRP receptor (see Figure 16-6). Subsequent transfer of the nascent
chain and ribosome to a site on the ER membrane where
translocation can take place allows hydrolysis of the bound
GTP. After dissociating, SRP and its receptor release the
bound GDP and recycle to the cytosol ready to initiate another round of interaction between ribosomes synthesizing
nascent secretory proteins with the ER membrane.

Passage of Growing Polypeptides Through
the Translocon Is Driven by Energy Released
During Translation
receptor in this process. The SRP receptor comprises two
subunits: a transmembrane  subunit, and a larger, peripheral  subunit. Treatment of microsomes with very small
amounts of protease cleaves the  subunit very near its site of
attachment to the membrane, releasing a soluble form of the
SRP receptor. Protease-treated microsomes are unable to
bind the SRP/nascent chain/ribosome complex or support cotranslational translocation. The soluble SRP receptor fragment, however, retains its ability to interact with the
SRP/nascent chain/ribosome complex, causing release of SRP
and allowing chain elongation to proceed. Thus the SRP and
SRP receptor not only help mediate interaction of a nascent

Once the SRP and its receptor have targeted a ribosome synthesizing a secretory protein to the ER membrane, the ribosome and nascent chain are rapidly transferred to the
translocon, a protein-lined channel within the membrane. As
translation continues, the elongating chain passes directly
from the large ribosomal subunit into the central pore of the
translocon. The 60S ribosomal subunit is aligned with the
pore of the translocon in such a way that the growing chain
is never exposed to the cytoplasm and does not fold until it
reaches the ER lumen (see Figure 16-6).
The translocon was first identified by mutations in the
yeast gene encoding Sec61, which caused a block in the

16-1 Translocation of Secretory Proteins Across the ER Membrane

7

translocation of secretory proteins into the lumen of the ER.
Subsequently, three proteins called the Sec61 complex were
found to form the mammalian translocon: Sec61, an integral membrane protein with 10 membrane-spanning  helices, and two smaller proteins, termed Sec61 and Sec61.
Chemical cross-linking experiments demonstrated that the
translocating polypeptide chain comes into contact with the
Sec61 protein in both yeast and mammalian cells, confirming its identity as a translocon component (Figure 16-7).
When microsomes in the cell-free translocation system
were replaced with reconstituted phospholipid vesicles containing only the SRP receptor and Sec61 complex, nascent
secretory protein was translocated from its SRP/ribosome

complex into the vesicles. This finding indicates that the SRP
receptor and the Sec61 complex are the only ER-membrane
proteins absolutely required for translocation. Thus the energy derived from chain elongation at the ribosome appears
to be sufficient to push the polypeptide chain across the
membrane in one direction.
Multiple copies of the Sec61 complex assemble to form
a translocon channel, which can be visualized by electron
microscopy. Images of the channel have been generated by
computer averaging of electron micrographs of purified
Sec61 channels bound to ribosomes that have been reconstituted in liposomes (Figure 16-8). These show the channel
as a cylinder, 5–6 nm high and 8.5 nm in diameter, with a

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

then are ready to initiate the insertion of another polypeptide
chain. Step 5 : As the polypeptide chain elongates, it passes
through the translocon channel into the ER lumen, where the
signal sequence is cleaved by signal peptidase and is rapidly
degraded. Step 6 : The peptide chain continues to elongate as
the mRNA is translated toward the 3 end. Because the
ribosome is attached to the translocon, the growing chain is
extruded through the translocon into the ER lumen. Steps 7 , 8 :
Once translation is complete, the ribosome is released, the
remainder of the protein is drawn into the ER lumen, the
translocon closes, and the protein assumes its native folded
conformation.

Focus Animation: Synthesis of Secreted and Membrane-Bound Proteins

▲ FIGURE 16-6 Synthesis of secretory proteins and their
cotranslational translocation across the ER membrane. Steps
1 , 2 : Once the ER signal sequence emerges from the ribosome,
it is bound by a signal-recognition particle (SRP). Step 3: The SRP
delivers the ribosome/nascent polypeptide complex to the SRP
receptor in the ER membrane. This interaction is strengthened by
binding of GTP to both the SRP and its receptor. Step 4 : Transfer
of the ribosome/nascent polypeptide to the translocon leads to
opening of this translocation channel and insertion of the signal
sequence and adjacent segment of the growing polypeptide
into the central pore. Both the SRP and SRP receptor, once
dissociated from the translocon, hydrolyze their bound GTP and

8

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-7 Cross-linking experiments
show that Sec61 is a translocon component that contacts
nascent secretory proteins as they pass into the ER lumen.
An mRNA encoding the N-terminal 70 amino acids of the
secreted protein prolactin was translated in a cell-free system
containing microsomes (see Figure 16-4b). The mRNA lacked a
chain-termination codon and contained one lysine codon, near
the middle of the sequence. The reactions contained a chemically
modified lysyl-tRNA in which a light-activated cross-linking
reagent was attached to the lysine side chain. Although the
entire mRNA was translated, the completed polypeptide could
not be released from the ribosome and thus became “stuck”
crossing the ER membrane. The reaction mixtures then were
exposed to an intense light, causing the nascent chain to
become covalently bound to whatever proteins were near it in
the translocon. When the experiment was performed using
microsomes from mammalian cells, the nascent chain became
covalently linked to Sec61. Different versions of the prolactin
mRNA were used to place the modified lysine residue at
different distances from the ribosome; cross-linking to Sec61
was observed only when the modified lysine was positioned
within the translocation channel. [Adapted from T. A. Rapoport, 1992,
Science 258:931; and D. Görlich and T. A. Rapoport, 1993, Cell 75:615.]

central pore, roughly 2 nm in diameter, perpendicular to the
plane of the membrane.
If the translocon were always open in the ER membrane,
especially in the absence of attached ribosomes and a translocating polypeptide, small molecules such as ATP and amino
acids would be able to diffuse freely through the central
pore. To maintain the permeability barrier of the ER membrane, the translocon is regulated so that it is open only
when a ribosome–nascent chain complex is bound. Thus the
translocon is a gated channel analogous to the gated ion
channels described in Chapter 7. When the translocon first
opens, a loop of the nascent chain, containing the signal

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-8 Electron microscopy
reconstruction reveals that a translocon associates closely
with a ribosome. Purified Sec61 complexes were solubilized by
treatment of ER membranes with detergents. When ribosomes
were added, translocons (blue) reassembled in artificial
phospholipid bilayers. The resulting particles were frozen, and
electron micrographs of a large number of particles were
generated, stored in a computer, and then averaged to produce a
single image. Note that although the ribosome is firmly attached
to the translocon, there is a gap between the two structures. The
fingerlike appendage below the translocon channel is thought to
be formed from a protein complex that associates with the
translocon. [Courtesy Dr. Christopher Akey and Jean-Francois Menetret,
Boston University School of Medicine.]

sequence and approximately 30 adjacent amino acids, can
insert into the translocon pore (see Figure 16-6).
The mechanism by which the translocon channel opens
and closes is controversial at this time. Some evidence suggests that a protein within the ER lumen blocks the translocon pore when a ribosome is not bound to the cytosolic side
of the translocon. Other observations, however, indicate that
Sec61 complexes may normally reside in the ER membrane
in an unassembled state and that the gating process involves
the assembly of a translocon channel at the site where the
ribosome and nascent chain are brought to the membrane by
the SRP and SRP receptor.
As the growing polypeptide chain enters the lumen of the
ER, the signal sequence is cleaved by signal peptidase, which
is a transmembrane ER protein associated with the translocon (see Figure 16-6). This protease recognizes a sequence on
the C-terminal side of the hydrophobic core of the signal
peptide and cleaves the chain specifically at this sequence
once it has emerged into the luminal space of the ER. After
the signal sequence has been cleaved, the growing polypeptide moves through the translocon into the ER lumen. The
translocon remains open until translation is completed and
the entire polypeptide chain has moved into the ER lumen.

16-1 Translocation of Secretory Proteins Across the ER Membrane

ATP Hydrolysis Powers Post-translational
Translocation of Some Secretory Proteins in Yeast
In most eukaryotes, secretory proteins enter the ER by cotranslational translocation, using energy derived from translation to pass through the membrane, as we’ve just
described. In yeast, however, some secretory proteins enter
the ER lumen after translation has been completed. In such
post-translational translocation, the translocating protein
passes through the same Sec61 translocon that is used in cotranslational translocation. However, the SRP and SRP receptor are not involved in post-translational translocation,
and in such cases a direct interaction between the translocon and the signal sequence of the completed protein appears
to be sufficient for targeting to the ER membrane. In addition, the driving force for unidirectional translocation across
the ER membrane is provided by an additional protein complex known as the Sec63 complex and a member of the
Hsc70 family of molecular chaperones known as BiP. The
tetrameric Sec63 complex is embedded in the ER membrane
in the vicinity of the translocon, while BiP is localized to the
ER lumen. Like other members of the Hsc70 family, BiP has

▲ FIGURE 16-9 Post-translational translocation across ER
membrane.This mechanism is fairly common in yeast and
probably occurs occasionally in higher eukaryotes. Small arrows
inside the translocon represent random sliding of the
translocating polypeptide inward and outward. Successive binding
of BiP·ADP to entering segments of the polypeptide prevents the
chain from sliding out toward the cytosol. See the text for
discussion. [See K. E. Matlack et al., 1997, Science 277:938.]

9

a peptide-binding domain and an ATPase domain. These
chaperones bind and stabilize unfolded or partially folded
proteins (see Figure 3-14).
The current model for post-translational translocation
of a protein into the ER is outlined in Figure 16-9. Once the
N-terminal segment of the protein enters the ER lumen, signal peptidase cleaves the signal sequence just as in cotranslational translocation (step 1). Interaction of BiP·ATP with
the luminal portion of the Sec63 complex causes hydrolysis
of the bound ATP, producing a conformational change in BiP
that promotes its binding to an exposed polypeptide chain
(step 2). Since the Sec63 complex is located near the translocon, BiP is thus activated at sites where nascent polypeptides
can enter the ER. Certain experiments suggest that in the
absence of binding to BiP, an unfolded polypeptide slides
back and forth within the translocon channel. Such random
sliding motions rarely result in the entire polypeptide’s
crossing the ER membrane. Binding of a molecule of
BiP·ADP to the luminal portion of the polypeptide prevents
backsliding of the polypeptide out of the ER. As further inward random sliding exposes more of the polypeptide on
the luminal side of the ER membrane, successive binding of

10

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

BiP·ADP molecules to the polypeptide chain acts as a
ratchet, ultimately drawing the entire polypeptide into the
ER within a few seconds (steps 3 and 4). On a slower time
scale, the BiP molecules spontaneously exchange their
bound ADP for ATP, leading to release of the polypeptide,
which can then fold into its native conformation (steps 5
and 6). The recycled BiP·ATP then is ready for another interaction with Sec63.
The overall reaction carried out by BiP is an important
example of how the chemical energy released by the hydrolysis of ATP can power the mechanical movement of a protein
across a membrane. Some bacterial cells also use an ATPdriven process for translocating completed proteins across
the plasma membrane. However, the mechanism of posttranslational translocation in bacteria differs somewhat from
that in yeast, as we describe in Section 16.4.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 16-1
Translocation of Secretory Proteins Across
the ER Membrane
Synthesis of secreted proteins; enzymes destined for the
ER, Golgi complex, or lysosome; and integral plasmamembrane proteins begins on cytosolic ribosomes, which
become attached to the membrane of the ER, forming the
rough ER (see Figure 16-1, left).

■

The ER signal sequence on a nascent secretory protein
consists of a segment of hydrophobic amino acids, generally located at the N-terminus.

■

In cotranslational translocation, the signal-recognition
particle (SRP) first recognizes and binds the ER signal sequence on a nascent secretory protein and in turn is bound
by an SRP receptor on the ER membrane, thereby targeting the ribosome/nascent chain complex to the ER.

■

The SRP and SRP receptor then mediate insertion of the
nascent secretory protein into the translocon. Hydrolysis
of GTP by the SRP and its receptor drive this docking
process (see Figure 16-6). As the ribosome attached to the
translocon continues translation, the unfolded protein
chain is extruded into the ER lumen. No additional energy
is required for translocation.

■

In post-translational translocation, a completed secretory protein is targeted to the ER membrane by interaction of the signal sequence with the translocon. The
polypeptide chain is then pulled into the ER by a ratcheting mechanism that requires ATP hydrolysis by the chaperone BiP, which stabilizes the entering polypeptide (see
Figure 16-9).

■

In both cotranslational and post-translational translocation, a signal peptidase in the ER membrane cleaves the
ER signal sequence from a secretory protein soon after the
N-terminus enters the lumen.

■

16-2 Insertion of Proteins into
the ER Membrane
In previous chapters we have encountered many of the vast
array of integral (transmembrane) proteins that are present
in the plasma membrane and other cellular membranes.
Each such protein has a unique orientation with respect
to the membrane’s phospholipid bilayer. Integral proteins
located in ER, Golgi, and lysosomal membranes and in the
plasma membrane, which are synthesized on the rough
ER, remain embedded in the membrane as they move to
their final destinations along the same pathway followed
by soluble secretory proteins (see Figure 16-1). During this
transport, the orientation of a membrane protein is preserved; that is, the same segments of the protein always
face the cytosol, while other segments always face in the
opposite direction. Thus the final orientation of these
membrane proteins is established during their biosynthesis
on the ER membrane. In this section, we first see how integral proteins can interact with membranes. Then we examine how several types of sequences, collectively known
as topogenic sequences, direct the insertion and orientation of various classes of integral proteins into the membrane. These processes build on and adapt the basic
mechanism used to translocate soluble secretory proteins
across the ER membrane.

Several Topological Classes of Integral Membrane
Proteins Are Synthesized on the ER
The topology of a membrane protein refers to the number
of times that its polypeptide chain spans the membrane and
the orientation of these membrane-spanning segments within
the membrane. The key elements of a protein that determine
its topology are membrane-spanning segments themselves,
which usually contain 20–25 hydrophobic amino acids. Each
such segment forms an  helix that spans the membrane,
with the hydrophobic amino acid residues anchored to the
hydrophobic interior of the phospholipid bilayer.
Scientists have found it useful to categorize integral membrane proteins into the four topological classes illustrated in
Figure 16-10. Topological classes I, II, and III comprise
single-pass proteins, which have only one membranespanning -helical segment. Type I proteins have a cleaved
N-terminal signal sequence and are anchored in the membrane with their hydrophilic N-terminal region on the
luminal face (also known as the exoplasmic face) and their
hydrophilic C-terminal region on the cytosolic face. Type II
proteins do not contain a cleavable signal sequence and are
oriented with their hydrophilic N-terminal region on the cytosolic face and their hydrophilic C-terminal region on the
exoplasmic face (i.e., opposite to type I proteins). Type III
proteins have the same orientation as type I proteins, but do
not contain a cleavable signal sequence. These different
topologies reflect distinct mechanisms used by the cell to

16-2 Insertion of Proteins into the ER Membrane

▲ FIGURE 16-10 Major topological classes of integral
membrane proteins synthesized on the rough ER. The
hydrophobic segments of the protein chain form  helices
embedded in the membrane bilayer; the regions outside the
membrane are hydrophilic and fold into various conformations.
All type IV proteins have multiple transmembrane  helices.
The type IV topology depicted here corresponds to that of G

establish the membrane orientation of transmembrane segments, as discussed in the next section.
The proteins forming topological class IV contain multiple membrane-spanning segments (see Figure 16-10). Many
of the membrane transport proteins discussed in Chapter 7
and the numerous G protein–coupled receptors covered in
Chapter 13 belong to this class, sometimes called multipass
proteins. A final type of membrane protein lacks a hydrophobic membrane-spanning segment altogether; instead,
these proteins are linked to an amphipathic phospholipid
anchor that is embedded in the membrane.

Internal Stop-Transfer and Signal-Anchor
Sequences Determine Topology
of Single-Pass Proteins
We begin our discussion with the membrane insertion of
integral proteins that contain a single, hydrophobic
membrane-spanning segment. Two sequences are involved in
targeting and orienting type I proteins in the ER membrane,
whereas type II and type III proteins contain a single, internal topogenic sequence.

Type I Proteins All type I transmembrane proteins possess
an N-terminal signal sequence that targets them to the ER
and an internal hydrophobic sequence that becomes the
membrane-spanning  helix. The N-terminal signal sequence
on a nascent type I protein, like that of a secretory protein,

11

protein–coupled receptors: seven  helices, the N-terminus on
the exoplasmic side of the membrane, and the C-terminus on
the cytosolic side. Other type IV proteins may have a different
number of helices and various orientations of the N-terminus
and C-terminus. [See E. Hartmann et al., 1989, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci.
USA 86:5786; and C. A. Brown and S. D. Black, 1989, J. Biol. Chem.
264:4442.]

initiates cotranslational translocation of the protein through
the combined action of the SRP and SRP receptor. Once the
N-terminus of the growing polypeptide enters the lumen of
the ER, the signal sequence is cleaved, and the growing chain
continues to be extruded across the ER membrane. However,
unlike the case with secretory proteins, a sequence of about
22 hydrophobic amino acids in the middle of a type I protein stops transfer of the nascent chain through the translocon (Figure 16-11). This internal sequence, because of its
hydrophobicity, can move laterally between the protein subunits that form the wall of the translocon and become anchored in the phospholipid bilayer of the membrane, where
it remains. Because of its dual function, this sequence is
called a stop-transfer anchor sequence.
Once translocation is interrupted, translation continues
at the ribosome, which is still anchored to the now unoccupied and closed translocon. As the C-terminus of the protein
chain is synthesized, it loops out on the cytosolic side of the
membrane. When translation is completed, the ribosome is
released from the translocon and the C-terminus of the newly
synthesized type I protein remains in the cytosol.
Support for this model, depicted in Figure 16-11, has
come from studies in which cDNAs encoding various mutant
receptors for human growth hormone (HGH) are expressed
in cultured mammalian cells. The wild-type HGH receptor, a
typical type I protein, is transported normally to the plasma
membrane. However, a mutant receptor that has charged
residues inserted into the -helical membrane-spanning segment, or that is missing most of this segment, is translocated

12

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲ FIGURE 16-11 Synthesis and insertion into the ER
membrane of type I single-pass proteins. Step 1 : After the
ribosome/nascent chain complex becomes associated with a
translocon in the ER membrane, the N-terminal signal sequence
is cleaved. This process occurs by the same mechanism as the
one for soluble secretory proteins (see Figure 16-6). Steps 2 , 3 :
The chain is elongated until the hydrophobic stop-transfer anchor
sequence is synthesized and enters the translocon, where it
prevents the nascent chain from extruding farther into the ER

lumen. Step 4 : The stop-transfer anchor sequence moves laterally
between the translocon subunits and becomes anchored in the
phospholipid bilayer. At this time, the translocon probably closes.
Step 5 : As synthesis continues, the elongating chain may loop
out into the cytosol through the small space between the
ribosome and translocon (see Figure 16-8). Step 6 : When
synthesis is complete, the ribosomal subunits are released into
the cytosol, leaving the protein free to diffuse in the membrane.

entirely into the ER lumen and is eventually secreted from
the cell. These findings establish that the hydrophobic
membrane-spanning  helix of the HGH receptor and of
other type I proteins functions both as a stop-transfer sequence and a membrane anchor that prevents the C-terminus
of the protein from crossing the ER membrane.

units forming the translocon wall into the phospholipid
bilayer, where it functions as a membrane anchor. Thus
this function is similar to the anchoring function of the stoptransfer anchor sequence in type I proteins.
In the case of type III proteins, the signal-anchor sequence, which is located near the N-terminus, inserts the nascent chain into the ER membrane with its N-terminus facing
the lumen, just the opposite of type II proteins. The signalanchor sequence of type III proteins also prevents further extrusion of the nascent chain into the ER lumen, functioning
as a stop-transfer sequence. Continued elongation of the
chain C-terminal to the signal-anchor/stop-transfer sequence
proceeds as it does for type I proteins, with the hydrophobic sequence moving laterally between the translocon subunits to anchor the polypeptide in the ER membrane (see
Figure 16-11).
The key feature of signal-anchor sequences that appears
to determine their insertion orientation is a high density of
positively charged amino acids adjacent to one end of the hydrophobic segment. For reasons that are not well understood
these positively charged residues tend to remain on the
cytosolic side of the membrane, thereby dictating the orientation of the signal-anchor sequence within the translocon.
Thus type II proteins tend to have positively charged

Type II and Type III Proteins Unlike type I proteins, type II
and type III proteins lack a cleavable N-terminal ER signal
sequence. Instead, both possess a single internal hydrophobic
signal-anchor sequence that functions as both an ER signal
sequence and membrane-anchor sequence. Recall that type II
and type III proteins have opposite orientations in the membrane (see Figure 16-10); this difference depends on the orientation that their respective signal-anchor sequences assume
within the translocon.
The internal signal-anchor sequence in type II proteins directs insertion of the nascent chain into the ER membrane
so that the N-terminus of the chain faces the cytosol (Figure
16-12). The internal signal-anchor sequence is not cleaved
and remains in the translocon while the C-terminal region
of the growing chain is extruded into the ER lumen by cotranslational translocation. During synthesis, the signalanchor sequence moves laterally between the protein sub-

[See H. Do et al., 1996, Cell 85:369; and W. Mothes et al., 1997, Cell 89:523.]

16-2 Insertion of Proteins into the ER Membrane

13

Multipass Proteins Have Multiple
Internal Topogenic Sequences
Figure 16-13 summarizes the arrangements of topogenic
sequences in single-pass and multipass transmembrane proteins. In multipass (type IV) proteins, each of the membranespanning  helices acts as a topogenic sequence in the ways
that we have already discussed. Multipass proteins fall into
one of two types depending on whether the N-terminus extends into the cytosol or the exoplasmic space (i.e., the ER
lumen, cell exterior). This N-terminal topology usually is
determined by the hydrophobic segment closest to the Nterminus and the charge of the sequences flanking it. If a
type IV protein has an even number of transmembrane 
helices, both its N-terminus and C-terminus will be oriented toward the same side of the membrane (see Figure
16-13d). Conversely, if a type IV protein has an odd number of  helices, its two ends will have opposite orientations
(see Figure 16-13e).

▲ FIGURE 16-12 Synthesis and insertion into the ER
membrane of type II single-pass proteins. Step 1 : After the
internal signal-anchor sequence is synthesized on a cytosolic
ribosome, it is bound by an SRP (not shown), which directs the
ribosome/nascent chain complex to the ER membrane. This is
similar to targeting of soluble secretory proteins except that the
hydrophobic signal sequence is not located at the N-terminus and
is not subsequently cleaved. The nascent chain becomes oriented
in the translocon with its N-terminal portion toward the cytosol.
This orientation is believed to be mediated by the positively
charged residues shown N-terminal to the signal-anchor
sequence.Step 2 : As the chain is elongated and extruded into
the lumen, the internal signal-anchor moves laterally out of the
translocon and anchors the chain in the phospholipid bilayer.
Step 3 : Once protein synthesis is completed, the C-terminus of
the polypeptide is released into the lumen, and the ribosomal
subunits are released into the cytosol. [See M. Spiess and H. F.
Lodish, 1986, Cell 44:177; and H. Do et al., 1996, Cell 85:369.]

residues on the N-terminal side of their signal-anchor sequence, whereas type III proteins tend to have positively
charged residues on the C-terminal side of their signalanchor sequence.
A striking experimental demonstration of the importance
of the flanking charge in determining membrane orientation
is provided by neuraminidase, a type II protein in the surface coat of influenza virus. Three arginine residues are located just N-terminal to the internal signal-anchor sequence
in neuraminidase. Mutation of these three positively charged
residues to negatively charged glutamate residues causes neuraminidase to acquire the reverse orientation. Similar experiments have shown that other proteins, with either type II or
type III orientation, can be made to “flip” their orientation in
the ER membrane by mutating charged residues that flank
the internal signal-anchor segment.

Proteins with N-Terminus in Cytosol (Type IV-A) Among
the multipass proteins whose N-terminus extends into the cytosol are the various glucose transporters (GLUTs) and most
ion-channel proteins discussed in Chapter 7. In these proteins, the hydrophobic segment closest to the N-terminus initiates insertion of the nascent chain into the ER membrane
with the N-terminus oriented toward the cytosol; thus this
-helical segment functions like the internal signal-anchor
sequence of a type II protein (see Figure 16-12). As the nascent chain following the first  helix elongates, it moves
through the translocon until the second hydrophobic  helix
is formed. This helix prevents further extrusion of the nascent chain through the translocon; thus its function is similar to that of the stop-transfer anchor sequence in a type I
protein (see Figure 16-11).
After synthesis of the first two transmembrane  helices,
both ends of the nascent chain face the cytosol and the loop
between them extends into the ER lumen. The C-terminus
of the nascent chain then continues to grow into the cytosol,
as it does in synthesis of type I and type III proteins. According to this mechanism, the third  helix acts as another type
II signal-anchor sequence, and the fourth as another stoptransfer anchor sequence (see Figure 16-13d). Apparently,
once the first topogenic sequence of a multipass polypeptide
initiates association with the translocon, the ribosome remains attached to the translocon, and topogenic sequences
that subsequently emerge from the ribosome are threaded
into the translocon without the need for the SRP and the SRP
receptor.
Experiments that use recombinant DNA techniques to exchange hydrophobic  helices have provided insight into the
functioning of the topogenic sequences in type IV-A multipass
proteins. These experiments indicate that the order of the hydrophobic  helices relative to each other in the growing
chain largely determines whether a given helix functions as a
signal-anchor sequence or stop-transfer anchor sequence.

14

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles
STA = Internal stop-transfer anchor sequence
SA-II = Internal signal-anchor sequence
SA-III = Internal signal-anchor sequence

(a) Type I

COO−
Signal
sequence

(b) Type II

(c) Type III

NH3+

NH3+

Cytosol

Lumen

NH3+

STA

Lumen

Cytosol

+++

COO−
SA-II

Cytosol

Lumen

+++

COO−

SA-III

(d) Type IV-A

NH3+

Cytosol

+++

Lumen

(e) Type IV-B

NH3+

Cytosol

Lumen

Cytosol

++++++
SA-III
SA-II

+++

STA

SA-II

Cytosol

Lumen

COO−

Cytosol

Lumen

SA-II

STA

SA-II

+++
STA

Cytosol

Lumen

STA

+++

Lumen

Cytosol

COO−
SA-II

STA

▲ FIGURE 16-13 Arrangement of topogenic sequences in
single-pass and multipass membrane proteins inserted into
the ER membrane. Topogenic sequences are shown in red;
soluble, hydrophilic portions, in blue. The internal topogenic
sequences form transmembrane  helices that anchor the
proteins or segments of proteins in the membrane. (a) Type I
proteins contain a cleaved signal sequence and a single internal
stop-transfer anchor (STA). (b, c) Type II and type III proteins
contain a single internal signal-anchor (SA) sequence. The
difference in the orientation of these proteins depends largely on

whether there is a high density of positively charged amino acids
() on the N-terminal side of the SA sequence (type II) or on
the C-terminal side of the SA sequence (type III). (d, e) Nearly all
multipass proteins lack a cleavable signal sequence, as depicted
in the examples shown here. Type IV-A proteins, whose Nterminus faces the cytosol, contain alternating SA-II sequences
and STA sequences. Type IV-B proteins, whose N-terminus faces
the lumen, begin with a SA-III sequence followed by alternating
SA-II and STA sequences. Proteins of each type with different
numbers of  helices (odd or even) are known.

Other than its hydrophobicity, the specific amino acid sequence of a particular helix has little bearing on its function.
Thus the first N-terminal  helix and the subsequent oddnumbered ones function as signal-anchor sequences, whereas
the intervening even-numbered helices function as stoptransfer anchor sequences.

by alternating type II signal-anchor sequences and stoptransfer sequences, as just described for type IV-A proteins.

Proteins with N-Terminus in the Exoplasmic Space (Type
IV-B) The large family of G protein–coupled receptors, all of
which contain seven transmembrane  helices, constitute the
most numerous type IV-B proteins, whose N-terminus extends into the exoplasmic space. In these proteins, the hydrophobic  helix closest to the N-terminus often is followed
by a cluster of positively charged amino acids, similar to a
type III signal-anchor sequence. As a result, the first  helix
inserts the nascent chain into the translocon with the Nterminus extending into the lumen (see Figure 16-13e). As
the chain is elongated, it is inserted into the ER membrane

A Phospholipid Anchor Tethers Some
Cell-Surface Proteins to the Membrane
Some cell-surface proteins are anchored to the phospholipid
bilayer not by a sequence of hydrophobic amino acids but
by a covalently attached amphipathic molecule, glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) (Figure 16-14a). These proteins are synthesized and initially anchored to the ER
membrane exactly like type I transmembrane proteins, with
a cleaved N-terminal signal sequence and internal stoptransfer anchor sequence directing the process (see Figure
16-11). However, a short sequence of amino acids in the luminal domain, adjacent to the membrane-spanning domain,
is recognized by a transamidase located within the ER membrane. This enzyme simultaneously cleaves off the original

16-2 Insertion of Proteins into the ER Membrane

15

the cytoskeleton. In addition, the GPI anchor targets the attached protein to the apical domain of the plasma membrane in certain polarized epithelial cells, as we discuss in
Chapter 17.
Some membrane proteins are tethered to the cytosolic
face of the plasma membrane by other types of lipid anchors
(see Figure 5-15). An important example is Ras protein,
which plays a key role in intracellular signaling pathways
discussed in Chapter 14.

The Topology of a Membrane Protein Often
Can Be Deduced from Its Sequence

▲ FIGURE 16-14 GPI-anchored proteins. (a) Structure of a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) from yeast. The hydrophobic
portion of the molecule is composed of fatty acyl chains,
whereas the polar (hydrophilic) portion of the molecule is
composed of carbohydrate residues and phosphate groups. In
other organisms, both the length of the acyl chains and the
carbohydrate moieties may vary somewhat from the structure
shown. (b) Formation of GPI-anchored proteins in the ER
membrane. The protein is synthesized and initially inserted into
the ER membrane as shown in Figure 16-11. A specific
transamidase simultaneously cleaves the precursor protein within
the exoplasmic-facing domain, near the stop-transfer anchor
sequence (red), and transfers the carboxyl group of the new Cterminus to the terminal amino group of a preformed GPI anchor.
[See C. Abeijon and C. B. Hirschberg, 1992, Trends Biochem. Sci. 17:32;
and K. Kodukula et al., 1992, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 89:4982.]

stop-transfer anchor sequence and transfers the remainder
of the protein to a preformed GPI anchor in the membrane
(Figure 16-14b).
Why change one type of membrane anchor for another?
Attachment of the GPI anchor, which results in removal of
the cytosol-facing hydrophilic domain from the protein, can
have several consequences. Proteins with GPI anchors, for
example, can diffuse in the plane of the phospholipid bilayer
membrane. In contrast, many proteins anchored by
membrane-spanning  helices are immobilized in the membrane because their cytosol-facing segments interact with

As we have seen, various topogenic sequences in integral
membrane proteins synthesized on the ER govern interaction
of the nascent chain with the translocon. When scientists
begin to study a protein of unknown function, the identification of topogenic sequences within the corresponding gene
sequence can provide important clues about the protein’s
topological class and function. Suppose, for example, that
the gene for a protein known to be required for a cell-to-cell
signaling pathway contains nucleotide sequences that encode
an apparent N-terminal signal sequence and an internal hydrophobic sequence. These findings would suggest that the
protein is a type I integral membrane protein and therefore
may be a cell-surface receptor for an extracellular ligand.
Identification of topogenic sequences requires a way to
scan sequence databases for segments that are sufficiently hydrophobic to be either a signal sequence or a transmembrane
anchor sequence. Topogenic sequences can often be identified
with the aid of computer programs that generate a hydropathy profile for the protein of interest. The first step is to assign
a value known as the hydropathic index to each amino acid in
the protein. By convention, hydrophobic amino acids are assigned positive values, and hydrophilic amino acids negative
values. Although different scales for the hydropathic index
exist, all assign the most positive values to amino acids with
side chains made up of mostly hydrocarbon residues (e.g.,
phenylalanine and methionine) and the most negative values
to charged amino acids (e.g., arginine and aspartate). The
second step is to identify longer segments of sufficient overall hydrophobicity to be N-terminal signal sequences or internal stop-transfer sequences and signal-anchor sequences.
To accomplish this, the total hydropathic index for each successive sliding “window” of 20 consecutive amino acids is
calculated along the entire length of the protein. Plots of these
calculated values against position in the amino acid sequence
yield a hydropathy profile.
Figure 16-15 shows the hydropathy profiles for three different membrane proteins. The prominent peaks in such
plots identify probable topogenic sequences, as well as their
position and approximate length. For example, the hydropathy profile of the human growth hormone receptor reveals
the presence of both a hydrophobic signal sequence at the extreme N-terminus of the protein and an internal hydrophobic stop-transfer sequence (see Figure 16-15a). On the basis

16

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-15 Hydropathy profiles can
identify likely topogenic sequences in integral membrane
proteins. Hydropathy profiles are generated by plotting the total
hydrophobicity of each segment of 20 contiguous amino acids
along the length of a protein. Positive values indicate relatively
hydrophobic portions; negative values, relatively polar portions of

of this profile, we can deduce, correctly, that the human
growth hormone receptor is a type I integral membrane protein. The hydropathy profile of the asialoglycoprotein receptor reveals a prominent internal hydrophobic signal-anchor
sequence but gives no indication of a hydrophobic Nterminal signal sequence (see Figure 16-15b). Thus we can
predict that the asialoglycoprotein receptor is a type II or
type III membrane protein. The distribution of charged
residues on either side of the signal-anchor sequence often
can distinguish between these possibilities, as positively
charged amino acids flanking a membrane-spanning segment
usually are oriented toward the cytosolic face of the membrane. For instance, in the case of the asialoglycoprotein receptor, a type II protein, the residues on the N-terminal side
of the hydrophobic peak carry a net positive charge.
The hydropathy profile of the GLUT1 glucose transporter, a multipass membrane protein, reveals the presence of
many segments that are sufficiently hydrophobic to be membrane-spanning helices (Figure 16-15c). The complexity of
this profile illustrates the difficulty both in unambiguously
identifying all the membrane-spanning segments in a multipass protein and in predicting the topology of individual
signal-anchor and stop-transfer sequences. More sophisticated computer algorithms have been developed that take
into account the presence of positively charged amino acids
adjacent to hydrophobic segments, as well as the length of
and spacing between segments. Using all this information,
the best algorithms can predict the complex topology of multipass proteins with an accuracy greater than 75 percent.

the protein. Probable topogenic sequences are marked. The
complex profiles for multipass (type IV) proteins, such as GLUT1
in part (c), often must be supplemented with other analyses to
determine the topology of these proteins. See the text for
discussion.

Finally, sequence homology to a known protein may permit accurate prediction of the topology of a newly discovered
multipass protein. For example, the genomes of multicellular
organisms encode a very large number of multipass proteins
with seven transmembrane  helices. The similarities between the sequences of these proteins strongly suggest that
all have the same topology as the well-studied G
protein–coupled receptors, which have the N-terminus oriented to the exoplasmic side and the C-terminus oriented to
the cytosolic side of the membrane.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 16-2
Insertion of Proteins into the ER Membrane
Integral membrane proteins synthesized on the rough ER
fall into four topological classes (see Figure 16-10).
■ Topogenic sequences—N-terminal signal sequences, internal stop-transfer anchor sequences, and internal signalanchor sequences—direct the insertion and orientation of
nascent proteins within the ER membrane. This orientation is retained during transport of the completed membrane protein to its final destination.
■ Single-pass membrane proteins contain one or two
topogenic sequences. In multipass membrane proteins,
each -helical segment can function as an internal
topogenic sequence, depending on its location in the
■

16-3 Protein Modifications, Folding, and Quality Control in the ER

polypeptide chain and the presence of adjacent positively
charged residues (see Figure 16-13).
■ Some cell-surface proteins are initially synthesized as type
I proteins on the ER and then are cleaved with their luminal domain transferred to a GPI anchor (see Figure 16-14).
■ The topology of membrane proteins can often be correctly predicted by computer programs that identify hydrophobic topogenic segments within the amino acid
sequence and generate hydropathy profiles (see Figure
16-15).

16-3 Protein Modifications, Folding,
and Quality Control in the ER
Membrane and soluble secretory proteins synthesized on the
rough ER undergo four principal modifications before they
reach their final destinations: (1) addition and processing of
carbohydrates (glycosylation) in the ER and Golgi, (2) formation of disulfide bonds in the ER, (3) proper folding of
polypeptide chains and assembly of multisubunit proteins in
the ER, and (4) specific proteolytic cleavages in the ER,
Golgi, and secretory vesicles.
One or more carbohydrate chains are added to the vast
majority of proteins that are synthesized on the rough ER;
indeed, glycosylation is the principal chemical modification
to most of these proteins. Carbohydrate chains in glycoproteins may be attached to the hydroxyl group in serine and
threonine residues or to the amide nitrogen of asparagine.
These are referred to as O-linked and N-linked oligosaccharides, respectively. O-linked oligosaccharides, such as those
found in collagen and glycophorin, often contain only one to
four sugar residues. The more common N-linked oligosaccharides are larger and more complex, containing several
branches in mammalian cells. In this section we focus on Nlinked oligosaccharides, whose initial synthesis occurs in the
ER. After the initial glycosylation of a protein in the ER, the
oligosaccharide chain is modified in the ER and commonly
in the Golgi, as well.
Disulfide bond formation, protein folding, and assembly
of multimeric proteins, which take place exclusively in the
rough ER, also are discussed in this section. Only properly
folded and assembled proteins are transported from the
rough ER to the Golgi complex and ultimately to the cell surface or other final destination. Unfolded, misfolded, or partly
folded and assembled proteins are selectively retained in the
rough ER. We consider several features of such “quality control” in the latter part of this section.
As discussed previously, N-terminal ER signal sequences
are cleaved from secretory proteins and type I membrane
proteins in the ER. Some proteins also undergo other specific
proteolytic cleavages in the Golgi complex or forming secretory vesicles. We cover these cleavages, as well as carbohydrate modifications that occur primarily or exclusively in the
Golgi complex, in the next chapter.

17

A Preformed N-Linked Oligosaccharide Is Added
to Many Proteins in the Rough ER
Biosynthesis of all N-linked oligosaccharides begins in the
rough ER with addition of a preformed oligosaccharide precursor containing 14 residues (Figure 16-16). The structure
of this precursor is the same in plants, animals, and singlecelled eukaryotes—a branched oligosaccharide, containing
three glucose (Glc), nine mannose (Man), and two Nacetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) molecules, which can be written
as Glc3Man9(GlcNAc)2. This branched carbohydrate structure is modified in the ER and Golgi compartments, but 5
of the 14 residues are conserved in the structures of all Nlinked oligosaccharides on secretory and membrane proteins.
The precursor oligosaccharide is linked by a pyrophosphoryl residue to dolichol, a long-chain polyisoprenoid lipid
that is firmly embedded in the ER membrane and acts as a
carrier for the oligosaccharide. The dolichol pyrophosphoryl oligosaccharide is formed on the ER membrane in a complex set of reactions catalyzed by enzymes attached to the
cytosolic or luminal faces of the rough ER membrane

Glc

GlcNAc = N -Acetylglucosamine
Man = Mannose

Glc

Glc = Glucose
= Conserved
= Variable

Glc

Man

Man

Man

Man

Man

Man

Man

Man

Man

GlcNAc

GlcNAc

NH3+ . . .

X Asn

X

(Ser/Thr)

. . . COO−

▲ FIGURE 16-16 Common 14-residue precursor of N-linked
oligosaccharides that is added to nascent proteins in the
rough ER. Subsequent removal and in some cases addition of
specific sugar residues occur in the ER and Golgi complex. The
core region, composed of five residues highlighted in purple, is
retained in all N-linked oligosaccharides. The precursor can be
linked only to asparagine (Asn) residues that are separated by
one amino acid (X) from a serine (Ser) or threonine (Thr) on the
carboxyl side.

18

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

(Figure 16-17). The final dolichol pyrophosphoryl oligosaccharide is oriented so that the oligosaccharide portion faces
the ER lumen.
The entire 14-residue precursor is transferred from the
dolichol carrier to an asparagine residue on a nascent
polypeptide as it emerges into the ER lumen (Figure 16-18,
step 1). Only asparagine residues in the tripeptide sequences
Asn-X-Ser and Asn-X-Thr (where X is any amino acid except proline) are substrates for oligosaccharyl transferase, the
enzyme that catalyzes this reaction. Two of the three subunits of this enzyme are ER membrane proteins whose
cytosol-facing domains bind to the ribosome, localizing a
third subunit of the transferase, the catalytic subunit, near
the growing polypeptide chain in the ER lumen. Not all AsnX-Ser/Thr sequences become glycosylated; for instance, rapid
folding of a segment of a protein containing an Asn-XSer/Thr sequence may prevent transfer of the oligosaccharide
precursor to it.
Immediately after the entire precursor, Glc3Man9(GlcNAc)2, is transferred to a nascent polypeptide, three different
enzymes remove all three glucose residues and one particular
mannose residue (Figure 16-18, steps 2–4). The three glucose
residues, which are the last residues added during synthesis
of the precursor on the dolichol carrier, appear to act as a sig-

▲ FIGURE 16-17 Biosynthesis of the dolichol pyrophosphoryl oligosaccharide precursor of N-linked oligosaccharides.
Dolichol phosphate is a strongly hydrophobic lipid, containing
75–95 carbon atoms, that is embedded in the ER membrane.
Two N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and five mannose residues
are added one at a time to a dolichol phosphate on the cytosolic
face of the ER membrane (steps 1 – 3 ). The nucleotide-sugar
donors in these and later reactions are synthesized in the
cytosol. Note that the first sugar residue is attached to dolichol
by a high-energy pyrophosphate linkage. Tunicamycin, which
blocks the first enzyme in this pathway, inhibits the synthesis of

nal that the oligosaccharide is complete and ready to be
transferred to a protein.

Oligosaccharide Side Chains May Promote
Folding and Stability of Glycoproteins
The oligosaccharides attached to glycoproteins serve various functions. For example, some proteins require N-linked
oligosaccharides in order to fold properly in the ER. This
function has been demonstrated in studies with the antibiotic
tunicamycin, which blocks the first step in formation of the
dolichol-linked precursor of N-linked oligosaccharides (see
Figure 16-17). In the presence of tunicamycin, for instance,
the hemagglutinin precursor polypeptide (HA0) is synthesized, but it cannot fold properly and form a normal trimer;
in this case, the protein remains, misfolded, in the rough ER.
Moreover, mutation in the HA sequence of just one
asparagine that normally is glycosylated to a glutamine
residue, thereby preventing addition of an N-linked oligosaccharide to that site, causes the protein to accumulate in the
ER in an unfolded state.
In addition to promoting proper folding, N-linked
oligosaccharides also confer stability on many secreted gly-

all N-linked oligosaccharides in cells. After the seven-residue
dolichol pyrophosphoryl intermediate is flipped to the luminal
face (step 4 ), the remaining four mannose and all three glucose
residues are added one at a time (steps 5 , 6 ). In the later
reactions, the sugar to be added is first transferred from a
nucleotide-sugar to a carrier dolichol phosphate on the cytosolic
face of the ER; the carrier is then flipped to the luminal face,
where the sugar is transferred to the growing oligosaccharide,
after which the “empty” carrier is flipped back to the cytosolic
face. [After C. Abeijon and C. B. Hirschberg, 1992, Trends Biochem.
Sci. 17:32.]

16-3 Protein Modifications, Folding, and Quality Control in the ER

▲ FIGURE 16-18 Addition and initial processing of N-linked
oligosaccharides in the rough ER of vertebrate cells. The
Glc3Man9(GlcNAc)2 precursor is transferred from the dolichol
carrier to a susceptible asparagine residue on a nascent protein
as soon as the asparagine crosses to the luminal side of the ER
(step 1 ). In three separate reactions, first one glucose residue

coproteins. Many secretory proteins fold properly and are
transported to their final destination even if the addition of
all N-linked oligosaccharides is blocked, for example, by
tunicamycin. However, such nonglycosylated proteins have
been shown to be less stable than their glycosylated forms.
For instance, glycosylated fibronectin, a normal component
of the extracellular matrix, is degraded much more slowly by
tissue proteases than is nonglycosylated fibronectin.
Oligosaccharides on certain cell-surface glycoproteins
also play a role in cell-cell adhesion. For example, the plasma
membrane of white blood cells (leukocytes) contains celladhesion molecules (CAMs) that are extensively glycosylated.
The oligosaccharides in these molecules interact with a
sugar-binding domain in certain CAMs found on endothelial
cells lining blood vessels. This interaction tethers the leukocytes to the endothelium and assists in their movement into
tissues during an inflammatory response to infection (see
Figure 6-34). Other cell-surface glycoproteins possess
oligosaccharide side chains that can induce an immune response. A common example is the A, B, O blood-group antigens, which are O-linked oligosaccharides attached to
glycoproteins and glycolipids on the surface of erythrocytes
and other cell types (see Figure 5-Y).

Disulfide Bonds Are Formed and Rearranged
by Proteins in the ER Lumen
In Chapter 3 we learned that both intramolecular and intermolecular disulfide bonds (–S–S–) help stabilize the tertiary
and quaternary structure of many proteins. These covalent

19

(step 2 ), then two glucose residues (step 3 ), and finally one
mannose residue (step 4 ) are removed. Re-addition of one
glucose residue (step 3a) plays a role in the correct folding of
many proteins in the ER, as discussed later. [See R. Kornfeld and
S. Kornfeld, 1985, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 45:631; and M. Sousa and A. J.
Parodi, 1995, EMBO J. 14:4196.]

bonds form by the oxidative linkage of sulfhydryl groups
(–SH), also known as thiol groups, on two cysteine residues
in the same or different polypeptide chains. This reaction can
proceed spontaneously only when a suitable oxidant is present. In eukaryotic cells, disulfide bonds are formed only in
the lumen of the rough ER; in bacterial cells, disulfide bonds
are formed in the periplasmic space between the inner and
outer membranes. Thus disulfide bonds are found only in
secretory proteins and in the exoplasmic domains of membrane proteins. Cytosolic proteins and organelle proteins
synthesized on free ribosomes lack disulfide bonds and depend on other interactions to stabilize their structures.
The efficient formation of disulfide bonds in the lumen of
the ER depends on the enzyme protein disulfide isomerase
(PDI), which is present in all eukaryotic cells. This enzyme
is especially abundant in the ER of secretory cells in such organs as the liver and pancreas, where large quantities of proteins that contain disulfide bonds are produced. As shown
in Figure 16-19a, the disulfide bond in the active site of PDI
can be readily transferred to a protein by two sequential
thiol-disulfide transfer reactions. The reduced PDI generated
by this reaction is returned to an oxidized form by the action of an ER-resident protein, called Ero1, which carries a
disulfide bond that can be transferred to PDI. It is not yet understood how Ero1 itself becomes oxidized. Figure 16-20 depicts the organization of the pathway for protein
disulfide-bond formation in the ER lumen and the analogous
pathway in bacteria.
In proteins that contain more than one disulfide bond,
the proper pairing of cysteine residues is essential for normal structure and activity. Disulfide bonds commonly are

20

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles
(a) Formation of a disulfide bond

Oxidized
PDI

S
SH

S

1

S

SH

SH

Reduced
PDI

SH
SH

2

S−

S

S

Reduced
substrate
protein

S

Oxidized
substrate
protein

(b) Rearrangement of disulfide bonds

Reduced
PDI

SH

SH

S−

S
S

1

S
S

S
2

S

Protein with
incorrect disulfide bonds

SH
SH

2

1

S−

Reduced
PDI

3

S

S

S

S

S
S

Protein with
correct disulfide bonds

▲ FIGURE 16-19 Formation and rearrangement of disulfide
bonds by protein disulfide isomerase (PDI). PDI contains an
active site with two closely spaced cysteine residues that are
easily interconverted between the reduced dithiol form and the
oxidized disulfide form. Numbered red arrows indicate the
sequence of electron transfers. Yellow bars represent disulfide
bonds. (a) In the formation of disulfide bonds, the ionized (–S)
form of a cysteine thiol in the substrate protein reacts with the
disulfide (SXS) bond in oxidized PDI to form a disulfide-bonded

and H. F. Gilbert, 1991, Biochemistry 30:619.]

formed between cysteines that occur sequentially in the
amino acid sequence while a polypeptide is still growing on
the ribosome. Such sequential formation, however, sometimes yields disulfide bonds between the wrong cysteines. For
example, proinsulin has three disulfide bonds that link cysteines 1 and 4, 2 and 6, and 3 and 5. In this case, disulfide
bonds initially formed sequentially (e.g., between cysteines
1 and 2) have to be rearranged for the protein to achieve its
proper folded conformation. In cells, the rearrangement of
disulfide bonds also is accelerated by PDI, which acts on a
broad range of protein substrates, allowing them to reach
their thermodynamically most stable conformations (Figure
16-19b). Disulfide bonds generally form in a specific order,
first stabilizing small domains of a polypeptide, then stabilizing the interactions of more distant segments; this phenomenon is illustrated by the folding of influenza HA protein
discussed in the next section.

Most proteins used for therapeutic purposes in humans or animals are secreted glycoproteins stabilized by disulfide bonds. When researchers first
tried to synthesize such proteins using plasmid expression
vectors in bacterial cells, the results were disappointing. In
most cases, the proteins were not secreted (even when a bacterial signal sequence replaced the normal one); instead, they
accumulated in the cytosol and often in a denatured state,
in part owing to the lack of disulfide bonds. After it became
clear that disulfide-bond formation occurs spontaneously
only in the ER lumen, biotechnologists eventually developed
expression vectors that can be used in animal cells (Chapter
9). Nowadays, such vectors and cultured animal cells are
preferred for large-scale production of therapeutic proteins
such as tissue plasminogen activator (an anticlotting agent)
and erythropoietin, a hormone that stimulates production
of red blood cells. ❚

PDI–substrate protein intermediate. A second ionized thiol in the
substrate then reacts with this intermediate, forming a disulfide
bond within the substrate protein and releasing reduced PDI.
(b) Reduced PDI can catalyze rearrangement of improperly
formed disulfide bonds by similar thiol-disulfide transfer reactions.
In this case, reduced PDI both initiates and is regenerated in the
reaction pathway. These reactions are repeated until the most
stable conformation of the protein is achieved. [See M. M. Lyles

16-3 Protein Modifications, Folding, and Quality Control in the ER

21

▲ FIGURE 16-20 Pathways for the formation of disulfide
bonds in eukaryotes and bacteria. Numbered red arrows
indicate the sequence of electron flow. A disulfide bond (yellow
bar) is formed by loss of a pair of electrons from cysteine thiol
(–SH) groups. (a) In the ER lumen of eukaryotic cells, electrons
from an ionized thiol in a newly synthesized substrate protein are
transferred to a disulfide bond in the active site of PDI (see
Figure 16-19). PDI, in turn, transfers electrons to a disulfide bond

in the luminal protein Ero1, thereby regenerating the oxidized
form of PDI. The mechanism of reoxidation of Ero1 is not known.
(b) In the periplasmic space of bacterial cells, the soluble protein
DsbA functions like eukaryotic PDI. Reduced DsbA is reoxidized
by DsbB, an inner-membrane protein. Finally, reduced DsbB is
reoxidized by transferring electrons to oxidized ubiquinone, a lipid
cofactor of the electron-transport chain in the inner membrane
(see Chapter 8). [See A. R. Frand et al., 2000, Trends Cell Biol. 10:203.]

Chaperones and Other ER Proteins Facilitate
Folding and Assembly of Proteins

that are unfolded or misfolded. Binding of calnexin and calreticulin to unfolded nascent chains prevents aggregation of
adjacent segments of a protein as it is being made on the ER.
Thus calnexin and calreticulin, like BiP, help prevent premature, incorrect folding of segments of a newly made protein.
Other important protein-folding catalysts in the ER
lumen are peptidyl-prolyl isomerases, a family of enzymes
that accelerate the rotation about peptidyl-prolyl bonds in
unfolded segments of a polypeptide:

Although many reduced, denatured proteins can spontaneously refold into their native state in vitro, such refolding
usually requires hours to reach completion. Yet new soluble
and membrane proteins produced in the ER generally fold
into their proper conformation within minutes after their
synthesis. The rapid folding of these newly synthesized proteins in cells depends on the sequential action of several proteins present within the ER lumen.
We have already seen how the chaperone BiP can drive
post-translational translocation in yeast by binding fully synthesized polypeptides as they enter the ER (see Figure 16-9).
BiP can also bind transiently to nascent chains as they enter
the ER during cotranslational translocation. Bound BiP is
thought to prevent segments of a nascent chain from misfolding or forming aggregates, thereby promoting folding of
the entire polypeptide into the proper conformation. Protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI) also contributes to proper folding,
which is stabilized by disulfide bonds in many proteins.
As illustrated in Figure 16-21, two other ER proteins, the
homologous lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) calnexin
and calreticulin, bind selectively to certain N-linked oligosaccharides on growing nascent chains. The ligand for these two
lectins, which contains a single glucose residue, is generated
by a specific glucosyltransferase in the ER lumen (see Figure
16-18, step 3a). This enzyme acts only on polypeptide chains

Such isomerizations sometimes are the rate-limiting step
in the folding of protein domains. Many peptidyl-prolyl isomerases can catalyze the rotation of exposed peptidyl-prolyl
bonds indiscriminately in numerous proteins, but some have
very specific protein substrates.
Many important secretory and membrane proteins synthesized on the ER are built of two or more polypeptide subunits. In all cases, the assembly of subunits constituting these

22

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲ FIGURE 16-21 Folding and assembly of hemagglutinin
(HA0) trimer in the ER. Transient binding of the chaperone BiP
(step 1a ) to the nascent chain and of two lectins, calnexin and
calreticulin, to certain oligosaccharide chains (step 1b ) promotes
proper folding of adjacent segments. A total of seven N-linked
oligosaccharide chains are added to the luminal portion of the
nascent chain during cotranslational translocation, and PDI
catalyzes the formation of six disulfide bonds per monomer.
Completed HA0 monomers are anchored in the membrane by a

multisubunit (multimeric) proteins occurs in the ER. An important class of multimeric secreted proteins is the immunoglobulins, which contain two heavy (H) and two light
(L) chains, all linked by intrachain disulfide bonds. Hemagglutinin (HA) is another multimeric protein that provides a
good illustration of folding and subunit assembly (see Figure 16-21). This trimeric protein forms the spikes that protrude from the surface of an influenza virus particle. HA is
formed within the ER of an infected host cell from three
copies of a precursor protein termed HA0, which has a single
membrane-spanning  helix. In the Golgi complex, each of
the three HA0 proteins is cleaved to form two polypeptides,
HA1 and HA2; thus each HA molecule that eventually resides on the viral surface contains three copies of HA1 and
three of HA2 (see Figure 3-9). The trimer is stabilized by interactions between the large exoplasmic domains of the constituent polypeptides, which extend into the ER lumen; after
HA is transported to the cell surface, these domains extend
into the extracellular space. Interactions between the smaller
cytosolic and membrane-spanning portions of the HA subunits also help stabilize the trimeric protein.
The time course of HA0 folding and assembly in vivo can
be determined by pulse-labeling experiments. In a typical experiment, virus-infected cells are pulse-labeled with a radioactive amino acid; at various times during the subsequent

single membrane-spanning  helix with their N-terminus in the
lumen (step 2 ). Interaction of three HA0 chains with one another,
initially via their transmembrane  helices, apparently triggers
formation of a long stem containing one  helix from the luminal
part of each HA0 polypeptide. Finally, interactions between
the three globular heads occur, generating a stable HA0 trimer
(step 3 ). [See U. Tatu et al., 1995, EMBO J. 14:1340; and D. Hebert et
al., 1997, J. Cell Biol. 139:613.]

chase period, membranes are solubilized by detergent and
exposed to monoclonal antibodies specific for either HA0
monomer or trimer. Immediately after the pulse, the
monomer-specific antibody is able to immunoprecipitate all
the radioactive HA0 protein. During the chase period, increasing proportions of the total radioactive HA0 protein instead react with the trimer-specific monoclonal antibody.
Such experiments have shown that each newly made HA0
polypeptide requires approximately 10 minutes to fold and
be incorporated into a trimer in living cells.

Improperly Folded Proteins in the ER Induce
Expression of Protein-Folding Catalysts
Wild-type proteins that are synthesized on the rough ER cannot exit this compartment until they achieve their completely
folded conformation. Likewise, almost any mutation that
prevents proper folding of a protein in the ER also blocks
movement of the polypeptide from the ER lumen or membrane to the Golgi complex. The mechanisms for retaining
unfolded or incompletely folded proteins within the ER
probably increase the overall efficiency of folding by keeping
intermediate forms in proximity to folding catalysts, which
are most abundant in the ER. Improperly folded proteins retained within the ER generally are found permanently bound

16-3 Protein Modifications, Folding, and Quality Control in the ER

4

Translation

Spliced
Hac1 mRNA

3
Endonucleasecut Hac1 mRNA
Unspliced
Hac1 mRNA
2

Ire1
monomer

Endonuclease

Cytosol
ER
lumen

▲ FIGURE 16-22 The unfolded-protein response. Ire1, a

▲

Hac1
transcription
factor

23

transmembrane protein in the ER membrane, has a binding site for
BiP on its luminal domain; the cytosolic domain contains a specific
RNA endonuclease. Step 1 : Accumulating unfolded proteins in the
ER lumen bind BiP molecules, releasing them from monomeric
Ire1. Dimerization of Ire1 then activates its endonuclease activity.
Steps 2 , 3 : The unspliced mRNA precursor encoding the
transcription factor Hac1 is cleaved by dimeric Ire1, and the two
exons are joined to form functional Hac1 mRNA. Current evidence
indicates that this processing occurs in the cytosol, although
pre-mRNA processing generally occurs in the nucleus. Step 4 :
Hac1 is translated into Hac1 protein, which then moves back into
the nucleus and activates transcription of genes encoding several
protein-folding catalysts. [See U. Ruegsegger et al., 2001, Cell 107:103;
A. Bertolotti et al., 2000, Nature Cell Biol. 2:326; and C. Sidrauski and
P. Walter, 1997, Cell 90:1031.]

Ire1 dimer
1

BiP

Unfolded proteins

Unfolded proteins
with BiP bound

to the ER chaperones BiP and calnexin. Thus these luminal
folding catalysts perform two related functions: assisting in
the folding of normal proteins by preventing their aggregation and binding to irreversibly misfolded proteins.
Both mammalian cells and yeasts respond to the presence
of unfolded proteins in the rough ER by increasing transcription of several genes encoding ER chaperones and other
folding catalysts. A key participant in this unfolded-protein
response is Ire1, an ER membrane protein that exists as both
a monomer and a dimer. The dimeric form, but not the
monomeric form, promotes formation of Hac1, a transcription factor that activates expression of the genes induced in
the unfolded-protein response. As depicted in Figure 16-22,
binding of BiP to the luminal domain of monomeric Ire1 prevents formation of the Ire1 dimer. Thus the quantity of free
BiP in the ER lumen probably determines the relative proportion of monomeric and dimeric Ire1. Accumulation of unfolded proteins within the ER lumen sequesters BiP
molecules, making them unavailable for binding to Ire1. As
a result the level of dimeric Ire1 increases, leading to an increase in the level of Hac1 and production of proteins that
assist in protein folding.
Mammalian cells contain an additional regulatory pathway that operates in response to unfolded proteins in the ER.
In this pathway, accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER
triggers proteolysis of ATF6, a transmembrane protein in the
ER membrane. The cytosolic domain of ATF6 released by
proteolysis then moves to the nucleus, where it stimulates
transcription of the genes encoding ER chaperones. Activa-

tion of a transcription factor by such regulated intramembrane proteolysis also occurs in the Notch signaling pathway
(see Figure 14-29). We will encounter another example of
this phenomenon, the cholesterol-responsive transcription
factor SREBP, in Chapter 18.
The hereditary form of emphysema illustrates the
detrimental effects that can result from misfolding
of proteins in the ER. This disease is caused by a
point mutation in 1-antitrypsin, which normally is secreted
by hepatocytes and macrophages. The wild-type protein binds
to and inhibits trypsin and also the blood protease elastase.
In the absence of 1-antitrypsin, elastase degrades the fine tissue in the lung that participates in the absorption of oxygen,
eventually producing the symptoms of emphysema. Although
the mutant 1-antitrypsin is synthesized in the rough ER, it
does not fold properly, forming an almost crystalline aggregate
that is not exported from the ER. In hepatocytes, the secretion of other proteins also becomes impaired, as the rough ER
is filled with aggregated 1-antitrypsin. ❚

Unassembled or Misfolded Proteins in the ER Are
Often Transported to the Cytosol for Degradation
Misfolded secretory and membrane proteins, as well as the
unassembled subunits of multimeric proteins, often are degraded within an hour or two after their synthesis in the
rough ER. For many years, researchers thought that proteolytic enzymes within the ER catalyzed degradation of misfolded or unassembled polypeptides, but such proteases were
never found. More recent studies have shown that misfolded
membrane and secretory proteins are transported from the
ER lumen, “backwards” through the translocon, into the cytosol, where they are degraded by the ubiquitin-mediated
proteolytic pathway (see Figure 3-15).
Ubiquitinylating enzymes localized to the cytosolic face
of the ER add ubiquitin to misfolded ER proteins as they exit
the ER. This reaction, which is coupled to hydrolysis of ATP,

24

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

may provide some of the energy required to drag these proteins back to the cytosol. The resulting polyubiquitinylated
polypeptides are quickly degraded in proteasomes. Exactly
how misfolded soluble and membrane proteins in the ER are
recognized and targeted to the translocon for export to the
cytosol is not known.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 16-3
Protein Modifications, Folding, and Quality Control
in the ER
All N-linked oligosaccharides, which are bound to asparagine residues, contain a core of three mannose and two
N-acetylglucosamine residues and usually have several
branches (see Figure 16-16).

■

O-linked oligosaccharides, which are bound to serine or
threonine residues, are generally short, often containing
only one to four sugar residues.

■

Formation of all N-linked oligosaccharides begins with
assembly of a ubiquitous 14-residue high-mannose precursor on dolichol, a lipid in the membrane of the rough
ER (see Figure 16-17). After this preformed oligosaccharide is transferred to specific asparagine residues of nascent polypeptide chains in the ER lumen, three glucose
residues and one mannose residue are removed (see Figure
16-18).

■

Oligosaccharide side chains may assist in the proper
folding of glycoproteins, help protect the mature proteins
from proteolysis, participate in cell-cell adhesion, and function as antigens.

■

Disulfide bonds are added to many secretory proteins
and the exoplasmic domain of membrane proteins in the
ER. Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), present in the ER
lumen, catalyzes both the formation and the rearrangement
of disulfide bonds (see Figure 16-19).

■

The chaperone BiP, the lectins calnexin and calreticulin,
and peptidyl-prolyl isomerases work together to assure
proper folding of newly made secretory and membrane
proteins in the ER. The subunits of multimeric proteins
also assemble in the ER.

■

Only properly folded proteins and assembled subunits
are transported from the rough ER to the Golgi complex
in vesicles.

■

The accumulation of abnormally folded proteins and
unassembled subunits in the ER can induce increased expression of ER protein-folding catalysts via the unfoldedprotein response (see Figure 16-22).

■

Unassembled or misfolded proteins in the ER often are
transported back through the translocon to the cytosol,
where they are degraded in the ubiquitin/proteasome
pathway.

■

16-4

Export of Bacterial Proteins

The cell wall surrounding gram-negative bacteria comprises
an inner membrane, which is the main permeability barrier
for the cytoplasm, a periplasmic space containing various
proteins and a layer of peptidoglycan, and an outer membrane, which is permeable to small molecules but not proteins. The peptidoglycan layer gives the cell wall its strength,
while the periplasmic proteins function in sensing and importing extracellular molecules and in assembling and maintaining the structural integrity of the cell wall. These proteins
(like all bacterial proteins) are synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes and then are translocated in the unfolded state across
the inner membrane (also called the cytoplasmic membrane).
Most proteins translocated across the inner membrane remain associated with the bacterial cell, either as a membrane
protein inserted into the outer or inner membrane or trapped
within the periplasmic space. Some bacterial species also possess specialized translocation systems that enable proteins to
move through both membranes of the cell wall into the extracellular space. In this section, we describe both types of
protein secretion in gram-negative bacteria.

Cytosolic SecA ATPase Pushes Bacterial
Polypeptides Through Translocons into
the Periplasmic Space
The mechanism for translocating bacterial proteins across
the inner membrane shares several key features with the
translocation of proteins into the ER of eukaryotic cells.
First, translocated proteins usually contain an N-terminal
hydrophobic signal sequence, which is cleaved by a signal
peptidase. Second, bacterial proteins pass through the inner
membrane in a channel, or translocon, composed of proteins
that are structurally similar to the eukaryotic Sec61 complex.
Third, bacterial cells express two proteins, Ffh and its receptor (FtsY), that are homologs of the SRP and SRP receptor,
respectively. In bacteria, however, these latter proteins appear to function mainly in the insertion of hydrophobic
membrane proteins into the inner membrane, not in cotranslational translocation as in eukaryotes. Indeed, all bacterial
proteins that are translocated across the inner membrane do
so only after their synthesis in the cytosol is completed but
before they are folded into their final conformation.
The post-translational translocation of bacterial proteins across the inner membrane cannot involve a ratchet
mechanism similar to that mediated by BiP in the ER lumen
(see Figure 16-9) because the ATP required for such a
mechanism would be lost by diffusion through the outer
membrane. Rather, the driving force for translocation of
bacterial proteins is generated by SecA, which binds to the
cytosolic side of the translocon and hydrolyzes cytosolic
ATP. In the model depicted in Figure 16-23, SecA binds to
the unfolded translocating polypeptide, and then a conformational change in SecA, driven by the energy released

16-4 Export of Bacterial Proteins

25

▲ FIGURE 16-23 Post-translational translocation across
inner membrane in gram-negative bacteria. The bacterial inner
membrane contains a translocon channel composed of three
subunits that are homologous to the components of the
eukaryotic Sec61 complex. Translocation of polypeptides from the
cytosol to the periplasmic space is powered by SecA, a cytosolic
ATPase that binds to the translocon and to the translocating
polypeptide. In the model shown here, binding and hydrolysis of
ATP cause conformational changes in SecA that push the bound

polypeptide segment through the channel (steps 1 , 2 ).
Repetition of this cycle results in movement of the polypeptide
through the channel in one direction. Current evidence indicates
that the N-terminal signal sequence moves from the channel into
the bilayer but at some point is cleaved by a signal peptidase, so
that the mature polypeptide enters the periplasmic space. [See

from ATP hydrolysis, acts to push the bound polypeptide
segment through the translocon pore toward the periplasmic side of the membrane. Repetition of this cycle eventually pushes the entire polypeptide chain through the
translocon into the periplasmic space, where disulfide
bonds are formed and the polypeptide folds into its proper
conformation.

membrane by complexes of periplasmic proteins that span
the inner and outer membranes. The energy for this translocation comes from hydrolysis of ATP in the cytosol, but the
mechanisms that couple ATP hydrolysis and translocation
across the outer membrane are not well understood.
Translocation by the type III and type IV secretion systems, on the other hand, entails a single step. These systems
consist of large protein complexes that span both membranes, allowing proteins to be translocated directly from the
cytosol to the extracellular environment. The type III system
is adapted not only for secreting proteins but also for injecting them into target cells, a very useful property for pathogenic bacteria.

Several Mechanisms Translocate Bacterial
Proteins into the Extracellular Space
Quite different mechanisms from the one shown in Figure
16-23 are used to translocate bacterial proteins from the cytosol across both the inner and outer bacterial membranes to
the extracellular space. These secretion mechanisms are particularly important for pathogenic bacteria, which commonly use secreted extracellular proteins to colonize specific
tissues within the host and to evade host defense mechanisms. Well-known examples of extracellular proteins that
promote the growth and dissemination of pathogenic bacteria include protein toxins (e.g., cholera toxin and tetanus
toxin) and pili, which are proteinaceous fibers that project
from the outer membrane and assist enteric bacteria in adhering to the epithelium of the gut.
The numerous specialized bacterial secretion systems
that have been identified can be classified into four general
types based on their mechanism of operation. Both the type I
and the type II secretion systems involve two steps. First,
substrate proteins are translocated across the inner membrane into the periplasmic space, where they fold and often
acquire disulfide bonds. Second, the folded proteins are
translocated from the periplasmic space across the outer

A. Economou and W. Wickner, 1994, Cell 78:835; and J. Eichler and
W. Wickner, 1998, J. Bacteriol. 180:5776.]

Pathogenic Bacteria Can Inject Proteins into
Animal Cells via Type III Secretion Apparatus
Yersinia pestis is the bacterial species responsible
for the bubonic plague, one of the deadliest diseases in human history. One reason Yersinia is such
a virulent pathogen lies in its ability to disable host
macrophage cells that might otherwise engulf and destroy
the invading bacterial cells. The incapacitating effect of
Yersinia is mediated primarily by a small set of proteins that
the bacterial cells inject into macrophage cells.
Various pathogenic bacteria inject proteins into host cells
via a complicated syringe-like machine composed of more
than 20 different proteins. This type III secretion apparatus,
shown in Figure 16-24, has ringlike components embedded
in both the inner and outer membranes of the bacterial cell
wall and a hollow needlelike structure (pilus) that projects

26

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲

▲ FIGURE 16-24 Type III secretion
apparatus for injecting bacterial proteins
into eukaryotic cells. (a) Schematic
diagram of the type III secretion apparatus,
which is similar in size and morphology to
the bacterial flagellum. Bacterial proteins
with targeting sequences (red) that allow
interaction with specialized chaperones
(orange) enter the cytosol-facing portion of
the type III secretion apparatus, travel down
the hollow core of the pilus in an ATPdependent process, and ultimately are
delivered to the cytoplasm of the target
eukaryotic cell. (b) Electron micrograph of
isolated type III secretion apparatuses. Long
needlelike pili can be seen extending from
the widened basal portions, which are
embedded in the outer and inner
membranes. See the text for discussion.
[Part (a) adapted from D. G. Thanassi and S. J.
Hultgren, 2000, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12:420. Part
(b) from T. Kubori et al., 1998, Science 280:602.]

out from the outer membrane. Proteins at the outer (distal)
end of the pilus can penetrate the plasma membrane of certain mammalian cells, thus creating a conduit that spans
three membranes, providing a connection between the bacterial cytoplasm and that of the target host cell.
A key insight into how the type III secretion apparatus
may operate came from the observation that many of the
components of the secretion apparatus are homologous to
proteins in the base of the bacterial flagellum. The flagellar
base is located in the inner membrane and functions as a
motor to drive rotation of the attached flagellum, which extends outward from the cell surface. The flagellum, which is
a hollow helical tube made up entirely of a repeating polymer of the protein flagellin, grows by addition of new flagellin subunits at the distal tip. Several proteins in the
flagellar base are thought to use the energy from ATP hydrolysis to push new flagellin subunits through the central
channel of the flagellum toward the distal end. Quite possibly, the type III secretion apparatus uses a similar ATP-driven
mechanism to push proteins through the central channel of
the pilus into target cells.
Recent experiments have identified the signal sequences
that target bacterial proteins for transport through the type
III secretion apparatus. For instance, recombinant DNA
methods were used to express in Yersinia cells chimeric proteins containing adenylate cyclase attached to different portions of YopE, which normally is secreted via the type III
apparatus. An amphipathic sequence at the N-terminus of
YopE was capable of directing adenylate cyclase, which normally resides in the cytosol, to the type III secretion apparatus for injection into mammalian cells. Other experiments
showed that YopE proteins in which this amphipathic tar-

geting sequence is mutated still are secreted normally. This
surprising finding eventually lead to discovery of a second,
independent targeting signal that allows YopE to bind to a
small chaperone molecule. The chaperone-YopE complex
can be successfully secreted even in the absence of an Nterminal amphipathic sequence. Each of the proteins secreted
by the type III apparatus is thought to interact with one of a
set of small chaperone proteins (see Figure 16-24). These
chaperones may act to keep secreted proteins in a partially
unfolded state as they pass through the central channel of the
type III apparatus. Once the transported proteins have been
released into the target cell, folding can be completed by cytosolic target-cell chaperones. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 16-4
Export of Bacterial Proteins
Gram-negative bacteria translocate completed proteins
across the inner membrane through a translocon related to
the ER translocon of eukaryotic cells.

■

The driving force for post-translational translocation
across the inner membrane of bacteria comes from SecA
protein, which uses energy derived from hydrolysis of cytosolic ATP to push polypeptides through the translocon
channel (see Figure 16-23).

■

Four bacterial secretion systems exist for translocating
proteins from the cytosol across both the inner and outer
membranes. Hydrolysis of cytosolic ATP drives secretion
in all the systems.

■

16-5 Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria and Chloroplasts

The type III secretion apparatus, used by pathogenic bacteria to inject proteins into eukaryotic cells, consists of a
basal portion that spans both membranes and an extracellular needlelike structure that can penetrate the plasma
membrane of a target cell (see Figure 16-24).

■

16-5 Sorting of Proteins to
Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
In the remainder of this chapter, we examine how proteins
synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes are sorted to mitochondria, chloroplasts, and peroxisomes (see Figure 16-1). Both
mitochondria and chloroplasts are surrounded by a double
membrane and have internal subcompartments, whereas
peroxisomes are bounded by a single membrane and have a
single luminal compartment known as the matrix. Because of
these and other differences, we consider peroxisomes separately in the last section.
Besides being bounded by two membranes, both mitochondria and chloroplasts also contain similar types of
electron-transport proteins and use an F-class ATPase to
synthesize ATP (see Figure 8-2). Remarkably, gram-negative
bacteria also exhibit these characteristics. Also like bacterial
cells, mitochondria and chloroplasts contain their own
DNA, which encodes organelle rRNAs, tRNAs, and some
proteins (Chapter 10). Moreover, growth and division of mitochondria and chloroplasts are not coupled to nuclear division. Rather, these organelles grow by the incorporation of
cellular proteins and lipids, and new organelles form by division of preexisting organelles—both processes occurring

continuously during the interphase period of the cell cycle.
The numerous similarities of free-living bacterial cells with
mitochondria and chloroplasts have led scientists to hypothesize that these organelles arose by the incorporation of bacteria into ancestral eukaryotic cells, forming endosymbiotic
organelles. Striking evidence for this ancient evolutionary relationship can be found in the many proteins of similar sequences shared by mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria,
including some of the proteins involved in membrane
translocation described in this section.
Proteins encoded by mitochondrial DNA or chloroplast
DNA are synthesized on ribosomes within the organelles and
directed to the correct subcompartment immediately after
synthesis. The majority of proteins located in mitochondria
and chloroplasts, however, are encoded by genes in the nucleus and are imported into the organelles after their synthesis in the cytosol. Apparently over eons of evolution much
of the genetic information from the ancestral bacterial DNA
in these endosymbiotic organelles moved, by an unknown
mechanism, to the nucleus. Precursor proteins synthesized
in the cytosol that are destined for the matrix of mitochondria or the equivalent space, the stroma, of chloroplasts usually contain specific N-terminal uptake-targeting sequences
that specify binding to receptor proteins on the organelle surface. Generally, this sequence is cleaved once it reaches the
matrix or stroma. Clearly, these uptake-targeting sequences
are similar in their location and general function to the signal
sequences that direct nascent proteins to the ER lumen. Although the three types of signals share some common sequence features, their specific sequences differ considerably,
as summarized in Table 16-1.

TABLE 16-1 Uptake-Targeting Sequences That Direct Proteins from the Cytosol to Organelles*
Location of Sequence
Within Protein

Removal of
Sequence

Endoplasmic
reticulum (lumen)

N-terminus

Yes

Core of 6–12 hydrophobic amino
acids, often preceded by one or
more basic amino acids (Arg, Lys)

Mitochondrion
(matrix)

N-terminus

Yes

Amphipathic helix, 20–50 residues
in length, with Arg and Lys
residues on one side and
hydrophobic residues on the other

Chloroplast
(stroma)

N-terminus

Yes

No common motifs; generally rich
in Ser, Thr, and small hydrophobic
residues and poor in Glu and Asp

Peroxisome (matrix)

C-terminus (most
proteins); N-terminus
(few proteins)

No

PTS1 signal (Ser-Lys-Leu) at
extreme C-terminus; PTS2
signal at N-terminus

Target Organelle

27

*Different or additional sequences target proteins to organelle membranes and subcompartments.
See Chapter 12 for targeting sequences required for uptake of proteins into the nucleus.

Nature of Sequence

28

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

charged amino acids predominate on one side of the helix
and hydrophobic amino acids predominate on the other side;
thus these sequences are amphipathic. Mutations that disrupt this amphipathic character usually disrupt targeting to
the matrix, although many other amino acid substitutions do
not. These findings indicate that the amphipathicity of matrix-targeting sequences is critical to their function.
The cell-free assay outlined in Figure 16-25 has been
widely used in studies on the import of mitochondrial precursor proteins. In this system, respiring (energized) mitochondria
extracted from cells can incorporate mitochondrial precursor
proteins carrying appropriate uptake-targeting sequences that
have been separately synthesized in the absence of mitochondria. Successful incorporation of the precursor into the organelle can be assayed either by resistance to digestion by an
exogenously added protease or, in most cases, by cleavage of
the N-terminal targeting sequences by specific proteases. The
uptake of completely synthesized mitochondrial precursor
proteins by the organelle in this system contrasts with the cellfree cotranslational translocation of secretory proteins, which
generally occurs only when microsomal membranes are present during synthesis (see Figure 16-4).

In both mitochondria and chloroplasts, protein import
requires energy and occurs at points where the outer and
inner organelle membranes are in close contact. Because mitochondria and chloroplasts contain multiple membranes
and membrane-limited spaces, sorting of many proteins to
their correct location often requires the sequential action of
two targeting sequences and two membrane-bound translocation systems: one to direct the protein into the organelle,
and the other to direct it into the correct organellar compartment or membrane. As we will see, the mechanisms for
sorting various proteins to mitochondria and chloroplasts
are related to some of the mechanisms discussed previously.

Amphipathic N-Terminal Signal Sequences Direct
Proteins to the Mitochondrial Matrix
All proteins that travel from the cytosol to the same mitochondrial destination have targeting signals that share common motifs, although the signal sequences are generally not
identical. Thus the receptors that recognize such signals are
able to bind to a number of different but related sequences.
The most extensively studied sequences for localizing proteins to mitochondria are the matrix-targeting sequences.
These sequences, located at the N-terminus, are usually
20–50 amino acids in length. They are rich in hydrophobic
amino acids, positively charged basic amino acids (arginine
and lysine), and hydroxylated ones (serine and threonine),
but tend to lack negatively charged acidic residues (aspartate and glutamate).
Mitochondrial matrix-targeting sequences are thought to
assume an -helical conformation in which positively

Figure 16-26 presents an overview of protein import from
the cytosol into the mitochondrial matrix, the route into the
mitochondrion followed by most imported proteins. We will
discuss in detail each step in protein transport into the matrix
EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-25 The
post-translational uptake of precursor
proteins into mitochondria can be
assayed in a cell-free system. The
imported protein must contain an
appropriate uptake-targeting sequence.
Uptake also requires ATP and a cytosolic
extract containing chaperone proteins that
maintain the precursor proteins in an
unfolded conformation. Protein uptake
occurs only with energized (respiring)
mitochondria, which have a proton
electrochemical gradient (proton-motive
force) across the inner membrane. This
assay has been used to study targeting
sequences and other features of the
translocation process.

▲

Uptaketargeting
sequence

Mitochondrial
protein

Mitochondrial Protein Import Requires
Outer-Membrane Receptors and
Translocons in Both Membranes

Trypsin

Add energized
yeast
mitochondria

1 Yeast mitochondrial
proteins made by
cytoplasmic ribosomes
in a cell-free system

2 Protein taken up
into mitochondria;
uptake-targeting
sequence removed
and degraded

3a Proteins sequestered within
mitochondria
are resistant to
trypsin

Trypsin
3b
Uptake-targeting
sequence and
mitochondrial
protein degraded

16-5 Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria and Chloroplasts

29

▲

FIGURE 16-26 Protein import into
the mitochondrial matrix. Precursor
proteins synthesized on cytosolic
ribosomes are maintained in an unfolded or
partially folded state by bound chaperones,
such as Hsc70 (step 1 ). After a precursor
protein binds to an import receptor near a
site of contact with the inner membrane
(step 2 ), it is transferred into the general
import pore (step 3 ). The translocating
protein then moves through this channel
and an adjacent channel in the inner
membrane (steps 4 , 5 ). Note that
translocation occurs at rare “contact sites”
at which the inner and outer membranes
appear to touch. Binding of the
translocating protein by the matrix
chaperone Hsc70 and subsequent ATP
hydrolysis by Hsc70 helps drive import into
the matrix. Once the uptake-targeting
sequence is removed by a matrix protease
and Hsc70 is released from the newly
imported protein (step 6 ), it folds into the
mature, active conformation within the
matrix (step 7 ). Folding of some proteins
depends on matrix chaperonins. See the
text for discussion. [See G. Schatz, 1996,

J. Biol. Chem. 271:31763, and N. Pfanner et al.,
1997, Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 13:25.]

and then consider how some proteins subsequently are targeted to other compartments of the mitochondrion.
After synthesis in the cytosol, the soluble precursors of
mitochondrial proteins (including hydrophobic integral
membrane proteins) interact directly with the mitochondrial
membrane. In general, only unfolded proteins can be imported into the mitochondrion. Chaperone proteins such as
cytosolic Hsc70 keep nascent and newly made proteins in an
unfolded state, so that they can be taken up by mitochondria. Import of an unfolded mitochondrial precursor is initiated by the binding of a mitochondrial targeting sequence
to an import receptor in the outer mitochondrial membrane.
These receptors were first identified by experiments in
which antibodies to specific proteins of the outer mitochondrial membrane were shown to inhibit protein import into

isolated mitochondria. Subsequent genetic experiments, in
which the genes for specific mitochondrial outer-membrane
proteins were mutated, showed that specific receptor proteins were responsible for the import of different classes of
mitochondrial proteins. For example, N-terminal matrixtargeting sequences are recognized by Tom20 and Tom22.
(Proteins in the outer mitochondrial membrane involved in
targeting and import are designated Tom proteins for
translocon of the outer membrane.)
The import receptors subsequently transfer the precursor proteins to an import channel in the outer membrane.
This channel, composed mainly of the Tom40 protein, is
known as the general import pore because all known mitochondrial precursor proteins gain access to the interior compartments of the mitochondrion through this channel. When

30

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

purified and incorporated into liposomes, Tom40 forms a
transmembrane channel with a pore wide enough to accommodate an unfolded polypeptide chain. The general import
pore forms a largely passive channel through the outer mitochondrial membrane, and the driving force for unidirectional transport into mitochondria comes from within the
mitochondrion. In the case of precursors destined for the
mitochondrial matrix, transfer through the outer membrane
occurs simultaneously with transfer through an innermembrane channel composed of the Tim23 and Tim17 proteins. (Tim stands for translocon of the inner membrane.)
Translocation into the matrix thus occurs at “contact sites”
where the outer and inner membranes are in close proximity.
Soon after the N-terminal matrix-targeting sequence of
a protein enters the mitochondrial matrix, it is removed by
a protease that resides within the matrix. The emerging protein also is bound by matrix Hsc70, a chaperone that is localized to the translocation channels in the inner
mitochondrial membrane by interacting with Tim44. This interaction stimulates ATP hydrolysis by matrix Hsc70, and
together these two proteins are thought to power translocation of proteins into the matrix.
Some imported proteins can fold into their final, active
conformation without further assistance. Final folding of
many matrix proteins, however, requires a chaperonin. As
discussed in Chapter 3, chaperonin proteins actively facilitate
protein folding in a process that depends on ATP. For instance, yeast mutants defective in Hsc60, a chaperonin in the
mitochondrial matrix, can import matrix proteins and cleave
their uptake-targeting sequence normally, but the imported
polypeptides fail to fold and assemble into the native tertiary and quaternary structures.

Studies with Chimeric Proteins Demonstrate
Important Features of Mitochondrial Import
Dramatic evidence for the ability of mitochondrial matrixtargeting sequences to direct import was obtained with
chimeric proteins produced by recombinant DNA techniques. For example, the matrix-targeting sequence of alcohol dehydrogenase can be fused to the N-terminus of
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), which normally resides in
the cytosol. In the presence of chaperones, which prevent the
C-terminal DHFR segment from folding in the cytosol, cellfree translocation assays show that the chimeric protein is
transported into the matrix (Figure 16-27a). The inhibitor
methotrexate, which binds tightly to the active site of DHFR
and greatly stabilizes its folded conformation, renders the
chimeric protein resistant to unfolding by cytosolic chaperones. When translocation assays are performed in the presence of methotrexate, the chimeric protein does not
completely enter the matrix. This finding demonstrates that
a precursor must be unfolded in order to traverse the import
pores in the mitochondrial membranes.
Additional studies revealed that if a sufficiently long
spacer sequence separates the N-terminal matrix-targeting se-

quence and DHFR portion of the chimeric protein, then a stable translocation intermediate forms in the presence of
methotrexate (Figure 16-27b). In order for such a stable
translocation intermediate to form, the spacer sequence must
be long enough to span both membranes; a spacer of 50
amino acids extended to its maximum possible length is adequate to do so. If the chimera contains a shorter spacer—say,
35 amino acids—no stable translocation intermediate is obtained because the spacer cannot span both membranes.
These observations provide further evidence that translocated
proteins can span both inner and outer mitochondrial membranes and traverse these membranes in an unfolded state.
Microscopic studies of stable translocation intermediates
show that they accumulate at sites where the inner and outer
mitochondrial membranes are close together, evidence that
precursor proteins enter only at such sites (Figure 16-27c).
The distance from the cytosolic face of the outer membrane
to the matrix face of the inner membrane at these contact
sites is consistent with the length of an unfolded spacer sequence required for formation of a stable translocation intermediate. Moreover, stable translocation intermediates can
be chemically cross-linked to the protein subunits that comprise the translocation channels of both the outer and inner
membranes. This finding demonstrates that imported proteins can simultaneously engage channels in both the outer
and inner mitochondrial membrane, as depicted in Figure
16-26. Since roughly 1000 stuck translocation intermediates
can be observed in a typical yeast mitochondrion, it is
thought that mitochondria have approximately 1000 general
import pores for the uptake of mitochondrial proteins.

Three Energy Inputs Are Needed to Import
Proteins into Mitochondria
As noted previously and indicated in Figure 16-26, ATP hydrolysis by Hsc70 chaperone proteins in both the cytosol and
the mitochondrial matrix is required for import of mitochondrial proteins. Cytosolic Hsc70 expends energy to maintain
bound precursor proteins in an unfolded state that is competent for translocation into the matrix. The importance of ATP
to this function was demonstrated in studies in which a mitochondrial precursor protein was purified and then denatured
(unfolded) by urea. When tested in the cell-free mitochondrial translocation system, the denatured protein was incorporated into the matrix in the absence of ATP. In contrast,
import of the native, undenatured precursor required ATP for
the normal unfolding function of cytosolic chaperones.
The sequential binding and ATP-driven release of multiple
matrix Hsc70 molecules to a translocating protein may simply trap the unfolded protein in the matrix. Alternatively, the
matrix Hsc70, anchored to the membrane by the Tim44 protein, may act as a molecular motor to pull the protein into the
matrix (see Figure 16-26). In this case, the functions of matrix
Hsc70 and Tim44 would be analogous to the chaperone BiP
and Sec63 complex, respectively, in post-translational translocation into the ER lumen (see Figure 16-9).

16-5 Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria and Chloroplasts

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-27 Experiments with
chimeric proteins show that a matrix-targeting sequence
alone directs proteins to the mitochondrial matrix and that
only unfolded proteins are translocated across both
membranes. The chimeric protein in these experiments
contained a matrix-targeting signal at its N-terminus (red),
followed by a spacer sequence of no particular function (black),
and then by dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), an enzyme normally
present only in the cytosol. (a) When the DHFR segment is
unfolded, the chimeric protein moves across both membranes to
the matrix of energized mitochondria and the matrix-targeting
signal then is removed. (b) When the C-terminus of the chimeric
protein is locked in the folded state by binding of methotrexate,
translocation is blocked. If the spacer sequence is long enough

The third energy input required for mitochondrial protein import is a H electrochemical gradient, or protonmotive force, across the inner membrane (Chapter 8). In
general, only mitochondria that are actively undergoing respiration, and therefore have generated a proton-motive force
across the inner membrane, are able to translocate precursor proteins from the cytosol into the mitochondrial matrix.
Treatment of mitochondria with inhibitors or uncouplers of
oxidative phosphorylation, such as cyanide or dinitrophenol,
dissipates this proton-motive force. Although precursor proteins still can bind tightly to receptors on such poisoned mitochondria, the proteins cannot be imported, either in intact
cells or in cell-free systems, even in the presence of ATP and
chaperone proteins. Scientists do not fully understand how
the proton-motive force is used to facilitate entry of a precursor protein into the matrix. Once a protein is partially
inserted into the inner membrane, it is subjected to a transmembrane potential of 200 mV (matrix space negative),
which is equivalent to an electric gradient of about 400,000

31

to extend across the transport channels, a stable translocation
intermediate, with the targeting sequence cleaved off, is
generated in the presence of methotrexate, as shown here.
(c) The C-terminus of the translocation intermediate in (b) can be
detected by incubating the mitochondria with antibodies that bind
to the DHFR segment, followed by gold particles coated with
bacterial protein A, which binds nonspecifically to antibody
molecules (see Figure 5-50). An electron micrograph of a
sectioned sample reveals gold particles (red arrowhead) bound to
the translocation intermediate at a contact site between the
inner and outer membranes. Other contact site (black arrows)
also are evident. [Parts (a) and (b) adapted from J. Rassow et al., 1990,
FEBS Letters 275:190. Part (c) from M. Schweiger et al., 1987, J. Cell Biol.
105:235, courtesy of W. Neupert.]

V/cm. One hypothesis is that the positive charges in the amphipathic matrix-targeting sequence could simply be “electrophoresed,” or pulled, into the matrix space by the
inside-negative membrane electric potential.

Multiple Signals and Pathways Target Proteins
to Submitochondrial Compartments
Unlike targeting to the matrix, targeting of proteins to the intermembrane space, inner membrane, and outer membrane
of mitochondria generally requires more than one targeting
sequence and occurs via one of several pathways. Figure
16-28 summarizes the organization of targeting sequences
in proteins sorted to different mitochondrial locations.

Inner-Membrane Proteins Three separate pathways are
known to target proteins to the inner mitochondrial membrane. One pathway makes use of the same machinery that is

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

Imported
protein

Location
of imported
protein

Locations of targeting sequences
in preprotein

Cleavage by
matrix protease
Alcohol
dehydrogenase III

Matrix
Matrix-targeting sequence

Cytochrome
oxidase
subunit
CoxVa

Cleavage by
matrix protease

Hydrophobic stoptransfer sequence

Inner
membrane
(path A)

FIGURE 16-28 Arrangement of
targeting sequences in imported
mitochondrial proteins. Most mitochondrial
proteins have an N-terminal matrix-targeting
sequence (pink) that is similar but not
identical in different proteins. Proteins
destined for the inner membrane, the
intermembrane space, or the outer
membrane have one or more additional
targeting sequences that function to direct
the proteins to these locations by several
different pathways. The designated pathways
in parentheses correspond to those
illustrated in Figures 16-29 and 16-30). [See
W. Neupert, 1997, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 66:863.]

Cleavage by
matrix protease
ATP
synthase
subunit 9

Mature protein

▲

32

Internal sequences
recognized by Oxa1

Inner
membrane
(path B)
Internal sequences recognized
by Tom70 receptor and Tim22 complex

ADP/ATP
antiporter

Inner
membrane
(path C)
First cleavage by
matrix protease

Cytochrome
b2

Intermembrane
space
(path A)

Second cleavage by protease
in intermembrane space

Intermembrane
space–targeting sequence

Targeting sequence for
the general import pore
Cytochrome
c heme lyase

Intermembrane
space
(path B)
Stop-transfer and outermembrane localization sequence

Porin
(P70)

Outer
membrane

used for targeting of matrix proteins (Figure 16-29, path A).
A cytochrome oxidase subunit called CoxVa is a typical protein transported by this pathway. The precursor form of
CoxVa, which contains an N-terminal matrix-targeting sequence recognized by the Tom20/22 import receptor, is
transferred through the general import pore of the outer
membrane and the inner-membrane Tim23/17 translocation
complex. In addition to the matrix-targeting sequence, which
is cleaved during import, CoxVa contains a hydrophobic
stop-transfer sequence. As the protein passes through the
Tim23/17 channel, the stop-transfer sequence blocks translocation of the C-terminus across the inner membrane. The

membrane-anchored intermediate is then transferred laterally into the bilayer of the inner membrane much as type I integral membrane proteins are incorporated into the ER
membrane (see Figure 16-11).
A second pathway to the inner membrane is followed by
proteins (e.g., ATP synthase subunit 9) whose precursors
contain both a matrix-targeting sequence and internal
hydrophobic domains recognized by an inner-membrane
protein termed Oxa1. This pathway is thought to involve
translocation of at least a portion of the precursor into the
matrix via the Tom20/22 and Tim23/17 channels. After
cleavage of the matrix-targeting sequence, the protein is in-

16-5 Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria and Chloroplasts

33

▲ FIGURE 16-29 Three pathways for transporting proteins
from the cytosol to the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Proteins with different targeting sequences are directed to the
inner membrane via different pathways. In all three pathways,
proteins cross the outer membrane via the Tom40 general import
pore. Proteins delivered by pathways A and B contain an
N-terminal matrix-targeting sequence that is recognized by the
Tom20/22 import receptor in the outer membrane. Although both
these pathways use the Tim23/17 inner-membrane channel, they
differ in that the entire precursor protein enters the matrix and

then is redirected to the inner membrane in pathway B. Matrix
Hsc70 plays a role similar its role in the import of soluble matrix
proteins (see Figure 16-26). Proteins delivered by pathway C
contain internal sequences that are recognized by the Tom70
import receptor. A different inner-membrane translocation channel
(Tim22/54) is used in this pathway. Two intermembrane proteins
(Tim9 and Tim10) facilitate transfer between the outer and inner
channels. See the text for discussion. [See R. E. Dalbey and A. Kuhn,

serted into the inner membrane by a process that requires
interaction with Oxa1 and perhaps other inner-membrane
proteins (Figure 16-29, path B). Oxa1 is related to a bacterial protein involved in inserting some inner-membrane proteins in bacteria. This relatedness suggests that Oxa1 may
have descended from the translocation machinery in the
endosymbiotic bacterium that eventually became the mitochondrion. However, the proteins forming the inner-

membrane channels in mitochondria are not related to the
SecY protein in bacterial translocons. Oxa1 also participates
in the inner-membrane insertion of certain proteins (e.g.,
subunit II of cytochrome oxidase) that are encoded by mitochondrial DNA and synthesized in the matrix by mitochondrial ribosomes.
The final pathway for insertion in the inner mitochondrial membrane is followed by multipass proteins that con-

2000, Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 16:51; and N. Pfanner and A. Geissler,
2001, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:339.]

34

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

tain six membrane-spanning domains, such as the ADP/ATP
antiporter. These proteins, which lack the usual N-terminal
matrix-targeting sequence, contain multiple internal mitochondrial targeting sequences. After the internal sequences
are recognized by Tom70, a second import receptor located
in the outer membrane, the imported protein passes through
the outer membrane through the general import pore (Figure
16-29, path C). The protein then is transferred to a second
translocation complex in the inner membrane composed of
the Tim22 and Tim54 proteins. Transfer to the Tim22/54
complex depends on a multimeric complex of two small proteins, Tim9 and Tim10, that reside in the intermembrane
space. These may act as chaperones to guide imported proteins from the general import pore to the Tim22/54 complex
in the inner membrane. Ultimately the Tim22/54 complex is
responsible for incorporating the multiple hydrophobic segments of the imported protein into the inner membrane.

Intermembrane-Space Proteins Two pathways deliver cytosolic proteins to the space between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes. The major pathway is followed by

▲ FIGURE 16-30 Two pathways for transporting proteins
from the cytosol to the mitochondrial intermembrane space.
Pathway A, the major one for delivery to the intermembrane
space, is similar to pathway A for delivery to the inner membrane
(see Figure 16-29). The major difference is that the internal
targeting sequence in proteins such as cytochrome b2 destined
for the intermembrane space is recognized by an innermembrane protease, which cleaves the protein on the

proteins, such as cytochrome b2, whose precursors carry two
different N-terminal targeting sequences, both of which ultimately are cleaved. The most N-terminal of the two sequences is a matrix-targeting sequence, which is removed by
the matrix protease. The second targeting sequence is a hydrophobic segment that blocks complete translocation of the
protein across the inner membrane (Figure 16-30, path A).
After the resulting membrane-embedded intermediate diffuses laterally away from the Tim23/17 translocation channel, a protease in the membrane cleaves the protein near the
hydrophobic transmembrane segment, releasing the mature
protein in a soluble form into the intermembrane space. Except for the second proteolytic cleavage, this pathway is similar to that of inner-membrane proteins such as CoxVa (see
Figure 16-29, path A).
Cytochrome c heme lyase, the enzyme responsible for the
covalent attachment of heme to cytochrome c, illustrates a
second pathway for targeting to the intermembrane space. In
this pathway, the imported protein is delivered directly to the
intermembrane space via the general import pore without
involvement of any inner-membrane translocation factors

intermembrane-space side of the membrane. The released
protein then folds and binds to its heme cofactor within the
intermembrane space. Pathway B involves direct delivery to the
intermembrane space through the Tom40 general import pore in
the outer membrane. See the text for further discussion. [See
R. E. Dalbey and A. Kuhn, 2000, Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 16:51;
N. Pfanner and A. Geissler, 2001, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:339; and
K. Diekert et al., 1999, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 96:11752.]

16-5 Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria and Chloroplasts

(Figure 16-30, path B). Since translocation through the
Tom40 general import pore does not seem to be coupled to
any energetically favorable process such as hydrolysis of ATP
or GTP, the mechanism that drives unidirectional translocation through the outer membrane is unclear. One possibility
is that cytochrome c heme lyase passively diffuses through
the outer membrane and then is trapped within the intermembrane space by binding to another protein that is delivered to that location by one of the translocation mechanisms
discussed previously.

Outer-Membrane Proteins Experiments with mitochondrial porin (P70) provide clues about how proteins are targeted to the outer mitochondrial membrane. A short matrix-targeting sequence at the N-terminus of P70 is
followed by a long stretch of hydrophobic amino acids (see
Figure 16-28). If the hydrophobic sequence is experimentally deleted from P70, the protein accumulates in the matrix space with its matrix-targeting sequence still attached.
This finding suggests that the long hydrophobic sequence
functions as a stop-transfer sequence that both prevents
transfer of the protein into the matrix and anchors it as an
integral protein in the outer membrane. Normally, neither
the matrix-targeting nor stop-transfer sequence is cleaved
from the anchored protein. The source of energy to drive
outer membrane proteins through the general import pore
has not yet been identified.

Targeting of Chloroplast Stromal Proteins Is
Similar to Import of Mitochondrial
Matrix Proteins
Among the proteins found in the chloroplast stroma are the
enzymes of the Calvin cycle, which functions in fixing carbon
dioxide into carbohydrates during photosynthesis (Chapter
8). The large (L) subunit of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase (rubisco) is encoded by chloroplast DNA and synthesized on chloroplast ribosomes in the stromal space. The
small (S) subunit of rubisco and all the other Calvin cycle enzymes are encoded by nuclear genes and transported to
chloroplasts after their synthesis in the cytosol. The precursor forms of these stromal proteins contain an N-terminal
stromal-import sequence (see Table 16-1).
Experiments with isolated chloroplasts, similar to those
with mitochondria illustrated in Figure 16-25, have shown
that they can import the S-subunit precursor after its synthesis. After the unfolded precursor enters the stromal space,
it binds transiently to a stromal Hsc70 chaperone and the Nterminal sequence is cleaved. In reactions facilitated by
Hsc60 chaperonins that reside within the stromal space,
eight S subunits combine with the eight L subunits to yield
the active rubisco enzyme.
The general process of stromal import appears to be very
similar to that for importing proteins into the mitochon-

35

drial matrix (see Figure 16-26). At least three chloroplast
outer-membrane proteins, including a receptor that binds the
stromal-import sequence and a translocation channel protein, and five inner-membrane proteins are known to be essential for directing proteins to the stroma. Although these
proteins are functionally analogous to the receptor and channel proteins in the mitochondrial membrane, they are not
structurally homologous. The lack of homology between
these chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins suggests that
they may have arisen independently during evolution.
The available evidence suggests that chloroplast stromal
proteins, like mitochondrial matrix proteins, are imported in
the unfolded state. Import into the stroma depends on ATP
hydrolysis catalyzed by a stromal Hsc70 chaperone whose
function is similar to Hsc70 in the mitochondrial matrix and
BiP in the ER lumen. Unlike mitochondria, chloroplasts cannot generate an electrochemical gradient (proton-motive
force) across their inner membrane. Thus protein import into
the chloroplast stroma appears to be powered solely by ATP
hydrolysis.

Proteins Are Targeted to Thylakoids by
Mechanisms Related to Translocation
Across the Bacterial Inner Membrane
In addition to the double membrane that surrounds them,
chloroplasts contain a series of internal interconnected
membranous sacs, the thylakoids (see Figure 8-31). Proteins localized to the thylakoid membrane or lumen carry
out photosynthesis. Many of these proteins are synthesized
in the cytosol as precursors containing multiple targeting
sequences. For example, plastocyanin and other proteins
destined for the thylakoid lumen require the successive action of two uptake-targeting sequences. The first is an
N-terminal stromal-import sequence that directs the protein to the stroma by the same pathway that imports the rubisco S subunit. The second sequence targets the protein
from the stroma to the thylakoid lumen. The role of these
targeting sequences has been shown in cell-free experiments
measuring the uptake into chloroplasts of mutant proteins
generated by recombinant DNA techniques. For instance,
mutant plastocyanin that lacks the thylakoid-targeting sequence but contains an intact stromal-import sequence accumulates in the stroma and is not transported into the
thylakoid lumen.
Three separate pathways for transporting proteins
from the stroma into the thylakoid have been identified.
Transport of plastocyanin and related proteins into the
thylakoid lumen occurs by an SRP-dependent pathway
(Figure 16-31, left). The SRP located in the stroma and the
SRP receptor and translocation channel in the thylakoid
membrane are homologs of the corresponding bacterial
proteins used in transporting unfolded proteins from the
cytosol into the periplasmic space or inner membrane of

36

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲

FIGURE 16-31 Two pathways for
transporting proteins from the
cytosol to the thylakoid lumen. In both
pathways, unfolded precursors are
delivered to the stroma via the same
outer-membrane proteins that import
stromal-localized proteins. Cleavage of the
N-terminal stromal-import sequence by a
stromal protease then reveals the
thylakoid-targeting sequence. At this point
the two pathways diverge. In the SRPdependent pathway (left), plastocyanin and
similar proteins are kept unfolded in the
stromal space by a set of chaperones (not
shown) and, directed by the thylakoidtargeting sequence, bind to proteins that
are closely related to the bacterial SRP,
SRP receptor, and SecY translocon, which
mediate movement into the lumen. After
the thylakoid-targeting sequence is
removed in the thylakoid lumen by a
separate endoprotease, the protein folds
into its mature conformation. In the pHdependent pathway (right), metal-binding
proteins fold in the stroma, and complex
redox cofactors are added. Two arginine
residues (RR) at the N-terminus of the
thylakoid-targeting sequence and a pH
gradient across the inner membrane are
required for transport of the folded protein
into the thylakoid lumen. The translocon in
the thylakoid membrane is composed of
at least four proteins related to proteins in
the bacterial inner membrane. [See
R. Dalbey and C. Robinson, 1999, Trends
Biochem. Sci. 24:17; R. E. Dalbey and A. Kuhn,
2000, Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 16:51; and
C. Robinson and A. Bolhuis, 2001, Nature Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 2:350.]

bacterial cells. A second pathway, which targets proteins
to the thylakoid membrane, depends on a protein related
to the mitochondrial Oxa1 protein and the homologous
bacterial protein (see Figure 16-29, path B). Some proteins
synthesized in the stroma or transported into the stroma
from the cytosol are inserted into the thylakoid membrane
via this pathway.
Finally, thylakoid proteins that bind metal-containing cofactors follow another pathway into the thylakoid lumen
(Figure 16-31, pH pathway). The unfolded precursors of
these proteins are first targeted to the stroma, where the Nterminal stromal-import sequence is cleaved off and the protein

then folds and binds its cofactor. A set of thylakoid-membrane
proteins assists in translocating the folded protein and bound
cofactor into the thylakoid lumen, a process powered by the
pH gradient normally maintained across the thylakoid membrane. The thylakoid-targeting sequence that directs a protein
to this pH-dependent pathway includes two closely spaced
arginine residues that are crucial for recognition. Bacterial cells
also have a mechanism for translocating folded proteins with
a similar arginine-containing sequence across the inner membrane. The molecular mechanism whereby these large folded
globular proteins are transported across the thylakoid membrane is currently under intense study.

16-6 Sorting of Peroxis0mal Proteins

37

All the information required to target a precursor protein from the cytosol to the mitochondrial matrix or
chloroplast stroma is contained within its N-terminal
uptake-targeting sequence. After protein import, the
uptake-targeting sequence is removed by proteases within
the matrix or stroma.

encoded by nuclear genes, synthesized on ribosomes free in
the cytosol, and then incorporated into preexisting or newly
generated peroxisomes. As peroxisomes are enlarged by addition of protein (and lipid), they eventually divide, forming
new ones, as is the case with mitochondria and chloroplasts.
The size and enzyme composition of peroxisomes vary
considerably in different kinds of cells. However, all peroxisomes contain enzymes that use molecular oxygen to oxidize various substrates, forming hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).
Catalase, a peroxisome-localized enzyme, efficiently decomposes H2O2 into H2O. Peroxisomes are most abundant in
liver cells, where they constitute about 1 to 2 percent of the
cell volume.

Cytosolic chaperones maintain the precursors of mitochondrial and chloroplast proteins in an unfolded state.
Only unfolded proteins can be imported into the organelles. Translocation occurs at sites where the outer and
inner membranes of the organelles are close together.

Cytosolic Receptor Targets Proteins with
an SKL Sequence at the C-Terminus into
the Peroxisomal Matrix

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 16-5
Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
Most mitochondrial and chloroplast proteins are encoded
by nuclear genes, synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes, and
imported post-translationally into the organelles.

■

■

■

■ Proteins destined to the mitochondrial matrix bind to receptors on the outer mitochondrial membrane, and then are
transferred to the general import pore (Tom40) in the outer
membrane. Translocation occurs concurrently through the
outer and inner membranes, driven by the proton-motive
force across the inner membrane and ATP hydrolysis by the
Hsc70 ATPase in the matrix (see Figure 16-26).

Proteins sorted to mitochondrial destinations other than
the matrix usually contain two or more targeting sequences, one of which may be an N-terminal matrixtargeting sequence (see Figure 16-28).

■

Some mitochondrial proteins destined for the intermembrane space or inner membrane are first imported into
the matrix and then redirected; others never enter the matrix but go directly to their final location.

■

Protein import into the chloroplast stroma occurs
through inner-membrane and outer-membrane translocation channels that are analogous in function to mitochondrial channels but composed of proteins unrelated in
sequence to the corresponding mitochondrial proteins.

■

Proteins destined for the thylakoid have secondary targeting sequences. After entry of these proteins into the
stroma, cleavage of the stromal-targeting sequences reveals
the thylakoid-targeting sequences.

■

■ The three known pathways for moving proteins from the
chloroplast stroma to the thylakoid closely resemble translocation across the bacterial inner membrane (see Figure
16-31). One of these systems can translocate folded proteins.

16-6

Sorting of Peroxisomal Proteins

Peroxisomes are small organelles bounded by a single membrane. Unlike mitochondria and chloroplasts, peroxisomes
lack DNA and ribosomes. Thus all peroxisomal proteins are

The import of catalase and other proteins into rat liver peroxisomes can be assayed in a cell-free system similar to that
used for monitoring mitochondrial protein import (see
Figure 16-25). By testing various mutant catalase proteins in
this system, researchers discovered that the sequence SerLys-Leu (SKL in one-letter code) or a related sequence at the
C-terminus was necessary for peroxisomal targeting. Further, addition of the SKL sequence to the C-terminus of a
normally cytosolic protein leads to uptake of the altered
protein by peroxisomes in cultured cells. All but a few of the
many different peroxisomal matrix proteins bear a sequence
of this type, known as peroxisomal-targeting sequence 1,
or simply PTS1.
The pathway for import of catalase and other PTS1bearing proteins into the peroxisomal matrix is depicted in
Figure 16-32. The PTS1 binds to a soluble receptor protein
in the cytosol (Pex5), which in turn binds to a receptor
in the peroxisome membrane (Pex14). The soluble and
membrane-associated peroxisomal import receptors appear
to have a function analogous to that of the SRP and SRP receptor in targeting proteins to the ER lumen. Still bound to
Pex5, the imported protein then moves through a multimeric
translocation channel, a feature that differs from protein import into the ER lumen. At some stage either during or after
entry into the matrix, Pex5 dissociates from the peroxisomal matrix protein and is recycled back to the cytoplasm. In
contrast to the N-terminal uptake-targeting sequences on
proteins destined for the ER lumen, mitochondrial matrix,
and chloroplast stroma, the PTS1 sequence is not cleaved
from proteins after their entry into a peroxisome. Protein
import into peroxisomes requires ATP hydrolysis, but it is
not known how the energy released from ATP is used to
power unidirectional translocation across the peroxisomal
membrane.
The peroxisome import machinery, unlike most systems
that mediate protein import into the ER, mitochondria, and
chloroplast, can translocate folded proteins across the

38

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

▲

FIGURE 16-32 Import of peroxisomal matrix proteins
directed by PTS1 targeting sequence. Step 1 : Catalase and
most other peroxisomal matrix proteins contain a C-terminal
PTS1 uptake-targeting sequence (pink) that binds to the cytosolic
receptor Pex5. Step 2 : Pex5 with the bound matrix protein
interacts with the Pex14 receptor located on the peroxisome
membrane. Step 3 : The matrix protein–Pex5 complex is then
transferred to a set of membrane proteins (Pex10, Pex12, and
Pex2) that are necessary for translocation into the peroxisomal
matrix by an unknown mechanism. Step 4 : At some point, either
during translocation or in the lumen, Pex5 dissociates from the
matrix protein and returns to the cytosol, a process that involves
the Pex2/10/12 complex and additional membrane and cytosolic
proteins not shown. Note that folded proteins can be imported
into peroxisomes and that the targeting sequence is not removed
in the matrix. [See P. E. Purdue and P. B. Lazarow, 2001, Ann. Rev. Cell
Devel. Biol. 17:701; S. Subramani et al., 2000, Ann. Rev. Biochem.
69:399; and V. Dammai and S. Subramani, 2001, Cell 105:187.]

are eventually degraded. Genetic analyses of cultured cells
from different Zellweger patients and of yeast cells carrying
similar mutations have identified more than 20 genes that are
required for peroxisome biogenesis. ❚

membrane. For example, catalase assumes a folded conformation and binds to heme in the cytoplasm before traversing the peroxisomal membrane. Cell-free studies have shown
that the peroxisome import machinery can transport a wide
variety of molecules, including very large ones. To explain
this unusual ability, scientists have speculated that a translocation channel of variable size may assemble by an unknown
mechanism to fit exactly the diameter of the PTS1-bearing
substrate molecule and then disassemble once translocation
has been completed.
A few peroxisomal matrix proteins such as thiolase
are synthesized as precursors with an N-terminal uptaketargeting sequence known as PTS2. These proteins bind
to a different cytosolic receptor protein, but otherwise
import is thought to occur by the same mechanism as for
PTS1-containing proteins.

Peroxisomal Membrane and Matrix Proteins Are
Incorporated by Different Pathways
Autosomal recessive mutations that cause defective
peroxisome assembly occur naturally in the human
population. Such defects can lead to severe impairment of many organs and to death. In Zellweger syndrome
and related disorders, for example, the transport of many or
all proteins into the peroxisomal matrix is impaired; newly
synthesized peroxisomal enzymes remain in the cytosol and

Studies with peroxisome-assembly mutants have shown
that different pathways are used for importing peroxisomal
matrix proteins versus inserting proteins into the peroxisomal membrane. For example, analysis of cells from some
Zellweger patients led to identification of genes encoding the
putative translocation channel proteins Pex10, Pex12, and
Pex2. Mutant cells defective in any one of these proteins cannot incorporate matrix proteins such as catalase into peroxisomes; nonetheless, the cells contain empty peroxisomes
that have a normal complement of peroxisomal membrane
proteins (Figure 16-33b). Mutations in any one of three
other genes were found to block insertion of peroxisomal
membrane proteins as well as import of matrix proteins
(Figure 16-33c). These findings demonstrate that one set of
proteins translocates soluble proteins into the peroxisomal
matrix but a different set is required for insertion of proteins
into the peroxisomal membrane. This situation differs
markedly from that of the ER, mitochondrion, and chloroplast, for which, as we have seen, membrane proteins and
soluble proteins share many of the same components for
their insertion into these organelles.
Although most peroxisomes are generated by division of
preexisting organelles, these organelles also can arise de novo
by the two-stage process depicted in Figure 16-34. In this
case, peroxisomal membrane proteins first are targeted to
precursor membranes by sequences that differ from both
PTS1 and PTS2. Analysis of mutant cells revealed that
Pex19 is the receptor protein responsible for targeting of
peroxisomal membrane proteins, while Pex3 and Pex16 are
necessary for their proper insertion into the membrane. The
insertion of peroxisomal membrane proteins generates
membranes that have all the components necessary for import of matrix proteins, leading to the formation of mature,

16-6 Sorting of Peroxisomal Proteins

39

▲

EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 16-33 Fluorescent-antibody
staining of peroxisomal biogenesis mutants reveals different
pathways for incorporation of membrane and matrix
proteins. Cells were stained with antibodies to PMP70, a
peroxisomal membrane protein, or with antibodies to catalase, a
peroxisomal matrix protein, then viewed in a fluorescent
microscope. (a) In wild-type cells, both peroxisomal membrane
and matrix proteins are visible as bright foci in numerous
peroxisomal bodies. (b) In cells from a Pex12-deficient patient,
catalase is distributed uniformly throughout the cytosol, whereas
PMP70 is localized normally to peroxisomal bodies. (c) In cells
from a Pex3-deficient patient, peroxisomal membranes cannot
assemble, and as a consequence peroxisomal bodies do not
form. Thus both catalase and PMP70 are mis-localized to the
cytosol. [Courtesy of Stephen Gould, Johns Hopkins University.]

controls the extent of peroxisome division. The small peroxisomes generated by division can be enlarged by incorporation of additional matrix and membrane proteins via
the same pathways described previously.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 16-6
Sorting of Peroxisomal Proteins
All peroxisomal proteins are synthesized on cytosolic
ribosomes and incorporated into the organelle posttranslationally.

■

Most peroxisomal matrix proteins contain a C-terminal
PTS1 targeting sequence; a few have an N-terminal PTS2
targeting sequence. Neither targeting sequence is cleaved
after import.

■

functional peroxisomes. Division of mature peroxisomes,
which largely determines the number of peroxisomes
within a cell, depends on still another protein, Pex11. Overexpression of the Pex11 protein causes a large increase in
the number of peroxisomes, suggesting that this protein

▲ FIGURE 16-34 Model of peroxisomal biogenesis and
division. The first stage in the de novo formation of peroxisomes
is the incorporation of peroxisomal membrane proteins into
precursor membranes. Pex19 acts as the receptor for membranetargeting sequences. Pex3 and Pex16 are required for the proper
insertion of proteins into the forming peroxisomal membrane.
Insertion of all peroxisomal membrane proteins produces a
peroxisomal ghost, which is capable of importing proteins

All proteins destined for the peroxisomal matrix bind to
a cytosolic receptor, which differs for PTS1- and PTS2-

■

targeted to the matrix. The pathways for importing PTS1- and
PTS2-bearing matrix proteins differ only in the identity of the
cytosolic receptor (Pex5 and Pex7, respectively) that binds the
targeting sequence (see Figure 16-32). Complete incorporation of
matrix proteins yields a mature peroxisome. The proliferation of
peroxisomes requires division of mature peroxisomes, a process
that depends on the Pex11 protein.

40

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

bearing proteins, and then are directed to common import
receptor and translocation machinery on the peroxisomal
membrane (see Figure 16-32).
Translocation of matrix proteins across the peroxisomal
membrane depends on ATP hydrolysis. Many peroxisomal
matrix proteins fold in the cytosol and traverse the membrane in a folded conformation.

■

Proteins destined for the peroxisomal membrane contain
different targeting sequences than peroxisomal matrix proteins and are imported by a different pathway.

■

Unlike mitochondria and chloroplasts, peroxisomes can
arise de novo from precursor membranes, as well as by division of preexisting organelles (see Figure 16-34).

■

PPEER
RSSPPEECCTTIIV
VEESS FF O
OR
R T
TH
HE
E FF U
UT
TU
UR
RE
E
As we have seen in this chapter, we now understand many aspects of the basic processes responsible for selectively transporting proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
mitochondrion, chloroplast, and peroxisome. Biochemical
and genetic studies, for instance, have identified cis-acting
signal sequences responsible for targeting proteins to the correct organelle membrane and the membrane receptors that
recognize these signal sequences. We also have learned much
about the underlying mechanisms that translocate proteins
across organelle membranes, and have determined whether
energy is used to push or pull proteins across the membrane
in one direction, the type of channel through which proteins
pass, and whether proteins are translocated in a folded or
an unfolded state. Nonetheless, many fundamental questions
remain unanswered, including how fully folded proteins
move across a membrane and how the topology of multipass
membrane proteins is determined.
The peroxisomal import machinery provides one example of the translocation of folded proteins. It not only is capable of translocating fully folded proteins with bound
cofactors into the peroxisomal matrix but can even direct the
import of a large gold particle decorated with a (PTS1) peroxisomal targeting peptide. Some researchers have speculated that the mechanism of peroxisomal import may be
related to that of nuclear import, the best-understood example of post-translational translocation of folded proteins
(Chapter 12). Both the peroxisomal and nuclear import machinery can transport folded molecules of very divergent
sizes, and both appear to involve a component that cycles between the cytosol and the organelle interior—the Pex5 PTS1
receptor in the case of peroxisomal import and the Ranimportin complex in the case of nuclear import. However,
there also appear to be crucial differences between the two
translocation processes. For example, nuclear pores represent large stable macromolecular assemblies readily observed
by electron microscopy, whereas analogous porelike structures have not been observed in the peroxisomal membrane.

Moreover, small molecules can readily pass through nuclear
pores, whereas peroxisomal membranes maintain a permanent barrier to the diffusion of small hydrophilic molecules.
Taken together, these observations suggest that peroxisomal
import may require an entirely new type of translocation
mechanism. The evolutionarily conserved mechanisms for
translocating folded proteins across the cytoplasmic membrane of bacterial cells and across the thylakoid membrane
of chloroplasts also are poorly understood. A better understanding of all of these processes for translocating folded
proteins across a membrane will likely hinge on future development of in vitro translocations systems that allow investigators to define the biochemical mechanisms driving
translocation and to identify the structures of trapped
translocation intermediates.
Compared with our understanding of how soluble proteins are translocated into the ER lumen and mitochondrial
matrix, our understanding of how cis-acting sequences specify the topology of multipass membrane proteins is quite elementary. For instance, we do not know how the translocon
channel accommodates polypeptides that are oriented differently with respect to the membrane, nor do we understand
how local polypeptide sequences interact with the translocon
channel both to set the orientation of transmembrane spans
and to signal for lateral passage into the membrane bilayer.
A better understanding of how the amino acid sequences of
membrane proteins can specify membrane topology will be
crucial for decoding the vast amount of structural information for membrane proteins contained within databases of
genomic sequences.
A more detailed understanding of all translocation
processes should continue to emerge from genetic and biochemical studies, both in yeasts and in mammals. These studies will undoubtedly reveal additional key proteins involved in
the recognition of targeting sequences and in the translocation
of proteins across lipid bilayers. Finally, the now mostly rudimentary structural studies of translocon channels will likely be
extended in the future to reveal the structures and conformational states for the channels at resolutions on the atomic scale.

KEY TERMS
chaperones 9
cotranslational
translocation 5
general import pore 29
hydropathy profile 15
N- and O-linked
oligosaccharides 17
post-translational
translocation 9
signal-anchor
sequence 12

signal-recognition
particle (SRP) 5
signal (uptake-targeting)
sequences 3
stop-transfer anchor
sequence 11
topogenic sequences 10
topology of membrane
proteins 10
translocon 6
unfolded-protein response 23

Analyze the Data

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Describe the source or sources of energy needed for unidirectional translocation across the membrane in (a) cotranslational translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER); (b) post-translational translocation into the ER;
(c) translocation across the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane;
and (d) translocation into the mitochondrial matrix.
2. Translocation into most organelles usually requires the
activity of one or more cytosolic proteins. Describe the basic
function of three different cytosolic factors required for
translocation into the ER, mitochondria, and peroxisomes,
respectively.
3. Predict what will happen when an analog of GTP that
cannot be hydrolyzed to GDP is added to an in vitro translocation reaction that depends on the SRP and SRP receptor. In
your answer describe what will happen to the nascent
polypeptide chains synthesized immediately after the nonhydrolyzable GTP analog is added and to nascent chains synthesized after all of the SRP and SRP receptor has bound to
the nonhydrolyzable GTP analog. (To actually perform this
experiment, a nonhydrolyzable analog of GTP that binds to
the SRP and SRP receptor but not to translation factors must
be used because GTP hydrolysis is required for translation.)
4. All G protein–coupled receptors have seven transmembrane segments with the N-terminus oriented toward the
exoplasmic space (cell exterior or ER lumen) and the
C-terminus oriented toward the cytosol (see Figure 16-10, type
IV). A minor class of G protein–coupled receptors begins with
a cleaved signal sequence. Diagram the topogenic sequences in
such a protein, indicating the type of each topogenic segment
and the likely location of positively charged segments.
5. Temperature-sensitive yeast mutants have been isolated
that block each of the enzymatic steps in the synthesis of the
dolichol-oligosaccharide precursor for N-linked glycosylation (see Figure 16-17). Propose an explanation for why mutations that block synthesis of the intermediate with the
structure dolichol-PP-(GlcNAc)2Man5 completely prevent
addition of N-linked oligosaccharide chains to secretory
proteins, whereas mutations that block conversion of this
intermediate into the completed precursor—dolichol-PP(GlcNAc)2Man9Glc3—allow the addition of N-linked
oligosaccharide chains to secretory glycoproteins.
6. Name four different proteins that facilitate the modification and/or folding of secretory proteins within the lumen
of the ER. Indicate which of these proteins covalently modifies substrate proteins and which brings about only conformational changes in substrate proteins.
7. Because you are interested in studying how a particular
secretory protein folds within the ER, you wish to determine
whether BiP binds to the newly synthesized protein in ER extracts. You find that you can isolate some of the newly syn-

41

thesized secretory protein bound to BiP when ADP is added
to the cell extract but not when ATP is added to the extract.
Explain this result based on the mechanism for BiP binding
to substrate proteins.
8. Cell biologists often wish to experimentally manipulate
mammalian cells by introducing a mutant version of a specific protein into the cell’s cytoplasm. Describe how you
might use recombinant DNA to engineer a strain of Yersinia
such that it would be capable of inserting a protein of interest into mammalian macrophage cells.
9. Describe what would happen to the precursor of a mitochondrial matrix protein in the following types of mitochondrial mutants: (a) a mutation in the Tom22 signal
receptor; (b) a mutation in the Tom70 signal receptor; (c) a
mutation in the matrix Hsc70; and (d) a mutation in the matrix signal peptidase.
10. Describe the similarities and differences between the
mechanism of import into the mitochondrial matrix and the
chloroplast stroma.
11. Design a set of experiments using chimeric proteins,
composed of a mitochondrial precursor protein fused to dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), that could be used to determine how much of the precursor protein must protrude into
the mitochondrial matrix in order for the matrix-targeting
sequence to be cleaved by the matrix-processing protease (see
Figure 16-27).
12. Proteins bearing a PTS1-targeting sequence can be
translocated into the peroxisomal matrix in a fully folded
state. Design an experiment to test the possibility that a protein lacking a peroxisomal-targeting sequence altogether can
be targeted to the peroxisomal matrix by tightly binding to
a PTS1-containing protein.
13. Suppose that you have identified a new mutant cell line
that lacks functional peroxisomes. Describe how you could
determine experimentally whether the mutant is primarily
defective for insertion/assembly of peroxisomal membrane
proteins or matrix proteins.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Imagine that you are evaluating the early steps in translocation and processing of the secretory protein prolactin. By
using an experimental approach similar to that shown in
Figure 16-7, you can use truncated prolactin mRNAs to
control the length of nascent prolactin polypeptides that are
synthesized. When prolactin mRNA that lacks a chaintermination (stop) codon is translated in vitro, the newly synthesized polypeptide ending with the last codon included on
the mRNA will remain attached to the ribosome, thus allowing a polypeptide of defined length to extend from the
ribosome. You have generated a set of mRNAs that encode

42

CHAPTER 16 • Moving Proteins into Membranes and Organelles

segments of the N-terminus of prolactin of increasing length,
and each mRNA can be translated in vitro by a cytosolic
translation extract containing ribosomes, tRNAs, aminoacyltRNA synthetases, GTP, and translation initiation and elongation factors. When radio-labeled amino acids are included
in the translation mixture, only the polypeptide encoded by
the added mRNA will be labeled. After completion of translation, each reaction mixture was resolved by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and the labeled polypeptides
were identified by autoradiography.

in neighboring gel lanes. Based on the amounts of labeled
polypeptide in the membrane fractions in the autoradiogram depicted below, deduce how long the prolactin nascent chain must be in order for ribosomes engaged in
translation to engage the SRP and thereby become bound
to microsomal membranes.

a. The autoradiogram depicted below shows the results of an
experiment in which each translation reaction was carried out
either in the presence () or the absence () of microsomal
membranes. Based on the gel mobility of peptides synthesized
in the presence or absence of microsomes, deduce how long
the prolactin nascent chain must be in order for the prolactin
signal peptide to enter the ER lumen and to be cleaved by signal peptidase. (Note that microsomes carry significant quantities of SRP weakly bound to the membranes.)

REFERENCES

Translocation of Proteins Across the ER Membrane

b. Given this length, what can you conclude about the conformational state of the nascent prolactin polypeptide when
it is cleaved by signal peptidase? The following lengths will
be useful for your calculation: the prolactin signal sequence
is cleaved after amino acid 31; the channel within the ribosome occupied by a nascent polypeptide is about 150 Å long;
a membrane bilayer is about 50 Å thick; in polypeptides with
an -helical conformation, one residue extends 1.5 Å,
whereas in fully extended polypeptides, one residue extends
about 3.5 Å.
c. The experiment described in part (a) is carried out in an
identical manner except that microsomal membranes are not
present during translation but are added after translation is
complete. In this case none of the samples shows a difference
in mobility in the presence or absence of microsomes. What
can you conclude about whether prolactin can be translocated into isolated microsomes post-translationally?
d. In another experiment, each translation reaction was
carried out in the presence of microsomes, and then the
microsomal membranes and bound ribosomes were separated from free ribosomes and soluble proteins by centrifugation. For each translation reaction, both the total
reaction (T) and the membrane fraction (M) were resolved

Dalbey, R. E., and G. Von Heijne. 1992. Signal peptidases in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes: a new protease family. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 17:474–478.
Johnson, A. E., and M. A. van Waes. 1999. The translocon: a
dynamic gateway at the ER membrane. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol.
15:799–842.
Keenan, R. J., D. M. Freymann, R. M. Stroud, and P. Walter.
2001. The signal recognition particle. Ann. Rev. Biochem.
70:755–775.
Menetret, J. F., A. Neuhof, D. G. Morgan, K. Plath, M. Radermacher, T. A. Rapoport, and C. W. Akey. 2000. The structure of
ribosome-channel complexes engaged in protein translocation. Mol.
Cell 6:1219–1232.
Rapoport, T. A., K. E. Matlack, K. Plath, B. Misselwitz, and O.
Staeck. 1999. Post-translational protein translocation across the
membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum. Biol. Chem. 380:
1143–1150.

Insertion of Proteins into the ER Membrane
Englund, P. T. 1993. The structure and biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol protein anchors. Ann. Rev. Biochem.
62:121–138.
Goder, V., and M. Spiess. 2001. Topogenesis of membrane proteins: determinants and dynamics. FEBS Lett. 504:87–93.
Mothes, W., et al. 1997. Molecular mechanism of membrane
protein integration into the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell 89:523–533.
von Heijne, G. 1999. Recent advances in the understanding of
membrane protein assembly and structure. Q. Rev. Biophys.
32:285–307.

Protein Modifications, Folding, and Quality Control
in the ER
Bertolotti, A., Y. Zhang, L. M. Hendershot, H. P. Harding, and
D. Ron. 2000. Dynamic interaction of BiP and ER stress transducers in the unfolded-protein response. Nature Cell Biol. 2:326–332.

References
Ellgaard, L., M. Molinari, and A. Helenius. 1999. Setting the
standards: quality control in the secretory pathway. Science
286:1882–1888.
Helenius, A., and M. Aebi. 2001. Intracellular functions of
N-linked glycans. Science 291:2364–2369.
Kornfeld, R., and S. Kornfeld. 1985. Assembly of asparaginelinked oligosaccharides. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 45:631–664.
Parodi, A. J. 2000. Protein glucosylation and its role in protein
folding. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 69:69–93.
Patil, C., and P. Walter. 2001. Intracellular signaling from the
endoplasmic reticulum to the nucleus: the unfolded protein response
in yeast and mammals. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:349–355.
Plemper, R. K., and D. H. Wolf. 1999. Retrograde protein
translocation: eradication of secretory proteins in health and disease.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 24:266–270.
Sevier, C. S., and C. A. Kaiser. 2002. Formation and transfer of
disulphide bonds in living cells. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
3:836–847.
Silberstein, S., and R. Gilmore. 1996. Biochemistry, molecular
biology, and genetics of the oligosaccharyltransferase. FASEB J.
10:849–858.
Tsai, B., Y. Ye, and T. A. Rapoport. 2002. Retro-translocation
of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. Nature
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:246–255.

Export of Bacterial Proteins
Danese, P. N., and T. J. Silhavy. 1998. Targeting and assembly
of periplasmic and outer-membrane proteins in Escherichia coli. Ann.
Rev. Genet. 32:59–94.
Galan, J. E. 2001. Salmonella interactions with host cells: type
III secretion at work. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 17:53–86.
Thanassi, D. G., and S. J. Hultgren. 2000. Multiple pathways
allow protein secretion across the bacterial outer membrane. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 12:420–430.
Wickner, W., and M. R. Leonard. 1996. Escherichia coli preprotein translocase. J. Biol. Chem. 271:29514–29516.

43

Sorting of Proteins to Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
Chen, K., X. Chen, and D. J. Schnell. 2000. Mechanism of protein import across the chloroplast envelope. Biochem. Soc. Trans.
28:485–491.
Dalbey, R. E., and A. Kuhn. 2000. Evolutionarily related insertion pathways of bacterial, mitochondrial, and thylakoid membrane
proteins. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 16:51–87.
Matouschek, A., N. Pfanner, and W. Voos. 2000. Protein unfolding by mitochondria: the Hsp70 import motor. EMBO Rept.
1:404–410.
Neupert, W., and M. Brunner. 2002. The protein import motor
of mitochondria. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:555–565.
Pfanner, N., and A. Geissler. 2001. Versatility of the mitochondrial protein import machinery. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
2:339–349.
Robinson, C., and A. Bolhuis. 2001. Protein targeting by the
twin-arginine translocation pathway. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
2:350–356.

Sorting of Peroxisomal Proteins
Dammai, V., and S. Subramani. 2001. The human peroxisomal
targeting signal receptor, Pex5p, is translocated into the peroxisomal
matrix and recycled to the cytosol. Cell 105:187–196.
Gould, S. J., and C. S. Collins. 2002. Opinion: peroxisomalprotein import: is it really that complex? Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
3:382–389.
Gould, S. J., and D. Valle. 2000. Peroxisome biogenesis disorders: genetics and cell biology. Trends Genet. 16: 340–345.
Purdue, P. E., and P. B. Lazarow. 2001. Peroxisome biogenesis.
Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 17:701–752.
Subramani, S., A. Koller, and W. B. Snyder. 2000. Import of peroxisomal matrix and membrane proteins. Ann. Rev. Biochem.
69:399–418.

17
VESICULAR TRAFFIC,
SECRETION, AND
ENDOCYTOSIS
caption to come

I

n the previous chapter we explored how proteins are targeted to and translocated across the membranes of different intracellular organelles. In this chapter we turn our
attention to the mechanisms that allow soluble and membrane proteins synthesized on the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to move to their final destinations via the secretory
pathway. A single unifying principle governs all protein trafficking in the secretory pathway: transport of membrane and
soluble proteins from one membrane-bounded compartment
to another is mediated by transport vesicles that collect
“cargo” proteins in buds arising from the membrane of one
compartment and then deliver these cargo proteins to the
next compartment by fusing with the membrane of that compartment. Importantly, as transport vesicles bud from one
membrane and fuse with the next, the same face of the membrane remains oriented toward the cytosol. Therefore once
a protein has been inserted into the membrane or the lumen
of the ER, the protein can be carried along the secretory
pathway, moving from one organelle to the next without
being translocated across another membrane or altering its
orientation within the membrane.
Figure 17-1 outlines the major routes for protein trafficking in the secretory pathway. Once newly synthesized
proteins are incorporated into the ER lumen or membrane as
discussed in Chapter 16, they can be packaged into anterograde (forward-moving) transport vesicles. These vesicles fuse
with each other to form a flattened membrane-bounded compartment (cisterna) known as the cis-Golgi. Certain proteins,
mainly ER-localized proteins, are retrieved from the cis-Golgi
to the ER via a different set of retrograde (backward-moving)
transport vesicles. A new cis-Golgi cisterna with its cargo of

proteins physically moves from the cis position (nearest the
ER) to the trans position (farthest from the ER), successively
becoming first a medial-Golgi cisterna and then a trans-Golgi
cisterna. This process, known as cisternal progression, does
not involve the budding off and fusion of anterograde transport vesicles. During cisternal progression, enzymes and
other Golgi-resident proteins are constantly being retrieved
from later to earlier Golgi cisternae by retrograde transport
vesicles, thereby remaining localized to the cis-, medial-, or
trans-Golgi cisternae.
Proteins in the secretory pathway that are destined for
compartments other than the ER or Golgi eventually reach
a complex network of membranes and vesicles termed the
trans-Golgi network (TGN). From this major branch point
in the secretory pathway, a protein can be loaded into one

OUTLINE
17.1 Techniques for Studying the Secretory
Pathway
17.2 Molecular Mechanisms of Vesicular Traffic
17.3 Vesicle Trafficking in the Early Stages
of the Secretory Pathway
17.4 Protein Sorting and Processing in Later Stages
of the Secretory Pathway
17.5 Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and
the Sorting of Internalized Proteins
17.6 Synaptic Vesicle Function and Formation
1

2

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis
Plasma
membrane
Cytosol
7

6

Regulated
secretion

Constitutive
secretion

9 Endocytosis
Endocytic
vesicle

Secretory
vesicle

8

TransGolgi
network

Sorting to
lysosomes

Late
endosome

Transport
vesicle

FPO

TransGolgi

Lysosome

MedialGolgi
Cisternal
progression

4

5

Retrograde
transport from
later to earlier
Golgi cisternae

3

Retrograde Golgi-to-ER
transport

CisGolgi

Cis-Golgi
network

2

Budding and fusion of
ER-to-Golgi vesicles to
form cis-Golgi

ER lumen

Rough ER

Protein synthesis on bound ribosomes;
1 cotranslational transport of proteins
into or across ER membrane

 FIGURE 17-1 Overview of
the secretory and endocytic
pathways of protein sorting.
Secretory pathway: Synthesis of
proteins bearing an ER signal
sequence is completed on the
rough ER ( 1 ), and the newly made
polypeptide chains are inserted into
the ER membrane or cross it into
the lumen (Chapter 16). Some
proteins (e.g., rough ER enzymes
or structural proteins) remain within
the ER. The remainder are
packaged into transport vesicles ( 2 )
that bud from the ER and fuse
together to form new cis-Golgi
cisternae. Missorted ER-resident
proteins and vesicle membrane
proteins that need to be reused are
retrieved to the ER by vesicles ( 3 )
that bud from the cis-Golgi and
fuse with the ER. Each cis-Golgi
cisterna, with its protein content,
physically moves from the cis to
the trans face of the Golgi
complex ( 4 ) by a nonvesicular
process called cisternal
progression. Retrograde transport
vesicles ( 5 ) move Golgi-resident
proteins to the proper Golgi
compartment. In all cells, certain
soluble proteins move to the cell
surface in transport vesicles ( 6 )
and are secreted continuously
(constitutive secretion). In certain
cell types, some soluble proteins
are stored in secretory vesicles ( 7 )
and are released only after the cell
receives an appropriate neural or
hormonal signal (regulated
secretion). Lysosome-destined
membrane and soluble proteins,
which are transported in vesicles
that bud from the trans-Golgi ( 8 ),
first move to the late endosome
and then to the lysosome.
Endocytic pathway: Membrane and
soluble extracellular proteins taken
up in vesicles that bud from the
plasma membrane ( 9 ) also can
move to the lysosome via the
endosome.

17.1 • Techniques for Studying the Secretory Pathway

of at least three different kinds of vesicles. After budding
from the trans-Golgi network, the first type of vesicle immediately moves to and fuses with the plasma membrane, releasing its contents by exocytosis. In all cell types, at least
some proteins are loaded into such vesicles and secreted continuously in this manner. Examples of proteins released by
such constitutive (or continuous) secretion include collagen
by fibroblasts, serum proteins by hepatocytes, and antibodies by activated B lymphocytes. The second type of vesicle
to bud from the trans-Golgi network, known as secretory
vesicles, are stored inside the cell until a signal for exocytosis causes release of their contents at the plasma membrane.
Among the proteins released by such regulated secretion are
peptide hormones (e.g., insulin, glucagon, ACTH) from various endocrine cells, precursors of digestive enzymes from
pancreatic acinar cells, milk proteins from the mammary
gland, and neurotransmitters from neurons.
The third type of vesicle that buds from the trans-Golgi
network is directed to the lysosome, an organelle responsible
for the intracellular degradation of macromolecules, and to
lysosome-like storage organelles in certain cells. Secretory
proteins destined for lysosomes first are transported by vesicles from the trans-Golgi network to a compartment usually
called the late endosome; proteins then are transferred to the
lysosome by a mechanism that is not well understood but
may involve direct fusion of the endosome with the lysosomal membrane. Soluble proteins delivered by this pathway
include lysosomal digestive enzymes (e.g., proteases, glycosidases, and phosphatases) and membrane proteins (e.g.,
V-class proton pump) that pump H from the cytosol into
the acidic lumen of the endosome and lysosome. As we will
see, some of the specific protein-processing and -sorting
events that take place within these organelles depend on their
low luminal pH.
The endosome also functions in the endocytic pathway in
which vesicles bud from the plasma membrane bringing
membrane proteins and their bound ligands into the cell (see
Figure 17-1). After being internalized by endocytosis, some
proteins are transported to lysosomes, while others are recycled back to the cell surface. Endocytosis is a way for cells
to take up nutrients that are in macromolecular form—for
example, cholesterol in the form of lipoprotein particles and
iron complexed with the serum protein transferrin. Endocytosis also can function as a regulatory mechanism to decrease
signaling activity by withdrawing receptors for a particular
signaling molecule from the cell surface.

17.1 Techniques for Studying
the Secretory Pathway
The key to understanding how proteins are transported
through the organelles of the secretory pathway has been to
develop a basic description of the function of transport vesicles. Many components required for the formation and fu-

3

sion of transport vesicles have been identified in the past
decade by a remarkable convergence of the genetic and biochemical approaches described in this section. All studies of
intracellular protein trafficking employ some method for assaying the transport of a given protein from one compartment to another. We begin by describing how intracellular
protein transport can be followed in living cells and then
consider genetic and in vitro systems that have proved useful in elucidating the secretory pathway.

Transport of a Protein Through the Secretory
Pathway Can Be Assayed in Living Cells
The classic studies of G. Palade and his colleagues in the 1960s
first established the order in which proteins move from organelle to organelle in the secretory pathway. These early studies also showed that secretory proteins were never released
into the cytosol, the first indication that transported proteins
are associated with some type of membrane-bounded intermediate. In these experiments, which combined pulse-chase
labeling (see Figure 3-36) and autoradiography, radioactively
labeled amino acids were injected into the pancreas of a hamster. At different times after injection, the animal was sacrificed
and the pancreatic cells were chemically fixed, sectioned, and
subjected to autoradiography to visualize the location of the
radiolabeled proteins. Because the radioactive amino acids
were administered in a short pulse, only those proteins synthesized immediately after injection were labeled, forming a
distinct group, or cohort, of labeled proteins whose transport
could be followed. In addition, because pancreatic acinar cells
are dedicated secretory cells, almost all of the labeled amino
acids in these cells are incorporated into secretory proteins,
facilitating the observation of transported proteins.
Although autoradiography is rarely used today to localize proteins within cells, these early experiments illustrate the
two basic requirements for any assay of intercompartmental
transport. First, it is necessary to label a cohort of proteins in
an early compartment so that their subsequent transfer to
later compartments can be followed with time. Second, it is
necessary to have a way to identify the compartment in
which a labeled protein resides. Here we describe two modern experimental procedures for observing the intracellular
trafficking of a secretory protein in almost any type of cell.
In both procedures, a gene encoding an abundant membrane glycoprotein (G protein) from vesicular stomatitis
virus (VSV) is introduced into cultured mammalian cells either by transfection or simply by infecting the cells with the
virus. The treated cells, even those that are not specialized for
secretion, rapidly synthesize the VSV G protein on the ER
like normal cellular secretory proteins. Use of a mutant
encoding a temperature-sensitive VSV G protein allows researchers to turn subsequent protein transport on and off. At
the restrictive temperature of 40 ˚C, newly made VSV G protein is misfolded and therefore retained within the ER by
quality control mechanisms discussed in Chapter 16, whereas
at the permissive temperature of 32 ˚C, the accumulated

4

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

protein is correctly folded and is transported through the secretory pathway to the cell surface. This clever use of a temperature-sensitive mutation in effect defines a protein cohort
whose subsequent transport can be followed.
In two variations of this basic procedure, transport of
VSV G protein is monitored by different techniques. Studies
using both of these modern trafficking assays and Palade’s
early experiments all came to the same conclusion: in mammalian cells vesicle-mediated transport of a protein molecule
from its site of synthesis on the rough ER to its arrival at the
plasma membrane takes from 30 to 60 minutes.

Microscopy of GFP-Labeled VSV G Protein One approach
for observing transport of VSV G protein employs a hybrid
gene in which the viral gene is fused to the gene encoding
green fluorescent protein (GFP), a naturally fluorescent protein (Chapter 5). The hybrid gene is transfected into cultured
cells by techniques described in Chapter 9. When cells expressing the temperature-sensitive form of the hybrid protein
(VSVG-GFP) are grown at the restrictive temperature,
VSVG-GFP accumulates in the ER, which appears as a lacy
network of membranes when cells are observed in a fluorescent microscope. When the cells are subsequently shifted to a
permissive temperature, the VSVG-GFP can be seen to move
first to the membranes of the Golgi apparatus, which are
densely concentrated at the edge of the nucleus, and then to
the cell surface (Figure 17-2a). By analyzing the distribution
of VSVG-GFP at different times after shifting cells to the permissive temperature, researchers have determined how long
VSVG-GFP resides in each organelle of the secretory pathway (Figure 17-2b).

Detection of Compartment-Specific Oligosaccharide Modifications A second way to follow the transport of secretory
proteins takes advantage of modifications to their carbohydrate side chains that occur at different stages of the secretory
pathway. To understand this approach, recall that many secretory proteins leaving the ER contain one or more copies of
the N-linked oligosaccharide Man8(GlcNAc)2, which are synthesized and attached to secretory proteins in the ER (see Figure 16-18). As a protein moves through the Golgi complex,
different enzymes localized to the cis-, medial-, and transGolgi cisternae catalyze an ordered series of reactions to these
core Man8(GlcNAc)2 chains. For instance, glycosidases that
reside specifically in the cis-Golgi compartment sequentially
trim mannose residues off of the core oligosaccharide to yield
a “trimmed” form Man5(GlcNAc)2 (Figure 17-3, reaction 1 ).
Scientists can use a specialized carbohydrate-cleaving enzyme
known as endoglycosidase D to distinguish glycosylated proteins that remain in the ER from those that have entered the
cis-Golgi: trimmed cis-Golgi–specific oligosaccharides are
cleaved from proteins by endoglycosidase D, whereas the core
(untrimmed) oligosaccharide chains on secretory proteins
within the ER are resistant to cleavage by this enzyme. Because
a deglycosylated protein produced by endoglycosidase D
digestion moves faster on an SDS gel than the corresponding
glycosylated protein, they can be readily distinguished.
This type of assay can be used to track movement of VSV
G protein in virus-infected cells pulse-labeled with radioactive amino acids. Immediately after labeling, all the extracted
labeled VSV G protein is still in the ER and is resistant to digestion by endoglycosidase D, but with time an increasing
fraction of the glycoprotein becomes sensitive to digestion

(a)

(b)
0 min

40 min

20

180 min

Total

O
FP
ER

O
FP
Golgi

VSVG–GFP (× 106)

ER

FPO

O
FP
Plasma
membrane

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-2 Protein transport through
the secretory pathway can be visualized by fluorescence
microscopy of cells producing a GFP-tagged membrane
protein. Cultured cells were transfected with a hybrid gene
encoding the viral membrane glycoprotein VSV G protein linked
to the gene for green fluorescent protein (GFP). A mutant
version of the viral gene was used so that newly made hybrid
protein (VSVG-GFP) is retained in the ER at 40 C but is released
for transport at 32 C. (a) Fluorescence micrographs of cells just
before and at two times after they were shifted to the lower

15
PM

10

5

0

Golgi

0

100

200
300
400
Time (min)

500

600

temperature. Movement of VSVG-GFP from the ER to the Golgi
and finally to the cell surface occurred within 180 minutes.
(b) Plot of the levels of VSVG-GFP in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), Golgi, and plasma membrane (PM) at different times after
shift to lower temperature. The kinetics of transport from one
organelle to another can be reconstructed from computer
analysis of these data. The decrease in total fluorescence that
occurs at later times probably results from slow degradation.
[From J. Lippincott-Schwartz et al., 2000, Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol.
16:557.]

17.1 • Techniques for Studying the Secretory Pathway
(a)

Trans

6

7

UDP

CMP

Exit

2

Medial

4 5

3

UDP

FPO
UDP

GDP

(GlcNAc)(Man)5(GlcNAc)2
(Man)5(GlcNAc)2

1

Cis
(Man)8(GlcNAc)2
(Man)5(GlcNAc)2

Golgi

Transport vesicle
from ER
= N-Acetylglucosamine
= Mannose
= Fucose

= Galactose
= N-Acetylneuraminic acid

▲ FIGURE 17-3 Processing of N-linked oligosaccharide
chains on glycoproteins within cis-, medial-, and trans-Golgi
cisternae in vertebrate cells. The enzymes catalyzing each step
are localized to the indicated compartments. After removal of
three mannose residues in the cis-Golgi (step 1 ), the protein
moves by cisternal progression to the medial-Golgi. Here, three
GlcNAc residues are added (steps 2 and 4 ), two more mannose
residues are removed (step 3 ), and a single fucose is added
(step 5 ). Processing is completed in the trans-Golgi by addition
of three galactose residues (step 6 ) and finally by linkage of an
N-acetylneuraminic acid residue to each of the galactose residues
(step 7 ). Specific transferase enzymes add sugars to the
oligosaccharide, one at a time, from sugar nucleotide precursors
imported from the cytosol. This pathway represents the Golgi
processing events for a typical mammalian glycoprotein. Variations
in the structure of N-linked oligosaccharides can result from
differences in processing steps in the Golgi. [See R. Kornfeld and
S. Kornfeld, 1985, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 45:631.]

(Figure 17-4). This conversion of VSV G protein from an endoglycosidase D–resistant form to an endoglycosidase
D–sensitive form corresponds to vesicular transport of the
protein from the ER to the cis-Golgi. Note that transport of
VSV G protein from the ER to the Golgi takes about 30 minutes as measured by either the assay based on oligosaccharide processing or fluorescence microscopy of VSVG-GFP.

Fraction of total G protein sensitive
to endaglycosidase D

(b)
1.0
0.8

Time 40°
(min) 32°

− − − − − − − −
0 5 10 15 20 30 45 60

Resistant
Sensitive

FPO

5

FPO
32°

0.6
0.4
0.2

40°
0

10

20

30
40
Time (min)

50

60

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-4 Transport of a membrane
glycoprotein from the ER to the Golgi can be assayed based
on sensititivity to cleavage by endoglycosidase D. Cells
expressing a temperature-sensitive VSV G protein (VSVG) were
labeled with a pulse of radioactive amino acids at the
nonpermissive temperature so that labeled protein was retained
in the ER. At periodic times after a return to the permissive
temperature of 32 C, VSVG was extracted from cells and
digested with endoglycosidase D, which cleaves the
oligosaccharide chains from proteins processed in the cis-Golgi
but not from proteins in the ER. (a) SDS gel electrophoresis of
the digestion mixtures resolves the resistant, uncleaved (slower
migrating) and sensitive, cleaved (faster migrating) forms of
labeled VSVG. As this electrophoretogram shows, initially all of
the VSVG was resistant to digestion, but with time an increasing
fraction is sensitive to digestion, reflecting protein transported
from the ER to the Golgi and processed there. In control cells
kept at 40 C, only slow-moving, digestion-resistant VSVG was
detected after 60 minutes (not shown). (b) Plot of the proportion
of VSVG that is sensitive to digestion, derived from
electrophoretic data, reveals the time course of ER → Golgi
transport. [From C. J. Beckers et al., 1987, Cell 50:523.]

Yeast Mutants Define Major Stages and Many
Components in Vesicular Transport
The general organization of the secretory pathway and many
of the molecular components required for vesicle trafficking
are similar in all eukaryotic cells. Because of this conservation, genetic studies with yeast have been useful in confirming
the sequence of steps in the secretory pathway and in identifying many of the proteins that participate in vesicular traffic.
Although yeasts secrete few proteins into the growth medium,
they continuously secrete a number of enzymes that remain

6

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis
Class A

Class B

Class C

Class D

Class E

ER

Golgi

Fate of
secreted
proteins
Defective
function

Normal
secretion

FPO

Accumulation
in the cytosol

Accumulation
in rough ER

Accumulation
in ER-to-Golgi
transport vesicles

Accumulation
in Golgi

Accumulation
in secretory
vesicles

Transport
into the ER

Budding of
vesicles from
the rough ER

Fusion of
transport vesicles
with Golgi

Transport from
Golgi to secretory
vesicles

Transport from
secretory vesicles
to cell surface

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-5 Phenotypes of yeast sec
mutants identified stages in the secretory pathway. These
temperature-sensitive mutants can be grouped into five classes
based on the site where newly made secreted proteins (red
dots) accumulate when cells are shifted from the permissive

localized in the narrow space between the plasma membrane
and the cell wall. The best-studied of these, invertase, hydrolyzes the disaccharide sucrose to glucose and fructose.
A large number of yeast mutants initially were identified
based on their ability to secrete proteins at one temperature
and inability to do so at a higher, nonpermissive temperature.
When these temperature-sensitive secretion (sec) mutants are
transferred from the lower to the higher temperature, they
accumulate secreted proteins at the point in the pathway
blocked by the mutation. Analysis of such mutants identified
five classes (A–E) characterized by protein accumulation in
the cytosol, rough ER, small vesicles taking proteins from the
ER to the Golgi complex, Golgi cisternae, or constitutive secretory vesicles (Figure 17-5). Subsequent characterization of
sec mutants in the various classes has helped elucidate the
fundamental components and molecular mechanisms of vesicle trafficking that we discuss in later sections.
To determine the order of the steps in the pathway, researchers analyzed double sec mutants. For instance, when
yeast cells contain mutations in both class B and class D functions, proteins accumulate in the rough ER, not in the Golgi
cisternae. Since proteins accumulate at the earliest blocked
step, this finding shows that class B mutations must act at an
earlier point in the secretory pathway than class D mutations
do. These studies confirmed that as a secreted protein is synthesized and processed it moves sequentially from the cytosol
→ rough ER → ER-to-Golgi transport vesicles → Golgi cisternae → secretory vesicles and finally is exocytosed.

Cell-free Transport Assays Allow Dissection
of Individual Steps in Vesicular Transport
In vitro assays for intercompartmental transport are powerful complementary approaches to studies with yeast sec mu-

temperature to the higher nonpermissive one. Analysis of double
mutants permitted the sequential order of the steps to be
determined. [See P. Novick et al., 1981, Cell 25:461, and C. A. Kaiser
and R. Schekman, 1990, Cell 61:723.]

tants for identifying and analyzing the cellular components
responsible for vesicular trafficking. In one application of
this approach, cultured mutant cells lacking one of the enzymes that modify N-linked oligosaccharide chains in the
Golgi are infected with vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). For
example, if infected cells lack N-acetylglucosamine transferase I, they produce abundant amounts of VSV G protein
but cannot add N-acetylglucosamine residues to the
oligosaccharide chains in the medial-Golgi as wild-type cells
do (Figure 17-6a). When Golgi membranes isolated from
such mutant cells are mixed with Golgi membranes from
wild-type, uninfected cells, the addition of N-acetylglucosamine to VSV G protein is restored (Figure 17-6b). This
modification is the consequence of the retrograde vesicular
transport of N-acetylglucosamine transferase I from the
wild-type medial-Golgi to the cis-Golgi compartment from
virally infected mutant cells. Successful intercompartmental
transport in this cell-free system depends on requirements
that are typical of a normal physiological process including a
cytosolic extract, a source of chemical energy in the form of
ATP and GTP, and incubation at physiological temperatures.
In addition, under appropriate conditions a uniform population of the retrograde transport vesicles that move Nacetylglucosamine transferase I from the medial- to cis-Golgi
can be purified away from the donor wild-type Golgi membranes by centrifugation. By examining the proteins that are
enriched in these vesicles, scientists have been able to identify
many of the integral membrane proteins and peripheral vesicle coat proteins that are the structural components of this
type of vesicle. Moreover, fractionation of the cytosolic extract required for transport in cell-free reaction mixtures has
permitted isolation of the various proteins required for formation of transport vesicles and of proteins required for the
targeting and fusion of vesicles with appropriate acceptor

17.2 • Molecular Mechanisms of Vesicular Traffic
(a)

7

(b)

Cis-Golgi

G protein
VSV-infected wild-type cells

VSV-infected mutant cells
(no N -acetylglucosamine
transferase I)

Medial-Golgi

Trans-Golgi

N -Acetylglucosamine
transferase I reaction

Golgi isolated from wildtype, uninfected cells

FPO

G protein in Golgi from
infected mutant cells

Incubation

Addition of
N -acetylglucosamine
to G protein

= N -Acetylglucosamine
= Mannose

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-6 Protein transport from
one Golgi cisternae to another can be assayed in a cell-free
system. (a) A mutant line of cultured fibroblasts is essential in
this type of assay. In this example, the cells lack the enzyme
N-acetylglucosamine transferase I (step 2 in Figure 17-3). In
wild-type cells, this enzyme is localized to the medial-Golgi and
modifies N-linked oligosaccharides by the addition of one
N-acetylglucosamine. In VSV-infected wild-type cells, the
oligosaccharide on the viral G protein is modified to a typical
complex oligosaccharide, as shown in the trans-Golgi panel. In
infected mutant cells, however, the G protein reaches the cell
membranes. In vitro assays similar in general design to the
one shown in Figure 17-6 have been used to study various
transport steps in the secretory pathway.

= Galactose
= N -Acetylneuraminic acid

surface with a simpler high-mannose oligosaccharide containing
only two N-acetylglucosamine and five mannose residues. (b)
When Golgi cisternae isolated from infected mutant cells are
incubated with Golgi cisternae from normal, uninfected cells, the
VSV G protein produced in vitro contains the additional Nacetylglucosamine. This modification is carried out by transferase
enzyme that is moved by retrograde transport vesicles from the
wild-type medial-Golgi cisternae to the mutant cis-Golgi cisternae
in the reaction mixture. [See W. E. Balch et al., 1984, Cell 39:405 and
525; W. A. Braell et al., 1984, Cell 39:511; and J. E. Rothman and
T. Söllner, 1997, Science 276:1212.]

of temperature-sensitive sec mutants defective for the secretion of proteins at the nonpermissive temperature (see
Figure 17-5).
Cell-free assays for intercompartmental protein transport have allowed the biochemical dissection of individual
steps of the secretory pathway. Such in vitro reactions can
be used to produce pure transport vesicles and to test the
biochemical function of individual transport proteins.

■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 17.1
Techniques for Studying the Secretory Pathway
All assays for following the trafficking of proteins
through the secretory pathway in living cells require a way
to label a cohort of secretory proteins and a way to identify the compartments where labeled proteins subsequently
are located.

■

Pulse-labeling with radioactive amino acids can specifically label a cohort of newly made proteins in the ER. Alternatively, a temperature-sensitive mutant protein that is
retained in the ER at the nonpermissive temperature will
be released as a cohort for transport when cells are shifted
to the permissive temperature.

■

Transport of a fluorescently labeled protein along the secretory pathway can be observed by microscopy (see Figure 17-2). Transport of a radiolabeled protein commonly
is tracked by following compartment-specific covalent
modifications to the protein.

■

Many of the components required for intracellular protein trafficking have been identified in yeast by analysis

■

17.2 Molecular Mechanisms
of Vesicular Traffic
Small membrane-bounded vesicles that transport proteins
from one organelle to another are common elements in the
secretory and endocytic pathways (see Figure 17-1). These
vesicles bud from the membrane of a particular “parent”
(donor) organelle and fuse with the membrane of a particular “target” (destination) organelle. Although each step in
the secretory and endocytic pathways employs a different
type of vesicle, studies employing genetic and biochemical
techniques described in the previous section have revealed
that each of the different vesicular transport steps is simply
a variation on a common theme. In this section we explore
that common theme, the basic mechanisms underlying vesicle budding and fusion.

8

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis
(a) Coated vesicle budding
GTP-binding protein
v-SNARE
protein
Membrane
cargo
protein

Soluble
cargo
protein

Membrane
cargo-receptor
protein

Donor
membrane

FPO

Coat proteins

Assembly of a Protein Coat Drives Vesicle
Formation and Selection of Cargo Molecules
Three types of coated vesicles have been characterized, each
with a different type of protein coat and each formed by reversible polymerization of a distinct set of protein subunits
(Table 17-1). Each type of vesicle, named for its primary coat
proteins, transports cargo proteins from particular parent organelles to particular destination organelles:
COPII vesicles transport proteins from the rough ER to
the Golgi.

Cytosol

■

(b) Uncoated vesicle fusion

Cytosol

the vesicle membrane with cognate t-SNAREs in the target
membrane brings the membranes into close apposition, allowing the two bilayers to fuse (Figure 17-7b).

COPI vesicles mainly transport proteins in the retrograde direction between Golgi cisternae and from the cisGolgi back to the rough ER.

■

Target
membrane

Clathrin vesicles transport proteins from the plasma
membrane (cell surface) and the trans-Golgi network to
late endosomes.

■

t-SNARE
proteins

t-SNARE
complex

▲ FIGURE 17-7 Overview of vesicle budding and fusion
with a target membrane. (a) Budding is initiated by recruitment
of a small GTP-binding protein to a patch of donor membrane.
Complexes of coat proteins in the cytosol then bind to the
cytosolic domain of membrane cargo proteins, some of which
also act as receptors that bind soluble proteins in the lumen,
thereby recruiting luminal cargo proteins into the budding vesicle.
(b) After being released and shedding its coat, a vesicle fuses
with its target membrane in a process that involves interaction
of cognate SNARE proteins.
The budding of vesicles from their parent membrane is
driven by the polymerization of soluble protein complexes
onto the membrane to form a proteinaceous vesicle coat (Figure 17-7a). Interactions between the cytosolic portions of integral membrane proteins and the vesicle coat gather the
appropriate cargo proteins into the forming vesicle. Thus the
coat not only adds curvature to the membrane to form a vesicle but also acts as the filter to determine which proteins are
admitted into the vesicle.
The integral membrane proteins in a budding vesicle include v-SNAREs, which are crucial to eventual fusion of the
vesicle with the correct target membrane. Shortly after formation of a vesicle is completed, the coat is shed exposing
its v-SNARE proteins. The specific joining of v-SNAREs in

Researchers have not yet identified the coat proteins surrounding the vesicles that move proteins from the transGolgi to the plasma membrane during either constitutive or
regulated secretion.
The general scheme of vesicle budding shown in Figure
17-7a applies to all three known types of coated vesicles.
Experiments with isolated or artificial membranes and purified coat proteins have shown that polymerization of the
coat proteins onto the cytosolic face of the parent membrane is necessary to produce the high curvature of the

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-8 Vesicle buds can be
visualized during in vitro budding reactions. When purified
COPII coat components are incubated with isolated ER vesicles
or artificial phospholipid vesicles (liposomes), polymerization of
the coat proteins on the vesicle surface induces emergence of
highly curved buds. In this electron micrograph of an in vitro
budding reaction, note the distinct membrane coat (dark) present
on the vesicle buds. [From K. Matsuoka et al., 1988, Cell 93(2):263.]

17.2 • Molecular Mechanisms of Vesicular Traffic

9

TABLE 17-1 Coated Vesicles Involved in Protein Trafficking
Vesicle Type

Coat Proteins

Associated GTPase

Transport Step Mediated

COPII

Sec23/Sec24 and Sec13/Sec31
complexes, Sec16

Sar1

ER to cis-Golgi

COPI

Coatomers containing seven
different COP subunits

ARF

cis-Golgi to ER
Later to earlier Golgi cisternae

Clathrin and
adapter proteins*

Clathrin  AP1 complexes

ARF

trans-Golgi to endosome

Clathrin  GGA

ARF

trans-Golgi to endosome

Clathrin  AP2 complexes

ARF

Plasma membrane to endosome

AP3 complexes

ARF

Golgi to lysosome, melanosome,
or platelet vesicles

*

Each type of AP complex consists of four different subunits. It is not known whether the coat of AP3 vesicles contains clathrin.

membrane that is typical of a transport vesicle about 50 nm
in diameter. Electron micrographs of in vitro budding reactions often reveal structures that exhibit discrete regions of
the parent membrane bearing a dense coat accompanied by
the curvature characteristic of a completed vesicle (Figure
17-8). Such structures, usually called vesicle buds, appear to
be intermediates that are visible after the coat has begun to
polymerize but before the completed vesicle pinches off
from the parent membrane. The polymerized coat proteins
are thought to form some type of curved lattice that drives
the formation of a vesicle bud by adhering to the cytosolic
face of the membrane.

A Conserved Set of GTPase Switch Proteins
Controls Assembly of Different Vesicle Coats
Based on in vitro vesicle-budding reactions with isolated
membranes and purified coat proteins, scientists have determined the minimum set of coat components required to form
each of the three major types of vesicles. Although most of
the coat proteins differ considerably from one type of vesicle to another, the coats of all three vesicles contain a small
GTP-binding protein that acts as a regulatory subunit to control coat assembly (see Figure 17-7a). For both COPI and
clathrin vesicles, this GTP-binding protein is known as ARF.
A different but related GTP-binding protein known as Sar1
is present in the coat of COPII vesicles. Both ARF and Sar1
are monomeric proteins with an overall structure similar to
that of Ras, a key intracellular signal-transducing protein
(see Figure 14-20). ARF and Sar1 proteins, like Ras, belong
to the GTPase superfamily of switch proteins that cycle between inactive GDP-bound and active GTP-bound forms (see
Figure 3-29).
The cycle of GTP binding and hydrolysis by ARF and
Sar1 are thought to control the initiation of coat assembly

as schematically depicted for the assembly of COPII vesicles
in Figure 17-9. First, an ER membrane protein known as
Sec12 catalyzes release of GDP from cytosolic Sar1  GDP
and binding of GTP. The guanine nucleotide–exchange factor apparently receives and integrates multiple, as yet unknown signals, probably including the presence of cargo
proteins in the ER membrane that are ready to be transported. Binding of GTP causes a conformational change in
Sar1 that exposes its hydrophobic N-terminus, which then
becomes embedded in the phospholipid bilayer and tethers
Sar1  GTP to the ER membrane. The membrane-attached
Sar1  GTP drives polymerization of cytosolic complexes of
COPII subunits on the membrane, eventually leading to formation of vesicle buds. Once COPII vesicles are released
from the donor membrane, the Sar1 GTPase activity hydrolyzes Sar1  GTP in the vesicle membrane to Sar1  GDP
with the assistance of one of the coat subunits. This hydrolysis triggers disassembly of the COPII coat. Thus Sar1 couples a cycle of GTP binding and hydrolysis to the formation
and then dissociation of the COPII coat.
ARF protein undergoes a similar cycle of nucleotide exchange and hydrolysis coupled to the assembly of vesicle
coats composed either of COPI or of clathrin and other coat
proteins (AP complexes) discussed later. A myristate anchor
covalently attached to the N-terminus of ARF protein
weakly tethers ARF  GDP to the Golgi membrane. When
GTP is exchanged for the bound GDP by a nucleotideexchange factor attached to the Golgi membrane, the resulting conformational change in ARF allows hydrophobic
residues in its N-terminal segment to insert into the membrane bilayer. The resulting tight association of ARF  GTP
with the membrane serves as the foundation for further coat
assembly.
Drawing on the structural similarities of Sar1 and ARF
to other small GTPase switch proteins, researchers have

10
1

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis
Sar1 membrane binding,
GTP exchange
GDP

Cytosol

GTP

Hydrophobic
N-terminus

GDP

Sar1
GTP

Sec12

ER lumen

Sec23/Sec24

2

COPII coat
assembly

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-10 Coated vesicles

FPO
Pi

3

GTP hydrolysis
Pi
Pi

4

accumulate during in vitro budding reactions in the presence
of a nonhydrolyzable analog of GTP. When isolated Golgi
membranes are incubated with a cytosolic extract containing
COPI coat proteins and ATP, vesicles form and bud off from the
membranes. Inclusion of a nonhydrolyzable analog of GTP in the
budding reaction prevents disassembly of the coat after vesicle
release. This micrograph shows COPI vesicles generated in such
a reaction and separated from membranes by centrifugation.
Coated vesicles prepared in this way can be analyzed to
determine their components and properties. [Courtesy of L. Orci.]

Coat disassembly

Uncoated vesicle

▲ FIGURE 17-9 Model for the role of Sar1 in the assembly
and disassembly of COPII coats. Step 1 : Interaction of soluble
GDP-bound Sar1 with the exchange factor Sec12, an ER integral
membrane protein, catalyzes exchange of GTP for GDP on Sar1.
In the GTP-bound form of Sar1, its hydrophobic N-terminus
extends outward from the protein’s surface and anchors Sar1 to
the ER membrane. Step 2 : Sar1 attached to the membrane
serves as a binding site for the the Sec23/Sec24 coat protein
complex. Cargo proteins are recruited to the forming vesicle bud
by binding of specific short sequences (sorting signals) in their
cytosolic regions to sites on the Sec23/Sec24 complex. The coat
is completed by assembly of a second type of coat complex
composed of Sec13/and Sec31 (not shown). Step 3 : After the
vesicle coat is complete, the Sec23 coat subunit promotes GTP
hydrolysis by Sar1. Step 4 : Release of Sar1 · GDP from the
vesicle membrane causes disassembly of the coat. [See
S. Springer et al., 1999, Cell 97:145.]

constructed genes encoding mutant versions of the two proteins that have predictable effects on vesicular traffic when
transfected into cultured cells. For example, in cells expressing mutant versions of Sar1 or ARF that cannot hydrolyze
GTP, vesicle coats form and vesicle buds pinch off. However,
because the mutant proteins cannot trigger disassembly of
the coat, all available coat subunits eventually become permanently assembled into coated vesicles that are unable to
fuse with target membranes. Addition of a nonhydrolyzable
GTP analog to in vitro vesicle-budding reactions causes a
similar blocking of coat disassembly. The vesicles that form
in such reactions have coats that never dissociate, allowing
their composition and structure to be more readily analyzed.
The purified COPI vesicles shown in Figure 17-10 were produced in such a budding reaction.

Targeting Sequences on Cargo Proteins Make
Specific Molecular Contacts with Coat Proteins
In order for transport vesicles to move specific proteins from
one compartment to the next, vesicle buds must be able to
discriminate among potential membrane and soluble cargo
proteins, accepting only those cargo proteins that should advance to the next compartment and excluding those that
should remain as residents in the donor compartment. In addition to sculpting the curvature of a donor membrane, the
vesicle coat also functions in selecting specific proteins as
cargo. The primary mechanism by which the vesicle coat
selects cargo molecules is by directly binding to specific

17.2 • Molecular Mechanisms of Vesicular Traffic

11

TABLE 17-2 Known Sorting Signals That Direct Proteins to Specific Transport Vesicles
Signal Sequence*

Proteins with Signal

Signal Receptor

Vesicles That Incorporate
Signal-bearing Protein

Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu
(KDEL)

ER-resident luminal proteins

KDEL receptor in
cis-Golgi membrane

COPI

Lys-Lys-X-X
(KKXX)

ER-resident membrane
proteins (cytosolic domain)

COPI  and  subunits

COPI

Di-acidic
(e.g., Asp-X-Glu)

Cargo membrane proteins in
ER (cytosolic domain)

Sec23/Sec24

COPII

Mannose 6-phosphate
(M6P)

Soluble lysosomal enzymes
after processing in cis-Golgi

M6P receptor in transGolgi membrane

Clathrin/AP1

Secreted lysosomal enzymes

M6P receptor in plasma
membrane

Clathrin/AP2

Asn-Pro-X-Tyr
(NPXY)

LDL receptor in the plasma
membrane (cytosolic domain)

AP2 complex

Clathrin/AP2

Tyr-X-X-
(YXX)

Membrane proteins in transGolgi (cytosolic domain)

AP1 (1 subunit)

Clathrin/AP1

Plasma membrane proteins
(cytosolic domain)

AP2 (2 subunit)

Clathrin/AP2

Plasma membrane proteins
(cytosolic domain)

AP2 complexes

Clathrin/AP2

Leu-Leu
(LL)

X  any amino acid;   hydrophobic amino acid. Single-letter amino acid abbreviations are in parentheses.

*

sequences, or sorting signals, in the cytosolic portion of
membrane cargo proteins (see Figure 17-7a). The polymerized coat thus acts as an affinity matrix to cluster selected
membrane cargo proteins into forming vesicle buds. Soluble
proteins within the lumen of parent organelles can in turn
be selected by binding to the luminal domains of certain
membrane cargo proteins, which act as receptors for luminal
cargo proteins. The properties of several known sorting signals in membrane and soluble proteins are summarized in
Table 17-2. We describe the role of these signals in more detail in later sections.

Rab GTPases Control Docking of Vesicles
on Target Membranes
A second set of small GTP-binding proteins, known as Rab
proteins, participate in the targeting of vesicles to the appropriate target membrane. Like Sar1 and ARF, Rab proteins
belong to the GTPase superfamily of switch proteins. Conversion of cytosolic Rab  GDP to Rab  GTP, catalyzed by
a specific guanine nucleotide – exchange factor, induces a
conformational change in Rab that enables it to interact with
a surface protein on a particular transport vesicle and insert
its isoprenoid anchor into the vesicle membrane. Once

Rab  GTP is tethered to the vesicle surface, it is thought to
interact with one of a number of different large proteins,
known as Rab effectors, attached to the target membrane.
Binding of Rab  GTP to a Rab effector docks the vesicle on
an appropriate target membrane (Figure 17-11, step 1 ).
After vesicle fusion occurs, the GTP bound to the Rab protein is hydrolyzed to GDP, triggering the release of Rab 
GDP, which then can undergo another cycle of GDP-GTP
exchange, binding, and hydrolysis.
Several lines of evidence support the involvement of specific Rab proteins in vesicle-fusion events. For instance, the
yeast SEC4 gene encodes a Rab protein, and yeast cells expressing mutant Sec4 proteins accumulate secretory vesicles
that are unable to fuse with the plasma membrane (class E
mutants in Figure 17-5). In mammalian cells, Rab5 protein is
localized to endocytic vesicles, also known as early endosomes. These uncoated vesicles form from clathrin-coated
vesicles just after they bud from the plasma membrane during endocytosis (see Figure 17-1, step 9 ). The fusion of early
endosomes with each other in cell-free systems requires the
presence of Rab5, and addition of Rab5 and GTP to cell-free
extracts accelerates the rate at which these vesicles fuse with
each other. A long coiled protein known as EEA1 (early
endosome antigen 1), which resides on the membrane of the

12

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

early endosome, functions as the effector for Rab5. In this
case, Rab5  GTP on one endocytic vesicle is thought to
specifically bind to EEA1 on the membrane of another endocytic vesicle, setting the stage for fusion of the two vesicles.
Similarly, Rab1 is essential for ER-to-Golgi transport reactions to occur in cell-free extracts. Rab1  GTP binds to a

Transport
vesicle

long coiled-coil protein known as p115, which specifically
tethers COPII vesicles carrying Rab1 GTP to the target
Golgi membrane. A different type of Rab effector appears
to function for each vesicle type and at each step of the secretory pathway. Many questions remain about how specific
complexes form between the different Rab proteins and their
corresponding effector proteins.

Paired Sets of SNARE Proteins Mediate Fusion
of Vesicles with Target Membranes
VAMP

Vesicle docking

Rab • GTP

1

Syntaxin
SNAP-25

Target
membrane
Assembly of
SNARE complexes

Rab effector
2

FPO

As noted previously, shortly after a vesicle buds off from the
donor membrane, the vesicle coat disassembles to uncover a
vesicle-specific membrane protein, a v-SNARE (see Figure
17-7b). Likewise, each type of target membrane in a cell contains t-SNARE membrane proteins. After Rab-mediated
docking of a vesicle on its target (destination) membrane, the
interaction of cognate SNAREs brings the two membranes
close enough together that they can fuse.
One of the best-understood examples of SNARE-mediated
fusion occurs during exocytosis of secreted proteins (Figure
17-11, steps 2 and 3 ). In this case, the v-SNARE, known as
VAMP (vesicle-associated membrane protein), is incorporated
into secretory vesicles as they bud from the trans-Golgi
network. The t-SNAREs are syntaxin, an integral membrane
protein in the plasma membrane, and SNAP-25, which is
attached to the plasma membrane by a hydrophobic lipid
anchor in the middle of the protein. The cytosolic region in
each of these three SNARE proteins contains a repeating heptad sequence that allows four  helices—one from VAMP, one
from syntaxin, and two from SNAP-25—to coil around one

SNARE
complex

 FIGURE 17-11 Model for docking and fusion of transport

VAMP
Syntaxin

SNAP-25

Membrane fusion

3

NSF
α-SNAP

Disassembly of
SNARE complexes

ATP
ADP + Pi
4

vesicles with their target membranes. The proteins shown in
this example participate in fusion of secretory vesicles with the
plasma membrane, but similar proteins mediate all vesicle-fusion
events. Step 1 : A Rab protein tethered via a lipid anchor to a
secretory vesicle binds to an effector protein complex on the
plasma membrane, thereby docking the transport vesicle on the
appropriate target membrane. Step 2 : A v-SNARE protein (in this
case, VAMP) interacts with the cytosolic domains of the cognate
t-SNAREs (in this case, syntaxin and SNAP-25). The very stable
coiled-coil SNARE complexes that are formed hold the vesicle
close to the target membrane. Inset: Numerous noncovalent
interactions between four long  helices, two from SNAP-25
and one each from syntaxin and VAMP, stabilize the coiled-coil
structure. Step 3 : Fusion of the two membranes immediately
follows formation of SNARE complexes, but precisely how this
occurs is not known. Step 4 : Following membrane fusion,
NSF in conjunction with -SNAP protein binds to the SNARE
complexes. The NSF-catalyzed hydrolysis of ATP then drives
dissociation of the SNARE complexes, freeing the SNARE
proteins for another round of vesicle fusion. [See J. E. Rothman
and T. Söllner, 1997, Science 276:1212, and W. Weis and R. Scheller,
1998, Nature 395:328. Inset from Y. A. Chen and R. H. Scheller, 2001,
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2(2):98.]

17.2 • Molecular Mechanisms of Vesicular Traffic

another to form a four-helix bundle. The unusual stability of
this bundled SNARE complex is conferred by the arrangement
of hydrophobic and charged amino residues in the heptad
repeats. The hydrophobic amino acids are buried in the central
core of the bundle, and amino acids of opposite charge are
aligned to form favorable electrostatic interactions between
helices. As the four-helix bundles form, the vesicle and target
membranes are drawn into close apposition by the embedded
transmembrane domains of VAMP and syntaxin.
In vitro experiments have shown that when liposomes
containing purified VAMP are incubated with other liposomes containing syntaxin and SNAP-25, the two classes of
membranes fuse, albeit slowly. This finding is strong evidence that the close apposition of membranes resulting from
formation of SNARE complexes is sufficient to bring about
membrane fusion. Fusion of a vesicle and target membrane
occurs much more rapidly and efficiently in the cell than it
does in liposome experiments in which fusion is catalyzed
only by SNARE proteins. The likely explanation for this difference is that in the cell the interactions between specific
Rab proteins and their effectors promote the formation of
specific SNARE bundles by tethering a vesicle to its target
membrane.
Yeast cells, like all eukaryotic cells, express more than
20 different related v-SNARE and t-SNARE proteins. Analyses of yeast sec mutants defective in each of the SNARE
genes have identified the specific membrane-fusion event in
which each SNARE protein participates. For all fusion events
that have been examined, the SNAREs form four-helix bundled complexes, similar to the VAMP/syntaxin/SNAP-25
complexes that mediate fusion of secretory vesicles with the
plasma membrane. However, in other fusion events (e.g.,
fusion of COPII vesicles with the cis-Golgi network), each
participating SNARE protein contributes only one  helix
to the bundle (unlike SNAP-25, which contributes two
helices); in these cases the SNARE complexes comprise one
v-SNARE and three t-SNARE molecules.
Using the in vitro liposome fusion assay, researchers have
tested the ability of various combinations of individual
v-SNARE and t-SNARE proteins to mediate fusion of donor
and target membranes. Of the very large number of different
combinations tested, only a small number mediated membrane fusion. To a remarkable degree the functional combinations of v-SNAREs and t-SNAREs revealed in these in vitro
experiments correspond to the actual SNARE protein interactions that mediate known membrane-fusion events in the
yeast cell. Thus the specificity of the interaction between
SNARE proteins can account for the specificity of fusion between a particular vesicle and its target membranes.

Dissociation of SNARE Complexes After
Membrane Fusion Is Driven by ATP Hydrolysis
After a vesicle and its target membrane have fused, the
SNARE complexes must dissociate to make the individual
SNARE proteins available for additional fusion events. Be-

13

cause of the stability of SNARE complexes, which are held
together by numerous noncovalent intermolecular interactions, their dissociation depends on additional proteins and
the input of energy.
The first clue that dissociation of SNARE complexes required the assistance of other proteins came from in vitro
transport reactions depleted of certain cytosolic proteins.
The observed accumulation of vesicles in these reactions indicated that vesicles could form but were unable to fuse with
a target membrane. Eventually two proteins, designated NSF
and -SNAP, were found to be required for ongoing vesicle
fusion in the in vitro transport reaction. The function of NSF
in vivo can be blocked selectively by N-ethylmaleimide
(NEM), a chemical that reacts with an essential –SH group
on NSF (hence the name, NEM-sensitive factor).
Among the class C yeast sec mutants are strains that lack
functional Sec18 or Sec17, the yeast counterparts of mammalian NSF and -SNAP, respectively. When these class C
mutants are placed at the nonpermissive temperature, they
accumulate ER-to-Golgi transport vesicles; when the cells are
shifted to the lower, permissive temperature, the accumulated vesicles are able to fuse with the cis-Golgi.
Subsequent to the initial biochemical and genetic studies
identifying NSF and -SNAP, more sophisticated in vitro
transport assays were developed. Using these newer assays,
researchers have shown that NSF and -SNAP proteins are
not necessary for actual membrane fusion, but rather are required for regeneration of free SNARE proteins. NSF, a
hexamer of identical subunits, associates with a SNARE
complex with the aid -SNAP (soluble NSF attachment protein). The bound NSF then hydrolyzes ATP, releasing sufficient energy to dissociate the SNARE complex (Figure 17-11,
step 4 ). Evidently, the defects in vesicle fusion observed in
the earlier in vitro fusion assays and in the yeast mutants
after a loss of Sec17 or Sec18 were a consequence of free
SNARE proteins rapidly becoming sequestered in undissociated SNARE complexes and thus unavailable to mediate
membrane fusion.

Conformational Changes in Viral Envelope
Proteins Trigger Membrane Fusion
Some animal viruses, including influenza virus, rabies virus,
and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), have an outer
phospholipid bilayer membrane, or envelope, surrounding
the core of the virus particle composed of viral proteins and
genetic material. The viral envelope is derived by budding
from the host-cell plasma membrane, which contains virusencoded glycoproteins. Enveloped viruses enter a host cell by
endocytosis following binding of one or more viral envelope
glycoproteins with a host’s cell-surface molecules. Subsequent
fusion of the viral envelope with the endosomal membrane releases the viral genome into the cytosol of the host cell, initiating replication of the virus (see Figure 4-41, step 3 ). The
molecular events of this fusion process have been elucidated
in considerable detail in the case of influenza virus.

14

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis
(b) pH 5.0–5.5

(a) pH 7.0

Cell-surface membrane

Sialic
acid
Fusion
peptide

Endosomal
membrane

FPO

Disulfide
bond
Viral envelope

▲ FIGURE 17-12 Schematic models of the structure
of influenza hemagglutinin (HA) at pH 7 and 5. Three HA1 and
three HA2 subunits compose a hemagglutinin molecule, which
protrudes from the viral envelope like a spike. (a) At pH ≈7, part
of each HA1 subunit forms a globular domain (green) at the tip of
the native spike. These domains bind to sialic acid residues on
the host-cell plasma membrane, initiating viral entry. Each HA1
subunit is linked to one HA2 subunit by a disulfide bond at the
base of the molecule near the viral envelope. Each HA2 subunit
contains a fusion peptide (red) at its N-terminus (only two are
visible), followed by a short  helix (orange cylinder), a nonhelical
loop (brown), and a longer  helix (light purple). The longer 
helices from the three HA2 subunits form a three-stranded
coiled-coil structure (see Figure 3-7). In this conformation, the
fusion peptides are buried within the molecule. (b) At the acidic
pH within a late endosome, the binding of the fusion peptide to
other segments of HA2 is disrupted, inducing major structural
rearrangements in the protein. First, the three HA1 globular
domains separate from each other but remain tethered to the
HA2 subunits by the disulfide bonds at the base of the molecule.
Second, the loop segment of each HA2 rearranges into an  helix
(brown) and combines with the short and long -helical
segments to form a continuous 88-residue  helix. The three
long  helices thus form a 13.5-nm-long three-stranded coiled
coil that protrudes outward from the viral envelope. In this
conformation, the fusion peptides are at the tip of the coiled coil
and can insert into the endosomal membrane. [Adapted from C. M.

peptide. Structural studies have shown that at pH 7.0, the Nterminus of each HA2 subunit is tucked into a crevice in the
spike (Figure 17-12a). This is the normal HA conformation
when a viral particle encounters the surface of a host cell. At
the acidic pH characteristic of late endosomes, HA undergoes
several conformational changes that cause a major rearrangement of the subunits. As a result, the three HA2 subunits twist
together into a three-stranded coiled-coil rod that protrudes
more than 13 nm outward from the viral envelope with the
fusion peptides at the tip of the rod (Figure 17-12b). In this
conformation, the highly hydrophobic fusion peptides are exposed and can insert into the lipid bilayer of the endosomal
membrane, triggering fusion of the viral envelope and the
membrane. Thus at pH 7 HA can be said to be trapped in a
metastable, “spring-loaded” state, which is converted to the
lower-energy fusogenic state by shifting the pH to 5–5.5.
Multiple low pH–activated HA spikes are essential for membrane fusion to occur. Figure 17-13 suggests one way by which
the protein scaffold formed by many HA spikes, possibly with
the assistance of other cellular proteins, could link together the
Endosomal membrane

Viral envelope
Activated
HA proteins

FPO

Cystolic
leaflet

Exoplasmic
leaflet

Carr et al., 1997, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. 94:14306; courtesy of Peter Kim.]

The predominant glycoprotein of the influenza virus is
hemagglutinin (HA), which forms the larger spikes on the surface of the virus. There is considerable evidence that following
endocytosis of an influenza virion, the low pH within the enclosing late endosome triggers fusion of its membrane with the
viral envelope. For instance, viral infection is inhibited by the
addition of lipid-soluble bases, such as ammonia or trimethylamine, which raise the normally acidic pH of late endosomes.
Also, a conformational change in the HA protein that is critical
for infectivity occurs over a very narrow range in pH (5.0–5.5).
Each HA spike on an influenza virion consists of three
HA1 and three HA2 subunits. At the N-terminus of HA2 is a
strongly hydrophobic 11-residue sequence, called the fusion

Fused membranes

▲ FIGURE 17-13 Model for membrane fusion directed by
hemagglutinin (HA). A number of low pH–activated HA spikes,
possibly in concert with host-cell membrane proteins, form a
scaffold that connects a small region of the viral envelope and
the endosomal membrane. By unknown mechanisms, the
exoplasmic leaflets of the two membranes fuse and then the
cytosolic leaflets, forming a fusion pore that widens until
complete fusion of the two membranes is achieved. A similar
interaction between membrane bilayers may be brought about
during SNARE-mediated vesicle fusion. [Adapted from J. R. Monck
and J. M. Fernandez, 1992, J. Cell Biol. 119:1395.]

17.3 • Early Stages of the Secretory Pathway

viral envelope and endosomal membrane and induce their fusion. This figure also illustrates how cellular membranes
brought into close apposition by SNARE complexes might fuse.
Note that each HA molecule participates in only one fusion
event, whereas the cellular fusion proteins, such as SNAREs, are
recycled and catalyze multiple cycles of membrane fusion.

15

and some of the evidence supporting the general mechanisms
discussed in the previous section. Recall that anterograde
transport from the ER to Golgi, the first step in the secretory pathway, is mediated by COPII vesicles, whereas the reverse retrograde transport from the cis-Golgi to the ER is
mediated by COPI vesicles (Figure 17-14). This retrograde

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 17.2
Cis Golgi
network

Molecular Mechanisms of Vesicular Traffic
The three well-characterized transport vesicles—COPI,
COPII, and clathrin vesicles—are distinguished by the proteins that form their coats and the transport routes they
mediate (see Table 17-1).

■

All types of coated vesicles are formed by polymerization of cytosolic coat proteins onto a donor (parent) membrane to form vesicle buds that eventually pinch off from
the membrane to release a complete vesicle. Shortly after
vesicle release, the coat is shed exposing proteins required
for fusion with the target membrane (see Figure 17-7).

SNARE pair
3

■

Small GTP-binding proteins (ARF or Sar1) belonging to
the GTPase superfamily control polymerization of coat proteins, the initial step in vesicle budding (see Figure 17-9).
After vesicles are released from the donor membrane, hydrolysis of GTP bound to ARF or Sar1 triggers disassembly of the vesicle coats.

2

COPII
vesicle

FPO

4

COPI
vesicle

■

Specific sorting signals in membrane and luminal proteins of donor organelles interact with coat proteins during vesicle budding, thereby recruiting cargo proteins to
vesicles (see Table 17-2).

Coat
protein

SNARE
protein

■

A second set of GTP-binding proteins, the Rab proteins,
regulate docking of vesicles with the correct target membrane.
Each Rab appears to bind to a specific Rab effector, a long
coiled-coil protein, associated with the target membrane.

■

Each v-SNARE in a vesicular membrane specifically
binds to a complex of cognate t-SNARE proteins in the
target membrane, inducing fusion of the two membranes.
After fusion is completed, the SNARE complex is disassembled in an ATP-dependent reaction mediated by other
cytosolic proteins (see Figure 17-11).

■

After an enveloped animal virus is endocytosed, the viral
envelope fuses with the surrounding endosomal membrane.
In the case of influenza virus, the acidic pH within late endosomes causes a conformational change in the HA protein in the viral envelope that permits insertion of HA into
the endosomal membrane.

■

17.3 Early Stages of
the Secretory Pathway
In this section we take a closer look at vesicular traffic
through the ER and Golgi stages of the secretory pathway

5

1

6
SNARE pair

Rough
ER

Soluble
cargo

Membrane receptor

Membrane
cargo

▲ FIGURE 17-14 Vesicle-mediated protein trafficking
between the ER and cis-Golgi. Steps 1 – 3 : Forward
(anterograde) transport is mediated by COPII vesicles, which are
formed by polymerization of soluble COPII coat protein
complexes (blue) on the ER membrane. v-SNAREs (red) and
other cargo proteins (green) in the ER membrane are
incorporated into the vesicle by interacting with coat proteins.
Soluble cargo proteins (COLOR) are recruited by binding to
appropriate receptors in the membrane of budding vesicles.
Dissociation of the coat recycles free coat complexes and
exposes v-SNARE proteins on the vesicle surface. After the
uncoated vesicle becomes tethered to the cis-Golgi membrane in
a Rab-mediated process, pairing between the exposed v-SNAREs
and cognate t-SNAREs in the Golgi membrane allow vesicle
fusion, releasing the contents into the cis-Golgi compartment
(see Figure 17-11). Steps 4 – 6 : Reverse (retrograde) transport,
mediated by vesicles coated with COPI proteins (green), recycles
the membrane bilayer and certain proteins, such as v-SNAREs
and missorted ER-resident proteins (not shown), from the cisGolgi to the ER. All SNARE proteins are shown in red although
each v-SNARE and t-SNARE are distinct proteins.

16

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

vesicle transport serves to retrieve v-SNARE proteins and the
membrane itself back to the ER to provide the necessary material for additional rounds of vesicle budding from the ER.
COPI-mediated retrograde transport also retrieves missorted
ER-resident proteins from the cis-Golgi to correct sorting
mistakes. Proteins that have been correctly delivered to the
Golgi advance through successive compartments of the Golgi
by cisternal progression.

COPII Vesicles Mediate Transport from the ER
to the Golgi
COPII vesicles were first recognized when cell-free extracts
of yeast rough ER membranes were incubated with cytosol,
ATP, and a nonhydrolyzable analog of GTP. The vesicles that
formed from the ER membranes had a distinct coat, similar
to that on COPI vesicles but composed of different proteins,
designated COPII proteins. Yeast cells with mutations in the
genes for COPII proteins are class B sec mutants and accumulate proteins in the rough ER (see Figure 17-5). Analysis
of such mutants has revealed several proteins required for
formation of COPII vesicles.
As described previously, formation of COPII vesicles is
triggered when Sec12, a guanine nucleotide – exchange factor, catalyzes the exchange of bound GDP for GTP on Sar1.
This exchange induces binding of Sar1 to the ER membrane
followed by binding of a complex of Sec23 and Sec24 proteins (see Figure 17-9). The resulting ternary complex formed
between Sar1 GTP, Sec23, and Sec24 is shown in Figure
17-15. After this complex forms on the ER membrane, a second complex comprising Sec13 and Sec31 proteins then
binds to complete the coat structure. A large fibrous protein,
called Sec16, which is bound to the cytosolic surface of the
ER, interacts with the Sec13/31 and Sec23/24 complexes,
and acts to organize the other coat proteins, increasing the
efficiency of coat polymerization.
Certain integral ER membrane proteins are specifically
recruited into COPII vesicles for transport to the Golgi. The
cytosolic segments of many of these proteins contain a
di-acidic sorting signal (Asp-X-Glu, or DXE in the oneletter code). This sorting signal binds to the Sec24 subunit
of the COPII coat and is essential for the selective export of
certain membrane proteins from the ER (see Figure 17-15).
Biochemical and genetic studies currently are under way to
identify additional signals that help direct membrane cargo
proteins into COPII vesicles. Other ongoing studies seek to
determine how soluble cargo proteins are selectively loaded
into COPII vesicles. Although purified COPII vesicles from
yeast cells have been found to contain a membrane protein
that binds the soluble  mating factor, the receptors for other
soluble cargo proteins such as invertase are not yet known.
The experiments described previously in which the transit of VSVG-GFP in cultured mammalian cells is followed
by fluorescence microscopy (see Figure 17-2) provided insight into the intermediates in ER-to-Golgi transport. In
some cells, small fluorescent vesicles containing VSVG-GFP
could be seen to form from the ER, move less than 1 m, and

Sec23
Sar1

Sec24

Vesicle
membrane

FPO

▲ FIGURE 17-15 Three-dimensional structure of ternary
complex comprising the COPII coat proteins Sec23 and
Sec24 and Sar1 · GTP. Early in the formation of the COPII coat,
Sec23 (orange)/Sec24 (green) complexes are recruited to the ER
membrane by Sar1 (red) in its GTP-bound state. In order to form
a stable ternary complex in solution for structural studies, the
nonhydrolyzable GTP analog GppNHp was used. A cargo protein
in the ER membrane can be recruited to COPII vesicles by
interaction of a tripeptide di-acidic signal (purple) in the cargo’s
cytosolic domain with Sec24. The likely position of the COPII
vesicle membrane and the transmembrane segment of the cargo
protein are indicated. The N-terminal segment of Sar1 that
tethers it to the membrane is not shown. [See X. Bi et al., 2002,
Nature 419:271; interaction with peptide courtesy of J. Goldberg.]

then fuse directly with the cis-Golgi. In other cells, in which
the ER was located several micrometers from the Golgi complex, several ER-derived vesicles were seen to fuse with each
other shortly after their formation, forming what is termed
the “ER-to-Golgi intermediate compartment.” These larger
structures then were transported along microtubules to the
cis-Golgi, much in the way vesicles in nerve cells are transported from the cell body, where they are formed, down the
long axon to the axon terminus (Chapter 20). Microtubules
function much as “railroad tracks” enabling these large aggregates of transport vesicles to move long distances to their
cis-Golgi destination. At the time the ER-to-Golgi intermediate compartment is formed, some COPI vesicles bud off from
it, recycling some proteins back to the ER.

COPI Vesicles Mediate Retrograde Transport
within the Golgi and from the Golgi to the ER
COPI vesicles were first discovered when isolated Golgi fractions were incubated in a solution containing ATP, cytosol, and
a nonhydrolyzable analog of GTP (see Figure 17-10). Subsequent analysis of these vesicles showed that the coat is formed
from large cytosolic complexes, called coatomers, composed of
seven polypeptide subunits. Yeast cells containing temperaturesensitive mutations in COPI proteins accumulate proteins in the

17.3 • Early Stages of the Secretory Pathway

rough ER at the nonpermissive temperature and thus are categorized as class B sec mutants (see Figure 17-5). Although discovery of these mutants initially suggested that COPI vesicles
mediate ER-to-Golgi transport, subsequent experiments
showed that their main function is retrograde transport, both
between Golgi cisternae and from the cis-Golgi to the rough ER
(see Figure 17-14, right). Because COPI mutants cannot recycle
membranes back to the rough ER, the ER gradually becomes
depleted of ER membrane proteins (e.g., v-SNAREs) necessary
for COPII vesicle function. Eventually vesicle formation from
the rough ER grinds to a halt; secretory proteins continue to
be synthesized but accumulate in the ER, the defining characteristic of class B sec mutants.
As discussed in Chapter 16, the ER contains several soluble proteins dedicated to the folding and modification of
newly synthesized secretory proteins. These include the chaperone BiP and the enzyme protein disulfide isomerase, which
are necessary for the ER to carry out its functions. Although
such ER-resident luminal proteins are not specifically selected
by COPII vesicles, their sheer abundance causes them to be
continuously loaded passively into vesicles destined for the cisGolgi. The transport of these soluble proteins back to the ER,
mediated by COPI vesicles, prevents their eventual depletion
Most soluble ER-resident proteins carry a Lys-Asp-GluLeu (KDEL in the one-letter code) sequence at their Cterminus (see Table 17-2). Several experiments demonstrated
that this KDEL sorting signal is both necessary and sufficient
for retention in the ER. For instance, when a mutant protein
disulfide isomerase lacking these four residues is synthesized
in cultured fibroblasts, the protein is secreted. Moreover, if
a protein that normally is secreted is altered so that it contains the KDEL signal at its C-terminus, the protein is retained in the ER. The KDEL sorting signal is recognized and
bound by the KDEL receptor, a transmembrane protein
found primarily on small transport vesicles shuttling between
the ER and the cis-Golgi and on the cis-Golgi reticulum. In
addition, soluble ER-resident proteins that carry the KDEL
signal have oligosaccharide chains with modifications that
are catalyzed by enzymes found only in the cis-Golgi or cisGolgi reticulum; thus at some time these proteins must have
left the ER and been transported at least as far as the cisGolgi network. These findings indicate that the KDEL receptor acts mainly to retrieve soluble proteins containing the
KDEL sorting signal that have escaped to the cis-Golgi network and return them to the ER (Figure 17-16).
The KDEL receptor and other membrane proteins that
are transported back to the ER from the Golgi contain a LysLys-X-X sequence at the very end of their C-terminal segment, which faces the cytosol (see Table 17-2). This KKXX
sorting signal which binds to a complex of the COPI  and
 subunits, is both necessary and sufficient to incorporate
membrane proteins into COPI vesicles for retrograde transport to the ER. Temperature-sensitive yeast mutants lacking
COPI or COPI not only are unable to bind the KKXX signal but also are unable to retrieve proteins bearing this signal
back to the ER, indicating that COPI vesicles mediate retrograde Golgi-to-ER transport.

17

Clearly, the partitioning of proteins between the ER and
Golgi complex is a highly selective and regulated process ultimately controlled by the specificity of cargo loading into
both COPII (anterograde) and COPI (retrograde) vesicles.
The selective entry of proteins into membrane-bounded
transport vesicles, the recycling of membrane phospholipids
and proteins, and the recycling of soluble luminal proteins
between the two compartments are fundamental features of
vesicular protein trafficking that also occur in later stages of
the secretory pathway.

Missorted
ER-resident
protein

Cis -Golgi
network

2

KDEL
receptor
COPI coat

ER-to-Golgi
transport
vesicle

3

FPO
1

Retrieval
of KDELbearing
proteins
to ER

COPII coat
4

Rough
ER

▲ FIGURE 17-16 Role of the KDEL receptor in retrieval of
ER-resident luminal proteins from the Golgi. ER luminal
proteins, especially those present at high levels, can be passively
incorporated into COPII vesicles and transported to the Golgi
(steps 1 and 2 ). Many such proteins bear a C-terminal KDEL
(Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu) sequence (red) that allows them to be
retrieved. The KDEL receptor, located mainly in the cis-Golgi
network and in both COPII and COPI vesicles, binds proteins
bearing the KDEL sorting signal and returns them to the ER
(steps 3 and 4 ). This retrieval system prevents depletion of ER
luminal proteins such as those needed for proper folding of
newly made secretory proteins. The binding affinity of the KDEL
receptor is very sensitive to pH. The small difference in the pH of
the ER and Golgi favors binding of KDEL-bearing proteins to the
receptor in Golgi-derived vesicles and their release in the ER.
[Adapted from J. Semenza et al., 1990, Cell 61:1349.]

18

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

Anterograde Transport Through the Golgi Occurs
by Cisternal Progression
At one time it was thought that small transport vesicles carry
secretory proteins from the cis- to the medial-Golgi and from
the medial- to the trans-Golgi. Indeed, electron microscopy
reveals many small vesicles associated with the Golgi complex that move proteins from one Golgi compartment to another (Figure 17-17). However, these vesicles most likely
mediate retrograde transport, retrieving ER or Golgi enzymes from a later compartment and transporting them to
an earlier compartment in the secretory pathway. In this way
enzymes that modify secretory proteins come to be localized
in the correct compartment.
The first evidence that the forward transport of cargo
proteins from the cis- to the trans-Golgi occurs by a nonvesicular mechanism, called cisternal progression, came from
careful microscopic analysis of the synthesis of algal scales.
These cell-wall glycoproteins are assembled in the cis-Golgi
into large complexes visible in the electron microscope. Like
other secretory proteins, newly made scales move from the
cis- to the trans-Golgi, but they can be 20 times larger than
the usual transport vesicles that bud from Golgi cisternae.
Similarly, in the synthesis of collagen by fibroblasts, large aggregates of the procollagen precursor often form in the

lumen of the cis-Golgi (see Figure 6-20). The procollagen aggregates are too large to be incorporated into small transport
vesicles, and investigators could never find such aggregates in
transport vesicles. These observations suggested that the forward movement of these and perhaps all secretory proteins
from one Golgi compartment to another does not occur via
small vesicles.
In one test of the cisternal progression model, collagen
folding was blocked by an inhibitor of proline hydroxylation, and soon all pre-made, folded procollagen aggregates were secreted from the cell. When the inhibitor was
removed, newly made procollagen peptides folded and
then formed aggregates in the cis-Golgi that subsequently
could be seen to move as a “wave” from the cis- through
the medial-Golgi cisternae to the trans-Golgi, followed by
secretion and incorporation into the extracellular matrix.
In these experiments procollagen aggregates were never
visible in small transport vesicles. Numerous controversial questions concerning membrane flow within the Golgi
stack remain unresolved. Nonetheless, the observed
movement of very large macromolecular assemblies
through the Golgi stack and the evidence described previously that COPI vesicles mediate retrograde transport
have led most researchers in the field to favor the cisternal
progression model.

Forming secretory
vesicle

Trans-Golgi network
Trans
Medial

Golgi
cisternae

Cis
Cis-Golgi reticulum
ER-to-Golgi
transport vesicles
Smooth protrusion
Transitional elements

0.5 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-17 Electron micrograph of
the Golgi complex in an exocrine pancreatic cell reveals both
anterograde and retrograde transport vesicles. A large
secretory vesicle can be seen forming from the trans-Golgi
network. Elements of the rough ER are on the left in this
micrograph. Adjacent to the rough ER are transitional elements

from which smooth protrusions appear to be budding. These
buds form the small vesicles that transport secretory proteins
from the rough ER to the Golgi complex. Interspersed among the
Golgi cisternae are other small vesicles now known to function in
retrograde, not anterograde, transport. [Courtesy G. Palade.]

17.4 • Later Stages of the Secretory Pathway

19

COPI vesicles also carry Golgi-resident proteins from
later to earlier compartments in the Golgi stack.

■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 17.3

Soluble and membrane proteins advance through the
Golgi complex by cisternal progression, a nonvesicular
process of anterograde transport.

Vesicle Traffic in the Early Stages of the Secretory
Pathway

■

COPII vesicles transport proteins from the rough ER to
the cis-Golgi; COPI vesicles transport proteins in the reverse direction (see Figure 17-14).

■

17.4 Later Stages of
the Secretory Pathway

COPII coats comprise three components: the small GTPbinding protein Sar1, a Sec23/Sec24 complex, and a
Sec13/Sec31 complex.

■

As cargo proteins move from the cis face to the trans face of
the Golgi complex by cisternal progression, modifications
to their oligosaccharide chains are carried out by Golgiresident enzymes. The retrograde trafficking of COPI vesicles from later to earlier Golgi compartments maintains
sufficient levels of these carbohydrate-modifying enzymes
in their functional compartments. Eventually, properly
processed cargo proteins reach the trans-Golgi network, the
most-distal Golgi compartment. Here they are sorted into
vesicles for delivery to their final destination. In this section
we discuss the different kinds of vesicles that bud from the
trans-Golgi network, the mechanisms that segregate cargo
proteins among them, and key processing events that occur
late in the secretory pathway. The transport steps mediated
by the major types of coated vesicles are summarized in
Figure 17-18.

Components of the COPII coat bind to membrane cargo
proteins containing a di-acidic or other sorting signal in
their cytosolic regions (see Figure 17-15). Soluble cargo
proteins probably are targeted to COPII vesicles by binding to a membrane protein receptor.

■

Membrane proteins needed to form COPII vesicles can
be retrieved from the cis-Golgi by COPI vesicles. One of
the sorting signals that directs membrane proteins into
COPI vesicles is a KKXX sequence, which binds to subunits of the COPI coat.

■

Many soluble ER-resident proteins contain a KDEL sorting signal. Binding of this retrieval sequence to a specific
receptor protein in the cis-Golgi membrane recruits
missorted ER proteins into retrograde COPI vesicles (see
Figure 17-16).

■

Plasma
membrane

5

3
?

Trans-Golgi
Clathrin

FPO
COPI

Medial-Golgi

COPI 2

Cis-Golgi

COPII

COPI

Cis-Golgi network

1
COPII
subunits

Rough ER

Late
endosome

 FIGURE 17-18 Involvement of the
three major types of coat proteins in
vesicular traffic in the secretory and
endocytic pathways. After formation of
vesicles by budding from a donor membrane,
the coats depolymerize into their subunits,
which are re-used to form additional transport
vesicles. COPII vesicles ( 1 ) mediate anterograde transport from the rough ER to the
cis-Golgi/cis-Golgi network. COPI vesicles ( 2 )
mediate retrograde transport within the Golgi
and from the cis-Golgi/cis-Golgi network to
the rough ER. The coat proteins surrounding
secretory vesicles ( 3 ) are not yet
characterized; these vesicles carry secreted
proteins and plasma-membrane proteins from
the trans-Golgi network to the cell surface.
Vesicles coated with clathrin (red) bud from
the trans-Golgi network ( 4 ) and from the
plasma membrane ( 5 ); after uncoating,
these vesicles fuse with late endosomes.
The coat on most clathrin vesicles contains
additional proteins not indicated here. Note
that secretory proteins move from the cis- to
trans-Golgi by cisternal progression, which is
not mediated by vesicles. [See H. Pelham, 1997,
Nature 389:17, and J. F. Presley et al., 1997, Nature
389:81.]

20

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

Vesicles Coated with Clathrin and/or Adapter
Proteins Mediate Several Transport Steps
The best-characterized vesicles that bud from the transGolgi network (TGN) have a two-layered coat: an outer
layer composed of the fibrous protein clathrin and an
inner layer composed of adapter protein (AP) complexes.
Purified clathrin molecules, which have a three-limbed
shape, are called triskelions from the Greek for threelegged (Figure 17-19a). Each limb contains one clathrin
heavy chain (180,000 MW) and one clathrin light chain

(a) Triskelion structure

Heavy
chain

(b) Assembly intermediate

Light
chain

FPO

Binding site
for assembly
particles
(c)

FPO
NEW PHOTO
10 X 10 picas
(17019c)

FPO
NEW PHOTO
10 X 10 picas
(17019d)

▲ FIGURE 17-19 Structure of clathrin coats. (a) A clathrin
molecule, called a triskelion, is composed of three heavy and
three light chains. It has an intrinsic curvature due to the bend in
the heavy chains. (b) The fibrous clathrin coat around vesicles is
constructed of 36 clathrin triskelions. Depicted here is an
intermediate in assembly of a clathrin coat, containing 10 of the
final 36 triskelions, which illustrates the intrinsic curvature and
the packing of clathrin triskelions. (c) Clathrin coats were formed
in vitro by mixing purified clathrin heavy and light chains with
AP2 complexes in the absence of membranes. Cryoelectron
micrographs of more than 1000 assembled particles were
analyzed by digital image processing to generate an average
structural representation. The left image shows the reconstructed
structure of a complete particle with AP2 complexes packed into
the interior of the clathrin cage. In the right image, the AP2
complexes have been subtracted to show only the assembled
clathrin heavy and light chains. [See B. Pishvaee and G. Payne, 1998,
Cell 95:443. Part (c) from C. J. Smith et al., 1998, EMBO J. 17:4943.]

(≈35,000 – 40,000 MW). Triskelions polymerize to form
a polygonal lattice with an intrinsic curvature (Figure
17-19b). When clathrin polymerizes on a donor membrane,
it does so in association with AP complexes, which assemble between the clathrin lattice and the membrane. Each AP
complex (340,000 MW) contains one copy each of four different adapter subunit proteins. A specific association between the globular domain at the end of each clathrin heavy
chain in a triskelion and one subunit of the AP complex both
promotes the co-assembly of clathrin triskelions with AP
complexes and adds to the stability of the completed vesicle
coat (Figure 17-19c).
By binding to the cytosolic face of membrane proteins,
adapter proteins determine which cargo proteins are specifically included in (or excluded from) a budding transport
vesicle. Each type of AP complex (e.g., AP1, AP2, AP3) and
the recently identified GGAs are composed of different,
though related, proteins. Vesicles containing each complex
have been found to mediate specific transport steps (see
Table 17-1). All vesicles whose coats contain one of these
complexes utilize ARF to initiate coat assembly onto the
donor membrane. As discussed previously, ARF also initiates
assembly of COPI coats. The additional features of the membrane or protein factors that determine which type of coat
will assemble after ARF attachment are not well understood
at this time.
Vesicles that bud from the trans-Golgi network en route
to the lysosome by way of the late endosome have clathrin
coats associated with either AP1 or GGA. Both AP1 and
GGA bind to the cytosolic domain of cargo proteins in the
donor membrane, but the functional differences between
vesicles that contain AP1 or GGA are unclear. Recent studies have shown that membrane proteins containing a Tyr-XX- sequence, where X is any amino acid and  is a bulky
hydrophobic amino acid, are recruited into clathrin/AP1
vesicles budding from the trans-Golgi network. This YXX
sorting signal interacts with one of the AP1 subunits in the
vesicle coat. As we discuss in the next section, vesicles with
clathrin/AP2 coats, which bud from the plasma membrane
during endocytosis, also can recognize the YXX sorting
signal.
Some vesicles that bud from the trans-Golgi network
have coats composed of the AP3 complex. These vesicles mediate trafficking to the lysosome, but they appear to bypass
the late endosome and fuse directly with the lysosomal membrane. In certain types of cells, such AP3 vesicles mediate
protein transport to specialized storage compartments related to the lysosome. For example, AP3 is required for delivery of proteins to melanosomes, which contain the black
pigment melanin in skin cells, and to platelet storage vesicles in megakaryocytes, a large cell that fragments into
dozens of platelets. Mice with mutations in either of the two
subunits of AP3 not only have abnormal skin pigmentation
but also exhibit bleeding disorders. The latter occur because
tears in blood vessels cannot be repaired without platelets
that contain normal storage vesicles.

17.4 • Later Stages of the Secretory Pathway

21

Dynamin Is Required for Pinching Off
of Clathrin Vesicles
A fundamental step in the formation of a transport vesicle
that we have not yet considered is how a vesicle bud is
pinched off from the donor membrane. In the case of
clathrin/AP-coated vesicles, a cytosolic protein called dynamin is essential for release of complete vesicles. At the later
stages of bud formation, dynamin polymerizes around the
neck portion and then hydrolyzes GTP. The energy derived
from GTP hydrolysis is thought to drive “contraction” of
dynamin around the vesicle neck until the vesicle pinches off
(Figure 17-20). Interestingly, COPI and COPII vesicles appear to pinch off from donor membranes without the aid of
a GTPase such as dynamin. At present this fundamental difference in the process of pinching off among the different
types of vesicles is not understood.
Incubation of cell extracts with a nonhydrolyzable derivative of GTP provides dramatic evidence for the importance
of dynamin in pinching off of clathrin/AP vesicles during endocytosis. Such treatment leads to accumulation of clathrincoated vesicle buds with excessively long necks that are
Exoplasmic face
GTP

Cytosolic face
Dynamin

GDP

Soluble
cargo
protein

Fibrous
clathrin
coat
Integral
cargo protein

FPO

AP
complex

Integral
receptor
protein

Clathrin-coated vesicle

▲ FIGURE 17-20 Model for dynamin-mediated pinching off
of clathrin/AP-coated vesicles. After a vesicle bud forms,
dynamin polymerizes over the neck. By a mechanism that is not
well understood, dynamin-catalyzed hydrolysis of GTP leads to
release of the vesicle from the donor membrane. Note that
membrane proteins in the donor membrane are incorporated into
vesicles by interacting with AP complexes in the coat. [Adapted
from K. Takel et al., 1995, Nature 374:186.]

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-21 GTP hydrolysis by
dynamin is required for pinching off of clathrin-coated
vesicles in cell-free extracts. A preparation of nerve terminals,
which undergo extensive endocytosis, was lysed by treatment
with distilled water and incubated with GTP- -S, a
nonhydrolyzable derivative of GTP. After sectioning, the
preparation was treated with gold-tagged anti-dynamin antibody
and viewed in the electron microscope. This image, which shows
a long-necked clathrin/AP-coated bud with polymerized dynamin
lining the neck, reveals that buds can form in the absence of
GTP hydrolysis, but vesicles cannot pinch off. The extensive
polymerization of dynamin that occurs in the presence of with
GTP- -S probably does not occur during the normal budding
process. [From K. Takel et al., 1995, Nature 374:186; courtesy of
Pietro De Camilli.]

surrounded by polymeric dynamin but do not pinch off (Figure 17-21). Likewise, cells expressing mutant forms of dynamin that cannot bind GTP do not form clathrin-coated
vesicles, and instead accumulate similar long-necked vesicle
buds encased with polymerized dynamin.
As with COPI and COPII vesicles, clathrin/AP vesicles normally lose their coat soon after their formation. Cytosolic
Hsc70, a constitutive chaperone protein found in all eukaryotic
cells, is thought to use energy derived from the hydrolysis of
ATP to drive depolymerization of the clathrin coat into triskelions. Uncoating not only releases triskelions for re-use in the
formation of additional vesicles, but also exposes v-SNAREs
for use in fusion with target membranes. Conformational
changes that occur when ARF switches from the GTP-bound to
GDP-bound state are thought to regulate the timing of clathrin
coat depolymerization. How the action of Hsc70 might be coupled to ARF switching is not well understood.

Mannose 6-Phosphate Residues Target Soluble
Proteins to Lysosomes
Most of the sorting signals that function in vesicular trafficking are short amino acid sequences in the targeted protein. In contrast, the sorting signal that directs soluble

22

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis
Lysosomal enzyme

UDPGlcNAc

U

P
P

2

P

FPO

U P
UMP
GlcNAc phosphotransferase

P

P
1

Catalytic site

Phosphodiesterase
Recognition sequences

Recognition site

▲ FIGURE 17-22 Formation of mannose 6-phosphate (M6P)
residues that target soluble enzymes to lysosomes. The M6P
residues that direct proteins to lysosomes are generated in the
cis-Golgi by two Golgi-resident enzymes. Step 1 : An Nacetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) phosphotransferase transfers a
phosphorylated GlcNAc group to carbon atom 6 of one or more
mannose residues. Because only lysosomal enzymes contain

sequences (red) that are recognized and bound by this enzyme,
phosphorylated GlcNAc groups are added specifically to
lysosomal enzymes. Step 2 : After release of a modified protein
from the phosphotransferase, a phosphodiesterase removes the
GlcNAc group, leaving a phosphorylated mannose residue on the
lysosomal enzyme. [See A. B. Cantor et al., 1992, J. Biol. Chem.
267:23349, and S. Kornfeld, 1987, FASEB J. 1:462.]

receptor
Exterior
Plasma membrane
P

Cytosol

Clathrincoated pit

6
Receptormediated
endocytosis

P

5

Recycling of
M6P receptor

Clathrincoated
vesicle

7

FPO

Uncoated
endocytic
vesicle

P

8

4a

P

2a

Clathrin
triskelions

P

Late
endosome
(low pH)

3
4

P

P

TransGolgi
network

2

Uncoated
transport
vesicle

1

Clathrincoated
bud

Clathrin-coated
vesicle

Lysosome

17.4 • Later Stages of the Secretory Pathway

lysosomal enzymes from the trans-Golgi network to the late
endosome is a carbohydrate residue, mannose 6-phosphate
(M6P), which is formed in the cis-Golgi. The addition and
initial processing of one or more preformed N-linked
oligosaccharide precursors in the rough ER is the same for
lysosomal enzymes as for membrane and secreted proteins,
yielding core Man8(GlcNAc)2 chains (see Figure 16-18). In
the cis-Golgi, the N-linked oligosaccharides present on most
lysosomal enzymes undergo a two-step reaction sequence
that generates M6P residues (Figure 17-22). The addition of
M6P residues to the oligosaccharide chains of soluble lysosomal enzymes prevents these proteins from undergoing the
further processing reactions characteristic of secreted and
membrane proteins (see Figure 17-3).
As shown in Figure 17-23, the segregation of M6P-bearing
lysosomal enzymes from secreted and membrane proteins
occurs in the trans-Golgi network. Here transmembrane
mannose 6-phosphate receptors bind the M6P residues on
lysosome-destined proteins very tightly and specifically.
Clathrin/AP1 vesicles containing the M6P receptor and
bound lysosomal enzymes then bud from the trans-Golgi network, lose their coats, and subsequently fuse with the late
endosome by mechanisms described previously. Because
M6P receptors can bind M6P at the slightly acidic pH (≈6.5)
of the trans-Golgi network but not at a pH less than 6, the
bound lysosomal enzymes are released within late endosomes, which have an internal pH of 5.0–5.5. Furthermore,
a phosphatase within late endosomes usually removes the
phosphate from M6P residues on lysosomal enzymes, preventing any rebinding to the M6P receptor that might occur
in spite of the low pH in endosomes. Vesicles budding from
late endosomes recycle the M6P receptor back to the trans-

 FIGURE 17-23 Trafficking of soluble lysosomal enzymes
from the trans-Golgi network and cell surface to lysosomes.
Newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes, produced in the ER,
acquire mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) residues in the cis-Golgi
(see Figure 17-22). For simplicity, only one phosphorylated
oligosaccharide chain is depicted, although lysosomal enzymes
typically have many such chains. In the trans-Golgi network,
proteins that bear the M6P sorting signal interact with M6P
receptors in the membrane and thereby are directed into
clathrin/AP1 vesicles (step 1 ). The coat surrounding released
vesicles is rapidly depolymerized (step 2 ), and the uncoated
transport vesicles fuse with late endosomes (step 3 ). After the
phosphorylated enzymes dissociate from the M6P receptors and
are dephosphorylated, late endosomes subsequently fuse with a
lysosome (step 4 ). Note that coat proteins and M6P receptors
are recycled (steps 2a and 4a ), and some receptors are
delivered to the cell surface (step 5 ). Phosphorylated lysosomal
enzymes occasionally are sorted from the trans-Golgi to the cell
surface and secreted. These secreted enzymes can be retrieved
by receptor-mediated endocytosis (steps 6 – 8 ), a process that
closely parallels trafficking of lysosomal enzymes from the transGolgi network to lysosomes. [See G. Griffiths et al., 1988, Cell 52:329;
S. Kornfeld, 1992, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 61:307; and G. Griffiths and
J. Gruenberg, 1991, Trends Cell Biol. 1:5.]

23

Golgi network or, on occasion, to the cell surface. Eventually,
mature late endosomes fuse with lysosomes, delivering the
lysosomal enzymes to their final destination.
The sorting of soluble lysosomal enzymes in the transGolgi network (see Figure 17-23, steps 1 – 4 ) shares many of
the features of trafficking between the ER and cis-Golgi compartments mediated by COPII and COPI vesicles. First, mannose 6-phosphate acts as a sorting signal by interacting with
the luminal domain of a receptor protein in the donor membrane. Second, the membrane-embedded receptors with their
bound ligands are incorporated into the appropriate vesicles—in this case, AP1-containing clathrin vesicles—by
interacting with the vesicle coat. Third, these transport vesicles
fuse only with one specific organelle, here the late endosome,
as the result of interactions between specific v-SNAREs and
t-SNAREs. And finally, intracellular transport receptors are
recycled after dissociating from their bound ligand.

Study of Lysosomal Storage Diseases Revealed
Key Components of the Lysosomal
Sorting Pathway
A group of genetic disorders, termed lysosomal
storage diseases, are caused by the absence of one
or more lysosomal enzymes. As a result, undigested glycolipids and extracellular components that would
normally be degraded by lysosomal enzymes accumulate in
lysosomes as large inclusions. I-cell disease is a particularly
severe type of lysosomal storage disease in which multiple
enzymes are missing from the lysosomes. Cells from affected
individuals lack the N-acetylglucosamine phosphotransferase that is required for formation of M6P residues on
lysosomal enzymes in the cis-Golgi (see Figure 17-22). Biochemical comparison of lysosomal enzymes from normal
individuals with those from patients with I-cell disease led
to the initial discovery of mannose 6-phosphate as the lysosomal sorting signal. Lacking the M6P sorting signal, the
lysosomal enzymes in I-cell patients are secreted rather than
being sorted to and sequestered in lysosomes.
When fibroblasts from patients with I-cell disease are
grown in a medium containing lysosomal enzymes bearing
M6P residues, the diseased cells acquire a nearly normal intracellular content of lysosomal enzymes. This finding indicates that the plasma membrane of these cells contain M6P
receptors, which can internalize extracellular phosphorylated
lysosomal enzymes by receptor-mediated endocytosis. This
process, used by many cell-surface receptors to bring bound
proteins or particles into the cell, is discussed in detail in the
next section. It is now known that even in normal cells, some
M6P receptors are transported to the plasma membrane and
some phosphorylated lysosomal enzymes are secreted (see
Figure 17-23). The secreted enzymes can be retrieved by receptor-mediated endocytosis and directed to lysosomes. This
pathway thus scavenges any lysosomal enzymes that escape
the usual M6P sorting pathway.

24

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

Hepatocytes from patients with I-cell disease contain a
normal complement of lysosomal enzymes and no inclusions,
even though these cells are defective in mannose phosphorylation. This finding implies that hepatocytes (the most abundant type of liver cell) employ a M6P-independent pathway
for sorting lysosomal enzymes. The nature of this pathway,
which also may operate in other cells types, is unknown. ❚

Protein Aggregation in the Trans-Golgi May
Function in Sorting Proteins to Regulated
Secretory Vesicles
As noted in the chapter introduction, all eukaryotic cells continuously secrete certain proteins, a process commonly called
constitutive secretion. Specialized secretory cells also store
other proteins in vesicles and secrete them only when triggered by a specific stimulus. One example of such regulated
secretion occurs in pancreatic  cells, which store newly
made insulin in special secretory vesicles and secrete insulin
in response to an elevation in blood glucose (see Figure 15-7).
These and other secretory cells simultaneously utilize two
different types of vesicles to move proteins from the transGolgi network to the cell surface: regulated transport vesicles, often simply called secretory vesicles, and unregulated
transport vesicles, also called constitutive secretory vesicles.
A common mechanism appears to sort regulated proteins
as diverse as ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone), insulin,
and trypsinogen into regulated secretory vesicles. Evidence for
a common mechanism comes from experiments in which recombinant DNA techniques are used to induce the synthesis
of insulin and trypsinogen in pituitary tumor cells already synthesizing ACTH. In these cells all three proteins segregate into
the same regulated secretory vesicles and are secreted together
when a hormone binds to a receptor on the pituitary cells and
causes a rise in cytosolic Ca2. Although these three proteins
share no identical amino acid sequences that might serve as a
sorting sequence, they obviously have some common feature
that signals their incorporation into regulated secretory vesicles.
Morphologic evidence suggests that sorting into the regulated pathway is controlled by selective protein aggregation.
For instance, immature vesicles in this pathway—those that
have just budded from the trans-Golgi network—contain diffuse aggregates of secreted protein that are visible in the electron microscope. These aggregates also are found in vesicles
that are in the process of budding, indicating that proteins
destined for regulated secretory vesicles selectively aggregate
together before their incorporation into the vesicles.
Other studies have shown that regulated secretory vesicles from many mammalian cells contain two proteins, chromogranin A and secretogranin II, that together form
aggregates when incubated at the ionic conditions (pH ≈6.5
and 1 mM Ca2) thought to occur in the trans-Golgi network; such aggregates do not form at the neutral pH of the
ER. The selective aggregation of regulated secreted proteins
together with chromogranin A or secretogranin II could be
the basis for sorting of these proteins into regulated secretory

vesicles. Secreted proteins that do not associate with these
proteins, and thus do not form aggregates, would be sorted
into unregulated transport vesicles by default.

Some Proteins Undergo Proteolytic Processing
After Leaving the Trans-Golgi
For some secretory proteins (e.g., growth hormone) and certain viral membrane proteins (e.g., the VSV glycoprotein), removal of the N-terminal ER signal sequence from the nascent
chain is the only known proteolytic cleavage required to convert the polypeptide to the mature, active species (see Figure
16-6). However, some membrane and many soluble secretory
proteins initially are synthesized as relatively long-lived, inactive precursors, termed proproteins, that require further
proteolytic processing to generate the mature, active proteins. Examples of proteins that undergo such processing are
soluble lysosomal enzymes, many membrane proteins such
as influenza hemagglutinin (HA), and secreted proteins such
as serum albumin, insulin, glucagon, and the yeast  mating
factor. In general, the proteolytic conversion of a proprotein
to the corresponding mature protein occurs after the proprotein has been sorted in the trans-Golgi network to appropriate vesicles.
In the case of soluble lysosomal enzymes, the proproteins
are called proenzymes, which are sorted by the M6P receptor
as catalytically inactive enzymes. In the late endosome or
lysosome a proenzyme undergoes a proteolytic cleavage that
generates a smaller but enzymatically active polypeptide.
Delaying the activation of lysosomal proenzymes until they
reach the lysosome prevents them from digesting macromolecules in earlier compartments of the secretory pathway.
Normally, mature vesicles carrying secreted proteins to
the cell surface are formed by fusion of several immature

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-24 Proteolytic cleavage of
proinsulin occurs in secretory vesicles after they have
budded from the trans-Golgi network. Serial sections of the
Golgi region of an insulin-secreting cell were stained with (a) a
monoclonal antibody that recognizes proinsulin but not insulin or
(b) a different antibody that recognizes insulin but not proinsulin.
The antibodies, which were bound to electron-opaque gold
particles, appear as dark dots in these electron micrographs (see
Figure 5-51). Immature secretory vesicles (closed arrowheads)
and vesicles budding from the trans-Golgi (arrows) stain with the
proinsulin antibody but not with insulin antibody. These vesicles
contain diffuse protein aggregates that include proinsulin and
other regulated secreted proteins. Mature vesicles (open
arrowheads) stain with insulin antibody but not with proinsulin
antibody and have a dense core of almost crystalline insulin.
Since budding and immature secretory vesicles contain proinsulin
(not insulin), the proteolytic conversion of proinsulin to insulin
must take place in these vesicles after they bud from the transGolgi network. The inset in (a) shows a proinsulin-rich secretory
vesicle surrounded by a protein coat (dashed line). [From L. Orci et
al., 1987, Cell 49:865; courtesy of L. Orci.]

17.4 • Later Stages of the Secretory Pathway

ones containing proprotein. Proteolytic cleavage of proproteins, such as proinsulin, occurs in vesicles after they move
away from the trans-Golgi network (Figure 17-24). The proproteins of most constitutively secreted proteins (e.g., albumin) are cleaved only once at a site C-terminal to a dibasic

(a) Constitutive secreted proteins
Proalbumin

NH3+

COO−

Arg Arg
Furin endoprotease

NH3+

(a) Proinsulin antibody

25

Arg Arg

COO−

Albumin

FPO

(b) Regulated secreted proteins

Proinsulin

S

S

S

S
0.2 m

NH3+

Arg Arg

B

C

Lys Arg

A

S S
PC3 endoprotease

PC2 endoprotease

C

NH3+

Lys Arg

S

S
S

S

G

COO−

Arg Arg

B

A

COO−

S S

Carboxypeptidase

Arg

Arg
S

S
S

S
B

Insulin

A
S S

(b) Insulin antibody

▲ FIGURE 17-25 Proteolytic processing of proproteins in
the constitutive and regulated secretion pathways. The
processing of proalbumin and proinsulin is typical of the
constitutive and regulated pathways, respectively. The
endoproteases that function in such processing cleave C-terminal
to sequences of two consecutive basic amino acids. (a) The
endoprotease furin acts on the precursors of constitutive
secreted proteins. (b) Two endoproteases, PC2 and PC3, act on
the precursors of regulated secreted proteins. The final
processing of many such proteins is catalyzed by a
carboxypeptidase that sequentially removes two basic amino acid
residues at the C-terminus of a polypeptide. [See D. Steiner et al.,
1992, J. Biol. Chem. 267:23435.]

G

0.5 m

recognition sequence such as Arg-Arg or Lys-Arg (Figure
17-25a). Proteolytic processing of proteins whose secretion is
regulated generally entails additional cleavages. In the case of
proinsulin, multiple cleavages of the single polypeptide chain
yields the N-terminal B chain and the C-terminal A chain of
mature insulin, which are linked by disulfide bonds, and the
central C peptide, which is lost and subsequently degraded
(Figure 17-25b).
The breakthrough in identifying the proteases responsible
for such processing of secreted proteins came from analysis

26

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

of yeast with a mutation in the KEX2 gene. These mutant
cells synthesized the precursor of the  mating factor but
could not proteolytically process it to the functional form,
and thus were unable to mate with cells of the opposite mating type (see Figure 22-13). The wild-type KEX2 gene encodes an endoprotease that cleaves the -factor precursor at
a site C-terminal to Arg-Arg and Lys-Arg residues. Using the
KEX2 gene as a DNA probe, researchers were able to clone
a family of mammalian endoproteases, all of which cleave a
protein chain on the C-terminal side of an Arg-Arg or LysArg sequence. One, called furin, is found in all mammalian
cells; it processes proteins such as albumin that are secreted
by the continuous pathway. In contrast, the PC2 and PC3
endoproteases are found only in cells that exhibit regulated
secretion; these enzymes are localized to regulated secretory
vesicles and proteolytically cleave the precursors of many
hormones at specific sites.

Several Pathways Sort Membrane Proteins to the
Apical or Basolateral Region of Polarized Cells
The plasma membrane of polarized epithelial cells is divided into two domains, apical and basolateral; tight junctions located between the two domains prevent the
movement of plasma-membrane proteins between the domains (see Figure 6-5). Several sorting mechanisms direct
newly synthesized membrane proteins to either the apical
or basolateral domain of epithelial cells, and any one protein may be sorted by more than one mechanism. Although
these sorting mechanisms are understood in general terms,
the molecular signals underlying the vesicle-mediated transport of membrane proteins in polarized cells are not yet

▲ FIGURE 17-26 Sorting of proteins
destined for the apical and basolateral
plasma membranes of polarized cells.
When cultured MDCK cells are infected
simultaneously with VSV and influenza
virus, the VSV G glycoprotein (purple) is
found only on the basolateral membrane,
whereas the influenza HA glycoprotein
(green) is found only on the apical
membrane. Some cellular proteins (orange
circle), especially those with a GPI anchor,
are likewise sorted directly to the apical
membrane and others to the basolateral
membrane (not shown) via specific
transport vesicles that bud from the transGolgi network. In certain polarized cells,
some apical and basolateral proteins are
transported together to the basolateral
surface; the apical proteins (orange oval)
then move selectively, by endocytosis and
transcytosis, to the apical membrane. [After
K. Simons and A. Wandinger-Ness, 1990, Cell
62:207; and K. Mostov et al., 1992, J. Cell Biol.
116:577.]

known. As a result of this sorting and the restriction on
protein movement within the plasma membrane due to
tight junctions, distinct sets of proteins are found in the apical or basolateral domain. This preferential localization of
certain transport proteins is critical to a variety of important physiological functions, such as absorption of nutrients from the intestinal lumen and acidification of the
stomach lumen (see Figures 7-27 and 7-28).
Microscopic and cell-fractionation studies indicate that
proteins destined for either the apical or the basolateral
membranes are initially located together within the membranes of the trans-Golgi network. In some cases, proteins
destined for the apical membrane are sorted into their own
transport vesicles that bud from the trans-Golgi network and
then move to the apical region, whereas proteins destined for
the basolateral membrane are sorted into other vesicles that
move to the basolateral region. The different vesicle types
can be distinguished by their protein constituents, including
distinct Rab and v-SNARE proteins, which apparently target
them to the appropriate plasma-membrane domain. In this
mechanism, segregation of proteins destined for either the
apical or basolateral membranes occurs as cargo proteins are
incorporated into particular types of vesicles budding from
the trans-Golgi network.
Such direct basolateral-apical sorting has been investigated in cultured Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK)
cells, a line of cultured polarized epithelial cells (see Figure
6-6). In MDCK cells infected with the influenza virus, progeny viruses bud only from the apical membrane, whereas in
cells infected with vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), progeny
viruses bud only from the basolateral membrane. This difference occurs because the HA glycoprotein of influenza

Influenza virus HA glycoprotein
VSV G glycoprotein
Direct apical
sorting
Basolateral
sorting

Endocytosis

FPO

GPI anchor

Trans -Golgi
reticulum

Transcytosis
Apical protein
Clathrincoated pit
Basolateral
plasma membrane

Recycling
Tight
junction

Apical plasma
membrane

17.5 • Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and the Sorting of Internalized Proteins

virus is transported from the Golgi complex exclusively to
the apical membrane, and the VSV G protein is transported
only to the basolateral membrane (Figure 17-26). Furthermore, when the gene encoding HA protein is introduced
into uninfected cells by recombinant DNA techniques, all
the expressed HA accumulates in the apical membrane, indicating that the sorting signal resides in the HA glycoprotein itself and not in other viral proteins produced during
viral infection.
Among the cellular proteins that undergo similar apicalbasolateral sorting in the Golgi are those with a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) membrane anchor. In MDCK
cells and most other types of epithelial cells, GPI-anchored
proteins are targeted to the apical membrane. In membranes
GPI-anchored proteins are clustered into lipid rafts, which
are rich in sphingolipids (see Figure 5-10). This finding suggests that lipid rafts are localized to the apical membrane
along with proteins that preferentially partition into them
in many cells. However, the GPI anchor is not an apical sorting signal in all polarized cells; in thyroid cells, for example,
GPI-anchored proteins are targeted to the basolateral membrane. Other than GPI anchors no unique sequences have
been identified that are both necessary and sufficient to target proteins to either the apical or basolateral domain. Instead, each membrane protein may contain multiple sorting
signals, any one of which can target it to the appropriate
plasma-membrane domain. The identification of such complex signals and of the vesicle coat proteins that recognize
them is currently being pursued for a number of different
proteins that are sorted to specific plasma-membrane domains of polarized epithelial cells.
Another mechanism for sorting apical and basolateral
proteins, also illustrated in Figure 17-26, operates in hepatocytes. The basolateral membranes of hepatocytes face the
blood (as in intestinal epithelial cells), and the apical membranes line the small intercellular channels into which bile is
secreted. In hepatocytes, newly made apical and basolateral
proteins are first transported in vesicles from the trans-Golgi
network to the basolateral region and incorporated into the
plasma membrane by exocytosis (i.e., fusion of the vesicle
membrane with the plasma membrane). From there, both basolateral and apical proteins are endocytosed in the same
vesicles, but then their paths diverge. The endocytosed basolateral proteins are sorted into transport vesicles that recycle them to the basolateral membrane. In contrast, the
apically destined endocytosed proteins are sorted into transport vesicles that move across the cell and fuse with the apical membrane, a process called transcytosis. As discussed in
the next section, transcytosis also is used to move extracellular materials from one side of an epithelium to another.
Even in epithelial cells, such as MDCK cells, in which apicalbasolateral protein sorting occurs in the Golgi, transcytosis
may provide a “fail-safe” sorting mechanism. That is, an apical protein sorted incorrectly to the basolateral membrane
would be subjected to endocytosis and then correctly delivered to the apical membrane.

27

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 17.4
Protein Sorting and Processing in Later Stages of
the Secretory Pathway
■ The trans-Golgi network (TGN) is a major branch point
in the secretory pathway where soluble secreted proteins,
lysosomal proteins, and in some cells membrane proteins
destined for the basolateral or apical plasma membrane are
segregated into different transport vesicles.
■ Many vesicles that bud from the trans-Golgi network as
well as endocytic vesicles bear a coat composed of AP
(adapter protein) complexes and clathrin (see Figure 17-19).

Pinching off of clathrin-coated vesicles requires dynamin, which forms a collar around the neck of the vesicle bud and hydrolyzes GTP (see Figure 17-20).

■

Soluble enzymes destined for lysosomes are modified in
the cis-Golgi yielding multiple mannose 6-phosphate
(M6P) residues on their oligosaccharide chains.

■

M6P receptors in the membrane of the trans-Golgi network bind proteins bearing M6P residues and direct their
transfer to late endosomes, where receptors and their ligand proteins dissociate. The receptors then are recycled to
the Golgi or plasma membrane, and the lysosomal enzymes
are delivered to lysosomes (see Figure 17-23).

■

Regulated secreted proteins are concentrated and stored
in secretory vesicles to await a neural or hormonal signal
for exocytosis. Protein aggregation within the trans-Golgi
network may play a role in sorting secreted proteins to the
regulated pathway.

■

Many proteins transported through the secretory pathway undergo post-Golgi proteolytic cleavages that yield the
mature, active proteins. Generally, proteolytic maturation
can occur in vesicles carrying proteins from the trans-Golgi
network to the cell surface, in the late endosome, or in the
lysosomal.

■

In polarized epithelial cells, membrane proteins destined
for the apical or basolateral domains of the plasma membrane are sorted in the trans-Golgi network into different
transport vesicles (see Figure 17-26). The GPI anchor is
the only apical-basolateral sorting signal identified so far.

■

In hepatocytes and some other polarized cells, all
plasma-membrane proteins are directed first to the basolateral membrane. Apically destined proteins then are endocytosed and moved across the cell to the apical membrane (transcytosis).

■

17.5 Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis
and the Sorting of Internalized Proteins
In previous sections we have explored the main pathways
whereby secretory and membrane proteins synthesized on

28

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

the rough ER are delivered to the cell surface or other destinations. Cells also can internalize materials from their surroundings and sort these to particular destinations. A few
cell types (e.g., macrophages) can take up whole bacteria and
other large particles by phagocytosis, a nonselective actinmediated process in which extensions of the plasma membrane envelop the ingested material, forming large vesicles
called phagosomes (see Figure 5-20). In contrast, all eukaryotic cells continually engage in endocytosis, a process in
which a small region of the plasma membrane invaginates
to form a membrane-limited vesicle about 0.05–0.1 m in
diameter. In one form of endocytosis, called pinocytosis,
small droplets of extracellular fluid and any material dissolved in it are nonspecifically taken up. Our focus in this
section, however, is on receptor-mediated endocytosis in
which a specific receptor on the cell surface binds tightly to
an extracellular macromolecular ligand that it recognizes; the
plasma-membrane region containing the receptor-ligand
complex then buds inward and pinches off, becoming a
transport vesicle.
Among the common macromolecules that vertebrate cells
internalize by receptor-mediated endocytosis are cholesterolcontaining particles called low-density lipoprotein (LDL); the
iron-binding protein transferrin; many protein hormones
(e.g., insulin); and certain glycoproteins. Receptor-mediated
endocytosis of such ligands generally occurs viaclathrin/AP2-

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-27
The initial stages of receptor-mediated
endocytosis of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) particles are revealed by electron
microscopy. Cultured human fibroblasts
were incubated in a medium containing
LDL particles covalently linked to the
electron-dense, iron-containing protein
ferritin; each small iron particle in ferritin
is visible as a small dot under the electron
microscope. Cells initially were incubated at
4 °C; at this temperature LDL can bind to its
receptor but internalization does not occur.
After excess LDL not bound to the cells
was washed away, the cells were warmed
to 37 °C and then prepared for microscopy
at periodic intervals. (a) A coated pit,
showing the clathrin coat on the inner
(cytosolic) surface of the pit, soon after the
temperature was raised. (b) A pit containing
LDL apparently closing on itself to form a
coated vesicle. (c) A coated vesicle
containing ferritin-tagged LDL particles.
(d) Ferritin-tagged LDL particles in a smoothsurfaced early endosome 6 minutes after
internalization began. [Photographs courtesy of
R. Anderson. Reprinted by permission from
J. Goldstein et al., Nature 279:679. Copyright
1979, Macmillan Journals Limited. See also M. S.
Brown and J. Goldstein, 1986, Science 232:34.]

coated pits and vesicles in a process similar to the packaging of lysosomal enzymes by mannose 6-phosphate (M6P)
in the trans-Golgi network (see Figure 17-23). As noted earlier, some M6P receptors are found on the cell surface, and
these participate in the receptor-mediated endocytosis of
lysosomal enzymes that are secreted. In general, transmembrane receptor proteins that function in the uptake of extracellular ligands are internalized from the cell surface during
endocytosis and are then sorted and recycled back to the cell
surface, much like the recycling of M6P receptors to the
plasma membrane and trans-Golgi. The rate at which a ligand is internalized is limited by the amount of its corresponding receptor on the cell surface.
Clathrin/AP2 pits make up about 2 percent of the surface
of cells such as hepatocytes and fibroblasts. Many internalized ligands have been observed in these pits and vesicles,
which are thought to function as intermediates in the endocytosis of most (though not all) ligands bound to cell-surface receptors (Figure 17-27). Some receptors are clustered
over clathrin-coated pits even in the absence of ligand. Other
receptors diffuse freely in the plane of the plasma membrane
but undergo a conformational change when binding to ligand, so that when the receptor-ligand complex diffuses into
a clathrin-coated pit, it is retained there. Two or more types
of receptor-bound ligands, such as LDL and transferrin, can
be seen in the same coated pit or vesicle.

(a)

(b)

LDL-ferritin
Clathrin-coated pit
(c)

0.2 m

LDL-ferritin
(d)

17.5 • Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and the Sorting of Internalized Proteins

protein known as apoB-100; the core of a particle is packed
with cholesterol in the form of cholesteryl esters (see Figure
18-12). Most mammalian cells produce cell-surface receptors
that specifically bind to apoB-100 and internalize LDL particles by receptor-mediated endocytosis. After endocytosis,
the LDL particles are transported to lysosomes via the endocytic pathway and then are degraded by lysosomal hydrolases. LDL receptors, which dissociate from their ligands in
the late endosome, recycle to the cell surface.

Receptors for Low-Density Lipoprotein and Other
Ligands Contain Sorting Signals That Target
Them for Endocytosis
As will be discussed in detail in the next chapter, lowdensity lipoprotein (LDL) is one of several complexes that
carry cholesterol through the bloodstream (see Figure 17-28).
A LDL particle, a sphere 20–25 nm in diameter, has an outer
phospholipid shell containing a single molecule of a large

LDL particle

Phospholipid monolayer
At neutral pH, ligand-binding
arm is free to bind another
LDL particle

ApoB protein
LDL receptor

29

1

Plasma membrane

Coated
pit
Clathrin
AP2
complex

2
Clathrin
triskelion

Coated
vesicle

FPO
5
Early
endosome

Late endosome

3

Lysosome
pH 5.0
Amino acids

Fatty acids

Cholesterol
4

▲ FIGURE 17-28 Endocytic pathway for internalizing lowdensity lipoprotein (LDL). Step 1 : Cell-surface LDL receptors
bind to an apoB protein embedded in the phospholipid outer
layer of LDL particles. Interaction between the NPXY sorting
signal in the cytosolic tail of the LDL receptor and the AP2
complex incorporates the receptor-ligand complex into forming
endocytic vesicles. Step 2 : Clathrin-coated pits (or buds)
containing receptor-LDL complexes are pinched off by the same
dynamin-mediated mechanism used to form clathrin/AP1 vesicles
on the trans-Golgi network (see Figure 17-20). Step 3 : After the
vesicle coat is shed, the uncoated endocytic vesicle (early

endosome) fuses with the late endosome. The acidic pH in this
compartment causes a conformational change in the LDL
receptor that leads to release of the bound LDL particle. Step 4 :
The proteins and lipids of the free LDL particle are broken down
to their constituent parts by enzymes in the lysosome. Step 5 :
The LDL receptor recycles to the cell surface where at the
neutral pH of the exterior medium the receptor undergoes a
conformational change so that it can bind another LDL particle.
[See M. S. Brown and J. L. Goldstein, 1986, Science 232:34, and
G. Rudenko et al., 2002, Science 298:2353.]

30

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

Studies of the inherited disorder familial hypercholesterolemia led to discovery of the LDL receptor and the initial
understanding of the endocytic pathway. An individual with
this disorder produces one of several mutant forms of the
LDL receptor, causing impaired endocytosis of LDL and high
serum levels of cholesterol (Chapter 18). The major features
of the LDL endocytic pathway as currently understood
are depicted in Figure 17-28. The LDL receptor is an 839residue glycoprotein with a single transmembrane segment; it
has a short C-terminal cytosolic segment and a long Nterminal exoplasmic segment that contains a -propeller
domain and a ligand-binding domain. Seven cysteine-rich
imperfect repeats form the ligand-binding domain, which interacts with the apoB-100 molecule in a LDL particle.
Mutant receptors from some individuals with familial hypercholesterolemia bind LDL normally,
but the LDL-receptor complex cannot be internalized by the cell and is distributed evenly over the cell surface
rather than being confined to clathrin/AP2-coated pits. In individuals with this type of defect, plasma-membrane receptors for other ligands are internalized normally, but the
mutant LDL receptor apparently is not recruited into coated
pits. Analysis of this mutant receptor and other mutant LDL
receptors generated experimentally and expressed in fibroblasts identified a four-residue motif in the cytosolic segment
of the receptor that is crucial for its internalization: Asn-ProX-Tyr where X can be any amino acid. This NPXY sorting
signal binds to the AP2 complex, linking the clathrin/AP2
coat to the cytosolic segment of the LDL receptor in forming coated pits. A mutation in any of the conserved residues
of the NPXY signal will abolish the ability of the LDL receptor to be incorporated into coated pits.
A small number of individuals who exhibit the usual
symptoms associated with familial hypercholesterolemia
produce normal LDL receptors. In these individuals, the gene
encoding the AP2 subunit protein that binds the NPXY sorting signal is defective. As a result, LDL receptors are not incorporated into clathrin/AP2 vesicles and endocytosis of
LDL particles is compromised. Analysis of patients with this
genetic disorder highlights the importance of adapter proteins in protein trafficking mediated by clathrin vesicles. ❚
Mutational studies have shown that other cell-surface receptors can be directed into forming clathrin/AP2 pits by a
different sorting signal: Tyr-X-X-, where X can be any
amino acid and  is a bulky hydrophobic amino acid. This
YXX sorting signal in the cytosolic segment of a receptor
protein binds to a specific cleft in the 2 subunit of the AP2
complex. Because the tyrosine and  residues mediate this
binding, a mutation in either one reduces or abolishes the
ability of the receptor to be incorporated into clathrin/AP2coated pits. Moreover, if influenza HA protein, which is not
normally endocytosed, is genetically engineered to contain
this four-residue sequence in its cytosolic domain, the mutant
HA is internalized. Recall from our earlier discussion that

this same sorting signal recruits membrane proteins into
clathrin/AP1 vesicles that bud from the trans-Golgi network
by binding to the µ1 subunit of AP1 (see Table 17-2). All these
observations indicate that YXX is a widely used signal for
sorting membrane proteins to clathrin-coated vesicles.
In some cell-surface proteins, however, other sequences
(e.g., Leu-Leu) or covalently linked ubiquitin molecules signal endocytosis. Among the proteins associated with clathrin/
AP2 vesicles, several contain domains that specifically bind
to ubiquitin, and it has been hypothesized that these vesicleassociated proteins mediate the selective incorporation of
ubiquitinated membrane proteins into endocytic vesicles. As
described later, the ubiquitin tag on endocytosed membrane
proteins is also recognized at a later stage in the endocytic
pathway and plays a role in delivering these proteins into the
interior of the lysosome where they are degraded.

The Acidic pH of Late Endosomes Causes Most
Receptor-Ligand Complexes to Dissociate
The overall rate of endocytic internalization of the plasma
membrane is quite high; cultured fibroblasts regularly internalize 50 percent of their cell-surface proteins and phospholipids each hour. Most cell-surface receptors that undergo
endocytosis will repeatedly deposit their ligands within the

Ligand in
lumen
Receptors in
vesicle
extensions

0.2 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-29 Electron microscopy
demonstrates that endocytosed receptor-ligand complexes
dissociate in late endosomes. Liver cells were perfused with an
asialoglycoprotein ligand and then were fixed and sectioned for
electron microscopy. The sections were stained with receptorspecific antibodies, tagged with gold particles 8 nm in diameter,
to localize the receptor and with asialoglycoprotein-specific
antibody, linked to gold particles 5 nm in diameter, to localize the
ligand (see Figure 5-51). As seen in this electron micrograph of a
late endosome, the ligand (smaller dark grains) is localized in the
vesicle lumen and the asialoglycoprotein receptor (larger dark
grains) is localized in the tubular extensions budding off from the
vesicle. [Courtesy of H. J. Geuze. Copyright 1983, M.I.T. See H. J. Geuze
et al., 1983, Cell 32:277.]

17.5 • Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and the Sorting of Internalized Proteins

Cell surface [pH 7.0]
Ligand-binding
arm (R1-R7)
LDL
receptor

β propeller
domain
NPXY
sorting signal

31

Released
LDL particle

Endosome [pH 5.0]

FPO

Cholesterol esters
Phospholipid
monolayer

LDL
particle

ApoB protein

Surface of
β propeller
domain becomes
positively charged,
and then binds
to the ligandbinding arm

R7

▲ FIGURE 17-30 Model for pH-dependent binding of LDL particles
by the LDL receptor. Schematic depiction of LDL receptor at neutral pH
found at the cell surface (left) and at acidic pH found in the interior of the
late endosome (right). At the cell surface, apoB 100 on the surface of a
LDL particle binds tightly to the receptor. Of the seven repeats (R1–R7) in
the ligand-binding arm, R4 and R5 appear to be most critical for LDL binding.
Within the endosome, histidine residues in the -propeller domain of the
LDL receptor become protonated. The positively charged propeller can bind
with high affinity to the ligand-binding arm, which contains negatively
charged residues, causing release of the LDL particle. Experimental electron
density and C trace model of the extracellular region of the LDL receptor
at pH 5.3 based on X-ray crystallographic analysis. In this conformation,
extensive hydrophobic and ionic interactions occur between the  propeller
and the R4 and R5 repeats. Red spheres represent Ca2 ions. [Part (b) from

Ligand
binding arm

R6
β propeller
domain

FPO

R5

R4
R3
R2

G. Rudenko et al., 2002, Science 298:2353.]

cell and then recycle to the plasma membrane, once again to
mediate internalization of ligand molecules. For instance, the
LDL receptor makes one round trip into and out of the cell
every 10–20 minutes, for a total of several hundred trips in
its 20-hour life span.
Internalized receptor-ligand complexes commonly follow
the pathway depicted for the M6P receptor in Figure 17-23
and the LDL receptor in Figure 17-28. Endocytosed cellsurface receptors typically dissociate from their ligands within
late endosomes, which appear as spherical vesicles with tubular branching membranes located a few micrometers from the
cell surface. The original experiments that defined the late endosome sorting vesicle utilized the asialoglycoprotein receptor.
This liver-specific protein mediates the binding and internalization of abnormal glycoproteins whose oligosaccharides terminate in galactose rather than the normal sialic acid, hence
the name asialoglycoprotein. Electron microscopy of liver cells
perfused with asialoglycoprotein reveal that 5–10 minutes
after internalization, ligand molecules are found in the lumen
of late endosomes, while the tubular membrane extensions are
rich in receptor and rarely contain ligand (Figure 17-29).
These findings indicate that the late endosome is the organelle
in which receptors and ligands are uncoupled.
The dissociation of receptor-ligand complexes in late endosomes occurs not only in the endocytic pathway but also
in the delivery of soluble lysosomal enzymes via the secretory
pathway (see Figure 17-23). As discussed in Chapter 7, the
membranes of late endosomes and lysosomes contain V-class

proton pumps that act in concert with Cl channels to acidify the vesicle lumen (see Figure 7-10). Most receptors, including the M6P receptor and cell-surface receptors for LDL
particles and asialoglycoprotein, bind their ligands tightly at
neutral pH but release their ligands if the pH is lowered to
6.0 or below. The late endosome is the first vesicle encountered by receptor-ligand complexes whose luminal pH is sufficiently acidic to promote dissociation of most endocytosed
receptors from their tightly bound ligands.
The mechanism by which the LDL receptor releases bound
LDL particles is now understood in detail (Figure 17-30). At
the endosomal pH of 5.0–5.5, histidine residues in the
-propeller domain of the receptor become protonated, forming a site that can bind with high affinity to the negatively
charged repeats in the ligand-binding domain. This intramolecular interaction sequesters the repeats in a conformation that
cannot simultaneously bind to apoB 100, thus causing release of the bound LDL particle.

The Endocytic Pathway Delivers Iron to Cells
Without Dissociation of Receptor-Transferrin
Complex in Endosomes
An exception to the general theme of pH-dependent receptor-ligand dissociation in the late endosome occurs in the endocytic pathway that delivers transferrin-bound iron to cells.
A major glycoprotein in the blood, transferrin transports
iron to all tissue cells from the liver (the main site of iron

32

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

ters the neutral pH of the extracellular interstitial fluid or
growth medium. The recycled receptor is then free to bind
another molecule of ferrotransferrin, and the released apotransferrin is carried in the bloodstream to the liver or intestine to be reloaded with iron.

storage in the body) and from the intestine (the site of iron
absorption). The iron-free form, apotransferrin, binds two
Fe3 ions very tightly to form ferrotransferrin. All mammalian cells contain cell-surface transferrin receptors that
avidly bind ferrotransferrin at neutral pH, after which the receptor-bound ferrotransferrin is subjected to endocytosis.
Like the components of a LDL particle, the two bound Fe3
atoms remain in the cell, but the apotransferrin part of the
ligand does not dissociate from the receptor and is secreted
from the cell within minutes after being endocytosed.
Although apotransferrin remains bound to the transferrin receptor at the low pH of late endosomes, changes in pH
are critical to functioning of the transferrin endocytic pathway. At a pH below 6.0, the two bound Fe3 atoms dissociate from ferrotransferrin, are reduced to Fe2 by an
unknown mechanism, and then are exported into the cytosol
by an endosomal transporter specific for divalent metal ions.
The receptor-apotransferrin complex remaining after dissociation of the iron atoms is recycled back to the cell surface.
Remarkably, although apotransferrin binds tightly to its receptor at a pH of 5.0 or 6.0, it does not bind at neutral pH.
Hence the bound apotransferrin dissociates from the transferrin receptor when the recycling vesicles fuse with the
plasma membrane and the receptor-ligand complex encoun-

Specialized Vesicles Deliver Cell Components
to the Lysosome for Degradation
The major function of lysosomes is to degrade extracellular
materials taken up by the cell and intracellular components
under certain conditions. Materials to be degraded must be
delivered to the lumen of the lysosome where the various
degradative enzymes reside. As just discussed, endocytosed
ligands (e.g., LDL particles) that dissociate from their receptors in the late endosome subsequently enter the lysosomal
lumen when the membrane of the late endosome fuses with
the membrane of the lysosome (see Figure 17-28). Likewise,
phagosomes carrying bacteria or other particulate matter can
fuse with lysosomes, releasing their contents into the lumen
for degradation. However, the delivery of endocytosed membrane proteins and of cytoplasmic materials to lysosomes for
degradation poses special problems and involves two unusual types of vesicles.

Peroxisome

Autophagic pathway
Autophagic
vesicle

1
Early
endosome

FPO
2

Transport
vesicle
1

Late endosome/
multivesicular body

2

3

Late endosome
Lysosome
Multivesicular endosomal
pathway

▲ FIGURE 17-31 Delivery of plasma-membrane proteins
and cytoplasmic components to the lysosomal interior for
degradation. Left: Early endosomes carrying endocytosed
plasma-membrane proteins (blue) and vesicles carrying
lysosomal membrane proteins (red) from the trans-Golgi network
fuse with the late endosome, transferring their membrane
proteins to the endosomal membrane (step 1 ). Proteins to be
degraded are incorporated into vesicles that bud into the interior
of the late endosome, eventually forming a multivesicular
endosome containing many such internal vesicles (step 2 ).
Fusion of a multivesicular endosome directly with a lysosome
releases the internal vesicles into the lumen of the lysosome
where they can be degraded (step 3 ). Because proton pumps

and other lysomal membrane proteins normally are not
incorporated into internal endosomal vesicles, they are delivered
to the lysosomal membrane and are protected from degradation.
Right: In the autophagic pathway, a cup-shaped structure
forms around portions of the cytosol or an organelle such as a
peroxisome, as shown here. Continued addition of membrane
eventually leads to the formation of an autophagic vesicle
that envelopes its contents by two complete membranes
(step 1 ). Fusion of the outer membrane with the membrane of
a lysosome releases a single-layer vesicle and its contents into
the lysosome interior (step 2 ). [See F. Reggiori and D. J. Klionsky,
2002, Eukaryot. Cell 1:11, and D. J. Katzmann et al., 2002, Nature Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 3:893.]

17.5 • Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and the Sorting of Internalized Proteins

Multivesicular Endosomes Resident lysosomal proteins,
such as V-class proton pumps and other lysosomal membrane proteins, can carry out their functions and remain in
the lysosomal membrane where they are protected from
degradation by the soluble hydrolytic enzymes in the lumen.
Such proteins are delivered to the lysosomal membrane by
transport vesicles that bud from the trans-Golgi network by
the same basic mechanisms described in earlier sections. In
contrast, endocytosed membrane proteins to be degraded are
transferred in their entirety to the interior of the lysosome by
a specialized delivery mechanism. Lysosomal degradation of
cell-surface receptors for extracellular signaling molecules is
a common mechanism for controlling the sensitivity of cells
to such signals (Chapter 13). Receptors that become damaged also are targeted for lysosomal degradation.
Early evidence that membranes can be delivered to the
lumen of compartments came from electron micrographs
showing membrane vesicles and fragments of membranes
within endosomes and lysosomes (see Figure 5-20c). Parallel experiments in yeast revealed that endocytosed receptor
proteins targeted to the vacuole (the yeast organelle equivalent to the lysosome) were primarily associated with membrane fragments and small vesicles within the interior of the
vacuole rather than with the vacuole surface membrane.
These observations suggest that endocytosed membrane
proteins can be incorporated into specialized vesicles that
form at the endosomal membrane (Figure 17-31, left). Although these vesicles are similar in size and appearance to
transport vesicles, they differ topologically. Transport vesicles
bud outward from the surface of a donor organelle into the
cytosol, whereas vesicles within the endosome bud inward
from the surface into the lumen (away from the cytosol).
Mature endosomes containing numerous vesicles in their interior are usually called multivesicular endosomes (or bodies).
Eventually the surface membrane of a multivesicular endosome fuses with the membrane of a lysosome, thereby delivering its internal vesicles and the membrane proteins they
contain into the lysosome interior for degradation. Thus the
sorting of proteins in the endosomal membrane determines
which ones will remain on the lysosome surface (e.g., pumps
and transporters) and which ones will be incorporated into
internal vesicles and ultimately degraded in lysosomes.

Autophagic Vesicles The delivery of bulk amounts of cytosol or entire organelles to lysosomes and their subsequent
degradation is known as autophagy (“eating oneself”). Autophagy is often a regulated process and is typically induced
in cells placed under conditions of starvation or other types
of stress, allowing the cell to recycle macromolecules for use
as nutrients.
The autophagic pathway begins with the formation of a
flattened double-membraned cup-shaped structure (Figure
17-31, right). This structure can grow by vesicle fusion and
eventually seals to form an autophagic vesicle that envelops
a region of the cytosol or an entire organelle (e.g., peroxisome, mitochondrion). Unknown at this time is the origin

33

of the membranes that form the initial cup-shaped organelle
and the vesicles that are added to it, but the endosome itself
is a likely candidate. The outer membrane of an autophagic
vesicle can fuse with the lysosome delivering a large vesicle,
bounded by a single membrane bilayer, to the interior of the
lysosome. The lipases and proteases within the lysosome
eventually will degrade this vesicle and its contents into their
molecular components.

Retroviruses Bud from the Plasma Membrane
by a Process Similar to Formation
of Multivesicular Endosomes
The vesicles that bud into the interior of endosomes have a
topology similar to that of enveloped virus particles that bud
from the plasma membrane of virus-infected cells. Moreover,
recent experiments demonstrate that a common set of proteins
are required for both types of membrane-budding events. In
fact, the two processes so closely parallel one another in mechanistic detail as to suggest that enveloped viruses have evolved
mechanisms to recruit the cellular proteins used in inward endosomal budding for their own purposes.
Many of the proteins required for inward budding of the
endosomal membrane were first identified by mutations in
yeast that blocked delivery of membrane proteins to the interior of the vacuole. More than 10 such “budding” proteins
have been identified in yeast, most with significant similarities to mammalian proteins that evidently perform the same
function in mammalian cells. The current model of endosomal budding to form multivesicular endosomes in mammalian cells is based primarily on studies in yeast (Figure
17-32). A ubiquitin-tagged peripheral membrane protein of
the endosome, known as Hrs, facilitates loading of specific
ubiquitinated membrane cargo proteins into vesicle buds directed into the interior of the endosome. The ubiquitinated
Hrs protein then recruits a set of three different protein complexes to the membrane. These ESCRT (endosomal sorting
complexes required for transport) complexes include the
ubiquitin-binding protein Tsg101. The membrane-associated
ESCRT complexes act to complete vesicle budding, leading
to release of a vesicle carrying specific membrane cargo into
the interior of the endosome. Finally, an ATPase, known as
Vps4, uses the energy from ATP hydrolysis to disassemble
the ESCRT complexes, releasing them into the cytosol for
another round of budding. In the fusion event that pinches
off a completed endosomal vesicle, the ESCRT proteins and
Vps4 most likely are functionally equivalent to SNAREs and
NSF, respectively, in the typical membrane-fusion process
discussed previously (see Figure 17-11).
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is an enveloped retrovirus that buds from the plasma membrane
of infected cells in a process driven by viral Gag protein, the
major structural component of completed virus particles.
Gag protein binds to the plasma membrane of an infected
cell and ≈4000 Gag molecules polymerize into a spherical

34

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

 FIGURE 17-32 Model of the
common mechanism for formation of
multivesicular endosomes and budding
of HIV from the plasma membrane.
Bottom: In endosomal budding, ubiquitinated
Hrs on the endosomal membrane directs
loading of specific membrane cargo proteins
(blue) into vesicle buds and then recruits
cytosolic ESCRT complexes to the
membrane (step 1 ). Note that both Hrs and
the recruited cargo proteins are tagged with
ubiquitin. After the set of bound ESCRT
complexes mediate membrane fusion and
pinching off of the completed vesicle
(step 2 ), they are disasssembled by the
ATPase Vps4 and returned to the cytosol
(step 3 ). Top: Budding of HIV particles from
HIV-infected cells occurs by a similar
mechanism using the virally encoded Gag
protein and cellular ESCRT complexes and
Vps4 (steps 4 – 6 ). Ubiquitinated Gag near
a budding particle functions like Hrs. See
text for discussion. [Adapted from O. Pornillos

HIV virus
HIV Env

Core particle

4

5

Extracellular
space
Plasma membrane
Cytosol

HIV Gag
protein

Ubiquitin

ATP

6

FPO

ADP + Pi

ESCRT complex
assembly

Hrs protein

1

Cargo proteins

 FIGURE 17-33 Electron micrographs of virus budding
from wild-type and ESCRT-deficient HIV-infected cells. (a) In
wild-type cells infected with HIV, virus particles bud from the
plasma membrane and are rapidly released into the extracellular
space. (b) In cells that lack the functional ESCRT protein Tsg101,
the viral Gag protein forms dense virus-like structures, but
budding of these structures from the plasma membrane cannot
be completed and chains of incomplete viral buds still attached to
the plasma membrane accumulate. [Courtesy of W. Sundquist.]

ESCRT complex
disassembly

3

ADP + Pi

Vps4
ATP

Ubiquitin

2

et al., 2002, Trends Cell Biol. 12:569.]

shell, producing a structure that looks like a vesicle bud
protruding outward from the plasma membrane. Mutational studies with HIV have revealed that the N-terminal
segment of Gag protein is required for association with the
plasma membrane, whereas the C-terminal segment is required for pinching off of complete HIV particles. For instance, if the portion of the viral genome encoding the
C-terminus of Gag is removed, HIV buds will form in infected cells, but pinching off does not occur and thus no
free virus particles are released.
The first indication that HIV budding employs the same
molecular machinery as vesicle budding into endosomes

Vps4

Lumen of
endosome

Endosomal
vesicle

came from the observation that Tsg101, a component of the
ESCRT complex, binds to the C-terminus of Gag protein.
Subsequent findings have clearly established the mechanistic parallels between the two processes (Figure 17-32). For
example, Gag is ubiquitinated as part of the process of virus
budding, and in cells with mutations in Tsg101 or Vps4, HIV
virus buds accumulate but cannot pinch off from the membrane (Figure 17-33). Moreover, when a segment from the
cellular Hrs protein is added to a truncated Gag protein,
proper budding and release of virus particles is restored.
Taken together, these results indicate that Gag protein mimics the function of Hrs, redirecting ESCRT complexes to the

17.6 • Synaptic Vesicle Function and Formation

plasma membrane where they can function in the budding of
virus particles.
Other enveloped retroviruses such as murine leukemia
virus and Rous sarcoma virus also have been shown to require ESCRT complexes for their budding, although each
virus appears to have evolved a somewhat different mechanism to recruit ESCRT complexes to the site of virus budding.

Transcytosis Moves Some Endocytosed Ligands
Across an Epithelial Cell Layer
As noted previously, transcytosis is used by some cells in the
apical-basolateral sorting of certain membrane proteins (see
Figure 17-26). This process of transcellular transport, which
combines endocytosis and exocytosis, also can be employed
to import an extracellular ligand from one side of a cell,
transport it across the cytoplasm, and secrete it from the
plasma membrane at the opposite side. Transcytosis occurs
mainly in sheets of polarized epithelial cells.
Maternal immunoglobulins (antibodies) contained in ingested breast milk are transported across the intestinal epithelial cells of the newborn mouse and human by transcytosis
(Figure 17-34). The Fc receptor that mediates this movement
binds antibodies at the acidic pH of 6 found in the intestinal
lumen but not at the neutral pH of the extracellular fluid on
the basal side of the intestinal epithelium. This difference in
the pH of the extracellular media on the two sides of intestinal epithelial cells allows maternal immunoglobulins to

35

move in one direction—from the lumen to the blood. The
same process also moves circulating maternal immunoglobulins across mammalian yolk-sac cells into the fetus.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 17.5
Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and the Sorting
of Internalized Proteins
Some extracellular ligands that bind to specific cell-surface receptors are internalized, along with their receptors,
in clathrin-coated vesicles whose coats also contain AP2
complexes.

■

Sorting signals in the cytosolic domain of cell-surface receptors target them into clathrin/AP2-coated pits for internalization. Known signals include the Asn-Pro-X-Tyr,
Tyr-X-X-, and Leu-Leu sequences (see Table 17-2).

■

The endocytic pathway delivers some ligands (e.g., LDL
particles) to lysosomes where they are degraded. Most receptor-ligand complexes dissociate in the acidic milieu of
the late endosome; the receptors are recycled to the plasma
membrane, while the ligands are sorted to lysosomes (see
Figure 17-28).

■

Iron is imported into cells by an endocytic pathway in
which Fe3 ions are released from ferrotransferrin in the
late endosome. The receptor-apotransferrin complex is recycled to the cell surface where the complex dissociates,
releasing both the receptor and apotransferrin for reuse.
■

Endocytosed membrane proteins destined for degradation in the lysosome are incorporated into vesicles that bud
into the interior of the endosome. Multivesicular endosomes, which contain many of these internal vesicles, can
fuse with the lysosome to deliver the vesicles to the interior of the lysosome (see Figure 17-31).

■

IgG

Epithelial cells
Fc region
Fc receptor
Membrane

Blood and
interstitial
fluid
(pH ~7)

FPO

Intestinal
lumen
(pH ~6)

Endosome

A portion of the cytoplasm or an entire organelle (e.g.,
peroxisome) can be enveloped in a flattened membrane and
eventually incorporated into a double-membraned autophagic vesicle. Fusion of the outer vesicle membrane with
the lysosome delivers the enveloped contents to the interior of the lysosome for degradation.

■

Some of the cellular components (e.g., ESCRT complexes) that mediate inward budding of endosomal membranes are used in the budding and pinching off of enveloped viruses such as HIV from the plasma membrane
of virus-infected cells (see Figure 17-32).

■

Basal
membrane

Luminal
membrane

Tight junction

▲ FIGURE 17-34 Transcytosis of maternal IgG
immunoglobulins across the intestinal epithelial cells of
newborn mice. This transcellular movement of a ligand involves
both endocytosis and exocytosis. The one-way movement of
ligand from the intestinal lumen to the blood depends on the
differential affinity of the Fc receptor for antibody at pH 6 (strong
binding) and at pH 7 (weak binding). See text for discussion.

17.6 Synaptic Vesicle Function
and Formation
In this final section we consider the regulated secretion of
neurotransmitters that is the basis for signaling by many
nerve cells. These small, water-soluble molecules (e.g., acetyl-

36

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

choline, dopamine) are released at chemical synapses, specialized sites of contact between a signaling neuron and a receiving cell. Generally signals are transmitted in only one
direction: an axon terminal from a presynaptic cell releases
neurotransmitter molecules that diffuse through a narrow
extracellular space (the synaptic cleft) and bind to receptors
on a postsynaptic cell (see Figure 7-31). The membrane of
the postsynaptic cell, which can be another neuron, a muscle cell, or a gland cell, is located within approximately 50
nm of the presynaptic membrane.
Neurotransmitters are stored in specialized regulated
secretory vesicles, known as synaptic vesicles, which are
40–50 nm in diameter. Exocytosis of these vesicles and release of neurotransmitters is initiated when a stimulatory
electrical impulse (action potential) travels down the axon of
a presynaptic cell to the axon terminal where it triggers opening of voltage-gated Ca2 channels. The subsequent localized rise in the cytosolic Ca2 concentration induces some
synaptic vesicles to fuse with the plasma membrane, releasing their contents into the synaptic cleft. We described the
major events in signal transmission at chemical synapses and
the effects of neurotransmitter binding on postsynaptic cells
in Chapter 7. Here we focus on the regulated secretion of
neurotransmitters and the formation of synaptic vesicles in
the context of the basic principles of vesicular trafficking already outlined in this chapter.

Synaptic Vesicles Loaded with Neurotransmitter
Are Localized Near the Plasma Membrane
The exocytosis of neurotransmitters from synaptic vesicles involves targeting and fusion events similar to those that lead
to release of secreted proteins in the secretory pathway. However, several unique features permit the very rapid release of
neurotransmitters in response to arrival of an action potential
at the presynaptic axon terminal. For example, in resting neurons some neurotransmitter-filled synaptic vesicles are
“docked” at the plasma membrane; others are in reserve in the
active zone near the plasma membrane at the synaptic cleft.
In addition, the membrane of synaptic vesicles contains a specialized Ca2-binding protein that senses the rise in cytosolic
Ca2 after arrival of an action potential, triggering rapid fusion of docked vesicles with the presynaptic membrane.
A highly organized arrangement of cytoskeletal fibers in
the axon terminal helps localize synaptic vesicles in the active
zone (Figure 17-35). The vesicles themselves are linked together by synapsin, a fibrous phosphoprotein associated with
the cytosolic surface of all synaptic-vesicle membranes. Filaments of synapsin also radiate from the plasma membrane
and bind to vesicle-associated synapsin. These interactions
probably keep synaptic vesicles close to the part of the
plasma membrane facing the synapse. Indeed, synapsin
knockout mice, although viable, are prone to seizures; during
repetitive stimulation of many neurons in such mice, the
number of synaptic vesicles that fuse with the plasma mem-

Axon terminal

Synapsin-containing
fibers

Postsynaptic cell

Active
zone

Docked synaptic
vesicle

0.1 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 17-35 Fibrous proteins
help localize synaptic vesicles to the active zone of axon
terminals. In this micrograph of an axon terminal obtained by the
rapid-freezing deep-etch technique, synapsin fibers can be seen
to interconnect the vesicles and to connect some to the active
zone of the plasma membrane. Docked vesicles are ready to be
exocytosed. Those toward the center of the terminal are in the
process of being filled with neurotransmitter. [From D. M. D. Landis
et al., 1988, Neuron 1:201.]

brane is greatly reduced. Thus synapsins are thought to recruit synaptic vesicles to the active zone.
Rab3A, a GTP-binding protein located in the membrane
of synaptic vesicles, also is required for targeting of neurotransmitter-filled vesicles to the active zone of presynaptic
cells facing the synaptic cleft. Rab3A knockout mice, like
synapsin-deficient mice, exhibit a reduced number of synaptic vesicles able to fuse with the plasma membrane after
repetitive stimulation. The neuron-specific Rab3 is similar
in sequence and function to other Rab proteins that participate in docking vesicles on particular target membranes in
the secretory pathway.

A Calcium-Binding Protein Regulates Fusion
of Synaptic Vesicles with the Plasma Membrane
Fusion of synaptic vesicles with the plasma membrane of
axon terminals depends on the same proteins that mediate
membrane fusion of other regulated secretory vesicles. The
principal v-SNARE in synaptic vesicles (VAMP) tightly binds
syntaxin and SNAP-25, the principal t-SNAREs in the
plasma membrane of axon terminals, to form four-helix
SNARE complexes. After fusion, SNAP proteins and NSF

17.6 • Synaptic Vesicle Function and Formation

within the axon terminal promote disassociation of VAMP
from t-SNAREs, as in the fusion of secretory vesicles depicted previously (see Figure 17-11).
Strong evidence for the role of VAMP in neurotransmitter exocytosis is provided by the mechanism of
action of botulinum toxin, a bacterial protein that
can cause the paralysis and death characteristic of botulism, a
type of food poisoning. The toxin is composed of two polypeptides: One binds to motor neurons that release acetylcholine at
synapses with muscle cells, facilitating entry of the other
polypeptide, a protease, into the cytosol of the axon terminal.
The only protein this protease cleaves is VAMP. After the botulinum protease enters an axon terminal, synaptic vesicles that
are not already docked rapidly lose their ability to fuse with the
plasma membrane because cleavage of VAMP prevents assembly of SNARE complexes. The resulting block in acetylcholine
release at neuromuscular synapses causes paralysis. However,
vesicles that are already docked exhibit remarkable resistance
to the toxin indicating that SNARE complexes may already be
in a partially assembled, protease-resistant state when vesicles
are docked on the presynaptic membrane. ❚
Presynaptic cell

37

The signal that triggers exocytosis of docked synaptic
vesicles is a rise in the Ca2 concentration in the cytosol near
vesicles from 0.1 M, characteristic of resting cells, to
1–100 M following arrival of an action potential in stimulated cells. The speed with which synaptic vesicles fuse with
the presynaptic membrane after a rise in cytosolic Ca2 (less
than 1 msec) indicates that the fusion machinery is entirely
assembled in the resting state and can rapidly undergo a conformational change leading to exocytosis of neurotransmitter. A Ca2-binding protein called synaptotagmin, located
in the membrane of synaptic vesicles, is thought to be a key
component of the vesicle fusion machinery that triggers exocytosis in response to Ca2 (Figure 17-36).
Several lines of evidence support a role for synaptotagmin as the Ca2 sensor for exocytosis of neurotransmitters.
For instance, mutant embryos of Drosophila and C. elegans
that completely lack synaptotagmin fail to hatch and exhibit
very reduced, uncoordinated muscle contractions. Larvae
with partial loss-of-function mutations of synaptotagmin
survive, but their neurons are defective in Ca2-stimulated
vesicle exocytosis. Moreover, in mice, mutations in synaptotagmin that decrease its affinity for Ca2 cause a corresponding

Transporter

4

Synaptic vesicle

3
Clathrin
Shibire
mutation

Synoptotagmin

FPO
2
+ Ca2+

Dynamin

SNARE
complex

Synaptic
Neurotransmitter
cleft

Postsynaptic cell

1

Botulinum
toxin

Neurotransmitter
receptors

▲ FIGURE 17-36 Release of neurotransmitters and the
recycling of synaptic vesicles. Step 1 : Synaptic vesicles loaded
with neurotransmitter (red circles) move to the active zone and
then dock at defined sites on the plasma membrane of a
presynaptic cell. Synpatotagmin prevents membrane fusion and
release of neurotransmitter. Botulinum toxin prevents exocytosis
by proteolytically cleaving VAMP, the v-SNARE on vesicles. Step
2 : In response to a nerve impulse (action potential), voltagegated Ca2 channels in the plasma membrane open, allowing an
influx of Ca2 from the extracellular medium. The resulting Ca2induced conformational change in synaptotagmin leads to fusion
of docked vesicles with the plasma membrane and release of
neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. Step 3 : After

clathrin/AP vesicles containing v-SNARE and neurotransmitter
transporter proteins bud inward and are pinched off in a dynaminmediated process, they lose their coat proteins. Dynamin
mutations such as shibire in Drosophila block the re-formation of
synaptic vesicles, leading to paralysis. Step 4 : The uncoated
vesicles import neurotransmitters from the cytosol, generating
fully reconstituted synaptic vesicles and completing the cycle.
Most synaptic vesicles are formed by endocytic recycling as
depicted here. However, endocytic vesicles containing membrane
from the axon terminus can fuse with the endosome; budding
from this compartment can then form “new” synaptic vesicles.
[See K. Takei et al., 1996, J. Cell. Biol. 133:1237; V. Murthy and
C. Stevens, 1998, Nature 392:497; and R. Jahn et al., 2003, Cell 112:519.]

38

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

increase in the amount of cytosolic Ca2 needed to trigger
rapid exocytosis.
Several hypotheses concerning how synaptotagmin promotes neurotransmitter exocytosis have been proposed, but
the precise mechanism of its function is still unresolved.
Synaptotagmin is known to bind phospholipids and after undergoing a Ca2-induced conformational change, it may
promote association of the phospholipids in the vesicle and
plasma membranes. Synaptotagmin also binds to SNARE
proteins and may catalyze a late stage in assembly of SNARE
complexes when bound to Ca2. Finally, synaptotagmin may
also act to inhibit inappropriate exocytosis in resting cells. At
the low cytosolic Ca2 levels found in resting nerve cells,
synaptotagmin apparently binds to a complex of the plasmamembrane proteins neurexin and syntaxin. The presence of
synaptotagmin blocks binding of other essential fusion proteins to the neurexin-syntaxin complex, thereby preventing
vesicle fusion. When synaptotagmin binds Ca2, it is displaced from the complex, allowing other proteins to bind
and thus initiating membrane docking or fusion. Thus synaptotagmin may operate as a “clamp” to prevent fusion from
proceeding in the absence of a Ca2 signal.

Fly Mutants Lacking Dynamin Cannot Recycle
Synaptic Vesicles
Synaptic vesicles are formed primarily by endocytic budding
from the plasma membrane of axon terminals. Endocytosis
usually involves clathrin-coated pits and is quite specific, in that
several membrane proteins unique to the synaptic vesicles (e.g.,
neurotransmitter transporters) are specifically incorporated
into the endocytosed vesicles. In this way, synaptic-vesicle
membrane proteins can be reused and the recycled vesicles
refilled with neurotransmitter (see Figure 17-36).
As in the formation of other clathrin/AP-coated vesicles,
pinching off of endocytosed synaptic vesicles requires the
GTP-binding protein dynamin (see Figure 17-20). Indeed,
analysis of a temperature-sensitive Drosophila mutant called
shibire (shi), which encodes the fly dynamin protein, provided early evidence for the role of dynamin in endocytosis.
At the permissive temperature of 20C, the mutant flies are
normal, but at the nonpermissive temperature of 30C, they
are paralyzed (shibire, paralyzed in Japanese) because pinching off of clathrin-coated pits in neurons and other cells is
blocked. When viewed in the electron microscope, the shi
neurons at 30C show abundant clathrin-coated pits with
long necks but few clathrin-coated vesicles. The appearance
of nerve terminals in shi mutants at the nonpermissive temperature is similar to that of terminals from normal neurons
incubated in the presence of a nonhydrolyzable analog of
GTP (see Figure 17-21). Because of their inability to pinch
off new synaptic vesicles, the neurons in shi mutants eventually become depleted of synaptic vesicles when flies are
shifted to the nonpermissive temperature, leading to a cessation of synaptic signaling and paralysis.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 17.6
Synaptic Vesicle Formation and Function
Transmission of nerve impulses at chemical synapses depends on the exocytosis of neurotransmitter-filled synaptic vesicles and the regeneration of empty vesicles by endocytosis.

■

Efficient recruitment of vesicles to the presynaptic membrane adjacent to the synaptic cleft requires cytosolic proteins, such as synapsin, and Rab3a, a GTP-binding protein
that is tethered to the vesicle membrane.

■

In resting neurons, synaptotagmin in the synaptic-vesicle membrane prevents fusion of docked vesicles with the
membrane. The influx of Ca2 following arrival of an action potential at the axon terminus leads to Ca2 binding
by synaptotagmin, causing a change in its conformation
that permits vesicle fusion to proceed (see Figure 17-36).
■

Synaptic vesicles are rapidly regenerated by endocytic
budding of clathrin-coated vesicles from the plasma membrane, a process that requires dynamin. After the clathrin
coat is shed, vesicles are refilled with neurotransmitter and
move to the active zone for another round of docking and
fusion.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
The biochemical, genetic, and structural information presented in this chapter shows that we now have a basic understanding of how protein traffic flows from one
membrane-bounded compartment to another. Our understanding of these processes has come largely from experiments on the function of various types of transport vesicles.
These studies have led to the identification of many vesicle
components and the discovery of how these components
work together to drive vesicle budding, to incorporate the
correct set of cargo molecules from the donor organelle, and
then to mediate fusion of a completed vesicle with the membrane of a target organelle.
Despite these advances, there remain important stages
of the secretory and endocytic pathways about which we
know relatively little. For example, we do not yet know
what types of proteins form the coats of either the regulated or constitutive secretory vesicles that bud from the
trans-Golgi network. Indeed, it is not clear whether assembly of a cytosolic coat drives their budding at all. Moreover,
the types of signals on cargo proteins that might target
them for packaging into secretory vesicles have not yet been
defined. Another baffling process is the formation of vesicles that bud away from the cytosol, such as the vesicles
that enter multivesicular endosomes. Although some of the
proteins that participate in formation of these “internal”
endosome vesicles are known, we do not know what de-

Review the Concepts

termines their shape or what type of process causes them to
pinch off from the donor membrane. In the future, it should
be possible for these and other poorly understood vesicletrafficking steps to be dissected through the use of the same
powerful combination of biochemical and genetic methods
that have delineated the working parts of COPI, COPII,
and clathrin/AP vesicles.
Questions still remain about vesicle trafficking between
the ER and cis-Golgi, between Golgi stacks, and between
the trans-Golgi and endosome, the best-characterized transport steps. In particular, our understanding of how proteins
are actually sorted between these organelles is incomplete
largely because of the highly dynamic nature of all the organelles along the secretory pathway. Although we know
many of the details of how particular vesicle components
function, we cannot account for why their functions are restricted to specific stages in the overall flow of anterograde
and retrograde transport steps. For example, we cannot explain why COPII vesicles fuse with one another to form a
new cis-Golgi stack, whereas COPI vesicles fuse with the
membrane of the ER, since both vesicle types appear to
contain similar sets of v-SNARE proteins. In the same vein,
we do not know what feature of the Golgi membrane actually distinguishes a COPI-coated vesicle bud from a
clathrin/AP-coated bud. In both cases binding of ARF protein to the Golgi membrane appears to initiate vesicle budding. The solution to these problems will require a more
integrated understanding of the flow of vesicular traffic in
the context of the entire secretory pathway. Recent improvements in our ability to image vesicular transport of
cargo proteins in live cells gives hope that some of these
more subtle aspects of vesicle function may be clarified in
the near future.

KEY TERMS
AP (adapter protein)
complexes
anterograde transport
ARF protein
autophagy
cisternal progression
clathrin
constitutive secretion
COPI
COPII
dynamin
ESCRT complexes
late endosome
mannose 6-phosphate
(M6P)
multivesicular endosomes

Rab proteins
receptor-mediated
endocytosis
regulated secretion
retrograde transport
sec mutants
secretory pathway
sorting signals
synaptotagmin
transcytosis
trans-Golgi network (TGN)
transport vesicles
t-SNAREs
v-SNAREs

39

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. The studies of Palade and colleagues using pulse-chase
labeling with radioactively labeled amino acids and autoradiography to visualize the location of the radiolabeled proteins is a classic case of the experimentalist realizing what
works well in his or her biological system. These experiments
were done with pancreatic acinar cells. Alternatively, HeLa
cells can be used. HeLa cells are a classic human cell line
originating from a cervical carcinoma. When applied to
HeLa cells, the same experimental protocols are a dismal
failure with respect to tracking secretion. How come?
2. Sec18 is a yeast gene that encodes NSF. It is a class C
mutant in the yeast secretory pathway. What is the mechanistic role of NSF in membrane trafficking. As indicated by
its class C phenotype, how does an NSF mutation produce
accumulation of vesicles at what appears to be one stage of
the secretory pathway?
3. Vesicle budding is associated with coat proteins. What is
the role of coat proteins in vesicle budding? How are coat
proteins recruited to membranes? What kinds of molecules
are likely to be included or excluded from newly formed vesicles? What is the best-known example of a protein likely to
be involved in vesicle pinching off?
4. Curiously, treatment of cells with the drug brefeldin A
(BFA) has the effect of decoating Golgi apparatus membranes, resulting in a cell in which the vast majority of Golgi
apparatus proteins are found in the ER. What inferences can
be made from this observation regarding roles of coat proteins other than promoting vesicle formation? Mutation of
Arf1 can produce the same phenotype as that of BFA. Predict
the nucleotide binding state of the Arf1 mutation.
5. EAGE is an antibody to an exposed “hinge” region of
COPI, which when microinjected into HeLa cells blocks the
function of COPI. Predict what the consequences of this
functional block should be for anterograde transport from
the ER to the plasma membrane. Propose an experiment to
test whether the effect of EAGE microinjection is initially on
anterograde or retrograde transport.
6. Specificity in fusion between vesicles involves two discrete and sequential processes. Describe the first of the two
processes and its regulation by GTPase switch proteins. Predict the consequences of overexpression of the GTPrestricted form of the early endosome–associated Rab, Rab5,
on the size of early endosomes.
7. Two different protein-mediated membrane fusion
processes are described in this chapter, SNARE- and viral
HA-mediated fusion. Compare and contrast the two. In each
example give particular attention to what the direct effect of
polypeptide sequences in membrane fusion is and to what
controls the specificity of membrane fusion in each.

40

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

8. Retrieval sequences are an essential mechanistic feature
of the secretory pathway. List the two known examples of
retrieval sequences for soluble and membrane proteins of the
ER? How does the presence of a retrieval sequence on a soluble ER protein result in its retrieval from the cis-Golgi complex? Describe how the concept of a retrieval sequence is
essential to the cisternal-progression model.
9. Adapter protein (AP) complexes bind directly to the cytosolic face of membrane proteins and also interact with
clathrin. What are the four known adapter protein complexes? Why may clathrin be considered to be an accessory
protein to a core coat composed of adapter proteins?
10. I-cell disease is a classic example of an inherited human
defect in protein targeting that affects an entire class of proteins, soluble enzymes of the lysosome. What is the molecular defect in I-cell disease? Why does it affect the targeting
of an entire class of proteins? Mutations in what other genes
would produce the same phenotype?
11. The TGN, trans-Golgi network, is the site of multiple
sorting processes as proteins and lipids exit the Golgi complex. Compare and contrast the sorting of proteins to lysosomes versus the packaging of proteins into regulated
secretory granules such as those containing insulin. Compare
and contrast the sorting of proteins to the basolateral versus
apical cell surfaces in MDCK cells versus hepatocytes.
12. The efficiency of bacterial phagocytosis by macrophages
is increased greatly by opsonization, i.e., decoration by antibody molecules bound to the bacterial surface. On the basis
of prior descriptions of antibody structure, to what portion
of the immunoglobulin molecule do you predict a macrophage receptor for opsonized bacteria is directed? Design an
experiment to test this prediction.
13. Hydrogen ion concentration, characterized by pH, is
often used to regulate ligand-receptor or iron-transferrin dissociation in receptor-mediated endocytosis. Describe how
this mechanism works, taking LDL-LDL receptor as the example. Mannose 6-phosphate–mannose 6-phosphate receptor interactions are also pH-dependent. How does elevating
endosomal pH lead to the secretion of newly synthesized
lysosomal enzymes into the extracellular media?
14. What mechanistic features are shared by (a) the formation of multivesicular endosomes by budding into the
interior of the endosome and (b) the outward budding of
HIV virus at the cell surface? You wish to design a peptide inhibitor/competitor of HIV budding and decide to
mimic in a synthetic peptide a portion of the HIV Gag protein. Which portion of the HIV Gag protein is the most
logical choice? What normal cellular process might this inhibitor block?
15. The exocytosis of neurotransmitter-filled synaptic
vesicles is an example of regulated exocytosis. How is the

influx of Ca2 following arrival of an action potential at
the axon terminus sensed and linked to the exocytosis of
synaptic vesicles? Why do normal Drosophila neurons incubated in the presence of a nonhydrolyzable analog of
GTP have the same appearance as nerve terminals in shi
mutants?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
A wide range of bacterial and plant protein toxins, e.g.,
Pseudomonas and Shiga toxin, bacterial toxins, and ricin,
a plant toxin, are heteromeric proteins consisting of A and
B subunits. The A subunit is catalytic. For Shiga toxin, the
proximal cause of food poisoning due to bacterially contaminated hamburger, the A subunit is an N-glycosidase
and specifically cleaves 28S ribosomal RNA, thereby intoxicating cells by inhibiting protein synthesis. One molecule of A subunit is sufficient to kill a cell. Interestingly the
A subunit of Shiga toxin is transferred into the cytosol
from the lumen of the ER by the Sec61 protein translocon.
The B subunit is the targeting subunit. The B subunit binds
to a glycolipid GM3 on the cell surface that acts as the
Shiga toxin internalization receptor. The B subunit itself
is nontoxic and may be used to track the routing of Shiga
toxin in cells in the absence of toxicity effects. Shiga toxin
is internalized into endosomes, from endosomes is transferred to the Golgi complex, and from the Golgi complex
goes to the ER.
In a series of experiments designed to characterize the
comparative mechanisms of Pseudomonas and Shiga toxin
transfer from the Golgi complex to the ER, investigators first
sequenced the respective targeting subunits. The C-terminal
24 amino acids of the B subunits of Pseudomonas toxin and
Shiga toxin are shown below:
C-terminal 24 amino acids of Pseudomonas toxin B subunit
KEQAISALPD YASQPGKPPR KDEL
C-terminal 24 amino acids of Shiga toxin B subunit
TGMTVTIKTN ACHNGGGFSE VIFR
From inspection of these sequences, what is the probable targeting receptor for transfer of Pseudomonas and Shiga toxins from the Golgi apparatus to the ER?
To test these predictions directly, investigators experimentally characterized the role of COPI coat proteins and
KDEL receptors in intoxication. Monkey cells were microinjected with antibodies directed against either COPI coat proteins or the cytoplasmic domain of KDEL receptors. Cells
then were incubated with Pseudomonas or Shiga toxin for
4 h. Protein synthesis was determined following a 30-minute
pulse with [35S]methionine. Results are shown in the accompanying figure.

References

41

What evidence do these results provide for or against
transport of wild-type Shiga toxin B subunit from the Golgi
complex to the ER in COPI-coated vesicles? What is the importance of the results with B-KDEL in interpreting the overall results of these experiments?

REFERENCES

Techniques for Studying the Secretory Pathway

Effect of microinjected antibodies on cell intoxication by
Pseudomonas and Shiga toxin. Protein synthesis in the absence
of microinjected antibodies equals 100.

How do these results support your sequence-based predictions and the known role of COPI coat protein in retrograde transport?
To characterize in a direct manner whether or not Shiga
toxin transfer from the Golgi apparatus to the ER is dependent on COPI coat proteins, investigators prepared two different fluorescent dye–conjugated Shiga toxin B subunits and
then assessed by fluorescence microscopy transport of the B
subunits from the Golgi complex to the ER. The first preparation was Cy3-conjugated wild-type B subunit. The second
preparation was Cy3-conjugated B subunit in which the C
terminal was extended by the four amino acids KDEL (BKDEL). Cells were microinjected with antibodies directed
against COPI coat proteins. Following microinjection, cells
were incubated with fluorescent B subunit for various periods of time and B subunit distributions scored. The results
are shown in the figure below.

Beckers, C. J., et al. 1987. Semi-intact cells permeable to macromolecules:
use in reconstitution of protein transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to
the Golgi complex. Cell 50:523–534.
Kaiser, C. A., and R. Schekman. 1990. Distinct sets of SEC genes
govern transport vesicle formation and fusion early in the secretory
pathway. Cell 61:723–733.
Novick, P., et al. 1981. Order of events in the yeast secretory
pathway. Cell 25:461–469.
Lippincott-Schwartz J., et al. 2001. Studying protein dynamics
in living cells. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:444–456.
Orci, L., et al. 1989. Dissection of a single round of vesicular
transport: sequential intermediates for intercisternal movement in the
Golgi stack. Cell 56:357–368.
Palade, G. 1975. Intracellular aspects of the process of protein
synthesis. Science 189:347–358.

Molecular Mechanisms of Vesicular Traffic
Jahn, R., et al. 2003. Membrane fusion. Cell 112:519–533.
Kirchhausen, T. 2000. Three ways to make a vesicle. Nature Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 1:187–198.
McNew, J. A., et al. 2000. Compartmental specificity of cellular membrane fusion encoded in SNARE proteins. Nature
407:153–159.
Ostermann, J., et al. 1993. Stepwise assembly of functionally active transport vesicles. Cell 75:1015–1025.
Schimmöller, F., I. Simon, and S. Pfeffer. 1998. Rab GTPases, directors of vesicle docking. J. Biol. Chem. 273:22161–22164.
Skehel, J. J., and D. C. Wiley. 2000. Receptor binding and membrane fusion in virus entry: the influenza hemagglutinin. Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 69:531–569.
Söllner, T., et al. SNAP receptors implicated in vesicle targeting
and fusion. Nature 362:318–324.
Springer, S., et al. 1999. A primer on vesicle budding. Cell
97:145–148.
Zerial, M., and H. McBride. 2001. Rab proteins as membrane
organizers. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:107–117.

Vesicle Trafficking in the Early Stages of the Secretory
Pathway

Effect of microinjected antibodies directed against COPI proteins
on the transport of wild type Shiga toxin B-subunit or Shiga toxin
E-subunit KDEL (B-KDEL) from Golgi complex to the ER.

Barlowe, C. 2002. COPII-dependent transport from the endoplasmic reticulum. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:417–422.
Bi, X., et al. 2002. Structure of the Sec23/24-Sar1 pre-budding
complex of the COPII vesicle coat. Nature 419:271–277.
Glick, B. S., and V. Malhotra. 1998. The curious status of the
Golgi apparatus. Cell 95:883–889.
Kuehn, M. J., and R. Schekman. 1997. COPII and secretory cargo capture into transport vesicles. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
9:477– 483.

42

CHAPTER 17 • Vesicular Traffic, Secretion, and Endocytosis

Letourneur, F., et al. 1994. Coatomer is essential for retrieval
of dilysine-tagged proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell
79:1199–1207.
Pelham, H. R. 1995. Sorting and retrieval between the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
7:530–535.
Schekman, R., and I. Mellman. 1997. Does COPI go both ways?
Cell 90:197–200.

Protein Sorting and Processing in Later Stages of the
Secretory Pathway
Bonifacino, J. S., and E. C. Dell’Angelica. 1999. Molecular bases
for the recognition of tyrosine-based sorting signals. J. Cell Biol.
145:923–926.
Ghosh, P., et al. 2003. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors: new
twists in the tale. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Bio. 4:202–213.
Hinshaw, J. E. 2000. Dynamin and its role in membrane fission.
Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 16:483–519.
Kirchhausen, T. 2000. Clathrin. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 69:699–727.
Mostov, K. E., et al. 1995. Regulation of protein traffic in
polarized epithelial cells: the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor
model. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 60:775–781.
Robinson, M. S., and J. S. Bonifacino. 2001. Adaptor-related
proteins. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:444– 453.
Schmid, S. 1997. Clathrin-coated vesicle formation and protein
sorting: an integrated process. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 66:511–548.
Simons, K., and E. Ikonen. 1997. Functional rafts in cell membranes. Nature 387:569–572.
Steiner, D. F., et al. 1996. The role of prohormone convertases
in insulin biosynthesis: evidence for inherited defects in their
action in man and experimental animals. Diabetes Metab.
22:94–104.
Tooze, S. A., et al. 2001. Secretory granule biogenesis: rafting to
the SNARE. Trends Cell Biol. 11:116–122.

Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and the Sorting
of Internalized Proteins
Brown, M. S., and J. L. Goldstein. 1986. Receptor-mediated
pathway for cholesterol homeostasis. Nobel Prize Lecture. Science
232:34–47.
Katzmann, D. J., et al. 2002. Receptor downregulation and multivesicular-body sorting. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:893–905.
Khalfan, W. A., and D. J. Klionsky. 2002. Molecular
machinery required for autophagy and the cytoplasm to vacuole targeting (Cvt) pathway in S. cerevisiae. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
14:468–475.
Lemmon, S. K., and L. M. Traub. 2000. Sorting in the endosomal
system in yeast and animal cells. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12:457–466.
Pornillos, O., et al. 2002. Mechanisms of enveloped RNA virus
budding. Trends Cell Biol. 12:569–579.
Riezman, H., P. Woodman, G. van Meer, and M. Marsh. 1997.
Molecular mechanisms of endocytosis. Cell 91:731–738.
Robinson, M. S., C. Watts, and M. Zerial. 1996. Membrane dynamics in endocytosis. Cell 84:13–21.
Rudenko, G., et al. 2002. Structure of the LDL receptor extracellular domain at endosomal pH. Science 298:2353–2358.

Synaptic Vesicle Function and Formation
Betz, W., and J. Angleson. 1998. The synaptic vesicle cycle. Ann.
Rev. Physiol. 60:347–364.
Chapman, E. R. 2002. Synaptotagmin: a Ca2 sensor that triggers exocytosis? Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:498–508.
De Camilli, P., et al. 1995. The function of dynamin in endocytosis. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 5:559–565.
Geppert, M., and T. Sudhof. 1998. Rab3 and synaptotagmin:
the yin and yang of synaptic membrane fusion. Ann. Rev. Neurosci.
21:75–96.
Neimann, H., J. Blasi, and R. Jahn. 1994. Clostridial neurotoxins: new tools for dissecting exocytosis. Trends Cell Biol. 4:179–185.

18
METABOLISM
AND MOVEMENT
OF LIPIDS
Fluorescence micrograph of hamster intestinal epithelium
after cellular uptake into lipid droplets of an orally
administered fluorescent analog of cholesterol (fluoresterol,
dissolved in corn oil) from the intestinal lumen (upper left,
unstained). [C. P. Sparrow et al., 1999, J. Lipid Res. 40:1747–1757.]

I

n this chapter we consider some of the special challenges
that a cell faces in metabolizing and transporting lipids,
which are poorly soluble in the aqueous interior of cells
and in extracellular fluids. Cells use lipids for storing energy, building membranes, signaling within and between
cells, sensing the environment, covalently modifying proteins, forming specialized permeability barriers (e.g., in
skin), and protecting cells from highly reactive chemicals.
Fatty acids, which are oxidized in mitochondria to release
energy for cellular functions (Chapter 8), are stored and
transported primarily in the form of triglycerides. Fatty
acids are also precursors of phospholipids, the structural
backbone of cellular membranes (Chapter 5). Cholesterol,
another important membrane component, is a precursor
for steroid hormones and other biologically active lipids
that function in cell–cell signaling. Also derived from precursors of cholesterol biosynthesis are the fat-soluble vitamins, which have diverse functions including the detection
of light by the retinal form of vitamin A in rhodopsin, the
control of calcium metabolism by the active hormone form
of vitamin D, protection against oxidative damage to cells
by vitamin E, and the cofactor activity of vitamin K in the
formation of blood clots.
With the exception of a few specialized cells that store
large quantities of lipids, the overwhelming majority of lipids
within cells are components of cellular membranes. Therefore we focus our discussion of lipid biosynthesis and movement on the major lipids found in cellular membranes and
their precursors (Figure 18-1). In lipid biosynthesis, water-

soluble precursors are assembled into membrane-associated
intermediates that are then converted into membrane lipid
products. The movement of lipids, especially membrane
components, between different organelles is critical for maintaining the proper composition and properties of membranes
and overall cell structure, but our understanding of such intracellular lipid transport is still rudimentary. In contrast,
analysis of the transport of lipids into, out of, and between
cells is far more advanced, and we describe in some detail
these lipid movements mediated by various cell-surface
transport proteins and receptors.
We conclude the chapter by examining the connection between cellular cholesterol metabolism and atherosclerosis,
which can lead to cardiovascular disease (e.g., heart attack,

OUTLINE
18.1 Phospholipids and Sphingolipids: Synthesis
and Intracellular Movement
18.2 Cholesterol: A Multifunctional Membrane
Lipid
18.3 Lipid Movement into and out of Cells
18.4 Feedback Regulation of Cellular Lipid
Metabolism
18.5 The Cell Biology of Atherosclerosis, Heart
Attacks, and Strokes
1

2

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

▲ FIGURE 18-1 Overview of synthesis of major membrane
lipids and their movement into and out of cells. Membrane
lipids (e.g., phospholipids, cholesterol) are synthesized through
complex multienzyme pathways that begin with sets of watersoluble enzymes and intermediates in the cytosol ( 1 ) that are
then converted by membrane-associated enzymes into waterinsoluble products embedded in the membrane ( 2 ), usually at
the interface between the cytosolic leaflet of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and the cytosol. Membrane lipids can move from
the ER to other organelles ( 3 ), such as the Golgi apparatus or
the mitochondrion, by either vesicle-mediated or other poorly
defined mechanisms. Lipids can move into or out of cells by
plasma-membrane transport proteins or by lipoproteins. Transport
proteins similar to those described in Chapter 7 that move lipids
( 4 ) include sodium-coupled symporters that mediate import;
CD36 and SR-BT superfamily proteins that can mediate

unidirectional or bidirectional transport; and ABC superfamily
proteins that mediate cellular export, the flipping of lipids from
the cytosolic to the exoplasmic leaflet of the membrane, or both.
Because lipids are insoluble in water, the transport proteins move
lipids from and to carrier proteins, lipoproteins, membranes, or
other lipid-binding complexes in the extracellular space and the
cytosol. Lipoproteins assembled in the ER carry in their
hydrophobic cores large amounts of lipid. They are secreted by
the classic Golgi-mediated secretory pathway ( 5 ), and their lipids
are imported either through ( 6 ) receptor-mediated endocytosis
or through ( 7 ) receptor-mediated selective lipid uptake. Cellular
lipid metabolism is regulated ( 8 ) by nuclear receptor
transcription factors that directly bind lipids and by nuclear sterol
regulatory element-binding proteins (nSREBPs) that are
generated by proteolysis of an integral membrane protein
precursor in the Golgi.

stroke), the number one cause of death in Western industrialized societies. We describe current theories about why large
arteries can become clogged with cholesterol-containing deposits and how cells recognize the differences between

“good” and “bad” cholesterol. As you will see, detailed
knowledge of the fundamental cell biology of lipid metabolism has led to the discovery of remarkably effective antiatherosclerotic drugs.

18.1 • Phospholipids and Sphingolipids: Synthesis and Intracellular Movement

(e.g., phosphate or fatty acids): all the phospholipids and
sphingolipids incorporating these precursor substances are associated with intracellular membranes; none are found free in
the cytosol. After they are formed, membrane lipids must be
distributed appropriately both in leaflets of a given membrane
and among the independent membranes of different organelles in eukaryotic cells. Here, we focus on the synthesis
and distribution of phospholipids and sphingolipids; we cover
the synthesis of cholesterol in Section 18.2.

18.1 Phospholipids
and Sphingolipids: Synthesis
and Intracellular Movement
A cell cannot divide or enlarge unless it makes sufficient
amounts of additional membranes to accommodate the expanded area of its outer surface and internal organelles. Thus
the generation of new cell membranes is as fundamentally
important to the life of a cell as is protein synthesis or DNA
replication. Although the protein components of biomembranes are critical to their biological functions, the basic
structural and physical properties of membranes are determined by their lipid components—principally phospholipids,
sphingolipids, and sterols such as cholesterol (Table 18-1).
Cells must be able to synthesize or import these molecules
to form membranes.
A fundamental principle of membrane biosynthesis is that
cells synthesize new membranes only by the expansion of existing membranes. Although some early steps in the synthesis
of membrane lipids take place in the cytoplasm, the final steps
are catalyzed by enzymes bound to preexisting cellular membranes, and the products are incorporated into the membranes as they are generated. Evidence for this phenomenon is
seen when cells are briefly exposed to radioactive precursors

Fatty Acids Are Precursors for Phospholipids
and Other Membrane Components
Fatty acids are key components of both phospholipids and
sphingolipids; they also anchor some proteins to cellular
membranes (see Figure 5-15). Thus the regulation of fatty
acid synthesis plays a key role in the regulation of membrane
synthesis as a whole. A fatty acid consists of a long hydrocarbon chain with a carboxyl group at one end (Figure 18-2).
A saturated fatty acid (e.g., palmitate) has only single bonds,
and an unsaturated fatty acid (e.g., arachidonate) has one or
more double bonds in the hydrocarbon chain.
The major fatty acids in phospholipids contain 14, 16,
18, or 20 carbon atoms and include both saturated and
unsaturated chains (see Table 18-1). Saturated fatty acids

TABLE 18-1 Synthesis and Transport of Fatty Acids and Major Membrane Lipids in Animal Cells
Principal Sites
of Synthesis

Import or Export
Mechanisms

Intercellular
Transport

Fatty acids (FAs):*
Myristate (C14:0)
Palmitate (C16:0)
Stearate (C18:0)
Oleate (C18:1)
Linoleate (C18:2)
Arachidonate (C20:4)

Saturated FAs up to
16 carbons long in the
cytosol; elongation
in the ER and
mitochondria; desaturation
in the ER

Diffusion and proteinmediated transport of free
FAs (FATPs, CD36); secreted
in lipoproteins as part of
phospholipids, triglycerides
and cholesteryl esters

Bound to albumin
and other proteins in
animal plasma (free FAs);
as part of phospholipids,
triglycerides, and cholesteryl
esters in circulating
lipoproteins

Phospholipids (e.g.,
phosphatidylcholine)†

ER primarily; some in
mitochondria

Export by ABC proteins;
endocytosis/exocytosis as
part of lipoproteins

Packaged into lipoproteins

Plasmalogens

Peroxisomes

—

—

Sphingolipids

ER and Golgi complex

—

Packaged into lipoproteins

Cholesterol

Partly in cytosol and
partly in ER

Export by ABC proteins;
endocytosis/exocytosis as part
of lipoproteins; import by
selective lipid uptake
from lipoproteins

Packaged into lipoproteins
(both unesterified and esterified)

Lipid Class

3

*In Cx:y abbreviation, x is the number of carbons in the chain and y is the number of double bonds.
Other abbreviations are: CD36, a multifunctional cell-surface protein; ER, endoplasmic reticulum;
FA, fatty acid; FATP, fatty acid transport protein.
†
The common diacyl glycerophospholipids also include phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidyl
serine, and phosphatidylinositol.

4

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids
O


CH3

O
Fatty acid
(Palmitate)
COO
CH3
Arachidonate
O
O
R

O
O

R
O

O
Triglyceride

R

O

O
1

3
2

O

O

O

P


O

O

O
Phospholipid
(Glycerol phospholipid)
3

1
2

O

O
O
P
O
O

O
O
Plasmalogen
O

OH
O
NH

P
O

O

O
Shingolipid

Desaturase enzymes, also located in the ER, introduce
double bonds at specific positions in some fatty acids. The
presence of a double bond creates a kink in the hydrocarbon chain that interrupts intermolecular packing (see Figure
2-18). As a result, membranes or triglyceride droplets whose
components are high in unsaturated fatty acids (e.g., liquid
corn and olive oils) tend to be more fluid at room temperature
than those with a high proportion of saturated fatty acids
(e.g., solid animal fats). Because humans cannot synthesize
certain essential polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic
acid and linolenic acid, we must obtain them from our diets.
In addition to de novo synthesis from acetyl CoA, fatty
acids can be derived from the enzymatic hydrolysis of triglycerides. The primary form in which fatty acids are stored and
transported between cells, triglycerides consist of three fatty
acyl chains esterified to glycerol; hence they are also called
triacylglycerols (see Figure 18-2). Complete hydrolysis of a
triglyceride molecule yields three unesterified fatty acid molecules, or free fatty acids (FFAs), and a glycerol molecule.

Unesterified Fatty Acids Move Within Cells Bound
to Small Cytosolic Proteins
Unesterified fatty acids within cells are commonly bound by fatty
acid–binding proteins (FABPs), which belong to a group of small
cytosolic proteins that facilitate the intracellular movement of
many lipids. These proteins contain a hydrophobic pocket lined
by  sheets (Figure 18-3). A long-chain fatty acid can fit into this
pocket and interact noncovalently with the surrounding protein.
The expression of cellular FABPs is regulated coordinately with cellular requirements for the uptake and release
of fatty acids. Thus FABP levels are high in active muscles

▲ FIGURE 18-2 Chemical structures of fatty acids and some
of their derivatives. Palmitate, a saturated fatty acid, contains 16
carbon atoms; arachidonate, a polyunsaturated fatty acid,
contains 20 carbons atoms. Both saturated and unsaturated fatty
acids are stored as triglycerides in which three fatty acyl chains
(R) are esterified to a glycerol molecule. Fatty acids are also
components of phospholipids (glycerol phospholipid),
plasmalogens, and sphingolipids, which along with cholesterol
are the major lipids present in membranes. The common
phospholipids (e.g., phosphatidylcholine) have two acyl chains
esterified to glycerol; in plasmalogens, one hydrocarbon chain is
attached to glycerol by an ether linkage and the other by an ester
linkage. Sphingolipids are built from sphingosine, an amino
alcohol that contains a long, unsaturated hydrocarbon chain.
Several types of polar X groups are found in all three of these
classes of membrane lipids (see Figure 5-5).

containing 14 or 16 carbon atoms are made from acetyl CoA
by two enzymes, acetyl-CoA carboxylase and fatty acid synthase. In animal cells, these enzymes are in the cytosol; in
plants, they are found in chloroplasts. Palmitoyl CoA (16
carbons) can be elongated to 18–24 carbons by the sequential addition of two-carbon units in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or sometimes in the mitochondrion.

▲ FIGURE 18-3 Binding of a fatty acid to the hydrophobic
pocket of a fatty acid–binding protein (FABP). The crystal
structure of adipocyte FABP (ribbon diagram) reveals that the
hydrophobic binding pocket is generated from two  sheets that
are nearly at right angles to each other, forming a clam-shell-like
structure. A fatty acid (pink) interacts noncovalently with
hydrophobic amino acid residues within this pocket. [See A. ReeseWagoner et al., 1999, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 23:1441(2–3):106–116.]

18.1 • Phospholipids and Sphingolipids: Synthesis and Intracellular Movement

the site for the synthesis of all its own lipids. The enzymes
that esterify the middle hydroxyl group of glycerol have a
preference for adding unsaturated fatty acids.
In addition to diacyl glycerophospholipids, animal cells
and some anaerobic microorganisms contain surprisingly
large amounts of plasmalogens, a different type of glycerolderived phospholipid. In these molecules, the hydrocarbon
chain on carbon 1 of glycerol is attached by an ether linkage,
rather than the ester linkage found in diacyl phospholipids
(see Figure 18-2). In animal cells, the synthesis of plasmalogens is catalyzed by enzymes bound to the membranes of
peroxisomes. Plasmalogens are known to be an important
reservoir of arachidonate, a polyunsaturated, long-chain
fatty acid that is a precursor for a large group of signaling
molecules called eicosanoids (e.g., prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes). The regulated release of arachidonate from membrane glycerophospholipids by the enzyme
phospholipase A2 plays a rate-determining role in many signaling pathways. Also derived from a plasmalogen is
platelet-activating factor (PAF), a signaling molecule that
plays a key role in the inflammatory response to tissue damage or injury (see Figure 6-32). In addition, plasmalogens
may influence the movement of cholesterol within mammalian cells.
Sphingolipids, another major group of membrane lipids,
are derivatives of sphingosine, an amino alcohol that contains a long, unsaturated hydrocarbon chain. Sphingosine is

that are using fatty acids for energy and in adipocytes (fatstoring cells) when they are either taking up fatty acids to be
stored as triglycerides or releasing fatty acids for use by other
cells. The importance of FABPs in fatty acid metabolism is
highlighted by the observations that they can compose as
much as 5 percent of all cytosolic proteins in the liver and
that genetic inactivation of cardiac muscle FABP converts the
heart from a muscle that primarily burns fatty acids for energy into one that primarily burns glucose.
Numerous other small water-soluble proteins with lipidbinding hydrophobic pockets are known. Although some evidence suggests that these proteins participate in intracellular
lipid transport, their function in this lipid movement remains
to be established with certainty.

Incorporation of Fatty Acids into Membrane
Lipids Takes Place on Organelle Membranes
Fatty acids are not directly incorporated into phospholipids;
rather, they are first converted in eukaryotic cells into CoA
esters. The subsequent synthesis of many diacyl glycerophospholipids from fatty acyl CoAs, glycerol 3-phosphate,
and polar head-group precursors is carried out by enzymes
associated with the cytosolic face of the ER membrane, usually the smooth ER, in animal cells (Figure 18-4). Mitochondria synthesize some of their own membrane lipids and
import others. In photosynthetic tissues, the chloroplast is
Acetyl CoA
Cytosolic enzymes
O
C

5

O

C

C

O

O

C

C

CH2

O

OH Fatty acid

O
C

S

CoA Fatty acyl CoA

CDP-choline

+
H2C

CH

OH OH

C
CH2
2

P

Cytosol

1

P

Choline

C

P

Diacylglycerol

OH

FPO

Choline Phosphatidyl choline
3
P
4

Phosphatase

ER
lumen

Lumen

P

Pi

Phosphatidic
acid

2 CoA

P

CMP

GPAT LPAAT
(acyl transferases)

Choline
phosphotransferase

P

Flippase

Choline

▲ FIGURE 18-4 Phospholipid synthesis. Because
phospholipids are amphipathic molecules, the last stages of their
multistep synthesis takes place at the interface between a
membrane and the cytosol and are catalyzed by membraneassociated enzymes. Step 1 : Fatty acids from fatty acyl CoA are
esterified to the phosphorylated glycerol backbone, forming
phosphatidic acid, whose two long hydrocarbon chains anchor

the molecule to the membrane. Step 2 : A phosphatase converts
phosphatidic acid into diacylglycerol. Step 3 : A polar head group
(e.g., phosphorylcholine) is transferred from CDP-choline to the
exposed hydroxyl group. Step 4 : Flippase proteins catalyze the
movement of phospholipids from the cytosolic leaflet in which
they are initially formed to the exoplasmic leaflet.

6

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

made in the ER, beginning with the coupling of palmitoyl
CoA and serine; the addition of a fatty acyl group to form
N-acyl sphingosine (ceramide) also takes place in the ER.
The subsequent addition of a polar head group to ceramide
in the Golgi yields sphingomyelin, whose head group is phosphorylcholine, and various glycosphingolipids, in which the
head group may be a monosaccharide or a more complex
oligosaccharide (see Figure 18-2). Some sphingolipid synthesis can also take place in mitochondria. In addition to serving as the backbone for sphingolipids, ceramide and its
metabolic products are important signaling molecules that
can influence cell growth, proliferation, endocytosis, resistance to stress, and apoptosis.
After their synthesis is completed in the Golgi, sphingolipids are transported to other cellular compartments
through vesicle-mediated mechanisms similar to those discussed in Chapter 17. In contrast, phospholipids, as well as
cholesterol, can move between organelles by different mechanisms, described in Section 18.2.

Flippases Move Phospholipids from One
Membrane Leaflet to the Opposite Leaflet
Even though phospholipids are initially incorporated into the
cytosolic leaflet of the ER membrane, various phospholipids
are asymmetrically distributed in the two leaflets of the ER
membrane and of other cellular membranes (see Table 5-1).
However, phospholipids spontaneously flip-flop from one
leaflet to the other only very slowly, although they can rapidly diffuse laterally in the plane of the membrane. For the
ER membrane to expand (growth of both leaflets) and have
asymmetrically distributed phospholipids, its phospholipid
components must be able to rapidly and selectively flip-flop
from one membrane leaflet to the other.

The usual asymmetric distribution of phospholipids in
membrane leaflets is broken down as cells (e.g., red blood
cells) become senescent or undergo apoptosis. For instance,
phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine are preferentially located in the cytosolic leaflet of cellular membranes. Increased exposure of these anionic phospholipids on
the exoplasmic face of the plasma membrane appears to
serve as a signal for scavenger cells to remove and destroy
old or dying cells. Annexin V, a protein that specifically binds
to anionic phospholipids, can be fluorescently labeled and
used to detect apoptotic cells in cultured cells and in tissues.
Although the mechanisms employed to generate and
maintain membrane phospholipid asymmetry are not well
understood, it is clear that flippases play a key role. These integral membrane proteins facilitate the movement of phospholipid molecules from one leaflet to the other (see Figure
18-4, step 4 ). One of the best-studied flippases is the mammalian ABCB4 protein, a member of the ABC superfamily of
small-molecule pumps. As discussed in Section 18.3, ABCB4
is expressed in certain liver cells (hepatocytes) and moves
phosphatidylcholine from the cytosolic to the exoplasmic
leaflet of the plasma membrane for subsequent release into
the bile in combination with cholesterol and bile acids.
Several other ABC superfamily members participate in the
cellular export of various lipids (Table 18-2).
ABCB4 was first suspected of having phospholipid flippase activity because mice with homozygous loss-of-function
mutations in the ABCB4 gene exhibited defects in the secretion of phosphatidylcholine into bile. To determine directly if
ABCB4 was in fact a flippase, researchers performed experiments on a homogeneous population of purified vesicles with
ABCB4 in the membrane and with the cytosolic face directed
outward. These vesicles were obtained by introducing cDNA
encoding mammalian ABCB4 into a temperature-sensitive

TABLE 18-2 Selected Human ABC Proteins
Disease Caused by
Defective Protein

Protein

Tissue Expression

Function

ABCA1

Ubiquitous

Exports cholesterol and
phospholipid for uptake into
high-density lipoprotein (HDL)

ABCB1 (MDR1)

Adrenal, kidney,
brain

Exports lipophilic drugs

ABCB4 (MDR2)

Liver

Exports phosphatidylcholine into bile

ABCB11

Liver

Exports bile salts into bile

CFTR

Exocrine tissue

Transports Cl ions

Cystic fibrosis

ABCD1

Ubiquitous in
peroxisomal membrane

Influences activity of peroxisomal
enzyme that oxidizes very long
chain fatty acids

Adrenoleukodystrophy
(ADL)

ABCG5/8

Liver, intestine

Exports cholesterol and
other sterols

-Sitosterolemia

Tangier’s disease

18.1 • Phospholipids and Sphingolipids: Synthesis and Intracellular Movement

7

yeast sec mutant. At the permissive temperature, the ABCB4
protein is expressed by the transfected cells and moves
through the secretory pathway to the cell surface (Chapter
17). At the nonpermissive temperature, however, secretory
vesicles cannot fuse with the plasma membrane, as they do in
wild-type cells; so vesicles containing ABCB4 and other yeast
proteins accumulate in the cells. After purifying these secretory vesicles, investigators labeled them in vitro with a fluorescent phosphatidylcholine derivative. The fluorescencequenching assay outlined in Figure 18-5 was used to demon-

strate that the vesicles containing ABCB4 exhibited ATPdependent some flippase activity, whereas those without
ABCB4 did not. The structures and mechanism of action of
some flippases are covered in Chapter 7.
Flip-flopping between leaflets, lateral diffusion, and membrane fusion and fission are not the only dynamic processes of
phospholipids in membranes. Their fatty acyl chains and, in
some cases, their head groups are subject to ongoing covalent remodeling (e.g., hydrolysis of fatty esters by phospholipases and resynthesis by acyl transferases). Another key

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 18-5 In vitro fluorescence
quenching assay can detect phospholipid flippase activity of
ABCB4. A homogeneous population of secretory vesicles
containing ABCB4 protein was purified from yeast sec mutants
transfected with the ABCB4 gene. Step 1 : Synthetic
phospholipids containing a fluorescently modified head group
(blue) were incorporated primarily into the outer, cytosolic leaflets
of the purified vesicles. Step 2 : If ABCB4 acted as a flippase,
then on addition of ATP to the outside of the vesicles a small
fraction of the outward-facing labeled phospholipids would be
flipped to the inside leaflet. Step 3 : Flipping was detected by
adding a membrane-impermeable quenching compound called
dithionite to the medium surrounding the vesicles. Dithionite
reacts with the fluorescent head group, destroying its ability to

fluoresce (gray). In the presence of the quencher, only labeled
phospholipid in the protected environment on the inner leaflet
will fluoresce. Subsequent to the addition of the quenching
agent, the total fluorescence decreases with time until it
plateaus at the point at which all external fluorescence is
quenched and only the internal phospholipid fluorescence can be
detected. The observation of greater fluorescence (less
quenching) in the presence of ATP than in its absence indicates
that ABCB4 has flipped some of the labeled phospholipid to the
inside. Step 4 : Addition of detergent to the vesicles generates
micelles and makes all fluorescent lipids accessible to the
quenching agent and lowers the fluorescence to baseline values.
[Adapted from S. Ruetz and P. Gros, 1994, Cell 77:1071.]

8

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

associated enzymes primarily in the ER, but also in the Golgi,
mitochondria, and peroxisomes (see Figure 18-4).

dynamic process is the intracellular movement of phospholipids from one membrane to a different one. Clearly, membranes are dynamic components of the cell that interact with
and react to changes in the intracellular and extracellular
environments.

Each type of lipid is initially incorporated into the preexisting membranes on which it is made.

■

Most membrane phospholipids are preferentially distributed in either the exoplasmic or the cytosolic leaflet.
This asymmetry results in part from the action of flippases
such as ABCB4, a phosphatidylcholine flippase contributing to the generation of bile in the liver.

■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 18.1
Phospholipids and Sphingolipids: Synthesis
and Intracellular Movement
Saturated and unsaturated fatty acids of various chain
lengths are components of phospholipids, sphingolipids,
and triglycerides (see Figure 18-2).

18.2 Cholesterol: A Multifunctional
Membrane Lipid

Fatty acids are synthesized by water-soluble enzymes and
modified by elongation and desaturation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).

Although phospholipids are critical for the formation of the
classic bilayer structure of membranes, eukaryotic cell membranes require other components, including sterols. Here, we
focus on cholesterol, the principal sterol in animal cells and
the most abundant single lipid in the mammalian plasma

■

■

The final steps in the synthesis of glycerophospholipids,
plasmalogens, and sphingolipids are catalyzed by membrane-

■

CH3
H3C
CH3

CH3
H

H3C
CH3

CH3

CH3

CH3
H

H

H

HO

HO
Cholesterol
(animal)

Ergosterol
(fungal)
H3C
CH3

CH3
H

CH3
H

H
HO

HO
Cholesterol

Stigmasterol
(plant)
O
H3C
HO
CH3 H
CH3

OH
OH

H

H
HO

H
O

H

Steroid hormone

Bile acid
H3C

 FIGURE 18-6 Chemical structures of major
sterols and cholesterol derivatives. The major
sterols in animals, fungi, and plants differ slightly
in structure, but all serve as key components of
cellular membranes. Cholesterol is stored as
cholesteryl esters in which a fatty acyl chain (R) is
esterified to the hydroxyl group. Excess
cholesterol is converted by liver cells into bile
acids (e.g., deoxycholic acid), which are secreted
into the bile.

CH3

CH3

CH3 H

H

CH2
HO
Vitamin D

CH3
CH3

CH3

18.2 • Cholesterol: A Multifunctional Membrane Lipid

membrane (almost equimolar with all phospholipids). Between
50 and 90 percent of the cholesterol in most mammalian cells
is present in the plasma membrane and related endocytic vesicle membranes. Cholesterol is also critical for intercellular signaling and has other functions to be described shortly. The
structures of the principal yeast sterol (ergosterol) and plant
phytosterols (e.g., stigmasterol) differ slightly from that of cholesterol (Figure 18-6). The small differences in the biosynthetic
pathways of fungal and animal sterols and in their structures
are the basis of most antifungal drugs currently in use.

Cholesterol Is Synthesized by Enzymes in the
Cytosol and ER Membrane
Figure 18-7 summarizes the complex series of reactions that
yield cholesterol and several other related biomolecules. The
basic features of this pathway are important in the synthesis
of other important lipids, and familiarity with these features
helps in understanding lipid regulation, discussed later. The first
steps of cholesterol synthesis (acetyl CoA → HMG CoA) take
place in the cytosol. The conversion of HMG CoA into mevalonate, the key rate-controlling step in cholesterol biosynthesis,
O



O

O

O

Acetyl CoA  acetoacetyl CoA

OH O
HMG CoA
HMG-Coa
reductase

S-CoA

O
O



is catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase, an ER integral membrane protein, even though both its substrate and its product
are water soluble. The water-soluble catalytic domain of HMGCoA reductase extends into the cytosol, but its eight transmembrane segments firmly embed the enzyme in the ER membrane
and act as a regulatory domain. Five of the transmembrane segments compose the so-called sterol-sensing domain. As described later, homologous domains are found in other proteins
taking part in cholesterol transport and regulation.
Mevalonate, the 6-carbon product formed by HMG-CoA
reductase, is converted in several steps into the 5-carbon isoprenoid compound isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and its
stereoisomer dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMPP). These
reactions are catalyzed by cytosolic enzymes, as are the subsequent reactions in which six IPP units condense to yield
squalene, a branched-chain 30-carbon intermediate. Enzymes bound to the ER membrane catalyze the multiple reactions that convert squalene into cholesterol in mammals or
into related sterols in other species.
Because an excessive accumulation of cholesterol can
lead to the formation of damaging cholesterol crystals, the
production and accumulation of cholesterol is tightly

S-CoA

S-CoA



9

OH
Mevalonate

O

OH

Isopentenyl pyrophosphate
(IPP)

OPP

OPP

2

Farnesyl pyrophosphate

▲ FIGURE 18-7 Cholesterol biosynthetic pathway. The
regulated rate-controlling step in cholesterol biosynthesis is the
conversion of -hydroxy--methylglutaryl CoA (HMG CoA) into
mevalonic acid by HMG-CoA reductase, an ER-membrane
protein. Mevalonate is then converted into isopentenyl
pyrophosphate (IPP), which has the basic five-carbon isoprenoid

Many other isoprenoids
Dolichol
Haem
Ubiquinone
Vitamins (A,E,K)
Chlorophyll
Lipid=anchored proteins (Ras)

Squalene

Cholesterol
HO

Isopentenyl adenosine

Vitamin D
Bile acids
Steroid hormones
Cholesterol esters
Modified proteins (hedgehog)

structure. IPP can be converted into cholesterol and into many
other lipids, often through the polyisoprenoid intermediates
shown here. Some of the numerous compounds derived from
isoprenoid intermediates and cholesterol itself are indicated. See
text for discussion.

10

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

controlled. For example, cholesteryl esters (see Figure 18-6)
are formed from excess cholesterol and stored as cytosolic
lipid droplets. Acyl:cholesterol acyl transferase (ACAT), the
enzyme that esterifies fatty acyl CoAs to the hydroxyl group
of cholesterol, is located in the ER membrane. Substantial
amounts of cholesteryl ester droplets are usually found only
in cells that produce steroid hormones and in foam cells,
which contribute to atherosclerotic disease in artery walls.
Intracellular lipid droplets, whether composed of cholesteryl
esters or triglycerides, have an outer protein coat that serves
as an interface between the aqueous environment of the
cytosol and the lipid. The coat proteins on lipid droplets in
mammalian cells are called perilipins or perilipin-related proteins, while the oleosins and their related proteins coat the
surfaces of lipid droplets called oil bodies in plants.

Many Bioactive Molecules Are Made from
Cholesterol and Its Biosynthetic Precursors
In addition to its structural role in membranes, discussed in
Chapter 5, cholesterol is the precursor for several important
bioactive molecules. They include bile acids (see Figure 18-6),
which are made in the liver and help emulsify dietary fats
for digestion and absorption in the intestines, steroid hormones produced by endocrine cells (e.g., adrenal gland,
ovary, testes), and vitamin D produced in the skin and kidneys. Arthropods need cholesterol or other sterols to produce
membranes and ecdysteroid hormones, which control development; however, they cannot make the precursor sterols
themselves and must obtain these compounds in their diet.
Another critical function of cholesterol is its covalent addition to Hedgehog protein, a key signaling molecule in embryonic development (Chapter 15).
Isopentenyl pyrophosphate and other isoprenoid intermediates in the cholesterol pathway also serve as precursors for
more than 23,000 biologically active molecules. Some of these
molecules are discussed in other chapters: various hemes, including the oxygen-binding component of hemoglobin and
electron-carrying components of cytochromes (see Figure
8-15a); ubiquinone, a component of the mitochondrial electron-transport chain (see Figure 8-16); chlorophylls, the lightabsorbing pigments in chloroplasts (see Figure 8-31); and
dolichol, a polyisoprenoid in the ER membrane that plays a
key role in the glycosylation of proteins (see Figure 16-17).
Isoprenoid derivatives are particularly abundant in
plants in which they form fragrances and flavors,
rubber and latex, hormones and pheromones, various defensive molecules, the active ingredient in marijuana,
the cardioprotective natural drug digitalis, anticancer drugs
such as taxol, and many others. Given the importance of isoprenoids as biosynthetic precursors, it is not surprising that
a second, mevalonate-independent pathway for IPP synthesis
evolved in eubacteria (e.g., E. coli), green algae, and higher
plants. In plants, this pathway is located in organelles called
plastids and operates to synthesize carotenoids, phytol (the
isoprenoid side chain of chlorophyll), and other isoprenoids. ❚

Cholesterol and Phospholipids Are Transported
Between Organelles by Golgi-Independent
Mechanisms
As already noted, the final steps in the synthesis of cholesterol
and phospholipids take place primarily in the ER, although
some of these membrane lipids are produced in mitochondria
and peroxisomes (plasmalogens). Thus the plasma membrane
and the membranes bounding other organelles (e.g., Golgi,
lysosomes) must obtain these lipids by means of one or more
intracellular transport processes. For example, in one important pathway, phosphatidylserine made in the ER is transported to the inner mitochondrial membrane where it is
decarboxylated to phosphatidylethanolamine, some of which
either returns to the ER for conversion into phosphatidylcholine or moves to other organelles.
Membrane lipids do accompany both soluble (luminal)
and membrane proteins during vesicular trafficking through
the Golgi-mediated secretory pathway (see Figure 17-1).
However, several lines of evidence suggest that there is substantial interorganelle movement of cholesterol and phospholipids through other, Golgi-independent mechanisms. For
example, chemical inhibitors of the classic secretory pathway
and mutations that impede vesicular traffic in this pathway
do not prevent cholesterol or phospholipid transport between membranes, although they do disrupt the transport
of proteins and Golgi-derived sphingolipids. Furthermore,
membrane lipids produced in the ER cannot move to mitochondria by means of classic secretory transport vesicles,
inasmuch as no vesicles budding from ER membranes have
been found to fuse with mitochondria.
Three mechanisms have been proposed for the transport
of cholesterol and phospholipids from their sites of synthesis
to other membranes independently of the Golgi-mediated secretory pathway (Figure 18-8). First, some Golgi-independent
transport is most likely through membrane-limited vesicles
or other protein–lipid complexes. The second mechanism entails direct protein-mediated contact of ER or ER-derived
membranes with membranes of other organelles. In the third
mechanism, small lipid-transfer proteins facilitate the exchange of phospholipids or cholesterol between different
membranes. Although such transfer proteins have been identified in assays in vitro, their role in intracellular movements
of most phospholipids is not well defined. For instance, mice
with a knockout mutation in the gene encoding the phosphatidylcholine-transfer protein appear to be normal in most
respects, indicating that this protein is not essential for cellular phospholipid metabolism.
One well-established component of the intracellular cholesterol-transport system is the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein. This protein, which is encoded in nuclear DNA, controls the transfer of cholesterol from
the cholesterol-rich outer mitochondrial membrane to the
cholesterol-poor inner membrane, where it undergoes the
first steps in its enzymatic conversion into steroid hormones.
StAR-mediated cholesterol transport is a key regulated, ratecontrolling step in steroid hormone synthesis. StAR contains

18.2 • Cholesterol: A Multifunctional Membrane Lipid

▲ FIGURE 18-8 Proposed mechanisms of Golgiindependent transport of cholesterol and phospholipids
between membranes. In mechanism (a), vesicles transfer lipids
between membranes without passing through the Golgi
apparatus. In mechanism (b), lipid transfer is a consequence of
direct contact between membranes that is mediated by

an N-terminal targeting sequence that directs the protein to the
mitochondrial outer membrane (Chapter 16) and a C-terminal
START (StAR-related transfer) domain that has a cholesterolbinding hydrophobic pocket. Similar START domains are
found in several proteins implicated in intracellular cholesterol
transport, and these domains have been shown to promote
cholesterol transfer in cultured cells. Mutations in the StAR
gene can cause congenital adrenal hyperplasia, a lethal disease
marked by a drastic reduction in the synthesis of steroid hormones. Some other proteins implicated in lipid transport, including the phosphatidylcholine-transfer protein already
mentioned, also contain START domains.

11

membrane-embedded proteins. In mechanism (c), transfer is
mediated by small, soluble lipid-transfer proteins. Some evidence
suggests that this mechanism does not account for a significant
part of the Golgi-independent flow of phospholipids between
membranes. [Adapted from F. R. Maxfield and D. Wustner, 2002,
J. Clin. Invest. 110:891.]

A second well-established contributor to intracellular
cholesterol movement is the Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1) protein, an integral membrane protein located in the rapidly
moving late endosomal/lysosomal compartment. Some of the
multiple membrane-spanning segments of NPC1 form a
sterol-sensing domain similar to that in HMG-CoA reductase. Mutations in NPC1 cause defects in intracellular cholesterol and glycosphingolipid transport and consequently
in the regulation of cellular cholesterol metabolism. Cells
without functional NPC1 or cells treated with a drug
that mimics loss of NPC1 function accumulate excess
cholesterol in the late endosomal/lysosomal compartment
(Figure 18-9). Cholesterol transport in NPC1-deficient cells
is restored by overexpression of Rab9, a small GTPase implicated in late endosomal vesicular transport (Chapter 17).
This finding suggests that vesicular trafficking plays at least
some role in NPC1-dependent cholesterol movement.

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 18-9 Cells with nonfunctional
Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1) protein accumulate cholesterol in
late endosomal/lysosomal vesicles. In cells that express a
transgene encoding a hybrid NPC1 protein linked to green
fluorescent protein (GFP), the hybrid protein is revealed in the
late endosomal/lysosomal compartment by its green
fluorescence. Shown in this two-color fluorescence micrograph
are three cells that had been treated with a drug that inhibits
NPC1 function. The cells were also stained with a bluefluorescing cholesterol-binding drug called fillipin. Note the
colocalization of cholesterol (blue) with the NPC1-GFP hybrid
protein (green) on the surfaces of vesicles adjacent to the
nucleus. The accumulation of cholesterol in these vesicles in the
absence of functional NPC1 suggests that late endosomal/
lysosomal vesicles play a role in intracellular cholesterol
trafficking. [From D. C. Ko et al., 2001, Mol. Biol. Cell 12:601; courtesy
of D. Ko and M. Scott.]

12

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

In humans, defects in NPC1 function cause abnormal lipid storage in intracellular organelles, resulting in neurologic abnormalities, neurodegeneration, and premature death. Indeed, identification of the
gene defective in such patients led to discovery of the NPC1
protein. ❚
The lipid compositions of different organelle membranes vary considerably (see Table 5-1). Some of these
differences are due to different sites of synthesis. For example, a phospholipid called cardiolipin, which is localized
to the mitochondrial membrane, is made only in mitochondria and little is transferred to other organelles.
Differential transport of lipids also plays a role in determining the lipid compositions of different cellular membranes. For instance, even though cholesterol is made in
the ER, the cholesterol concentration (cholesterol-tophospholipid molar ratio) is ~1.5–13-fold higher in the
plasma membrane than in other organelles (ER, Golgi, mitochondrion, lysosome). Although the mechanisms responsible for establishing and maintaining these differences are
not well understood, the distinctive lipid composition of
each membrane has a major influence on its physical properties (Chapter 5).

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 18.2
Cholesterol: A Multifunctional Membrane Lipid
The initial steps in cholesterol biosynthesis take place in
the cytosol, whereas the last steps are catalyzed by enzymes
associated with the ER membrane.

■

(a) Transport protein–mediated export
and import

The rate-controlling step in cholesterol biosynthesis is
catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase, whose transmembrane
segments are embedded in the ER membrane and contain
a sterol-sensing domain.

■

Cholesterol itself and isoprenoid intermediates in its synthesis are biosynthetic precursors of steroid hormones, bile
acids, lipid-soluble vitamins, and numerous other bioactive molecules (see Figure 18-7).

■

Considerable evidence indicates that vesicular trafficking through the Golgi complex is not responsible for much
cholesterol and phospholipid movement between membranes. Golgi-independent vesicular transport, direct protein-mediated contacts between different membranes, soluble protein carriers, or all three may account for some
interorganelle transport of cholesterol and phospholipids
(see Figure 18-8).

■

The StAR protein, which has a hydrophobic cholesterolbinding pocket, plays a key role in moving cholesterol into
the mitochondrion for steroid hormone synthesis.

■

■ The NPC1 protein, a large, multipass transmembrane protein, contains a sterol-sensing domain similar to that in HMGCoA reductase. NPC1 is required for the normal movement
of cholesterol between certain intracellular compartments.

18.3 Lipid Movement into and out
of Cells
In multicellular organisms, particularly mammals, lipids are
often imported and exported from cells and transported

(b) Lipoprotein- and receptor-mediated export and import
Lipoprotein
4
3

Import

Exterior
HO

Receptor

OH

Exterior
Cytosol

Coated
pit

95%

Export
5

Cytosol

Import

Export
Vesicle
OH

HO

HO

Endosome

FPO

Lipid

2

Golgi

Transport proteins
Lipoprotein

Extracellular binding protein

6
Intracellular binding protein

ER
Lysosome
1

Microsomal transfer protein

18.3 • Lipid Movement into and out of Cells

among different tissues by the circulation. Such lipid movements help maintain appropriate intracellular and wholebody lipid levels and have other advantages for an
organism. For instance, lipids absorbed from the diet in the
intestines or stored in adipose tissue can be distributed to
cells throughout the body. In this way, cells can obtain essential dietary lipids (e.g., linoleate) and can avoid wasting
energy on the synthesis of lipids (e.g., cholesterol) otherwise
available from the diet. The ability of some cells to export
lipids permits the excretion of excess lipids from the body or
their secretion into certain body fluids (e.g., milk in mammary glands). In addition, the coordination of lipid and energy metabolism throughout the organism depends on
intercellular lipid transport.
Not surprisingly, intracellular and intercellular lipid
transport and metabolism are coordinately regulated, as
discussed in Section 18.4. Here, we review the primary ways
in which cells import and export lipids. The two main mechanisms of cellular lipid export and import are summarized in Figure 18-10. In the first mechanism, the import
or export of individual lipid molecules is mediated by cellsurface transport proteins. The principles underlying this
mechanism are similar to those for small water-soluble molecules such as glucose, discussed in Chapter 7. A noteworthy difference is that the hydrophobic lipids, which are
poorly soluble in aqueous solution, often associate with
lipid-binding proteins in the extracellular space or the cytosol, rather than remaining free in solution. In the second
mechanism of lipid import and export, collections of lipids
are packaged with proteins into transport particles called
lipoproteins. These lipoproteins are exported from cells
through the classic secretory pathway (Chapter 17). Lipids
carried by extracellular lipoproteins are taken up by cells
through surface receptors.

 FIGURE 18-10 The two major pathways for importing
and exporting cellular lipids. (a) Individual lipid molecules cross
the plasma membrane with the assistance of transmembrane
transport proteins. Intracellular and extracellular lipid-binding
proteins (shown here), lipid micelles, or membranes normally
participate as the donors and acceptors of the lipids. In some
cases, the concentration gradients of the transported substances
are sufficient to drive transport (e.g., import of bile acids in the
liver and intestines by Na-linked symporters). In others, coupled
ATP hydrolysis helps drive lipid transport (e.g., secretion of bile
lipids from hepatocytes by ABC proteins). (b) Lipids are also
transported as components of lipoproteins. These large
assemblies of protein and lipids are assembled in the ER with
the assistance of microsomal transfer protein ( 1 ), are exported
( 2 ) through the secretory pathway ( 3 ) as water-soluble
particles, and then circulate in the blood. After circulating
lipoproteins bind to certain cell-surface receptors ( 4 ), the intact
particles can be internalized by endocytosis ( 5 ) and the lipids are
subsequently hydrolyzed in lysosomes ( 6 ), as depicted here.
Other receptors mediate the uptake of individual lipid
components from lipoproteins, releasing a lipid-depleted particle
into the extracellular space.

13

Cell-Surface Transporters Aid in Moving Fatty
Acids Across the Plasma Membrane
For many years, transmembrane fatty acid transport was
thought not to require a protein mediator, because these hydrophobic molecules can diffuse across lipid bilayers. Although some protein-independent fatty acid transport
probably does take place, some cells (e.g., intestinal epithelial
cells, cardiac muscle cells, and adipocytes) must import or
export substantial amounts of fatty acids at rates or with a
specificity and regulation or both that are not possible by diffusion alone. Several integral membrane proteins have been
shown to participate in fatty acid import in cell culture and
whole-animal experiments. These proteins include various
fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs) and the multifunctional
cell-surface protein CD36. These transporters mediate the
movement of substrates down their concentration gradients.
In contrast, transporters that mediate the export of fatty
acids have not yet been identified, but at least some transporters may mediate bidirectional transport, depending on
the direction of the fatty acid concentration gradient.
Because of their poor water solubility, most fatty acids
are bound to a carrier protein in the aqueous cytosol and extracellular space (see Figure 18-10a). The major mammalian
extracellular binding protein that donates or accepts fatty
acids is serum albumin. The most abundant protein in mammalian plasma (fluid part of the blood), albumin has at least
one hydrophobic  helix–lined lipid-binding groove or cleft
on its surface. In addition to mediating the transport of fatty
acids, albumin mediates that of several anionic organic acids
(e.g., bilirubin) and other molecules through the bloodstream. The major intracellular carriers of fatty acids are the
fatty acid–binding proteins described earlier.

ABC Proteins Mediate Cellular Export
of Phospholipids and Cholesterol
The export of phospholipids and cholesterol can be simultaneous owing to the activity of various members of the ABC
superfamily (see Table 18-2). The best-understood example
of this phenomenon is in the formation of bile, an aqueous
fluid containing phospholipids, cholesterol, and bile acids,
which are derived from cholesterol. After export from liver
cells, phospholipids, cholesterol, and bile acids form watersoluble micelles in the bile, which is delivered through ducts
to the gallbladder where it is stored and concentrated. In response to a fat-containing meal, bile is released into the small
intestine to help emulsify dietary lipids and thus aid in their
digestion and absorption into the body. As we shall see later,
the alteration of biliary metabolism by drugs can be used to
prevent heart attacks.
Figure 18-11 outlines the major transport proteins that
mediate the secretion and movement of bile components.
Three ABC proteins move phospholipids, cholesterol, and
bile acids across the apical surface of liver cells into small
ductules (step 1 ). One of these proteins, the ABCB4 flippase,
flips phosphatidylcholine from the cytosolic leaflet to the

14

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids
Bile
micelle

Liver cells
1
ABCB4

Phospholipid
+
bile acid
+
cholesterol

8

Na+

Na+

NTCP

ABCB11
Bile acid

To
mouth

Bile acid
Liver

ABCG5/8
ABCA1

Cholesterol +
phospholipid

Bile
Portal vein

FPO

Gallbladder

Blood
vessel

Food
Stomach

Intestinal epithelial cells
2
Bile acid

Bile
acid

Bile acid

Lumen of
the stomach

IBAT
Na+

Na+

I-BABP

3
Intestines

Cholesterol

???

ABCA1

Cholesterol +
phospholipid

ABCG5/8 5

▲ FIGURE 18-11 Major transport proteins in the liver and
intestines taking part in the enterohepatic circulation of
biliary lipids. The secretion of bile components and recycling of
bile acids are mediated by a diverse array of transport proteins in
liver cells (hepatocytes) and intestinal epithelial cells. Both of
these polarized cell types import lipids across one surface and
export them across the opposite surface. Step 1 : Hepatocytes
export lipids across their apical membranes into the bile by using
three ATP-dependent ABC proteins: ABCB4 (phospholipids),
ABCB11 (bile acids), and ABCG5/8 (sterols). Step 2 : Intestinal
epithelial cells import bile components and dietary lipids from the

intestinal lumen by using the ileal bile acid transporter (IBAT), a
Na-linked symporter, and other less well defined transporters
located in the apical membrane. Step 3 : Imported bile acids are
transported to the basolateral surface bound to intestinal bile
acid-binding protein (I-BABP) and are exported into the blood with
the aid of unknown transporters. Step 4 : Bile acids returned to
the liver in the blood are imported by NTCP, another Na-linked
symporter. Step 5 : Absorption of sterols by intestinal cells is
reduced by ABCG5/8, which appears to pump plant sterols and
cholesterol out of the cells and back into the lumen.

exoplasmic leaflet of the apical membrane in hepatocytes,
as described earlier. The precise mechanism by which the excess phospholipid desorbs from the exoplasmic leaflet into
the extracellular space is not understood. A related protein,
ABCB11, transports bile acids, whereas the ABCG5 and
ABCG8 “half” proteins combine into a single ABC protein
(ABCG5/8) that exports sterols into the bile.
In the intestine the ileal bile acid transporter (IBAT) imports bile acids from the lumen into intestinal epithelial cells
(step 2 ). IBAT is a Na-linked symporter (see Figure 7-21)
that uses the energy released by the movement of Na down
its concentration gradient to power the uptake of about 95
percent of the bile acids. Those bile acids imported on the
apical side of intestinal epithelial cells move intracellularly
with the aid of intestinal bile acid–binding protein (I-BABP)
to the basolateral side. There, they are exported into the
blood by poorly characterized transport proteins (step 3 )
and eventually returned to liver cells by another Na-linked

symporter called NTCP (step 4 ). This cycling of bile acids
from liver to intestine and back, referred to as the enterohepatic circulation, is tightly regulated and plays a major role
in lipid homeostasis.
Because the amount of dietary cholesterol is normally
low, a substantial fraction of the cholesterol in the intestinal
lumen comes from the biliary cholesterol secreted by the
liver. ABCG5/8 also is expressed in the apical membrane of
intestinal epithelial cells, where it helps control the amounts
of cholesterol and plant-derived sterols absorbed apparently
by pumping excess or unwanted absorbed sterols out of the
epithelial cells back into the lumen (see Figure 18-11, step
5 ). Partly as a result of this activity, only about 1 percent of
dietary plant sterols, which are not metabolically useful to
mammals, enter the bloodstream. Unabsorbed bile acids
(normally 5 percent of the luminal bile acids) and unabsorbed cholesterol and plant sterols are eventually excreted
in the feces.

18.3 • Lipid Movement into and out of Cells

Inactivating mutations in the genes encoding
ABCG5 or ABCG8 cause -sitosterolemia. Patients with this rare genetic disease absorb abnormally high amounts of both plant and animal sterols and
their livers secrete abnormally low amounts into the bile. Indeed, findings from studies with -sitosterolemia patients
first implicated these ABC proteins in cellular sterol export. ❚
Two other cell-surface transport proteins mediate the export of cellular cholesterol, phospholipid, or both: the ABC
superfamily member ABCA1 and a homolog of the fatty acid
transporter CD36 called SR-BI. These proteins will be described in detail shortly because of their important roles in
lipoprotein metabolism.

Lipids Can Be Exported or Imported in Large
Well-Defined Lipoprotein Complexes
To facilitate the mass transfer of lipids between cells, animals
have evolved an efficient alternative to the molecule-bymolecule import and export of lipids mediated by cellsurface transport proteins, such as those depicted in Figure
18-11. This alternative packages from hundreds to thousands of lipid molecules into water-soluble, macromolecular
carriers, called lipoproteins, that cells can secrete into the circulation or take up from the circulation as an ensemble.

15

A lipoprotein particle has a shell composed of proteins
(apolipoproteins) and a cholesterol-containing phospholipid
monolayer (Figure 18-12). The shell is amphipathic because
its outer surface is hydrophilic, making these particles water
soluble, and its inner surface is hydrophobic. Adjacent to the
hydrophobic inner surface of the shell is a core of neutral
lipids containing mostly cholesteryl esters, triglycerides, or
both. Small amounts of other hydrophobic compounds (e.g.,
vitamin E, carotene) also are carried in the lipoprotein core.
Mammalian lipoproteins fall into four major classes. Three
of them—high-density lipoprotein (HDL), low-density
lipoprotein (LDL), and very low density lipoprotein (VLDL)—
are named on the basis of their differing buoyant densities.
The lower the protein-to-lipid ratio, the lower the density. The
fourth class, the chylomicrons, is the least dense and contains
the highest proportion of lipids. Each class of lipoproteins has
distinctive apolipoprotein and lipid compositions, sizes, and
functions (Table 18-3). VLDLs and chylomicrons carry mainly
triglycerides in their cores, whereas the cores of LDLs and
HDLs consist mostly of cholesteryl esters. Apolipoproteins
help organize the structure of a lipoprotein particle and determine its interactions with enzymes, extracellular lipidtransfer proteins, and cell-surface receptors. Each LDL particle
contains a single copy of a large (537-kDa) apolipoprotein
called apoB-100 embedded in its outer shell (see Figure 18-12).
In contrast, several copies of different apolipoproteins are
found in each of the other lipoprotein classes.

TABLE 18-3 Major Classes of Human Plasma Lipoproteins
Property

Chylomicron

VLDL

LDL

HDL

Mass,
approx. (kDa)

50–1000  103

10–80 103

2.3 103

0.175–0.360 103

Diameter (nm)

75–1200

30–80

18–25

5–12

Triglycerides
(% of core lipids)

97

75

12

11

Cholesteryl esters
(% of core lipids)

3

25

88

89

Protein:lipid mass
ratio

1:100

9:100

25:100

90:100

Major
apolipoproteins

A, B-48, C, E

B-100, C, E

B-100

A, C

Major physiological
function

Transports dietary
triglyceride (Tg) from
intestines to extrahepatic
tissues (e.g., muscle,
adipose tissue); Tgdepleted remnants
deliver dietary
cholesterol and
some Tg to the liver

Transports hepatic
Tg to extrahepatic
tissues; converted
into LDL

Transports plasma
cholesterol to liver
and to extrahepatic
tissues

Takes up cholesterol
from extrahepatic tissues
and delivers it to liver,
steroid-producing tissues,
and other lipoproteins

16

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

Phospholipid

Cholesteryl
ester

 FIGURE 18-13 Lipoprotein remodeling and

class and the other classes of lipoproteins have the same general
structure: an amphipathic shell, composed of a phospholipid
monolayer (not bilayer), cholesterol, and protein, and a hydrophobic
core, composed mostly of cholesteryl esters or triglycerides or
both but with minor amounts of other neutral lipids (e.g., some
vitamins). This model of LDL is based on electron microscopy and
other low-resolution biophysical methods. LDL is unique in that it
contains only a single molecule of one type of apolipoprotein
(apoB), which appears to wrap around the outside of the particle
as a band of protein. The other lipoproteins contain multiple
apolipoprotein molecules, often of different types. [Adapted from

interconversions in the circulatory system. Apolipoproteins are
indicated by capital letters (e.g., A, B-100) projecting from
particles. (a) After having been secreted from the liver 1 , VLDL’s
triglycerides are hydrolyzed by lipoprotein lipase, an extracellular
enzyme attached to the blood-facing surfaces of vessels 2 . The
loss of triglycerides and some apolipoproteins from VLDL produces
IDL 3 , which is converted into LDL (black) 4 . Both IDL and LDL
can be removed from the circulation by endocytosis by means of
LDL receptors (LDLR) on liver (hepatic) cells 5 and nonliver
(extrahepatic) cells 6 . (b) Dietary lipids are absorbed (blue) 1
and packaged into chylomicrons in intestinal epithelial cells,
secreted into the lymph and then enter the blood stream 2 . In
the circulation, they are remodeled similarly to the remodeling of
VLDL 3 , forming smaller, cholesterol-enriched chylomicron
remnants 4 , which are taken up by hepatocytes through
receptor-mediated endocytosis 5 . (c) HDL is thought to be
formed after secretion of apolipoprotein A from cells 1 by the
formation of pre-HDL particles, which contain apoA but very
little 1.H6 lipid 2 . Those small particles act as acceptors for
phospholipid and cholesterol exported from cells (primarily liver
and intestine) by the ABCA1 transporter 3 , from a cholesterolrich intermediate 4 . Lethicin:cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT),
an enzyme in the plasma, esterifies cholesterol after its
incorporation into HDL 5 . Cholesteryl esters in the core of a
large HDL particle can be transferred to cells (especially liver 6
and steroidogenic 7 cells) by the receptor SR-BI or to other
lipoproteins by cholesteryl ester–transfer protein (CETP) 8 and
subsequently to tissues such as the liver 9 . [Adapted from M. S.

M. Krieger, 1995, in E. Haber, ed., Molecular Cardiovascular Medicine,
Scientific American Medicine, pp. 31–47.]

Brown and J. L. Goldstein, 1984, Sci. Am. 251(5):58, and M. Krieger,
1999, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 68:523.]

Unesterfied
cholesterol

FPO
Apolipoprotein B

LDL

▲ FIGURE 18-12 Model of low-density lipoprotein (LDL). This

Lipoproteins Are Made in the ER, Exported
by the Secretory Pathway, and Remodeled
in the Circulation
Only two types of lipoproteins, VLDL and chylomicrons, are
fully formed within cells by assembly in the ER, a process
that requires the activity of microsomal transfer protein. The
assembled particles move through the secretory pathway to
the cell surface and are released by exocytosis—VLDL from
liver cells and chylomicrons from intestinal epithelial cells
(see Figure 18-10b). LDLs, IDLs (intermediate-density
lipoproteins), and some HDLs are generated extracellularly
in the bloodstream and on the surfaces of cells by the remodeling of secreted VLDLs and chylomicrons. There are
four types of modifications:
Hydrolysis of triglycerides and phospholipids by lipases
and esterification of cholesterol by an acyl transferase

■

Transfer of cholesteryl esters, triglycerides, and phospholipids between lipoproteins by specific lipid-transfer proteins

■

Uptake by some particles of cholesterol and phospholipids
exported from cells

■

Association and dissociation of some apolipoproteins
from the surfaces of the particles

■

For example, VLDL secreted from hepatocytes is converted into IDL and eventually into LDL, which can then deliver its cholesterol to cells through LDL receptors (Figure
18-13a). Similarly, chylomicrons carrying dietary lipids from
the intestines are converted by lipase hydrolysis into chylomicron remnants, which eventually undergo endocytic uptake by the liver (Figure 18-13b). Small pre-HDL particles
are generated extracellularly from apoA apolipoproteins,
secreted mainly by liver and intestinal cells, and from small
amounts of cholesterol and phospholipid. They are then further converted into larger, spherical HDL particles, which
constitute the bulk of the HDL found in the blood (Figure
18-13c). A major way that pre-HDL particles grow larger
is by accepting phospholipids and cholesterol exported from
cells with the aid of yet another ABC protein called ABCA1
(see Table 18-2). This protein was implicated in the formation of HDL when defects in the ABCA1 gene were shown to
cause Tangier’s disease, a very rare genetic disease in which
affected persons have almost no HDL in their blood. After
being incorporated into HDL, cholesterol is esterified by
lecithin:cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT), an enzyme present in the plasma. Large HDL particles can transfer their
cholesteryl esters to other lipoproteins through cholesteryl
ester–transfer protein (CETP) or to cells (especially the liver
and steroidogenic cells) through the receptor SR-BI, discussed later.

18.3 • Lipid Movement into and out of Cells
(a)

(b)

Dietary lipids

6
LDL

LDLR
5
Liver

1
Liver

LDLR
B-100

4

5

Intestinal
cell

Extrahepatic
cell

LDLR

17

Remnant receptors
(LDLR/LRP)

2

1
VLDL
E C

B-100

E

Chylomicron
remnant

Chylomicron

LDL
E

B-100

A C

E

B-48

3
Capillaries

Capillaries

FPO

Lipoprotein lipase
2
(c)
9

Liver

Cholesteryl
ester

Other
lipoproteins

SR-BI
1

B-48
4

8

B-100

Lipoprotein lipase
3

OH
CEPT

6

7

SR-BI

Steroidogenic
cells

ApoA
2

preβ-HDL

ABCA1
transporter

Liver and
intestinal
cells

Steroid
hormones

HDL

3

A
5

A
LCAT

4
preβ-HDL
A

A
Unesterified
cholesterol-enriched
intermediate

In Section 18.5, we examine in detail the findings that the
plasma LDL cholesterol concentration (including both unesterified and esterified cholesterol) is directly correlated
with risk for coronary artery disease, whereas the plasma
HDL cholesterol concentration is inversely correlated with
risk. For this reason, LDL is popularly called “bad cholesterol” and HDL, “good cholesterol.”

Cells Use Several Protein-Mediated Mechanisms
to Import Lipoprotein Lipids
For maximum efficiency, the lipids within circulating lipoproteins should be taken up only by those cells that require them
for membrane formation (e.g., dividing cells), steroid hormone synthesis (e.g., endocrine cells), energy production (e.g.,
muscle cells), or storage (adipose cells, endocrine cells). The
targeting of lipoprotein lipids to appropriate cells is accomplished in one of two ways: (1) local, partial extracellular

hydrolysis of core triglycerides followed by transport proteinmediated uptake of the released fatty acids or (2) the regulated expression of cell-surface lipoprotein receptors that
mediate the direct uptake of lipoprotein lipids.
The first targeting mechanism, for example, supplies cells
with fatty acids for use as an energy source in muscle and
for storage in adipose tissue. The extracellular enzyme
lipoprotein lipase is attached by glycosaminoglycan (GAG)
chains to the blood-facing surface of endothelial cells in these
tissues. Fatty acids released from the hydrolysis of core
triglycerides in VLDL and chylomicrons then cross the vessel
wall and enter underlying cells through fatty acid transporters such as FATPs and CD36 (see Figure 18-10a). This
process results in the delivery of fatty acids to the cells concomitant with remodeling of the lipoprotein particles.
The expression of various lipoprotein receptors by different tissues also ensures that lipids are delivered to cells
that need and can use them. In every case of receptor-

18

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

facilitated delivery, cholesteryl esters and triglycerides in the
lipoprotein core must cross two topological barriers to enter
the cytoplasmic space: the phospholipid monolayer shell of
the lipoprotein particle and the cell’s bilayer plasma membrane. At some point in the lipid-delivery process, the esterified transport forms of the core lipids must be hydrolyzed to
unesterified forms (cholesterol, fatty acids) to be usable by
the importing cells. Cells have evolved two distinct mechanisms for receptor-facilitated uptake of lipids in lipoprotein
cores: receptor-mediated endocytosis of entire lipoprotein
particles and selective lipid uptake of certain lipid components of lipoprotein particles.

Analysis of Familial Hypercholesterolemia
Revealed the Pathway for Receptor-Mediated
Endocytosis of LDL Particles
There is no better example of the synergistic relation between basic molecular cell biology and medicine than the story of the discovery of the LDL
receptor (LDLR) pathway for delivering cholesterol to cells.
The series of elegant and Nobel Prize–winning studies leading to this discovery served as sources of insight into the
mechanisms underlying LDL metabolism, the functions and
properties of several key organelles, cellular systems for coordinately regulating complex metabolic pathways, and new
approaches for treating atherosclerosis.
Some of these experiments compared LDL metabolism in
normal human cells and in cells from patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH), a hereditary disease that is
marked by elevated plasma LDL cholesterol and is now
known to be caused by mutations in the LDLR gene. In patients who have one normal and one defective copy of the
LDLR gene (heterozygotes), LDL cholesterol is increased
about twofold. Those with two defective LDLR genes (homozygotes) have LDL cholesterol levels that are from fourfold to sixfold as high as normal. FH heterozygotes
commonly develop cardiovascular disease about 10 years
earlier than normal people do, and FH homozygotes usually
die of heart attacks before reaching their late 20s. ❚
Here, we illustrate how analysis of the cellular defects underlying familial hypercholesterolemia can illuminate normal
cellular processes. First let’s consider typical cell-culture experiments in which the interactions of LDL with normal and
FH homozygous cells were examined as a function of LDL
concentration, which defined the high-affinity LDL receptor, and incubation temperature, which established the temperature dependence of LDL uptake. In these experiments,
purified LDL was first labeled by the covalent attachment
of radioactive 125I to the side chains of tyrosine residues in
apoB-100 on the surfaces of the LDL particles. Cultured cells
from normal persons and FH patients were incubated for
several hours with the labeled LDL. Investigators then de-

termined how much LDL was bound to the surfaces of cells,
how much was internalized, and how much of the apoB-100
component of the LDL was degraded by enzymatic hydrolysis to individual amino acids. The degradation of apoB-100
was detected by the release of 125I-tyrosine into the culture
medium.
We can see from the results shown in Figure 18-14a that,
compared with normal cells, homozygous FH cells are
clearly defective in the binding and internalization of added
LDL and in the degradation of apoB-100 at the normal physiologic temperature of 37 C. The homozygous cells exhibit
essentially no activity. Heterozygous cells exhibit about half
the activity of normal cells. The shape of the binding curve
for normal cells is consistent with a receptor that has a high
affinity for LDL and is saturable. Note also that the curves
for LDL internalization and degradation have the same
shape as the binding curve. Moreover, when the experiments
were performed with normal cells at 4 C, LDL binding was
observed, but internalization and degradation were inhibited
(Figure 18-14b). Low temperature does not normally inhibit
the binding of molecules to cell-surface receptors, but it does
inhibit processes, such as the internalization and subsequent
degradation of molecules, that depend on membrane trafficking (Chapter 17). Thus these results suggest that LDL
first binds to cell-surface receptors and is subsequently internalized and degraded. One final feature of these results is
worth noting. After cells were incubated for 5 hours at
37 C, the amounts of internalized LDL and hydrolyzed
apoB-100 were substantially greater than that of surfacebound LDL. This result indicates that each receptor molecule
bound and mediated the internalization of more than one
LDL particle in the incubation period. In other words, the
LDL receptor is recycled.
Pulse-chase experiments with normal cells and a fixed
concentration of 125I-labeled LDL helped to further define
the time course of events in receptor-mediated cellular LDL
processing. These experiments clearly demonstrate the order
of events: surface binding of LDL → internalization →
degradation (Figure 18-15). The results of electron microscopy studies with LDL particles tagged with an electrondense label revealed that LDL first binds to clathrin-coated
endocytic pits that invaginate and bud off to form coated
vesicles and then endosomes (see Figure 17-27). Findings
from further experiments showed that the LDL receptor recognizes apoB-100 and one or two closely related apolipoproteins; thus binding by this receptor is highly specific for LDL.
Binding is also pH dependent: strong binding of LDL occurs
at the pH of extracellular fluid (7.4); weak or no binding occurs at the lower pH (≈4.5–6) found in some intracellular organelles (e.g., endosomes and lysosomes). Because of this
property, the LDL receptor releases bound LDL within intracellular vesicles and can be recycled to the cell surface.
A variety of mutations in the gene encoding the LDL receptor can cause familial hypercholesterolemia. Some mutations prevent the synthesis of the LDLR protein; others
prevent proper folding of the receptor protein in the ER,

18.3 • Lipid Movement into and out of Cells
INTERNALIZATION

ng LDL per mycell protein

BINDING
0.2

19

DEGRADATION

1.0

5.0

0.5

2.5

Normal

0.1

FH homozygote
0

50
125

100

0

BINDING

100

0

50
125

I LDL concentration

0.2

1.0

FPO
37 °C

100

I LDL concentration

INTERNALIZATION
37 °C

ng LDL per mycell protein

50
125

I LDL concentration

DEGRADATION
37 °C

5.0

4 °C
0.5

0.1

2.5

4 °C
4 °C
50

0
125 I

100

0

LDL concentration

50
125 I

100

LDL concentration

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 18-14 LDL binding,
internalization, and degradation are reduced in cells from
patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) and are
influenced by temperature. Cultured fibroblasts were incubated
for 5 h in a medium containing LDL whose apolipoprotein B
(apoB) component was labeled on tyrosine side chains with 125I.
The amounts of LDL bound to the cell surface (binding) and
present within cells (internalization), as well as the amount of
125
I-tyrosine released into the medium owing to apoB
degradation (hydrolysis), were determined as a function of the
LDL concentration. (a) The curves shown here represent typical
results from experiments at 37 C with cells from a normal
person and from a person homozygous for FH. Note that the

leading to its premature degradation (Chapter 16); still other
mutations reduce the ability of the LDL receptor to bind
LDL tightly. A particularly informative group of mutant receptors are expressed on the cell surface and bind LDL normally but cannot mediate the internalization of bound LDL.
Analyses of such defective LDL receptors led to the concept
of internalization sequences in cell-surface proteins destined
for endocytosis by means of clathrin-coated pits. As discussed in Chapter 17, such sorting signals, located in the cytosolic domains of certain membrane proteins, play a key
role in directing these proteins to particular vesicles.
The results of these pioneering studies and other research
led to the current model for the receptor-mediated endocy-

0

50
125 I

100

LDL concentration

y-axis scales are different and that the relative maximal values
for binding internalization and hydrolysis are approximately
0.2:1:5. (b) These results for normal cells at 37 C and
4 C show that LDL binding is not reduced dramatically at low
temperature, whereas subsequent internalization and hydrolysis
are blocked. These findings suggest that internalization and
hydrolysis entail membrane movements, which are typically
inhibited at low temperatures. See text for discussion. [Adapted
from M. S. Brown and J. L. Goldstein, 1979, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA
76:3330, and J. L. Goldstein and M. S. Brown, 1989, in C. R. Scriver et
al., eds., The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease, 6th ed, McGraw-Hill,
p. 1215.]

tosis of LDL and other receptor–ligand combinations detailed in Chapter 17 (see in particular Figure 17-28) and
summarized in Figure 18-10b. After internalized LDL particles reach lysosomes, lysosomal proteases hydrolyze their
surface apolipoproteins and lysosomal cholesteryl esterases
hydrolyze their core cholesteryl esters. The unesterified cholesterol is then free to leave the lysosome and be used as necessary by the cell in the synthesis of membranes or various
cholesterol derivatives. The export of cholesterol from lysosomes depends on the NPC1 protein mentioned previously.
If LDLR-mediated endocytosis were not regulated, cells
would continuously take up LDL and accumulate massive
amounts of LDL-derived cholesterol because of the recycling

of receptors and the large reservoir of LDL in the bloodstream. However, an elegant regulatory system described in
Section 18.4 limits LDL uptake. LDL delivers most of its
cholesterol to the liver, which expresses the majority of the
body’s LDL receptors. The LDL receptor not only interacts
with apoB-100 on the surfaces of LDL particles, but also
binds to apoE on the surfaces of chylomicron remnants and
intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL) particles. A related
receptor called LRP (LDLR-related protein) recognizes
apoE but not apoB-100; thus LRP mediates the endocytosis
of chylomicron remnants and IDL, but not LDL, by hepato-

18.4 • Feedback Regulation of Cellular Lipid Metabolism

Figure 18-16 depicts a model for the selective uptake of
cholesteryl esters by a cell-surface receptor called SR-BI
(scavenger receptor, class B, type I). SR-BI binds HDL,
LDL, and VLDL and can mediate selective uptake from all
of these lipoproteins. The detailed mechanism of selective
lipid uptake has not yet been elucidated, but it may entail
hemifusion of the outer phospholipid monolayer of the
lipoprotein and the exoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane. The cholesteryl esters initially enter the hydrophobic
center of the plasma membrane, are subsequently transferred across the inner leaflet, and are eventually hydrolyzed by cytosolic, not lysosomal, cholesteryl esterases.
The lipid-depleted particles remaining after lipid transfer
dissociate from SR-BI and return to the circulation; they
can then extract more phospholipid and cholesterol from
other cells by means of the ABCA1 protein or other cellsurface transport proteins (see Figure 18-13c). Eventually,
small lipid-depleted HDL particles circulating in the bloodstream are filtered out by the kidney and bind to a different
receptor on renal epithelial cells. After these particles have
been internalized by receptor-mediated endocytosis, they
are degraded by lysosomes.
The receptor SR-BI differs in two important respects from
the LDL receptor. First, SR-BI clusters on microvilli and in
cell-surface lipid rafts (Chapter 5), not in coated pits as does
the LDL receptor. Second, SR-BI mediates the transfer of
lipids across the membrane, not endocytosis of entire LDL
particles as mediated by the LDL receptor. A multifunctional
receptor, SR-BI can mediate the selective uptake from lipoproteins of diverse lipids (e.g., cholesteryl esters, vitamin E); it
also functions in the reverse direction to facilitate the export
of unesterified cholesterol from cells to bound lipoproteins.
SR-BI has a structure similar to that of the fatty acid transporter CD36, and they both belong to the superfamily of
scavenger receptors; as discussed later, some of these receptors
apparently play a role in the onset of atherosclerosis.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 18.3
Lipid Movement into and out of Cells
Movement of lipids into and out of cells usually requires
either cell-surface transport proteins and water-soluble
binding proteins (or micelles), or lipoprotein secretion and
lipoprotein receptor–facilitated uptake (see Figure 18-10).

■

Fatty acid transporters (FATPs, CD36) in the plasma
membrane facilitate the movement of fatty acids between
intracellular binding proteins (e.g., FABP) and extracellular carriers (e.g., albumin).

■

The ABC superfamily comprises ATP-hydrolyzing smallmolecule pumps. Many ABC proteins mediate the export
of various lipids from cells (see Table 18-2).

■

Several ABC proteins export bile components from hepatocytes: ABCB4 (phospholipids), ABCB11 (bile salts),
and ABCG5/8 (cholesterol and plant sterols). Na-linked

■

21

lipid symporters (e.g., IBAT and NTCP), which mediate
the cellular uptake of bile acids, also play a key role in the
enterohepatic circulation (see Figure 18-11).
Lipoproteins are large particles with cores of neutral
lipids (cholesteryl esters, triglycerides) and amphipathic
shells composed of apolipoproteins, a monolayer of phospholipids, and unesterified cholesterol.

■

Each class of lipoprotein has a characteristic protein and
lipid composition and functions in the cellular export, extracellular transport through the circulatory system, and
receptor-mediated cellular import of lipids (see Table 18-3
and Figure 18-13).

■

Familial hypercholesterolemia is caused by mutations in
the gene encoding the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor. Persons with this disorder have elevated plasma
LDL levels and develop cardiovascular disease at abnormally young ages.

■

Receptor-mediated endocytosis of lipoproteins, such as
LDL, is one mechanism for delivering cholesterol to cells.

■

In a second mechanism for delivering cholesterol to cells,
the receptor SR-BI mediates the selective uptake of cholesteryl esters from high-density lipoprotein, LDL, and very
low density lipoprotein. The resulting lipid-depleted
lipoprotein particle is subsequently released from the cell
and can be reused (see Figure 18-16).

■

18.4 Feedback Regulation of Cellular
Lipid Metabolism
As is readily apparent, a cell would soon face a crisis if it did
not have enough lipids to make adequate amounts of membranes or had so much cholesterol that large crystals formed
and damaged cellular structures. To prevent such disastrous
events, cells normally maintain appropriate lipid levels by
regulating their supply and utilization of lipids. We have seen
how cells acquire lipids by biosynthesis or import and how
they export lipids. In this section, we consider the regulation
of cellular lipid metabolism, focusing on cholesterol. However, the regulatory pathways that control cellular cholesterol
levels also function in controlling fatty acid and phospholipid metabolism. Coordinate regulation of the metabolism
of these membrane components is necessary to maintain the
proper composition of membranes.
For more than 50 years the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway has been known to be subject to negative feedback regulation by cholesterol. Indeed, it was the first biosynthetic
pathway shown to exhibit this type of end-product regulation. As the cellular cholesterol level rises, the need to import
cholesterol through the LDL receptor or to synthesize additional cholesterol goes down. As a consequence, transcription of the genes encoding the LDL receptor and cholesterol
biosynthetic enzymes decreases. For example, when normal
cultured cells are incubated with increasing concentrations of

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

LDL, the expression and activity of HMG-CoA reductase,
the rate-controlling enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis, is
suppressed, whereas the activity of acyl:cholesterol acyl
transferase (ACAT), which converts cholesterol into the
esterified storage form, is increased. Conversely, when the
cellular cholesterol level begins to fall as cells use more cholesterol, expression of the LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase increases and the activity of ACAT decreases. Such
coordinate regulation is an efficient way for cells to maintain
cellular cholesterol homeostasis.

ER-to-Golgi Transport and Proteolytic
Activation Control the Activity of SREBP
Transcription Factors
Cholesterol-dependent transcriptional regulation often depends on 10-base-pair sterol regulatory elements (SREs), or
SRE half-sites, in the promoters of regulated target genes. As
you might expect from the discussion of transcriptional control in Chapter 11, the interaction of cholesterol-dependent
SRE-binding proteins (SREBPs) with these response elements
modulates the expression of the target genes. What you

Lumen

Cytosol

(b)

N
Nuclear
SREBP

OH
HO

OH

LH

(a)

might not expect is that the SREBP-mediated pathway,
whereby cholesterol controls the expression of proteins engaged in cholesterol metabolism, begins in the ER and includes at least two other proteins besides SREBP.
When cells have adequate concentrations of cholesterol,
SREBP is found in the ER membrane complexed with SCAP
(SREBP cleavage-activating protein), insig-1 (or its close homolog insig-2), and perhaps other proteins (Figure 18-17,
left). SREBP has three distinct domains: an N-terminal cytosolic domain that includes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
DNA-binding motif (see Figure 11-22b) and functions as a
transcription factor, a central membrane-anchoring domain
containing two transmembrane  helices, and a C-terminal
cytosolic regulatory domain. SCAP has eight transmembrane
 helices and a large C-terminal cytosolic domain that interacts with the regulatory domain of SREBP. Five of the transmembrane helices in SCAP form a sterol-sensing domain,
similar to that in HMG-CoA reductase. The sterol-sensing
domain in SCAP binds tightly to insig-1(2), but only at high
cellular cholesterol levels. When insig-1(2) is tightly bound
to SCAP, it blocks the binding of SCAP to COP II vesicle coat
proteins and thus prevents incorporation of the SCAP/SREBP
complex into ER-to-Golgi transport vesicles (see Chapter 17).

bH

22

Into the
nucleus
S2P

SREBP
bH

S1P

LH

Vesicle
Budding

SCAP

SREBP

FPO
SCAP

N
HO

Vesicular
transport

Insig-1(2)

OH

HO
High
cholesterol

N

Low
cholesterol

ER

▲ FIGURE 18-17 Model for cholesterol-sensitive control of
SREBP activation mediated by insig-1(2) and SCAP. The
cellular pool of cholesterol is monitored by combined action of
insig-1(2) and SCAP, both transmembrane proteins located in the
ER membrane. (Left ) When cholesterol levels are high, insig-1(2)
binds to the sterol-sensing domain in SCAP, anchoring the
SCAP/SREBP complex in the ER membrane. (b) The dissociation
of insig-1(2) from SCAP at low cholesterol levels allows the

ER

Golgi

SCAP/SREBP complex to move to the Golgi complex (bottom).
(Right ) The sequential cleavage of SREBP by the site 1 and
site 2 proteases (S1P, S2P) associated with the Golgi membrane
releases the N-terminal bHLH domain, called nuclear SREBP
(nSREBP). After translocating into the nucleus, nSREBP controls
the transcription of genes containing sterol regulatory elements
(SREs) in their promoters. [Adapted from T. F. Osborne, 2001, Genes
Devel. 15:1873; see T. Yang et al., 2002, Cell 110:489.]

18.4 • Feedback Regulation of Cellular Lipid Metabolism

When cellular cholesterol levels drop, insig-1(2) no longer
binds to SCAP, and the SCAP/SREBP complex can move from
the ER to the Golgi apparatus (Figure 18-17, right). In the
Golgi, SREBP is cleaved sequentially at two sites by two
membrane-bound proteases, S1P and S2P. The second intramembrane cleavage at site 2 releases the N-terminal
bHLH-containing domain into the cytosol. This fragment,
called nSREBP (nuclear SREBP), binds directly to the nuclear
import receptor and is rapidly translocated into the nucleus
(see Figure 12-29). In the nucleus, nSREBP activates the transcription of genes containing SREs in their promoters, such as
those encoding the LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase.
After cleavage of SREBP in the Golgi, SCAP apparently recycles back to the ER where it can interact with insig-1(2) and
another SREBP molecule. High-level transcription of SREcontrolled genes requires the ongoing generation of new
nSREBP because it is degraded fairly rapidly by the ubiquitinmediated proteasomal pathway (Chapter 3). The rapid generation and degradation of nSREBP help cells respond quickly
to changes in levels of intracellular cholesterol.

In the insig-1(2)/SCAP/SREBP pathway for controlling
cellular cholesterol metabolism, the cell exploits intercompartmental movements (ER → Golgi → cytosol → nucleus),
regulated by sterol-dependent protein–protein interactions,
and post-translational proteolytic cleavage to activate a
membrane-bound transcription factor. Cleavage of SREBP in
this pathway is one of several known examples of regulated
intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). For instance, RIP activates
transcription factors in the Notch signaling pathway (Chapter 14) and in the unfolded-protein response (Chapter 16).
RIP is also responsible for the generation of the toxic amyloid  peptides that contribute to the onset of Alzheimer’s
disease (see Figure 14-30).

Multiple SREBPs Regulate Expression
of Numerous Lipid-Metabolizing Proteins
Under some circumstances (e.g., during cell growth), cells
need an increased supply of all the essential membrane lipids
and their fatty acid precursors (coordinate regulation). But

Citrate

Acetate

ATP-citrate
lyase

Acetyl-CoA
synthetase

SREBP-2

SREBP-1

Acetyl CoA
Acetyl-CoA
carboxylase

AcetoacetylCoA thiolase

Acetoacetyl CoA
HMG-CoA synthase

FPO

Malonyl CoA
NADPH

NADP +

HMG CoA
HMG-CoA reductase

Malic
enzyme

NADPH

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase

NADPH

Glucose
6-phosphate

6-phosphogluconate

NADPH

Monounsaturated
fatty acids

G6PD PGDH
NADPH

NADP +

NADP +
Fatty acyl CoA
GPAT

Squalene
Squalene expoxidase
Lanosterol synthase
CYP51
Lathosterol oxidase
DHCR

Fatty acid synthase
Long-chain fatty acyl elongase

Saturated fatty acids

Malate

Mevalonate
Mevalonate kinase
Phosphomevalonate kinase
Mevalonate PP decarboxylase
GPP synthase
IPP isomerase
FPP synthase
Squalene synthase

23

Monoacylglycerol 3-phosphate
NADPH

Cholesterol

LDL receptor

▲ FIGURE 18-18 Global regulation of cellular lipid
metabolism by SREBP. SREBP controls the transcription of
genes indicated here encoding key proteins directly required for
the synthesis and import of cholesterol and for the synthesis of
fatty acids, phospholipids, and triglycerides. SREBPs also regulate
the activity of genes in the production of NADPH, which is an
energy source for many of the steps in these biosynthetic

Triacylglycerides and phospholipids

pathways. Abbreviations: GPP  geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate;
IPP  isopentenyl pyrophosphate; FPP  farnesyl pyrophosphate;
CYP51  lanosterol 14-demethylase; DHCR  7-dehydrocholesterol reductase; G6PD  glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase; PGDH  6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase;
GPAT  glycerol 3-phosphate acyl transferase. [Adapted from J. D.
Horton, J. L. Goldstein, and M. S. Brown, 2002, J. Clin. Invest. 109:1128.]

24

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

cells sometimes need greater amounts of some lipids than
others (differential regulation). For example, cells that are
producing bile acids or steroid hormones need an increased
supply of cholesterol but not of fatty acids or phospholipids.
The complex regulation of lipid metabolism characteristic
of higher eukaryotes is due largely to a plethora of transcription factors, including multiple SREBPs, that control the
expression of proteins taking part in the synthesis, degradation, transport, and storage of lipids.
There are three known isoforms of SREBP in mammals:
SREBP-1a and SREBP-1c, which are generated from alternatively spliced RNAs produced from the same gene, and
SREBP-2, which is encoded by a different gene. Together
these protease-regulated transcription factors control the
availability not only of cholesterol but also of fatty acids and
their products triglycerides and phospholipids. In mammalian cells, SREBP-1a and SREBP-1c exert a greater influence on fatty acid metabolism than on cholesterol
metabolism, whereas the reverse is the case for SREBP-2. As
indicated in Figure 18-18, SREBPs can regulate the activities of genes encoding many different proteins. Such proteins
include those participating in the cellular uptake of lipids
(e.g., the LDL receptor, SR-BI, and lipoprotein lipase) and
numerous enzymes in the pathways for synthesizing cholesterol, fatty acids, triglycerides, and phospholipids.
SREBP-1 may play an important role in the development of fatty liver, a major pathologic consequence of alcohol abuse. In fatty liver, abnormally
high levels of triglycerides and cholesterol accumulate in the
cytosol as lipid droplets, which can contribute to alcoholic
hepatitis and cirrhosis. The results of experiments using cultured hepatocytes and mice suggest that the metabolism of
alcohol to acetaldehyde by hepatic alcohol dehydrogenase
leads to the activation of SREBP-1 and the release of
nSREBP-1, which in turn induces the synthesis of excess fatty
acids and triglycerides. Consistent with this suggestion is the
finding that overexpression of a truncated, constitutively active form of SREBP-1 (i.e., nSREBP-1) in the livers of mice
significantly increases both fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis, resulting in a fatty liver. ❚
In contrast with the insig-1(2)/SCAP/SREBP pathway in
mammalian cells, the homologous pathway in Drosophila
does not respond to changes in cellular sterol levels. Instead,
the SCAP-dependent proteolytic activation of SREBP is suppressed by high levels of phosphatidylethanolamine, the
main phospholipid in fruit flies. This finding, the result of an
elegant series of experiments using both enzyme inhibitors and
RNA interference (RNAi), indicates that the sterol-sensing
domain of Drosophila SCAP responds to the cellular level
of phosphatidylethanolamine, not cholesterol. Thus so-called
sterol-sensing domains might more appropriately be called
lipid-sensing domains. Whether these domains directly bind
to their controlling lipids or mediate interaction with other
proteins that directly bind the lipids (i.e., sense the levels of
the regulatory lipids) is not yet known.

As mentioned previously, HMG-CoA reductase also contains a sterol-sensing domain. This domain senses high levels
of cholesterol, some cholesterol derivatives, and certain nonsteroidal precursors of cholesterol, triggering the rapid,
ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation of the enzyme.
As a consequence, HMG-CoA reductase activity drops, causing reduced cholesterol synthesis. Like SCAP, HMG-CoA reductase is located in the ER membrane and insig-1(2) binds
to its sterol-sensing domain. This binding also is cholesterol
dependent and is required for the cholesterol-dependent proteasomal degradation of HMG-CoA reductase. Thus mammalian insig-1(2) and the sterol-sensing domain of SCAP or
HMG-CoA reductase apparently combine to form a cholesterol sensor. It seems likely that, in the course of evolution, the
sterol-sensing domain and its associated proteins proved effective for recognizing various lipid molecules and were incorporated into a variety of regulatory systems for this purpose.

Members of the Nuclear Receptor Superfamily
Contribute to Cellular and Whole-Body Lipid
Regulation
In addition to SREBPs, several members of the nuclear receptor superfamily regulate lipid metabolism. Nuclear receptors are transcription factors that are generally activated
when bound to specific small-molecule ligands (Chapter 11).
Certain nuclear receptors influence whole-body lipid metabolism by regulating the absorption of dietary lipids, cellular
synthesis of lipids, transport protein–mediated import and
export of lipids, levels of lipoproteins and their receptors,
and catabolism of lipids (e.g., fatty acid oxidation in the peroxisome) and their secretion from the body.
Some ligands for nuclear receptors are extracellular molecules that diffuse across the plasma membrane (e.g., steroid
hormones) or enter cells through transporters (e.g., bile
acids, fatty acids). Alternatively, ligands generated within a
cell, including oxygen-modified cholesterol (oxysterols), bile
acids, and certain fatty acids and their derivatives, may bind
to nuclear receptors within the same cell. Nuclear receptors
sense changes in the levels of all key cellular lipids by binding
the lipids themselves or their metabolic products. When activated, these receptors stimulate or suppress gene expression
to ensure that the proper physiological levels of lipids are
maintained (feedback regulation for cellular homeostasis).
The binding of multiple types of lipids to an individual nuclear receptor allows the receptor to coordinately control
several metabolic pathways.
For example, hepatocytes express LXR (liver X receptor), a nuclear receptor that senses the levels of oxysterols.
When cellular cholesterol increases in the liver, oxysterols
are generated and activate LXR. Activated LXR stimulates
the expression of cholesterol 7-hydroxylase, the key ratelimiting enzyme in the hepatic conversion of cholesterol into
bile acids, a major pathway for disposing of excess cholesterol from the body. LXR also stimulates the expression of
the ABC proteins that export cholesterol into the bile
(ABCG5/8) or onto lipoproteins in the blood (ABCA1). In

18.5 • The Cell Biology of Atherosclerosis, Heart Attacks, and Strokes

addition, LXR promotes lipoprotein production and modification and the expression of SREBP-1c, which then turns
on the transcription of genes required for fatty acid synthesis. The resulting increase in fatty acids can contribute to
cholesterol esterification and phospholipid synthesis to
maintain the proper ratio of cholesterol to phospholipid.
Thus sensing of increased cellular cholesterol by LXR results in diverse responses that prevent the accumulation of
excess cholesterol.
Another nuclear receptor, called FXR, is activated by the
binding of bile acids. Expressed in hepatocytes and intestinal
epithelial cells, FXR plays a key role in regulating the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids. Bile acid–activated FXR
stimulates the expression of intracellular bile acid–binding
protein (I-BABP) and of transport proteins (e.g., ABCB11,
NTCP) that mediate cellular export and import of bile acids
(see Figure 18-11). In contrast, active FXR represses the expression of cholesterol 7-hydroxylase, thereby decreasing
the synthesis of bile acids from cholesterol in the liver—another example of end-product inhibition of a metabolic pathway. Both FXR and LXR function as heterodimers with the
nuclear receptor RXR.
In the next section, we will see how an understanding of
the SREBP and nuclear receptor regulatory pathways has
contributed to effective strategies for reducing the risk of
atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 18.4
Feedback Regulation of Cellular Lipid Metabolism
Two key transcription-control pathways are employed
to regulate the expression of enzymes, transporters, receptors, and other proteins taking part in cellular and wholebody lipid metabolism.

■

In the insig-1(2)/SCAP/SREBP pathway, the active
nSREBP transcription factor is released from the Golgi
membrane by intramembrane proteolysis when cellular
cholesterol is low (see Figure 18-17). It then stimulates the
expression of genes with sterol regulatory elements (SREs)
in their promoters (e.g., the genes for LDLR and HMGCoA reductase). When cholesterol is high, SREBP is retained in the ER membrane complexed with insig-1(2) and
SCAP.

■

SREBP controls the transcription of numerous genes encoding proteins having roles in cellular lipid metabolism
(see Figure 18-18). In mammals, SREBP-1a and SREBP-1c
have a greater influence on fatty acid metabolism than on
cholesterol metabolism; the reverse is the case for SREBP-2.

■

■ In the nuclear-receptor pathway, transcription factors in the
cytosol are activated by intracellular lipids (e.g., high levels of
oxysterols or bile acids). The ligand–transcription factor complex then enters the nucleus and regulates the expression of
specific target genes that participate in feedback regulation of
the synthesis, transport, and catabolism of lipids.

25

Homologous transmembrane sterol-sensing domains are
present in several integral membrane proteins participating in lipid metabolism (e.g., SCAP, HMG-CoA reductase,
NPC1). These domains appear to help detect and respond
to changes in the levels of a variety of lipids, not just sterols.
Binding to insig-1(2) is essential for sterol-sensing by at
least some of these domains.

■

18.5 The Cell Biology
of Atherosclerosis, Heart Attacks,
and Strokes
In this concluding section we examine the relation
between lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis, the
most common cause of heart attacks and strokes.
Atherosclerosis accounts for 75 percent of deaths due to cardiovascular disease in the United States. Advances in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying lipid
metabolism and its regulation are having an enormous effect on
the treatment and prevention of this major health problem.
Frequently called cholesterol-dependent clogging of the
arteries, atherosclerosis is characterized by the progressive
deposition of lipids, cells, and extracellular matrix material
in the inner layer of the wall of an artery. The resulting distortion of the artery’s wall can lead, either alone or in combination with a blood clot, to major blockage of blood flow.
Thus, to understand the cellular basis of atherosclerosis, we
need to first briefly consider the structure of an artery. ❚
Specialized epithelial cells called endothelial cells form a
thin layer, the endothelium, that lines the blood vessel wall
immediately adjacent to the lumen through which the blood
flows (Figure 18-19a). Beneath the endothelium are several
concentric layers of extracellular matrix and cells that make
up the artery wall: the intima, composed largely of amorphous collagens, proteoglycans, and elastic fibers; the media,
a well-organized layer of smooth muscle cells whose contraction controls the diameter of the vessel lumen and thus
influences blood pressure; and the adventitia, a layer of connective tissue and cells that forms the interface between the
vessel and the tissue through which it runs.
Under normal circumstances, the plasma (the fluid part
of blood) and many types of blood cells flow smoothly and
rapidly through the lumen of an artery, a type of movement
termed laminar flow. When an infection or traumatic damage occurs within the walls of an artery or in the underlying
tissue, a complex series of events permits white blood cells
(leukocytes) to initially adhere loosely to the luminal surface
of the artery wall and roll, propelled by the laminar flow of
the surrounding plasma (see Figure 6-30). Subsequently, adhesion molecules mediate firm attachment of the white cells
to the endothelium and their movement across the endothelium into the wall. Within the artery wall, white blood cells
called monocytes differentiate into macrophages, which fight
infection in a number of ways. For instance, macrophages
and other leukocytes release proteins and small molecules

26

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids
(a) Normal artery wall

(b) Fatty streak stage

White blood cells
Rolling white
adhere and migrate blood cell
Blood flow
into artery wall to
through lumen
fight infection
Endothelium

Intima

Adventitia

Media
(smooth muscle cells)

Macrophage foam
cell formation

FPO

(c) Atheroslerotic plaque stage

(d) Rupture of endothelium and
occlusive blood clot formation

Fibrous cap
formation

Macrophage foam
cell accumulation

Formation of
necrotic core

▲ FIGURE 18-19 Major stages in the onset and progression
of atherosclerosis in the artery wall. (a) The anatomy of a
normal artery wall, which is composed of concentric layers of
cells and extracellular matrix, is shown. White blood cells adhere
to the endothelium, roll along it, and then migrate into an artery
wall to fight infection (see Figure 6-30). (b) When plasma LDL is
high or plasma HDL is low, or both, macrophages in the intima
can accumulate lipoprotein cholesterol, generating foam cells
filled with cholesteryl ester droplets (see Figure 18-20).
Accumulation of foam cells produces a fatty streak in the vessel
wall that is only visible microscopically. (c) Continued generation

that directly attack bacteria and other pathogens. The cells
also secrete proteins that help recruit additional monocytes
and other immune cells (e.g., T lymphocytes) to join in the
fight. Macrophages also engulf and destroy pathogens, damaged macromolecules, and infected or dead body cells. When
the infection has been cured, damaged tissue is repaired and
the remaining macrophages and other leukocytes move out
of the artery wall and reenter the circulation.
As we will see, atherosclerosis is an “unintended” consequence of this normal physiological inflammatory response, which is designed to protect against infection and
tissue damage. For this reason and because atherosclerosis
most often strikes late in life after the prime reproductive
years, there appears to have been little evolutionary selec-

Occlusive blood clot

of foam cells and migration of smooth muscle cells from the
media into the intima is followed by cell death, producing an
advanced atherosclerotic plaque. This plaque consists of a
necrotic core of lipids (including needlelike cholesterol crystals)
and extracellular matrix overlain by a fibrous cap of smooth
muscle cells and matrix. (d) As an atherosclerotic plaque grows
into the lumen of the artery, it disrupts and reduces the flow of
blood. In some cases, the plaque alone can fully occlude the
artery. In many cases, the fibrous cap ruptures, inducing
formation of a blood clot that can fully occlude the artery.
[Adapted from R. Russell, 1999, N. Engl. J. Med. 340(2):115.]

tive pressure against the disease. Thus, although atherosclerosis has an enormous negative influence on modern human
populations, its high incidence in well-fed, long-lived persons
is not surprising.

Arterial Inflammation and Cellular Import
of Cholesterol Mark the Early Stages
of Atherosclerosis
During an inflammatory response, macrophages in the inflamed artery wall can endocytose substantial amounts of
cholesterol from lipoproteins, which accumulate within the
artery wall under some circumstances (Figure 18-20a). As
macrophages convert the imported cholesterol into the ester

18.5 • The Cell Biology of Atherosclerosis, Heart Attacks, and Strokes

27

Vascular lumen

Monocyte
Adhesion and
migration
1

Endothelium
LDL

Intima

Differentiation

2

FPO
3

SR

LDL oxidation

HDL
5

Efflux
Lipid
droplet

oxLDL

Foam
cell

SR
4
Macrophage

oxLDL uptake

Media
Smooth muscle cells

(a)

▲ FIGURE 18-20 Generation of macrophage foam cells in
an artery wall. (a) At a site of infection or damage ( 1 ),
monocytes adhere to and migrate across the activated
endothelial cell layer into the intima ( 2 ), where they differentiate
into macrophages. When plasma LDL levels are high, the
concentration of LDL in the intima is high, and some of the LDL
is oxidized to oxLDL or otherwise modified ( 3 ). Scavenger
receptors expressed by macrophages are proposed to bind to
and endocytose oxLDL, which is degraded. Its cholesterol
accumulates as cholesteryl esters in cytosolic lipid droplets,
leading to an accumulation of cholesterol and the formation of
foam cells ( 4 ). Macrophages also express ABCA1 and SR-BI,

form, they become filled with cholesteryl ester lipid droplets.
The resulting lipid-filled macrophages are called foam cells
because the lipid droplets have a foamy appearance (Figure
18-20b). As macrophage foam cells accumulate in an artery
wall, they initially form an early fatty streak, the first unique
step in atherosclerosis (Figure 18-19b).
The next stage in atherosclerosis is marked by the continued accumulation of macrophage foam cells, proliferation
of smooth muscle cells, and migration of these cells from the
media into the intima. The smooth muscle cells secrete additional extracellular matrix, and some internalize sufficient
amounts of lipoprotein cholesterol to also become foam
cells. The initial macroscopically invisible early fatty streak
grows bigger as the disease progresses, forming an early
atherosclerotic plaque, or atheromatous plaque. Cells within
the center of the plaque die, producing a necrotic core containing large amounts of cholesteryl esters and unesterified
cholesterol (Figure 18-19c). Cholesterol crystals, readily detected microscopically, commonly form within a more advanced plaque, which is eventually covered by a fibrous cap
composed of smooth muscle cells and collagen.

(b)

which can mediate the efflux of excess cellular cholesterol to
HDL in the intima ( 5 ). Thus the amount of cholesterol
accumulation is determined by the relative uptake of LDL-derived
cholesterol and efflux to HDL. (b) Micrograph of a coronary artery
with an atherosclerotic plaque containing many intimal
macrophage foam cells (FC) filled with spherical cholesteryl ester
lipid droplets (white circles). Some smooth muscle cells also are
present and also contain lipid droplets (arrow). [Part (a) adapted
from C. K. Glass and J. L. Witztum, 2001, Cell 104:503. Part (b) from
H. C. Stary, 2003, Atlas of Atherosclerosis Progression and Regression,
2d ed., Parthenon Publishing, p. 61.]

Atherosclerotic Plaques Can Impede Blood Flow,
Leading to Heart Attacks and Strokes
As an atherosclerotic plaque expands, it projects farther and
farther into the lumen of the vessel, narrowing the lumen and
distorting the normal shape of the endothelium lining the
vessel. Because blood flow through the affected artery is reduced and disturbed, the rate of delivery of nutrient-rich,
oxygenated blood to tissues fed by the artery decreases, a
condition known as ischemia. If sufficiently severe, such partial starvation of the heart can cause pain (angina).
If the endothelial lining covering a plaque ruptures, a
large platelet and fibrin blood clot (thrombus) can form
very rapidly and block or occlude the artery (Figure 18-19d
and Figure 18-21). Tissue downstream of an occlusion soon
becomes depleted of oxygen (ischemic hypoxia) and energy
sources (e.g., fatty acids in the adult heart, glucose in the
brain). The extent of damage, including tissue death,
caused by a severe occlusion depends on the length of time
that the artery is occluded and the size of the affected area.
Severe occlusion of a coronary (heart) artery can cause a

28

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

heart attack; occlusion of an artery feeding the brain can
cause a stroke.
Atherosclerosis can begin at or even before puberty but
usually takes decades to develop into overt disease. In some
cases, the growth of new blood vessels permits sufficient
blood flow to tissue downstream of a plaque so that major
tissue damage does not occur. Balloon stretching, removal
of plaques, insertion of metal scaffolds (stents), and grafting
of a bypass vessel are among the surgical treatments for advanced blockage of coronary arteries.

fatty streaks. Given these facts, you might initially guess that
LDLR-mediated endocytosis is responsible for foam cell formation, but there are two powerful reasons why it cannot
be true. First, LDLR activity is under cholesterol-dependent,
SREBP-controlled feedback regulation, which maintains cellular cholesterol levels within a narrow range. Intracellular
cholesterol levels far below those seen in foam cells prevent
transcriptional activation of the LDLR gene by the insig1(2)/SCAP/SREBP pathway (see Figure 18-17). The consequent low level of LDLR expression prevents massive
intracellular cholesterol buildup. Second, in familial hypercholesterolemic patients who lack LDLR activity and consequently have high plasma LDL levels, the onset of atherosclerosis is at much younger ages and its progress is dramatically accelerated compared with normal people. Clearly, the
formation of foam cells in these patients does not require
LDLR activity.
The obvious conclusion based on this evidence is that an
LDLR-independent mechanism is responsible for the cellular
uptake of LDL cholesterol that leads to the formation of
foam cells. One proposed mechanism is shown in Figure
18-20a. In this model, LDL present in the artery wall at the
site of infection or cell damage is subject to oxidation by the
products of various oxidative reactions or to other modifications generated by inflammatory cells. For example, the
oxidation of unsaturated fatty acyl chains in LDL particles
generates reactive aldehyde and other species that can covalently modify the protein and phospholipid components of
the outer shells of the lipoprotein particles. Endocytosis of
such modified LDL particles by receptors on macrophages
not subject to cholesterol-dependent feedback suppression
would result in foam cell formation.
Support for this model comes from the finding that
macrophages express a diverse array of multiligand receptors
belonging to the superfamily of scavenger receptors. Some of
these receptors can bind tightly to modified LDLs and, in experiments using transgenic mice, have been implicated in the
formation of macrophage foam cells. The normal function of
some scavenger receptors (e.g., SR-AI/II) is to recognize and
promote the endocytic destruction of damaged macromolecules, pathogens, and injured, aged, or apoptotic cells by
macrophages. Because these receptors do not normally take
part in cellular cholesterol metabolism, their activities are
not subject to regulation by cholesterol. Thus they can
mediate the massive accumulation of intracellular cholesterol
by macrophages, generally limited only by the amount of
extracellular modified LDL.

LDLR-Independent Uptake of LDL (Bad
Cholesterol) Leads to Formation of Foam Cells

Reverse Cholesterol Transport by HDL (Good
Cholesterol) Protects Against Atherosclerosis

As noted, the first unique step of atherosclerosis is the accumulation in the artery wall of macrophage foam cells filled
with lipid droplets containing cholesteryl esters. The greater
the plasma LDL concentration and the greater the concentration of LDL in the artery wall, the more rapidly foam cells
develop and accumulate to form microscopically visible early

Epidemiological evidence indicates that the concentration of
HDL cholesterol in the plasma is inversely correlated with
the risk for atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, transgenic overexpression of apolipoprotein A-I,
the major apolipoprotein in HDL, suppresses atherosclerosis in animal models of the disease. Several properties of

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 18-21 Atherosclerosis narrows
and blocks blood flow through coronary arteries. X-ray multislice computed tomographic image of a human heart reveals a
major occlusion (black arrow) of the left anterior descending
artery (LAD, arrow) and a narrowing of a nearby vessel (white
arrow) as a block in the stream of blood (seen in the arteries as a
white tube). [From K. Nieman et al., 2001, Lancet 357:599.]

18.5 • The Cell Biology of Atherosclerosis, Heart Attacks, and Strokes

29

Other
lipoproteins
3

CETP

B-100
2

1
ABCA1
Extrahepatic
cell

LCAT

FPO

Bile acids
Cholesterol

SR-BI

HDL

4
A

Liver
5
Bile (cholesterol, bile
acids, phospholipids)

▲ FIGURE 18-22 HDL-mediated reverse cholesterol
transport. Cholesterol from peripheral tissues is transferred to
circulating HDL by ABCA1 ( 1 ) and possibly other transporters
such as SR-BI and is converted into cholesteryl esters by the
plasma enzyme LCAT. Cholesteryl esters in the HDL core can be
transferred to other lipoproteins by CETP ( 2 ) for subsequent
endocytosis by lipoprotein receptors expressed primarily by liver
cells ( 3 ). Alternatively, the receptor SR-BI, which is present

mostly on liver and steroidogenic tissues, can mediate the
selective uptake of cholesteryl esters from HDL ( 4 ). Cholesterol
delivered to the liver and bile acids derived from it are secreted
into the bile ( 5 ). Cholesterol delivered to steroidogenic tissues is
initially stored as cholesteryl ester droplets and ultimately used
to make steroid hormones. [Adapted from A. Rigotti and M. Krieger,

HDL could contribute to its apparent ability to protect
against atherosclerosis.
As discussed earlier, HDL can remove cholesterol from cells
in extrahepatic tissues, including artery walls, and eventually
deliver the cholesterol to the liver either directly by selective
lipid uptake mediated by the receptor SR-BI or indirectly by
transferring its cholesterol to other lipoproteins that are ligands
of hepatic endocytic receptors (see Figure 18-13c). The excess
cholesterol can then be secreted into the bile and eventually excreted from the body (see Figure 18-11). Figure 18-22 summarizes this process, called reverse cholesterol transport, which
lowers both the intracellular cholesterol in macrophages and
the total amount of cholesterol carried by the body, thereby directly and indirectly reducing foam cell formation. In a sense,
there is a competition between LDL-mediated delivery of cholesterol to cells in the artery wall and HDL-mediated removal
of excess cholesterol from those cells. In fact, the ratio of
plasma LDL cholesterol to HDL cholesterol is considered a
much better indicator of risk for cardiovascular disease than
the total plasma cholesterol concentration.
In addition to its role in atheroprotective reverse cholesterol transport, HDL itself and some plasma enzymes associated with HDL can suppress the oxidation of LDL.
Decreased LDL oxidation presumably reduces the substrates
for scavenger receptors on macrophages, thereby inhibiting
their accumulation of LDL cholesterol and thus foam cell
formation. HDL also appears to have anti-inflammatory
properties, which may contribute to its atheroprotective effect. Finally, the interaction of HDL with the receptor SR-BI
can stimulate the activity of endothelial nitric oxide (NO)
synthase, leading to increased production of nitric oxide.
This potent atheroprotective signaling molecule can diffuse

into nearby vascular smooth muscle and induce its relaxation
(see Figure 13-30). Relaxation of the smooth muscle around
an artery results in dilation (widening) of the artery lumen
and consequently increased blood flow, thereby helping to
prevent ischemia and tissue damage.

1999, N. Engl. J. Med. 341:2011; see also M. Krieger, 1999, Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 68:523.]

Two Treatments for Atherosclerosis Are Based on
SREBP-Regulated Cellular Cholesterol Metabolism
The complex pathogenesis of atherosclerosis,
which we have only briefly sketched here, presents
a daunting challenge to modern molecular medicine. However, as our understanding of the cell biology underlying this complexity has advanced, many opportunities
for intervening in the disease process by modulating cellular
pathways have arisen. We conclude this chapter by describing two examples of such interventions affecting cellular
lipid metabolism.
Because the risk for atherosclerotic disease is directly
proportional to the plasma levels of LDL cholesterol and inversely proportional to those of HDL cholesterol, a major
public health goal has been to lower LDL and raise HDL
cholesterol levels. The most successful drug interventions to
date have been aimed at reducing plasma LDL. The steadystate levels of plasma LDL are determined by the relative
rates of LDL formation and LDL removal or clearance. LDL
receptors, especially those expressed in the liver, play a major
role in clearing LDL from the plasma. The liver is key in cholesterol regulation not only because it is the site of about
70 percent of the body’s LDL receptors, but also because it
is the site where unesterified cholesterol and its bile acid

(a)

No drugs

Resin + Statin

Bile acid binding resin

Plasma

Liver
cell

HMG-CoA

Cholesterol

HMG-CoA

Cholesterol

Bile acid

HMG-CoA

Bile acid

Cholesterol
Bile acid

STATIN

RESIN

RESIN

Intestine

Liver cell

(b)

6
Cholesterol
7α-hydroxylase

Nucleus

6 12

Bile

FPO
FXR

Bile
lipid micelle

Blood

LDLR

5

nSREBP
5 11

ER

ABCB4

4 10
ABCG5/8

Phospholipid
+
cholesterol
+
bile acid

SREBP

9 15
S2P
S1P

SCAP

Golgi

ABCB11

HO

Lysosome

Cholesterol

1
STATIN

Mevalonate

2 8
NPC1

Cholesterol
7α-hydroxylase

Bile acid

To intestines

Na+

Intestinal lumen
(from stomach
and liver)

4

Na+
NTCP

7
Bile acid

HMG-CoA

Bile acid

3

Blood
(from intestines)

Blood
(to liver)
Intestinal epithelial cell

1
BILE
ACIDBINDING +
Bile
RESIN
acid

Bile acid
I-BABP

Bile acid
Transporter

I-BAT

30

LDL

Insig-1(2)
HMG-CoA
reductase

Excretion

8

7 13

3 9

Na+

Atherosclerosis
Heart attacks
Stroke

LDLR

Na+

2

18.5 • The Cell Biology of Atherosclerosis, Heart Attacks, and Strokes

 FIGURE 18-23 Two pharmaceutical approaches for
preventing atherosclerosis. (a) Treatment with bile acid statins
or binding-resins lowers hepatic cholesterol levels. This stimulates
expression of LDLRs, enhancing LDL removal from the plasma
and reducing the risk of atherosclerosis. Combined treatment
with both types of drugs often is more effective than using either
alone. (b) Statin therapy: Step 1 : after oral administration, a
statin drug inhibits HMG-CoA reductase in liver (top) and other
cells, lowering production of mevalonate, a precursor of
cholesterol. Step 2 : Cholesterol levels drop, reducing ( 3 ) the
interactions of insig-1(2) with the SCAP/SREBP complex, which
can then move ( 4 ) to the Golgi for processing by the proteases
S1P and S2P. As a consequence, there is increased production of
the soluble transcription factor nSREBP ( 5 ), which moves to the
nucleus, binds SREs, and increases expression of genes such as
the LDL receptor (LDLR) ( 6 ). nSREBP-mediated increases in
LDLR activity ( 7 ) result in enhanced LDL endocytosis, the

derivatives are secreted into bile, some of which is ultimately
to be excreted from the body (see Figure 18-11).
An increase in LDLR activity, especially in the liver, can
lower LDL levels and protect against atherosclerosis. We
know the insig-1(2)/SCAP/SREBP pathway normally regulates the expression of the LDL receptor in response to intracellular cholesterol (see Figure 18-17). Thus treatments that
lower cellular cholesterol levels in the liver will increase the
expression of the LDL receptor and consequently lower
plasma LDL levels. Two approaches are widely used to lower
steady-state hepatic cholesterol levels: (1) reducing cholesterol
synthesis and (2) increasing the conversion of cholesterol into
bile acids in the liver (Figure 18-23). Both approaches exploit
the regulatory mechanisms for controlling cellular cholesterol
already described.
Perhaps the most successful anti-atherosclerosis medications are the statins. These drugs bind to HMG-CoA reductase and directly inhibit its activity, thereby lowering
cholesterol biosynthesis and the pool of hepatic cholesterol.
Activation of SREBP in response to this cholesterol depletion promotes increased synthesis of HMG-CoA reductase
and the LDL receptor. Of most importance here is the resulting increased numbers of hepatic LDL receptors, which
can mediate increased import of LDL cholesterol from the
plasma. Statins also appear to inhibit atherosclerosis by suppressing the inflammation that triggers the process. Although the mechanism of this inhibition is not well
understood, it apparently contributes to the atheroprotective effect of statins.
The most common drugs used to lower hepatic cholesterol by increasing the formation of bile acids do so by interrupting the enterohepatic circulation. These bile acid
sequestrants (e.g., cholestyramine) are insoluble resins that
bind tightly to bile acids in the lumen of the intestines,
forming complexes that prevent IBAT-mediated absorption
by intestinal epithelial cells. The complexes are excreted in
the feces. The resulting decrease in the return of bile acids
to the liver causes a drop in the hepatic bile acid pool. As

31

reduction of plasma LDL concentrations ( 8 ), and consequently
reduced atherosclerosis, heart attacks, and stroke ( 9 ).
Bile acid binding resin therapy: Oral administration of a bile
acid–binding resin, or sequestrant ( 1 ), increases the loss of bile
acids from the body by preventing their absorption by intestinal
epithelial cells through the I-BAT transport protein and reduces
bile acids delivered to the blood ( 2 ) and then to the liver ( 3 ) by
the transporter NTCP. Step 4 : The lower levels of cytoplasmic
bile acids reduce the amount of bile acid bound to the nuclear
hormone receptor FXR ( 5 ) and its suppression ( 6 ) of the
expression of cholesterol 7-hydroxylase. The consequent
increased levels of expression and activity of cholesterol 7hydroxylase ( 7 ) reduce the levels of intracellular cholesterol ( 8 ).
As with the statin treatment, the reduced cellular cholesterol
levels ( 9–15 ) increase LDLR activity, lower plasma LDL levels,
and protect against atherosclerosis. [Part (a) adapted from M. S.
Brown and J. L. Goldstein, 1986, Science 232:34.]

noted previously, when bile acid levels are high, the nuclear receptor FXR represses the expression of cholesterol
7-hydroxylase activity, the key enzyme in bile acid synthesis. This repression is lifted as the bile acid pool is being
depleted by the drug, leading to an increase in the conversion of cholesterol into bile acids. The resulting drop in the
cellular cholesterol pool in hepatocytes engages the SREBP
pathway, leading to increased hepatic LDLR synthesis and
import of LDL cholesterol (see Figure 18-23).
Thus both the statins and the bile acid sequestrants ultimately reduce plasma LDL cholesterol by increasing the
SREBP-mediated expression of the LDL receptor in the liver.
When a statin and a bile acid sequestrant are administered
simultaneously, they act together to substantially lower
hepatic cholesterol, stimulate high levels of hepatic LDLR
activity, and thus lower plasma LDL concentrations (see Figure 18-23). Unfortunately, statins and bile acid sequestrants
are not particularly effective for LDLR-deficient patients
who are homozygous for familial hypercholesterolemia, because both therapies depend on stimulating endogenous
LDLR activity. Nevertheless, most people at risk for atherosclerosis are not FH homozygotes and the widespread use
of these drugs has been shown in many clinical studies to
save lives. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 18.5
The Cell Biology of Atherosclerosis, Heart Attacks,
and Strokes
Atherosclerosis is the progressive accumulation of cholesterol, inflammatory and other cells, and extracellular
matrix in the subendothelial space (intima) of an artery
wall, ultimately leading to the formation of a plaque that
can occlude the lumen (see Figure 18-19).

■

The partial or complete blockage of coronary arteries by
atherosclerotic plaques and associated blood clots can
starve heart muscle for oxygen and other nutrients and

■

32

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

cause tissue death (heart attack). Similar blockage of arteries supplying the brain causes stroke.
Normal inflammatory responses in an artery wall, triggered by infection or injury, may lead to the formation and
accumulation of cholesterol-filled macrophage foam cells,
the first indication of atherosclerosis.

■

Plasma LDL (bad cholesterol) promotes foam cell formation and thus atherosclerosis by a LDLR-independent
mechanism apparently requiring scavenger receptors (see
Figure 18-20).

■

Plasma HDL (good cholesterol) reduces the risk for atherosclerosis in part by mediating the reverse transport of cholesterol from peripheral cells to the liver (see Figure 18-22).

■

Two types of drugs are widely used for treating or preventing atherosclerosis: statins, which reduce cholesterol
biosynthesis by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase, and bile
acid sequestrants, which prevent the enterohepatic recycling
of bile acids from the intestine to the liver. Both treatments
lower hepatic cholesterol levels, leading to an SREBPmediated increase in hepatic expression of LDL receptors,
which act to lower plasma LDL levels (see Figure 18-23).

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
Despite considerable progress in our understanding of the cellular metabolism and movement of lipids, the mechanisms for
transporting cholesterol and phospholipids between organelle
membranes remain poorly characterized. Several recent advances may contribute to progress in this area. First, researchers have partly purified two specialized ER membrane
compartments, called MAM (mitochondrion-associated membrane) and PAM (plasma membrane–associated membrane),
that may play roles in membrane lipid synthesis and Golgiindependent intracellular lipid transport. Both MAM and PAM
have a very high capacity for phospholipid or sterol synthesis
or both and directly contact mitochondrial membranes and
the plasma membrane, respectively. Second, selection for cells
with mutations that interfere with intraorganelle lipid transport open the door to genetic dissection of this system. The
results of such genetic studies in yeast have suggested that ERto-mitochondrion phospholipid transport is regulated by ubiquitination. Third, the demonstration that some Rab proteins
can influence NPC1-dependent cholesterol transport will refocus efforts on vesicular mechanisms for lipid traffic. Finally,
cholesterol/sphingolipid-rich lipid rafts and related caveolae
are under increased experimental scrutiny that is likely to serve
as a source of insight into mechanisms of intracellular lipid
transport and control of intracellular signaling pathways.
Another fundamental question concerns the generation,
maintenance, and function of the asymmetric distribution of
lipids within the leaflets of one membrane and the variation
in lipid composition among the membranes of different organelles. What are the mechanisms underlying this complex-

ity and why is such complexity needed? We already know
that certain lipids can specifically interact with and influence
the activity of some proteins. For example, the large multimeric proteins that participate in oxidative phosphorylation
in the inner mitochondrial membrane appear to assemble
into supercomplexes whose stability may depend on the
physical properties and binding of specialized phospholipids
such as cardiolipin.
A detailed molecular understanding of how various
transport proteins move lipids from one membrane leaflet
to another (flippase activity) and into and out of cells is not
yet in hand. Such understanding will undoubtedly require a
determination of many high-resolution structures of these
molecules, their capture in various stages of the transport
process, and careful kinetic and other biophysical analyses of
their function, similar to the approaches discussed in Chapter 7 for elucidating the operation of ion channels and ATPpowered pumps.
The fruitful transfer of information between cell biology
and medicine can work in both directions. For instance, insights into the insig-1(2)/SCAP/SREBP and nuclear receptor
pathways provided the basis for treatment of atherosclerosis with statins and bile acid sequestrants. Continuing efforts
are underway to develop even more effective drugs based on
these pathways. On the other hand, analysis of familial hypercholesterolemia was a source of major insights into
receptor-mediated endocytosis, and a new class of antihypercholesterolemia drugs (such as Ezetimibe) that inhibit
intestinal cholesterol absorption may serve as a useful tool
for identifying the proteins that mediate cholesterol absorption and the mechanisms by which they function.

KEY TERMS
ABC superfamily 000
apolipoprotein 000
atherosclerotic
plaque 000
bad cholesterol 000
bile acid 000
chylomicron 000
enterohepatic
circulation 000
familial
hypercholesterolemia
(FH) 000
fatty acid transport
protein (FATP) 000
fatty acid–binding
protein (FABP) 000
flippase 000
foam cell 000
good cholesterol 000

high-density
lipoprotein 000
inflammatory
response 000
insig1(2)/SCAP/SREBP
pathway 000
low-density lipoprotein 000
Niemann-Pick C1
(NPC1) protein 000
receptor SR-BI 000
receptor-mediated
endocytosis 000
reverse cholesterol
transport 000
selective lipid uptake 000
SRE-binding protein
(SREBP) 000
statin 000
sterol-sensing domain 000

Review the Concepts

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Phospholipid biosynthesis at the interface between the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the cytosol presents a number of challenges that must be solved by the cell. Explain
how each of the following is handled.
a. The substrates for phospholipid biosynthesis are all water
soluble, yet the end products are not.
b. The immediate site of incorporation of all newly synthesized phospholipids is the cytosolic leaflet of the ER membrane, yet phospholipids must be incorporated into both
leaflets.
c. Many membrane systems in the cell, for example, the
plasma membrane, are unable to synthesize their own phospholipids, yet these membranes must also expand if the cell
is to grow and divide.
2. What are the common fatty acid chains in glycerophospholipids, and why do these fatty acid chains differ in their
number of carbon atoms by multiples of 2?
3. Plants, fungi, and animals all contain sterols in their
membranes. Rather than being absorbed from the intestine,
most plant sterols are excreted by humans. Why is this element of the human diet not efficiently absorbed?
4. The biosynthesis of cholesterol is a highly regulated
process. What is the key regulated enzyme in cholesterol
biosynthesis? This enzyme is subject to feedback inhibition.
What is feedback inhibition? How does this enzyme sense
cholesterol levels in a cell? Cite one other example of a protein whose activity is sensitive to lipid levels.
5. One source of cholesterol for humans is meat. Vegetarians eliminate this cholesterol contribution. Yet vegetarians
can still develop atherosclerosis. How can this be?
6. It is evident that one function of cholesterol is structural
because it is the most common single lipid molecule in the
plasma membrane of mammals. Yet cholesterol may also
have other functions. What aspects of cholesterol and its metabolism lead to the conclusion that cholesterol is a multifunctional membrane lipid?
7. Phospholipids and cholesterol must be transported from
their site of synthesis to various membrane systems within
cells. One way of doing this is through vesicular transport, as
is the case for many proteins in the secretory pathway. However, most phospholipid and cholesterol membrane-tomembrane transport in cells is not by Golgi-mediated vesicular transport. What is the evidence for this statement? What
appear to be the major mechanisms for phospholipid and
cholesterol transport?
8. The intercellular movement of phospholipids and cholesterol is mediated by various proteins. What are the two
major mechanisms by which lipids are exported from cells?

33

What are the three major methods by which lipids are imported into cells?
9. Enterohepatic circulation involves the cycling of bile
acids from liver to intestine and back. Explain the role of bile
acid cycling in the maintenance of lipid homeostasis.
10. What are the four major classes of lipoproteins in the
mammalian circulatory system? Which of these carry mainly
cholesterol and which carry mainly triglycerides? Of the cholesterol carriers, a high level of some is considered to be
“good” while a high level of some is considered to be “bad.”
Which are the “good” and “bad” carriers, and why are they
considered to be “good”or “bad”?
11. Much health concern is focused on the negative effects
of high (or low) levels of lipids in the blood circulatory system. Yet circulating lipids are actually essential to the health
and well-being of humans. What are the beneficial effects of
circulating lipids, including cholesterol and triglycerides?
12. Atherosclerosis may be thought of as a disease of the organism rather than of the single cell. Do you agree or disagree and why? Explain how hepatic transplantation could,
in fact, be one of the strategies for the treatment of familial
hypercholesterolemia. How does the fact that atherosclerosis
typically manifests itself late in life affect the possibility of
whether or not evolution has selected for or against the
disease?
13. Increasing concentrations of LDL in the extracellular
fluid suppresses HMG-CoA reductase activity and the transcription of genes encoding LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase. Conversely, when extracellular LDL levels are low,
the transcription of these genes is induced. The responsible
transcription factors are SRE-binding proteins (SREBPs).
When cells have an adequate level of cholesterol, SREBP is
an ER transmembrane protein. To what proteins is SREBP
complexed? How does this complex sense the level of sterol?
Where within the cell is SREBP released as a soluble protein
into the cytosol? What is the mechanism by which SREBP i
s released? In relation to this process, what is the meaning
of RIP?
14. A number of different members of the nuclear-receptor
superfamily regulate lipid metabolism. Specific small molecules are typical activators. Such molecules can be either synthesized inside the target cell, diffuse into the cell, or be
transported into the cell. One example is FXR, which is activated by binding of bile acids. FXR is expressed in hepatocytes and intestinal epithelial cells. Is the source of bile acid
that activates FXR cell synthesized, cell imported, or a combination of the two? Rather than giving specific names of
proteins whose synthesis is regulated by FXR, predict classes
of proteins whose synthesis should be regulated by a bile
acid–activated nuclear receptor.
15. Atherosclerosis may be thought of as an unintended
consequence of normal physiological responses designed to

34

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

protect the body against infection and tissue damage. Explain how inflammation, cholesterol, and foam cells are involved in atherosclerosis.

level of N SREBP and M SREBP? How does this effect indicate a role of Golgi apparatus in the formation of N SREBP?

16. Two different classes of drugs that are in current use to
reduce cholesterol levels in the blood have been discussed in
detail in this chapter. What are the names of these two drug
classes? How does each class act to lower blood cholesterol
levels?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
You are reviewing the results of a series of recent experiments to determine the regulation of the proteolysis of sterol
regulatory element–binding protein (SREBP) by Site-1/2 proteases. In the first experiment, you take an indirect approach
to ask if Site-1/2 proteases are components of the Golgi apparatus. You treat CHO cells with the drug brefeldin A
(BFA). Brefeldin A induces the redistribution of Golgi proteins to the ER. In the experiment, CHO cells are incubated
for 16 hours in the absence of added sterols, then incubated
for an additional 5 hours in the absence or presence of added
sterols in the absence or presence of BFA (see the first figure).
At the end of the 5-hour incubation, the CHO cells are
homogenized and separated into a cytoplasm (50 g protein
per gel lane) and nuclear fraction (100 g protein per gel
lane). Proteins are then separated on SDS-polyacrylamide
gels and probed for the presence of various molecular forms
of SREBP (I  intact, M  intermediate cleavage form, N 
nuclear form).

With this initial evidence for Golgi involvement in hand,
you decide to ask if I SREBP interacts physically with two
other proteins SCAP and INSIG-1. You take a coimmunoprecipitation approach to the problem. To increase the possibility of protein interactions, you first transfect cells with
multiple plasmids encoding the various proteins. You then
prepare lysates and immunoprecipitate with antibodies directed against a single protein. Each lysate after immunoprecipitation is considered to consist of a supernatant (S,
containing material not precipitated by the antibody) and a
pellet (P, containing material precipitated). The presence of
the proteins in the S or P fractions is analyzed by immunoblotting using an antibody that recognizes the respective protein. What evidence does the data shown in the
second figure provide for the physical interaction of SREBP,
SCAP, and INSIG-1?

REFERENCES

Phospholipids and Sphingolipids: Synthesis
and Intracellular Movement

Based on the observed results, what is the size of
M SREBP and N SREBP compared to the size of I SREBP?
How can there be an apparent product in this experiment
without an apparent loss in intact SREBP? What is the normal effect of added sterols on the production of nuclear
SREBP? What is the normal half-life of nuclear SREBP? Why
is the instability of nuclear SREBP important to the function of
the sterol regulatory pathway? What is the effect of BFA on the

Daleke, D. L. 2003. Regulation of transbilayer plasma membrane phospholipid asymmetry. J. Lipid Res. 44:233–242.
Daleke, D. L., and J. V. Lyles. 2000. Identification and purification of aminophospholipid flippases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1486:108–127.
Dowhan, W. 1997. Molecular basis for membrane phospholipid
diversity: why are there so many lipids? Ann. Rev. Biochem.
66:199–232.
Henneberry, A. L., M. M. Wright, and C. R. McMaster. 2002.
The major sites of cellular phospholipid synthesis and molecular determinants of fatty acid and lipid head group specificity. Mol. Biol.
Cell 13:3148–3161.

References
Kent, C. 1995. Eukaryotic phospholipid biosynthesis. Ann. Rev.
Biochem. 64:315–343.
Ostrander, D. B., et al. 2001. Lack of mitochondrial anionic
phospholipids causes an inhibition of translation of protein components of the electron transport chain: a yeast genetic model system
for the study of anionic phospholipid function in mitochondria.
J. Biol. Chem. 276:25262–25272.
Ruetz, S., and P. Gros. 1994. Phosphatidylcholine translocase: a
physiological role for the mdr2 gene. Cell 77:1071–1081.
Smit, J. J. M., et al. 1993. Homozygous disruption of the murine
mdr2 P-glycoprotein gene leads to a complete absence of phospholipid from bile and to liver disease. Cell 75:451–462.
Storch, J., and A. E. A. Thumser. 2000. The fatty acid transport
function of fatty acid-binding proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1486:28–44.
Thompson, J., A. Reese-Wagoner, and L. Banaszak. 1999. Liver
fatty acid binding protein: species variation and the accommodation of different ligands. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1441(2–3):
117–130.

Cholesterol: A Multifunctional Membrane Lipid
Bloch, K. 1965. The biological synthesis of cholesterol. Science
150(692):19–28.
Edwards, P. A., and J. Ericsson. 1999. Sterols and isoprenoids:
signaling molecules derived from the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 68:157–185.
Ioannou, Y. A. 2001. Multidrug permeases and subcellular cholesterol transport. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:657–668.
Maxfield, F. R., and D. Wustner. 2002. Intracellular cholesterol
transport. J. Clin. Invest. 110:891–898.
Munn, N. J., et al. 2003. Deficiency in ethanolamine plasmalogen leads to altered cholesterol transport. J. Lipid Res. 44:182–192.
Sacchettini, J. C., and C. D. Poulter. 1997. Creating isoprenoid
diversity. Science 277(5333):1788–1789.
Strauss, J. F., P. Liu, L. K. Christenson, and H. Watari. 2002.
Sterols and intracellular vesicular trafficking: lessons from the study
of NPC1. Steroids 67:947–951.
Vance, D. E., and J. E. Vance. 1996. Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins, and Membranes, 3rd ed. Elsevier.
Vance, D. E., and H. Van den Bosch. 2000. Cholesterol in the
year 2000. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1529(1–3):1–8.
Voelker, D. R. 2003. New perspectives on the regulation of
inter-membrane glycerophospholipid traffic. J. Lipid Res.
44:441–449.

Lipid Movement into and out of Cells
Abumrad, N. A., et al. 1993. Cloning of a rat adipocyte membrane protein implicated in binding or transport of long-chain fatty
acids that is induced during preadipocyte differentiation: homology
with human CD36. J. Biol. Chem. 268:17665–17668.
Acton, S., et al. 1996. Identification of scavenger receptor
SR-BI as a high density lipoprotein receptor. Science 271(5248):
518–520.
Borst, P., and R. O. Elferink. 2002. Mammalian ABC transporters in health and disease. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 71:537–592.
Brown, M. S., and J. L. Goldstein. 1986. A receptor-mediated
pathway for cholesterol homeostasis. Science 232(4746):34–47.
Glass, C., R. C. Pittman, D. B. Weinstein, and D. Steinberg. 1983.
Dissociation of tissue uptake of cholesterol ester from that of apoprotein A-I of rat plasma high density lipoprotein: selective delivery of
cholesterol ester to liver, adrenal, and gonad. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci.
USA 80:5435–5439.
Goldstein, J. L., and M. S. Brown. 1974. Binding and degradation
of low density lipoproteins by cultured human fibroblasts: comparison

35

of cells from a normal subject and from a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 249: 5153–5162.
Hajri, T., and N. A. Abumrad. 2002. Fatty acid transport across
membranes: relevance to nutrition and metabolic pathology. Ann.
Rev. Nutr. 22:383–415.
Havel, R. J., and J. P. Kane. 2001. Introduction: Structure and
Metabolism of Plasma Lipoproteins. In C. R. Scriver et al., eds., The
Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. McGraw-Hill,
8th ed., pp. 2205–2716.
Meier, P. J., and Stieger, B. 2002. Bile salt transporters. Ann. Rev.
Physiol. 64:635–661.
Oram, J. F. 2002. ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 and cholesterol trafficking. Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 13:373–381.
Schaffer, J. E., and H. F. Lodish. 1994. Expression cloning and
characterization of a novel adipocyte long chain fatty acid transport
protein. Cell 79:427–436.
Sharp, D., et al. 1993. Cloning and gene defects in microsomal
triglyceride transfer protein associated with a beta lipoproteinaemia.
Nature 365(6441):65–69.
Shelness, G. S., and J. A. Sellers. 2001. Very-low-density lipoprotein assembly and secretion. Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 12(2):151–157.
Stahl, A., R. E. Gimeno, L. A. Tartaglia, and H. F. Lodish. 2001.
Fatty acid transport proteins: a current view of a growing family.
Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 12(6):266–273.
Stein, Y., et al. 1983. Metabolism of HDL-cholesteryl ester in
the rat, studied with a nonhydrolyzable analog, cholesteryl linoleyl
ether. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 752:98–105.
Wong, H., and M. C. Schotz. 2002. The lipase gene family.
J. Lipid Res. 43:993–999.

Feedback Regulation of Cellular Lipid Metabolism
Chawla, A., J. J. Repa, R. M. Evans, and D. J. Mangelsdorf.
2001. Nuclear receptors and lipid physiology: opening the X-files.
Science 294(5548):1866–7180.
Dobrosotskaya, Y., et al. 2002. Regulation of SREBP processing
and membrane lipid production by phospholipids in Drosophila. Science 296(5569):879–883.
Francis, G. A., E. Fayard, F. Picard, and J. Auwerx. 2003. Nuclear receptors and the control of metabolism. Ann. Rev. Physiol.
65:261–311.
Horton, J. D., J. L. Goldstein, and M. S. Brown. SREBPs: activators of the complete program of cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis in the liver. J. Clin. Invest. 109:1125–1131.
Moore, K. J., M. L. Fitzgerald, and M. W. Freeman. 2001. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors in macrophage biology:
friend or foe? Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 12:519–527.
Repa, J. J., and D. J. Mangelsdorf. 2002. The liver X receptor
gene team: potential new players in atherosclerosis. Nature Med.
8:1243–1248.
Sever, N., et al. 2003. Accelerated degradation of HMG CoA reductase mediated by binding of insig-1 to its sterol-sensing domain.
Mol. Cell 11:25–33.
Trauner, M., and J. L. Boyer. 2003. Bile salt transporters: Molecular characterization, function, and regulation. Physiol. Rev. 83:
633–671.
Yang, T., et al. 2002. Crucial step in cholesterol homeostasis:
sterols promote binding of SCAP to INSIG-1, a membrane protein
that facilitates retention of SREBPs in ER. Cell 110:489–500.

The Cell Biology of Atherosclerosis, Heart Attacks,
and Strokes
Brown, M. S., and J. L. Goldstein. 1983. Lipoprotein metabolism in the macrophage: implications for cholesterol deposition in
atherosclerosis. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 52:223–261.

36

CHAPTER 18 • Metabolism and Movement of Lipids

Endo, A., Y. Tsujita, M. Kuroda, and K. Tanzawa. 1977. Inhibition of cholesterol synthesis in vitro and in vivo by ML-236A and
ML-236B, competitive inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylcoenzyme A reductase. Eur. J. Biochem. 77:31–36.
Febbraio, M., D. P. Hajjar, and R. L. Silverstein. 2001. CD36:
a class B scavenger receptor involved in angiogenesis, athero
sclerosis, inflammation, and lipid metabolism. J. Clin. Invest.
108:785–791.
Glomset, J. A. 1968. The plasma lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase reaction. J. Lipid Res. 9:155–167.
Gotto, A. M., Jr. 2003. Treating hypercholesterolemia: looking
forward. Clin. Cardiol. 26(suppl. 1):I21–I28.

Krieger, M., and J. Herz. 1994. Structures and functions of
multiligand lipoprotein receptors: macrophage scavenger receptors and
LDL receptor-related protein (LRP). Ann. Rev. Biochem. 63:601–637.
Ross, R. 1999. Atherosclerosis: an inflammatory disease. N.
Engl. J. Med. 340(2):115–126.
Van Heek, M., et al. 1997. In vivo metabolism-based discovery
of a potent cholesterol absorption inhibitor, SCH58235, in the rat
and rhesus monkey through the identification of the active metabolites of SCH48461. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 283:157–163.
Willner, E. L., et al. 2003. Deficiency of acyl CoA:cholesterol
acyltransferase 2 prevents atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 100(3):1262–1267.

18.1 • Last A Head

37

19
MICROFILAMENTS
AND INTERMEDIATE
FILAMENTS
As a cell moves forward, it constantly assembles a network of
intermediate filaments (red). Prominent structures include the
punctate distributions of cell adhesions (yellow) containing
both actin and viamentin. [Courtesy of J. Evans.]

T

he ability of cells to migrate is one of the crowning
achievements of evolution. Primitive cells probably
lacked such self-generated movement (motility), depending on currents in the primordial milieu to move them
about. In multicellular organisms, however, the migration of
single cells and groups of cells from one part of an embryo to
another is critical to the development of the organism. In
adult animals, single cells search out foreign invaders as part
of a host’s defenses against infection; on the other hand, uncontrolled cell migration is an ominous sign of a cancerous
cell. Some bacterial cells also can move by the beating of flagella powered by a rotary motor in the cell membrane (see
Figure 3-22b). Motile eukaryotic cells, however, use different
mechanisms to generate movement.
Even stationary cells, which predominate in the body,
may exhibit dramatic changes in their morphology—the contraction of muscle cells, the elongation of nerve axons, the
formation of cell-surface protrusions, the constriction of a
dividing cell in mitosis. Even more subtle than these movements are those that take place within cells—the active separation of chromosomes, the streaming of cytosol, the
transport of membrane vesicles. These internal movements
are essential elements in the growth and differentiation of
cells, carefully controlled by the cell to take place at specified
times and in particular locations.
The cytoskeleton, a cytoplasmic system of fibers, is critical to cell motility. In Chapter 5, we introduced the three
types of cytoskeletal fibers—microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules—and considered their roles in supporting cell membranes and organizing the cell contents (see
Figure 5-29). All these fibers are polymers built from small
protein subunits held together by noncovalent bonds. Instead
of being a disordered array, the cytoskeleton is organized into

discrete structures—primarily bundles, geodesic-dome-like
networks, and gel-like lattices. In this chapter, we extend our
earlier consideration of actin microfilaments and intermediate
filaments (Figure 19-1). Both of these cytoskeletal components are usually attached to the plasma membrane and
form a skeleton that helps support the plasma membrane.
However, actin filaments participate in several types of cell
movements, whereas intermediate filaments are not directly
engaged in cell movements.
All cell movements are a manifestation of mechanical
work; they require a fuel (ATP) and proteins that convert the
energy stored in ATP into motion. Cells have evolved two
basic mechanisms for generating movement. One mechanism
entails the assembly and disassembly of microfilaments and
microtubules; it is responsible for many changes in cell
shape. The other mechanism requires a special class of enzymes called motor proteins, first described in Chapter 3.
These proteins use energy from ATP to walk or slide along
a microfilament or a microtubule and ferry organelles and
vesicles with them. A few movements require both the action
of motor proteins and cytoskeleton rearrangements. In this
chapter, we also cover myosin, the motor protein that interacts with actin, building on our earlier description of the

OUTLINE
19.1 Actin Structures
19.2 The Dynamics of Actin Assembly
19.3 Myosin-Powered Cell Movements
19.4 Cell Locomotion
19.5 Intermediate Filaments
1

2

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

structure of myosin II and its role in muscle contraction.
Myosin II belongs to a large family of proteins found in both
animals and plants. The functions of three myosins (I, II, and
V) are well established, but the activities of the others are still
largely unknown. A discussion of microtubules, the third
type of cytoskeletal fiber, and their motor proteins is deferred
until Chapter 20.

5

1
3
4

2

FPO

19.1

CYTOSKELETAL COMPONENT

CELL FUNCTION

1

Actin dynamics

Membrane extension

2

Filament networks: bundles

Cell structure

3

Myosin motors

Contractility and vesicle
transport

4

Actin bundles and intermediate
filaments

Cell adhesion

5

Lamin network

Nuclear structure

▲ FIGURE 19-1 Overview of the actin and intermediate

Video: Actin Filaments in a Lamellipodium of
a Fish Keratinocyte

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

filament cytoskeletons and their functions. The actin
cytoskeletal machinery (red) is responsible for maintaining cell
shape and generating force for movements. Polymerization and
depolymerization of actin filaments ( 1 ) drives the membrane
forward, whereas actin cross-linking proteins organize bundles
and networks of filaments ( 2 ) that support overall cell shape.
Movements within the cell and contractions at the cell
membrane ( 3 ) are produced by myosin motor proteins. The actin
(red) and intermediate filament (purple) cytoskeletons integrate a
cell and its contents with other cells in tissues ( 4 ) through
attachments to cell adhesions. Another type of intermediate
filament, the nuclear lamins ( 5 ) are responsible for maintaining
the structure of the nucleus.

Actin Structures

As we saw in Chapter 5, the actin cytoskeleton is organized
into various large structures that extend throughout the cell.
Because it is so big, the actin cytoskeleton can easily change
cell morphology just by assembling or disassembling itself. In
preceding chapters, we have seen examples of large protein
complexes in which the number and positions of the subunits
are fixed. For example, all ribosomes have the same number
of protein and RNA components, and their three-dimensional geometry is invariant. However, the actin cytoskeleton
is different—the lengths of filaments vary greatly, the filaments are cross-linked into imperfect bundles and networks,
and the ratio of cytoskeletal proteins is not rigidly maintained. This organizational flexibility of the actin cytoskeleton permits a cell to assume many shapes and to vary them
easily. In moving cells, the cytoskeleton must assemble rapidly
and does not always have a chance to form well-organized,
highly ordered structures.
In this section, we consider the properties of monomeric
and polymeric actin, as well as the various proteins that assemble actin filaments into large structures. With this basic
understanding of the actin cytoskeleton established, we examine in Section 19.2 how a cell can tailor this framework to
carry out various tasks requiring motion of the entire cell or
subcellular parts.

Actin Is Ancient, Abundant,
and Highly Conserved

Band of
actin and
myosin
Actin
network

Actin is the most abundant intracellular protein in a eukaryotic cell. In muscle cells, for example, actin comprises 10
percent by weight of the total cell protein; even in nonmuscle
cells, actin makes up 1–5 percent of the cellular protein. The
cytosolic concentration of actin in nonmuscle cells ranges
from 0.1 to 0.5 mM; in special structures such as microvilli,
however, the local actin concentration can be 5 mM. To

 FIGURE 19-2 Actin cytoskeleton in a moving cell. Fish
keratinocytes are among the fastest crawling cells. Two actincontaining structures work together to generate the force for
movement. A network of actin filaments in the front of the cell
pushes the membrane forward. Meanwhile, the cell body is
pulled by a band of myosin and actin (bracketed). This
arrangement of actin and myosin is typical in a moving cell. [From
T. M. Svitkina et al., 1997, J. Cell Biol. 139:397.]

19.1 • Actin Structures

grasp how much actin cells contain, consider a typical liver
cell, which has 2  104 insulin receptor molecules but
approximately 5  108, or half a billion, actin molecules.
The high concentration of actin compared with other cell
proteins is a common feature of all cytoskeletal proteins. Because they form structures that cover large parts of the cell
interior, these proteins are among the most abundant proteins in a cell.
A moderate-sized protein with a molecular weight of
42,000, actin is encoded by a large, highly conserved gene
family. Actin arose from a bacterial ancestor and then
evolved further as eukaryotic cells became specialized. Some
single-celled organisms such as rod-shaped bacteria, yeasts,
and amebas have one or two actin genes, whereas many multicellular organisms contain multiple actin genes. For instance, humans have six actin genes, which encode isoforms
of the protein, and some plants have more than 60 actin
genes, although most are pseudogenes. In vertebrates, the
four -actin isoforms present in various muscle cells and the
-actin and -actin isoforms present in nonmuscle cells differ
at only four or five positions. Although these differences
among isoforms seem minor, the isoforms have different
functions: -actin is associated with contractile structures; actin accounts for filaments in stress fibers; and -actin is at
the front, or leading edge, of moving cells where actin

filaments polymerize (Figure 19-2). Sequencing of actins
from different sources has revealed that they are among the
most conserved proteins in a cell, comparable with histones,
the structural proteins of chromatin (Chapter 10). The sequences of actins from amebas and from animals are identical at 80 percent of the positions.

G-Actin Monomers Assemble into Long,
Helical F-Actin Polymers
Actin exists as a globular monomer called G-actin and as a
filamentous polymer called F-actin, which is a linear chain of
G-actin subunits. (The microfilaments visualized in a cell by
electron microscopy are F-actin filaments plus any bound proteins.) Each actin molecule contains a Mg2 ion complexed
with either ATP or ADP. Thus there are four states of actin:
ATP–G-actin, ADP–G-actin, ATP–F-actin, and ADP–F-actin.
Two of these forms, ATP–G-actin and ADP–F-actin, predominate in a cell. The importance of the interconversion between
the ATP and the ADP forms of actin in the assembly of the cytoskeleton is discussed later.
Although G-actin appears globular in the electron microscope, x-ray crystallographic analysis reveals that it is separated into two lobes by a deep cleft (Figure 19-3a). The lobes
and the cleft compose the ATPase fold, the site where ATP

(a)

(b)

IV

3

(c)

() end

II
ATPbinding
cleft

III

I

N-terminus
C-terminus
() end

▲ FIGURE 19-3 Structures of monomeric G-actin and
F-actin filament. (a) Model of a -actin monomer from a
nonmuscle cell shows it to be a platelike molecule (measuring
5.5  5.5  3.5 nm) divided by a central cleft into two
approximately equally sized lobes and four subdomains,
numbered I–IV. ATP (red) binds at the bottom of the cleft and
contacts both lobes (the yellow ball represents Mg2). The Nand C-termini lie in subdomain I. (b) In the electron microscope,
negatively stained actin filaments appear as long, flexible, and
twisted strands of beaded subunits. Because of the twist, the
filament appears alternately thinner (7 nm diameter) and thicker

(9 nm diameter) (arrows). (c) In one model of the arrangement of
subunits in an actin filament, the subunits lie in a tight helix
along the filament, as indicated by the arrow. One repeating unit
consists of 28 subunits (13 turns of the helix), covering a
distance of 72 nm. Only 14 subunits are shown in the figure. The
ATP-binding cleft is oriented in the same direction (top) in all
actin subunits in the filament. The end of a filament with an
exposed binding cleft is designated the ()end; the opposite end
is the () end. [Part (a) adapted from C. E. Schutt et al., 1993, Nature
365:810; courtesy of M. Rozycki. Part (b) courtesy of R. Craig. Part (c) see
M. F. Schmid et al., 1994, J. Cell Biol. 124:341; courtesy of M. Schmid.]

4

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

and Mg2 are bound. In actin, the floor of the cleft acts as a
hinge that allows the lobes to flex relative to each other.
When ATP or ADP is bound to G-actin, the nucleotide affects the conformation of the molecule. In fact, without a
bound nucleotide, G-actin denatures very quickly.
The addition of ions—Mg2, K, or Na—to a solution
of G-actin will induce the polymerization of G-actin into
F-actin filaments. The process is also reversible: F-actin
depolymerizes into G-actin when the ionic strength of the
solution is lowered. The F-actin filaments that form in vitro
are indistinguishable from microfilaments isolated from cells,
indicating that other factors such as accessory proteins are
not required for polymerization in vivo. The assembly of Gactin into F-actin is accompanied by the hydrolysis of ATP to
ADP and Pi; however, as discussed later, ATP hydrolysis affects the kinetics of polymerization but is not necessary for
polymerization to take place.
When negatively stained by uranyl acetate for electron
microscopy, F-actin appears as twisted strings of beads
whose diameter varies between 7 and 9 nm (Figure 19-3b).
From the results of x-ray diffraction studies of actin filaments and the actin monomer structure shown in Figure
19-3a, scientists have produced a model of an actin filament
in which the subunits are organized as a tightly wound helix
(Figure 19-3c). In this arrangement, each subunit is surrounded by four other subunits, one above, one below, and
two to one side. Each subunit corresponds to a bead seen in
electron micrographs of actin filaments.
The ability of G-actin to polymerize into F-actin and of
F-actin to depolymerize into G-actin is an important property of actin. In this chapter, we will see how the reversible
assembly of actin lies at the core of many cell movements.

F-Actin Has Structural and Functional Polarity
All subunits in an actin filament point toward the same end
of the filament. Consequently, a filament exhibits polarity; that
is, one end differs from the other. By convention, the end at
which the ATP-binding cleft of the terminal actin subunit is exposed to the surrounding solution is designated the () end. At
the opposite end, the () end, the cleft contacts the neighboring actin subunit and is not exposed (see Figure 19-3c).
Without the atomic resolution afforded by x-ray crystallography, the cleft in an actin subunit and therefore the
polarity of a filament are not detectable. However, the polarity of actin filaments can be demonstrated by electron
microscopy in “decoration” experiments, which exploit
the ability of myosin to bind specifically to actin filaments.
In this type of experiment, an excess of myosin S1, the
globular head domain of myosin, is mixed with actin filaments and binding is permitted to take place. Myosin attaches to the sides of a filament with a slight tilt. When all
the actin subunits are bound by myosin, the filament appears coated (“decorated”) with arrowheads that all point
toward one end of the filament (Figure 19-4). Because

()

()
Pointed
end

Barbed
end

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-4 Decoration demonstrates
the polarity of an actin filament. Myosin S1 head domains bind
to actin subunits in a particular orientation. When bound to all the
subunits in a filament, S1 appears to spiral around the filament.
This coating of myosin heads produces a series of arrowhead-like
decorations, most easily seen at the wide views of the filament.
The polarity in decoration defines a pointed () end and a barbed
() end; the former corresponds to the top of the model in
Figure 19-3c. [Courtesy of R. Craig.]
myosin binds to actin filaments and not to microtubules or
intermediate filaments, arrowhead decoration is one criterion by which actin filaments are identified among the
other cytoskeletal fibers in electron micrographs of thinsectioned cells.

CH-Domain and Other Proteins Organize
Microfilaments into Bundles and Networks
Actin filaments can form a tangled network of filaments in
vitro. However, actin cross-linking proteins are required to
assemble filaments into the stable networks and bundles that
provide a supportive framework for the plasma membrane
(Figure 19-5). Some actin cross-linking proteins (e.g., fimbrin
and fascin) are monomeric proteins that contain two actinbinding domains in a single polypeptide chain. But many
cross-linking proteins, particularly those that form networks
of filaments, consist of two or more polypeptide chains, each
of which contains a single actin-binding domain. Multiple
actin-binding sites in these proteins are generated by their assembly into dimers or other oligomers. Actin bundles and
networks are often stabilized by several different actin crosslinking proteins.
Many actin cross-linking proteins belong to the calponin
homology–domain superfamily (Table 19-1). Each of these
CH-domain proteins has a pair of actin-binding domains
whose sequence is homologous to that of calponin, a muscle protein. The actin-binding domains are separated by repeats of helical coiled-coil or -sheet immunoglobulin
motifs. The organization of the actin-binding sites in these
proteins determines whether they organize filaments into
bundles or networks. When the binding sites are arranged
in tandem, as in fimbrin and -actinin, the bound actin filaments are packed tightly and align into bundles (see Figure
19-5a), which are located in cell extensions. However, if
binding sites are spaced apart at the ends of flexible arms,
as in filamin, spectrin, and dystrophin, then cross-links can

19.1 • Actin Structures

5

TABLE 19-1 Selected Actin-Binding Proteins
Protein

MW

Domain Organization*

Location

CH-DOMAIN SUPERFAMILY
Fimbrin

68,000

-Actinin

102,000

Spectrin

: 280,000
: 246,000–275,000

FPO
β

427,000

Filamin

280,000

Filopodia, lamellipodia, stress fibers,
adhesion plaques
α

FPO
α

Dystrophin

Microvilli, stereocilia, adhesion plaques,
yeast actin cables

FPO

Cortical networks

β

α

FPO

FPO

β

Muscle cortical networks

Filopodia, pseudopodia, stress fibers

OTHERS
Fascin

55,000

FPO

Filopodia, lamellipodia, stress fibers,
microvilli, acrosomal process

Villin

92,000

FPO

Microvilli in intestinal and kidney
brush border

*Blue  actin-binding domains; red  calmodulin-like Ca2-binding domains; purple  -helical repeats;
green  -sheet repeats; tan  uncharacterized domains.

form between orthogonally arranged and loosely packed filaments (see Figure 19-5b). The large networks thus formed
fill the cytoplasm and give it a gel-like character. Because
these proteins also bind membrane proteins, the networks
are generally found in the cortical region adjacent to the
plasma membrane. In proteins that form networks of filaments, repeats of different protein motifs determine the
length of the arms and thus the spacing and orientation between filaments.
Although CH-domain proteins form the majority of
actin cross-linking proteins, other proteins that bind to different sites on actin play equally important roles in organizing actin filaments. One such protein, fascin, is found in
many actin bundles including stress fibers, cell-surface microvilli, and the sensory bristles that cover the body of the
fruit fly Drosophila. The important structural role of fascin
is illustrated by the effects of mutations in the singed gene,
which encodes fascin in Drosophila. In singed mutants, sensory bristles are bent and deformed, evidence that fascin is
responsible for maintaining the rigidity of actin bundles in
the core of each bristle.

(b)

(a)

Actin filament

Fimbrin cross-link

▲ FIGURE 19-5 Actin cross-linking proteins bridging pairs
of actin filaments. (a) When cross-linked by fimbrin (red), a short
protein, actin filaments pack side by side to form a bundle.
(b) Long cross-linking proteins such as filamin are flexible and
can thus cross-link pairs of filaments lying at various angles.
[Part (a) courtesy of D. Hanein. Part (b) courtesy of J. Hartwig.]

6

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 19.1
Actin Structures
A major component of the cytoskeleton, actin is the most
abundant intracellular protein in eukaryotic cells and is
highly conserved.

■

The various actin isoforms exhibit minor sequence differences but generally perform different functions.

■

F-actin is a helical filamentous polymer of globular Gactin subunits all oriented in the same direction (see Figure 19-3).

■

Actin filaments are polarized with one end, the () end,
containing an exposed ATP-binding site.

■

Actin filaments are organized into bundles and networks by
a variety of bivalent cross-linking proteins (see Figure 19-5).
■

Many actin cross-linking proteins belong to the CH-domain superfamily (see Table 19-1). They include the bundle-forming proteins fimbrin and -actinin and the larger
network-forming proteins spectrin, dystrophin, and filamin.

■

19.2 The Dynamics
of Actin Assembly
As mentioned previously, the actin cytoskeleton is not a static,
unchanging structure consisting of bundles and networks of
filaments. Rather, the microfilaments in a cell are constantly
shrinking or growing in length, and bundles and meshworks

of microfilaments are continually forming and dissolving.
These changes in the organization of actin filaments generate
forces that cause equally large changes in the shape of a cell.
In this section, we consider the mechanism of actin polymerization and the regulation of this process, which is largely responsible for the dynamic nature of the cytoskeleton.

Actin Polymerization in Vitro Proceeds
in Three Steps
The in vitro polymerization of G-actin to form F-actin filaments can be monitored by viscometry, sedimentation, fluorescence spectroscopy, and fluorescence microscopy. When
actin filaments become long enough to become entangled,
the viscosity of the solution increases, which is measured as
a decrease in its flow rate in a viscometer. The basis of the
sedimentation assay is the ability of ultracentrifugation
(100,000g for 30 minutes) to pellet F-actin but not G-actin.
The third assay makes use of G-actin covalently labeled with
a fluorescent dye; the fluorescence spectrum of the modified
G-actin monomer changes when it is polymerized into
F-actin. Finally, growth of the labeled filaments can be imaged with a fluorescence microscope. These assays are useful in kinetic studies of actin polymerization and during
purification of actin-binding proteins, which cross-link or
depolymerize actin filaments.
The in vitro polymerization of G-actin proceeds in three
sequential phases (Figure 19-6a). The first nucleation phase
is marked by a lag period in which G-actin aggregates into
short, unstable oligomers. When the oligomer reaches a cer-

(a)

Nucleus

Nucleus

F-actin

F-actin

G-actin

(−) end
Nucleation

Elongation

FPO

(+) end
Steady state

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-6 Polymerization of G-actin

(b)
Nucleation

Mass of filaments

Focus Annimation: Actin Polymerization

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Nucleus

Elongation

Nuclei added

No nuclei added

Time

Steady state

in vitro occurs in three phases. (a) In the initial nucleation phase,
ATP–G-actin monomers (pink) slowly form stable complexes of
actin (purple). These nuclei are rapidly elongated in the second
phase by the addition of subunits to both ends of the filament.
In the third phase, the ends of actin filaments are in a steady
state with monomeric ATP–G-actin. After their incorporation into
a filament, subunits slowly hydrolyze ATP and become stable
ADP–F-actin (white). Note that the ATP-binding clefts of all the
subunits are oriented in the same direction in F-actin. (b) Time
course of the in vitro polymerization reaction (pink curve) reveals
the initial lag period. If some actin filament fragments are added
at the start of the reaction to act as nuclei, elongation proceeds
immediately without any lag period (purple curve).

19.2 • The Dynamics of Actin Assembly

Mass

Filament
Monomer

Cc

Actin concentration

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-7 Concentration of G-actin
determines filament formation. The critical concentration (Cc) is
the concentration of G-actin monomers in equilibrium with actin
filaments. At monomer concentrations below the Cc, no
polymerization takes place. At monomer concentrations above
the Cc, filaments assemble until the monomer concentration
reaches Cc.

7

critical concentration, Cc. This parameter is the dissociation
constant, the ratio of the “on” and “off” rate constants, and
it measures the concentration of G-actin where the addition
of subunits is balanced by the dissociation of subunits; that
is, the on rate equals the off rate. Under typical in vitro conditions, the Cc of G-actin is 0.1 M. Above this value, a solution of G-actin will polymerize; below this value, a solution
of F-actin will depolymerize (Figure 19-7).
After ATP–G-actin monomers are incorporated into a filament, the bound ATP is slowly hydrolyzed to ADP. As a result of this hydrolysis, most of the filament consists of
ADP–F-actin, but some ATP–F-actin is found at one end (see
next subsection). However, ATP hydrolysis is not essential
for polymerization to take place, as evidenced by the ability
of G-actin containing ADP or a nonhydrolyzable ATP analog
to polymerize into filaments.

Actin Filaments Grow Faster at () End Than
at () End

tain length (three or four subunits), it can act as a stable seed,
or nucleus, which in the second elongation phase rapidly increases in length by the addition of actin monomers to both
of its ends. As F-actin filaments grow, the concentration of
G-actin monomers decreases until equilibrium is reached between filaments and monomers. In this third steady-state
phase, G-actin monomers exchange with subunits at the filament ends, but there is no net change in the total mass of filaments. The kinetic curves presented in Figure 19-6b show
that the lag period can be eliminated by the addition of a
small number of F-actin nuclei to the solution of G-actin.
When the steady-state phase has been reached, the concentration of the pool of unassembled subunits is called the

We saw earlier that myosin decoration experiments reveal an
inherent structural polarity of F-actin (see Figure 19-4). This
polarity is also manifested by the different rates at which
ATP-G-actin adds to the two ends. One end of the filament,
the () end, elongates 5–10 times as fast as does the opposite, or (), end. The unequal growth rates can be demonstrated by a simple experiment in which myosin-decorated
actin filaments nucleate the polymerization of G-actin. Electron microscopy of the elongated filaments reveals bare sections at both ends, corresponding to the added undecorated
G-actin. The newly polymerized (undecorated) actin is 5–10
times as long at the () end as at the () end of the filaments
(Figure 19-8a).

(a)

(b)
(−) end

(+) end

×
×

+

C C = C C = 0.1 µM

Capping protein

FPO

(−) end

(+) end

×

×

C C = C C− = 0.6 µM

Capping protein

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-8 Myosin decoration and
capping proteins demonstrate unequal growth rates at the
two ends of an actin filament. (a) When short myosindecorated filaments are the nuclei for actin polymerization, the
resulting elongated filaments have a much longer undecorated
() end than () end. This result indicates that G-actin monomers
are added much faster at the () end than at the () end.

(b) Blocking the () or () ends of a filament with actin-capping
proteins permits growth only at the opposite end. In
polymerization assays with capped filaments, the critical
concentration (Cc) is determined by the unblocked growing end.
Such assays show that the Cc at the () end is much lower than
the Cc at the () end. [Part (a) courtesy of T. Pollard.]

8

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments
−

C C > G-actin concentration > C C+
(−)

(+)

FPO
▲ FIGURE 19-9 Treadmilling of actin filaments. At G-actin
concentrations intermediate between the Cc values for the ()
and () ends, actin subunits can flow through the filaments by
attaching preferentially to the () end and dissociating
preferentially from the () end of the filament. This treadmilling
phenomenon occurs in some moving cells. The oldest subunits in
a treadmilling filament lie at the () end.

The difference in elongation rates at the opposite ends of
an actin filament is caused by a difference in Cc values at the
two ends. This difference can be measured by blocking one
or the other end with proteins that “cap” the ends of actin
filaments. If the () end of an actin filament is capped, it can
elongate only from its () end; conversely, elongation takes
place only at the () end when the () end of a filament is
blocked (Figure 19-8b). Polymerization assays of such
capped filaments have shown that the Cc is about six times
lower for polymerization at the () end than for addition at
the () end.
As a result of the difference in the Cc values for the ()
and () ends of a filament, we can make the following predictions: at ATP–G-actin concentrations below Cc , there is
no filament growth; at G-actin concentrations between Cc
and Cc , growth is only at the () end; and, at G-actin concentrations above Cc , there is growth at both ends, although
it is faster at the () end than at the () end. When the
steady-state phase is reached at G-actin concentrations intermediate between the Cc values for the () and the () ends,
subunits continue to be added at the () end and lost from
the () end (Figure 19-9). In this situation, the length of the
filament remains constant, with the newly added subunits
traveling through the filament, as if on a treadmill, until they
reach the () end, where they dissociate. Turnover of actin
filaments at the leading edge of some migrating cells probably occurs by a treadmilling type of mechanism, with subunits added to filaments near the leading edge of the cell and
lost from the other end toward the rear.

Toxins Perturb the Pool of Actin Monomers
Several toxins shift the usual equilibrium between actin
monomers and filaments. Two unrelated toxins, cytochalasin
D and latrunculin promote the dissociation of filaments,

though by different mechanisms. Cytochalasin D, a fungal
alkaloid, depolymerizes actin filaments by binding to the ()
end of F-actin, where it blocks further addition of subunits.
Latrunculin, a toxin secreted by sponges, binds G-actin and
inhibits it from adding to a filament end. Exposure to either
toxin thus increases the monomer pool. When cytochalasin is
added to live cells, the actin cytoskeleton disappears and cell
movements such as locomotion and cytokinesis are inhibited.
These observations were among the first that implicated
actin filaments in cell motility.
In contrast, the monomer–polymer equilibrium is shifted
in the direction of filaments by jasplakolinode, another
sponge toxin, and by phalloidin, which is isolated from
Amanita phalloides (the “angel of death” mushroom). Phalloidin poisons a cell by binding at the interface between subunits in F-actin, thereby locking adjacent subunits together
and preventing actin filaments from depolymerizing. Even
when actin is diluted below its critical concentration, phalloidin-stabilized filaments will not depolymerize. Fluorescence-labeled phalloidin, which binds only to F-actin, is
commonly used to stain actin filaments for light microscopy.

Actin Polymerization Is Regulated by Proteins
That Bind G-Actin
In the artificial world of a test tube, experimenters can start
the polymerization process by adding salts to G-actin or can
depolymerize F-actin by simply diluting the filaments. Cells,
however, must maintain a nearly constant cytosolic ionic
concentration and thus employ a different mechanism for
controlling actin polymerization. The cellular regulatory
mechanism includes several actin-binding proteins that either
promote or inhibit actin polymerization. Here, we consider
two such proteins that have been isolated and characterized.

Inhibition of Actin Assembly by Thymosin 4 Calculations
based on the Cc of G-actin (0.1 M), a typical cytosolic total
actin concentration (0.5 mM), and the ionic conditions of the
cell indicate that nearly all cellular actin should exist as filaments; there should be very little G-actin. Actual measurements, however, show that as much as 40 percent of actin in
an animal cell is unpolymerized. What keeps the cellular concentration of G-actin above its Cc? The most likely explanation is that cytosolic proteins sequester actin, holding it in a
form that is unable to polymerize.
Because of its abundance in the cytosol and ability to
bind ATP–G-actin (but not F-actin), thymosin 4 is considered to be the main actin-sequestering protein in cells. A
small protein (5000 MW), thymosin binds ATP–G-actin
in a 1:1 complex. The binding of thymosin 4 blocks the
ATP-binding site in G-actin, thereby preventing its polymerization. In platelets, the concentration of thymosin 4 is
0.55 mM, approximately twice the concentration of unpolymerized actin (0.22 mM). At these concentrations, approximately 70 percent of the monomeric actin in a platelet
should be sequestered by thymosin 4.

19.2 • The Dynamics of Actin Assembly

Thymosin 4 (T4) functions like a buffer for monomeric
actin, as represented in the following reaction:
F-actin 34 G-actin 34 T4

G-actin/ T4

In a simple equilibrium, an increase in the cytosolic concentration of thymosin 4 would increase the concentration of
sequestered actin subunits and correspondingly decrease Factin, because actin filaments are in equilibrium with actin
monomers. This effect of thymosin 4 on the cellular F-actin
level has been experimentally demonstrated in live cells.

Promotion of Actin Assembly by Profilin Another cytosolic
protein, profilin (15,000 MW), also binds ATP-actin
monomers in a stable 1:1 complex. At most, profilin can
buffer 20 percent of the unpolymerized actin in cells, a level
too low for it to act as an effective sequestering protein.
Rather than sequestering actin monomers, the main function
of profilin probably is to promote the assembly of actin filaments in cells. It appears to do so by several mechanisms.
First, profilin promotes the assembly of actin filaments
by acting as a nucleotide-exchange factor. Profilin is the only
actin-binding protein that allows the exchange of ATP for
ADP. When G-actin is complexed with other proteins, ATP
or ADP is trapped in the ATP-binding cleft of actin. However, because profilin binds to G-actin at a site opposite the

ATP

2

7

6

FPO
ADP

ATP-binding cleft, it can recharge ADP-actin monomers released from a filament, thereby replenishing the pool of ATPactin (Figure 19-10).
Second, as a complex with G-actin, profilin is postulated
to assist in the addition of monomers to the () end of an
actin filament. This hypothesis is consistent with the threedimensional structure of the profilin–actin complex in
which profilin is bound to the part of an actin monomer opposite the ATP-binding end, thereby leaving it free to associate with the () end of a filament (see Figure 19-3). After
the complex binds transiently to the filament, the profilin
dissociates from actin.
Finally, profilin also interacts with membrane components taking part in cell–cell signaling, suggesting that it may
be particularly important in controlling actin assembly
at the plasma membrane. For example, profilin binds to the
membrane phospholipid phosphoinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2); this interaction prevents the binding of profilin to Gactin. (As discussed in Chapter 13, PIP2 is hydrolyzed in response to certain extracellular signals.) In addition, profilin
binds to proline-rich sequences that are commonly found in
membrane-associated signaling proteins such as Vasp and
Mena. This interaction, which does not inhibit the binding of
profilin to G-actin, localizes profilin–actin complexes to the
membrane.

Filament-Binding Severing Proteins Create
New Actin Ends

ADP

3

1

9

5

4

ATP

▲ FIGURE 19-10 Model of the complementary roles of
profilin and thymosin 4 in regulating polymerization of
G-actin. Actin subunits (pink) complexed with thymosin 4
(purple) dissociate ( 1 )and add to the end of a filament ( 2 ). In
the filament, ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP, the ADP-associated
subunit eventually dissociates from the opposite end of the
filament ( 3 ), the ADP-G-actin forms a complex with profilin
(green) ( 4 ), and ATP exchanges with ADP to form ATP-G-actin
( 5 ). Profilin delivers actin monomers to the () end of actin
filaments ( 6 ) or thymosin 4 sequesters the ATP-G-actin into a
polymerization ready pool of subunits ( 7 ).

A second group of proteins, which bind to actin filaments,
control the length of actin filaments by breaking them into
shorter fragments and generating new filament ends for polymerization (Table 19-2). A valuable clue that led to the discovery of these severing proteins came from studies of
amebas. Viscosity measurements and light-microscope observations demonstrated that during ameboid movement the
cytosol flows forward in the center of the cell and then turns
into a gel when it reaches the front end of the cell. As discussed later, this “sol to gel” transformation depends on the
assembly of new actin filaments in the front part of a moving
ameba and the disassembly of old actin filaments in the rear
part. Because the actin concentration in a cell favors the formation of filaments, the breakdown of existing actin filaments and filament networks requires the assistance of
severing proteins such as gelsolin and cofilin.
Severing proteins are thought to break an actin filament
by stabilizing a change in the conformation of the subunit
to which it binds; the resulting strain on the intersubunit
bonds leads to its breakage. In support of this hypothesis are
electron micrographs showing that an actin filament with
bound cofilin is severely twisted. After a severing protein
breaks a filament at one site, it remains bound at the () end
of one of the resulting fragments, where it prevents the addition or exchange of actin subunits, an activity called capping. The () ends of fragments remain uncapped and are
rapidly shortened. Thus severing promotes turnover of actin

10

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

TABLE 19-2 Some Cytosolic Proteins That Control Actin Polymerization
Protein

MW

Activity

Cofilin

15,000

Dissociation from () end

Severin

40,000

Severing, capping [() end]

Gelsolin

87,000

Severing, capping [() end]

CapZ capping protein

36,000 ()
32,000 ()

Capping [() end]

Tropomodulin

40,000

Capping [() end]

Arp2/3 complex

200,000

Capping [() end], side binding and nucleation

filaments by creating new () ends and causes disintegration of an actin network, although many filaments remain
cross-linked. The turnover of actin filaments promoted by
severing proteins is necessary not only for cell locomotion
but also for cytokinesis.
The capping and severing proteins are regulated by several signaling pathways. For example, both cofilin and gelsolin bind PIP2 in a way that inhibits their binding to actin
filaments and thus their severing activity. Hydrolysis of PIP2
by phospholipase C releases these proteins and induces rapid
severing of filaments. The reversible phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of cofilin also regulates its activity, and
the severing activity of gelsolin is activated by an increase in
cytosolic Ca2 to about 106 M. The counteracting influence of different signaling molecules, Ca2, and PIP2 permits
the reciprocal regulation of these proteins. In Section 19.4,
we consider how extracellular signals coordinate the activities of different actin-binding proteins, including severing
proteins, in cell migration.

Myosin thick filament

Z disk

Z disk

Actin thin filament

FPO
Cap Z

Tropomodulin

▲ FIGURE 19-11 Diagram of sarcomere in skeletal muscle
showing location of actin-capping proteins. CapZ (green) caps
the () ends of actin thin filaments, which are located at the Z
disk separating adjacent sarcomeres. Tropomodulin (yellow) caps
the () ends of thin filaments, located toward the center of a
sarcomere. The presence of these two proteins at opposite ends
of a thin filament prevents actin subunits from dissociating during
muscle contraction.

Actin-Capping Proteins Stabilize F-Actin
Another group of proteins can cap the ends of actin filaments
but, unlike severing proteins, cannot break filaments to create new ends. One such protein, CapZ, binds the () ends
of actin filaments independently of Ca2 and prevents the
addition or loss of actin subunits from the () end. Capping
by this protein is inhibited by PIP2, suggesting that its activity is regulated by the same signaling pathways that control
cofilin and profilin. Tropomodulin, which is unrelated to
CapZ in sequence, caps the () ends of actin filaments. Its
capping activity is enhanced in the presence of tropomyosin,
which suggests that the two proteins function as a complex
to stabilize a filament. An actin filament that is capped at
both ends is effectively stabilized, undergoing neither addition nor loss of subunits. Such capped actin filaments are
needed in places where the organization of the cytoskeleton
is unchanging, as in a muscle sarcomere (Figure 19-11) or at
the erythrocyte membrane.

Arp2/3 Assembles Branched Filaments
A family of actin-related proteins (Arps), exhibiting 50 percent sequence similarity with actin, has been identified in
many eukaryotic organisms. One group of Arps, a complex
of seven proteins called Arp2/3, stimulates actin assembly in
vivo. (Another Arp group that is associated with microtubules and a microtubule motor protein is discussed in the
next chapter.) Isolated from cell extracts on the basis of its
ability to bind profilin, the Arp2/3 complex binds at 70° to
the side of an actin filament to nucleate a daughter filament.
The combination of mother and daughter filaments creates
a branched network in which Arp2/3 is located at the branch
points (Figure 19-12). As a result, the newly created ends of
filaments elongate and create the force to push the membrane forward.

19.2 • The Dynamics of Actin Assembly

Branching is stimulated by the WASp family of proteins
under the control of the Rho GTPases. Actin cross-linking
proteins such as filamin stabilize the branched network,
whereas actin-severing proteins such as cofilin disassemble
the branched structures.

Actin ruffle

Intracellular Movements and Changes in Cell
Shape Are Driven by Actin Polymerization
By manipulating actin polymerization and depolymerization,
the cell can create forces that produce several types of movement. As noted previously and described in detail later, actin
polymerization at the leading edge of a moving cell is critical to cell migration. Here, we consider other examples of
cell movement that most likely result from actin polymerization—one concerning infection and the other blood clotting.
Most infections are spread by bacteria or viruses that are
liberated when an infected cell lyses. However, some bacteria
and viruses escape from a cell on the end of a polymerizing
actin filament. Examples include Listeria monocytogenes, a
bacterium that can be transmitted from a pregnant woman to
the fetus, and vaccinia, a virus related to the smallpox virus.
When such organisms infect mammalian cells, they move
through the cytosol at rates approaching 11 m/min. Fluorescence microscopy revealed that a meshwork of short actin
filaments follows a moving bacterium or virus like the plume
of a rocket exhaust (Figure 19-13). These observations suggested that actin generates the force necessary for movement.
The first hints about how actin mediates bacterial movement were provided by a microinjection experiment in which
fluorescence-labeled G-actin was injected into Listeriainfected cells. In the microscope, the labeled monomers could
be seen incorporating into the tail-like meshwork at the end

Actin tail

Bacterium

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-13 Fluorescence microscopy
implicates actin in movement of Listeria in infected fibroblasts.
Bacteria (red) are stained with an antibody specific for a bacterial
membrane protein that binds cellular profilin and is essential for
infectivity and motility. Behind each bacterium is a “tail” of actin
(green) stained with fluorescent phalloidin. Numerous bacterial
cells move independently within the cytosol of an infected
mammalian cell. Infection is transmitted to other cells when a
spike of cell membrane, generated by a bacterium, protrudes into
a neighboring cell and is engulfed by a phagocytotic event.
[Courtesy of J. Theriot and T. Mitchison.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

1999, J. Cell Biol. 145:1009; courtesy of T. M. Svitkina and
G. G. Borisy.]

Video: Direct Observation of Actin Filament
Branching Mediated by Arp2/3 Complex

 FIGURE 19-12 Branched actin filaments with
Arp2/3 at the branch points. An extensive network of
actin filaments fills the cytoplasm at the leading edge of a
keratinocyte. Within selected areas of the network, highly
branched filaments (green) are seen. At each branch point
lies the Arp2/3 complex. [From T. M. Svitkina and G. G. Borisy,

11

12

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-14 Platelets change shape
during blood clotting. Resting cells have a discoid shape (left).
When exposed to clotting agents, the cells settle and spread out
on the substratum (center ). During clot retraction, the cells

assume a stellate shape and extend numerous filopodia (right).
The changes in morphology result from complex rearrangements
of the actin cytoskeleton, which is cross-linked to the plasma
membrane. [Courtesy of J. White.]

nearest the bacterium, with a simultaneous loss of actin
throughout the tail. This result showed that actin polymerizes into filaments at the base of the bacterium and suggested
that, as the tail-like meshwork assembles, it pushes the bacterium ahead. Findings from studies with mutant bacteria indicate that the interaction of cellular Arp 2/3 with a bacterial
membrane protein promotes actin polymerization at the end
of the tail nearest the bacterium. Recent studies have detected rocket tails trailing common cytoplasmic vesicles such

as endosomes. Such observations suggest that actin polymerization may underlie the movement of endosomes in the
cytoplasm.
During blood clotting, complicated rearrangements of
the cytoskeleton in activated platelets dramatically change
the cell shape and promote clot formation (Figure 19-14).
The cytoskeleton of an unactivated platelet consists of a rim
of microtubules (the marginal band), a membrane skeleton,
and a cytosolic actin network. The membrane skeleton in

(a)

(b)

1

Clot
2

Filamin

FPO

Gp1b-IX

3

4

▲ FIGURE 19-15 Cross-linkage of actin filament networks
to the platelet plasma membrane. In platelets, a threedimensional network of actin filaments is attached to the integral
membrane glycoprotein complex Gp1b-IX by filamin. Gp1b-IX
also binds to proteins in a blood clot outside the platelet.
Platelets also possess a two-dimensional cortical network of
actin and spectrin similar to that underlying the erythrocyte
membrane (see Figure 5-31). (b) This composite picture of the
actin cytoskeleton in a resting platelet shows the different

arrangements of microfilaments. Beneath the plasma membrane
( 1 ) lies a two-dimensional network of filaments ( 2 ) crosslinked by spectrin. Filamin organizes the filaments into a threedimensional gel ( 3 , 4 ), forming the cortex of the cell. A
lattice of filament bundles forms adhesions to the underlying
substratum. The disk shape of the cell is maintained by a ring
of microtubules ( 5 ) at the cell periphery. [Part (b) courtesy of
John Hartwig.]

19.3 • Myosin-Powered Cell Movements

platelets is somewhat similar to the cortical cytoskeleton in
erythrocytes (see Figure 5-31). A critical difference between
erythrocytes and platelet cytoskeletons is the presence in the
platelet of the second network of actin filaments, which are
organized by filamin cross-links into a three-dimensional gel
(Figure 19-15). The gel fills the cytosol of a platelet and is anchored by filamin to a glycoprotein complex (Gp1b-IX) in
the platelet membrane. Gp1b-IX not only binds filamin but
also is the membrane receptor for two blood-clotting proteins. Thus forces generated during rearrangements of the
actin cytoskeleton in platelets can be transmitted to a developing clot. Several examples of similar connections between
the cytoskeleton and components of the extracellular matrix
are described in Chapter 6.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 19.2
The Dynamics of Actin Assembly
Within cells, the actin cytoskeleton is dynamic, with filaments able to grow and shrink rapidly.

■

■ Polymerization of G-actin in vitro is marked by a lag period during which nucleation occurs. Eventually, a polymerization reaction reaches a steady state in which the rates of
addition and loss of subunits are equal (see Figure 19-10).

The concentration of actin monomers in equilibrium
with actin filaments is the critical concentration (Cc ). At a
G-actin concentration above Cc, there is net growth of filaments; at concentrations below Cc, there is net depolymerization of filaments.
■

Actin filaments grow considerably faster at their () end
than at their () end, and the Cc for monomer addition to
the () end is lower than that for addition at the () end.

■

The assembly, length, and stability of actin filaments are
controlled by specialized actin-binding proteins that can
sever filaments or cap the ends or both. These proteins are
in turn regulated by various mechanisms.

■

■ The complementary actions of thymosin 4 and profilin
are critical to regulating the actin cytoskeleton near the cell
membrane (see Figure 19-10).

The regulated polymerization of actin can generate
forces that move certain bacteria and viruses or cause
changes in cell shape.

■

19.3 Myosin-Powered Cell
Movements
We now examine the function of different myosin motor proteins in nonmuscle cells and muscle. As discussed in Chapter 3, interactions between myosin II and actin filaments are
responsible for muscle contraction. At first, scientists
thought that most cell movements were caused by a contrac-

13

tile mechanism similar to the sliding of actin and myosin filaments in muscle cells. This idea was based on several properties of at least some nonmuscle cells: the ability of cytosolic
extracts to undergo contractile-like movements, the presence
of actin and myosin II, and the existence of structures similar
to muscle sarcomeres. However, the results of later biochemical studies led to the extraction of “unusual” forms of
myosin that differed from myosin II in structure, location,
and enzymatic properties.
As biologists investigated various types of cell movements, it became clear that myosin II mediates only a few
types, such as cytokinesis and muscle contraction. Other
types of cell movements, including vesicle transport, membrane extension, and the movement of chromosomes, require
either other myosin isoforms, other motor proteins such as
kinesin or dynein, or actin polymerization. In this section, we
first consider the properties of various myosins and some of
their functions in nonmuscle cells. Contraction, the special
form of movement resulting from the interaction of actin and
myosin II, is most highly evolved in skeletal muscle cells.
However, somewhat similar contractile events entailing less
organized systems are found in nonmuscle cells. After reviewing the highly ordered structure of actin and myosin filaments in the sarcomere of skeletal muscle, we describe the
primary mechanisms for regulating contraction.

Myosins Are a Large Superfamily
of Mechanochemical Motor Proteins
Seventeen members of the myosin gene family have been
identified by genomic analysis (Chapter 9). Three family
members—myosin I, myosin II, and myosin V—are present
in nearly all eukaryotic cells and are the best understood. Although the specific activities of these myosins differ, they all
function as motor proteins. As already noted, myosin II powers muscle contraction, as well as cytokinesis. Myosins I and
V take part in cytoskeleton–membrane interactions, such as
the transport of membrane vesicles.
Researchers are currently uncovering the activities of
the remaining myosins. Genetic analysis has revealed that
myosins VI, VII, and XV have functions associated with
hearing and hair cell stereocilia structure. Plants do not have
the same myosins as animal cells. Three myosins (VII, XI,
and XIII) are exclusively expressed in plants. Myosin XI,
which may be the fastest myosin of all, is implicated in the
cytoplasmic streaming seen in green algae and higher plants
(Table 19-3).
All myosins consist of one or two heavy chains and several light chains, which generally have a regulatory function.
A characteristic head, neck, and tail domain organization is
found in all myosin heavy chains. Myosin II and myosin V
are dimers in which -helical sequences in the tail of
each heavy chain associate to form a rodlike coiled-coil
structure. In contrast some myosins, including myosin I, are
monomers because their heavy chains lack this -helical
sequence. All myosin head domains have ATPase activity and

14

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

TABLE 19-3 Myosins
Type

Structure

I

TYPE
I

TYPE

II
II

TYPE

V
V

Activity

FPO
FPO
FPO

STRUCTURE

Membrane binding,
endocytic vesicles

FUNCTION

Membrane binding
endocytic vesicles

STRUCTURE

FUNCTION

Filament sliding

Filament sliding

STRUCTURE

FUNCTION

Vesicle transport

Vesicle transport

VI

Endocytosis

TYPE
XI

XI

FPO

STRUCTURE

FUNCTION

Cytoplasmic streaming

(a)

Cytoplasmic streaming

(b)
Myosin V
Myosin II

Myosin I

FPO

Myosin II heads
Myosin II tail

Bare zone
160 nm
325 nm

▲ FIGURE 19-16 Functions of myosin tail domains.
(a) Myosin I and myosin V are localized to cellular membranes
by undetermined sites in their tail domains. As a result, these
myosins are associated with intracellular membrane vesicles or
the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane. (b) In contrast,

the coiled-coil tail domains of myosin II molecules pack side by
side, forming a thick filament from which the heads project. In a
skeletal muscle, the thick filament is bipolar. Heads are at the
ends of the thick filament and are separated by a bare zone,
which consists of the side-by-side tails.

19.3 • Myosin-Powered Cell Movements

Unraveling the mechanism of myosin-powered movement
was greatly aided by development of in vitro motility assays.
In one such assay, the sliding-filament assay, the movement
of fluorescence-labeled actin filaments along a bed of myosin
molecules is observed in a fluorescence microscope. Because
the myosin molecules are tethered to a coverslip, they cannot
move; thus any force generated by interaction of myosin
heads with actin filaments forces the filaments to move relative to the myosin (Figure 19-17a). If ATP is present, added
actin filaments can be seen to glide along the surface of the
coverslip; if ATP is absent, no filament movement is observed. This movement is caused by a myosin head (bound to
the coverslip) “walking” toward the () end of a filament;
thus filaments move with the () end in the lead. [The one
exception is myosin VI, which moves in the opposite direction, toward the () end; so the () end of a moving filament
is in the lead.] The rate at which myosin moves an actin filament can be determined from video camera recordings of
sliding-filament assays (Figure 19-17b). The velocity of filament movement can vary widely, depending on the myosin
tested and the assay conditions (e.g., ionic strength, ATP and
Ca2 concentrations, temperature).

Myosin

Actin
(+)

(+)

(−)

(−)

(b)
2
2
1
3

2
3

3
1

1

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-17 Sliding-filament
assay is used to detect myosin-powered movement.
After myosin molecules are adsorbed onto the surface of a
glass coverslip, excess myosin is removed; the coverslip
then is placed myosin-side down on a glass slide to form a
chamber through which solutions can flow. A solution of actin
filaments, made visible by staining with rhodamine-labeled
phalloidin, is allowed to flow into the chamber. (The coverslip
in the diagram is shown inverted from its orientation on the
flow chamber to make it easier to see the positions of the
molecules.) In the presence of ATP, the myosin heads walk
toward the () end of filaments by the mechanism illustrated
in Figure 3-25. Because myosin tails are immobilized, walking
of the heads causes sliding of the filaments. Movement of
individual filaments can be observed in a fluorescence light
microscope. (b) These photographs show the positions of
three actin filaments (numbered 1, 2, 3) at 30-second
intervals recorded by video microscopy. The rate of filament
movement can be determined from such recordings. [Part (b)
courtesy of M. Footer and S. Kron.]

The most critical feature of myosin is its ability to generate a force that powers movements. Researchers have used a
device called an optical trap to measure the forces generated
by single myosin molecules (Figure 19-18). The results of
optical-trap studies show that myosin II moves in discrete
steps, approximately 5–10 nm long, and generates 3–5 piconewtons (pN) of force, approximately the same force as that
exerted by gravity on a single bacterium. This force is sufficient
to cause myosin thick filaments to slide past actin thin filaments
during muscle contraction or to transport a membranebounded vesicle through the cytoplasm. With a step size of
5 nm, myosin would bind to every actin subunit on one strand
of the filament. Some evidence suggests that ATP hydrolysis
and myosin walking are closely coupled, with myosin taking a
discrete step for every ATP molecule hydrolyzed.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Myosin Heads Walk Along Actin Filaments
in Discrete Steps

(a)

Technique Annimation: In Vitro Motility Assay

in conjunction with the neck domain couple ATP hydrolysis
to movement of a myosin molecule along an actin filament
via a common mechanism involving cyclical binding and hydrolysis of ATP and attachment/detachment of myosin and
actin (see Figures 3-24 and 3-25).
The role of a particular myosin in vivo is related to its tail
domain. For example, the tail domains of myosins I, V, VI,
and XI bind the plasma membrane or the membranes of intracellular organelles; as a result, these molecules have
membrane-related activities (Figure 19-16a). In contrast, the
coiled-coil tail domains of myosin II dimers associate to form
bipolar thick filaments in which the heads are located at both
ends of the filament and are separated by a central bare zone
devoid of heads (Figure 19-16b). The close packing of
myosin molecules into thick filaments, which are a critical
part of the contractile apparatus in skeletal muscle, allows
many myosin head domains to interact simultaneously with
actin filaments.
The number and type of light chains bound in the neck
region vary among the different myosins (see Table 19-3).
The light chains of myosin I and myosin V are calmodulin,
a Ca2-binding regulatory subunit in many intracellular enzymes (see Figure 3-28). Myosin II contains two different
light chains called essential and regulatory light chains (see
Figure 3-24); both are Ca2-binding proteins but differ from
calmodulin in their Ca2-binding properties. All myosins are
regulated in some way by Ca2; however, because of the differences in their light chains, the different myosins exhibit
different responses to Ca2 signals in the cell.

15

16

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

(a)
Actin

Myosin

Latex bead

Glass slide

Optical trap "off "

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-18 Optical trap determines
force generated by a single myosin molecule. In an optical
trap, the beam of an infrared laser focused by a light microscope
on a latex bead (or any other object that does not absorb infrared
light) captures and holds the bead in the center of the beam. The
strength of the force holding the bead is adjusted by increasing
or decreasing the intensity of the laser beam. In this experiment,
a bead is attached to the end of an actin filament. With the
optical trap turned off, the actin filament and its attached bead
move in response to the force generated by myosin adsorbed on
the coverslip, as in Figure 19-17. When the optical trap is turned

The neck domains in different myosins vary in length and
number of associated light chains. Generally, the longer the
neck domain of a myosin, the greater its step size (i.e., the
distance traveled along an actin filament in one step). Because the neck region is the lever arm of myosin, a longer
neck would lead to a longer distance traveled by the arm. For
instance, myosin II, with a short neck, has from 5- to 10-nm
steps, whereas myosin V, with a long neck, has much longer
35-nm steps. The correlation between step size and neck
length has been further supported by experiments in which
the neck domain is lengthened by recombinant methods.
However, the correlation between neck length and step size is
not absolute, as evidenced by myosin VI, which moves in 20nm steps, although it has a neck domain shorter than that
of myosin II.

Myosin-Bound Vesicles Are Carried Along
Actin Filaments
Among the many movements exhibited by cells, vesicle
translocation has been one of the most fascinating to cell biologists. In early studies of the cytoplasm, researchers found
that certain particles, now known to be membrane-bounded
vesicles, moved in straight lines within the cytosol, sometimes stopping and then resuming movement, at times after
changing direction. This type of behavior could not be
caused by diffusion, because the movement was clearly not
random. Therefore, researchers reasoned, there must be
tracks, most likely actin filaments or microtubules, along
which the particles travel, as well as some type of motor to
power the movement.

Optical trap "on"

on, it captures the filament, through the bead, and holds the
filament to the surface of a myosin-coated coverslip. The force
exerted by a single myosin molecule on an actin filament is
measured from the force needed to hold the bead in the optical
trap. A computer-controlled electronic feedback system keeps the
bead centered in the trap, and myosin-generated movement of
the bead is counteracted by the opposing force of the trap. The
distance traveled by the actin filament is measured from the
displacement of the bead in the trap.

In the sliding-filament assay, walking of the myosin head
along an actin filament causes the filament to move because
the myosin tail is immobilized. In cells, however, the situation
is often reversed: when part of an extensive network, actin filaments are largely immobile, whereas myosin is free to move.
In this case, if the tail of a myosin molecule binds to the membrane of a vesicle and the head walks along a filament, the
vesicle will be carried along as “cargo.” Here, we present evidence that some myosins, including myosins I, V, and VI, do
just that. We also consider the related process of cytoplasmic
streaming, which is most likely powered by myosin XI.

Vesicle Trafficking (Myosins I, V, and VI) Findings from
studies with amebas provided the initial clues that myosin I
participates in vesicle transport. Indeed the first myosin I
molecule to be identified and characterized was from these
organisms; subsequently, the cDNA sequences of three
myosin I genes were identified in Acanthameba, a common
soil ameba. Using antibodies specific for each myosin I isoform, researchers found that the isoforms are localized to different membrane structures in the cell. For example, myosin
IA is associated with small cytoplasmic vesicles. Myosin IC,
in contrast, is found at the plasma membrane and at the
contractile vacuole, a vesicle that regulates the osmolarity of
the cytosol by fusing with the plasma membrane. The introduction of antibodies against myosin IC into a living ameba
prevents transport of the vacuole to the membrane; as a result, the vacuole expands uncontrollably, eventually bursting
the cell. In addition, myosin I in animal cells serves as a
membrane–microfilament linkage in microvilli, another example of a membrane-associated function.

19.3 • Myosin-Powered Cell Movements

Several types of evidence suggest that myosin V also participates in the intracellular transport of membrane-bounded
vesicles. For example, mutations in the myosin V gene in
yeast disrupt protein secretion and lead to an accumulation
of vesicles in the cytoplasm. Vertebrate brain tissue is rich in
myosin V, which is concentrated on Golgi stacks. This association with membranes is consistent with the effects of
myosin V mutations in mice. Such mutations are associated
with defects in synaptic transmission and eventually cause
death from seizures. Myosin VI also is implicated in membrane trafficking of vesicles.
Unlike myosin in a thick filament where multiple heads
interact with the same actin filament, cytoplasmic myosins
work alone in carrying their membrane cargos. How do
these myosins move without dissociating from the filament?
The answer lies in the duty ratio, the fraction of time spent
attached to the filament during the ATPase cycle. Myosins
with a high duty ratio, such as myosins V and VI, are bound
to actin filaments for most of the ATP cycle. Consequently,
these myosins process or move along a filament for considerable distances with little danger of falling off.

(a)

Moving cytoplasm

Nonmoving
cytoplasm

Moving
cytoplasm

Nitella cell

Vacuole

17

Cytoplasmic Streaming (Myosin XI) In large, cylindrical
green algae such as Nitella and Chara, cytosol flows rapidly,
at a rate approaching 4.5 mm/min, in an endless loop around
the inner circumference of the cell (Figure 19-19). This cytoplasmic streaming is a principal mechanism for distributing cellular metabolites, especially in large cells such as plant
cells and amebas. This type of movement probably represents an exaggerated version of the smaller-scale movements
exhibited during the transport of membrane vesicles.
Close inspection of objects caught in the flowing cytosol,
such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and other membrane-bounded vesicles, show that the velocity of streaming
increases from the cell center (zero velocity) to the cell periphery. This gradient in the rate of flow is most easily
explained if the motor generating the flow lies at the membrane. In electron micrographs, bundles of actin filaments
can be seen aligned along the length of the cell, lying across
chloroplasts embedded at the membrane. Attached to the
actin bundles are vesicles of the ER network. The bulk cytosol is propelled by myosin attached to parts of the ER lying
along the stationary actin filaments. The flow rate of the

(b)

Cell wall

ER

Nonmoving
cortical
cytoplasm

Plasma membrane
Cell wall

Actin filaments
Chloroplast

▲ FIGURE 19-19 Cytoplasmic streaming in cylindrical giant
algae. (a) The center of a Nitella cell is filled with a single large
water-filled vacuole, which is surrounded by a layer of moving
cytoplasm (indicated by blue arrows). A nonmoving layer of cortical
cytoplasm filled with chloroplasts lies just under the plasma
membrane (enlarged lower figure). On the inner side of this layer
are bundles of stationary actin filaments (red), all oriented with the
same polarity. A motor protein (blue dots), most likely myosin XI,

carries parts of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) along the actin
filaments. The movement of the ER network propels the entire
viscous cytoplasm, including organelles that are enmeshed in the
ER network. (b) An electron micrograph of the cortical cytoplasm
shows a large vesicle connected to an underlying bundle of actin
filaments. This vesicle, which is part of the ER network, contacts
the stationary actin filaments and moves along them by a myosin
motor protein. [Part (b) from B. Kachar.]

18

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

cytosol in Nitella is at least 15 times as fast as the movement
produced by any other myosin. This evidence and other evidence suggest that cytoplasmic streaming is powered by
myosin XI, one of the fastest moving myosins.

Actin and Myosin II Form Contractile Bundles
in Nonmuscle Cells
Nonmuscle cells contain prominent contractile bundles composed of actin and myosin II filaments. The contractile bundles of
nonmuscle cells, which may be transitory or permanent differ in
several ways from the noncontractile bundles of actin described
earlier in this chapter (see Figure 19-5). Interspersed among the
actin filaments of a contractile bundle is myosin II, which is responsible for their contractility. When isolated from cells, these
bundles contract on the addition of ATP. Contractile bundles are
always located adjacent to the plasma membrane as a sheet or
belt, whereas noncontractile actin bundles form the core of membrane projections (e.g., microvilli and filopodia).
In epithelial cells, contractile bundles are most commonly
found as a circumferential belt, which encircles the inner surface of the cell at the level of the adherens junction (see Figure 6-5). Stress fibers, which are seen along the ventral
surfaces of cells cultured on artificial (glass or plastic) surfaces, are a second type of contractile bundle. The ends of
stress fibers terminate at integrin-containing focal adhesions,
special structures that attach a cell to the underlying substratum (see Figure 6-26). Circumferential belts and stress
fibers contain several proteins found in smooth muscle, and
both exhibit some organizational features resembling muscle
sarcomeres. Nonetheless, both these structures appear to
function primarily in cell adhesion rather than cell movement. The observation that stress fibers are rarely seen in

cells and other evidence suggest that these structures may actually be an artifact caused by culturing cells on glass or plastic surfaces.
A third type of contractile bundle, referred to as a contractile ring, is a transient structure that assembles at the
equator of a dividing cell, encircling the cell midway between
the poles of the spindle. Although all three types of contractile bundles are structurally similar, only the contractile ring
mediates cell movement. As division of the cytoplasm (cytokinesis) proceeds, the diameter of the contractile ring decreases; so the cell is pinched into two parts by a deepening
cleavage furrow. Dividing cells stained with antibodies
against myosin I and myosin II show that myosin II is localized to the contractile ring, whereas myosin I is at the cell
poles (Figure 19-20). This localization indicates that myosin
II but not myosin I takes part in cytokinesis.
The results of experiments in which active myosin II is
eliminated from the cell demonstrate that cytokinesis is indeed dependent on myosin II (Figure 19-21). In one type of
experiment, anti-myosin II antibodies are microinjected into
one cell of a sea urchin embryo at the two-cell stage. In other
experiments, expression of myosin II is inhibited by deletion
of the myosin gene or by antisense inhibition of myosin
mRNA expression. In all cases, a cell lacking myosin II replicates to form a multinucleated syncytium because cytokinesis, but not chromosome separation, is inhibited. Without
myosin II, cells fail to assemble a contractile ring, although
other events in the cell cycle proceed normally.

One cell
Nucleus

Untreated

Treated: Delete myosin II gene
or inject anti-myosin II
antibodies
One cell

Myosin I
Myosin I

Myosin II

Pole
Pole

Cleavage
furrow

Multicellular,
mononucleate

Unicellular,
multinucleate

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-21 Inhibition of myosin II
▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-20 Fluorescent antibodies
reveal the localization of myosin I and myosin II during
cytokinesis. Fluorescence micrograph of a Dictyostelium ameba
during cytokinesis reveals that myosin II (red) is concentrated in
the cleavage furrow, whereas myosin I (green) is localized at the
poles of the cell. The cell was stained with antibodies specific for
myosin I and myosin II, with each antibody preparation linked to
a different fluorescent dye. [Courtesy of Y. Fukui.]

demonstrates that it is required for cytokinesis. The activity of
myosin II can be inhibited either by deleting its gene or by
microinjecting anti-myosin II antibodies into a cell. A cell that lacks
myosin II is able to replicate its DNA and nucleus but fails to
divide; as a result, the cell forms a large, multinucleate syncytium
over a period of time. In comparison, an untreated cell during the
same period continues to divide, forming a multicellular ball of
cells in which each cell contains a single nucleus.

19.3 • Myosin-Powered Cell Movements

Organized Thick and Thin Filaments
in Skeletal Muscle Slide Past One Another
During Contraction
Muscle cells have evolved to carry out one highly specialized
function—contraction. Muscle contractions must occur
quickly and repetitively, and they must occur through long
distances and with enough force to move large loads. A typical skeletal muscle cell, called a myofiber, is cylindrical,
large (1– 40 mm in length and 10–50 m in width), and
multinucleated (containing as many as 100 nuclei). The cy-

(a)

Myosin filaments

Z disk
I band

AI
zone

toplasm is packed with a regular repeating array of filament
bundles organized into a specialized structure called a sarcomere. A chain of sarcomeres, each about 2 m long in
resting muscle, constitutes a myofibril. The sarcomere is
both the structural and the functional unit of skeletal muscle. During contraction, the sarcomeres are shortened to
about 70 percent of their uncontracted, resting length. Electron microscopy and biochemical analysis have shown that
each sarcomere contains two types of filaments: thick filaments, composed of myosin II, and thin filaments, containing actin (Figure 19-22).

(b)

Myosin filaments

Actin filaments

Actin filaments

H
zone

AI
zone

Actin filaments

Z disk

A band

Actin filaments

Z disk

Z disk
AI zone

I band

19

I band

AI zone
A band

I band

Sarcomere
1 m

(c)

Sarcomere
Al zone

Thick filament

Thin filament

Thin filament
Myosin cross-bridge
Thick filament backbone

▲ FIGURE 19-22 Structure of the sarcomere. (a) Electron
micrograph of mouse striated muscle in longitudinal section,
showing one sarcomere. On either side of the Z disks are the
lightly stained I bands, composed entirely of actin filaments. These
thin filaments extend from both sides of the Z disk to interdigitate
with the dark-stained myosin thick filaments in the A band. The
region containing both thick and thin filaments (the AI zone) is
darker than the area containing only myosin thick filaments (the H

zone). (b) Diagram of a sarcomere. The () ends of actin filaments
are attached to the Z disks. (c) Electron micrograph showing actinmyosin cross-bridges in the AI zone of a striated flight muscle of
an insect. This image shows a nearly crystalline array of thick
myosin and thin actin filaments. The muscle was in the rigor state
at preparation. Note that the myosin heads protruding from the
thick filaments connect with the actin filaments at regular intervals.
[Part (a) courtesy of S. P. Dadoune. Part (c) courtesy of M. Reedy.]

20

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

Relaxed
Myosin head
(+)

Thick filament

(−)

Thin filament

(−)

(+)

FPO
A band

I band

I band

+ ATP, Ca2+

Contracted

To understand how a muscle contracts, consider the interactions between one myosin head (among the hundreds
in a thick filament) and a thin (actin) filament as diagrammed in Figure 3-25. During these cyclical interactions,
also called the cross-bridge cycle, the hydrolysis of ATP is
coupled to the movement of a myosin head toward the Z
disk, which corresponds to the () end of the thin filament.
Because the thick filament is bipolar, the action of the myosin
heads at opposite ends of the thick filament draws the thin
filaments toward the center of the thick filament and therefore toward the center of the sarcomere (Figure 19-23). This
movement shortens the sarcomere until the ends of the thick
filaments abut the Z disk or the () ends of the thin filaments overlap at the center of the A band. Contraction of
an intact muscle results from the activity of hundreds of
myosin heads on a single thick filament, amplified by the
hundreds of thick and thin filaments in a sarcomere and
thousands of sarcomeres in a muscle fiber.

A band

Video: Three-Dimensional Animation of an Actin-Myosin
Crossbridge Regulated by Tropomyosin-Troponin

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

▲ FIGURE 19-23 The sliding-filament model of contraction
in striated muscle. The arrangement of thick myosin and thin
actin filaments in the relaxed state is shown in the upper
diagram. In the presence of ATP and Ca2, the myosin heads
extending from the thick filaments walk toward the () ends of
the thin filaments. Because the thin filaments are anchored at
the Z disks (purple), movement of myosin pulls the actin
filaments toward the center of the sarcomere, shortening its
length in the contracted state as shown in the lower diagram.

(b)

(a)

Contraction of Skeletal Muscle Is Regulated
by Ca2 and Actin-Binding Proteins
Like many cellular processes, skeletal muscle contraction is
initiated by an increase in the cytosolic Ca2 concentration.
As described in Chapter 7, the Ca2 concentration of the
cytosol is normally kept low, below 0.1 M. In nonmuscle
cells, Ca2 ATPases in the plasma membrane, which pump
calcium out of the cell, maintain this low concentration. In

− Ca2 +

(c) Skeletal muscle

+Ca2 +

CONTRACTION
Actin • TM • TN – Ca2+
OFF

Ca2+ binding

FPO

Myosin
binding
site

Ca2 +↓

Ca2 +↑

ON
Actin • TM • TN

TN

RELAXATION
Actin
TM

TM

▲ FIGURE 19-24 Actin-dependent regulation of
skeletal muscle contraction. (a) Model of the
tropomyosin-troponin (TM-TN) regulatory complex on a
thin filament. TN, a clublike complex of TN-C, TN-I, and
TN-T subunits, is bound to the long -helical TM
molecule. (b) Three-dimensional electron-microscopic
reconstructions of the TM helix (yellow) on a thin
filament from scallop muscle. TM in its “off” state (left )

shifts to its new position (arrow) in the “on” state (right ) when
the Ca2 concentration increases. This movement exposes
myosin-binding sites (red) on actin. TN is not shown in this
representation. (c) Regulation of skeletal muscle contraction by
Ca2 binding to TN. Note that the TM-TN complex remains bound
to the thin filament whether muscle is relaxed or contracted. [Part
(b) adapted from W. Lehman, R. Craig, and P. Vibert, 1993, Nature
123:313; courtesy of P. Vibert.]

19.3 • Myosin-Powered Cell Movements

contrast, in skeletal muscle cells, a low cytosolic Ca2 level is
maintained primarily by a unique Ca2 ATPase that continually pumps Ca2 ions from the cytosol into the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), a network of tubules in the muscle-cell
cytosol (see Figure 7-7). This activity establishes a reservoir
of Ca2 in the SR.
The arrival of a nerve impulse at a neuromuscular junction leads to the opening of voltage-gated Ca2 channels in
the SR membrane (see Figure 7-45). The ensuing release of
Ca2 from the SR raises the cytosolic Ca2 concentration
surrounding myofibrils sufficiently to trigger contraction. In
skeletal muscle, the cytosolic Ca2 concentration influences
the interaction of four accessory proteins with actin thin filaments. The position of these proteins on the thin filaments
in turn controls myosin–actin interactions.
Tropomyosin (TM) is a ropelike molecule, about 40 nm in
length; TM molecules are strung together head to tail, forming a continuous chain along each actin thin filament (Figure
19-24a). Associated with tropomyosin is troponin (TN),
a complex of the three subunits, TN-T, TN-I, and TN-C.
Troponin-C is the calcium-binding subunit of troponin. Similar in sequence to calmodulin and the myosin light chains,
TN-C controls the position of TM on the surface of an actin
filament through the TN-I and TN-T subunits.
Scientists currently think that, under the control of Ca2
and TN, TM can occupy two positions on a thin filament—
an “off” state and an “on” state. In the absence of Ca2 (the
off state), myosin can bind to a thin filament, but the TM-TN
complex prevents myosin from sliding along the thin filament. Binding of Ca2 ions to TN-C triggers a slight movement of TM that exposes the myosin-binding sites on actin
(Figure 19-24b). At Ca2 concentrations 106 M, the inhibition exerted by the TM-TN complex is relieved, and con-

traction occurs. The Ca2-dependent cycling between on and
off states in skeletal muscle is summarized in Figure 19-24c.

Myosin-Dependent Mechanisms
Regulate Contraction in Smooth Muscle
and Nonmuscle Cells
A smooth muscle cell contains large, loosely aligned contractile bundles that resemble the contractile bundles in epithelial cells and contractile ring during cytokinesis.
Although specialized for generating force to close off blood
vessels, propel food down the gut, and restrict airway passages, the contractile apparatus of smooth muscle and its regulation constitute a valuable model for undertanding how
myosin activity is regulated in a nonmuscle cell. As we have
just seen, skeletal muscle contraction is regulated by cycling
of actin between on and off states. In contrast, smooth muscle contraction is regulated by cycling of myosin II between
on and off states. Contraction of smooth muscle and nonmuscle cells is regulated by intracellular Ca2 levels in response to many extracellular signaling molecules.

Calcium-Dependent Activation of Myosin II Contraction of
vertebrate smooth muscle is regulated primarily by a complex
pathway in which the myosin regulatory light chain (LC) undergoes phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. When the
regulatory light chain is unphosphorylated, myosin II is inactive. The smooth muscle contracts when the regulatory LC is
phosphorylated by the enzyme myosin LC kinase (Figure
19-25a). Because this enzyme is activated by Ca2, the cytosolic Ca2 level indirectly regulates the extent of LC phosphorylation and hence contraction. The Ca2-dependent
regulation of myosin LC kinase activity is mediated through
(b) Regulation by Rho kinase

(a) Phosphorylation of light chains

FPO

Inactive

Ca2 +↓

Phosphatase

OFF
Myosin LC

MLCK • Ca2+ – CaM
Active

MLCK
Inactive

Ca2 +↑
Ca2+ + CaM

RELAXED

Rho
kinase

Phosphatase

Active
Myosin LC
phosphatase
Relaxed

▲ FIGURE 19-25 Myosin-dependent mechanisms for
regulating smooth muscle contraction. (a) In vertebrate
smooth muscle, phosphorylation of the myosin regulatory light
chains by Ca2-dependent myosin LC kinase activates
contraction. At Ca2 concentrations 106M, the myosin LC
kinase is inactive, and a myosin LC phosphatase, which is not

dependent on Ca2 for activity, dephosphorylates the
myosin LC, causing muscle relaxation. (b) Activation of
Rho kinase leads to phosphorylation and inactivation
of the myosin LC phosphatase. Various extracellular
signaling molecules induce activation of Rho kinase in
both smooth muscle and nonmuscle cells.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

ON

Myosin LC
phosphatase – Pi

CaM + Ca2+

Video: Rho-Kinase–Mediated Contraction of
Isolated Stress Fibers

Contraction

CONTRACTION
Myosin LC – Pi

21

22

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

calmodulin. Calcium first binds to calmodulin, and the
Ca2/calmodulin complex then binds to myosin LC kinase
and activates it. Because this mode of regulation relies on the
diffusion of Ca2 and the action of protein kinases, contraction is much slower in smooth muscle than in skeletal muscle.
The role of activated myosin LC kinase can be demonstrated by microinjecting a kinase inhibitor into smooth muscle cells. Even though the inhibitor does not block the rise in
the cytosolic Ca2 level that follows the arrival of a nerve impulse, injected cells cannot contract. The effect of the inhibitor
can be overcome by microinjecting a proteolytic fragment of
myosin LC kinase that is active even in the absence of Ca2calmodulin (this treatment also does not affect Ca2 levels).

Signal-Induced Activation of Myosin II by Rho Kinase Unlike skeletal muscle, which is stimulated to contract solely by
nerve impulses, smooth muscle cells and nonmuscle cells are
regulated by many types of external signals in addition to
nervous stimuli. For example, norepinephrine, angiotensin,
endothelin, histamine, and other signaling molecules can
modulate or induce the contraction of smooth muscle or elicit
changes in the shape and adhesion of nonmuscle cells by triggering various signal-transduction pathways. Some of these
pathways lead to an increase in the cytosolic Ca2 level; as
previously described, this increase can stimulate myosin activity by activating myosin LC kinase (see Figure 19-25a).
Other signaling pathways activate Rho kinase, which can
stimulate myosin activity in two ways. First, Rho kinase can
phosphorylate myosin LC phosphatase (see Figure 19-25b),
thereby inhibiting its activity. With the phosphatase inactivated, the level of myosin LC phosphorylation and thus
myosin activity increase. In addition, Rho kinase directly activates myosin by phosphorylating the regulatory light chain.
Note that Ca2 plays no role in the regulation of myosin
activity by Rho kinase.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 19.3
Myosin-Powered Cell Movements
All myosin isoforms can interact with actin filaments
through their head domains, but their cellular roles differ,
depending on their tail domains (see Table 19-3).

■

Movement of actin filaments by myosin can be directly
monitored in the sliding-filament assay (see Figure 19-17).

■

Myosins I, V, and VI power intracellular translocation
of some membrane-limited vesicles along actin filaments.
A similar process is responsible for cytoplasmic streaming,
which is probably mediated by myosin XI, one of the
fastest moving myosins (see Figure 19-19).

■

■ In nonmuscle cells, actin filaments and myosin II form
contractile bundles that have a primitive sarcomere-like
organization. Common examples are the circumferential
belt present in epithelial cells and the stress fibers in cells
cultured on plastic or glass surfaces; in the latter case, they
may be an artifact. Both structures function in cell adhesion.

The contractile ring, a transient bundle of actin and
myosin II, forms in a dividing cell and pinches the cell into
two halves in cytokinesis.

■

In skeletal muscle cells, actin thin filaments and myosin
thick filaments are organized into highly ordered structures, called sarcomeres (see Figure 19-22). The () end
of the thin filaments is attached to the Z disk, the demarcation between adjacent sarcomeres.

■

During skeletal muscle contraction, myosin heads at
each end of a thick filament walk along thin filaments toward the Z disks bounding a sarcomere. The force generated by myosin movement pulls the thin filaments toward the center of the sarcomere, shortening its length
(see Figure 19-23).

■

The rapid rise in cytosolic Ca2 induced by nerve stimulation of a skeletal muscle changes the interaction between
actin filaments and tropomyosin, exposing the myosinbinding sites and thus permitting contraction to occur (see
Figure 19-24).
■

Contraction of smooth muscle and nonmuscle cells is
triggered by phosphorylation of the myosin regulatory light
chains either by myosin LC kinase, in response to a rise in
cytosolic Ca2, or by Rho kinase, in response to external
signals (see Figure 19-25).

■

19.4

Cell Locomotion

We have now examined the different mechanisms used by
cells to create movement—from the assembly of actin filaments and the formation of actin-filament bundles and networks to the contraction of bundles of actin and myosin and
the sliding of single myosin molecules along an actin filament. These mechanisms are thought to constitute the major
processes whereby cells generate the forces needed to migrate. Cell locomotion results from the coordination of motions generated by different parts of a cell. These motions are
complex, but their major features can be revealed by fluorescent antibody-labeling techniques combined with fluorescence microscopy.
A property exhibited by all moving cells is polarity; that
is, certain structures always form at the front of the cell,
whereas others are found at the rear. Cell migration is initiated by the formation of a large, broad membrane protrusion at the leading edge of a cell. Video microscopy reveals
that a major feature of this movement is the polymerization
of actin at the membrane. In addition, actin filaments at the
leading edge are rapidly cross-linked into bundles and networks in a protruding region, called a lamellipodium in vertebrate cells. In some cases, slender, fingerlike membrane
projections, called filopodia, also are extended from the leading edge. These structures then form stable contacts with the
underlying surface and prevent the membrane from retracting. In this section, we take a closer look at how cells employ
the various force-generating processes to move across a

19.4 • Cell Locomotion
Focal adhesion

23

Direction of movement

Cell body movement

FPO

2 Adhesion

4 De-adhesion
New adhesion
Old adhesion

▲ FIGURE 19-26 Steps in keratinocyte movement. In a fastmoving cell such as a fish epidermal cell, movement begins with
the extension of one or more lamellipodia from the leading edge
of the cell ( 1 ); some lamellipodia adhere to the substratum by
focal adhesions ( 2 ). Then the bulk of the cytoplasm in the cell

body flows forward ( 3 ). The trailing edge of the cell
remains attached to the substratum until the tail
eventually detaches and retracts into the cell body
( 4 ). See text for more discussion.

surface. We also consider the role of signaling pathways in
coordinating and integrating the actions of the cytoskeleton,
a major focus of current research.

sion, attachment to the substratum, forward flow of cytosol,
and retraction of the rear of the cell (Figure 19-26).

Cell Movement Coordinates Force Generation
with Cell Adhesion
A moving keratinocyte (skin cell) and a moving fibroblast
(connective tissue cell) display the same sequence of changes
in cell morphology—initial extension of a membrane protru-

Membrane Extension The network of actin filaments at
the leading edge (see Figure 19-12) is a type of a cellular
engine that pushes the membrane forward by an actin
polymerization–based mechanism (Figure 19-27a). The key
(a)

Membrane

 FIGURE 19-27 Forces produced by assembly of the actin
network. (a) As shown in this diagram, actin filaments are
assembled into a branched network in which the ends of
filaments approach the plasma membrane at an acute angle.
ATP–G-actin (red) adds to the filament end and pushes the
membrane forward ( 1 ). The Arp2/3 complex (blue) binds to sides
of filaments ( 2 ) and forms a branch at a 70° angle from the
filament. With time, filaments ends are capped by capping
protein (yellow) ( 3 ); the ATP–G-actin subunits convert into
ADP–G-actin subunits (white) ( 4 ) and dissociate from the
filament through the action of the severing proteins cofilin and
gelsolin (gray) ( 5 ). The released ADP–G-actin subunits form
complexes with profilin (green) ( 6 ) to regenerate ATP–G-actin
subunits. (b) The network of actin filaments supports the
elongation of filaments and the generation of pushing forces. An
actin filament is stiff but can bend from thermal fluctuations. In
the elastic Brownian ratchet model, bending of filaments at the
leading edge ( 1 ), where the () ends contact the membrane,
creates space at the membrane for subunits to bind to the ends
of filaments ( 2 ). The elastic recoil force of the filaments then
pushes the membrane forward. [Part (a) adapted from T. M. Svitkina
and G. G. Borisy, 1999, J. Cell Biol. 145:1009.]

1
ATP–G-actin

3
Filamin
2

Profilin

6
Capping protein

4
ADP–G-actin

5
Cofilin, gelsolin

(b)

FPO
1
2

Membrane

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Lamellipodium

Overview Animation: Cell Motility
Video: Mechanics of Fish Keratinocyte
Migration

3 Translocation

1 Extension

24

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

step in generating the force is (step 1) the addition of actin
subunits at the ends of filaments close to the membrane. New
filament ends are created (step 2) by branches formed by the
Arp 2/3 complex. The branched network of filaments are stabilized by cross-linking proteins such as filamin. As the filaments grow, the ATP-actin subunits are converted into
ADP-actin subunts. Consequently, (step 3) capping protein
caps the () ends of filaments, and (step 4) cofilin and gelsolin fragment actin filaments and (step 5) cause actin subunits to dissociate. Profilin converts the ADP-actin monomers
into a polymerization-competent ATP-actin monomer ready
to participate in the next cycle.
A mechanism to explain what propels the membrane forward, called the elastic Brownian ratchet model, is based on
the elastic mechanical property of an actin filament (Figure
19-27b). Electron micrographs show that the ends of actin
filaments abut against the membrane, leaving no space for an
actin subunit to bind. However, thermal energy causes a filament to bend, creating room for subunit addition. Because
actin filaments have the same stiffness as that of a plastic
rod, the energy stored in bending straightens the filament.
The concerted action of numerous filaments undergoing similar movements and their cross-linkage into a mechanically
strong network generate sufficient force (several piconewtons) to push the membrane forward.

come anchored to the attachment site, which quickly develops into a focal adhesion. The attachment serves two purposes: it prevents the leading lamella from retracting and it
attaches the cell to the substratum, allowing the cell to push
forward.

Cell Body Translocation After the forward attachments have
been made, the bulk contents of the cell body are translocated forward (see Figure 19-26). How this translocation is
accomplished is unknown; one speculation is that the nucleus and the other organelles are embedded in the cytoskeleton and that myosin-dependent cortical contraction
moves the cytoplasm forward. The involvement of myosindependent cortical contraction in cell migration is supported
by the localization of myosin II. Associated with the movement is a transverse band of myosin II and actin filaments
at the boundary between the lamellipodia and the cell body
(Figure 19-28).
Breaking Cell Attachments Finally, in the last step of move-

extended and the cytoskeleton has been assembled, the membrane becomes firmly attached to the substratum. Time-lapse
microscopy shows that actin bundles in the leading edge be-

ment (de-adhesion), the focal adhesions at the rear of the cell
are broken and the freed tail is brought forward. In the light
microscope, the tail is seen to “snap” loose from its connections—perhaps by the contraction of stress fibers in the tail
or by elastic tension—but it leaves a little bit of its membrane
behind, still firmly attached to the substratum.
The ability of a cell to move corresponds to a balance between the mechanical forces generated by the cytoskeleton
and the resisting forces generated by cell adhesions. Cells
cannot move if they are either too strongly attached or not

(a)

(b)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-28 Contractile forces are

exerts traction forces on the substratum. A keratinocyte plated
on a thin silicon membrane exerts lateral forces from contraction
of the cell body and causes the membrane to buckle. [Part (a)

Cell–Substrate Adhesions When the membrane has been

generated by a moving cell. (a) A fluorescence micrograph of a
keratinocyte shows that the network of actin filaments (blue) is
located at the front of the cell, whereas myosin II (red) is at the
rear of the cell. However, both are located in a band (white) that
traverses the cell just anterior to the nucleus. Contraction of this
band is postulated to pull the cell body forward. (b) A moving cell

from T. M. Svitkina and G. G. Borisy, 1999, J. Cell Biol. 145:1009; courtesy
of T. M. Svitkina. Part (b) from K. Burton et al., 1999, Mol. Biol. Cell
10:3745; courtesy of K. Burton.]

19.4 • Cell Locomotion

attached to a surface. This relation can be demonstrated by
measuring the rate of movement in cells that express varying levels of integrins, the cell-adhesion molecules that mediate most cell–matrix interactions (Chapter 6). Such
measurements show that the fastest migration occurs at an
intermediate level of adhesion, with the rate of movement
falling off at high and low levels of adhesion. Cell locomotion thus results from traction forces exerted by the cell on
the underlying substratum. The traction forces can be detected by the effects of cells on extremely thin sheets of silicon (Figure 19-28b). As a cell moves forward, contractile
forces exerted at the front and the back of the cell cause the
membrane to buckle. On a stiffer membrane that resists deformation, the buckling forces will be transformed into the
forward movement of the cell.

Ameboid Movement Entails Reversible Gel–Sol
Transitions of Actin Networks
Amebas are large, highly motile protozoans whose forward
movement exhibits the same basic steps as those characterizing the movement of keratinocytes. Ameboid movement is
initiated when the plasma membrane balloons forward to
form a pseudopodium, or “false foot,” which is similar to a
lamellipodium in a vertebrate cell. As the pseudopodium attaches to the substratum, it fills with cytosol that is flowing
forward through the cell. In the last step in movement, the
rear of the ameba is pulled forward, breaking its attachments
to the substratum.
Movement of an ameba is accompanied by changes in the
viscosity of its cytosol, which cycles between sol and gel
states. The central region of cytoplasm, the endoplasm, is a
fluidwidowl, which flows rapidly toward the front of the cell,
filling the pseudopodium. Here, the endoplasm is converted
into the ectoplasm, a gel that forms the cortex, just beneath
the plasma membrane. As the cell crawls forward, the ectoplasmic gel at the tail end of the cell is converted back into endoplasmic sol, only to be converted once again into ectoplasm
when it again reaches the front of the cell. This cycling between sol and gel states continues only when the cell migrates.
The transformation between sol and gel states results
from the disassembly and reassembly of actin microfilament
networks in the cytosol. Several actin-binding proteins probably control this process and hence the viscosity of the cytosol. Profilin at the front of the cell promotes actin
polymerization, and -actinin and filamin form gel-like actin
networks in the more viscous ectoplasm, as discussed earlier. Conversely, proteins such as cofilin sever actin filaments
to form the more fluid endoplasm.

External Signals and Various Signaling Pathways
Coordinate Events That Lead to Cell Migration
A striking feature of a moving cell is its polarity: a cell has a
front and a back. When a cell makes a turn, a new leading
lamellipodium or pseudopodium forms in the new direction.

25

If these extensions form in all directions, as in the myosin I
ameba mutants, then the cell is unable to pick a new direction of movement. To sustain movement in a particular direction, a cell requires signals to coordinate events at the
front of the cell with events at the back and, indeed, signals
to tell the cell where its front is. In this section, we present
several examples of how external signals activate cell migration and control the direction of movement.

Activation of Filopodia, Membrane Ruffles, and Stress
Fibers by Growth Factors Certain growth factors in a fresh
wound stimulate a quiescent cultured fibroblast to grow and
divide by forming filopodia and lamellipodia at its leading
edge and later to assemble stress fibers and focal adhesions.
Similar signal-induced events are thought to take place in the
wound-healing response of fibroblasts in vivo, the development of cells in embryos, and the metastasis of cancer cells.
These events require the polymerization of actin filaments,
the activation of myosin molecules, and the assembly of actin
bundles and networks. The cytoskeletal rearrangements that
are a part of the wound-healing response of fibroblasts include intracellular signaling pathways directed by Rac, Rho,
and Cdc42, all Ras-like molecules belonging to the GTPase
superfamily of switch proteins. These pathways are activated
by the binding of growth factors to receptor tyrosine kinases,
a class of cell-surface receptors described in Chapter 13.
The roles of Ras-related proteins were revealed by simple microinjection experiments. When Rac was microinjected into a fibroblast, the membrane immediately started
to form upward projections called ruffles; focal adhesions
and stress fibers formed 5–10 minutes later. Injection of an
inactive form of Rac inhibited all reorganization of the
actin cytoskeleton when growth factors were added to the
cell. When Rho, rather than Rac, was injected, it mimicked
the mitogenic effects of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a
chemokine in serum and a potent stimulator of platelet aggregation. Both Rho and LPA induced the assembly of
stress fibers and focal adhesions within 2 minutes but did
not induce membrane ruffling.
These findings lead to a model in which extracellular factors trigger Ras-linked signal-transduction pathways that activate actin polymerization at the leading-edge membrane as
an early event and the formation of focal adhesions as a later
event (Figure 19-29). If this model is correct, then the inhibition of stress-fiber assembly should not affect membrane
ruffling. To test the model, Rac and ADP-ribosylase, an enzyme that inactivates Rho by covalently attaching ADP to
it, were co-injected into a fibroblast. As predicted, membrane
ruffles were formed, but the assembly of stress fibers was
blocked. These observations suggest that Rho-dependent
events such as stress-fiber formation are “downstream” of
control by Rac. The results of later experiments in which
Cdc42 was microinjected into fibroblasts showed that this
protein controlled an earlier step, the formation of filopodia.
Thus the sequence of events in wound healing begins with
the participation of filopodia and lamellipodia during the

26

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments
Growth factors

LPA
PIP2

PLC
Cdc42

Rac

Arp2/3
cofilin

FPO
Rho

Cofilin
Profilin
Gelsolin

IP3
Ca2+

Myosin II
ER

Filopodia
formation

Lamellipodia
formation

Focal adhesion and
stress fiber assembly

Actin turnover

▲ FIGURE 19-29 Role of signal-transduction pathways in
cell locomotion and the organization of the cytoskeleton.
Extracellular signals are transmitted across the plasma
membrane by receptors specific for different factors. One set of
growth factors induces actin polymerization at the leading edge
through a Rac- and Cdc42-dependent pathway (left ); another set
of factors acts downstream through a Rho-dependent pathway to

induce the assembly of focal adhesions and cortical contraction
(center ). Adhesion of a cell to the extracellular matrix triggers a
parallel signaling pathway that induces the activation of profilin,
cofilin, and gelsolin (right ). Triggering of this pathway activates
phospholipase C (PLC), which hydrolyzes PIP2 in the membrane.
The subsequent increase in cytosolic Ca2 stimulates actin
turnover.

migration of cells into the wound and the formation of focal
adhesions and stress fibers to close the wound.
An important aspect of locomotion is how movement is coordinated in response to different stimuli. For example, the assembly of the branched actin network at the membrane is
enhanced by the action of several signaling pathways and their
adapter proteins. The branching activity of the Arp2/3 complex
is activated by an adapter protein, WASp, under the control of
the Cdc42 GTPase. In addition, as discussed previously, the hydrolysis of PIP2 by phospholipase C releases profilin, cofilin,
and gelsolin from the membrane. In another pathway, inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), a by-product of PIP2 hydrolysis, stimulates the release of Ca2 ions from the endoplasmic reticulum
into the cytosol; this increase in Ca2 ions activates myosin II
and the severing activity of gelsolin. These parallel pathways
thus stimulate both actin severing and filament growth, thereby
increasing actin turnover (Figure 19-29, right).

movements. For example, leukocytes are guided by a tripeptide secreted by many bacterial cells. In the development of
skeletal muscle, a secreted protein signal called scatter factor guides the migration of myoblasts to the proper locations
in limb buds (Chapter 22).
Despite the variety of different chemotactic molecules—
sugars, peptides, cell metabolites, cell-wall or membrane
lipids—they all work through a common and familiar mechanism: binding to cell-surface receptors, activation of intracellular signaling pathways, and re-modeling of the cytoskeleton through the activation or inhibition of various
actin-binding proteins. The central question is, How do cellsurface receptors detect as small as a 2 percent difference in
the concentration of chemotactic molecules across the length
of the cell? To direct cell migration, an external chemoattractant gradient must somehow induce internal gradients
that lead to polarization of the actin cytoskeleton.

Steering of Migrating Cells by Chemotactic Molecules

Coincident Gradients of Chemoattractants, Activated G
Proteins, and Ca2 Micrographs of cAMP receptors tagged

Under certain conditions, extracellular chemical cues guide
the locomotion of a cell in a particular direction. In some
cases, the movement is guided by insoluble molecules in the
underlying substratum. In other cases, the cell senses soluble molecules and follows them, along a concentration gradient, to their source. The latter response is called
chemotaxis. One of the best-studied examples of chemotaxis
is the migration of Dictyostelium amebas along an increasing
concentration of cAMP. Following cAMP to its source, the
amebas aggregate into a slug and then differentiate into a
fruiting body. Many other cells also display chemotactic

with green fluorescent protein (GFP) show that the receptors are distributed uniformally along the length of an ameba
cell (Figure 19-30). Therefore an internal gradient must be
established by another component of the signalling pathway.
Because cAMP receptors signal through trimeric G proteins,
a subunit of the trimeric G protein and other downstream
signaling proteins were tagged with GFP. Fluorescence micrographs show that the concentration of trimeric G proteins
is higher in the direction of the chemoattractant. Trimeric G
proteins coupled to cAMP receptors can activate pathways

19.5 • Intermediate Filaments
(a) G subunit

leading to the activation of Arp 2/3 through the mediator
protein WASp or through other pathways that increase cytosolic Ca2 (see Figure 13-29).
Findings from studies with fluorescent dyes that act as internal Ca2 sensors indicate that a cytosolic gradient of Ca2
also is established in migrating cells, with the lowest concentration at the front of the cell and the highest concentration
at the rear. Moreover, if a pipette containing a chemoattractant is placed to the side of a migrating leukocyte, the overall
concentration of cytosolic Ca2 first increases and then the
Ca2 gradient reorients, with the lowest concentration on
the side of the cell closest to the pipette, causing the cell to
turn toward the chemotactic source. After the chemoattractant is removed, the cell continues to move in the direction of
its newly established Ca2 gradient (see Figure 5-47).
We have seen that many actin-binding proteins, including
myosins I and II, gelsolin, -actinin, and fimbrin, are regulated
by Ca2. Hence the cytosolic Ca2 gradient may regulate the
sol-to-gel transitions that take place in cell movement. The low
Ca2 concentration at the front of the cell would favor the formation of actin networks by activating myosin I, inactivating
actin-severing proteins, and reversing the inhibition of Ca2regulated actin cross-linking proteins. The high Ca2 concentration at the rear of the cell would cause actin networks to
disassemble and a sol to form by activating gelsolin or would
cause cortical actin networks to contract by activating myosin
II. Thus an internal gradient of Ca2 would contribute to the
turnover of actin filaments in migrating cells.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 19.4
Cell Locomotion
Migrating cells undergo a series of characteristic events:
extension of a lamellipodium or pseudopodium, adhesion

■

of the extended leading edge to the substratum, forward
flow (streaming of the cytosol), and retraction of the cell
body (see Figure 19-26).
Cell locomotion is probably through a common mechanism including actin polymerization and branching–generated movement at the leading edge, assembly of adhesion structures, and cortical contraction mediated by
myosin II (see Figure 19-28).

■

External signals (e.g., growth factors and chemoattractants) induce the assembly and organization of the cytoskeleton and the establishment of an internal gradient of
trimeric G proteins and calcium (see Figure 19-29). The
resulting polarization of the cell leads to locomotion.

■

19.5

Intermediate Filaments

In the remainder of this chapter, we consider the properties
of intermediate filaments (IFs) and the cytoskeletal structures that they form in cells. Intermediate filaments are
found in nearly all animals but not in in plants and fungi.
The association of intermediate filaments with the nuclear
and plasma membranes suggests that their principal
function is structural (Figure 19-31). In epithelium, for instance, intermediate filaments provide mechanical support
for the plasma membrane where it comes into contact with
other cells or with the extracellular matrix. In epidermal
cells (outer layer of skin) and the axons of neurons (Figure
19-32), intermediate filaments are at least 10 times as abundant as microfilaments or microtubules, the other components of the cytoskeleton.
Much of the following discussion about intermediate filaments will seem familiar because their cellular organization
is similar to that of the actin microfilaments discussed in preceding sections. These two types of cytoskeletal fibers are

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

5 m

Video: Chemotaxis of a Single Dictyostelium
Cell to the Chemoattractant cAMP

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-30
Chemoattractant is used to demonstrate signalinduced gradient of G subunit. False color images
of amebas expressing (a) a GFP-tagged G subunit and
(b) a GFP-tagged cAMP receptor, which served as a
control. When an external source of chemoattractant
was placed near the cells (at the top of the
photographs), the cells turned toward the source.
(a) The G subunit became concentrated at the leading
edge of the cell, closest to the chemoattractant, and
depleted from the tail. (b) In contrast, the cAMP
receptor retained a uniform distribution in the cell
membrane. [From T. Jin et al., 2000, Science 287:1034.]

(b) cAMP receptor

27

28

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

Intermediate Filaments Differ in Stability, Size,
and Structure from Other Cytoskeletal Fibers
Several physical and biochemical properties distinguish intermediate filaments from microfilaments and microtubules.
To begin with, intermediate filaments are extremely stable.
Even after extraction with solutions containing detergents
and high concentrations of salts, most intermediate filaments
in a cell remain intact, whereas microfilaments and microtubules depolymerize into their soluble subunits. In fact,
most IF purification methods employ these treatments to free
intermediate filaments from other proteins. Intermediate filaments also differ in size from the other two cytoskeletal
fibers. Indeed, their name derives from their 10-nm diameter—smaller than microtubules (24 nm) but larger than microfilaments (7 nm) (see Figure 5-29). Moreover, in contrast
with the globular actin and tubulin subunits, which polymerize into microfilaments and hollow microtubules, respectively, IF subunits are -helical rods that assemble into
ropelike filaments. Finally, IF subunits do not bind nucleotides, and their assembly into intermediate filaments does
not require the hydrolysis of ATP or GTP, as does the polymerization of G-actin and tubulin. However, many of the details concerning the assembly of intermediate filaments in
cells remain speculative.

IF Proteins Are Classified According to Their
Distributions in Specific Tissues
▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-31 Staining with
fluorochrome-tagged antibodies reveals cellular distribution
of keratin and lamin intermediate filaments. In this fluorescent
micrograph of a PtK2 cell doubly stained with anti-keratin and
anti-lamin antibodies, a meshwork of lamin intermediate filaments
(blue) can be seen underlying the nuclear membrane. The
cytoplasmic keratin cytoskeleton (red) extends from the nuclear
membrane to the plasma membrane. [Courtesy of R. D. Goldman.]

also similar in that they are usually associated with cell membranes. Unlike microfilaments and microtubules, however,
intermediate filaments do not contribute to cell motility.
There are no known examples of IF-dependent cell movements or of motor proteins that move along intermediate
filaments.

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-32 Deep-etching
reveals microtubules and intermediate filaments in a
neuronal axon. Neurofilaments and microtubules in a
quick-frozen frog axon are visualized by the deep-etching
technique. Several 24-nm-diameter microtubules run
longitudinally; thinner, 10-nm-diameter intermediate
filaments also run longitudinally. Occasional connections
link the two types of cytoskeletal fibers. [From
N. Hirokawa, 1982, J. Cell Biol. 94:129; courtesy of
N. Hirokawa.]

In higher vertebrates, the subunits composing intermediate
filaments constitute a superfamily of highly  helical proteins
that are found in the cytoplasm of different tissues and at the
nuclear membrane. The superfamily is divided into four
groups on the basis of similarities in sequence and their patterns of expression in cells (Table 19-4). Unlike the actin and
tubulin isoforms, the various classes of IF proteins are widely
divergent in sequence and vary greatly in molecular weight.
We introduce the four groups here and consider their functions in various cells in more detail later.
The most ubiquitous group of IFs are the lamins. In contrast with the cytosolic location of the other four classes of IF
proteins, lamins are found exclusively in the nucleus. Of the
three nuclear lamins, two are alternatively spliced products
encoded by a common gene, whereas the third is encoded
by a separate gene. A single lamin gene is found in the
Axon
Neurofilament
Microtubule

FPO
Neurofilament
0.1 µm

19.5 • Intermediate Filaments

29

TABLE 19-4 Primary Intermediate Filaments in Mammals
MW (103)*

Filament Form

Tissue Distribution

Lamin A

70

Homopolymer

Nucleus

Lamin B

67

Homopolymer

Nucleus

Lamin C

67

Homopolymer

Nucleus

Acidic keratins

40–57

Heteropolymers

Epithelia

Basic keratins

53–67

Heteropolymers

Epithelia

Vimentin

57

Homo- and heteropolymers

Mesenchyme (fibroblasts)

Desmin

53

Homo- and heteropolymers

Muscle

Glial fibrillary acidic protein

50

Homo- and heteropolymers

Glial cells, astrocytes

Peripherin

57

Homo- and heteropolymers

Peripheral and central
neurons

NF-L

62

Homopolymers

Mature neurons

NF-M

102

Heteropolymers

Mature neurons

NF-H

110

Heteropolymers

Mature neurons

Internexin

66

—

Developing CNS

IF Protein
NUCLEAR LAMINS

KERATINS†

TYPE III INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS

NEUROFILAMENTS

*Intermediate filaments show species-dependent variations in molecular weight (MW).
†
More than 15 isoforms of both acidic and basic keratins are known.

Drosophila genome; none are in the yeast genome. Because
the lamin, but not the cytosolic, groups of IFs are expressed
in Drosophila, lamins are probably the evolutionary precursor of the IF superfamily.
Epithelial cells express acidic and basic keratins. They associate in a 1:1 ratio to form heterodimers, which assemble
into heteropolymeric keratin filaments; neither type alone
can assemble into a keratin filament. The keratins are the
most diverse classes of IF proteins, with a large number of
keratin isoforms being expressed. These isoforms can be divided into two groups: about 10 keratins are specific for
“hard” epithelial tissues, which give rise to nails, hair, and
wool; and about 20, called cytokeratins, are more generally
found in the epithelia that line internal body cavities. Each
type of epithelium always expresses a characteristic combination of acidic and basic keratins.
Four proteins are classified as type III IF proteins. Unlike
the keratins, the type III proteins can form both homo- and
heteropolymeric IF filaments. The most widely distributed of
all IF proteins is vimentin, which is typically expressed in
leukocytes, blood vessel endothelial cells, some epithelial

cells, and mesenchymal cells such as fibroblasts (see the illustration at the beginning of this chapter). Vimentin filaments help support cellular membranes. Vimentin networks
may also help keep the nucleus and other organelles in a defined place within the cell. Vimentin is frequently associated
with microtubules and, as noted earlier, the network of vimentin filaments parallels the microtubule network (see Figure 1-15). The other type III IF proteins have a much more
limited distribution. Desmin filaments in muscle cells are responsible for stabilizing sarcomeres in contracting muscle.
Glial fibrillary acidic protein forms filaments in the glial cells
that surround neurons and in astrocytes. Peripherin is found
in neurons of the peripheral nervous system, but little is
known about it.
The core of neuronal axons is filled with neurofilaments
(NFs), each a heteropolymer composed of three polypeptides—
NF-L, NF-M, and NF-H—which differ greatly in molecular
weight (see Figure 19-32 and Table 19-4). Neurofilaments are
responsible for the radial growth of an axon and thus determine axonal diameter, which is directly related to the speed at
which it conducts impulses. The influence of the number of

30

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

neurofilaments on impulse conduction is highlighted by a mutation in quails named quiver, which blocks the assembly of
neurofilaments. As a result, the velocity of nerve conduction is
severely reduced. Also present in axons are microtubules,
which direct axonal elongation.
Because of their characteristic distributions, IF proteins are useful in the diagnosis and treatment of
certain tumors. In a tumor, cells lose their normal
appearance, and thus their origin cannot be identified by
their morphology. However, tumor cells retain many of the
differentiated properties of the cells from which they are derived, including the expression of particular IF proteins.
With the use of fluorescence-tagged antibodies specific for
those IF proteins, diagnosticians can often determine
whether a tumor originated in epithelial, mesenchymal, or
neuronal tissue.
For example, the most common malignant tumors of the
breast and gastrointestinal tract contain keratins and lack vimentin; thus they are derived from epithelial cells (which
contain keratins but not vimentin) rather than from the underlying stromal mesenchymal cells (which contain vimentin
but not keratins). Because epithelial cancers and mesenchymal cancers are sensitive to different treatments, identifying
the IF proteins in a tumor cell helps a physician select the
most effective treatment for destroying the tumor. ❚

All IF Proteins Have a Conserved Core Domain
and Are Organized Similarly into Filaments
Besides having in common an ability to form filaments 10
nm in diameter, all IF subunit proteins have a common do-

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE
19-33 Electron microscopy
visualizes intermediate structures
in the assembly of intermediate
filaments. Shown here are electron
micrographs and drawings of IF
protein dimers and tetramers and of
mature intermediate filaments from
Ascaris, an intestinal parasitic worm.
(a) IF proteins form parallel dimers
with a highly conserved coiled-coil
core domain and globular tails and
heads, which are variable in length
and sequence. (b) A tetramer is
formed by antiparallel, staggered sideby-side aggregation of two identical
dimers. (c) Tetramers aggregate endto-end and laterally into a protofibril. In
a mature filament, consisting of four
protofibrils, the globular domains form
beaded clusters on the surface.
[Adapted from N. Geisler et al., 1998,
J. Mol. Biol. 282:601.]

(a)

Head

Rod

N-terminus

main structure: a central -helical core flanked by globular
N- and C-terminal domains. The core helical domain, which
is conserved among all IF proteins, consists of four long 
helices separated by three nonhelical, “spacer” regions. The
-helical segments pair to form a coiled-coil dimer.
In electron micrographs, an IF-protein dimer appears as
a rodlike molecule with globular domains at the ends; two
dimers associate laterally into a tetramer (Figure 19-33a, b).
The results of labeling experiments with antibodies to the
N- or C-terminal domain indicate that the polypeptide
chains are parallel in a dimer, whereas the dimers in a
tetramer have an antiparallel orientation. The next steps
in assembly are not well understood but seem to include
the end-to-end association of tetramers to form long protofilaments, which aggregate laterally into a loose bundle
of protofibrils. Compaction of a protofibril yields a mature
10-nm-diameter filament with the N- and C-terminal
globular domains of the tetramers forming beaded clusters
along the surface (Figure 19-33c). Interestingly, because the
tetramer is symmetric, an intermediate filament may not
have a polarity, as does an actin filament or a microtubule.
This idea is supported by findings from experiments showing
that vimentin subunits can incorporate along the length, as
well as the ends, of a filament.
Although the -helical core is common to all IF proteins,
the N- and C-terminal domains of different types of IF proteins vary greatly in molecular weight and sequence. Partly
because of this lack of sequence conservation, scientists initially speculated that the N- and C-terminal domains do not
have roles in IF assembly. The results of several subsequent
experiments, however, proved this hypothesis to be partly incorrect. For instance, if the N-terminal domain of an IF

Tail

(b)
C

N

C

C-terminus

FPO

(c)

N

FPO

Tetramer
Protofilament

Protofibril

FPO

19.5 • Intermediate Filaments

protein is shortened, either by proteolysis or by deletion mutagenesis, the truncated protein cannot assemble into filaments. (Keratins are an exception; they form filaments even
if both terminal domains are absent.) The prevailing view
now is that the N-terminal domain plays an important role
in the assembly of most intermediate filaments. Even though
the C-terminal domain is dispensable for IF assembly, it
seems to affect the organization of IF cytoskeletons in a cell.
Thus these domains may control lateral interactions within
an intermediate filament, as well as interactions between intermediate filaments and other cellular components.

Identity of IF Subunits Whether IF monomers, dimers, or
tetramers constitute the immediate subunit for assembly of
filaments, analogous to G-actin monomers in the assembly
of microfilaments, is still unresolved. The main supporting
evidence for the involvement of the IF tetramer comes from
cell fractionation experiments showing that, although most
vimentin in cultured fibroblasts is polymerized into filaments, 1–5 percent of the protein exists as a soluble pool of
tetramers. The presence of a tetramer pool suggests that vimentin monomers are rapidly converted into dimers, which
rapidly form tetramers.
Homo- and Heteropolymeric Filaments Some IF proteins
form homopolymeric filaments; others form only heteropolymeric filaments with other proteins in their class; and
some can form both homo- and heteropolymeric filaments.
Some IF proteins, but not the keratins, can form heteropolymers with IF proteins in another class. NF-L self-associates

31

to form a homopolymer, but NF-H and NF-M commonly coassemble with the NF-L backbone, and so most neurofilaments contain all three proteins. Spacer sequences in the
coiled-coil regions of IF dimers or sequences in the diverse Nor C-terminal domains or both are most likely responsible
for determining whether particular IF proteins assemble into
heteropolymers or homopolymers. In fact, mutations in these
regions generate mutated IF polypeptides that can form heterooligomers with normal IF proteins. These hybrid molecules
often “poison” IF polymerization by blocking assembly at an
intermediate stage. The ability of mutated IF proteins to
block IF assembly has proved extremely useful in studies of
the function of intermediate filaments in a cell. At the end
of the chapter, we look at how such mutations in keratins
have revealed the role of keratin filaments in the epidermis.

Intermediate Filaments Are Dynamic
Although intermediate filaments are clearly more stable than
microtubules and microfilaments, IF proteins have been
shown to exchange with the existing IF cytoskeleton. In one
experiment, a biotin-labeled type I keratin was injected into
fibroblasts; within 2 hours after injection, the labeled protein
had been incorporated into the already existing keratin cytoskeleton (Figure 19-34). The results of this experiment and
others demonstrate that IF subunits in a soluble pool are able
to add themselves to preexisting filaments and that subunits
are able to dissociate from intact filaments.
The relative stability of intermediate filaments presents
special problems in mitotic cells, which must reorganize all

(a) 20 minutes after injection
Biotin-keratin subunit

Keratin IFs

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-34

(b) 4 hours after injection

Chemical labeling and fluorescent staining
reveal the incorporation of type I keratin
into existing IF cytoskeleton. Monomeric
type I keratin was purified, chemically labeled
with biotin, and microinjected into living
fibroblast cells. The cells were then fixed at
different times after injection and stained
with a fluorescent antibody to biotin and with
antibodies to keratin. (a) At 20 minutes after
injection, the injected biotin-labeled keratin is
concentrated in small foci scattered through
the cytoplasm (left ) and has not been
integrated into the endogenous keratin
cytoskeleton (right ). (b) By 4 hours, the
biotin-labeled subunits (left ) and the keratin
filaments (right ) display identical patterns,
indicating that the microinjected protein has
become incorporated into the existing
cytoskeleton. [From R. K. Miller, K. Vistrom, and
R. D. Goldman, 1991, J. Cell Biol. 113:843;
courtesy of R. D. Goldman.]

32

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

three cytoskeletal networks in the course of the cell cycle. In
particular, breakdown of the nuclear envelope early in mitosis depends on the disassembly of the lamin filaments that
form a meshwork supporting the membrane. As discussed
in Chapter 21, the phosphorylation of nuclear lamins by
Cdc2, a cyclin-dependent kinase that becomes active early
in mitosis (prophase), induces the disassembly of intact filaments and prevents their reassembly. Later in mitosis
(telophase), removal of these phosphates by specific phosphatases promotes lamin reassembly, which is critical to reformation of a nuclear envelope around the daughter
chromosomes. The opposing actions of kinases and phosphatases thus provide a rapid mechanism for controlling the
assembly state of lamin intermediate filaments. Other intermediate filaments undergo similar disassembly and reassembly in the cell cycle.

Various Proteins Cross-Link Intermediate
Filaments to One Another and to Other Cell
Structures
Intermediate filament–associated proteins (IFAPs) cross-link
intermediate filaments with one another, forming a bundle or
a network, and with other cell structures, including the
plasma membrane. Only a few IFAPs have been identified to
date, but many more will undoubtedly be discovered as researchers focus attention on the proteins that control IF organization and assembly. Unlike actin-binding proteins or
microtubule-associated proteins, none of the known IFAPs
sever or cap intermediate filaments, sequester IF proteins in
a soluble pool, or act as a motor protein. Rather, IFAPs appear to play a role in organizing the IF cytoskeleton, integrating the IF cytoskeleton with both the microfilament and
the microtubule cytoskeletons, and attaching the IF cytoskeleton to the nuclear membrane and plasma membrane,
especially at cell junctions.
A physical linkage between intermediate filaments and
microtubules can be detected with certain drugs. Treatment
of cells with high concentrations of colchicine causes the
complete dissolution of microtubules after a period of several
hours. Although vimentin filaments in colchicine-treated
cells remain intact, they clump into disorganized bundles
near the nucleus. This finding demonstrates that the organization of vimentin filaments is dependent on intact microtubules and suggests the presence of proteins linking the two
types of filaments. In other studies, IFs have been shown to
be cross-linked to actin filaments.
One family of IFAPs, the plakins, is responsible for linking
IFs with both microtubules and microfilaments. One plakin
family member is plectin, a 500,000-MW protein that has
been shown to cross-link intermediate filaments with microtubules and actin filaments in vitro. Plectin also interacts with
other cytoskeletal proteins, including spectrin, microtubuleassociated proteins, and lamin B. Immunoelectron microscopy reveals gold-labeled antibodies to plectin decorating
short, thin connections between microtubules and vimentin,

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-35 Gold-labeled antibody
allows visualization of plectin cross-links between
intermediate filaments and microtubules. In this
immunoelectron micrograph of a fibroblast cell, microtubules are
highlighted in red; intermediate filaments, in blue; and the short
connecting fibers between them, in green. Staining with goldlabeled antibodies to plectin (yellow) reveals that these fibers
contain plectin. [From T. M. Svitkina, A. B. Verkhovsky, and G. G. Borisy,
1996, J. Cell Biol. 135:991; courtesy of T. M. Svitkina.]

indicating the presence of plectin in these cross-links (Figure
19-35). The N-terminus of plectin and other plakins contains
a calponin-homology (CH) domain similar to that in fimbrin
and other actin cross-linking proteins. This finding suggests
that some plakins form cross-links between actin microfilaments and intermediate filaments.
Cross-links between microtubules and neurofilaments are
seen in micrographs of nerve-cell axons (see Figure 19-32).
Although the identity of these connections in axons is unknown, they may be IFAPs whose function is to cross-link
neurofilaments and microtubules into a stable cytoskeleton.
Alternatively, these connections to microtubules may be the
long arms of NF-H, which is known to bind microtubules.

IF Networks Form Various Supportive Structures
and Are Connected to Cellular Membranes
A network of intermediate filaments is often found as a laminating layer adjacent to a cellular membrane, where it provides mechanical support. The best example is the nuclear
lamina along the inner surface of the nuclear membrane (see
Figure 21-16). This supporting network is composed of lamin
A and lamin C filaments cross-linked into an orthogonal lattice, which is attached by lamin B to the inner nuclear membrane through interactions with a lamin B receptor, an IFAP,
in the membrane. Like the membrane skeleton of the plasma
membrane, the lamin nuclear skeleton not only supports the
inner nuclear membrane but also provides sites where nuclear
pores and interphase chromosomes attach. Thus, the nuclear
lamins organize the nuclear contents from the outside in.

19.5 • Intermediate Filaments

In addition to forming the nuclear lamina, intermediate
filaments are typically organized in the cytosol as an extended system that stretches from the nuclear envelope to the
plasma membrane (see Figure 19-31). Some intermediate filaments run parallel to the cell surface, whereas others traverse the cytosol; together they form an internal framework
that helps support the shape and resilience of the cell. The results of in vitro binding experiments suggest that, at the
plasma membrane, vimentin filaments bind two proteins:
ankyrin, the actin-binding protein associated with the
Na/K ATPase in nonerythroid cells, and plectin, which
also binds to 64 integrin in certain cell junctions (Chapter 6). Through these two IFAPs, the vimentin cytoskeleton is
attached to the plasma membrane, providing a flexible structural support.
In muscle, a lattice composed of a band of desmin filaments surrounds the sarcomere (Figure 19-36). The desmin
filaments encircle the Z disk and are cross-linked to the
plasma membrane by several IFAPs, including paranemin
and ankyrin. Longitudinal desmin filaments cross to neighboring Z disks within the myofibril, and connections between desmin filaments around Z disks in adjacent
myofibrils serve to cross-link myofibrils into bundles within
a muscle cell. The lattice is also attached to the sarcomere
through interactions with myosin thick filaments. Because
the desmin filaments lie outside the sarcomere, they do not
actively participate in generating contractile forces. Rather,
desmin plays an essential structural role in maintaining muscle integrity. In transgenic mice lacking desmin, for example, this supporting architecture is disrupted and muscles are
misaligned.
Z disk

Desmin/synemin

FPO
M line

Desmin

▲ FIGURE 19-36 Diagram of desmin filaments in muscle.
These type III intermediate filaments encircle the Z disk and
make additional connections to neighboring Z disks. The
alignment of desmin filaments with the muscle sarcomere is
held in place at the Z disk by a collar of desmin/synemin
heteropolymers.

33

In Chapter 6, we describe the linkage between keratin
filaments in epithelial cells and two types of anchoring junctions: desmosomes, which mediate cell–cell adhesion, and
hemidesmosomes, which are responsible for attaching cells
to the underlying extracellular matrix. In the electron microscope, both junctions appear as darkly staining proteinaceous plaques that are bound to the cytosolic face of
the plasma membrane and attached to bundles of keratin filaments (see Figure 6-8). The keratin filaments in one cell are
thus indirectly connected to those in a neighboring cell by
desmosomes or to the extracellular matrix by hemidesmosomes. As a result of these connections, shearing forces are
distributed from one region of a cell layer to the entire sheet
of epithelial cells, providing strength and rigidity to the entire epithelium. Without the supporting network of intermediate filaments, an epithelium remains intact, but the
cells are easily damaged by abrasive forces. Like actin microfilaments, which are attached to a third type of cell junction in epithelial cells, intermediate filaments form a flexible
but resilient framework that gives structural support to an
epithelium.

Disruption of Keratin Networks Causes Blistering
The epidermis is a tough outer layer of tissue, which acts as
a water-tight barrier to prevent desiccation and serves as a
protection against abrasion. In epidermal cells, bundles of
keratin filaments are cross-linked by filaggrin, an IFAP, and
are anchored at their ends to desmosomes. As epidermal cells
differentiate, the cells condense and die, but the keratin filaments remain intact, forming the structural core of the dead,
keratinized layer of skin. The structural integrity of keratin is
essential in order for this layer to withstand abrasion.
In humans and mice, the K4 and K14 keratin isoforms form heterodimers that assemble into
protofilaments. A mutant K14 with deletions in either the N- or the C-terminal domain can form heterodimers
in vitro but does not assemble into protofilaments. The expression of such mutant keratin proteins in cells causes IF
networks to break down into aggregates. Transgenic mice
that express a mutant K14 protein in the basal stem cells of
the epidermis display gross skin abnormalities, primarily
blistering of the epidermis, that resemble the human skin disease epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS). Histological examination of the blistered area reveals a high incidence of
dead basal cells. Death of these cells appears to be caused by
mechanical trauma from rubbing of the skin during movement of the limbs. Without their normal bundles of keratin
filaments, the mutant basal cells become fragile and easily
damaged, causing the overlying epidermal layers to delaminate and blister (Figure 19-37). Like the role of desmin filaments in supporting muscle tissue, the general role of keratin
filaments appears to be to maintain the structural integrity of
epithelial tissues by mechanically reinforcing the connections
between cells. ❚

34

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments
■ The assembly of intermediate filaments probably proceeds
through several intermediate structures, which associate by
lateral and end-to-end interactions (see Figure 19-33).

Epidermis

Although intermediate filaments are much more stable
than microfilaments and microtubules, they readily exchange subunits from a soluble pool.

■

Dermis

The phosphorylation of intermediate filaments early in
mitosis leads to their disassembly; they reassemble late in
mitosis after dephosphorylation of the subunits.

■

The organization of intermediate filaments into networks and bundles, mediated by various IFAPs, provides
structural stability to cells. IFAPs also cross-link intermediate filaments to the plasma and nuclear membranes, microtubules, and microfilaments.

■

Normal

Major degenerative diseases of skin, muscle, and neurons are caused by disruption of the IF cytoskeleton or its
connections to other cell structures.

■

Epidermis

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE

Dermis

Mutated

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 19-37 Transgenic mice
carrying a mutant keratin gene exhibit blistering similar to
that in the human disease epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
Histological sections through the skin of a normal mouse and a
transgenic mouse carrying a mutant K14 keratin gene are shown.
In the normal mouse, the skin consists of a hard outer epidermal
layer covering and in contact with the soft inner dermal layer. In
the skin from the transgenic mouse, the two layers are
separated (arrow) due to weakening of the cells at the base of
the epidermis. [From P. Coulombe et al., 1991, Cell 66:1301; courtesy of
E. Fuchs.]

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 19.5
Intermediate Filaments
Intermediate filaments are present only in cells that display a multicellular organization. An essential role of intermediate filaments is to distribute tensile forces across
cells in a tissue.

■

Unlike microtubules and microfilaments, intermediate
filaments are assembled from a large number of different
IF proteins. These proteins are divided into four major
types based on their sequences and tissue distribution. The
lamins are expressed in all cells, whereas the other types
are expressed in specific tissues (see Table 19-4).

■

With the list of proteins encoded by the genome growing ever
larger, a major challenge is to understand how they contribute to intracellular motility and cell movements. Historically, knowledge of motility has been built on a largely
biochemical and structural foundation. The major biochemical components of the actin cytoskeleton have been identified, and their roles in defining the structure of the
cytoskeleton and regulation are being discovered. However,
motility is a dynamic process in which function is also built
on the foundation of mechanics.
Dynamics implies a change in structure with time and includes movements of proteins and protein structures. From
Newton’s laws of physics, movements are linked with forces,
but we are only now becoming capable of studying forces at
the molecular and cellular levels. Much has changed from the
pioneering studies of muscle physiologists who measured
muscle fiber contractile forces with tension gauges and of experimental cell physiologists who estimated the contractile
force of the contractile ring from the bending of glass needles. These pioneering studies lead directly to modern studies
that incorporate elegant physical techniques such as optical
traps capable of measuring piconewton forces or that deduce
stiffness from images of microtubules and microfilaments
buckling against an unmovable object. At the heart of these
discoveries lies the capability of the light microscope to
image single molecules and to watch the binding of individual ligands and enzyme action on individual nucleotides.
But to understand fully how a cell moves, we must be
able to measure forces in the cell. In vivo methods that measure force directly are not yet invented. What is needed? A
mechanical sensor, perhaps engineered from a fluorescent
protein, that can change fluorescence when a force is applied.
Such a technique would be the analog of experiments in

Review the Concepts

which fluorescently labeled actin was microinjected into a
live cell and scientists watched for the first time the actin cytoskeleton treadmill at the leading edge of the cell.
A second challenge is to understand how a cell moves in
its natural environment—between layers of cells in a threedimensional extracellular matrix. The story of cell motility
is one shaped by studies of cells moving on a flat surface.
The flat world imposes a geometry in which interactions
with the substratum is through adhesions on the ventral surface of the cell while the free, noninteracting surface defines
the dorsal surface. Consider, instead, movement through a
gel of matrix. When surrounded by matrix, cells lose their
stereotypic flat shape and take on tubular spindle shape.
With adhesions on all sides, cells corkscrew through the gel
of matrix molecules. The adhesions are smaller than those
formed with a flat surface, which itself makes studying adhesions more difficult. Furthermore, the techniques for estimating the forces that a cell must exert to crawl on a flat
surface cannot be applied to a three-dimensional situation.
Squeezing through a gel adds several dimensions of complexity to our understanding how cell motility and adhesion
are coupled.

3. Much of our understanding of actin assembly in the cell
is derived from experiments using purified actin in vitro.
What techniques may be used to study actin assembly in
vitro? Explain how each of these techniques works.
4. The predominant forms of actin inside a cell are ATP-Gactin and ADP-F-actin. Explain how the interconversion of
the nucleotide state is coupled to the assembly and disassembly of actin subunits. What would be the consequence for
actin filament assembly/disassembly if a mutation prevented
actin’s ability to bind ATP? What would be the consequence
if a mutation prevented actin’s ability to hydrolyze ATP?
5. Actin filaments at the leading edge of a crawling cell are
believed to undergo treadmilling. What is treadmilling, and
what accounts for this assembly behavior?
6. Although purified actin can reversibly assemble in vitro,
various actin-binding proteins regulate the assembly of actin
filaments in the cell. Predict the effect on a cell’s actin cytoskeleton if function-blocking antibodies against each of the
following were independently microinjected into cells: profilin, thymosin 4, gelsolin, tropomodulin, and the Arp2/3
complex.
7. There are at least 17 different types of myosin. What
properties do all types share, and what makes them different?

KEY TERMS
actin-related proteins
(Arps) (000)
calponin homology–domain
superfamily (000)
cell locomotion (000)
chemotaxis (000)
contractile bundles (000)
critical concentration (000)
cytoskeleton (000)
F-actin (000)
G-actin (000)
intermediate
filaments (000)
keratins (000)
lamellipodium (000)
lamins (000)

35

microfilaments (000)
motor protein (000)
myosin head domain (000)
myosin tail domain (000)
myosin LC kinase (000)
plakins (000)
profilin (000)
sarcomere (000)
sliding-filament
assay (000)
thick filaments (000)
thin filaments (000)
thymosin 4 (000)
treadmilling (000)

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Actin filaments have a defined polarity. What is filament
polarity? How is it generated at the subunit level? How is filament polarity detectable?
2. In cells, actin filaments form bundles and/or networks.
How do cells form such structures, and what specifically determines whether actin filaments will form a bundle or a
network?

8. The ability of myosin to walk along an actin filament
may be observed with the aid of an appropriately equipped
microscope. Describe how such assays are typically performed. Why is ATP required in these assays? How may such
assays be used to determine the direction of myosin movement or the force produced by myosin?
9. Contractile bundles occur in nonmuscle cells, although the
structures are less organized than the sarcomeres of muscle
cells. What is the purpose of nonmuscle contractile bundles?
10. Contraction of both skeletal and smooth muscle is triggered by an increase in cytosolic Ca2. Compare the mechanisms by which each type of muscle converts a rise in Ca2
into contraction.
11. Several types of cells utilize the actin cytoskeleton to
power locomotion across surfaces. What types of cells have
been utilized as models for the study of locomotion? What
sequential morphological changes do each of these model
cells exhibit as they move across a surface? How are actin filaments involved in each of these morphological changes?
12. To move in a specific direction, migrating cells must utilize extracellular cues to establish which portion of the cell
will act as the front and which will act as the back. Describe
how G proteins and Ca2 gradients appear to be involved
in the signaling pathways used by migrating cells to determine direction of movement.
13. Unlike actin filaments, intermediate filaments do not
exhibit polarity. Explain how the structure of intermediate
filament subunits and the relationship between assembled

36

CHAPTER 19 • Microfilaments and Intermediate Filaments

subunits in an intermediate filament produce a filament
lacking polarity.
14. Compared to actin filaments, intermediate filaments are
relatively stable. However, cells can induce intermediate filament disassembly when needed. How does this disassembly occur, and why is it necessary?
15. Animal cells contained proteins that could be considered
to serve as intermediate filament-associated proteins. Several
such intermediate filament-associated proteins have now
been identified. What functions do these proteins carry out in
cells? To what other cellular structures do intermediate filament-associated proteins bind?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Understanding of actin filaments has been greatly facilitated
by the ability of scientists to purify actin and actin-binding
proteins and the ability to assemble actin filaments in vitro.
Following are various experimental approaches designed to
characterize actin assembly and the effects of actin-binding
proteins on actin assembly.
a. The graph in part (a) of the figure depicts the actin polymerization rate at the plus () and minus () ends of rabbit
actin as a function of actin concentration. Assume that you
could add actin filaments of a predefined length to rabbit
actin maintained at the concentrations labeled A, B, and C in
the figure. Diagram the appearance of the filaments after a
10-minute incubation at each of the indicated actin concentrations, if the original filaments are depicted as follows:
Original filament: __________________
Make sure to mark the location of the original () and
() ends of the filament on your diagrams.
b. A novel actin-binding protein (X) is overexpressed in certain highly malignant cancers. You wish to determine if protein X caps actin filaments at the () or () end. You
incubate an excess of protein X with various concentrations
of G-actin under conditions that induce polymerization.
Control samples are incubated in the absence of protein X.
The results are shown in part (b) of the figure. How can you
conclude from these data that protein X binds to the () end
of actin filaments? Design an experiment, using myosin S1
fragments and electron microscopy, to corroborate the conclusion that protein X binds to the () end. What results
would you expect if this conclusion is correct?
c. An in vitro system was developed to study actin assembly and disassembly in nonmuscle cells. In this study, tissue
culture cells were incubated for several hours with [35S]methionine so that all the actin monomers in each filament were
labeled. Actin filaments were then collected by differential
centrifugation and put into a buffer containing one of three

different cytosolic extracts (A, B, or C). The amounts of soluble actin in each sample were monitored over time (see part
(c) of the figure). What do these data indicate about the effects of A, B, and C on the assembly and disassembly of actin
filaments?

References

REFERENCES

37

Small, J. V., T. Strada, E. Vignal, and K. Rottner. 2002. The
lamellipodium: where motility begins. Trends Cell Biol. 12:112–120.

General References

Myosin-Powered Cell Movements

Bray, D. 2001. Cell Movements. Garland.
Howard, J. 2001. The Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the
Cytoskeleton. Sinauer.
Kreis, T., and R. Vale. 1999. Guidebook to the Cytoskeletal and
Motor Proteins. Oxford University Press.

Berg, J. S., B. C. Powell, and R. E. Cheney. 2001. A millennial
myosin census. Mol. Biol. Cell 12:780–794.
Bresnick, A. R. 1999. Molecular mechanisms of nonmuscle
myosin: II. Regulation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11:26–33.
Buss, F., J. Luzio, and J. Kendrick-Jones. 2002. Myosin VI, an
actin motor for membrane traffic and cell migration. Traffic
3:851–858.
Field, C., R. Li, and K. Oegema. 1999. Cytokinesis in eukaryotes: a mechanistic comparison. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11:68–80.
Gregorio, C. C., H. Granzier, H. Sorimachi, and S. Labeit. 1999.
Muscle assembly: a titanic achievement? Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
11:18–25.
Mermall, V., P. L. Post, and M. S. Mooseker. 1998. Unconventional myosin in cell movement, membrane traffic, and signal transduction. Science 279:527–533.
Rayment, I. 1996. The structural basis of the myosin ATPase activity. J. Biol. Chem. 271:15850–15853.
Simmon, R. 1996. Molecular motors: single-molecule mechanics. Curr. Biol. 6:392–394.
Squire, J. M., and E. P. Morris. 1998. A new look at thin filament regulation in vertebrate skeletal muscle. FASEB J. 12:761–771.
Vale, R. D., and R. A. Milligan. 2000. The way things move:
looking under the hood of molecular motor proteins. Science
288:88–95.

Web Sites
The following site contains links to laboratories that study the
cytoskeleton
http:/vlib.org/Science/Cell_Biology/labs.shtml
Actin-centric sites containing all things actin
http://www.bms.ed.ac.uk/research/others/smaciver/Cyto-Topics/
Topics.htm
http://expmed.bwh.harvard.edu/main/resources.html#
cytoskeleton
The myosin home page
http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/myosin/myosin.html
The cytokinetic mafia home page—all things cytokinetic
http://www.unc.edu/depts/salmlab/mafia/mafia.html

Actin Structures
Bretscher, A. 1999. Regulation of cortical structure by the ezrinradixin-moesin protein family. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11:109–116.
Furukawa, R., and M. Fechheimer. 1997. The structure, function, and assembly of actin filament bundles. Int’l. Rev. Cytol.
175:29–90.
McGough, A. 1998. F-actin-binding proteins. Curr. Opin. Struc.
Biol. 8:166–176.
Sheterline, P., J. Clayton, and J. C. Sparrow. 1995. Protein profile. Actin 2:1–103.
Stossel, T. P., et al. 2001. Filamins as integrators of cell mechanics
and signalling. Nature Rev. Cell Biol. 2(2):138–145.
Stradal, T., W. Kranewitter, S. J. Winder, and M. Gimona. 1998.
CH domains revisited. FEBS Lett. 431:134–137.

The Dynamics of Actin Assembly
Cameron, L. A., P. A. Giardini, F. S. Soo, and J. A. Theriot. 2000.
Secrets of actin-based motility revealed by a bacterial pathogen.
Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1:110–119.
Cooper, J. A., and D. A. Schafer. 2000. Control of actin assembly and disassembly at filament ends. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
12:97–103.
Higgs, H. N., and T. D. Pollard. 2000. Regulation of actin filament network formation through ARP2/3 complex: activation by a
diverse array of proteins. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 70:619–676.
Kwiatkowski, D. J. 1999. Functions of gelsolin: motility, signaling, apoptosis, cancer. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11:103–108.
Theriot, J. A. 1997. Accelerating on a treadmill: ADF/cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in the dynamic cytoskeleton. J.
Cell Biol. 136:1165–1168.
Pollard, T. D., L. Blanchoin, and R. D. Mullins. 2000. Molecular mechanisms controlling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle
cells. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struc. 29:545–576.

Cell Locomotion
Borisy, G. G., and T. M. Svitkina. 2000. Actin machinery: pushing the envelope. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12:104–112.
Chung, C. Y., S. Funamoto, and R. A. Firtel. 2001. Signaling
pathways controlling cell polarity and chemotaxis. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 26:557–566.
Condeelis, J. 2001. How is actin polymerization nucleated in
vivo? Trends Cell Biol. 11:288–93.
Hall, A. 1998. Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton. Science
279:509–514.
Pettit, E. J., and F. S. Fay. 1998. Cytosolic free calcium and the
cytoskeleton in the control of leukocyte chemotaxis. Physiol. Rev.
78:949–967.
Pollard, T. D., and G. G. Borisy. 2003. Cellular motility driven
by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments. Cell 112:453–465.
Welch, M. D., A. Mallavarapu, J. Rosenblatt, and T. J. Mitchison. 1997. Actin dynamics in vivo. Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol. 9:54–61.

Intermediate Filaments
Coulombre, P. A., and B. M. Omary. 2002. “Hard” and “Soft”
principles defining the structure, function, and regulation of keratin
intermediate filaments. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:110–122.
Fuchs, E., and D. W. Cleveland. 1998. A structural scaffolding
of intermediate filaments in health and disease. Science 279:514–519.
Leung, C. L., K. J. Green, and R. K. Liem. 2002. Plakins: a family of versatile cytolinker proteins. Trends Cell Biol. 12:37–45.
Stuurman, N., S. Heins, and U. Aebi. 1998 Nuclear lamins: their
structure, assembly, and interactions. J. Struc. Biol. 122:42–66.

20
MICROTUBULES

A 3-second time lapse movie captures the kinesin-powered
movement of a vesicle along a microtubule. [From N. Pollack et al.,
1999, J. Cell Biol. 147:493–506; courtesy of R. D. Vale.]

I

n Chapter 19, we looked at microfilaments and intermediate filaments—two of the three types of cytoskeletal
fibers—and their associated proteins. This chapter focuses on the third cytoskeletal system—microtubules. Like
microfilaments, microtubules take part in certain cell movements, including the beating of cilia and flagella and the
transport of vesicles in the cytoplasm. These movements result from the polymerization and depolymerization of microtubules or the actions of microtubule motor proteins.
Both processes are required for some other cell movements,
such as the alignment and separation of chromosomes in
meiosis and mitosis (see Figure 9-3). Microtubules also direct
the migration of nerve-cell axons by guiding the extension
of the neuronal growth cone.
In addition to contributing to cell motility, microtubules
play a major role in organizing the cell through a special
structure called the microtubule-organizing center, or
MTOC. Located near the nucleus, the MTOC directs the assembly and orientation of microtubules, the direction of
vesicle trafficking, and the orientation of organelles. Because
organelles and vesicles are transported along microtubules,
the MTOC becomes responsible for establishing the polarity of the cell and the direction of cytoplasmic processes in
both interphase and mitotic cells (Figure 20-1).

In this chapter, we build on the general principles learned
in Chapter 19 about the structure and function of the microfilament cytoskeleton and show how many of the same
concepts also apply to microtubules. We begin the chapter by
examining the structure and assembly of microtubules and
then consider how microtubule assembly and microtubule
motor proteins can power cell movements. The discussion
of microtubules concludes with a detailed examination of the
translocation of chromosomes in mitosis. Although we consider microtubules, microfilaments, and intermediate filaments individually, the three cytoskeletal systems do not act
completely independently of one another. An important example of their interdependence can be found in cell division
when interaction between actin microfilaments and microtubules determines the plane of cleavage.

OUTLINE
20.1 Microtubule Organization and Dynamics
20.2 Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements
20.3 Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins
in Mitosis
817

818

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
(a)

2

1
3
(−)

1

2

4

(−)
4
3
Interphase
cell
CYTOSKELETAL COMPONENT

Mitotic
cell
CELL FUNCTION

1 MTOC, spindle pole

Organizing cell polarity

2 Microtubule dynamics

Chromosome movements
MT assembly
(+) end–directed vesicle and
chromosome transport
(−) end–directed vesicle
transport spindle assembly

3 Kinesin motors
4 Dynein motors

(b)

▲ FIGURE 20-1 Microtubules (blue) organized around
the MTOC and spindle poles ( 1 ) establish an internal polarity
to movements and structures in the interphase cell (left) and
the mitotic cell (right). Assembly and disassembly ( 2 ) cause
microtubules to probe the cell cytoplasm and are harnessed
at mitosis to move chromosomes. Long-distance movement of
vesicles ( 3 and 4 ) are powered by kinesin and dynein motors.
Both motors are critical in the assembly of the spindle and
the separation of chromosomes in mitosis.

Microtubule

20.1 Microtubule Organization
and Dynamics
A microtubule is a polymer of globular tubulin subunits,
which are arranged in a cylindrical tube measuring 25 nm
in diameter—more than twice the width of an intermediate
filament and three times the width of a microfilament (see
Figure 5-29). Varying in length from a fraction of a micrometer to hundreds of micrometers, microtubules are much
stiffer than either microfilaments or intermediate filaments
because of their tubelike construction. A consequence of this
tubular design is the ability of microtubules to generate pushing forces without buckling, a property that is critical to the
movement of chromosomes and the mitotic spindle in mitosis.
Cells contain two populations of microtubules: stable,
long-lived microtubules and unstable, short-lived microtubules. Stable microtubules are generally found in nonreplicating cells. They include a central bundle of microtubules in
cilia and flagella, extensions of the plasma membrane that beat
rhythmically to propel materials across epithelial surfaces, to
enable sperm to swim, or to push an egg through the oviduct
(Figure 20-2a). A marginal band of stable microtubules present in some erythrocytes and platelets enables these cells to
pass through small blood vessels. Another example exists in
nerve cells (neurons), which must maintain long processes

Intermediate
filaments

Axon

(c)

819

20.1 • Microtubule Organization and Dynamics

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-2 Various microscopic
techniques are used to visualize stable and transient
microtubule structures. (a) Surface of the ciliated epithelium
lining a rabbit oviduct viewed in the scanning electron microscope.
Microtubule-containing cilia cover ciliated cells, and actin-containing
microvilli populate the surface of secretory cells. Beating cilia
propel an egg down the oviduct. (b) Microtubules and
intermediate filaments in a quick-frozen frog axon visualized by
the deep-etching technique (right). Several 24-nm-diameter
microtubules and thinner, 10-nm-diameter intermediate filaments
can be seen. Both types of fibers are oriented longitudinally; they
are cross-linked by various proteins. (c) Isolated mitotic apparatus
visualized by differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy.
The spindle and asters, which are critical in pulling the
chromosomes to the poles, are composed of transient
microtubules that assemble early in mitosis and disassemble at
its completion. [Part (a) from R. G. Kessels and R. H. Kardon, 1975,
Tissues and Organs, W. H. Freeman and Company. Part (b) from
N. Hirokawa, 1982, J. Cell Biol. 94:129; courtesy of N. Hirokawa. Part (c)
from E. D. Salmon and R. R. Segall, 1980, J. Cell Biol. 86:355.]

called axons (see Figure 7-29). An internal core of stable microtubules in axons not only supports their structure but also
provides tracks along which vesicles move through the axonal
cytoplasm (Figure 20-2b). The disassembly of such stable
structures would have catastrophic consequences—sperm
would be unable to swim, a red blood cell would lose its
springlike pliability, and axons would retract.
In contrast with these permanent, stable structures,
unstable microtubules are found in cells that need to assemble and disassemble microtubule-based structures quickly.
For example, in mitosis, the cytosolic microtubule network
characteristic of interphase cells disassembles, and the tubulin from it is used to form the spindle-shaped apparatus that
partitions chromosomes equally to the daughter cells (Figure 20-2c). When mitosis is complete, the spindle disassembles and the interphase microtubule network re-forms.
Before proceeding to a discussion of microtubule-based
movements, we examine the assembly, disassembly, and polarity of microtubules, as well as a group of proteins that are
integrally associated with microtubules. An important property of a microtubule is oscillation between growing and shortening phases. This complex dynamic behavior permits a cell to
quickly assemble or disassemble microtubule structures.

Heterodimeric Tubulin Subunits Compose
the Wall of a Microtubule
The building block of a microtubule is the tubulin subunit,
a heterodimer of - and -tubulin. Both of these 55,000MW monomers are found in all eukaryotes, and their sequences are highly conserved. Although a third tubulin,
-tubulin, is not part of the tubulin subunit, it probably
nucleates the polymerization of subunits to form –microtubules. Encoded by separate genes, the three tubulins exhibit homology with a 40,000-MW bacterial GTPase, called
FtsZ (see Figure 5-30b). Like tubulin, this bacterial protein

has the ability to polymerize and participates in cell division.
Perhaps the protein carrying out these ancestral functions in
bacteria was modified in the course of evolution to fulfill the
diverse roles of microtubules in eukaryotes.
Each tubulin subunit binds two molecules of GTP. One
GTP-binding site, located in -tubulin, binds GTP irreversibly
and does not hydrolyze it. The second site, located on tubulin, binds GTP reversibly and hydrolyzes it to GDP. Thus,
tubulin is a GTPase like bacterial FtsZ protein. In the atomic
structure of the tubulin subunit, the GTP bound to -tubulin
is trapped at the interface between the - and -tubulin
monomers and is thus nonexchangeable. The second GTP lies
at the surface of the -tubulin monomer; this GTP is freely
exchangeable with GDP (Figure 20-3a). As discussed later, the
(a)
β Tubulin

α Tubulin

GDP

GTP

Taxol

Subunit

(b)
α Tubulin

GTP GDP

β Tubulin

8 nm

Protofilament

24 nm

▲ FIGURE 20-3 Structure of tubulin monomers and their
organization in microtubules. (a) Ribbon diagram of the dimeric
tubulin subunit. The GTP (red) bound to the -tubulin monomer is
nonexchangeable, whereas the GDP (blue) bound to the -tubulin
monomer is exchangeable with GTP. The anticancer drug taxol
(green) was used in structural studies to stabilize the dimer
structure. (b) The organization of tubulin subunits in a microtubule. The subunits are aligned end to end into protofilaments,
which pack side by side to form the wall of the microtubule. In
this model, the protofilaments are slightly staggered so that
-tubulin in one protofilament is in contact with -tubulin in the
neighboring protofilaments. The microtubule displays a structural
polarity in that subunits are added preferentially at the end,
designated the () end, at which -tubulin monomers are
exposed. [Part (a) modified from E. Nogales et al., 1998, Nature 391:199;
courtesy of E. Nogales. Part (b) adapted from Y. H. Song and E. Mandelkow,
1993, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 90:1671.]

820

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

A

Singlet

B

A

Doublet
(cilia, flagella)

B

C

Triplet
(basal bodies, centrioles)

▲ FIGURE 20-4 Arrangement of protofilaments in singlet,
doublet, and triplet microtubules. In cross section, a
typical microtubule, a singlet, is a simple tube built from 13
protofilaments. In a doublet microtubule, an additional set of

10 protofilaments forms a second tubule (B) by fusing to
the wall of a singlet (A) microtubule. Attachment of another
10 protofilaments to the B tubule of a doublet microtubule
creates a C tubule and a triplet structure.

guanine bound to -tubulin modulates the addition of tubulin subunits at the ends of a microtubule.
In a microtubule, lateral and longitudinal interactions
between the tubulin subunits are responsible for maintaining the tubular form. Longitudinal contacts between the
ends of adjacent subunits link the subunits head to tail into
a linear protofilament. Within each protofilament, the
dimeric subunits repeat every 8 nm. Through lateral interactions, protofilaments associate side by side into a sheet or
cylinder—a microtubule. In most microtubules, the heterodimers in adjacent protofilaments are staggered only
slightly, forming tilted rows of - and -tubulin monomers
in the microtubule wall. The head-to-tail arrangement of the
- and -tubulin dimers in a protofilament confers an overall polarity on a microtubule. Because all protofilaments in
a microtubule have the same orientation, one end of a microtubule is ringed by -tubulin, whereas the opposite end is
ringed by -tubulin (Figure 20-3b). As in actin microfilaments, the two ends of a microtubule, designated the ()
and () ends, differ in their rates of assembly and critical
concentrations (Cc). The () end corresponds to the -tubulin
end of a microtubule.
Virtually every microtubule in a cell is a simple tube, a
singlet microtubule, built from 13 protofilaments. In rare
cases, singlet microtubules contain more or fewer protofilaments; for example, certain microtubules in the neurons of
nematode worms contain 11 or 15 protofilaments. In addition to the simple singlet structure, doublet or triplet microtubules are found in specialized structures such as cilia and
flagella (doublet microtubules) and centrioles and basal bodies (triplet microtubules). Each doublet or triplet contains
one complete 13-protofilament microtubule (A tubule) and
one or two additional tubules (B and C) consisting of 10
protofilaments (Figure 20-4).

to 4 °C, they depolymerize into -tubulin dimers (Figure
20-5). When warmed to 37 °C in the presence of GTP, the
tubulin dimers polymerize into microtubules. Cycles of heating and cooling are key steps in purifying microtubules and
their associated proteins from cell extracts.
Tubulin polymerization has several properties in common with the polymerization of actin to form microfilaments. First, at -tubulin concentrations above the
critical concentration (Cc), the dimers polymerize into
microtubules, whereas at concentrations below the Cc, microtubules depolymerize, similar to the behavior of G-actin
and F-actin (see Figure 19-7). Second, the nucleotide, either
GTP or GDP, bound to the -tubulin causes the critical
concentration (Cc) for assembly at the () and () ends of
a microtubule to differ. By analogy with F-actin assembly,
the preferred assembly end is designated the () end. Third,

Microtubule Assembly and Disassembly Take
Place Preferentially at the () End
Microtubules assemble by the polymerization of dimeric
-tubulin. Assembly and stability of microtubules are temperature dependent. For instance, if microtubules are cooled

Mass of microtubules

Cool to 4 °C

Warm to 37 °C

0
Time
Depolymerization
of MTs

Polymerization
of αβ -tubulin

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-5 Temperature affects
whether microtubules (MTs) assemble or disassemble. At low
temperatures, microtubules depolymerize, releasing -tubulin,
which repolymerizes at higher temperatures in the presence
of GTP.

821

20.1 • Microtubule Organization and Dynamics
GTP

GTP

α Tubulin
β Tubulin
GTP
cap

MT

(+) end

GDP
microtubule

()
(−) end
1

2

Protofilament
assembly

Sheet
assembly
3 Microtubule
elongation

Flagellar
nucleus

▲ FIGURE 20-7 Stages in assembly of microtubules. Free

MT
()

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-6 Addition of microtubule
fragments demonstrates polarity of tubulin polymerization.
Fragments of flagellar microtubules act as nuclei for the in vitro
addition of -tubulin. The nucleating flagellar fragment can be
distinguished in the electron microscope from the newly formed
microtubules (MT) seen radiating from the ends of the flagellar
fragment. The greater length of the microtubules at one end
indicates that tubulin subunits are added preferentially to this
end. [Courtesy of G. Borisy.]
at –tubulin concentrations higher than the Cc for polymerization, dimers add preferentially to the () end.
Fourth, when the –tubulin concentration is higher than
the Cc at the () end but lower than the Cc at the () end,
microtubules can treadmill by adding subunits to one end
and dissociating subunits from the opposite end (see Figure 19-9). Because the intracellular concentration of
assembly-competent tubulin (10–20 M) is much higher
than the critical concentration (Cc) for assembly (0.03 M),
polymerization is highly favored in a cell. Finally, the initial
rate of tubulin polymerization is accelerated in the presence
of nuclei—that is, microtubule-based structures or fragments (Figure 20-6).

tubulin dimers associate longitudinally to form short
protofilaments ( 1 ). These protofilaments are probably unstable
and quickly associate laterally into more stable curved sheets
( 2 ). Eventually, a sheet wraps around into a microtubule with
13 protofilaments. The microtubule then grows by the addition
of subunits to the ends of protofilaments composing the
microtubule wall ( 3 ).The free tubulin dimers have GTP (red dot)
bound to the exchangeable nucleotide-binding site on the
-tubulin monomer. After incorporation of a dimeric subunit into a
microtubule, the GTP on the -tubulin (but not on the -tubulin)
is hydrolyzed to GDP. If the rate of polymerization is faster than
the rate of GTP hydrolysis, then a cap of GTP-bound subunits is
generated at the () end, although the bulk of -tubulin in a
microtubule will contain GDP. The rate of polymerization is twice
as fast at the () end as at the () end.

Microtubule assembly comprises three steps: (1) protofilaments assemble from –tubulin subunits, (2) protofilaments associate to form the wall of the microtubule, and
(3) the addition of more subunits to the ends of the protofilaments elongates the microtubule (Figure 20-7). In the electron microscope, the ends of growing microtubules frequently
appear uneven because some protofilaments elongate faster
than other protofilaments. The appearance of microtubules
undergoing shortening is quite different, suggesting that the
mechanism of disassembly differs from that of assembly (Figure 20-8). Under shortening conditions, the microtubule ends
are splayed, as if the lateral interactions between protofilaments have been broken. When frayed apart and freed from
lateral stabilizing interactions, the protofilaments may depolymerize by endwise dissociation of tubulin subunits. The
splayed appearance of a shortening microtubule provided
clues about the potential instability of a microtubule.

822

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
50
Microtubule length (µm)

(a) Assembly (elongation)

Catastrophe

40
Disassembly

30

Rescue

20
10

Assembly

0

(b) Disassembly (shrinkage)

30

60

90

Time (min)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-9 Rate of microtubule
growth in vitro is much slower than shrinkage. Individual
microtubules can be observed in the light microscope, and their
lengths can be plotted at different times during assembly
and disassembly. Assembly and disassembly each proceed at
uniform rates, but there is a large difference between the rate of
assembly and that of disassembly, as seen in the different slopes
of the lines. Shortening of a microtubule is much more rapid
(7 m/min) than growth (1 m/min). Notice the abrupt transitions
to the shrinkage stage (catastrophe) and to the elongation stage
(rescue). [Adapted from P. M. Bayley, K. K. Sharma, and S. R. Martin,

Frayed ends

1994, in Microtubules, Wiley-Liss, p. 118.]

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-8 Cryoelectron microscopy
allows observation of disassembled microtubules.
Microtubules undergoing assembly (a) or disassembly (b) can
be quickly frozen in liquid ethane and examined in the frozen
state in a cryoelectron microscope. In assembly conditions,
microtubule ends are relatively smooth; occasionally a short
protofilament is seen to extend from one end. In disassembly
conditions, the protofilaments splay at the microtubule ends,
giving the ends a frayed appearance. Splaying of protofilaments
probably promotes the loss of tubulin subunits from their ends,
leading to shrinkage of the microtubule. [Micrographs courtesy of

Dynamic Instability Is an Intrinsic Property
of Microtubules
Under appropriate in vitro conditions, some individual microtubules oscillate between growth and shortening phases
(Figure 20-9). In all cases, the rate of microtubule growth is
much slower than the rate of shortening. When first discovered, this behavior of microtubules, termed dynamic instability, was surprising to researchers because they expected
that under any condition all the microtubules in a solution or
the same cytosol would behave identically.

E. Mandelkow and E. M. Mandelkow.]

0:00

A

0:27

3:51

Video: Cytoplasmic Assembly of
Microtubules in Cultured Cells

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

A

B
C

B

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-10 Fluorescence
microscopy reveals in vivo growth and shrinkage
of individual microtubules. Fluorescently-labeled
tubulin was microinjected into cultured human
fibroblasts. The cells were chilled to depolymerize
preexisting microtubules into tubulin dimers and were
then incubated at 37 °C to allow repolymerization,

B

C
A

C

thus incorporating the fluorescent tubulin into all the cell’s
microtubules. A region of the cell periphery was viewed in the
fluorescence microscope at 0 second, 27 seconds later, and 3
minutes 51 seconds later (left to right panels). In this period,
several microtubules elongate and shorten. The letters mark the
position of ends of three microtubules. [From
P. J. Sammak and G. Borisy, 1988, Nature 332:724.]

20.1 • Microtubule Organization and Dynamics

The results of subsequent in vivo studies showed that individual cytosolic and mitotic microtubules display dynamic
instability. In one set of experiments, fluorescent –tubulin
subunits were microinjected into live cultured cells. The cells
were chilled to depolymerize preexisting microtubules into
tubulin dimers and then incubated at 37 °C to allow repolymerization, thus incorporating the fluorescent tubulin into
all the cellular microtubules. Video recordings of a small region in labeled cells showed that some microtubules became
longer, others became shorter, and some appeared alternately
to grow and to shrink over a period of several minutes (Figure 20-10). Because most microtubules in a cell associate by
their () ends with MTOCs, their instability is largely limited to the () ends.
Two conditions influence the stability of microtubules.
First, the oscillations between growth and shrinkage in
vitro occur at tubulin concentrations near the C c. As already stated, at tubulin concentrations above the Cc, the
entire population of microtubules grows and, at concentrations below the Cc, all microtubules shrink. At concentrations near the C c, however, some microtubules grow,
whereas others shrink. The second condition affecting microtubule stability is whether GTP or GDP occupies the
exchangeable nucleotide-binding site on -tubulin at the
() end of a microtubule (Figure 20-11). Because dissociation (“off” rate) of a GDP-tubulin dimer is four orders of
magnitude as fast as that of a GTP-tubulin dimer, a microtubule is destabilized and depolymerizes rapidly if the ()
end becomes capped with subunits containing GDP–tubulin rather than GTP–-tubulin. This situation can arise
Tubulin with
bound GDP
(−)
Preexisting
microtubule

when a microtubule shrinks rapidly, exposing GDP–tubulin in the walls of the microtubule, or when a microtubule grows so slowly that the hydrolysis of -tubulin–
bound GTP converts it into GDP before additional subunits
can be added to the () end of the microtubule. Before a
shortening microtubule vanishes entirely, it can be “rescued” and start to grow if tubulin subunits with bound
GTP add to the () end before the bound GTP hydrolyzes.
Thus the parameters that determine the stability of a microtubule are the growth rate, the shrinkage rate, the catastrophe frequency, and the rescue frequency.

Numerous Proteins Regulate Microtubule
Dynamics and Cross-Linkage to Other Structures
A large number of proteins influence the assembly and stability of microtubules and their association with other cell
structures (Table 20-1). These proteins are collectively called
microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) because most copurify with microtubules isolated from cells. The results of
immunofluorescence localization studies also have shown a
parallel distribution of MAPs and microtubules in cells—
strong evidence for their interaction in vivo.
MAPs are classified into two groups on the basis of
their function. One group stabilizes microtubules. The stucture of a stabilizing MAP consists of two domains—a basic
microtubule-binding domain and an acidic projection domain. In the electron microscope, the projection domain appears as a filamentous arm that extends from the wall of the
microtubule. This arm can bind to membranes, intermediate

Tubulin with
bound GTP

 FIGURE 20-11 Dynamic instability model

(+)

Addition of
GTP-bound tubulin
GTP cap

High concentration
of GTP-bound
free tubulin

Stable

823

Low concentration
of GTP-bound
free tubulin

Unstable
GDP cap

of microtubule growth and shrinkage. GTPbound –tubulin subunits (red) add preferentially
to the () end of a preexisting microtubule. After
incorporation of a subunit, the GTP (red dot) bound
to the -tubulin monomer is hydrolyzed to GDP.
Only microtubules whose () ends are associated
with GTP-tubulin (those with a GTP cap) are stable
and can serve as primers for the polymerization of
additional tubulin. Microtubules with GDP-tubulin
(blue) at the () end (those with a GDP cap) are
rapidly depolymerized and may disappear within
1 minute. At high concentrations of unpolymerized
GTP-tubulin, the rate of addition of tubulin is faster
than the rate of hydrolysis of the GTP bound in
the microtubule or the rate of dissociation of
GTP-tubulin from microtubule ends; thus the
microtubule grows. At low concentrations of
unpolymerized GTP-tubulin, the rate of addition of
tubulin is decreased; consequently, the rate of
GTP hydrolysis exceeds the rate of addition of
tubulin subunits and a GDP cap forms. Because
the GDP cap is unstable, the microtubule end
peels apart to release tubulin subunits. [See
T. Mitchison and M. Kirschner, 1984, Nature 312:237;
M. Kirschner and T. Mitchison, 1986, Cell 45:329; and
R. A. Walker et al., 1988, J. Cell Biol. 107:1437.]

824

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

filaments, or other microtubules, and its length controls how
far apart microtubules are spaced (Figure 20-12).
The microtubule-binding domain contains several
repeats of a conserved, positively charged four-residue
amino acid sequence that binds the negatively charged Cterminal part of tubulin. This binding is postulated to neu-

MTs

MTs

Microtubule

MAP2

25 nm

Tau

25 nm

tralize the charge repulsion between tubulin subunits
within a microtubule, thereby stabilizing the polymer.
MAP1A and MAP1B are large, filamentous molecules
found in axons and dendrites of neurons as well as in nonneuronal cells. Each of these MAPs is derived from a
single precursor polypeptide, which is proteolytically
processed in a cell to generate one light chain and one
heavy chain.
Other stabilizing MAPs include MAP2, MAP4, Tau, and
CLIP170. MAP4, the most widespread of all the MAPs, is
found in neuronal and non-neuronal cells. In mitosis, MAP4
regulates microtubule stability, and CLIP170 cross-links
microtubules to chromosomes. MAP2 is found only in
dendrites, where it forms fibrous cross-bridges between
microtubules and links microtubules to intermediate filaments.
Tau, which is much smaller than most other MAPs, is present
in both axons and dendrites. This protein exists in several iso-

20.1 • Microtubule Organization and Dynamics

forms derived from alternative splicing of a tau mRNA. The
ability of Tau to cross-link microtubules into thick bundles
may contribute to the stability of axonal microtubules. Findings from gene transfection experiments implicate Tau in axonal elongation. Deletion of the genes encoding Tau and
MAPIB leads to more severe phenotypes of axonal dysgenesis
and lethality. Furthermore, aberrant polymerization of Tau
into filaments is linked to neurodegenerative diseases such as
human dementia in Alzheimer’s patients.
When stabilizing MAPs coat the outer wall of a microtubule, tubulin subunits are unable to dissociate from the
ends of that microtubule. Although bound MAPs generally
dampen the rate of microtubule disassembly, the assembly
of microtubules is affected to varying degrees: some MAPs,
such as Tau and MAP4, stabilize microtubules, whereas
other MAPs do not. Because of the effect of assembly MAPs
on microtubule dynamics, modulating the binding of MAPs
can control the length of microtubules. In most cases, this
control is accomplished by the reversible phosphorylation
of the MAP projection domain. Phosphorylated MAPs are
unable to bind to microtubules; thus they promote microtubule disassembly. MAP kinase, a key enzyme for phosphorylating MAPs, is a participant in many signal-transduction
pathways (Chapter 14), indicating that MAPs are targets of
many extracellular signals. MAPs, especially MAP4, are also
phosphorylated by a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) that
plays a major role in controlling the activities of various proteins in the course of the cell cycle (Chapter 21).
A second group of MAPs directly destabilizes microtubules
in many cell types. One of this group, called katanin, severs intact cytosolic microtubules by an ATP-dependent process. Internal bonds between tubulin subunits in the microtubule wall
are broken, causing microtubules to fragment. This activity
may release microtubules at the MTOC. Another protein,
called Op18 or stathmin, increases the frequency of rapid disassembly of microtubules in the mitotic spindle. This protein
may act by binding tubulin dimers, thereby reducing the pool
of dimers available for polymerization. Phosphorylation inactivates Op18 and inhibits its destabilizing effect.

Colchicine and Other Drugs Disrupt
Microtubule Dynamics
Some of the earliest studies of microtubules employed several
drugs that inhibit mitosis, a cell process that depends on microtubule assembly and disassembly. Two such drugs isolated from plants, colchicine and taxol, have proved to be
very powerful tools for probing microtubule function, partly
because they bind only to -tubulin or microtubules and
not to other proteins and because their concentrations in
cells can be easily controlled.
Colchicine and a synthetic relative, colcemid, have long
been used as mitotic inhibitors. In cells exposed to high concentrations of colcemid, cytosolic microtubules depolymerize, leaving an MTOC. However, when plant or animal cells
are exposed to low concentrations of colcemid, the microtubules remain and the cells become “blocked” at meta-

825

phase, the mitotic stage at which the duplicated chromosomes are fully condensed (see Figure 9-3). When the treated
cells are washed with a colcemid-free solution, colcemid
diffuses from the cell and mitosis resumes normally. Thus
experimenters commonly use colcemid to accumulate metaphase cells for cytogenetic studies; removal of the colcemid
leaves a population of cells whose cell cycle is in synchrony.
Such synchronous populations are advantageous for studies
of the cell cycle (Chapter 21).
The interface between -tubulin and -tubulin monomers in dimeric tubulin contains a high-affinity but reversible
binding site for colchicine. Colchicine-bearing tubulin
dimers, at concentrations much less than the concentration
of free tubulin subunits, can add to the end of a growing microtubule. However, the presence of one or two colchicinebearing tubulins at the end of a microtubule prevents the
subsequent addition or loss of other tubulin subunits. Thus
colchicine “poisons” the end of a microtubule and alters the
steady-state balance between assembly and disassembly. As
a result of this disruption of microtubule dynamics, mitosis
is inhibited in cells treated with low concentrations of
colchicine.
Other drugs bind to different sites on tubulin dimers or
to microtubules and therefore affect microtubule stability
through different mechanisms. For example, at low concentrations, taxol binds to microtubules and stabilizes them by
inhibiting their shortening.
Drugs that disturb the assembly and disassembly
of microtubules have been widely used to treat various diseases. Indeed, more than 2500 years ago,
the ancient Egyptians treated heart problems with colchicine.
Nowadays, this drug is used primarily in the treatment of
gout and certain other diseases affecting the joints and skin.
Other inhibitors of microtubule dynamics, including taxol,
are effective anticancer agents and are used in the treatment
of ovarian cancer. ❚

MTOCs Orient Most Microtubules
and Determine Cell Polarity
In an interphase fibroblast cell, cytosolic microtubules are
arranged in a distinctive hub-and-spoke array that lies at the
center of a cell (Figure 20-13a). The microtubule spokes radiate from a central site occupied by the centrosome, which
is the primary microtubule-organizing center in many interphase cells. We will use the term MTOC to refer to any of the
structures used by cells to nucleate and organize microtubules. In animal cells, the MTOC is usually a centrosome,
a collection of microtubule-associated proteins that sometimes but not always contains a pair of centrioles (Figure
20-13b). The centrioles, each a pinwheel array of triplet microtubules, lie in the center of the MTOC but do not make
direct contact with the () ends of the cytosolic microtubules.
Centrioles are not present in the MTOCs of plants and fungi;
moreover, some epithelial cells and newly fertilized eggs from
animals also lack centrioles. Thus, it is the associated

826

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
(a) Interphase animal cell

(a)

(+)

Basal body
(−)

Flagellum
or cilium

(+)
Nucleus
(−)

Centriole
MTOC

(−)
(+)

(b) Mitotic animal cell
Chromosome
MTOC
(−)
(+)

(+)

(−)

(+)

(b)
Centriole
Spindle microtubules

(c) Nerve cell

(−)

PC
PC

(+)
(+)

(+)
(−)

(−)

C
C

MT
MT

(+)

Dendrite

(−)
Axon
(+)

(−)

(+) (−)

(−)

(−)

(+)
(+) (−)
Nucleus

MTOC
(+)
(+)

C
C

Cell body

▲ FIGURE 20-14 Orientation of cellular microtubules. (a) In

0.5 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-13 The centrosome, which
functions as a microtubule-organizing center, contains a pair
of orthogonal centrioles in most animal cells. (a) Micrograph
showing several cells each with an MTOC identified by
fluorescently labeled antibodies against PCM1, a centrosomal
protein. (b) Electron micrograph of the MTOC in an animal cell.
The pair of centrioles (red), C and C, in the center are oriented
at right angles; thus one centriole is seen in cross section, and
the other longitudinally. Surrounding the centrioles is a cloud of
material, the pericentriolar (PC) matrix, which contains -tubulin
and pericentrin. Embedded within the MTOC, but not contacting
the centrioles, are the () ends of microtubules (MT; yellow).
[Part (a) from A. Kubo and S. Tsukita, 2003, J. Cell Sci. 116:919. Part (b)
from B. R. Brinkley, 1987, in Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, vol. 2,
Birkhauser Press, p. 665; courtesy of B. R. Brinkley.]

interphase animal cells, the () ends of most microtubules are
proximal to the MTOC. Similarly, the microtubules in flagella and
cilia have their () ends continuous with the basal body, which
acts as the MTOC for these structures. (b) As cells enter mitosis,
the microtubule network rearranges, forming a mitotic spindle.
The () ends of all spindle microtubules point toward one of the
two MTOCs, or poles, as they are called in mitotic cells. (c) In
nerve cells, the () ends of all axonal microtubules are oriented
toward the base of the axon, but dendritic microtubules have
mixed polarities.

proteins in an MTOC that have the capacity to organize cytosolic microtubules.
Because microtubules assemble from the MTOC, microtubule polarity becomes fixed in a characteristic orientation
(Figure 20-14). In most interphase animal cells, for instance,
the () ends of microtubules are closest to the MTOC. In
mitosis, the centrosome duplicates and migrates to new positions flanking the nucleus. There the centrosome becomes

20.1 • Microtubule Organization and Dynamics

the organizing center for microtubules forming the mitotic
apparatus, which will separate the chromosomes into the
daughter cells in mitosis. The microtubules in the axon of a
nerve cell, which help stabilize the long process, are all oriented in the same direction.
In contrast with the single perinuclear MTOC present in
most interphase animal cells, plant cells, polarized epithelial
cells, and embryonic cells contain hundreds of MTOCs,
which are distributed throughout the cell, often near the cell
cortex. In plant cells and polarized epithelial cells, a cortical
array of microtubules aligns with the cell axis. In both cell
types, the polarity of the cell is linked to the orientation of
the microtubules.

The -Tubulin Ring Complex Nucleates
Polymerization of Tubulin Subunits
The MTOC organizes cytosolic microtubules by first nucleating microtubule assembly and then anchoring and releasing
microtubules. Despite its amorphous appearance, the pericentriolar material of an MTOC is an ordered lattice that
contains many proteins that are necessary for initiating the assembly of microtubules (see Figure 20-13). One of these proteins, -tubulin, was first identified in genetic studies designed

827

to discover proteins that interact with -tubulin. The results
of subsequent studies demonstrated that -tubulin and the
lattice protein pericentrin are part of the pericentriolar material of centrosomes; these proteins have also been detected in
MTOCs that lack a centriole. The finding that the introduction of antibodies against -tubulin into cells blocks microtubule assembly implicates -tubulin as a necessary factor in
nucleating the polymerization of tubulin subunits.
Approximately 80 percent of the -tubulin in cells is part
of a 25S complex, which has been isolated from extracts of
frog oocytes and fly embryos. Named the -tubulin ring complex (-TuRC) for its ringlike appearance in the electron microscope, the complex comprises eight polypeptides and
measures 25 nm in diameter. Findings from in vitro experiments show that the -TuRC can directly nucleate microtubule
assembly at subcritical tubulin concentrations—that is, at concentrations below which polymerization would not take place
in the absence of the -TuRC. To investigate how -TuRC associates with microtubules, scientists performed immunolabeling experiments with the use of gold-conjugated antibodies
specific for -TuRC components, either -tubulin or XGRIP.
The results of these studies reveal that complexes are localized to one end of a microtubule and are not present along the
sides (Figure 20-15a). This location is consistent with a role for

(a)

(b)
(+) end

αβ -Tubulin

(−) end

γ-TuRC

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-15 The -tubulin ring
complex (-TuRC) is localized to one end of the microtubule.
(a) A fluorescence micrograph (left) and an electron micrograph
(right) of microtubules stained with gold-labeled antibodies to
-tubulin or XGRIP, a microtubule-binding protein. Both proteins
are components of the -TuRC. The labeled proteins are localized
to one end of the microtubules. (b) A model of the -TuRC.
This complex is thought to nucleate microtubule assembly by

presenting a row of -tubulin subunits, which can directly bind
-tubulin subunits. This model is supported by plotting the
positions of gold-labeled antibodies to either -tubulin (red) or
XGRIP109 (yellow) from several experiments onto a microtubule
end. [Parts (a) and (b, right) from T. J. Keating and G. G. Borisy, 2000,
Nature Cell Biol. 2:352; courtesy of T. J. Keating and G. G. Borisy. Part (b,
left) modified from C. Wiese and Y. Zheng, 1999, Curr. Opin. Struc. Biol.
9:250.]

828

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

-TuRC in nucleating microtubule assembly. A model of TuRC based on electron microscopy shows -tubulin in contact with the () end of a microtubule (Figure 20-15b).

Cytoplasmic Organelles and Vesicles
Are Organized by Microtubules
Fluorescence microscopy reveals that membrane-limited organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi,
endosomes, and mitochondria are associated with microtubules. For instance, in cultured fibroblasts stained with
anti-tubulin antibodies and DiOC6, a fluorescent dye specific
for the ER, the anastomosing ER network in the cytosol is
seen to colocalize with microtubules (Figure 20-16). If cells
are treated with a microtubule-depolymerizing drug, the ER

loses its networklike organization. After the drug has been
washed from the cells, tubular fingers of ER grow as new
microtubules assemble. In cell-free systems, the ER can be reconstituted with microtubules and an ER-rich cell extract.
Even under this cell-free regime, ER membranes elongate
along microtubules. This close association between the ER
and intact microtubules suggests that proteins bind ER membranes to microtubules.
The role of microtubules in organizing the Golgi complex
also has been studied extensively. In interphase fibroblasts,
the Golgi complex is concentrated near the MTOC. In mitosis (or after the depolymerization of microtubules by colcemid), the Golgi complex breaks into small vesicles that are
dispersed throughout the cytosol. When the cytosolic microtubules re-form during interphase (or after removal of the
colcemid), the Golgi vesicles move along these microtubule
tracks toward the MTOC, where they reaggregate to form
large membrane complexes.
These observations were among the first to suggest that
microtubules play a role in the intracellular transport of
membrane-limited organelles and vesicles. Other examples of
such transport and the motor proteins that power them are
described in Section 20.2.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 20.1
Microtubule Organization and Dynamics
Tubulins belong to an ancient family of GTPases that
polymerize to form microtubules, hollow cylindrical structures 25 nm in diameter.

■

Microtubules, like actin microfilaments, exhibit both
structural and functional polarity.

■

Dimeric –tubulin subunits interact end-to-end to form
protofilaments, which associate laterally into microtubules
(see Figure 20-7).

■

Microtubules exhibit structural polarity. Subunits are
added and lost preferentially at one end, the () end.

■

■ Assembly and disassembly of microtubules depends on the
critical concentration, Cc, of –tubulin subunits. Above
the Cc, microtubules assemble; below the Cc, microtubules
disassemble.

Microtubules exhibit two dynamic phenomena that are
pronounced at tubulin concentrations near the Cc: (1) treadmilling, the addition of subunits at one end and their loss
at the other end, and (2) dynamic instability, the oscillation
between lengthening and shortening (see Figure 20-9).
■

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-16 Fluorescence
microscopy reveals colocalization of endoplasmic reticulum
membranes and cytosolic microtubules. DiOC6, an ER-binding
fluorescent dye (green), and fluorescently-labeled anti-tubulin
antibodies (red) were used to stain a cultured frog fibroblast. The
alignment of the ER network and microtubules in many but not
all regions of the cytoplasm is evident because the cell has
sparse microtubules. [Courtesy of M. Terasaki.]

The balance between growth and shrinkage of unstable
microtubules depends on whether the exchangeable GTP
bound to -tubulin is present on the () end or whether
it has been hydrolyzed to GDP (see Figure 20-11).

■

Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) organize microtubules and affect their stability. Some MAPs prevent

■

829

20.2 • Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements

or promote cytosolic microtubule depolymerization; other
MAPs organize microtubules into bundles or cross-link
them to membranes and intermediate filaments or both (see
Table 20-1).
Various drugs, including colchicine and taxol, disrupt microtubule dynamics and have an antimitotic effect. Some of
these drugs are useful in the treatment of certain cancers.

■

Cell polarity including the organization of cell organelles, direction of membrane trafficking, and orientation of microtubules is determined by microtubuleorganizing centers (MTOCs). Most interphase animal cells
contain a single, perinuclear MTOC from which cytosolic
microtubules radiate (see Figure 20-13).

■

■ Because microtubule assembly is nucleated from MTOCs,
the () end of most microtubules is adjacent to the MTOC
and the () end is distal (see Figure 20-14).
■ A -tubulin–containing complex is a major component of
the pericentriolar material and is able to nucleate the polymerization of tubulin subunits to form microtubules in vitro.

20.2 Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered
Movements
Within cells, proteins, organelles, and other membranelimited vesicles, organelles, and proteins are frequently transported distances of many micrometers along well-defined
routes in the cytosol and delivered to particular addresses.
Diffusion alone cannot account for the rate, directionality,
and destinations of such transport processes. Findings from
early experiments with fish-scale pigment cells and nerve cells
first demonstrated that microtubules function as tracks in the
intracellular transport of various types of “cargo.” Eventually, two families of motor proteins—kinesins and dyneins—
were found to mediate transport along microtubules.
A second type of movement that depends on microtubule
motor proteins is the beating of cilia and flagella. Huge numbers of cilia (more than 107/mm2) cover the surfaces of mammalian respiratory passages where their beating dislodges and
expels particulate matter that collects in the mucus secretions
of these tissues. In the oviduct, cilia help transport eggs down
the fallopian tube. In contrast, sperm cells and many unicel-

lular organisms have a single flagellum, which propels the
cells forward at velocities approaching 1 mm/s.
In this section, we first consider the transport of materials in axons. Studies of such axonal transport, a process first
discovered more than 50 years ago, have contributed greatly
to our understanding of microtubule-associated intracellular
transport. We then consider the structure and function of the
microtubule motor proteins. A description of the unique microtubule-based structures and motor proteins responsible for
the movement of cilia and flagella concludes this section.

Axonal Transport Along Microtubules
Is in Both Directions
A neuron must constantly supply new materials—proteins
and membranes—to an axon terminal to replenish those lost
in the exocytosis of neurotransmitters at the junction
(synapse) with another cell. Because proteins and membranes
are synthesized only in the cell body, these materials must be
transported down the axon, which can be as much as a meter
in length, to the synaptic region. This movement of materials
is accomplished on microtubules, which are all oriented with
their () ends toward the terminal (see Figure 20-14c).
The results of classic pulse-chase experiments in which
radioactive precursors are microinjected into the dorsal-root
ganglia near the spinal cord and then tracked along their
nerve axons showed that axonal transport is in both directions. Anterograde transport proceeds from the cell body to

Dorsal ganglion
Dorsal root

Inject
radiolabeled
amino acids

Axons of
sciatic nerve

Spinal cord

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-17 The rate of axonal
transport in vivo can be determined by radiolabeling and gel
electrophoresis. The cell bodies of neurons in the sciatic nerve
are located in dorsal-root ganglia. Radioactive amino acids
injected into these ganglia in experimental animals are
incorporated into newly synthesized proteins, which are then
transported down the axon to the synapse. Animals are
sacrificed at various times after injection and the dissected
sciatic nerve is cut into small segments for analysis with the use
of gel electrophoresis. The red, blue, and purple dots represent
groups of proteins that are transported down the axon at
different rates, red most rapidly, purple least rapidly.

Nerve
segments

1

2

3

4

Assay for various
radiolabeled proteins

830

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
(a)

(b)

Microtubule

0:00

0:24

Vesicles

Video: Organelle Movement Along Microtubules in a Squid Axon

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

0:48

0:60

0:72

0:96

1 m

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-18 DIC microscopy
demonstrates microtubule-based vesicle transport in
vitro. (a) The cytoplasm was squeezed from a squid giant
axon with a roller onto a glass coverslip. After buffer
containing ATP was added to the preparation, it was
viewed in a differential interference contrast microscope,
and the images were recorded on videotape. In the
sequential images shown, the two organelles indicated by
open and solid triangles move in opposite directions
(indicated by colored arrows) along the same filament,

the synaptic terminals and is associated with axonal growth
and the delivery of synaptic vesicles. In the opposite, retrograde, direction, “old” membranes from the synaptic terminals move along the axon rapidly toward the cell body where
they will be degraded in lysosomes. Findings from such experiments also revealed that different materials move at different speeds (Figure 20-17). The fastest-moving material,
consisting of membrane-limited vesicles, has a velocity of
about 250 mm/day, or about 3 m/s. The slowest-moving
material, comprising tubulin subunits and neurofilaments,
moves only a fraction of a millimeter per day. Organelles
such as mitochondria move down the axon at an intermediate rate.

0.1 m

pass each other, and continue in their original directions. Elapsed
time in seconds appears at the upper-right corner of each video
frame. (b) A region of cytoplasm similar to that shown in part (a)
was freeze dried, rotary shadowed with platinum, and viewed in
the electron microscope. Two large structures attached to one
microtubule are visible; these structures presumably are small
vesicles that were moving along the microtubule when the
preparation was frozen. [See B. J. Schnapp et al., 1985, Cell 40:455;
courtesy of B. J. Schnapp, R. D. Vale, M. P. Sheetz, and T. S. Reese.]

Axonal transport can be directly observed by video microscopy of cytoplasm extruded from a squid giant axon. The
movement of vesicles along microtubules in this cell-free system requires ATP, its rate is similar to that of fast axonal
transport in intact cells, and it can proceed in both the anterograde and the retrograde directions (Figure 20-18a). Electron microscopy of the same region of the axon cytoplasm
reveals vesicles attached to individual microtubules (Figure
20-18b). These pioneering in vitro experiments established
definitely that organelles move along individual microtubules
and that their movement requires ATP. As discussed shortly,
these two observations led to the identification of microtubule motor proteins, which generate the movements.

20.2 • Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements
(a)

Gap

831

(b)
40

Distance (µm)

30

20

10

0

150

200

250

300

Time (s)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-19 Transport of GFP-tagged
neurofilaments down axons exhibits periodic pauses. (a) A
segment of an axon is imaged after GFP-labeled neurofilament
protein, NF-M, is expressed in a cultured neuronal cell. Bundles
of labeled neurofilaments are separated by gaps within an axon.
A GFP-labeled neurofilament (arrowhead) is seen to traverse a

Findings from recent experiments in which neurofilaments tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP) were injected into cultured cells suggest that neurofilaments pause
frequently as they move down an axon (Figure 20-19). Although the peak velocity of neurofilaments is similar to that
of fast-moving vesicles, their numerous pauses lower the average rate of transport. These findings suggest that there is
no fundamental difference between fast and slow axonal
transport, although why neurofilament transport stops periodically is unknown.

Kinesin I Powers Anterograde Transport
of Vesicles in Axons
The first microtubule motor protein was identified by using
a simple system consisting of microtubules assembled in vitro
from purified tubulin subunits and stabilized by the drug
taxol. When synaptic vesicles and ATP were added to these
microtubules, the vesicles neither bound to the microtubules
nor moved along them. However, the addition of a cytosolic
extract of squid giant axon (free of tubulin) caused the vesicles to bind to the microtubules and to move along them,
indicating that a soluble protein in the axonal cytosol is required for translocation.
When researchers incubated vesicles, axonal cytosol, and
microtubules in the presence of AMPPNP, a nonhydrolyzable
analog of ATP, the vesicles bound tightly to the microtubules

15-µm gap between two labeled bundles. In this time series, each
frame is taken at 5-second intervals. (b) A plot of the
time-dependent distance traveled shows pauses (arrow) in
neurofilament transport. Although the peak velocity (arrowheads) is
similar to fast axonal transport, the average velocity is much lower.
[From L. Wang et al., 2000, Nature Cell Biol. 2:137; courtesy of A. Brown.]

but did not move. However, the vesicles did move when ATP
was added. These results suggested that a motor protein in
the cytosol binds to microtubules in the presence of ATP
or AMPPNP, but movement requires ATP hydrolysis. To purify the soluble motor protein, scientists incubated a mixture
of microtubules, cell or tissue extract, and AMPPNP, with
the rationale that AMPPNP would promote tight binding
between the microtubules and motor proteins in the extract. After incubation, the microtubules with any bound
proteins were collected by centrifugation. Treatment of the
microtubule-rich material in the pellet with ATP released one
predominant protein back into solution; this protein is now
known as kinesin I.
Kinesin I isolated from squid giant axons is a dimer of
two heavy chains, each complexed to a light chain, with a
total molecular weight of 380,000. The molecule comprises
a pair of large globular head domains connected by a long
central stalk to a pair of small globular tail domains, which
contain the light chains (Figure 20-20). Each domain carries
out a particular function: the head domain, which binds microtubules and ATP, is responsible for the motor activity of
kinesin, and the tail domain is responsible for binding to the
membrane of vesicles, most likely through the kinesin light
chain.
Kinesin-dependent movement of vesicles can be tracked
by in vitro motility assays similar to those used to study
myosin-dependent movements. In one type of assay, a vesicle

832

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

 FIGURE 20-20 Structure of kinesin. (a) Schematic model
of kinesin showing the arrangement of the two heavy chains
(each with a molecular weight of 110,000–135,000) and the two
light chains (60,000–70,000 MW). (b) Three-dimensional structure
of the kinesin dimer based on x-ray crystallography. Each head is
attached to an -helical neck region, which forms a coiled-coil
dimer. Microtubules bind to the helix indicated; this interaction is
regulated by the nucleotide (orange) bound at the opposite side
of the domain. The distance between microtubule binding sites is
5.5 nm. [Part (b) courtesy of E. Mandelkow and E. M. Mandelkow,
adapted from M. Thormahlen et al., 1998, J. Struc. Biol. 122:30.]

(a)

(b)

Head
ADP
Neck

Head

Stalk
Neck

or a plastic bead coated with kinesin is added to a glass
slide along with a preparation of microtubules. In the presence of ATP, the beads can be observed microscopically to
move along a microtubule in one direction. By determining the polarity of the microtubules, researchers found that
the beads coated with kinesin I always moved from the ()
to the () end of a microtubule (Figure 20-21). Thus
kinesin I is a () end–directed microtubule motor protein.
Because this direction corresponds to anterograde transport, kinesin I is implicated as a motor protein that mediates anterograde axonal transport.

Most Kinesins Are Processive
() End–Directed Motor Proteins
To date, approximately 10 different kinesin subfamilies
have been identified. All contain a globular head (motor)
domain, but they differ in their tail domains and several
other properties. In most kinesins, the motor domain is at the
N-terminus (N-type) of the heavy chain but, in others, the
motor domain is centrally located (M-type) or at the
C-terminus (C-type). Both N- and M-type kinesins are ()
end–directed motors, whereas C-type kinesins are () end–
directed motors. Although most kinesins have two heavy
chains (e.g., kinesin I), others have a single heavy chain (e.g.,

MTbinding
sites

Light
chain
Tail

KIF1) or four heavy chains (e.g., BimC). Tetrameric BimC
has an unusual bipolar arrangement in which pairs of motor
domains lie at opposite ends of a central rod segment.
Kinesins can be divided into two broad functional
groups— cytosolic and mitotic kinesins—on the basis of the
nature of the cargo that they transport (Table 20-2). The
functional differences between kinesins are related to their
unique tail domains, which determine their cargoes. Cytosolic kinesins take part in vesicle and organelle transport; they
include the classic axonal kinesin I, which has been shown to
transport lysosomes and other organelles. Some cytosolic kinesins, however, transport one specific cargo. For example,
KIF1B and its close relative KIF1A transport mitochondria
and synaptic vesicles, respectively, to nerve terminals. Other
cytosolic kinesins mediate the transport of secretory vesicles
to the plasma membrane and the radial movement of ER

Video: Kinesin-Driven
Transport of Vesicles Along
Microtubules in Vitro

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Vesicle

Kinesin
receptor
Kinesin
(−)

(+)
Microtubule stationary

▲ FIGURE 20-21 Model of kinesin-catalyzed
vesicle transport. Kinesin molecules, attached to
unidentified receptors on the vesicle surface,
transport the vesicles from the () end to the ()

end of a stationary microtubule. ATP is required for movement.
[Adapted from R. D. Vale et al., 1985, Cell 40:559; and T. Schroer et al.,
1988, J. Cell Biol. 107:1785.]

20.2 • Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements

833

TABLE 20-2 Functional Classes of Microtubule Motor Proteins
Class

Common Members

Cargo

Direction of Movement*

Cytosolic motors

Kinesins (I, KIFIA, KIFIB)

Cytosolic vesicles/organelles

()

Cytosolic dynein

Cytosolic vesicles/organelles

()

Kinesin II

Cytosolic vesicles/organelles

()

Kinesin BimC (bipolar)

Spindle and astral MTs

()

Chromokinesins

Chromosomes (arms)

()

MCAK

Kinetochores

()

CENP-E

Kinetochores

()

Kinesin Ncd

Spindle and astral MTs

()

Cytosolic dynein

Kinetochores, centrosomes, cell
cortex near spindle poles

()

Outer-arm and inner-arm
dyneins†

Doublet microtubules in cilia
and flagella

()

Mitotic motors

Axonemal motors

*Movement of motor protein toward the () end or () end of microtubules.
† Outer-arm dyneins have three heavy chains, and inner-arm dyneins have two heavy chains.

membranes and pigment granules. Mitotic kinesins, in contrast, participate in spindle assembly and chromosome segregation in cell division. This group comprises numerous
proteins, including the kinetochore-associated protein
CENP-E, the bipolar BimC, and a () end–directed motor
protein called Ncd. The functions of mitotic kinesins are described in more detail in Section 20.3.
A sequence called the tetratrico peptide sequence has
been recently identified in the light chains of kinesin I and
may interact with receptor proteins in the membrane of various cargoes. Such interactions would tether the cargo
organelle or vesicle to kinesin. For instance, the tetratrico
peptide sequence has been found to bind to several proteins,
including the amyloid precursor protein. Other kinesins may
have different interaction sequences that bind to other
receptors on membranes.
Two fundamental properties of the kinesin motor—its step
size and force—have been determined in optical-trap experiments similar to those performed on myosin (see Figure 19-18).
Findings from these studies show that a dimeric kinesin molecule (e.g., kinesin I) exerts a force of 6 piconewtons, which is
sufficient to pull a bound vesicle through the viscous cytoplasm. The kinesin step size of 8 nm matches the distance between successive - or -tubulin monomers in a protofilament,
suggesting that kinesin binds to only one or the other monomer.
Electron microscopy reconstructions show that kinesin binds
primarily to -tubulin. In other experiments, researchers have
established that a double-headed kinesin molecule moves along
a single protofilament, with one head always bound to the microtubule. As a result, a kinesin molecule can move along a mi-

crotubule for a long distance without detaching from it, a property referred to as processivity. Because of their high processivity, dimeric kinesins are very efficient in transporting cargo
from one part of a cell to another.
In Chapter 3, we saw that the neck region of myosin,
which acts as a rigid lever arm, is critical in coupling ATP hydrolysis to the movement of myosin along an actin microfilament. In contrast with myosin, kinesin has a flexible neck
domain, which links the head domain to the central stalk domain (see Figure 20-20). Current models propose that ATP hydrolysis by kinesin causes movement of the flexible neck,
which then positions the head domain into the next step along
a microtubule protofilament. According to this model, the direction of kinesin movement depends on neck function, not on
the motor domain. This function of the neck is supported by
findings from recent domain-replacement experiments. For example, replacing the motor domain in () end–directed Ncd
with the motor domain from () end–directed kinesin I
yielded a () end–directed chimeric protein. Likewise, swapping the kinesin and Vcd motor domains into kinesin I produced a () end–directed protein. These results show that the
direction of movement is not an intrinsic property of the
motor domain. However, mutations in the neck region of Ncd
converted it from a () into a () end–directed motor protein.

Cytosolic Dyneins Are () End–Directed Motor
Proteins That Bind Cargo Through Dynactin
The second family of microtubule motor proteins, the
dyneins, is responsible for retrograde axonal transport,

834

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
(a)

(b)

Heavy
chains
p150 Glued

Dynein
Intermediate
chains
Light
chains

Dynamtin
p62

Capping
protein

Membrane

Spectrin

Arp 1

Ankyrin

▲ FIGURE 20-22 Cytosolic dynein and the dynactin
heterocomplex. (a) Diagram of dynein (green) bound to the
dynactin complex (orange) through interactions between the
dynein light chains and the dynamtin subunits of dynactin. The
Arp1 subunits of dynactin form a minifilament that associates
with spectrin underlying the cell membrane. The Glued subunits

bind microtubules and vesicles. (b) Electron micrograph of a
metal replica of the dynactin complex isolated from brain cells.
The Arp1 minifilament (purple) and the dynamtin/Glued side arm
(blue) are visible. [Part (a) adapted from N. Hirokawa, 1998, Science

transit of Golgi vesicles to the centrosome, and some other
() end–directed movements. Dyneins are exceptionally
large, multimeric proteins, with molecular weights exceeding 1  106. They are composed of two or three heavy
chains complexed with a poorly determined number of intermediate and light chains. As summarized in Table 20-2,
the dyneins are divided into two functional classes. Here we
consider cytosolic dynein, which has a role in the movement of vesicles and chromosomes. Axonemal dyneins,
responsible for the beating of cilia and flagella, are considered later.
Like kinesin I, cytosolic dynein is a two-headed molecule,
with two identical or nearly identical heavy chains forming
the head domains. However, unlike kinesin, dynein cannot
mediate cargo transport by itself. Rather, dynein-related
transport requires dynactin, a large protein complex that
links vesicles and chromosomes to the dynein light chains
(Figure 20-22). The results of in vitro binding experiments
show that dynactin also binds to microtubules, thereby enhancing the processivity of dynein-dependent movement.
Dynactin consists of at least eight subunits, including a protein called Glued, which binds microtubules; Arp1, an actinrelated protein that binds spectrin; and dynamtin, which
interacts with the light chains of dynein. The microtubulebinding site in Glued contains a 57-residue motif that is also
present in CLIP170, a microtubule-associated protein that
cross-links microtubules and endocytic vesicles (see Table
20-1). One model proposes that dynein generates the force

for vesicle movement but remains tethered to a microtubule
through dynactin.
As discussed later, several lines of evidence suggest that the
dynein-dynactin complex and another complex, the nuclear/mitotic apparatus (NuMA) protein, mediate the association of microtubules with centrosomes in mitosis. The results
of in vitro studies show that truncated NuMA protein binds
microtubules if the C-terminal region is retained. As in MAPs,
the C-terminal region of NuMA protein is highly acidic, and
ionic interactions may mediate its binding to microtubules.

279:518. Part (b) from D. M. Eckley et al., 1999, J. Cell Biol. 147:307.]

Multiple Motor Proteins Sometimes Move
the Same Cargo
Figure 20-23 summarizes the role of kinesins and cytosolic
dyneins in intracellular transport along microtubules. Because the orientation of microtubules is fixed by the MTOC,
the direction of transport—toward or away from the cell
periphery—depends on the motor protein. Some cargoes,
such as pigment granules, can alternate their direction of
movement along a single microtubule. In this case, both anterograde and retrograde microtubule motor proteins must
associate with the same cargo. Recent biochemical experiments have identified dynactin in a complex with kinesin. A
model proposes that dynactin is part of the membrane receptor and serves as a common adapter for binding kinesin
and cytoplasmic dynein. Thus the direction of movement can
be switched by swapping one motor protein for the other.

20.2 • Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements
(+)

Pigment
granule

Secretory
vesicle

(+)

MTOC

Lysosome

(+)
Mitochondrion

ER/Golgi
(+)

(+)

Cytosolic dyneins

▲ FIGURE 20-23 General model of kinesin- and
dynein-mediated transport in a typical cell. The array
of microtubules, with their () ends pointing toward the
cell periphery, radiates from an MTOC in the Golgi
region. Kinesin-dependent anterograde transport (red)

Cytosolic kinesins

conveys mitochondria, lysosomes, and an assortment of vesicles
to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or cell periphery. Cytosolic
dynein–dependent retrograde transport (green) conveys
mitochondria, elements of the ER, and late endosomes to the
cell center. [Adapted from N. Hirokawa, 1998, Science 279:518.]

Cell membrane
(+)

(+)

(+)
Myosin

(+)

Vesicle

Microfilament

Vesicle
Microtubule

Kinesin

(−)

▲ FIGURE 20-24 Cooperation of myosin and kinesin at
the cell cortex. Microtubules approach the actin-rich cell
membrane. Consequently, some cargoes are transported to
the cell periphery by kinesin motor proteins on microtubules
but complete the journey on microfilaments under the power
of myosin motor proteins.

In some cases, a vesicle must traverse microtubule-poor
but microfilament-rich regions in the cell. For example,
during endocytosis, vesicles from the actin-rich plasma
membrane are carried inward, whereas during secretion,
vesicles derived from the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
are moved outward. The results of several complementary
experiments imply that microtubule and microfilament
motor proteins bind to the same vesicles and cooperate in
their transport. One piece of evidence was obtained from
microscopy of vesicle movements in extruded cytoplasm
from a squid giant axon. As observed many times before,
vesicles traveled along microtubule tracks; surprisingly,
movement continued at the periphery of the extruded cytoplasm through a region containing microfilaments but no
microtubules. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that a
given vesicle could move on a microtubule or a microfilament. Thus at least two motor proteins, myosin and either
kinesin or cytosolic dynein, must be bound to the same
vesicle (Figure 20-24). The discovery that a given vesicle
can travel along both cytoskeletal systems suggests that, in
a neuron, synaptic vesicles are transported at a fast rate by
kinesin in the microtubule-rich axon and then travel
through the actin-rich cortex at the nerve terminal on a
myosin motor.

Eukaryotic Cilia and Flagella Contain a Core
of Doublet Microtubules Studded
with Axonemal Dyneins
Cilia and flagella are flexible membrane extensions that
project from certain cells. They range in length from a few

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

ER

Video: Cytoplasmic Dynein Dynamics in Living
Dictyostelium Cells

Endosome

(−)

Golgi

835

836

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

(a)

Plasma
membrane

Nexin

Central pair
of singlet
microtubules

Inner-arm
dynein

Stalk
Head

1

Outer-arm
dynein

Stem

9
2

Base

8

50 µm

3
7

4
6

Central
sheath

5

100 nm

Radial spoke head
A tubule

B tubule

J. E. Heuser, 1984, J. Mol. Biol. 18:1083.]

Doublet microtubule

(b)
4
5

B tubule

3

A tubule
Dynein arms
6
2

Radial spoke
Central
singlet
microtubule

7

1

9

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-26 Freeze-etching reveals
structure of axonemal dynein. Electron micrograph of freezeetched outer-arm dynein from Tetrahymena cilia and an artist’s
interpretation of the structure. The base contains several
intermediate and light chains. Attached to the common base
are three heavy chains each composed of a long stem, large
globular head domain and small globular domain, and short stalk
connecting the globular domains. Microtubules bind to the tip of
the stalk. All axonemal dyneins are thought to have the general
structure shown here, although some outer-arm dyneins contain
two heavy chains, and inner-arm dyneins contain one or two
heavy chains. [Electron micrograph from U. W. Goodenough and

8
50 nm

▲ FIGURE 20-25 Structure of an axoneme.
(a) Cross-sectional diagram of a typical flagellum showing its
major structures. The dynein arms and radial spokes with
attached heads surround a central pair of singlet microtubules.
(b) Micrograph of a transverse section through an isolated
demembranated cilium. [See U. W. Goodenough and J. E. Heuser,
1985, J. Cell Biol. 100:2008. Part (b) courtesy of L. Tilney.]

micrometers to more than 2 mm for some insect sperm flagella.
Virtually all eukaryotic cilia and flagella possess a central bundle of microtubules, called the axoneme, which consists of nine

doublet microtubules surrounding a central pair of singlet microtubules (Figure 20-25). This characteristic “9  2” arrangement of microtubules is seen in cross section with the electron
microscope. Each doublet microtubule consists of A and B
tubules. The () end of axonemal microtubules is at the distal
end of the axoneme. At its point of attachment to the cell, the
axoneme connects with the basal body. Containing nine triplet
microtubules (see Figure 20-4), the basal body plays an important role in initiating the growth of the axoneme.
The axoneme is held together by three sets of protein
cross-links (see Figure 20-25a). The central pair of singlet
microtubules is connected by periodic bridges, like rungs on
a ladder, and is surrounded by a fibrous structure termed the
inner sheath. A second set of linkers, composed of the protein nexin, joins adjacent outer doublet microtubules. Radial
spokes, which radiate from the central singlets to each A
tubule of the outer doublets, are proposed to regulate dynein.
Permanently attached periodically along the length of the
A tubule of each doublet microtubule are inner-arm and
outer-arm dyneins (see Figure 20-25a). These axonemal
dyneins are complex multimers of heavy chains, intermediate
chains, and light chains. When isolated axonemal dyneins
are slightly denatured and spread out on an electron microscope grid, they are seen as a bouquet of two or three “blossoms” connected to a common base (Figure 20-26). Each
blossom consists of a large globular head domain attached to
a small globular domain through a short stalk; a stem connects one or more blossoms to a common base. The base is
thought to attach a dynein to the A tubule, whereas the globular domains project outward toward the B tubule of the
neighboring doublet.

20.2 • Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements

A single dynein heavy chain, which forms each stalk,
head, and stem is enormous, approximately 4500 amino
acids in length with a molecular weight exceeding 540,000.
At least eight or nine different heavy chains have been identified, each capable of hydrolyzing ATP. On the basis of
sequence comparisons with the ATP-binding sites in other
proteins, the ATP-binding site of axonemal dynein is predicted to lie in the globular head domain of the heavy chain,
with the microtubule-binding site being at the tip of the stalk.
Inner-arm dyneins are either one- or two-headed structures,
containing one or two heavy chains. Outer-arm dyneins contain two heavy chains (e.g., in a sea urchin sperm flagellum)
or three heavy chains (e.g., in Tetrahymena cilia and Chlamydomonas flagella).
The intermediate and light chains in axonemal dynein are
thought to form the base region. These chains help mediate the
attachment of the dynein arm to the A tubule and may also
participate in regulating dynein activity. The base proteins of
axonemal dyneins are thus analogous to those composing the
dynactin complexes associated with cytosolic dynein.

Ciliary and Flagellar Beating Are Produced by
Controlled Sliding of Outer Doublet Microtubules
Ciliary and flagellar beating is characterized by a series of
bends, originating at the base of the structure and propagated toward the tip (Figure 20-27). The bends push against
the surrounding fluid, propelling the cell forward or moving
the fluid across a fixed epithelium. A bend results from the
sliding of adjacent doublet microtubules past one another.
Because active sliding occurs all along the axoneme, bends
can be propagated without damping. Findings from microscopic studies with isolated axonemes from which the crosslinkage proteins (e.g., nexin) are removed have shown that
doublet microtubules slide past one another in the presence
of ATP but no bending occurs (Figure 20-28a). Thus the

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-27 Video microscopy shows
flagellar movements that propel sperm and Chlamydomonas
forward. In both cases, the cells are moving to the left. (a) In the
typical sperm flagellum, successive waves of bending originate at
the base and are propagated out toward the tip; these waves push
against the water and propel the cell forward. Captured in this
multiple-exposure sequence, a bend at the base of the sperm in
the first (top) frame has moved distally halfway along the flagellum
by the last frame. A pair of gold beads on the flagellum are seen to
slide apart as the bend moves through their region. (b) Beating of
the two flagella on Chlamydomonas occurs in two stages, called
the effective stroke (top three frames) and the recovery stroke
(remaining frames). The effective stroke pulls the organism through
the water. During the recovery stroke, a different wave of bending
moves outward from the bases of the flagella, pushing the flagella
along the surface of the cell until they reach the position to initiate
another effective stroke. Beating commonly occurs 5–10 times
per second. [Part (a) from C. Brokaw, 1991, J. Cell Biol. 114(6): cover
photograph; courtesy of C. Brokaw. Part (b) courtesy of S. Goldstein.]

837

ATP-dependent movement of doublet microtubules must be
restricted by cross-linking proteins in order for sliding to be
converted into the bending of an axoneme.
On the basis of the polarity and direction of sliding of the
doublet microtubules and the properties of axonemal
dyneins, the small head domains of the dynein arms on the A
tubule of one doublet are thought to “walk” along the adjacent doublet’s B tubule toward its base, the () end (Figure
20-28b). The force producing active sliding requires ATP and
probably entails a conformational change in the head and
stem that translocates the stalk. Successive binding and
hydrolysis of ATP causes the dynein stalks to successively
release from and attach to the adjacent doublet. Although
this general model is most likely correct, many important details such as the mechanism of force transduction by dynein
are still unknown.

(a)

(b)

838
(a)

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
Dynein arms

Most kinesins are dimers with a head domain that binds
microtubules and ATP and a tail domain that binds vesicles or other cargo (see Figure 20-20). The flexible neck
region determines the direction of kinesin movement, and
the tail domain determines cargo specificity.

■

()
()

()

()

B

■ Cytosolic dyneins are linked to their cargoes (vesicles and
chromosomes) by dynactin, a large multiprotein complex (see
Figure 20-22). Dynactin also binds to microtubules, thereby
increasing the processivity of dynein-mediated transport.

A

In microtubule-poor regions of the cell, vesicles are
probably transported along microfilaments powered by a
myosin motor.

■

(b)

Flagellar beating propels cells forward, and ciliary beating sweeps materials across tissues.

■

Stalk

The axoneme in both flagella and cilia contains nine
outer doublet microtubules arranged in a circle around two
central singlet microtubules (see Figure 20-25).

■

Axonemal dyneins, which are larger and more complex
than cytosolic dyneins, are permanently attached to doublet microtubules in axonemes. The dynein arms with their
small globular heads project toward the adjacent doublet.

■

Stem
Head

Walking of dynein arms extending from one doublet toward the () end of a neighboring doublet generates a sliding force in the axoneme (see Figure 20-27). This linear
force is converted into a bend by regions that resist sliding.

■

Prestroke

Poststroke

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-28 In vitro dyneinmediated sliding of doublet microtubules requires ATP.
(a) Electron micrograph of two doublet microtubules in a
protease-treated axoneme incubated with ATP. In the absence
of cross-linking proteins, which are removed by the protease,
doublet microtubules slide excessively. The dynein arms can be
seen projecting from A tubules and interacting with B tubule of
the top microtubule. (b) Single-headed dynein molecules in their
prestroke and poststroke states. Thousands of images of purified
inner-arm dynein were recorded in an electron microscope and
then averaged. A comparison of dynein containing ADP and
vanadate, a state mimicking the ADP-Pi state, with dynein absent
of any bound nucleotide, suggests that the difference in structure
may be related to the conformational changes taking place in the
ATP cycle. A model of the force-generation mechanism suggests
that the head changes orientation relative to the stem, causing
a movement of the microtubule-binding stalk. [Part (a) courtesy of
P. Satir. Part (b) from S. A. Burgess et al., 2003, Nature 421:715; courtesy
of S. A. Burgess.]

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 20.2
Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements
Two families of motor proteins, kinesin and dynein,
transport membrane-limited vesicles, proteins, and organelles along microtubules (see Table 20-2).

■

■ Nearly all kinesins move cargo toward the () end of
microtubules (anterograde transport), whereas dyneins
transport cargo toward the () end (retrograde transport).

20.3 Microtubule Dynamics
and Motor Proteins in Mitosis
Mitosis is the process that partitions newly replicated chromosomes equally into separate parts of a cell. The last step in
the cell cycle, mitosis takes about 1 hour in an actively dividing animal cell (see Figure 1-17). In that period, the cell builds
and then disassembles a specialized microtubule structure, the
mitotic apparatus. Larger than the nucleus, the mitotic apparatus is designed to attach and capture chromosomes, align the
chromosomes, and then separate them so that the genetic material is evenly partitioned to each daughter cell. Fifteen hours
later, the whole process is repeated by the two daughter cells.
Figure 20-29 depicts the characteristic series of events
that can be observed by light microscopy in mitosis in a eukaryotic cell. Although the events unfold continuously, they
are conventionally divided into four substages: prophase,
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. The beginning of mitosis is signaled by the appearance of condensing chromosomes, first visible as thin threads inside the nucleus. By late
prophase, each chromosome appears as two identical filaments, the chromatids (often called sister chromatids), held
together at a constricted region, the centromere. Each chromatid contains one of the two new daughter DNA molecules
produced in the preceding S phase of the cell cycle; thus each
cell that enters mitosis has four copies of each chromosomal
DNA, designated 4n.

20.3 • Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis
(a) Interphase (G2)

(b) Prophase

Kinetochore

Sister
chromatids

(e) Anaphase

(f) Telophase

(g) Interphase (G1)

Cleavage
furrow

▲ FIGURE 20-29 The stages of mitosis and cytokinesis in an
animal cell. For simplicity, only two sets of duplicated
chromosomes, distinguished by color, are depicted. (a) Interphase
(G2): DNA and centrosome replication. After DNA replication during
the S phase, the chromosomes, each containing a sister chromatid,
are decondensed and not visible as distinct structures. By G2
the centrioles have replicated to form daughter centrosomes.
(b) Prophase: centrosome migration. The centrosomes, each with a
daughter centriole, begin moving toward opposite poles of the cell.
The chromosomes begin to condense, appearing as long threads.
(c) Prometaphase: spindle formation. The nuclear envelope
fragments into small vesicles and spindle microtubules enter the
nuclear region. Chromosome condensation is completed; each
visible chromosome is composed of two chromatids held together
at their centromeres. Kinetochores at centromeres attach

In Chapter 21, we consider in detail how progression
through the cell cycle, and hence cell replication, is regulated.
In this section, we focus on the mechanics of mitosis in a
“typical” animal cell. Mistakes in mitosis can lead to missing
or extra chromosomes, causing abnormal patterns of development when they occur during embryogenesis and pathologies when they occur after birth. To ensure that mitosis
proceeds without errors in the trillions of cell divisions that
take place in the life span of an organism, a highly redundant
mechanism has evolved in which each crucial step is carried
out concurrently by microtubule motor proteins and microtubule assembly dynamics.

chromosomes to spindle microtubules. (d) Metaphase:
chromosome alignment. The chromosomes move
toward the equator of the cell, where they become
aligned in the equatorial plane. (e) Anaphase:
chromosome separation. The two sister chromatids
separate into independent chromosomes. Each
chromosome, attached to a kinetochore microtubule,
moves toward one pole. Simultaneously, the poles move
apart. (f) Telophase and cytokinesis. Nuclear membranes
re-form around the daughter nuclei; the chromosomes
decondense and become less distinct. The spindle
disappears as the microtubules depolymerize, and cell
cleavage proceeds. (g) Interphase (G1): Following
cleavage, the daughter cells enter G1 of interphase.

The Mitotic Apparatus Is a Microtubule Machine
for Separating Chromosomes
The structure of the mitotic apparatus changes constantly
during the course of mitosis (Figure 20-30). For one brief
moment at metaphase, however, the chromosomes are
aligned at the equator of the cell. We begin our discussion
by examining the structure of the mitotic apparatus at
metaphase and then describe how it captures and organizes
chromosomes during prophase, how it separates chromosomes during anaphase, and how it determines where cells
divide during telophase.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Spindle poles

(d) Metaphase

Focus Animation: Mitosis

Centrosomes

(c) Prometaphase

839

840

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
(b)

(a)

Early prophase

Focus Animation: Mitosis

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

(c)

Prometaphase
(d)

Metaphase

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-30 Fluorescence
microscopy reveals changes in the organization of
chromosomes and microtubules at four mitotic stages.
Cultured fibroblasts were stained with a fluorescent antitubulin antibody (green) and the DNA-binding dye ethidium
(purple). Thus in these fluorescence micrographs, green
reveals microtubules; purple, chromatin; and blue, regions
with both structures. (a) During early prophase, the nucleus
is surrounded by an array of interphase microtubules and
the chromatin is diffuse. (b) By prometaphase, the nuclear

At metaphase, the mitotic apparatus is organized into
two parts: a central mitotic spindle and a pair of asters (Figure 20-31a; see also Figure 20-2c). The spindle is a bilaterally
symmetric bundle of microtubules and associated proteins
with the overall shape of a football; it is divided into opposing halves at the equator of the cell by the metaphase chromosomes. An aster is a radial array of microtubules at each
pole of the spindle.
In each half of the spindle, a single centrosome at the pole
organizes three distinct sets of microtubules whose () ends
all point toward the centrosome (Figure 20-31b). One set,
the astral microtubules, forms the aster; they radiate outward from the centrosome toward the cortex of the cell,
where they help position the mitotic apparatus and later help
to determine the cleavage plane in cytokinesis. The other two
sets of microtubules compose the spindle. The kinetochore
microtubules attach to chromosomes at specialized attachment sites on the chromosomes called kinetochores. Polar
microtubules do not interact with chromosomes but instead
overlap with polar microtubules from the opposite pole. Two
types of interactions hold the spindle halves together to form

Anaphase

membrane has broken down and the replicated centrosomes
(centrioles) have migrated to the poles from which microtubules
radiate. (c) At metaphase, the fully condensed chromosomes
have aligned midway between the poles to form the metaphase
plate. Dense bundles of microtubules connect the chromosomes
to the poles. (d) In late anaphase, the chromosomes are pulled to
the poles along the radiating microtubules. [From J. C. Waters, R.
W. Cole, and C. L. Rieder, 1993, J. Cell Biol. 122:361; courtesy of C. L.
Rieder.]

the bilaterally symmetric mitotic apparatus: (1) lateral
interactions between the overlapping () ends of the polar
microtubules and (2) end-on interactions between the kinetochore microtubules and the kinetochores of the sister chromatids. The large protein complexes, called cohesins, that
link sister chromatids together are discussed in Chapter 21.
The mitotic apparatus is basic to mitosis in all organisms,
but its appearance and components can vary widely. In the
budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, for instance, the mitotic apparatus consists of just a spindle, which itself is constructed from a minimal number of kinetochore and polar
microtubules. These microtubules are organized by spindle
pole bodies, trilaminated structures located in the nuclear
membrane, which do not break down during mitosis. Furthermore, because a yeast cell is small, it does not require welldeveloped asters to assist in mitosis. Although the spindle pole
body and centrosome differ structurally, they have proteins
such as -tubulin in common that act to organize the mitotic
spindle. Like yeast cells, most plant cells do not contain visible centrosomes. We consider the unique features of the mitotic apparatus in plant cells at the end of this section.

20.3 • Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis
(a)

(b)

841

Zone of interdigitation

Kinetochore MT

Kinetochore

(+)

Astral
MT
(+)

(+)

(+)

(+)

(+)

(−)

(−)

(+)

(+)
Pole
(centrosome)
(+)

Polar MTs
Aster

Spindle

Chromosome
Aster

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-31 High-voltage electron
microscopy visualizes components of the mitotic apparatus
in a metaphase mammalian cell. (a) Microtubules were
stained with biotin-tagged anti-tubulin antibodies to increase
their size in this electron micrograph. The large cylindrical objects
are chromosomes. (b) Schematic diagram corresponding to the
metaphase cell in (a). Three sets of microtubules (MTs) make up

the mitotic apparatus. All the microtubules have their () ends at
the poles (centrosomes). Astral microtubules project toward the
cortex and are linked to it. Kinetochore microtubules are
connected to chromosomes (blue). Polar microtubules project
toward the cell center with their distal () ends overlapping. [Part

The Kinetochore Is a Centromere-Based Protein
Complex That Captures and Helps Transport
Chromosomes

proteins that link the kinetochore to the spindle are homologous in humans and yeast. Microtubule-binding proteins
(e.g., CLIP170, CENP-E) and microtubule motor proteins
(e.g., the mitotic kinesin MCAK and cytosolic dynein) cooperate in attaching the kinetochore to a microtubule end while
tubulin subunits are added or released. The presence of these
motor proteins indicates that kinetochores play a role in transporting chromosomes to opposite ends of the cell in mitosis.

The sister chromatids of a metaphase chromosome are transported to each pole bound to kinetochore microtubules. In
regard to their attachment to microtubules and movement,
chromosomes differ substantially from the vesicle and organelle cargoes transported along cytosolic microtubules.
The linkage of metaphase chromosomes to the () ends of
kinetochore microtubules is mediated by a large protein
complex, the kinetochore, which has several functions: to
trap and attach microtubule ends to the chromosomes, to
generate force to move chromosomes along microtubules,
and to regulate chromosome separation and translocation
to the poles. In an animal cell, the kinetochore forms at the
centromere and is organized into an inner and outer layer
embedded within a fibrous corona (Figure 20-32).
In all eukaryotes, three components participate in attaching chromosomes to microtubules: the centromere, kinetochore and spindle proteins, and the cell-cycle machinery.
The location of the centromere and hence that of the kinetochore is directly controlled by a specific sequence of chromosomal DNA termed centromeric DNA (Chapter 10).
Although the sequences of centromeric DNA and of DNAbinding proteins in the kinetochore are not well conserved
through evolution, the cell-cycle proteins and many of the

(a) courtesy of J. R. McIntosh.]

Duplicated Centrosomes Align and Begin
Separating in Prophase
Because each half of the metaphase mitotic apparatus emanates from a polar centrosome, its assembly depends on duplication of the centrosome and movement of the daughter
centrosomes to opposite halves of the cell. This process,
known as the centriole cycle (or centrosome cycle) marks
the first steps in mitosis, beginning during G1 when the
centrioles and other centrosome components are duplicated
(Figure 20-33). By G2, the two “daughter” centrioles have
reached full length, but the duplicated centrioles are still
present within a single centrosome. Early in mitosis, the two
pairs of centrioles separate and migrate to opposite sides of
the nucleus, establishing the bipolarity of the dividing cell. In
some respects, then, mitosis can be understood as the migration of duplicated centrosomes, which along their journey
pick up chromosomes, pause in metaphase, and during

842

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
(a)

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-32
Kinetochore proteins mediate attachment
of chromosomes to microtubules. (a)
Electron micrograph section through a
kinetochore reveals
the microtubules (MT), inner and outer
kinetochore layers (IL and OL), and
chromosome. (b) In animal cells, the
kinetochore consists of an inner layer
containing proteins that bind centromeric
DNA and an outer layer connected to the ()
ends of kinetochore microtubules. The
microtubules embedded in the outer layer
extend toward one of the two poles of the
cell. The outer layer and fibrous corona
around the microtubule ends contain
microtubule-binding proteins and motor
proteins, including CLIP170, cytosolic dynein,
and the kinesins CENP-E and MCAK. [Part (a)

OL
IL

(b)
Sister
chromatids

MT

Kinetochore
microtubules

from B. McEwen et al., 1998, Chromosoma
107:366; courtesy of B. McEwen.]

Kinetochore

Outer layer

Inner layer

Centromere DNA

Centromere

Dynein
Kinetochore microtubule
(+) end

MCAK
CENP-E

Cytosol

Fibrous corona

 FIGURE 20-33 Relation of
centrosome duplication to the cell
cycle. After the pair of parent centrioles
(red) separates slightly, a daughter
centriole (blue) buds from each and
elongates. By G2, growth of the daughter
centrioles is complete, but the two pairs
remain within a single centrosomal
complex. Early in mitosis, the centrosome
splits, and each centriole pair migrates to
opposite ends of the cell.

G1

S

G2

M

G1

20.3 • Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis

anaphase continue their movement to new locations in the
daughter cells, where they release the chromosomes and organize the cytosolic microtubules.
Microtubule dynamics change drastically at the onset of
mitosis, when long interphase microtubules disappear and
are replaced by astral and spindle microtubules. These mitotic microtubules, which are nucleated from the newly duplicated centrosomes, are more numerous, shorter, and less
stable than interphase microtubules. The average lifetime of
a microtubule decreases from 10 minutes in interphase cells
to 60–90 seconds in the mitotic apparatus. This increase in
dynamic instability enables microtubules to assemble and
disassemble quickly in mitosis.
The results of genetic and cell biological studies, primarily
in yeast and flies, have implicated several kinesins in organ-

(a)

(+)

(+)

(−)

(−)

1

(−)

Microtubule
alignment

)+(

(−)

(−) end–directed
movement

(b)

Centrosome
separation

Pushing forces
in overlap zone
)+(
(−)

(−)

)+(
)+(

(−)

(−)

(−)

izing polar microtubules into a bipolar array, thereby orienting assembly of the spindle and spindle asters. For instance,
antibodies against either a () or a () end–directed kinesin inhibit the formation of a bipolar spindle when they are microinjected into a cell before but not after prophase. A ()
end–directed kinesin protein, such as Kin-C, is thought to help
align the oppositely oriented polar microtubules extending
from each centrosome. Then a () end–directed kinesin, most
likely the bipolar BimC, cross-links antiparallel microtubules
and pushes them apart. In addition, findings from localization
experiments with anti-dynein antibodies have demonstrated
the presence of cytosolic dynein in the centrosomes and cortex of dividing animal cells. The results of other studies with
yeast mutants lacking cytosolic dynein suggest that dynein at
the cortex simultaneously helps tether the astral microtubules
and orient the poles of the spindle. Thus the alignment and initial separation of centrosomes at prophase depend on the
growth of polar and astral microtubules and on the action of
several motor proteins, as depicted in Figure 20-34.
Although centrosomes facilitate the formation of the
spindle poles, recent findings show that polar microtubules
can be assembled and organized into antiparallel bundles in
the absence of centrosomes. For instance, the Ran GTPase
that functions in nuclear import and export (Chapter 12)
appears to promote the polymerization of tubulin subunits.
Ran acts with other proteins, possibly motor proteins, to stabilize microtubules by increasing their frequency of rescue.

Formation of the Metaphase Mitotic Spindle
Requires Motor Proteins and Dynamic
Microtubules

(+)

2

843

(−)

(+)
Pulling force on asters

▲ FIGURE 20-34 Model for participation of microtubule
motor proteins in centrosome movements at prophase. (a) At
prophase, polar microtubules growing randomly from opposite
poles are aligned with the aid of () end–directed motors (orange).
(b) After alignment, () end–directed mitotic kinesins (yellow),
including the bipolar kinesin BimC, generate pushing forces that
separate the poles. In addition, a () end–directed force exerted
by cytosolic dynein (green) located at the cortex may pull asters
toward the poles. Similar forces act later at anaphase.

When the duplicated centrosomes have become aligned, formation of the spindle proceeds, driven by simultaneous events
at centrosomes and chromosomes. As just discussed, the centrosome facilitates spindle formation by nucleating the assembly of the spindle microtubules. In addition, the () ends
of microtubules are gathered and stabilized at the pole by
dynein-dynactin working with the nuclear/mitotic apparatus
protein. The role of dynein in spindle pole formation has been
demonstrated by reconstitution studies in which bipolar spindles form in Xenopus egg extracts in the presence of centrosomes, microtubules, and sperm nuclei. The addition of
antibodies against cytosolic dynein to this in vitro system releases and splays the spindle microtubules but leaves the centrosomal astral microtubules in position (Figure 20-35).
The dynamic instability of spindle microtubules at the
other end, the () end, is critical to their capture of chromosomes during late prophase as the nuclear membrane begins to
break down. By quickly lengthening and shortening at its ()
end, a dynamic microtubule probes into the chromosome-rich
environment of the cell. Sometimes the () end of a microtubule directly contacts a kinetochore, scoring a “bull’s-eye.”
More commonly, a kinetochore contacts the side of a microtubule and then slides along the microtubule to the () end in
a process that includes cytosolic dynein and mitotic kinesins

844

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules
(a)
Kinetochore
Growing microtubule
(+)
Spindle
pole

(+)
(+)

Shrinking microtubule

End capture

(b)

1

(+)

Control

Side capture

Chromosome 2
slides to the
(+) end

Addition of dynein antibody

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-35 Cytosolic dynein
participates in the formation and stabilization of mitotic
spindle poles. In vitro reconstituted spindles were stained with
fluorescently-labeled polyclonal antibodies to tubulin (green) and
dynein (red) and examined with a fluorescence microsope. In the
control spindle (left), cytosolic dynein is present at each tapered
end, as well as at the equator. Addition of a dynein monoclonal
antibody after the formation of the spindle (right) disrupts dynein
localization and causes the poles to splay. [From R. Heald et al.,

▲ FIGURE 20-36 Capture of chromosomes by microtubules
in prometaphase. (a) In late prophase, spindle microtubules
probe randomly for chromosomes by alternately growing and
shrinking at their distal () ends. (b) Some chromosomes first
encounter the side ( 1 ), not the end, of a microtubule, interacting
with the microtubule through proteins at the kinetochore.
Kinetochore-associated () end–directed motor proteins (e.g.,
MCAK) then move the chromosome to the () end ( 2 ), thereby
stabilizing the microtubule.

1997, J. Cell Biol. 138:615; courtesy of R. Heald.]

(a) Motor-generated forces

(b) Treadmilling

CENP-E
(+)

(−)

Dynein

Focus Animation: Microtubule Dynamics

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

(+)

(−)

Chromokinesin
(+)
(+)

Polar
microtubules
(−)

(+)
(+)

▲ FIGURE 20-37 Model of the forces stabilizing
metaphase chromosomes at the equatorial plate.
(a) Cytoplasmic dynein, a () end–directed motor (light
green) at the kinetochore and a () end–directed motor
(pink) at the spindle pole pull chromosomes toward the
pole. Chromokinesin, a nonkinetochore () end–directed
motor on the chromatid arms, exerts an opposite force on

polar microtubules, pushing chromosomes away from the pole.
CENP-E, a kinesin that does not mediate movement, keeps
the kinetochore tethered to the kinetochore microtubule.
(b) Treadmilling of tubulin subunits briefly stabilizes the
lengths of spindle microtubules at metaphase by balancing
assembly at the kinetochore with disassembly at the poles.

20.3 • Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis
(a)

845

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-38

(b)

Metaphase
chromosomes
Kinetochore

Pole
Pole-to-pole image slice

Sequential slices (time)

Mitchison and E. D. Salmon, 2001, Nature
Cell Biol. 3:E17; courtesy of A. Desai.]

on the kinetochore (Figure 20-36). Whether a chromosome
attaches to the () end of a spindle microtubule by a direct hit
or by the side capture/sliding process, the kinetochore “caps”
the () end of the microtubule. Eventually, the kinetochore of
each sister chromatid in a chromosome is captured by microtubules arising from the nearest spindle poles. Each chromosome arm becomes attached to additional microtubules as
mitosis progresses toward metaphase.
During late prophase (prometaphase), the newly condensed chromosomes attached to the () ends of kinetochore
microtubules move to the equator of the spindle. Along the
way, the chromosomes exhibit saltatory behavior, oscillating
between movements toward and then away from the pole or
equator. These oscillations result from alternating depolymerization and polymerization at the () ends of kinetochore microtubules. In addition, motor proteins associated with both
ends of kinetochore microtubules and with the distal ends of
polar microtubules on chromosome arms generate opposing
forces that are thought to position captured chromosomes
equally between the two spindle poles (Figure 20-37a).
Although the lengths of kinetochore and polar microtubules eventually become stable, there continues to be a flow,
or treadmilling, of subunits through the microtubules toward
the poles. At metaphase, the loss of tubulin subunits at the ()
ends of spindle microtubules is balanced by the addition of
subunits at the () ends (Figure 20-37b). The flow of tubulin
subunits from kinetochores to the poles can be visualized after
a very small “pulse” of fluorescently labeled tubulin subunits
has been microinjected into a cell (Figure 20-38). Microtubules
appear speckled because very few of the subunits are fluores-

cent. By comparing the positions of each speckle, one can see
whether the tubulin subunits are moving in a specific direction.
The images show that the mitotic spindle at metaphase is a
finely balanced, yet dynamic, structure that holds chromosomes at the equatorial plate. By mechanisms discussed in
Chapter 21, the cell cycle is held in check until all chromosomes have been captured and aligned. A single unattached
kinetochore is sufficient to prevent entry into anaphase.

Anaphase Chromosomes Separate and the
Spindle Elongates
The same forces that form the spindle during prophase and
metaphase also direct the separation of chromosomes toward opposite poles at anaphase. Anaphase is divided into
two distinct stages, anaphase A and anaphase B (early and
late anaphase). Anaphase A is characterized by the shortening of kinetochore microtubules at their () ends, which
pulls the chromosomes toward the poles. In anaphase B,
the two poles move farther apart, bringing the attached
chromosomes with them into what will become the two
daughter cells.

Microtubule Shortening in Anaphase A The results of in
vitro studies have indicated that the depolymerization of
microtubules in Xenopus eggs is sufficient to move chromosomes toward the poles. In one such study, purified microtubules were mixed with purified anaphase chromosomes; as
expected, the kinetochores bound preferentially to the ()
ends of the microtubules. To induce depolymerization of the

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Kinetochore

Video: Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy of
Metaphase Dynamics

Pole

Poleward flux of tubulin subunits
during metaphase is visualized by
fluorescence speckle microscopy.
(a) When a substoichiometric amount
of fluorescent tubulin subunits is
assembled into a microtubule, the
microtubule appears speckled. (b) In
a live cell at metaphase, the speckled
microtubules do not have the fibrous
appearance observed in conventional
fluorescence microscopy. However,
the dynamics of subunit translocation
is revealed by taking a slice through
the same position from each frame
of a time-lapse series (boxed area). If
the labeled tubulin subunits move,
then the slope of the line formed by
a speckle in consecutive images
corresponds to the translocation rate.
Here, the speckles on both sides of
the spindle travel toward the poles at
a rate of 0.75 µm/s. [Part (b) from T. J.

846

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

(+)

(−)

Kinetochore
microtubules
containing
fluorescent
tubulin

(+)

(−)

Pole
(MTOC)

Target region
for laser light
Expose to laser light;
kinetochore microtubules
depolymerize at (+) ends
and kinetochores move
toward poles
Bleached region
of microtubules

Free fluorescent
tubulin

powered, in some way, by microtubule disassembly and must
not have been powered by microtubule motor proteins.
The in vivo fluorescence-tagging experiment depicted in
Figure 20-39 provides evidence that shortening of kinetochore microtubules at their () ends moves chromosomes toward the poles in mammalian cells. A kinetochore-associated
kinesin, MCAK, promotes disassembly at the () end while
CENP-E, also at kinetochores, binds to the progressively
shortening end. According to this model, microtubule disassembly drives poleward movement of chromosomes. Although kinetochore kinesins promote this disassembly or
keep chromosomes attached to the shortening () end of
kinetochore microtubules, they do not actually move chromosomes along the microtubules.

Spindle Elongation in Anaphase B Findings from several
types of experiments have implicated three processes in the
separation of the poles in anaphase B: a pushing force gen-

Overlap zone
)+(

)+(
)+(
)+(

No
depolymerization
Region of
depolymerization

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-39 Shortening at the ()
end of kinetochore microtubules moves chromosomes
poleward in anaphase A. Fibroblasts are injected with
fluorescent tubulin and then allowed to enter metaphase so that
all the microtubules are fluorescent. Only the kinetochore
microtubules are shown. In early anaphase, a band of
microtubules (yellow box) is subjected to a laser light, which
bleaches the fluorescence but leaves the microtubules
continuous and functional across the bleached region. The
bleached segment of each microtubule thus provides a marker
for the position of that part of the microtubule. In anaphase, the
distance between the bleached zone and the adjacent pole
(marked by red double-headed arrows) does not change, whereas
the distance to the adjacent chromatid (marked by black doubleheaded arrows) becomes shorter. This finding indicates that
during anaphase microtubules disassemble at the () end just
behind the kinetochores, not at the poles. [Adapted from G. J.
Gorbsky et al., 1987, J. Cell Biol. 104:9, and 1988, J. Cell Biol. 106:1185.]

microtubules, the reaction mixture was diluted, thus lowering
the concentration of free tubulin dimers. Video microscopy analysis then showed that the chromosomes moved
toward the () end, at a rate similar to that of chromosome
movement during anaphase in intact cells. Because no ATP
(or any other energy source) was present in these experiments,
chromosome movement toward the () end must have been

)+(

)+(

)−(

)+(

)+(

)+(

)−(

)+(
)+(

)+(

ATP; microtubule polymerization

Newly polymerized tubulin

Overlap zone

▲ FIGURE 20-40 Model of spindle elongation and
movement of poles during anaphase B. One or more
() end–directed spindle kinesins (orange) bind to antiparallel
polar microtubules in the overlap region and then “walk” along a
microtubule in the other half-spindle toward its () end. In cells
that assemble an aster, cytoplasmic dynein, a () end–directed
motor protein (green) anchored in the cortex of the plasma
membrane, walks along astral microtubules, pulling the poles
outward. Tubulin subunits are simultaneously added to the plus
ends of all polar microtubules, thereby lengthening the spindle.
[Adapted from H. Masuda and W. Z. Cande, 1987, Cell 49:193.]

20.3 • Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis

erated by kinesin-mediated sliding of polar microtubules past
one another, a pulling force generated by cortex-associated
cytosolic dynein, and lengthening of polar microtubules at
their () ends. The coordinated effect of these processes is
depicted in Figure 20-40.
When metaphase cells are depleted of ATP by mild
detergent treatment, poleward chromosome movement
(anaphase A) proceeds but the spindle poles do not separate
(anaphase B). This finding indicates that microtubule motor
proteins take part in separating the spindle poles, as they
do in centrosome movement in prometaphase (see Figure
20-34). Experiments with artificial spindles assembled from
frog egg extracts were sources of further insight into anaphase
B movements. In the presence of calcium, the spindle is activated and elongates, simulating anaphase B, and the zone of
overlap between the two halves of the spindle decreases in
length. The observation that adjacent antiparallel microtubules in this system migrate in the direction of their pole-facing () ends suggests that a () end–directed kinesin separates
spindle poles in anaphase B. In one model, the bipolar kinesin
BimC attached to a microtubule in the overlap region walks
toward the () end of a neighboring but antiparallel microtubule, thus pushing the adjacent microtubule in the direction
of its () end (see Figure 20-40). Involvement of a kinesin
motor is supported by experiments in which antibodies raised
against a conserved region of the kinesin superfamily inhibit
ATP-induced elongation of diatom spindles in vitro.
In the presence of -tubulin, reactivated frog spindles
and isolated diatom spindles add tubulin subunits to the
() end of polar microtubules, thus lengthening them. The
third process taking place in anaphase B can be demonstrated by cutting the spindle in half with a microneedle at
anaphase; the resulting half-spindles move quickly to the
poles, at a rate faster than usual during anaphase. This observation suggests that cytosolic dynein, a () end–directed
motor protein associated with the cortex, pulls on astral
microtubules, thereby moving the poles farther apart (see
Figure 20-40).

847

Microtubules and Microfilaments Work
Cooperatively During Cytokinesis
After the chromosomes have migrated to opposite ends of
the cell during anaphase, two closely related events proceed
(see Figure 20-29): the nuclear envelope re-forms around
each complete set of chromosomes, marking the end of mitosis (telophase), and the cytoplasm divides, a process termed

First
cleavage

Second
cleavage

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 20-41 Micromanipulation
experiments can determine whether the spindle or the asters
control location of the cleavage plane during cytokinesis. A
small glass ball is pressed against a fertilized egg until
membranes from opposite sides of the cell touch and fuse, thus
changing the spherical egg into a doughnut shape. In the first
cell division, a normal spindle develops and the doughnut-shaped
cell divides to produce a single C-shaped cell with two normal
nuclei. This result is expected whether the asters or the spindle
determines the cleavage plane. In the second cell division, the
two nuclei each produce a normal spindle. If the spindle
determined the cleavage plane, then cleavage of the C-shaped
cell would yield three cells, one of them with two nuclei (lower
left). If the asters determined the cleavage plane, then a third
cleavage plane would form between asters from two different
spindles (lower right). Cell division produced four cells, indicating
an extra furrow formed between a pair of asters.

Extra
furrows

Spindle determines furrow

Asters determine furrow

848

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

 FIGURE 20-42 Regulation of myosin light chain by
mitosis-promoting factor. The mitosis-promoting factor (MPF) is
an activated complex of a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK1) and a
mitotic cyclin protein. Phosphorylation of inhibitory sites on the
myosin light chain by the kinase activity of MPF early in mitosis
prevents active myosin heavy chains from interacting with actin
filaments and sliding along them, a process required for
cytokinesis. When MPF activity falls at anaphase, a constitutive
phosphatase dephosphorylates the inhibitory sites, permitting
cytokinesis to proceed. Another enzyme, myosin light-chain
kinase, phosphorylates a different residue, activating myosin to
interact with actin filaments. [See L. L. Satterwhite et al., 1992, J. Cell

Myosin light chain
Interphase
MPF

Myosin light-chain kinase
P

P

Inhibitory
site

Activating
site

Metaphase

MPF turns off,
phosphatase acts

Biol. 118:595; adapted from A. Murray and T. Hunt, 1993, The Cell Cycle:
An Introduction, W. H. Freeman and Company.]

P
Late anaphase
Active myosin

Cytokinesis

cytokinesis. With completion of cytokinesis, two daughter
cells are formed. In Chapter 19, we saw how the contractile
ring of actin and myosin II constricts the cell during cytokinesis but does not constrict the mechanism that determines
the plane of cleavage through the cell. It is clear that the contractile ring and hence the cleavage furrow always develop
where the chromosomes line up during metaphase, but
which component of the mitotic apparatus dictates where the
contractile ring will assemble is not clear.
Findings from micromanipulation experiments have
shown that different cells rely on either the spindle or the
asters to determine the cleavage plane (Figure 20-41). For instance, the presence of two asters determines where cleavage occurs in fertilized sand dollar eggs, whereas the spindle
determines the cleavage plane in animal cells.
One hypothesis is that astral or spindle microtubules send
a signal to the region of the cortex midway between asters.
This signal promotes the interaction of actin microfilaments
and myosin II, resulting in the formation of the contractile ring
followed by the development of the cleavage furrow. The signal is unidentified as yet, but an alluring candidate is CDK1.
Not only does activation of this cyclin-dependent kinase trigger entry into mitosis, but the myosin light chain is one of its
known substrates. Phosphorylation of the regulatory light
chains in myosin II by CDK1 early in mitosis inhibits interaction of myosin with actin filaments, thus preventing premature
formation of the contractile ring (Figure 20-42). The decrease
in CDK1 activity in late anaphase relieves this inhibition, leading to assembly of the contractile ring and its contraction to
form the cleavage furrow (see Figure 19-20). In Chapter 21,
we examine how the activity of CDK1 and other cyclindependent kinases waxes and wanes in replicating cells.

Plant Cells Reorganize Their Microtubules
and Build a New Cell Wall in Mitosis
As noted previously, interphase plant cells lack a
single perinuclear microtubule-organizing center
that organizes microtubules into the radiating interphase array typical of animal cells. Instead, numerous
MTOCs line the cortex of plant cells and nucleate the assembly of transverse bands of microtubules below the cell
wall (Figure 20-43, left). These cortical microtubules, which
are cross-linked by plant-specific MAPs, aid in laying down
extracellular cellulose microfibrils, the main component of
the rigid cell wall (see Figure 6-33).
Although mitotic events in plant cells are generally similar to those in animal cells, formation of the spindle and cytokinesis have unique features in plants (see Figure 20-43).
Plant cells bundle their cortical microtubules and reorganize
them into a spindle at prophase without the aid of centrosomes. At metaphase, the mitotic apparatus appears much
the same in plant and animal cells. Golgi-derived vesicles,
which appear at metaphase, are transported into the mitotic
apparatus along microtubules that radiate from each end of
the spindle. At telophase, these vesicles line up near the center of the dividing cell and then fuse to form the phragmoplast, a membrane structure that replaces the animal-cell
contractile ring. The membranes of the vesicles forming the
phragmoplast become the plasma membranes of the daughter cells. The contents of these vesicles, such as polysaccharide precursors of cellulose and pectin, form the early cell
plate, which develops into the new cell wall between the
daughter cells.

20.3 • Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis
Interphase

Prophase

Metaphase

849

Telophase

Preprophase
band

Phragmoplast

Cell plate

▲ FIGURE 20-43 Mitosis in a higher plant cell.
Immunofluorescence micrographs (top) and corresponding
diagrams (bottom) showing arrangement of microtubules in
interphase and mitotic plant cells. A cortical array of microtubules
girdles a cell during interphase. Webs of microtubules cap the
growing ends of plant cells and remain intact during cell division.
As a cell enters prophase, the microtubules are bundled around
the nucleus and reorganized into a spindle that appears similar

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 20.3
Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis
In mitosis, the replicated chromosomes are separated
and evenly partitioned to two daughter chromosomes. This
part of the cell cycle is commonly divided into four substages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase (see
Figure 20-29).

■

The mitotic apparatus of animal cells comprises the astral microtubules forming the asters, the polar and kinetochore microtubules forming the football-shaped spindle,
the spindle poles derived from the duplicated centrosomes,
and chromosomes attached to the kinetochore microtubules (see Figure 20-31).

to that in metaphase animal cells. By late telophase, the nuclear
membrane has re-formed around the daughter nuclei, and the
Golgi-derived phragmoplast has assembled at the equatorial
plate. Additional small vesicles derived from the Golgi
complex accumulate at the equatorial plate and fuse with
the phragmoplast to form the new cell plate. [Adapted from
R. H. Goddard et al., 1994, Plant Physiol. 104:1; micrographs courtesy
of Susan M. Wick.]

Motor protein–mediated interactions between opposing
polar microtubules and between asters and the cell cortex
align and separate the centrosomes at prophase, establishing the bipolar orientation of the spindle (see Figure 20-34).

■

Kinetochore microtubules capture chromosomes during
prophase (see Figure 20-32). Opposing forces generated by
motor proteins at both ends of spindle microtubules center the chromosomes at metaphase (see Figure 20-37).

■

■

A simple set of microtubule motor proteins—BimC,
CENP-E, and cytosolic dynein—are conserved in all spindles. Additional motor proteins are present in more complex organisms.

■

The combined action of microtubule dynamics (polymerization and depolymerization) and microtubule motors
are responsible for the transport of chromosomes to the
opposite poles at anaphase (see Figures 20-39 and 20-40).

■

Cleavage during cytokinesis generates two daughter
cells. The signal for cleavage is unknown, but it probably
relieves the inhibition on interaction between actin filaments and myosin II that prevents premature formation of
the contractile ring.

■

850

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
Dynein is an enigmatic molecular motor for several reasons. First, the head domain is based on distinctive repeats
of a -propeller motif. The -propeller–based design suggests that the catalytic mechanism may differ from those
of kinesin and myosin. Equally distinctive is the microtubule-binding stalk that extends from the catalytic head
domain. Electron micrographs suggest that conformation
changes in the head are amplified into large motions of the
stalk. Clues to the mechanism will emerge from an atomiclevel structure of the entire dynein molecule. As in previous studies of myosin, scientists will take a two-pronged
approach employing microscopy and crystallography to
create a composite model of dynein structure. Threedimensional reconstructions from cryoelectron micrographs
will reveal the overall organization of the stalk, head, and
stem domains under conditions that simulate different
stages in force generation. High-resolution information
about the catalytic core and coupling to the stalk will be
obtained by x-ray crystallography. Structures determined
by this approach will be fitted into the electron densities
from cryoelectron microscopy.
Dynein seems to be a complementary partner of kinesin
and myosin in trafficking vesicles and chromosomes. Although an emerging theme is that dynactin couples a membrane cargo to dynein or kinesin, how microtubule-based
movements are coordinated with myosin-based movements
remains an unresolved question. Several lines of investigation
suggest that dynein could play a central role in coordination.
Because the () ends of actin filaments and microtubules
tend to point toward the cell periphery, dynein is the only
major class of motors that moves toward the cell interior.
The location of cytoplasmic dynein in the actin-rich cortex
is similar to that of myosin and distinct from that of kinesin.
Whether dynactin also couples myosin to membrane trafficking is unknown.
The most impressive microtubule machine is the mitotic
apparatus. In the course of the cell cycle, it assembles and
disassembles and faithfully carries out its core function—
the separation of chromosomes. The mitotic apparatus
does not exist as a program hardwired in the genome. Instead, the instructions for structure are a consequence of
chemistry, the assembly encoded in the reversible interactions between proteins and the timing controlled by signaling circuits. Particularly interesting questions concern the
tension-sensing mechanisms that center chromosomes at
the metaphase plate and translocate chromosomes at
anaphase, the positioning mechanisms of the spindle pole
body and the contractile ring, and the force generation
mechanism at cytokinesis. A combination of biophysical
force-measuring methods and molecular biological mutagenesis methods will be employed to extract the answers
to these questions.

KEY TERMS
anaphase 838
asters 840
axonal transport 829
axoneme 836
basal body 836
centriole cycle 841
centromere 838
centrosome 825
cytokinesis 848
dynamic instability 822
dyneins 829
kinesins 829

kinetochores 840
metaphase 838
microtubule-associated
proteins (MAPs) 823
microtubule-organizing
center (MTOC) 817
microtubules 817
mitosis 838
mitotic spindle 840
prophase 838
telophase 838
tubulin 818

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. Microtubules are polar filaments; that is, one end is different from the other. What is the basis for this polarity, how
is polarity related to microtubule organization within the
cell, and how is polarity related to the intracellular movements powered by microtubule-dependent motors?
2. Microtubules both in vitro and in vivo undergo dynamic
instability, and this type of assembly is thought to be intrinsic to the microtubule. What is the current model to account
for dynamic instability?
3. In cells, microtubule assembly depends on other proteins
as well as tubulin concentration and temperature. What
types of proteins influence microtubule assembly in vivo, and
how does each type affect assembly?
4. Microtubules within a cell appear to be arranged in specific arrays. What cellular structure is responsible for determining the arrangement of microtubules within a cell? How
many of these structures are found in a typical cell? Describe
how such structures serve to nucleate microtubule assembly.
5. Many drugs that inhibit mitosis bind specifically to
tubulin, microtubules, or both. What diseases are such drugs
used to treat? Functionally speaking, these drugs can be divided into two groups based on their effect on microtubule
assembly. What are the two mechanisms by which such
drugs alter microtubule assembly?
6. Kinesin I was the first member of the kinesin motor
family to be identified and therefore is perhaps the bestcharacterized family member. Describe how kinesin I was
first isolated and identified. What fundamental property of
microtubule-dependent motors was taken advantage of in
this procedure?
7. Certain cellular components appear to move bidirectionally on microtubules. Describe how this is possible given

Analyze the Data

that microtubule orientation is fixed by the MTOC. What
types of regulatory processes are thought to control which
direction a given cellular cargo will move? Is it possible for
certain cellular components to move on both microtubules
and actin filaments? Explain your answer.

buffer alone. Part (b) depicts the results when the tubulin
and buffer solution in the chamber was replaced with a solution containing tubulin and the M-type kinesin motor
protein Kin I. What conclusions can you draw from these
experiments?

8. The motile properties of kinesin motor proteins involve
both the motor domain and the neck domain. Describe the
role of each domain in kinesin movement, direction of movement, or both. What is the experimental evidence for the importance of the neck in kinesin motility?

(a)

Length (µm)

Buffer only

9. Cell swimming depends on appendages containing microtubules. What is the underlying structure of these appendages, and how do these structures generate the force
required to produce swimming?
10. The mitotic spindle is often described as a microtubulebased cellular machine. The microtubules that constitute the
mitotic spindle can be classified into three distinct types.
What are the three types of spindle microtubules, and what
is the function of each?

Buffer +
tubulin

Time

(b)
Kin I + tubulin
Length (µm)

11. Mitotic spindle function relies heavily on microtubule
motors. For each of the following motor proteins, predict the
effect on spindle formation, function, or both of adding a
drug that specifically inhibits only that motor: Kin-C, BimC,
cytosolic dynein, and CENP-E.
12. The poleward movement of kinetochores, and hence
chromatids, during anaphase A requires that kinetochores
maintain a hold on the shortening microtubules. How does a
kinetochore hold onto shortening microtubules?
13. Anaphase B involves the separation of spindle poles.
What forces have been proposed to drive this separation?
What underlying molecular mechanisms are thought to provide these forces?
14. Cytokinesis, the process of cytoplasmic division, occurs
shortly after the separated sister chromatids have neared the
opposite spindle poles. How is the plane of cytokinesis determined? What are the respective roles of microtubules and
actin filaments in cytokinesis?

Time

b. In another assay, taxol-stabilized microtubules were incubated alone (Ctrl), with kinesin heavy chain (KHC) and
ATP, with Kin I and ATP, or with Kin I and AMPPNP, and
then centrifuged to pellet polymerized tubulin. Supernatant
(s) and pellet (p) fractions were then separated by SDSPAGE, and the gel was stained to reveal the position of tubulin, as shown in part (c). What conclusions can you draw
from these experiments? What is the significance of the nucleotide present for Kin I activity? Would you expect ATP to
be present in the experiments depicted in part (b) of the figure? Why or why not?
ATP
Ctrl

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
Motor proteins are generally considered to move cellular
components along microtubules. However, some kinesin
family motors may have other functions as described below.
a. In one set of experiments, microtubules were observed
in a microscope chamber in which the solution could be
rapidly exchanged. Part (a) of the accompanying figure depicts the effect on microtubule length as a function of time
when the tubulin and buffer in the chamber were replaced
first by an identical tubulin and buffer solution and then by

851

(c)

Tubulin

s

p

ATP
KHC
s

p

ATP
Kin I
s

p

AMPPNP
Kin I
s

p

852

CHAPTER 20 • Microtubules

c. Similar results to those shown in part (c) were also
obtained when GMPCPP, a nonhydrolyzable GTP analog,
was used to assemble stabilized microtubules. What does this
result suggest about the action of Kin I?
d. There is additional evidence that Kin I can produce similar results even at low ratios relative to tubulin. Given this
fact and what you know about microtubule assembly, where
might you expect to find the motor on microtubules?

REFERENCES
Kinesin home page
http://www.proweb.org/kinesin/
Kreis, T., and R. Vale. 1999. Guidebook to the Cytoskeletal and
Motor Proteins, 2d ed. Oxford University Press.

Microtubule Organization and Dynamics
Bornens, M. 2002. Centrosome composition and microtubule
anchoring mechanisms. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:25–34.
Desai, A., and T. J. Mitchison. 1997. Microtubule polymerization dynamics. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 13:83–117.
Dutcher, S. K. 2001. The tubulin fraternity: alpha to eta. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 13:49–54.
Mathur, J., and M. Hulskamp. 2002. Microtubules and microfilaments in cell morphogenesis in higher plants. Curr. Biol.
12:R669–R676.
Nogales, E. 2001. Structural insights into microtubule function.
Ann. Rev. Biomol. Struc. 30:397–420.
Vaughn, K. C., and J. D. I. Harper. 1998. Microtubule-organizing
centers and nucleating sites in land plants. Int’l. Rev. Cytol. 181:75–149.
Zimmerman, W., C. A. Sparks, and S. J. Doxsey. 1999. Amorphous no longer: the centrosome comes into focus. Curr. Opin. Cell
Biol. 11:122–128.

Kinesin- and Dynein-Powered Movements
Allan, V. J., H. M. Thompson, and M. A. McNiven. 2002. Motoring around the Golgi. Nature Cell Biol. 4:E236–E242.
Dell, R. R. 2003. Dynactin polices two-way organelle traffic.
J. Cell Biol. 160:291–293.
Dietz, S., W. R. Schief, and J. Howard. 2002. Molecular motors:
single-molecule recordings made easy. Curr. Biol. 12:R203–R205.
Dujardin, D. L., and R. B. Vallee. 2002. Dynein at the cortex.
Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:44–49.
Dutcher, S. K. 1995. Flagellar assembly in two hundred and fifty
easy-to-follow steps. Trends Genet. 11:398–404.
Goldstein, L. S. 2001. Kinesin molecular motors: transport pathways, receptors, and human disease. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA
98:6999–7003.
Higuchi, H., and S. A. Endow. 2002. Directionality and processivity of molecular motors. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:50–57.
Hirokawa, N. 1998. Kinesin and dynein superfamily proteins
and the mechanism of organelle transport. Science 279:519–526.

Holleran, E. A., S. Karki, and E. L. F. Holzbaur. 1998. The role
of the dynactin complex in intracellular motility. Int’l. Rev. Cytol.
182:69–109.
Karcher, R. L., S. W. Deacon, and V. I. Gelfand. 2002. Motorcargo interactions: the key to transport specificity. Trends Cell Biol.
12:21–27.
Kull, F. J., and S. A. Endow. 2002. Kinesin: switch I and II and
the motor mechanism. J. Cell Sci. 115:15–23.
Mandelkow, E., and K. A. Johnson. 1998. The structural and
mechanochemical cycle of kinesin. Trends Biochem. Sci. 23:429–433.
Moore, J. D., and S. A. Endow. 1996. Kinesin proteins: a phylum of motors for microtubule-based motility. Bioessays 18:207–218.
Sablin, E. P., and R. J. Fletterick. 2001. Nucleotide switches in
molecular motors: structural analysis of kinesins and myosins. Curr.
Opin. Struc. Biol. 11:716–724.
Shaw, J. V., and D. W. Cleveland. 2002. Slow axonal transport:
fast motors in the slow lane. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:58–62.
Thaler, C. D., and L. T. Haimo. 1996. Microtubules and microtubule motors: mechanisms of regulation. Int’l. Rev. Cytol.
164:269–327.
Vale, R. D., and R. J. Fletterick. 1997. The design plan of kinesin motors. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 8:4–9.

Microtubule Dynamics and Motor Proteins in Mitosis
Compton, D. A. 1998. Focusing on spindle poles. J. Cell Sci.
111:1477–1481.
Cyr, R. J. 2001. Plant cells: mitosis, cytokinesis, and cell plate
formation. Encyclopedia of Life Sciences.
Doxsey, S. 2001. Re-evaluating centrosome function. Nature
Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2:688–698.
Inoue, S. 1996. Mitotic organization and force generation by assembly/disassembly of microtubules. Cell Struc. Funct. 21:375–379.
Kapoor, T. M., and D. A. Compton. 2002. Searching for the middle ground: mechanisms of chromosome alignment during mitosis.
J. Cell Biol. 157:551–556.
Karsenti, E., and I. Vernos. 2001. The mitotic spindle: a selfmade machine. Science 294:543–547.
Kitagawa, K., and P. Hieter. 2001. Evolutionary conservation between budding yeast and human kinetochores. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 2:678–687.
Mitchison, T. J., and E. D. Salmon. 2001. Mitosis: a history of
division. Nature Cell Biol. 3:E17–E21.
Nicklas, R. B. 1997. How cells get the right chromosomes. Science 275:632–637.
Nigg, E. A. 2001. Mitosis. Nature Encyclopedia of Life Sciences.
Palazzo, R. E., and T. N. Davis. 2001. Centrosomes and spindle pole bodies. Methods in Cell Biology, vol. 67. Academic Press.
Rieder, C. L., and E. D. Salmon. 1998. The vertebrate cell kinetochore and its roles during mitosis. Trends Cell Biol. 8:310–318.
Schimoda, S. L., and F. Solomon. 2002. Integrating functions at
the kinetochore. Cell 109:9–12.
Wittmann, T., A. Hyman, and A. Desai. 2001. The spindle: a
dynamic assembly of mirotubules and motors. Nature Cell Biol.
3:E28–E34.
Zhou, J., J. Yao, and H. C. Joshi. 2002. Attachment and tension in the spindle assembly checkpoint. J. Cell Sci. 115:3547–3555.

21
REGULATING THE
EUKARYOTIC CELL
CYCLE

This cultured rat kidney cell in metaphase shows condensed
chromosomes (blue), microtubules of the spindle apparatus
(red), and the inner nuclear envelope protein POM121 (green).
The POM121 staining demonstrates that the inner nuclear
envelope proteins retract into the ER during mitosis.
[Brian Burke and Jan Ellenberger, 2002, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:487.]

T

he cell cycle entails an ordered series of macromolecular events that lead to cell division and the production
of two daughter cells each containing chromosomes
identical to those of the parental cell. Duplication of the
parental chromosomes occurs during the S phase of the cycle,
and one of the resulting daughter chromosomes is distributed
to each daughter cell during mitosis (see Figure 9-3). Precise
temporal control of the events of the cell cycle ensures that
the replication of chromosomes and their segregation to
daughter cells occur in the proper order and with extraordinarily high fidelity. Regulation of the cell cycle is critical for
the normal development of multicellular organisms, and loss
of control ultimately leads to cancer, an all-too-familiar disease that kills one in every six people in the developed world
(Chapter 23).
In the late 1980s, it became clear that the molecular
processes regulating the two key events in the cell cycle—
chromosome replication and segregation—are fundamentally similar in all eukaryotic cells. Because of this similarity,
research with diverse organisms, each with its own particular experimental advantages, has contributed to a growing
understanding of how these events are coordinated and controlled. Biochemical and genetic techniques, as well as recombinant DNA technology, have been employed in
studying various aspects of the eukaryotic cell cycle. These
studies have revealed that cell replication is primarily controlled by regulating the timing of nuclear DNA replication

and mitosis. The master controllers of these events are a
small number of heterodimeric protein kinases that contain a
regulatory subunit (cyclin) and catalytic subunit (cyclindependent kinase). These kinases regulate the activities of
multiple proteins involved in DNA replication and mitosis by
phosphorylating them at specific regulatory sites, activating
some and inhibiting others to coordinate their activities. In
this chapter we focus on how the cell cycle is regulated and
the experimental systems that have led to our current understanding of these crucial regulatory mechanisms.

OUTLINE
21.1 Overview of the Cell Cycle and Its Control
21.2 Biochemical Studies with Oocytes, Eggs,
and Early Embryos
21.3 Genetic Studies with S. pombe
21.4 Molecular Mechanisms for Regulating
Mitotic Events
21.5 Genetic Studies with S. cerevisiae
21.6 Cell-Cycle Control in Mammalian Cells
21.7 Checkpoints in Cell-Cycle Regulation
21.8 Meiosis: A Special Type of Cell Division
1

2

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

21.1 Overview of the Cell Cycle
and Its Control
Daughter
cells

We begin our discussion by reviewing the stages of the eukaryotic cell cycle, presenting a summary of the current
model of how the cycle is regulated, and briefly describing
key experimental systems that have provided revealing information about cell-cycle regulation.

G0
M
G1

The Cell Cycle Is an Ordered Series of Events
Leading to Cell Replication
As illustrated in Figure 21-1, the cell cycle is divided into
four major phases. In cycling (replicating) somatic cells, cells
synthesize RNAs and proteins during the G1 phase, preparing for DNA synthesis and chromosome replication during
the S (synthesis) phase. After progressing through the G2
phase, cells begin the complicated process of mitosis, also
called the M (mitotic) phase, which is divided into several
stages (see Figure 20-29).
In discussing mitosis, we commonly use the term chromosome for the replicated structures that condense and become visible in the light microscope during the prophase
period of mitosis. Thus each chromosome is composed of the
two daughter DNA molecules resulting from DNA replication plus the histones and other chromosomal proteins
associated with them (see Figure 10-27). The identical daughter DNA molecules and associated chromosomal proteins
that form one chromosome are referred to as sister chromatids. Sister chromatids are attached to each other by
protein cross-links along their lengths. In vertebrates, these
become confined to a single region of association called the
centromere as chromosome condensation progresses.
During interphase, the portion of the cell cycle between
the end of one M phase and the beginning of the next, the
outer nuclear membrane is continuous with the endoplasmic
reticulum (see Figure 5-19). With the onset of mitosis in
prophase, the nuclear envelope retracts into the endoplasmic reticulum in most cells from higher eukaryotes, and most
Golgi membranes also are incorporated into the endoplasmic
reticulum. As described in Chapter 20, cellular microtubules
disassemble and reassemble into the mitotic apparatus consisting of a football-shaped bundle of microtubules (the
spindle) with a star-shaped cluster of microtubules radiating
from each end, or spindle pole. During the metaphase period of mitosis, a multiprotein complex, the kinetochore,
assembles at each centromere. The kinetochores of sister
chromatids then associate with microtubules coming
from opposite spindle poles (see Figure 20-31). During the
anaphase period of mitosis, sister chromatids separate. They
initially are pulled by motor proteins along the spindle microtubules toward the opposite poles and then are further
separated as the mitotic spindle elongates (see Figure 20-40).
Once chromosome separation is complete, the mitotic spindle disassembles and chromosomes decondense during
telophase. The nuclear envelope re-forms around the segregated

G2

Chromosome
condensation,
nuclear envelope
breakdown,
chromosome
segregation

Chromosome
decondensation,
re-formation of
nuclear envelope,
cytokinesis

FPO
Sister
chromatids
S
DNA synthesis

▲ FIGURE 21-1 Summary of major events in the eukaryotic
cell cycle and the fate of a single parental chromosome.
In proliferating cells, G1 is the period between “birth” of a cell
following mitosis and the initiation of DNA synthesis, which
marks the beginning of the S phase. At the end of the S phase,
a replicated chromosome consists of two daughter DNA
molecules and associated chromosomal proteins. Each of the
individual daughter DNA molecules and their associated
chromosomal proteins (not shown) is called a sister chromatid.
The end of G2 is marked by the onset of mitosis, during which
the mitotic spindle (red lines) forms and pulls apart sister
chromatids, followed by division of the cytoplasm (cytokinesis)
to yield two daughter cells. The G1, S, and G2 phases are
collectively referred to as interphase, the period between one
mitosis and the next. Most nonproliferating cells in vertebrates
leave the cell cycle in G1, entering the G0 state.

chromosomes as they decondense. The physical division of the
cytoplasm, called cytokinesis, then yields two daughter cells as
the Golgi complex re-forms in each daughter cell. Following mitosis, cycling cells enter the G1 phase, embarking on another
turn of the cycle. In yeasts and other fungi, the nuclear envelope does not break down during mitosis. In these organisms,
the mitotic spindle forms within the nuclear envelope, which
then pinches off, forming two nuclei at the time of cytokinesis.
In vertebrates and diploid yeasts, cells in G1 have a
diploid number of chromosomes (2n), one inherited from
each parent. In haploid yeasts, cells in G1 have one of each
chromosome (1n), the haploid number. Rapidly replicating
human cells progress through the full cell cycle in about 24
hours: mitosis takes ≈30 minutes; G1, 9 hours; the S phase,
10 hours; and G2, 4.5 hours. In contrast, the full cycle takes
only ≈90 minutes in rapidly growing yeast cells.
In multicellular organisms, most differentiated cells
“exit” the cell cycle and survive for days, weeks, or in some

21.1 • Overview of the Cell Cycle and Its Control

cases (e.g., nerve cells and cells of the eye lens) even the lifetime of the organism without dividing again. Such postmitotic cells generally exit the cell cycle in G1, entering a
phase called G0 (see Figure 21-1). Some G0 cells can return to
the cell cycle and resume replicating; this reentry is regulated,
thereby providing control of cell proliferation.

Regulated Protein Phosphorylation
and Degradation Control Passage Through
the Cell Cycle
The concentrations of the cyclins, the regulatory subunits of
the heterodimeric protein kinases that control cell-cycle

3

events, increase and decrease as cells progress through the
cell cycle. The catalytic subunits of these kinases, called
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), have no kinase activity unless they are associated with a cyclin. Each CDK can associate with different cyclins, and the associated cyclin
determines which proteins are phosphorylated by a particular cyclin-CDK complex.
Figure 21-2 outlines the role of the three major classes of
cyclin-CDK complexes that control passage through the cell
cycle: the G1, S-phase, and mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes.
When cells are stimulated to replicate, G1 cyclin-CDK complexes are expressed first. These prepare the cell for the
S phase by activating transcription factors that promote

APC-Cdh1/proteasome
degrades mitotic cyclins

APC-Cdc20/
proteasome
degrades
8
securin

Telophase and cytokinesis

APC-Cdc20

Anaphase
Early
G1

1 DNA pre-replication
complexes assemble
at origins

FPO
M

2 G1 cyclin-CDK inactivates APC

Mid-late
G1

7
Metaphase

Mitotic
cyclin-CDK

G1
cyclin-CDK

Restriction
point

4 G1 cyclin-CDK phosphorylates
S-phase inhibitor

G2

S

Mitotic
cyclin-CDK
activates
early mitotic
events

3 G1 cyclin-CDK activates
expression of S-phase cyc-CDK
components

Inhibitor
S-phase
cyclin-CDK

SCF
S-phase cyclin-CDK 6
activates pre-replication
complexes

S-phase
cyclin-CDK

5 SCF/proteasome
degrades phosphorylated
S-phase cyclin-CDK
inhibitor

DNA replication

▲ FIGURE 21-2 Overview of current model for regulation of
the eukaryotic cell cycle. Passage through the cycle is
controlled by G1, S-phase, and mitotic cyclin-dependent kinase
complexes (green). These are composed of a regulatory cyclin
subunit and a catalytic cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) subunit.
Two ubiquitin ligase complexes (orange), SCF and APC,
polyubiquitinate specific substrates including S-phase inhibitors
(step 5 ), securin (step 8 ), and mitotic cyclins (step 9 ), marking
these substrates for degradation by proteasomes. Proteolysis of
the S-phase inhibitor activates S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes,

leading to chromosome replication. Proteolysis of securin
results in degradation of protein complexes that connect
sister chromatids at metaphase, thereby initiating anaphase,
the mitotic period in which sister chromatids are separated
and moved to the opposite spindle poles. Reduction in
the activity of mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes caused by
proteolysis of mitotic cyclins permits late mitotic events and
cytokinesis to occur. These proteolytic cleavages drive the
cycle in one direction because of the irreversibility of protein
degradation. See text for further discussion.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

APC-Cdh1

Overview Animation: Cell-Cycle Control

9

4

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

transcription of genes encoding enzymes required for DNA
synthesis and the genes encoding S-phase cyclins and CDKs.
The activity of S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes is initially held
in check by inhibitors. Late in G1, the G1 cyclin-CDK complexes induce degradation of the S-phase inhibitors by phosphorylating them and consequently stimulating their
polyubiquitination by the multiprotein SCF ubiquitin ligase
(step 5 ). Subsequent degradation of the polyubiquitinated
S-phase inhibitor by proteasomes releases active S-phase
cyclin-CDK complexes.
Once activated, the S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes
phosphorylate regulatory sites in the proteins that form
DNA pre-replication complexes, which are assembled on
replication origins during G1 (Chapter 4). Phosphorylation
of these proteins not only activates initiation of DNA replication but also prevents reassembly of new pre-replication
complexes. Because of this inhibition, each chromosome is
replicated just once during passage through the cell cycle, ensuring that the proper chromosome number is maintained
in the daughter cells.
Mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes are synthesized during
the S phase and G2, but their activities are held in check by
phosphorylation at inhibitory sites until DNA synthesis is
completed. Once activated by dephosphorylation of the inhibitory sites, mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes phosphorylate
multiple proteins that promote chromosome condensation,
retraction of the nuclear envelope, assembly of the mitotic
spindle apparatus, and alignment of condensed chromosomes at the metaphase plate. During mitosis, the anaphasepromoting complex (APC), a multisubunit ubiquitin ligase,
polyubiquitinates key regulatory proteins marking them for
proteasomal degradation. One important substrate of the
APC is securin, a protein that inhibits degradation of the
cross-linking proteins between sister chromatids. The polyubiquitination of securin by the APC is inhibited until the
kinetochores assembled at the centromeres of all chromosomes have become attached to spindle microtubules, causing chromosomes to align at the metaphase plate. Once all
the chromosomes are aligned, the APC polyubiquitinates securin, leading to its proteasomal degradation and the subsequent degradation of the cross-linking proteins connecting
sister chromatids (see Figure 21-2, step 8 ). This sequence
of events initiates anaphase by freeing sister chromatids to
segregate to opposite spindle poles.
Late in anaphase, the APC also directs polyubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation of the mitotic
cyclins. Polyubiquitination of the mitotic cyclins by APC is
inhibited until the segregating chromosomes have reached
the proper location in the dividing cell (see Figure 21-2, step
9 ). Degradation of the mitotic cyclins leads to inactivation
of the protein kinase activity of the mitotic CDKs. The resulting decrease in mitotic CDK activity permits constitutively active protein phosphatases to remove the phosphates
that were added to specific proteins by the mitotic cyclinCDK complexes. As a result, the now separated chromosomes decondense, the nuclear envelope re-forms around

daughter-cell nuclei, and the Golgi apparatus reassembles
during telophase; finally, the cytoplasm divides at cytokinesis, yielding the two daughter cells.
During early G1 of the next cell cycle, phosphatases dephosphorylate the proteins that form pre-replication complexes. These proteins had been phosphorylated by S-phase
cyclin-CDK complexes during the previous S phase, and their
phosphorylation was maintained during mitosis by mitotic
cyclin-CDK complexes. As a result of their dephosphorylation in G1, new pre-replication complexes are able to reassemble at replication origins in preparation for the next S
phase (see Figure 21-2, step 1 ). Phosphorylation of APC by
G1 cyclin-CDK complexes in late G1 inactivates it, allowing
accumulation of S-phase and mitotic cyclins during the ensuing cycle.
Passage through three critical cell-cycle transitions—
G1 → S phase, metaphase → anaphase, and anaphase →
telophase and cytokinesis—is irreversible because these transitions are triggered by the regulated degradation of proteins,
an irreversible process. As a consequence, cells are forced to
traverse the cell cycle in one direction only.
In higher organisms, control of the cell cycle is achieved
primarily by regulating the synthesis and activity of
G1 cyclin-CDK complexes. Extracellular growth factors
function as mitogens by inducing synthesis of G1 cyclinCDK complexes. The activity of these and other cyclinCDK complexes is regulated by phosphorylation at specific
inhibitory and activating sites in the catalytic subunit. Once
mitogens have acted for a sufficient period, the cell cycle
continues through mitosis even when they are removed.
The point in late G1 where passage through the cell cycle
becomes independent of mitogens is called the restriction
point (see Figure 21-2).

Diverse Experimental Systems Have Been Used
to Identify and Isolate Cell-Cycle Control Proteins
The first evidence that diffusible factors regulate the cell
cycle came from cell-fusion experiments with cultured mammalian cells. When interphase cells in the G1, S, or G2 phase
of the cell cycle were fused to cells in mitosis, their nuclear
envelopes retracted and their chromosomes condensed (Figure 21-3). This finding indicates that some diffusible component or components in the cytoplasm of the mitotic cells
forced interphase nuclei to undergo many of the processes associated with early mitosis. We now know that these factors
are the mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes.
Similarly, when cells in G1 were fused to cells in S phase
and the fused cells exposed to radiolabeled thymidine, the
label was incorporated into the DNA of the G1 nucleus as
well as the S-phase nucleus, indicating that DNA synthesis
began in the G1 nucleus shortly after fusion. However, when
cells in G2 were fused to S-phase cells, no incorporation of labeled thymidine occurred in the G2 nuclei. Thus diffusible
factors in an S-phase cell can enter the nucleus of a G1 cell
and stimulate DNA synthesis, but these factors cannot in-

21.1 • Overview of the Cell Cycle and Its Control

Mitotic
chromosomes

5

However, complementation of the recessive mutation by the
wild-type allele carried by one of the plasmid clones in the library allows a transformed mutant cell to grow into a colony;
the plasmids bearing the wild-type allele can then be recovered from those cells. Because many of the proteins that regulate the cell cycle are highly conserved, human cDNAs
cloned into yeast expression vectors often can complement
yeast cell-cycle mutants, leading to the rapid isolation of
human genes encoding cell-cycle control proteins.
Biochemical studies require the preparation of cell extracts from many cells. For biochemical studies of the cell
cycle, the eggs and early embryos of amphibians and marine
invertebrates are particularly suitable. In these organisms,
multiple synchronous cell cycles follow fertilization of a large
egg. By isolating large numbers of eggs from females and
G1 chromosomes

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-3 A diffusable factor in
mitotic cells can induce mitosis in an interphase cell. In
unfused interphase cells, the nuclear envelope is intact and the
chromosomes are not condensed, so individual chromosomes
cannot be distinguished (see Figures 1-2b and 5-25). In mitotic
cells, the nuclear envelope is absent and the individual replicated
chromosomes are highly condensed. This micrograph shows a
hybrid cell resulting from fusion of a mitotic cell (left side) with
an interphase cell in G1 (right side). A factor from the mitotic cell
cytoplasm has caused the nuclear envelope of the G1 cell to
retract into the endoplasmic reticulum, so that it is not visible.
The factor has also caused the G1 cell chromosomes to partially
condense. The mitotic chromosomes can be distinguished
because the two sister chromatids are joined at the centromere.
[From R. T. Johnson and P. N. Rao, 1970, Biol. Rev. 46:97.]

duce DNA synthesis in a G2 nucleus. We now know that
these factors are S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes, which can
activate the pre-replication complexes assembled on DNA
replication origins in early G1 nuclei. Although these cellfusion experiments demonstrated that diffusible factors control entry into the S and M phases of the cell cycle, genetic
and biochemical experiments were needed to identify these
factors.
The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the distantly related fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe have
been especially useful for isolation of mutants that are
blocked at specific steps in the cell cycle or that exhibit altered
regulation of the cycle. In both of these yeasts, temperaturesensitive mutants with defects in specific proteins required to
progress through the cell cycle are readily recognized microscopically and therefore easily isolated (see Figure 9-6). Such
cells are called cdc (cell-division cycle) mutants. The wild-type
alleles of recessive temperature-sensitive cdc mutant alleles
can be isolated readily by transforming haploid mutant cells
with a plasmid library prepared from wild-type cells and then
plating the transformed cells at the nonpermissive temperature (Figure 21-4). When plated out, the haploid mutant cells
cannot form colonies at the nonpermissive temperature.

cdc28 ts
cells
grown
at 25 °C

Transform with
plasmid library
of wild-type
S. cerevisiae DNA

Transformed
cdc28 ts cells
grown at 35 °C

Gene X

FPO
Gene Y

No colony
formation

CDC28
Isolate
plasmid

CDC28

Cells in colony at
various cell-cycle
stages

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-4 Wild-type cell-division
cycle (CDC) genes can be isolated from a S. cerevisiae
genomic library by functional complementation of cdc
mutants. Mutant cells with a temperature-sensitive mutation in
a CDC gene are transformed with a genomic library prepared
from wild-type cells and plated on nutrient agar at the
nonpermissive temperature (35 C). Each transformed cell takes
up a single plasmid containing one genomic DNA fragment.
Most such fragments include genes (e.g., X and Y) that do not
encode the defective Cdc protein; transformed cells that take up
such fragments do not form colonies at the nonpermissive
temperature. The rare cell that takes up a plasmid containing the
wild-type version of the mutant gene (in this case CDC28 ) is
complemented, allowing the cell to replicate and form a colony at
the nonpermissive temperature. Plasmid DNA isolated from this
colony carries the wild-type CDC gene corresponding to the gene
that is defective in the mutant cells. The same procedure is used
to isolate wild-type CDC genes in S. pombe. See Figures 9-19
and 9-20 for more detailed illustrations of the construction and
screening of a yeast genomic library.

6

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

TABLE 21-1 Selected Cyclins and Cyclin-Dependent
Kinases (CDKs) *

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.1

Organism/Protein

■

Name

S. POMBE
CDK (one only)

Cdc2

Mitotic cyclin (one only)

Cdc13

S. CEREVISIAE
CDK (one only)

Cdc28

Mid G1 cyclin

Cln3

Late G1 cyclins

Cln1, Cln2

Early S-phase cyclins

Clb5, Clb6

Late S-phase and early mitotic cyclins

Clb3, Clb4

Late mitotic cyclins

Clb1, Clb2

VERTEBRATES

Overview of the Cell Cycle and Its Control
The eukaryotic cell cycle is divided into four phases: M
(mitosis), G1 (the period between mitosis and the initiation
of nuclear DNA replication), S (the period of nuclear DNA
replication), and G2 (the period between the completion of
nuclear DNA replication and mitosis) (see Figure 21-1).
Cyclin-CDK complexes, composed of a regulatory cyclin subunit and a catalytic cyclin-dependent kinase subunit, regulate progress of a cell through the cell cycle (see
Figure 21-2). Large multisubunit ubiquitin ligases also
polyubiquitinate key cell-cycle regulators, marking them
for degradation by proteasomes.

■

Diffusible mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes cause chromosome condensation and disassembly of the nuclear envelope in G1 and G2 cells when they are fused to mitotic
cells. Similarly, S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes stimulate
DNA replication in the nuclei of G1 cells when they are
fused to S-phase cells.
■

The isolation of yeast cell-division cycle (cdc) mutants
led to the identification of genes that regulate the cell cycle
(see Figure 21-4).

■

Mid G1 CDKs

CDK4, CDK6

Late G1 and S-phase CDK

CDK2

Mitotic CDK

CDK1

Mid G1 cyclins

D-type cyclins

Late G1 and S-phase cyclin

Cyclin E

S-phase and mitotic cyclin

Cyclin A

Mitotic cyclin

Cyclin B

*

Those cyclins and CDKs discussed in this chapter are listed and
classified by the period in the cell cycle in which they function. A heterodimer composed of a mitotic cyclin and CDK is commonly referred to as a mitosis-promoting factor (MPF).

fertilizing them simultaneously by addition of sperm (or
treating them in ways that mimic fertilization), researchers
can obtain extracts from cells at specific points in the cell
cycle for analysis of proteins and enzymatic activities.
In the following sections we describe critical experiments
that led to the current model of eukaryotic cell-cycle regulation summarized in Figure 21-2 and present further details of
the various regulatory events. As we will see, results obtained
with different experimental systems and approaches have
provided insights about each of the key transition points in
the cell cycle. For historical reasons, the names of various cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases from yeasts and vertebrates differ. Table 21-1 lists the names of those that we
discuss in this chapter and indicates when in the cell cycle
they are active.

Amphibian and invertebrate eggs and early embryos
from synchronously fertilized eggs provide sources of extracts for biochemical studies of cell-cycle events.

■

21.2 Biochemical Studies with
Oocytes, Eggs, and Early Embryos
A breakthrough in identification of the factor that induces
mitosis came from studies of oocyte maturation in the frog
Xenopus laevis. To understand these experiments, we must
first lay out the events of oocyte maturation, which can be
duplicated in vitro. As oocytes develop in the frog ovary,
they replicate their DNA and become arrested in G2 for 8
months during which time they grow in size to a diameter of
1 mm, stockpiling all the materials needed for the multiple
cell divisions required to generate a swimming, feeding tadpole. When stimulated by a male, an adult female’s ovarian
cells secrete the steroid hormone progesterone, which induces the G2-arrested oocytes to enter meiosis I and
progress through meiosis to the second meiotic metaphase
(Figure 21-5). At this stage the cells are called eggs. When
fertilized by sperm, the egg nucleus is released from its
metaphase II arrest and completes meiosis. The resulting
haploid egg pronucleus then fuses with the haploid sperm
pronucleus, producing a diploid zygote nucleus. DNA replication follows and the first mitotic division of early embryogenesis begins. The resulting embryonic cells then
proceed through 11 more rapid, synchronous cell cycles
generating a hollow sphere, the blastula. Cell division then

21.2 • Biochemical Studies with Oocytes, Eggs, and Early Embryos
First polar body
Progesterone

Second polar body
Fertilization

1

Oocyte
arrested in G2

7

2

Meiosis I

FPO
3

Egg arrested
in meiosis II

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-5 Progesterone stimulates
meiotic maturation of Xenopus oocytes in vitro. Step 1 :
Treatment of G2-arrested Xenopus oocytes surgically removed
from the ovary of an adult female with progesterone causes the
oocytes to enter meiosis I. Two pairs of synapsed homologous
chromosomes (blue) connected to mitotic spindle microtubules
(red) are shown schematically to represent cells in metaphase of
meiosis I. Step 2 : Segregation of homologous chromosomes
and a highly asymmetrical cell division expels half the
chromosomes into a small cell called the first polar body.
The oocyte immediately commences meiosis II and arrests

slows, and subsequent divisions are nonsynchronous with
cells at different positions in the blastula dividing at different times.

Maturation-Promoting Factor (MPF) Stimulates
Meiotic Maturation of Oocytes and Mitosis
in Somatic Cells
When G2-arrested Xenopus oocytes are removed from the
ovary of an adult female frog and treated with progesterone,
they undergo meiotic maturation, the process of oocyte maturation from a G2-arrested oocyte to the egg arrested in
metaphase of meiosis II (see Figure 21-5). Microinjection of
cytoplasm from eggs arrested in metaphase of meiosis II into
G2-arrested oocytes stimulates the oocytes to mature into

4

Male
Female
pronucleus pronucleus

First
cleavage

in metaphase to yield an egg. Two chromosomes connected to
spindle microtubules are shown schematically to represent egg
cells arrested in metaphase of meiosis II. Step 3 : Fertilization by
sperm releases eggs from their metaphase arrest, allowing them
to proceed through anaphase of meiosis II and undergo a second
highly asymmetrical cell division that eliminates one chromatid of
each chromosome in a second polar body. Step 4 : The resulting
haploid female pronucleus fuses with the haploid sperm
pronucleus to produce a diploid zygote, which undergoes DNA
replication and the first mitosis of 12 synchronous early
embryonic cleavages.

eggs in the absence of progesterone (Figure 21-6). This system not only led to the initial identification of a factor in egg
cytoplasm that stimulates maturation of oocytes in vitro but
also provided an assay for this factor, called maturationpromoting factor (MPF). As we will see shortly, MPF turned
out to be the key factor that regulates the initiation of mitosis in all eukaryotic cells.
Using the microinjection system to assay MPF activity at
different times during oocyte maturation in vitro, researchers
found that untreated G2-arrested oocytes have low levels of
MPF activity; treatment with progesterone induces MPF activity as the cells enter meiosis I (Figure 21-7). MPF activity
falls as the cells enter the interphase between meiosis I and II,
but then rises again as the cells enter meiosis II and remains
high in the egg cells arrested in metaphase II. Following

Transfer
cytoplasm
1a

FPO
2

1b
Egg arrested
in metaphase II

Inject MPF

Oocyte
arrested in G2

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-6 A diffusible factor in
arrested Xenopus eggs promotes meiotic maturation. When
≈5 percent of the cytoplasm from an unfertilized Xenopus egg
arrested in metaphase of meiosis II is microinjected into a G2arrested oocyte (step 1a ), the oocyte enters meiosis I (step 2 )
and proceeds to metaphase of meiosis II (step 3 ), generating a
mature egg in the absence of progesterone. This process can be

3

Meiosis I

Egg arrested
in meiosis II

repeated multiple times without further addition of progesterone,
showing that egg cytoplasm contains an oocyte maturationpromoting factor (MPF). Microinjection of G2-arrested oocytes
provided the first assay for MPF activity (step 1b ) at different
stages of the cell cycle and in different organisms. [See Y. Masui
and C. L. Markert, 1971, J. Exp. Zool. 177:129.]

8

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

MPF activity

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-7 MPF
Progesterone

activity in Xenopus oocytes, eggs, and early
embryos peaks as cells enter meiosis and
mitosis. Diagrams of the cell structures
corresponding to each stage are shown in
Figure 21-5. MPF activity was determined by
the microinjection assay shown in Figure 21-6
and quantitated by making dilutions of cell
extracts. See text for discussion. [See J. Gerhart

Fertilization

FPO
G2 arrest

Meiosis I

Meiosis II
metaphase arrest

et al., 1984, J. Cell Biol. 98:1247; adapted from A.
Murray and M. W. Kirschner, 1989, Nature 339:275.]

First
Second
embryonic embryonic
mitosis
mitosis

Time

Mitotic Cyclin Was First Identified in Early Sea
Urchin Embryos
Experiments with inhibitors showed that new protein synthesis is required for the increase in MPF during the mitotic
phase of each cell cycle in early frog embryos. As in early

136

126

116

106

96

86

76

66

56

46

36

Min (post fertilization)
26

(a)

Cyclin

FPO

B

C
INSERT HALFTONE OF GEL LANES

Intensity of cyclin band

(b)
% Cells dividing
during 10 min intervals

fertilization, MPF activity falls again until the zygote (fertilized egg) enters the first mitosis of embryonic development.
Throughout the following 11 synchronous cycles of mitosis
in the early embryo, MPF activity is low in the interphase periods between mitoses and then rises as the cells enter mitosis.
Although initially discovered in frogs, MPF activity has
been found in mitotic cells from all species assayed. For
example, cultured mammalian cells can be arrested in mitosis by treatment with compounds (e.g., colchicine) that inhibit assembly of microtubules. When cytoplasm from such
mitotically arrested mammalian cells was injected into
G2-arrested Xenopus oocytes, the oocytes matured into eggs;
that is, the mammalian somatic mitotic cells contained a cytosolic factor that exhibited frog MPF activity. This finding
suggested that MPF controls the entry of mammalian somatic cells into mitosis as well as the entry of frog oocytes
into meiosis. When cytoplasm from mitotically arrested
mammalian somatic cells was injected into interphase cells,
the interphase cells entered mitosis; that is, their nuclear
membranes disassembled and their chromosomes condensed.
Thus MPF is the diffusible factor, first revealed in cell-fusion
experiments (see Figure 21-3), that promotes entry of cells
into mitosis. Conveniently, the acronym MPF also can stand
for mitosis-promoting factor, a name that denotes the more
general activity of this factor.
Because the oocyte injection assay initially used to measure MPF activity is cumbersome, several years passed before
MPF was purified by column chromatography and characterized. MPF is in fact one of the heterodimeric complexes
composed of a cyclin and CDK now known to regulate the
cell cycle. Each MPF subunit initially was recognized
through different experimental approaches. First we discuss
how the regulatory cyclin subunit was identified and then describe how yeast genetic experiments led to discovery of the
catalytic CDK subunit.

50

25

FPO
60
120
Min (post fertilization)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-8 Experimental detection of
cyclical synthesis and destruction of mitotic cyclin in sea
urchin embryos. A suspension of sea urchin eggs was
synchronously fertilized by the addition of sea urchin sperm, and
35
S-methionine was added. At 10-minute intervals beginning 16
minutes after fertilization, samples were taken for protein
analysis on an SDS polyacrylamide gel and for detection of cell
cleavage by microscopy. (a) Autoradiograms of the SDS gels at
each sampling time. Most proteins, such as X and Y, continuously
increased in intensity. In contrast, cyclin suddenly decreased in
intensity at 76 minutes after fertilization and then began
increasing again at 86 minutes. The cyclin band peaked again at
106 min and decreased again at 126 min. (b) Plot of the intensity
of the cyclin band (red line) and the fraction of cells that had
undergone cleavage during the previous 10-minute interval (cyan
line). Note that the amount of cyclin fell precipitously just before
cell cleavage. [From T. Evans et al., 1983, Cell 33:389.]

21.2 • Biochemical Studies with Oocytes, Eggs, and Early Embryos

frog embryos, the initial cell cycles in the early sea urchin embryo occur synchronously, with all the embryonic cells entering mitosis simultaneously. Biochemical studies with sea
urchin eggs and embryos led to identification of the cyclin
component of MPF. These studies with synchronously fertilized sea urchin eggs revealed that the concentration of one
protein peaked early in mitosis, fell abruptly just before cell
cleavage, and then accumulated during the following interphase to peak early in the next mitosis and fall abruptly just
before the second cleavage (Figure 21-8). Careful analysis
showed that this protein, named cyclin B, is synthesized continuously during the embryonic cell cycles but is abruptly destroyed following anaphase. Since its concentration peaks in
mitosis, cyclin B functions as a mitotic cyclin.
In subsequent experiments, a cDNA clone encoding sea
urchin cyclin B was used as a probe to isolate a homologous
cyclin B cDNA from Xenopus laevis. Pure Xenopus cyclin
B, obtained by expression of the cDNA in E. coli, was used
to produce antibody specific for cyclin B. Using this antibody, a polypeptide was detected in Western blots that copurified with MPF activity from Xenopus eggs, demonstrating that one subunit of MPF is indeed cyclin B.

Cyclin B Levels and Kinase Activity of MitosisPromoting Factor (MPF) Change Together
in Cycling Xenopus Egg Extracts
Some unusual aspects of the synchronous cell cycles in early
Xenopus embryos provided a way to study the role of mitotic
cyclin in controlling MPF activity. First, following fertilization
of Xenopus eggs, the G1 and G2 periods are minimized during
the initial 12 synchronous cell cycles. That is, once mitosis is
complete, the early embryonic cells proceed immediately into
the next S phase, and once DNA replication is complete, the
cells progress almost immediately into the next mitosis. Second, the oscillation in MPF activity that occurs as early frog
embryos enter and exit mitosis is observed in the cytoplasm of
a fertilized frog egg even when the nucleus is removed and
no transcription can occur. This finding indicates that all the
cellular components required for progress through the truncated cell cycles in early Xenopus embryos are stored in the
unfertilized egg. In somatic cells generated later in development and in yeasts considered in later sections, specific
mRNAs must be produced at particular points in the cell
cycle for progress through the cycle to proceed. But in early
Xenopus embryos, all the mRNAs necessary for the early cell
divisions are present in the unfertilized egg.
Extracts prepared from unfertilized Xenopus eggs thus
contain all the materials required for multiple cell cycles, including the enzymes and precursors needed for DNA replication, the histones and other chromatin proteins involved in
assembling the replicated DNA into chromosomes, and the
proteins and phospholipids required in formation of the nuclear envelope. These egg extracts also synthesize proteins
encoded by mRNAs in the extract, including cyclin B.

9

When nuclei prepared from Xenopus sperm are added to
such a Xenopus egg extract, the highly condensed sperm
chromatin decondenses, and the sperm DNA replicates one
time. The replicated sperm chromosomes then condense and
the nuclear envelope disassembles, just as it does in intact
cells entering mitosis. About 10 minutes after the nuclear envelope disassembles, all the cyclin B in the extract suddenly is
degraded, as it is in intact cells following anaphase. Following cyclin B degradation, the sperm chromosomes decondense and a nuclear envelope re-forms around them, as in
an intact cell at the end of mitosis. After about 20 minutes,
the cycle begins again. DNA within the nuclei formed after
the first mitotic period (now 2n) replicates, forming 4n nuclei. Cyclin B, synthesized from the cyclin B mRNA present
in the extract, accumulates. As cyclin B approaches peak levels, the chromosomes condense once again, the nuclear envelopes break down, and about 10 minutes later cyclin B is
once again suddenly destroyed. These remarkable Xenopus
egg extracts can mediate several of these cycles, which mimic
the rapid synchronous cycles of an early frog embryo.
Studies with this egg extract experimental system were
aided by development of a new assay for MPF activity. Using
MPF purified with the help of the oocyte injection assay (see
Figure 21-6), researchers had found that MPF phosphorylates histone H1. This H1 kinase activity provided a much
simpler and more easily quantitated assay for MPF activity
than the oocyte injection assay. Armed with a convenient
assay, researchers tracked the MPF activity and concentration of cyclin B in cycling Xenopus egg extracts. These studies showed that MPF activity rises and falls in synchrony
with the concentration of cyclin B (Figure 21-9a). The early
events of mitosis—chromosome condensation and nuclear
envelope disassembly—occurred when MPF activity reached
its highest levels in parallel with the rise in cyclin B concentration. Addition of cycloheximide, an inhibitor of protein
synthesis, prevented cyclin B synthesis and also prevented the
rise in MPF activity, chromosome condensation, and nuclear
envelope disassembly.
To test the functions of cyclin B in these cell-cycle events,
all mRNAs in the egg extract were degraded by digestion with
a low concentration of RNase, which then was inactivated by
addition of a specific inhibitor. This treatment destroys mRNAs
without affecting the tRNAs and rRNAs required for protein
synthesis, since their degradation requires much higher concentrations of RNase. When sperm nuclei were added to the
RNase-treated extracts, the 1n nuclei replicated their DNA, but
the increase in MPF activity and the early mitotic events (chromosome condensation and nuclear envelope disassembly),
which the untreated extract supports, did not occur (Figure
21-9b). Addition of cyclin B mRNA, produced in vitro from
cloned cyclin B cDNA, to the RNase-treated egg extract and
sperm nuclei restored the parallel oscillations in the cyclin B
concentration and MPF activity and the characteristic early and
late mitotic events as observed with the untreated egg extract
(Figure 21-9c). Since cyclin B is the only protein synthesized
under these conditions, these results demonstrate that it is the

10

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
(a) Untreated extract

= MPF activity
= Cyclin B concentration

(b) RNase-treated extract

Mitotic events
Addition of
sperm nuclei

Addition of
sperm nuclei

Time

FPO

(c) RNase-treated extract + wild-type cyclin B mRNA
Mitotic events

Time

(d) RNase-treated extract + nondegradable cyclin B mRNA

Addition of
sperm nuclei

Addition of
sperm nuclei

Mitotic arrest

Time
Time

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-9 Cycling of MPF activity
and mitotic events in Xenopus egg extracts depend on
synthesis and degradation of cyclin B. In all cases, MPF
activity and cyclin B concentration were determined at various
times after addition of sperm nuclei to a Xenopus egg extract
treated as indicated in each panel. Microscopic observations
determined the occurrence of early mitotic events (blue shading),

crucial protein whose synthesis is required to regulate MPF
activity and the cycles of chromosome condensation and
nuclear envelope breakdown mediated by cycling Xenopus
egg extracts.
In these experiments, chromosome decondensation and
nuclear envelope assembly (late mitotic events) coincided with
decreases in the cyclin B level and MPF activity. To determine
whether degradation of cyclin B is required for exit from mitosis, researchers added a mutant mRNA encoding a nondegradable cyclin B to a mixture of RNase-treated Xenopus
egg extract and sperm nuclei. As shown in Figure 21-9d, MPF
activity increased in parallel with the level of the mutant cyclin B, triggering condensation of the sperm chromatin and
nuclear envelope disassembly (early mitotic events). However,
the mutant cyclin B produced in this reaction never was degraded. As a consequence, MPF activity remained elevated,
and the late mitotic events of chromosome decondensation
and nuclear envelope formation were both blocked. This experiment demonstrates that the fall in MPF activity and exit
from mitosis depend on degradation of cyclin B.
The results of the two experiments with RNase-treated
extracts show that entry into mitosis requires the accumula-

including chromosome condensation and nuclear envelope
disassembly, and of late events (orange shading), including
chromosome decondensation and nuclear envelope reassembly.
See text for discussion. [See A. W. Murray et al., 1989, Nature
339:275; adapted from A. Murray and T. Hunt, 1993, The Cell Cycle:
An Introduction, W. H. Freeman and Company.]

tion of cyclin B, the Xenopus mitotic cyclin, to high levels,
and that exit from mitosis requires the degradation of this
mitotic cyclin. Since MPF kinase activity varied in parallel
with the concentration of the mitotic cyclin, the results implied that high MPF kinase activity results in entry into mitosis and that a fall in MPF kinase activity is required to exit
mitosis.

Anaphase-Promoting Complex (APC) Controls
Degradation of Mitotic Cyclins and Exit
from Mitosis
Further studies revealed that vertebrate cells contain three
proteins that can function like cyclin B to stimulate Xenopus oocyte maturation: two closely related cyclin Bs and cyclin A. Collectively called B-type cyclins, these proteins
exhibit regions of high sequence homology. (B-type cyclins
are distinguished from G1 cyclins described in Section 21.5.)
In intact cells, degradation of all the B-type cyclins begins
after the onset of anaphase, the period of mitosis when sister chromatids are separated and pulled toward opposite
spindle poles.

21.2 • Biochemical Studies with Oocytes, Eggs, and Early Embryos

 FIGURE 21-10 Regulation of mitotic

Metaphase
High mitotic cyclin
High MPF activity
Mitotic cyclin

MPF

CDK
Late anaphase
Prophase

Active
APC

Synthesis of
mitotic cyclin

Proteasome

P
+
Cdh1

Interphase

Polyubiquitination

G1 cyclinCDK

Cdc14

Inactive
APC

Ub
Ub

FPO

11

Ub

cyclin levels in cycling Xenopus early
embryonic cells. In late anaphase, the
anaphase-promoting complex (APC)
polyubiquitinates mitotic cyclins. As the cyclins
are degraded by proteasomes, MPF kinase
activity declines precipitously, triggering the
onset of telophase. APC activity is directed
toward mitotic cyclins by a specificity factor,
called Cdh1, that is phosphorylated and
thereby inactivated by G1 cyclin-CDK
complexes. A specific phosphatase called
Cdc14 removes the regulatory phosphate from
the specificity factor late in anaphase. Once
the specificity factor is inhibited in G1, the
concentration of mitotic cyclin increases,
eventually reaching a high enough level to
stimulate entry into the subsequent mitosis.

Low mitotic cyclin
Low MPF activity
Telophase

Biochemical studies with Xenopus egg extracts showed
that at the time of their degradation, wild-type B-type cyclins
are modified by covalent addition of multiple ubiquitin molecules. This process of polyubiquitination marks proteins for
rapid degradation in eukaryotic cells by proteasomes, multiprotein cylindrical structures containing numerous proteases.
Addition of a ubiquitin chain to a B-type cyclin or other target protein requires three types of enzymes (see Figure 3-13).
Ubiquitin is first activated at its carboxyl-terminus by formation of a thioester bond with a cysteine residue of ubiquitinactivating enzyme, E1. Ubiquitin is subsequently transferred
from E1 to a cysteine of one of a class of related enzymes
called ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, E2. The specific E2 determines, along with a third protein, ubiquitin ligase (E3), the
substrate protein to which a ubiquitin chain will be covalently
linked. Many ubiquitin ligases are multisubunit proteins.
Sequencing of cDNAs encoding several B-type cyclins from
various eukaryotes showed that all contain a homologous
nine-residue sequence near the N-terminus called the destruction box. Deletion of this destruction box, as in the mutant
mRNA used in the experiment depicted in Figure 21-8, prevents the polyubiquitination of B-type cyclins and thus makes
them nondegradable. The ubiquitin ligase that recognizes the
mitotic cyclin destruction box is a multisubunit protein called
the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), which we introduced
earlier in the chapter (see Figure 21-2, steps 8 and 9 ).
Figure 21-10 depicts the current model that best explains the changes in mitotic cyclin levels seen in cycling
Xenopus early embryonic cells. Cyclin B, the primary mi-

totic cyclin in multicellular animals (metazoans), is synthesized throughout the cell cycle from a stable mRNA. The
observed fall in its concentration in late anaphase results
from its APC-stimulated degradation at this point in the
cell cycle. As we discuss in Section 21.5, genetic studies
with yeast led to identification of an APC specificity factor, called Cdh1, that binds to APC and directs it to polyubiquitinate mitotic cyclins. This specificity factor is active
only in late anaphase when the segregating chromosomes
have moved far enough apart in the dividing cell to assure
that both daughter cells will contain one complete set of
chromosomes. Phosphorylation of Cdh1 by other cyclinCDK complexes during G1 inhibits its association with
the APC and thus degradation of mitotic cyclin (see Figure
21-2, step 2 ). This inhibition permits the gradual rise in
mitotic cyclin levels observed throughout interphase of the
next cell cycle.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.2
Biochemical Studies with Oocytes, Eggs,
and Early Embryos
MPF is a protein kinase that requires a mitotic cyclin
for activity. The protein kinase activity of MPF stimulates
the onset of mitosis by phosphorylating multiple specific
protein substrates, most of which remain to be identified.

■

In the synchronously dividing cells of early Xenopus and
sea urchin embryos, the concentration of mitotic cyclins

■

12

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

cyclin followed by its periodic degradation at late anaphase
is required for the rapid cycles of mitosis observed in early
Xenopus embryos. Identification of the catalytic protein kinase subunit of MPF and further insight into its regulation
came from genetic analysis of the cell cycle in the fission
yeast S. pombe. This yeast grows as a rod-shaped cell that increases in length as it grows and then divides in the middle
during mitosis to produce two daughter cells of equal size
(Figure 21-11).
In wild-type S. pombe, entry into mitosis is carefully regulated in order to properly coordinate cell division with cell
growth. Temperature-sensitive mutants of S. pombe with
conditional defects in the ability to progress through the cell
cycle are easily recognized because they cause characteristic
changes in cell length at the nonpermissive temperature. The
many such mutants that have been isolated fall into two
groups. In the first group are cdc mutants, which fail to
progress through one of the phases of the cell cycle at the
nonpermissive temperature; they form extremely long cells
because they continue to grow in length, but fail to divide. In
contrast, wee mutants form smaller-than-normal cells because they are defective in the proteins that normally prevent
cells from dividing when they are too small.
In S. pombe wild-type genes are indicated in italics with
a superscript plus sign (e.g., cdc2); genes with a recessive

(e.g., cyclin B) and MPF activity increase as cells enter
mitosis and then fall as cells exit mitosis (see Figures 21-7
and 21-8).
The rise and fall in MPF activity during the cell cycle result from concomitant synthesis and degradation of mitotic
cyclin (see Figure 21-9).

■

The multisubunit anaphase-promoting complex (APC)
is a ubiquitin ligase that recognizes a conserved destruction box sequence in mitotic cyclins and promotes their
polyubiquitination, marking the proteins for rapid degradation by proteasomes. The resulting decrease in MPF activity leads to completion of mitosis.

■

The ubiquitin ligase activity of APC is controlled so that
mitotic cyclins are polyubiquitinated only during late
anaphase (see Figure 21-10). Deactivation of APC in G1
permits accumulation of mitotic cyclins during the next cell
cycle. This results in the cyclical increases and decreases in
MPF activity that cause the entry into and exit from mitosis.
■

21.3

Genetic Studies with S. pombe

The studies with Xenopus egg extracts described in the previous section showed that continuous synthesis of a mitotic
(a)

(b)

Cytokinesis

Nuclear division
Chromosome
segregation

G1
Spindle
formation

M

FPO
G2

Spindle pole
body duplication

electron micrograph of S. pombe cells at various stages of the
cell cycle. Long cells are about to enter mitosis; short cells have
just passed through cytokinesis. (b) Main events in the S. pombe

START

S

Chromosome
condensation

▲ FIGURE 21-11 The fission yeast S. pombe. (a) Scanning

Growth

DNA
replication

cell cycle. Note that the nuclear envelope does not disassemble
during mitosis in S. pombe and other yeasts. [Part (a) courtesy of
N. Hajibagheri.]

21.3 • Genetic Studies with S. pombe

mutation, in italics with a superscript minus sign (e.g.,
cdc2). The protein encoded by a particular gene is designated by the gene symbol in Roman type with an initial capital letter (e.g., Cdc2).

A Highly Conserved MPF-like Complex Controls
Entry into Mitosis in S. pombe
Temperature-sensitive mutations in cdc2, one of several different cdc genes in S. pombe, produce opposite phenotypes
depending on whether the mutation is recessive or dominant
(Figure 21-12). Recessive mutations (cdc2) give rise to abnormally long cells, whereas dominant mutations (cdc2D)
give rise to abnormally small cells, the wee phenotype. As discussed in Chapter 9, recessive mutations generally cause a loss
of the wild-type protein function; in diploid cells, both alleles must be mutant in order for the mutant phenotype to be
observed. In contrast, dominant mutations generally result
in a gain in protein function, either because of overproduction
or lack of regulation; in this case, the presence of only one
mutant allele confers the mutant phenotype in diploid cells.
The finding that a loss of Cdc2 activity (cdc2 mutants) prevents entry into mitosis and a gain of Cdc2 activity (cdc2D
mutants) brings on mitosis earlier than normal identified
Cdc2 as a key regulator of entry into mitosis in S. pombe.
The wild-type cdc2 gene contained in a S. pombe plasmid library was identified and isolated by its ability to complement cdc2 mutants (see Figure 21-4). Sequencing
showed that cdc2 encodes a 34-kDa protein with homology
to eukaryotic protein kinases. In subsequent studies, researchers identified cDNA clones from other organisms that
could complement S. pombe cdc2 mutants. Remarkably,
they isolated a human cDNA encoding a protein identical to
S. pombe Cdc2 in 63 percent of its residues.
cdc2 +
(wild type)

cdc2 −
(recessive)

FPO

cdc D
(dominant)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-12 Recessive and dominant
S. pombe cdc2 mutants have opposite phenotypes. Wild-type
cell (cdc2) is schematically depicted just before cytokinesis with
two normal-size daughter cells. A recessive cdc2 mutant cannot
enter mitosis at the nonpermissive temperature and appears as
an elongated cell with a single nucleus, which contains
duplicated chromosomes. A dominant cdc2D mutant enters
mitosis prematurely before reaching normal size in G2; thus, the
two daughter cells resulting from cytokinesis are smaller than
normal, that is, they have the wee phenotype.

13

Isolation and sequencing of another S. pombe cdc gene
(cdc13), which also is required for entry into mitosis, revealed that it encodes a protein with homology to sea urchin
and Xenopus cyclin B. Further studies showed that a heterodimer of Cdc13 and Cdc2 forms the S. pombe MPF; like
Xenopus MPF, this heterodimer has protein kinase activity
that will phosphorylate histone H1. Moreover, the H1 protein kinase activity rises as S. pombe cells enter mitosis and
falls as they exit mitosis in parallel with the rise and fall in
the Cdc13 level. These findings, which are completely analogous to the results obtained with Xenopus egg extracts (see
Figure 21-9a), identified Cdc13 as the mitotic cyclin in
S. pombe. Further studies showed that the isolated Cdc2 protein and its homologs in other eukaryotes have little protein
kinase activity until they are bound by a cyclin. Hence, this
family of protein kinases became known as cyclin-dependent
kinases, or CDKs.
Researchers soon found that antibodies raised against
a highly conserved region of Cdc2 recognize a polypeptide
that co-purifies with MPF purified from Xenopus eggs.
Thus Xenopus MPF is also composed of a mitotic cyclin
(cyclin B) and a CDK (called CDK1). This convergence of
findings from biochemical studies in an invertebrate (sea
urchin) and a vertebrate (Xenopus) and from genetic studies in a yeast indicated that entry into mitosis is controlled
by analogous mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes in all eukaryotes (see Figure 21-2, step 7 ). Moreover, most of the participating proteins have been found to be highly conserved
during evolution.

Phosphorylation of the CDK Subunit Regulates
the Kinase Activity of MPF
Analysis of additional S. pombe cdc mutants revealed that
proteins encoded by other genes regulate the protein kinase
activity of the mitotic cyclin-CDK complex (MPF) in fission
yeast. For example, temperature-sensitive cdc25 mutants
are delayed in entering mitosis at the nonpermissive temperature, producing elongated cells. On the other hand, overexpression of Cdc25 from a plasmid present in multiple
copies per cell decreases the length of G2 causing premature
entry into mitosis and small (wee) cells (Figure 21-13a). Conversely, loss-of-function mutations in the wee1 gene causes
premature entry into mitosis resulting in small cells, whereas
overproduction of Wee1 protein increases the length of G2
resulting in elongated cells. A logical interpretation of these
findings is that Cdc25 protein stimulates the kinase activity
of S. pombe MPF, whereas Wee1 protein inhibits MPF activity (Figure 21-13b).
In subsequent studies, the wild-type cdc25 and wee1
genes were isolated, sequenced, and used to produce the encoded proteins with suitable expression vectors. The deduced
sequences of Cdc25 and Wee1 and biochemical studies of the
proteins demonstrated that they regulate the kinase activity of
S. pombe MPF by phosphorylating and dephosphorylating
specific regulatory sites in Cdc2, the CDK subunit of MPF.

14

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

both residues are phosphorylated, MPF is inactive. Finally,
the Cdc25 phosphatase removes the phosphate from Y15,
yielding highly active MPF. Site-specific mutagenesis that
changed the Y15 in S. pombe CDK to a phenylalanine, which
cannot be phosphorylated, produced mutants with the wee
phenotype, similar to that of wee1 mutants. Both mutations
prevent the inhibitory phosphorylation at Y15, resulting in
the inability to properly regulate MPF activity, and, consequently, premature entry into mitosis.

(a)
Deficit of Cdc25
or
Excess of Wee1
Elongated cells
(increased G2)
Deficit of Wee1
or
Excess of Cdc25
Small cells
(decreased G2)

FPO

(b)

Conformational Changes Induced by Cyclin
Binding and Phosphorylation Increase
MPF Activity

Mitotic cyclin

S. pombe MPF
CDK

Wee1

Unlike both fission and budding yeasts, each of which produce just one CDK, vertebrates produce several CDKs (see
Table 21-1). The three-dimensional structure of one human
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK2) has been determined and
provides insight into how cyclin binding and phosphorylation of CDKs regulate their protein kinase activity. Although the three-dimensional structures of the S. pombe
CDK and most other cyclin-dependent kinases have not
been determined, their extensive sequence homology with
human CDK2 suggests that all these CDKs have a similar
structure and are regulated by a similar mechanism.
Unphosphorylated, inactive CDK2 contains a flexible region, called the T-loop, that blocks access of protein substrates
to the active site where ATP is bound (Figure 21-15a). Steric
blocking by the T-loop largely explains why free CDK2, unbound to cyclin, has no protein kinase activity. Unphosphorylated CDK2 bound to one of its cyclin partners, cyclin A, has
minimal but detectable protein kinase activity in vitro, although it may be essentially inactive in vivo. Extensive interactions between cyclin A and the T-loop cause a dramatic shift
in the position of the T-loop, thereby exposing the CDK2 active site (Figure 21-15b). Binding of cyclin A also shifts the position of the 1 helix in CDK2, modifying its substrate-binding
surface. Phosphorylation of the activating threonine, located

Cdc25

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-13 Cdc25 and Wee1 have
opposing effects on S. pombe MPF activity. (a) Cells that lack
Cdc25 or Wee1 activity, as a result of recessive temperaturesensitive mutations in the corresponding genes, have the
opposite phenotype. Likewise, cells with multiple copies of
plasmids containing wild-type cdc25 or wee1, and which thus
produce an excess of the encoded proteins, have opposite
phenotypes. (b) These phenotypes imply that the mitotic cyclinCDK complex is activated (→) by Cdc25 and inhibited (—l) by
Wee1. See text for further discussion.

Figure 21-14 illustrates the functions of four proteins that
regulate the protein kinase activity of the S. pombe CDK.
First is Cdc13, the mitotic cyclin of S. pombe (equivalent to
cyclin B in metazoans), which associates with the CDK to
form MPF with extremely low activity. Second is the Wee1
protein-tyrosine kinase, which phosphorylates an inhibitory
tyrosine residue (Y15) in the CDK subunit. Third is another
kinase, designated CDK-activating kinase (CAK), which
phosphorylates an activating threonine residue (T161). When

Mitotic
cyclin
Inactive
MPF

Inactive
MPF

Inactive
MPF

Wee1

Y15

T161

FPO

CDK
Y15

Y15
P

T161

▲ FIGURE 21-14 Regulation of the kinase activity of
S. pombe mitosis-promoting factor (MPF). Interaction of
mitotic cyclin (Cdc13) with cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdc2) forms
MPF. The CDK subunit can be phosphorylated at two regulatory
sites: by Wee1 at tyrosine-15 (Y15) and by CDK-activating kinase
(CAK) at threonine-161 (T161). Removal of the phosphate on Y15

T161

Active
MPF

CAK

Cdc25

Y15

T161

P

P

Y15

T161
P

Substrate-binding
surface

by Cdc25 phosphatase yields active MPF in which the CDK
subunit is monophosphorylated at T161. The mitotic cyclin subunit
contributes to the specificity of substrate binding by MPF,
probably by forming part of the substrate-binding surface (crosshatch), which also includes the inhibitory Y15 residue.

21.3 • Genetic Studies with S. pombe

15

43p5(w) X 13p (d)

▲ FIGURE 21-15 Structural models of human CDK2, which
is homologous to the S. pombe cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK). (a) Free, inactive CDK2 unbound to cyclin A. In free
CDK2, the T-loop blocks access of protein substrates to the
-phosphate of the bound ATP, shown as a ball-and-stick model.
The conformations of the regions highlighted in yellow are
altered when CDK is bound to cyclin A. (b) Unphosphorylated,
low-activity cyclin A–CDK2 complex. Conformational changes
induced by binding of a domain of cyclin A (purple) cause the
T-loop to pull away from the active site of CDK2, so that
substrate proteins can bind. The 1 helix in CDK2, which

in the T-loop, causes additional conformational changes in the
cyclin A–CDK2 complex that greatly increase its affinity for
protein substrates (Figure 21-15c). As a result, the kinase activity of the phosphorylated complex is a hundredfold greater
than that of the unphosphorylated complex.
The inhibitory tyrosine residue (Y15) in the S. pombe
CDK is in the region of the protein that binds the ATP phosphates. Vertebrate CDK2 proteins contain a second inhibitory
residue, threonine-14 (T14), that is located in the same region
of the protein. Phosphorylation of Y15 and T14 in these proteins prevents binding of ATP because of electrostatic repulsion between the phosphates linked to the protein and the
phosphates of ATP. Thus these phosphorylations inhibit protein kinase activity even when the CDK protein is bound by
a cyclin and the activating residue is phosphorylated.

Other Mechanisms Also Control Entry
into Mitosis by Regulating MPF Activity
So far we have discussed two mechanisms for controlling entry
into mitosis: (a) regulation of the concentration of mitotic cyclins
as outlined in Figure 21-10 and (b) regulation of the kinase activity of MPF as outlined in Figure 21-14. Further studies of
S. pombe mutants with altered cell cycles have revealed additional
genes whose encoded proteins directly or indirectly influence
MPF activity. At present it is clear that MPF activity in S. pombe
is regulated in a complex fashion in order to control precisely
the timing of mitosis and therefore the size of daughter cells.
Enzymes with activities equivalent to S. pombe Wee1 and
Cdc25 have been found in cycling Xenopus egg extracts. The

interacts extensively with cyclin A, moves several angstroms into
the catalytic cleft, where it probably contributes to substrate
specificity. (c) Phosphorylated, high-activity cyclin A–CDK2
complex. The conformational changes induced by phosphorylation
of the activating threonine (red ball) alter the shape of the
substrate-binding surface, greatly increasing the affinity for
protein substrates. These changes also reposition key catalytic
side chains, leading to the correct alignment of the ATP
phosphates for the phosphotransfer reaction. [Courtesy of P. D.
Jeffrey. See A. A. Russo et al., 1996, Nature Struct. Biol. 3:696.]

Xenopus Wee1 tyrosine kinase activity is high and Cdc25
phosphatase activity is low during interphase. As a result,
MPF assembled from Xenopus CDK1 and newly synthesized
mitotic cyclin is inactive. As the extract initiates the events of
mitosis, Wee1 activity diminishes and Cdc25 activity increases so that MPF is converted into its active form. Although cyclin B is the only protein whose synthesis is
required for the cycling of early Xenopus embryos, the activities of other proteins, including Xenopus Wee1 and
Cdc25, must be properly regulated for cycling to occur. In its
active form, Cdc25 is phosphorylated. Its activity is also controlled by additional protein kinases and phosphatases.
MPF activity also can be regulated by controlling transcription of the genes encoding the proteins that regulate
MPF activity. For example, after the initial rapid synchronous cell divisions of the early Drosophila embryo, all the
mRNAs are degraded, and the cells become arrested in G2.
This arrest occurs because the Drosophila homolog of
Cdc25, called String, is unstable. The resulting decrease in
String phosphatase activity maintains MPF in its inhibited
state, preventing entry into mitosis. The subsequent regulated entry into mitosis by specific groups of cells is then triggered by the regulated transcription of the string gene.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.3
Genetic Studies with S. pombe
In the fission yeast S. pombe, the cdc2 gene encodes a
cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK) that associates with
a mitotic cyclin encoded by the cdc13 gene. The resulting

■

16

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

mitotic cyclin-CDK heterodimer is equivalent to Xenopus
MPF. Mutants that lack either the mitotic cyclin or the
CDK fail to enter mitosis and form elongated cells.

(a)

The protein kinase activity of the mitotic cyclin-CDK complex (MPF) depends on the phosphorylation state of two
residues in the catalytic CDK subunit (see Figure 21-14). The
activity is greatest when threonine-161 is phosphorylated and
is inhibited by Wee1-catalyzed phosphorylation of tyrosine-15,
which interferes with correct binding of ATP. This inhibitory
phosphate is removed by the Cdc25 protein phosphatase.
■

A decrease in Wee1 activity and increase in Cdc25 activity, resulting in activation of the mitotic cyclin-CDK
complex, results in the onset of mitosis.

1 m

■

The human cyclin A–CDK2 complex is similar to MPF
from Xenopus and S. pombe. Structural studies with the
human proteins reveal that cyclin binding to CDK2 and
phosphorylation of the activating threonine (equivalent to
threonine-161 in the S. pombe CDK) cause conformational
changes that expose the active site and modify the substratebinding surface so that it has high activity and affinity for
protein substrates (see Figure 21-15).

■

(b)
Lamin
filament

FPO

21.4 Molecular Mechanisms
for Regulating Mitotic Events
In the previous sections, we have seen that a regulated increase in MPF activity induces entry into mitosis. Presumably,
the entry into mitosis is a consequence of the phosphorylation
of specific proteins by the protein kinase activity of MPF. Although many of the critical substrates of MPF remain to be
identified, we now know of examples that show how regulation by MPF phosphorylation mediates many of the early
events of mitosis leading to metaphase: chromosome condensation, formation of the mitotic spindle, and disassembly of
the nuclear envelope (see Figure 20-29).
Recall that a decrease in mitotic cyclins and the associated inactivation of MPF coincides with the later stages of
mitosis (see Figure 21-9a). Just before this, in early anaphase,
sister chromatids separate and move to opposite spindle
poles. During telophase, microtubule dynamics return to interphase conditions, the chromosomes decondense, the nuclear envelope re-forms, the Golgi complex is remodeled, and
cytokinesis occurs. Some of these processes are triggered by
dephosphorylation; others, by protein degradation.
In this section, we discuss the molecular mechanisms and
specific proteins associated with some of the events that characterize early and late mitosis. These mechanisms illustrate
how cyclin-CDK complexes together with ubiquitin ligases
control passage through the mitotic phase of the cell cycle.

Phosphorylation of Nuclear Lamins and Other
Proteins Promotes Early Mitotic Events
The nuclear envelope is a double-membrane extension of the
rough endoplasmic reticulum containing many nuclear pore

C

C

C

C
Lamin tetramer

MPF
C P

C C

C
P

P

P

P

P
Phosphorylated
lamin dimers

P

P

▲ FIGURE 21-16 The nuclear lamina and its
depolymerization. (a) Electron micrograph of the nuclear lamina
from a Xenopus oocyte. Note the regular meshlike network of
lamin intermediate filaments. This structure lies adjacent to the
inner nuclear membrane (see Figure 19-31). (b) Schematic
diagrams of the structure of the nuclear lamina. Two orthogonal
sets of 10-nm-diameter filaments built of lamins A, B, and C form
the nuclear lamina (top). Individual lamin filaments are formed by
end-to-end polymerization of lamin tetramers, which consist of
two lamin dimers (middle). The red circles represent the globular
N-terminal domains. Phosphorylation of specific serine residues
near the ends of the coiled-coil rodlike central section of lamin
dimers causes the tetramers to depolymerize (bottom). As a result,
the nuclear lamina disintegrates. [Part (a) from U. Aebi et al., 1986,
Nature 323:560; courtesy of U. Aebi. Part (b) adapted from A. Murray and
T. Hunt, 1993, The Cell Cycle: An Introduction, W. H. Freeman and Company.]

21.4 • Molecular Mechanisms for Regulating Mitotic Events

complexes (see Figure 5-19). The lipid bilayer of the inner nuclear membrane is supported by the nuclear lamina, a meshwork of lamin filaments located adjacent to the inside face
of the nuclear envelope (Figure 21-16a). The three nuclear
lamins (A, B, and C) present in vertebrate cells belong to the
class of cytoskeletal proteins, the intermediate filaments, that
are critical in supporting cellular membranes (Chapter 19).
Lamins A and C, which are encoded by the same transcription unit and produced by alternative splicing of a single pre-mRNA, are identical except for a 133-residue region
at the C-terminus of lamin A, which is absent in lamin C.
Lamin B, encoded by a different transcription unit, is modified post-transcriptionally by the addition of a hydrophobic
isoprenyl group near its carboxyl-terminus. This fatty acid
becomes embedded in the inner nuclear membrane, thereby
anchoring the nuclear lamina to the membrane (see Figure
5-15). All three nuclear lamins form dimers containing a

17

rodlike -helical coiled-coil central section and globular
head and tail domains; polymerization of these dimers
through head-to-head and tail-to-tail associations generates
the intermediate filaments that compose the nuclear lamina
(see Figure 19-33).
Early in mitosis, MPF phosphorylates specific serine
residues in all three nuclear lamins, causing depolymerization of the lamin intermediate filaments (Figure 21-16b). The
phosphorylated lamin A and C dimers are released into solution, whereas the phosphorylated lamin B dimers remain
associated with the nuclear membrane via their isoprenyl anchor. Depolymerization of the nuclear lamins leads to disintegration of the nuclear lamina meshwork and contributes to
disassembly of the nuclear envelope. The experiment summarized in Figure 21-17 shows that disassembly of the nuclear envelope, which normally occurs early in mitosis,
depends on phosphorylation of lamin A.

(a) Interphase

(b) Prophase

FPO
(c) Metaphase

Lamin A stain

DNA stain

Cells with wild-type human lamin A

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-17 Transfection experiments
demonstrate that phosphorylation of human lamin A is
required for lamin depolymerization. Site-directed mutagenesis
was used to prepare a mutant human lamin A gene encoding a
protein in which alanines replace the serines that normally are
phosphorylated in wild-type lamin A (see Figure 21-16b). As a
result, the mutant lamin A cannot be phosphorylated. Expression
vectors carrying the wild-type or mutant human gene were
separately transfected into cultured hamster cells. Because the
transfected lamin genes are expressed at much higher levels than
the endogenous hamster lamin gene, most of the lamin A
produced in transfected cells is human lamin A. Transfected cells
at various stages in the cell cycle then were stained with a

Lamin A stain

DNA stain

Cells with mutant human lamin A

fluorescent-labeled monoclonal antibody specific for human
lamin A and with a fluorescent dye that binds to DNA. The bright
band of fluorescence around the perimeter of the nucleus
in interphase cells stained for human lamin A represents
polymerized (unphosphorylated) lamin A (a). In cells expressing
the wild-type human lamin A, the diffuse lamin staining
throughout the cytoplasm in prophase and metaphase (b and c)
and the absence of the bright peripheral band in metaphase
(c) indicate depolymerization of lamin A. In contrast, no lamin
depolymerization occurred in cells expressing the mutant lamin
A. DNA staining showed that the chromosomes were fully
condensed by metaphase in cells expressing either wild-type or
mutant lamin A. [From R. Heald and F. McKeon, 1990, Cell 61:579.]

18

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

In addition, MPF-catalyzed phosphorylation of specific
nucleoporins (see Chapter 12) causes nuclear pore complexes
to dissociate into subcomplexes during prophase. Similarly,
phosphorylation of integral membrane proteins of the inner
nuclear membrane is thought to decrease their affinity for
chromatin and contribute to disassembly of the nuclear envelope. The weakening of the associations between the inner
nuclear membrane and the nuclear lamina and chromatin
may allow sheets of inner nuclear membrane to retract into
the endoplasmic reticulum, which is continuous with the
outer nuclear membrane.
Several lines of evidence indicate that MPF-catalyzed
phosphorylation also plays a role in chromosome condensation and formation of the mitotic spindle apparatus. For instance, genetic experiments in the budding yeast S. cerevisiae
identified a family of SMC (structural maintenance of chromosomes) proteins that are required for normal chromosome
segregation. These large proteins (≈1200 amino acids) contain characteristic ATPase domains at their C-terminus and
long regions predicted to participate in coiled-coil structures.
Immunoprecipitation studies with antibodies specific for
Xenopus SMC proteins revealed that in cycling egg extracts
some SMC proteins are part of a multiprotein complex called
condensin, which becomes phosphorylated as cells enter mitosis. When the anti-SMC antibodies were used to deplete
condensin from an egg extract, the extract lost its ability
to condense added sperm chromatin. Other in vitro experiments showed that phosphorylated purified condensin
binds to DNA and winds it into supercoils (see Figure 4-7),
whereas unphosphorylated condensin does not. These results
have lead to the model that individual condensin complexes

are activated by phosphorylation catalyzed by MPF or another protein kinase regulated by MPF. Once activated, condensin complexes bind to DNA at intervals along the
chromosome scaffold. Self-association of the bound complexes via their coiled-coil domains and supercoiling of the
DNA segments between them is proposed to cause chromosome condensation.
Phosphorylation of microtubule-associated proteins by
MPF probably is required for the dramatic changes in microtubule dynamics that result in the formation of the mitotic
spindle and asters (Chapter 20). In addition, phosphorylation of proteins associated with the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and Golgi complex, by MPF or other protein kinases
activated by MPF-catalyzed phosphorylation, is thought to
alter the trafficking of vesicles between the ER and Golgi to
favor trafficking in the direction of the ER during prophase.
As a result, vesicular traffic from the ER through the Golgi to
the cell surface (Chapter 17), seen in interphase cells, does
not occur during mitosis.

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-18 Onset of anaphase

In the presence of nondegradable cyclin B (b), chromosomes
segregated to the spindle poles by 15 minutes, as in (a), but the
spindle microtubules did not depolymerize and the chromosomes
did not decondense even after 80 minutes. These observations
indicate that degradation of cyclin B is not required for chromosome
segregation during anaphase, although it is required for
depolymerization of spindle microtubules and chromosome
decondensation during telophase. (c) Various concentrations of a
cyclin B peptide containing the destruction box were added to
extracts that had not been treated with RNase; the samples were
stained for DNA at 15 or 35 minutes after formation of the spindle
apparatus. The two lowest peptide concentrations delayed
chromosome segregation, and the higher concentrations completely
inhibited chromosome segregation. In this experiment, the added
cyclin B peptide is thought to competitively inhibit APC-mediated
polyubiquitination of cyclin B as well as another target protein
whose degradation is required for chromosome segregation.

depends on polyubiquitination of proteins other than cyclin B
in cycling Xenopus egg extracts. The reaction mixtures contained
an untreated or RNase-treated Xenopus egg extract and isolated
Xenopus sperm nuclei, plus other components indicated below.
Chromosomes were visualized with a fluorescent DNA-binding dye.
Fluorescent rhodamine-labeled tubulin in the reactions was
incorporated into microtubules, permitting observation of the mitotic
spindle apparatus. (a, b) After the egg extract was treated with
RNase to destroy endogenous mRNAs, an RNase inhibitor was
added. Then mRNA encoding either wild-type cyclin B or a mutant
nondegradable cyclin B was added. The time at which the
condensed chromosomes and assembled spindle apparatus
became visible after addition of sperm nuclei is designated 0
minutes. In the presence of wild-type cyclin B (a), condensed
chromosomes attached to the spindle microtubules and segregated
toward the poles of the spindle. By 40 minutes, the spindle had
depolymerized (thus is not visible), and the chromosomes had
decondensed (diffuse DNA staining) as cyclin B was degraded.

Unlinking of Sister Chromatids
Initiates Anaphase
We saw earlier that in late anaphase, polyubiquitination of
mitotic cyclin by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC)
leads to the proteasomal destruction of this cyclin (see Figure
21-10). Additional experiments with Xenopus egg extracts
provided evidence that degradation of cyclin B, the Xenopus mitotic cyclin, and the resulting decrease in MPF activity are required for chromosome decondensation but not for
chromosome segregation (Figure 21-18a, b).

[From S. L. Holloway et al., 1993, Cell 73:1393; courtesy of A. W. Murray.]

(a) RNase treated extract  mRNA encoding wild-type cyclin B

DNA

Tubulin

0

10

15

40

Time (min)

(b) RNase treated extract  mutant mRNA encoding nondegradable cyclin B

DNA

Tubulin

0

10

15

80

Time (min)

(c) Untreated extract  cylin B destruction-box peptide
15-min reaction time

DNA

35-min reaction time

DNA

0

20

40

60

80

Peptide
Peptide
conc.
added
conc. added
(g/ml)
(g/ml)

19

20

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

To determine if ubiquitin-dependent degradation of
another protein is required for chromosome segregation, researchers prepared a peptide containing the cyclin destruction-box sequence and the site of polyubiquitination. When
this peptide was added to a reaction mixture containing untreated egg extract and sperm nuclei, decondensation of the
chromosomes and, more interestingly, movement of chromosomes toward the spindle poles were greatly delayed at
peptide concentrations of 20–40 g/ml and blocked altogether at higher concentrations (Figure 21-18c). The added
excess destruction-box peptide is thought to act as a substrate for the APC-directed polyubiquitination system, competing with the normal endogenous target proteins and
thereby delaying or preventing their degradation by proteasomes. Competition for cyclin B accounts for the observed
inhibition of chromosome decondensation. The observation
that chromosome segregation also was inhibited in this experiment but not in the experiment with mutant nondegradable cyclin B (see Figure 21-18b) indicated that segregation
depends on proteasomal degradation of a different target
protein.
As mentioned earlier, each sister chromatid of a
metaphase chromosome is attached to microtubules via its
kinetochore, a complex of proteins assembled at the centromere. The opposite ends of these kinetochore microtubules associate with one of the spindle poles (see Figure
20-31). At metaphase, the spindle is in a state of tension with
forces pulling the two kinetochores toward the opposite
spindle poles balanced by forces pushing the spindle poles
apart. Sister chromatids do not separate because they are

held together at their centromeres and multiple positions
along the chromosome arms by multiprotein complexes
called cohesins. Among the proteins composing the cohesin
complexes are members of the SMC protein family discussed
in the previous section. When Xenopus egg extracts were depleted of cohesin by treatment with antibodies specific for
the cohesin SMC proteins, the depleted extracts were able
to replicate the DNA in added sperm nuclei, but the resulting
sister chromatids did not associate properly with each other.
These findings demonstrate that cohesin is necessary for
cross-linking sister chromatids.
Recent genetic studies in the budding yeast S. cerevisiae
have led to the model depicted in Figure 21-19 for how the
APC regulates sister chromatid separation to initiate
anaphase. Cohesin SMC proteins bind to each sister chromatid; other subunits of cohesin, including Scc1, then link
the SMC proteins, firmly associating the two chromatids.
The cross-linking activity of cohesin depends on securin,
which is found in all eukaryotes. Prior to anaphase, securin
binds to and inhibits separase, a ubiquitous protease related
to the caspase proteases that regulate programmed cell death
(Chapter 22). Once all chromosome kinetochores have attached to spindle microtubules, the APC is directed by a
specificity factor called Cdc20 to polyubiquitinate securin,
leading to the onset of anaphase. (This specificity factor is
distinct from Cdh1, which directs the APC to polyubiquitinate B-type cyclins.) Polyubiquitinated securin is rapidly degraded by proteasomes, thereby releasing separase. Free
from its inhibitor, separase cleaves Scc1, breaking the protein
cross-link between sister chromatids. Once this link is bro-

Ub
Ub

Cdc20
Metaphase

Separase

APC

Ub

Anaphase

Smc1
Scc1

Smc3

Securin

FPO

▲ FIGURE 21-19 Model for control of entry into anaphase
by APC-regulated degradation of the cohesin link between
sister chromatids. (Left) The multiprotein cohesin complex
contains SMC1 and SMC3 (purple), dimeric proteins that bind DNA
of each sister chromatid through globular domains at one end.
Scc1 (orange) and two other cohesin subunits (not shown) bind
to the SMC proteins associated with each chromatid, thus crosslinking the chromatids. (Center) Once all chromosome

kinetochores have bound to spindle microtubules, the APC
specificity factor Cdc20 targets APC to polyubiquitinate securin
which is then degraded by the proteasome (not shown). (Right)
The released separase then cleaves Scc1, severing the cross-link
between sister chromatids. See text for discussion. [Adapted from
F. Uhlmann, 2001, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:754; and A. Tomans, Nature
Milestones, http://www.nature.com/celldivision/milestones/
full/milestone23.html.]

21.4 • Molecular Mechanisms for Regulating Mitotic Events

ken, the poleward force exerted on kinetochores can move
sister chromatids toward the opposite spindle poles.
Because Cdc20—the specificity factor that directs APC
to securin—is activated before Cdh1—the specificity factor
that directs APC to mitotic cyclins—MPF activity does not
decrease until after the chromosomes have segregated (see
Figure 21-2, steps 8 and 9 ). As a result of this temporal
order in the activation of the two APC specificity factors
(Cdc20 and Cdh1), the chromosomes remain in the condensed state and reassembly of the nuclear envelope does
not occur until chromosomes are moved to the proper position. We consider how the timing of Cdh1 activation is
regulated in a later section.

Reassembly of the Nuclear Envelope
and Cytokinesis Depend on Unopposed
Constitutive Phosphatase Activity
Earlier we discussed how MPF-mediated phosphorylation
of nuclear lamins, nucleoporins, and proteins in the inner nuclear membrane contributes to the dissociation of nuclear
pore complexes and retraction of the nuclear membrane into
the reticular ER. Once MPF is inactivated in late anaphase
by the degradation of mitotic cyclins, the unopposed action
of phosphatases reverses the action of MPF. The dephosphorylated inner nuclear membrane proteins are thought to bind
to chromatin once again. As a result, multiple projections of
regions of the ER membrane containing these proteins are
thought to associate with the surface of the decondensing
chromosomes and then fuse with each other to form a
continuous double membrane around each chromosome
(Figure 21-20). Dephosphorylation of nuclear pore subcomplexes is thought to allow them to reassemble nuclear pore
complexes traversing the inner and outer membranes soon
after fusion of the ER projections (see Figure 12-18).
The fusion of ER projections depicted in Figure 21-20 occurs by a mechanism similar to that described for the fusion
of vesicles and target membranes in the secretory pathway
(see Figure 17-11). Proteins with activities similar to those of
NSF and -SNAP in the secretory pathway have been shown
to function in the fusion of experimentally produced nuclear
envelope vesicles in vitro and are thought to mediate the fusion of ER projections around chromosomes during telophase
in the intact cell. These same proteins also function in the fusion events that reassemble the Golgi apparatus. The membrane-associated SNARE proteins that direct the fusion of
nuclear envelope extensions from the ER have not been identified, but syntaxin 5 has been shown to function as both the
V-SNARE and T-SNARE during reassembly of the Golgi.
During fusion of nuclear envelope vesicles in vitro, the same
Ran GTPase that functions in transport through nuclear pore
complexes (Chapter 12) functions similarly to Rab GTPases in
vesicle fusion in the secretory pathway. Because the Ranspecific guanosine nucleotide–exchange factor (Ran-GEF)
is associated with chromatin, a high local concentration of
Ran · GTP is produced around the chromosomes, directing
membrane fusions at the chromosome surface.

21

The reassembly of nuclear envelopes containing nuclear
pore complexes around each chromosome forms individual
mininuclei called karyomeres (see Figure 21-20). Subsequent
fusion of the karyomeres associated with each spindle pole
generates the two daughter-cell nuclei, each containing a full
set of chromosomes. Dephosphorylated lamins A and C appear to be imported through the reassembled nuclear pore
complexes during this period an reassemble into a new nuclear
lamina. Reassembly of the nuclear lamina in the daughter nuclei probably is initiated on lamin B molecules, which remain
associated with the ER membrane via their isoprenyl anchors
throughout mitosis and become localized to the inner membrane of the reassembled nuclear envelopes of karyomeres.
During cytokinesis, the final step in cell division, the actin
and myosin filaments composing the contractile ring slide past
each other to form a cleavage furrow of steadily decreasing

▲ FIGURE 21-20 Model for reassembly of the nuclear
envelope during telophase. Extensions of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) associate with each decondensing chromosome
and then fuse with each other, forming a double membrane
around the chromosome. Nuclear pore subcomplexes
reassemble into nuclear pores, forming individual mininuclei
called karyomeres. The enclosed chromosome further
decondenses, and subsequent fusion of the nuclear envelopes of
all the karyomeres at each spindle pole forms a single nucleus
containing a full set of chromosomes. Reassembly of the nuclear
lamina is not shown. [See A. Murray and T. Hunt, 1993, The Cell Cycle:
An Introduction, W. H. Freeman and Company; and ]

diameter (see Figure 19-20). As MPF activity rises early in
mitosis, it phosphorylates the regulatory myosin light chain,
thereby inhibiting the ability of myosin to associate with
actin filaments. The inactivation of MPF at the end of
anaphase permits protein phosphatases to dephosphorylate
myosin light chain (see Figure 20-42). As a result, the contractile machinery is activated, the cleavage furrow can form,
and cytokinesis proceeds. This regulatory mechanism assures
that cytokinesis does not occur until the daughter chromosomes have segregated sufficiently toward the opposite poles
to assure that each daughter cell receives the proper number
of chromosomes.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.4

21.5 • Genetic Studies with S. cerevisiae

protein is written in Roman letters with an initial capital
(e.g., Cdc28), similar to S. pombe proteins.
The phenotypic behavior of temperature-sensitive cdc28
mutants indicates that Cdc28 function is critical for entry
into the S phase. When these mutants are shifted to the nonpermissive temperature, they behave like wild-type cells suddenly deprived of nutrients. That is, cdc28 mutant cells that
have grown large enough to pass START at the time of the
temperature shift continue through the cell cycle normally
and undergo mitosis, whereas those that are too small to
have passed START when shifted to the nonpermissive temperature do not enter the S phase even though nutrients are
plentiful. Even though cdc28 cells blocked in G1 continue to
grow in size at the nonpermissive temperature, they cannot
pass START and enter the S phase. Thus they appear as large
cells with no bud.
The wild-type CDC28 gene was isolated by its ability to
complement mutant cdc28 cells at the nonpermissive temperature (see Figure 21-4). Sequencing of CDC28 showed
that the encoded protein is homologous to known protein
kinases, and when Cdc28 protein was expressed in E. coli,
it exhibited protein kinase activity. Actually, Cdc28 from
S. cerevisiae was the first cell-cycle protein shown to be a
protein kinase. Subsequently, the wild-type S. pombe cdc2
gene was found to be highly homologous to the S. cerevisiae
CDC28 gene, and the two encoded proteins—Cdc2 and
Cdc28—are functionally analogous. Each type of yeast contains a single cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK), which
(a)

23

can substitute for each other: Cdc2 in S. pombe and Cdc28
in S. cerevisiae (see Table 21-1).
The difference in the mutant phenotypes of cdc2
S. pombe cells and cdc28 S. cerevisiae cells can be explained
in terms of the physiology of the two yeasts. In S. pombe cells
growing in rich media, cell-cycle control is exerted primarily at the G2 → M transition (i.e., entry to mitosis). In many
cdc2 mutants, including those isolated first, enough Cdc2
activity is maintained at the nonpermissive temperature to
permit cells to enter the S phase, but not enough to permit
entry into mitosis. Such mutant cells are observed to be elongated cells arrested in G2. At the nonpermissive temperature,
cultures of completely defective cdc2 mutants include some
cells arrested in G1 and some arrested in G2, depending on
their location in the cell cycle at the time of the temperature
shift. Conversely, cell-cycle regulation in S. cerevisiae is exerted primarily at the G1 → S transition (i.e., entry to the S
phase). Therefore, partially defective cdc28 cells are arrested
in G1, but completely defective cdc28 cells are arrested in either G1 or G2. These observations demonstrate that both the
S. pombe and the S. cerevisiae CDKs are required for entry
into both the S phase and mitosis.

Three G1 Cyclins Associate with S. cerevisiae CDK
to form S Phase–Promoting Factors
By the late 1980s, it was clear that mitosis-promoting factor
(MPF) is composed of two subunits: a CDK and a mitotic

(b)
Cytokinesis

Chromosome
segregation;
nuclear
division

Growth

START

G1
M

Spindle
formation

FPO

Spindle pole
body
duplication

S

G2
Bud
emergence

DNA
replication
Nuclear
migration

24

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

B-type cyclin required to activate the catalytic subunit. By
analogy, it seemed likely that S. cerevisiae contains an
S phase–promoting factor (SPF) that phosphorylates and regulates proteins required for DNA synthesis. Similar to MPF,
SPF was proposed to be a heterodimer composed of the
S. cerevisiae CDK and a cyclin, in this case one that acts in
G1 (see Figure 21-2, steps 2 – 4 ).
To identify this putative G1 cyclin, researchers looked for
genes that, when expressed at high concentration, could suppress certain temperature-sensitive mutations in the S. cerevisiae CDK. The rationale of this approach is illustrated in
Figure 21-22. Researchers isolated two such genes designated CLN1 and CLN2. Using a different approach, researchers identified a dominant mutation in a third gene
called CLN3. Sequencing of the three CLN genes showed
that they encoded related proteins each of which includes an
≈100-residue region exhibiting significant homology with
B-type cyclins from sea urchin, Xenopus, human, and
S. pombe. This region encodes the cyclin domain that interacts with CDKs and is included in the domain of human cyclin A shown in Figure 21-15b,c. The finding that the three
Cln proteins contain this region of homology with mitotic
cyclins suggested that they were the sought-after S. cerevisiae
G1 cyclins. (Note that the homologous CDK-binding domain
found in various cyclins differs from the destruction box
mentioned earlier, which is found only in B-type cyclins.)
Gene knockout experiments showed that S. cerevisiae
cells can grow in rich medium if they carry any one of the
three G1 cyclin genes. As the data presented in Figure 21-23
indicate, overproduction of one G1 cyclin decreases the fraction of cells in G1, demonstrating that high levels of the
G1 cyclin-CDK complex drive cells through START prematurely. Moreover, in the absence of any of the G1 cyclins, cells
become arrested in G1, indicating that a G1 cyclin–CDK heterodimer, or SPF, is required for S. cerevisiae cells to enter the
S phase. These findings are reminiscent of the results for the
S. pombe mitotic cyclin (Cdc13) with regard to passage
through G2 and entry into mitosis. Overproduction of the
mitotic cyclin caused a shortened G2 and premature entry
into mitosis, whereas inhibition of the mitotic cyclin by mutation resulted in a lengthened G2 (see Figure 21-12). Thus
these results confirmed that the S. cerevisiae Cln proteins are
G1 cyclins that regulate passage through the G1 phase of the
cell cycle.
In wild-type yeast cells, CLN3 mRNA is produced at a
nearly constant level throughout the cell cycle, but its translation is regulated in response to nutrient levels. The CLN3
mRNA contains a short upstream open-reading frame that
inhibits initiation of translation of this mRNA. This inhibition is diminished when nutrients and hence translation initiation factors are in abundance. Since Cln3 is a highly
unstable protein, its concentration fluctuates with the translation rate of CLN3 mRNA. Consequently, the amount and
activity of Cln3-CDK complexes, which depends on the concentration of Cln3 protein, is largely regulated by the nutrient level.

(a)

25 °C

36 °C

G1 cyclin

Wild-type cells
SPF

Colonies form

Wild-type
CDK

Colonies form

Wild-type
G1 cyclin

(b)

cdc28 ts cells

Colonies form

(c)

cdc28 ts cells
transformed
with high-copy
G1 cyclin
plasmid

Mutant,
low-affinity
CDK

Arrested in G1

FPO
Excess
wild-type
G1 cyclin

Mutant,
low-affinity
CDK

Equilibrium
shifted

SPF

Colonies form

Colonies form

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-22 Genes encoding two
S. cerevisiae G1 cyclins were identified by their ability to
supress a temperature-sensitive mutant CDK. This genetic
screen is based on differences in the interactions between G1
cyclins and wild-type and temperature-sensitive
(ts) S. cerevisiae CDKs. (a) Wild-type cells produce a normal
CDK that associates with G1 cyclins, forming the active
S phase–promoting factor (SPF), at both the permissive and
nonpermissive temperature (i.e., 25  and 36 C). (b) Some
cdc28 ts mutants express a mutant CDK with low affinity for G1
cyclin at 36 °C. These mutants produce enough G1 cyclin-CDK
(SPF) to support growth and colony development at 25 C, but
not at 36 C. (c) When cdc28 ts cells were transformed with a
S. cerevisiae genomic library cloned in a high-copy plasmid,
three types of colonies formed at 36 C: one contained a
plasmid carrying the wild-type CDC28 gene; the other two
contained plasmids carrying either the CLN1 or CLN2 gene. In
transformed cells carrying the CLN1 or CLN2 gene, the
concentration of the encoded G1 cyclin is high enough to offset
the low affinity of the mutant CDK for a G1 cyclin at 36 C, so
that enough SPF forms to support entry into the S phase and
subsequent mitosis. Untransformed cdc28 ts cells and cells
transformed with plasmids carrying other genes are arrested
in G1 and do not form colonies. [See J. A. Hadwiger et al., 1989,
Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 86:6255.]

21.5 • Genetic Studies with S. cerevisiae
− Glucose

High-level expression of G1 cyclin

Cln3 expression vector

GAL1
promoter

(a) Wild-type cells
+ empty vector

G1 cyclin gene

No G1 cyclin expression

+ Glucose

(c) cln1 −/cln2 −/cln3 − cells
+ G1 cyclin vector

(b) Wild-type cells
+ G1 cyclin vector
−Glc

−Glc

25

−Glc

+Glc (135 min)

G1

G2

Fluorescence

Cell number

Cell number

Cell number

FPO
+Glc (135 min)

G1

G2

Fluorescence

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-23 Overexpression of G1
cyclin prematurely drives S. cerevisiae cells into the S phase.
The yeast expression vector used in these experiments (top )
carried one of the three S. cerevisiae G1 cyclin genes linked to
the strong GAL1 promoter, which is turned off when glucose is
present in the medium. To determine the proportion of cells in G1
and G2, cells were exposed to a fluorescent dye that binds to
DNA and then were passed through a fluorescence-activated cell
sorter (see Figure 5-34). Since the DNA content of G2 cells is
twice that of G1 cells, this procedure can distinguish cells in the
two cell-cycle phases. (a) Wild-type cells transformed with an
empty expression vector displayed the normal distribution of
cells in G1 and G2 in the absence of glucose (Glc) and after
addition of glucose. (b) In the absence of glucose, wild-type cells

Once sufficient Cln3 is synthesized from its mRNA, the
Cln3-CDK complex phosphorylates and activates two related transcription factors, SBF and MBF. These induce transcription of the CLN1 and CLN2 genes whose encoded
proteins accelerate entry into the S phase. Thus regulation
of CLN3 mRNA translation in response to the concentration
of nutrients in the medium is thought to be primarily responsible for controlling the length of G1 in S. cerevisiae. SBF
and MBF also stimulate transcription of several other genes
required for DNA replication, including genes encoding
DNA polymerase subunits, RPA subunits (the eukaryotic
ssDNA-binding protein), DNA ligase, and enzymes required
for deoxyribonucleotide synthesis.

+Glc
(135 min)

G2
G1
Fluorescence

transformed with the G1 cyclin expression vector displayed a
higher-than-normal percentage of cells in the S phase and G2
because overexpression of the G1 cyclin decreased the G1 period
(top curve). When expression of the G1 cyclin from the vector
was shut off by addition of glucose, the cell distribution returned
to normal (bottom curve). (c) Cells with mutations in all three G1
cyclin genes and transformed with the G1 cyclin expression
vector also showed a high percentage of cells in S and G2 in the
absence of glucose (top curve). Moreover, when expression of
G1 cyclin from the vector was shut off by addition of glucose, the
cells completed the cell cycle and arrested in G1 (bottom curve),
indicating that a G1 cyclin is required for entry into the S phase.
[Adapted from H. E. Richardson et al., 1989, Cell 59:1127.]

One of the important substrates of the late G1 cyclin–
CDK complexes (Cln1-CDK and Cln2-CDK in S. cerevisiae)
is Cdh1. Recall that this specificity factor directs the APC to
polyubiquitinate B-type cyclins during late anaphase of the
previous mitosis, marking these cyclins for proteolysis by
proteasomes (see Figure 21-10). The MBF transcription factor activated by the Cln3-CDK complex also stimulates transcription of CLB5 and CLB6, which encode cyclins of the
B-type, hence their name. Because the complexes formed between these B-type cyclins and the S. cerevisiae CDK are required for initiation of DNA synthesis, the Clb5 and Clb6
proteins are called S-phase cyclins. Inactivation of the APC
earlier in G1 allows the S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes to

26

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

accumulate in late G1. The specificity factor Cdh1 is phosphorylated and inactivated by both late G1 and B-type
cyclin-CDK complexes, and thus remains inhibited throughout S, G2, and M phase until late anaphase.

polyubiquitinate Sic1 by a different mechanism, namely,
phosphorylation of Sic1 by a G1 cyclin-CDK (see Figure
21-24). This difference in strategy probably occurs because
the APC has several substrates, including securin and B-type
cyclins, which must be degraded at different times in the
cycle. In contrast, entry into the S phase requires the degradation of only a single protein, the Sic1 inhibitor. An obvious
advantage of proteolysis for controlling passage through
these critical points in the cell cycle is that protein degradation is an irreversible process, ensuring that cells proceed irreversibly in one direction through the cycle.

Degradation of the S-Phase Inhibitor Triggers
DNA Replication
As the S-phase cyclin-CDK heterodimers accumulate in late
G1, they are immediately inactivated by binding of an inhibitor, called Sic1, that is expressed late in mitosis and in
early G1. Because Sic1 specifically inhibits B-type cyclinCDK complexes, but has no effect on the G1 cyclin-CDK
complexes, it functions as an S-phase inhibitor.
Entry into the S phase is defined by the initiation of DNA
replication. In S. cerevisiae cells this occurs when the Sic1
inhibitor is precipitously degraded following its polyubiquitination by a distinct ubiquitin ligase called SCF (Figure
21-24; see also Figure 21-2, step 5 ). Once Sic1 is degraded, the
S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes induce DNA replication by
phosphorylating multiple proteins bound to replication origins.
This mechanism for activating the S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes—that is, inhibiting them as the cyclins are synthesized
and then precipitously degrading the inhibitor—permits the sudden activation of large numbers of complexes, as opposed to the
gradual increase in kinase activity that would result if no inhibitor were present during synthesis of the S-phase cyclins.
We can now see that regulated proteasomal degradation
directed by two ubiquitin ligase complexes, SCF and APC,
controls three major transitions in the cell cycle: onset of the
S phase through degradation of Sic1, the beginning of
anaphase through degradation of securin, and exit from mitosis through degradation of B-type cyclins. The APC is directed to polyubiquitinate securin, which functions as an
anaphase inhibitor, by the Cdc20 specificity factor (see Figure 21-19). Another specificity factor, Cdh1, targets APC to
B-type cyclins (see Figure 21-10). The SCF is directed to

Multiple Cyclins Direct the Kinase Activity of S.
cerevisiae CDK During Different Cell-Cycle Phases
As budding yeast cells progress through the S phase, they
begin transcribing genes encoding two additional B-type cyclins, Clb3 and Clb4. These form heterodimeric cyclin-CDK
complexes that, together with complexes including Clb5 and
Clb6, activate DNA replication origins throughout the remainder of the S phase. The Clb3-CDK and Clb4-CDK complexes also initiate formation of the mitotic spindle at the
beginning of mitosis. When S. cerevisiae cells complete chromosome replication and enter G2, they begin expressing two
more B-type cyclins, Clb1 and Clb2. These function as
mitotic cyclins, associating with the CDK to form complexes
that are required for mediating the events of mitosis.
Each group of cyclins thus directs the S. cerevisiae CDK to
specific functions associated with various cell-cycle phases, as
outlined in Figure 21-25. Cln3-CDK induces expression of
Cln1, Cln2, and other proteins in mid-late G1 by phosphorylating and activating the SBF and MBF transcription factors.
Cln1-CDK and Cln2-CDK inhibit the APC, allowing B-type
cyclins to accumulate; these G1 cyclin-CDKs also activate
degradation of the S-phase inhibitor Sic1. The S-phase CDK
complexes containing Clb5, Clb6, Clb3, and Clb4 then trigger DNA synthesis. Clb3 and Clb4 also function as mitotic

G1 cyclin
CDK
S-phase
cyclin
Sic1

CDK

S-phase
cyclin
1

P
P

Mid-late G1

Sic1

CDK

Polyubiquitination;
proteasomal
degradation

FPO

▲ FIGURE 21-24 Control of the G1 → S phase transition in
S. cerevisiae by regulated proteolysis of the S-phase inhibitor
Sic1. The S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes (Clb5-CDK and Clb6CDK) begin to accumulate in G1, but are inhibited by Sic1. This
inhibition prevents initiation of DNA replication until the cell is
fully prepared. G1 cyclin-CDK complexes assembled in late G1

2

S-phase
cyclin
CDK

3

DNA
replication

S phase

(Cln1-CDK and Cln2-CDK) phosphorylate Sic1 (step 1 ), marking it
for polyubiquitination by the SCF ubiquitin ligase, and subsequent
proteasomal degradation (step 2 ). The active S-phase cyclin-CDK
complexes then trigger initiation of DNA synthesis (step 3 ) by
phosphorylating substrates that remain to be identified. [Adapted
from R. W. King et al., 1996, Science 274:1652.]

21.5 • Genetic Studies with S. cerevisiae
Clb1,2-CDK

M

Cln3-CDK

G2
G1

Clb3,4CDK

FPO
S

START

Cln1,2-CDK

Clb5,6-CDK

▲ FIGURE 21-25 Activity of S. cerevisiae cyclin-CDK
complexes through the course of the cell cycle. The width of
the colored bands is approximately proportional to the
demonstrated or proposed protein kinase activity of the indicated
cyclin-CDK complexes. S. cerevisiae produces a single cyclindependent kinase (CDK) whose activity is controlled by the
various cyclins, which are expressed during different portions of
the cell cycle.

cyclins in that the complexes they form with CDK trigger formation of mitotic spindles. The remaining two S. cerevisiae
cyclins, Clb1 and Clb2, whose concentrations peak midway
through mitosis, function exclusively as mitotic cyclins, forming complexes with CDK that trigger chromosome segregation and nuclear division (see Table 21-1).

Cdc14 Phosphatase Promotes Exit from Mitosis
Genetic studies with S. cerevisiae have provided insight into
how B-type cyclin-CDK complexes are inactivated in late
anaphase, permitting the various events constituting
telophase and then cytokinesis to occur. These complexes are
the S. cerevisiae equivalent of the mitosis-promoting factor
(MPF) first identified in Xenopus oocytes and early embryos.
As mentioned previously, the specificity factor Cdh1, which
targets the APC to polyubiquitinate B-type cyclins, is phosphorylated by both late G1 and B-type cyclin-CDK complexes, thereby inhibiting Cdh1 activity during late G1, S, G2,
and mitosis before late anaphase.
When daughter chromosomes have segregated properly
in late anaphase, the Cdc14 phosphatase is activated and dephosphorylates Cdh1, allowing it to bind to the APC. This
interaction quickly leads to APC-mediated polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of B-type cyclins, and
hence MPF inactivation (see Figure 21-10). Since MPF is still
active when Cdc14 is first activated in late anaphase, it po-

27

tentially could compete with Cdc14 by re-phosphorylating
Cdh1. However, Cdc14 also induces expression of Sic1 by
removing an inhibitory phosphate on a transcription factor
that activates transcription of the SIC1 gene. Sic1 can bind to
and inhibit the activity of all B-type cyclin-CDK complexes.
Thus, starting late in mitosis, the inhibition of MPF by Sic1
allows the Cdc14 phosphatase to get the upper hand; the Btype cyclin APC specificity factor Cdh1 is dephosphorylated
and directs the precipitous degradation of all the S. cerevisiae
B-type cyclins. In Section 21.7, we will see how the activity
of Cdc14 itself is controlled to assure that a cell exits mitosis only when its chromosomes have segregated properly.
As discussed already, Sic1 also inhibits the S-phase cyclinCDKs as they are formed in mid-G1 (see Figure 21-24). This
inhibitor of B-type cyclins thus serves a dual function in the
cell cycle, contributing to the exit from mitosis and delaying
entry into the S phase until the cell is ready.

Replication at Each Origin Is Initiated Only
Once During the Cell Cycle
As discussed in Chapter 4, eukaryotic chromosomes are
replicated from multiple origins. Some of these initiate DNA
replication early in the S phase, some later, and still others toward the end. However, no eukaryotic origin initiates more
than once per S phase. Moreover, the S phase continues until
replication from all origins along the length of each chromosome results in replication of the chromosomal DNA in its
entirety. These two factors ensure that the correct gene copy
number is maintained as cells proliferate.
Yeast replication origins contain an 11-bp conserved core
sequence to which is bound a hexameric protein, the originrecognition complex (ORC), required for initiation of DNA
synthesis. DNase I footprinting analysis (Figure 11-15) and
immunoprecipitation of chromatin proteins cross-linked to
specific DNA sequences (Figure 11-40) during the various
phases of the cell cycle indicate that the ORC remains associated with origins during all phases of the cycle. Several
replication initiation factors required for the initiation of
DNA synthesis were initially identified in genetic studies in
S. cerevisiae. These include Cdc6, Cdt1, Mcm10, and the
MCM hexamer, a complex of six additional, closely related
Mcm proteins; these proteins associate with origins during
G1, but not during G2 or M. During G1 the various initiation
factors assemble with the ORC into a pre-replication complex at each origin. The MCM hexamer is thought to act
analogously to SV40 T-antigen hexamers, which function as
a helicase to unwind the parental DNA strands at replication
forks (see Figure 4-36). Cdc6, Cdt1, and Mcm10 are required to load opposing MCM hexamers on the origin.
The restriction of origin “firing” to once and only once
per cell cycle in S. cerevisiae is enforced by the alternating
cycle of B-type cyclin-CDK activities throughout the cell
cycle: low in telophase through G1 and high in S, G2, and M
through anaphase (see Figure 21-25). As we just discussed,
S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes become active at the

28

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

beginning of the S phase when their specific inhibitor, Sic1, is
degraded. In the current model for S. cerevisiae replication,
pre-replication complexes assemble early in G1 when B-type
cyclin activity is low (Figure 21-26, step 1 ). Initiation of
DNA replication requires an active S-phase cyclin-CDK complex and a second heterodimeric protein kinase, Dbf4-Cdc7,
which is expressed in G1 (step 2 ). By analogy with cyclindependent kinases (CDKs), which must be bound by a partner
cyclin to activate their protein kinase activity, the Dbf4dependent kinase Cdc7 is often called DDK. Although the
complete set of proteins that must be phosphorylated to activate initiation of DNA synthesis has not yet been determined, there is evidence that phosphorylation of at least one
subunit of the hexameric MCM helicase and of Cdc6 is
required. Another consequence of S-phase cyclin-CDK acti-

vation is binding of the initiation factor Cdc45 to the prereplication complex. Cdc45 is required for the subsequent
binding of RPA, the heterotrimeric protein that binds singlestranded DNA generated when the MCM helicase unwinds
the parental DNA duplex.
By stabilizing the unwound DNA, RPA promotes binding of the complex between primase and DNA polymerase
 (Pol ) that initiates the synthesis of daughter strands (see
Figure 21-26, step 3 ). Like the MCM helicase, Cdc45 remains associated with the replication forks as they extend
in both directions from the origin. Presumably, it functions
in the further cycles of RPA and primase–Pol  binding required to prime synthesis of the lagging daughter strand.
Subsequent binding of DNA polymerase  and its accessory
cofactors Rfc and PCNA is thought to occur as it does in

 FIGURE 21-26 Model for assembly of the pre-replication
complex and its regulation by S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes
in S. cerevisiae. Step 1 : During early G1, unphosphorylated
replication initiation factors assemble on an origin-recognition
complex (ORC) bound to a replication origin to generate a
pre-replication complex. Step 2 : In the S phase, S-phase
cyclin-CDK complexes and DDK phosphorylate components of
the pre-initiation complex, leading to binding of Cdc45 and
activation of the hexameric MCM helicases, which unwind the
parental DNA strands. RPA binds to the resulting single-stranded
DNA. Step 3 : A complex of DNA polymerase  (Pol ) and
primase initiates the synthesis of daughter strands. Step 4 :
DNA polymerase  plus its accessory factors PCNA and Rfc
elongate daughter strands initiated by Pol –primase. As DNA
replication proceeds, the phosphorylated initiation factors Cdc6,
Cdt1, and Mcm10 are displaced. An ORC binds to the origin
sequence in the daughter DNA strand, but the phosphorylated
initiation factors cannot assemble a pre-replication complex on it
or on the ORC bound to the parental strand. Step 5 : B-type
cyclin-CDK complexes maintain the initiation factors in a
phosphorylated state throughout S, G2, and mitosis through
early anaphase. These factors cannot assemble into new
pre-replication complexes until the B-type cyclins are degraded
following their polyubiquitination by the APC in late anaphase.
Additional replication factors not shown function at step 2 .
Although phosphorylation of several components of the
pre-replication complex is represented, all the critical targets of
S-phase cyclin-CDKs and DDK have not been determined.

21.6 • Cell-Cycle Control in Mammalian Cells

the synthesis of SV40 DNA (see Figure 4-34); these proteins
are required for continued synthesis of the leading strand
and for synthesis of most of the lagging strand. An additional DNA polymerase, Pol ε, is also required for chromosomal DNA synthesis, but its function is not yet
understood.
As the replication forks progress away from each origin,
presumably phosphorylated forms of Cdc6, Cdt1, and
Mcm10 are displaced from the chromatin. However, ORC
complexes immediately bind to the origin sequence in the
replicated daughter duplex DNAs and remain bound throughout the cell cycle (see Figure 21-26, step 4 ). Origins can fire
only once during the S phase because the phosphorylated initiation factors cannot reassemble into a pre-replication complex. Consequently, phosphorylation of components of the
pre-replication complex by S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes
and the DDK complex simultaneously activates initiation of
DNA replication at an origin and inhibits re-initiation of replication at that origin. As we have noted, B-type cyclin-CDK
complexes remain active throughout the S phase, G2, and early
anaphase, maintaining the phosphorylated state of the replication initiation factors that prevents the assembly of new prereplication complexes (step 5 ).
Only when the APC triggers degradation of all B-type
cyclins in late anaphase and telophase does the then unopposed action of phosphatases remove the phosphates on the
initiation factors (Cdc6, Cdt1, and Mcm10), allowing the reassembly of pre-replication complexes during G1. As discussed previously, the inhibition of APC activity throughout
G1 sets the stage for accumulation of the S-phase cyclins
needed for onset of the S phase. This regulatory mechanism
has two consequences: (1) pre-replication complexes are assembled only during G1, when the activity of B-type cyclinCDK complexes is low, and (2) each origin initiates
replication one time only during the S phase, when S phase
cyclin-CDK complex activity is high. As a result, chromosomal DNA is replicated only one time each cell cycle.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.5
Genetic Studies with S. cerevisiae
S. cerevisiae expresses a single cyclin-dependent protein
kinase (CDK), encoded by CDC28, which interacts with
several different cyclins during different phases of the cell
cycle (see Figure 21-25).

■

■ Three G1 cyclins are active in G1: Cln1, Cln2, and Cln3.
The concentration of CLN3 mRNA does not vary significantly through the cell cycle, but its translation is regulated by the availability of nutrients.

Once active Cln3-CDK complexes accumulate in midlate G1, they phosphorylate and activate two transcription
factors that stimulate expression of Cln1 and Cln2, of enzymes and other proteins required for DNA replication,
and of the S-phase B-type cyclins Clb5 and Clb6.
■

29

■ The late G1 cyclin-CDK complexes (Cln1-CDK and
Cln2-CDK) phosphorylate and inhibit Cdh1, the specificity
factor that directs the anaphase-promoting complex (APC)
to B-type cyclins, thus permitting accumulation of S-phase
B-type cyclins.

S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes initially are inhibited by
Sic1. Polyubiquitination of Sic1 by the SCF ubiquitin ligase marks Sic1 for proteasomal degradation, releasing
activated S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes that trigger onset
of the S phase (see Figure 21-24).

■

B-type cyclins Clb3 and Clb4, expressed later in the
S phase, form heterodimers with the CDK that also promote DNA replication and initiate spindle formation early
in mitosis.

■

B-type cyclins Clb1 and Clb2, expressed in G2, form heterodimers with the CDK that stimulate mitotic events.

■

In late anaphase, the specificity factor Cdh1 is activated
by dephosphorylation and then directs APC to polyubiquitinate all of the B-type cyclins (Clbs). Their subsequent
proteasomal degradation inactivates MPF activity, permitting exit from mitosis (see Figure 21-10).

■

DNA replication is initiated from pre-replication complexes assembled at origins during early G1. S-phase
cyclin-CDK complexes simultaneously trigger initiation
from pre-replication complexes and inhibit assembly of
new pre-replication complexes by phosphorylating components of the pre-replication complex (see Figure 21-26).

■

Initiation of DNA replication occurs at each origin, but
only once, until a cell proceeds through anaphase when activation of APC leads to the degradation of B-type cyclins.
The block on reinitiation of DNA replication until replicated chromosomes have segregated assures that daughter
cells contain the proper number of chromosomes per cell.

■

21.6 Cell-Cycle Control
in Mammalian Cells
In multicellular organisms, precise control of the cell cycle
during development and growth is critical for determining
the size and shape of each tissue. Cell replication is controlled by a complex network of signaling pathways that integrate extracellular signals about the identity and numbers
of neighboring cells and intracellular cues about cell size and
developmental program (Chapter 15). Most differentiated
cells withdraw from the cell cycle during G1, entering the
G0 state (see Figure 21-1). Some differentiated cells (e.g.,
fibroblasts and lymphocytes) can be stimulated to reenter the
cycle and replicate. Many postmitotic differentiated cells,
however, never reenter the cell cycle to replicate again. As we
discuss in this section, the cell-cycle regulatory mechanisms
uncovered in yeasts and Xenopus eggs and early embryos
also operate in the somatic cells of higher eukaryotes including humans and other mammals.

30

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

Mammalian Restriction Point Is Analogous
to START in Yeast Cells
Most studies of mammalian cell-cycle control have been
done with cultured cells that require certain polypeptide
growth factors (mitogens) to stimulate cell proliferation.

Binding of these growth factors to specific receptor proteins
that span the plasma membrane initiates a cascade of signal
transduction that ultimately influences transcription and cellcycle control (Chapters 13–15).
Mammalian cells cultured in the absence of growth factors are arrested with a diploid complement of chromosomes

(a)

(b)
G0 cells

1
Add growth actors

DNA stain
2

10–16 h

Microinject
anti-cyclin D
antibody

3
Add BrdU ( )
4
Determine incorporation
of BrdU after 16 h

Cyclin D
bound to
antibody

Y
Y
Y
BrdU-positive cells

% of BrdU-positive cells

(c)

BrdU-negative cells

Control

100

FPO

BrdU stain

+ Anti-cyclin D

80
60
40

Anti-cyclin D
stain

20
0

10

12

14

16

Time when antibody and BrdU added
(hours after addition of growth factors)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-27 Microinjection
experiments with anti-cyclin D antibody demonstrate that
cyclin D is required for passage through the restriction point.
The G0-arrested mammalian cells used in these experiments
pass the restriction point 14–16 hours after addition of growth
factors and enter the S phase 6–8 hours later. (a) Outline of
experimental protocol. At various times 10–16 hours after
addition of growth factors ( 1 ), some cells were microinjected
with rabbit antibodies against cyclin D ( 2 ). Bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU), a thymidine analog, was then added to the medium ( 3 ),
and the uninjected control cells (left ) and microinjected
experimental cells (right ) were incubated for an additional 16
hours. Each sample then was analyzed to determine the
percentage of cells that had incorporated BrdU ( 4 ), indicating
that they had entered the S phase. (b) Analysis of control cells
and experimental cells 8 hours after addition of growth factors.
The three micrographs show the same field of cells stained 16
hours after addition of BrdU to the medium. Cells were stained

with different fluorescent agents to visualize DNA (top ), BrdU
(middle ), and anti-cyclin D antibody (bottom ). Note that the two
cells in this field injected with anti-cyclin D antibody (the red cells
in the bottom micrograph) did not incorporate BrdU into nuclear
DNA, as indicated by their lack of staining in the middle
micrograph. (c) Percentage of control cells (blue bars) and
experimental cells (red bars) that incorporated BrdU. Most cells
injected with anti-cyclin D antibodies 10 or 12 hours after addition
of growth factors failed to enter the S phase, indicated by the
low level of BrdU incorporation. In contrast, anti-cyclin D
antibodies had little effect on entry into the S phase and DNA
synthesis when injected at 14 or 16 hours, that is, after cells had
passed the restriction point. These results indicate that cyclin D
is required to pass the restriction point, but once cells have
passed the restriction point, they do not require cyclin D to enter
the S phase 6–8 hours later. [Parts (b) and (c) adapted from V. Baldin
et al., 1993, Genes & Devel. 7:812.]

21.6 • Cell-Cycle Control in Mammalian Cells

in the G0 period of the cell cycle. If growth factors are added
to the culture medium, these quiescent cells pass through the
restriction point 14–16 hours later, enter the S phase 6–8
hours after that, and traverse the remainder of the cell cycle
(see Figure 21-2). Like START in yeast cells, the restriction
point is the point in the cell cycle at which mammalian cells
become committed to entering the S phase and completing
the cell cycle. If mammalian cells are moved from a medium
containing growth factors to one lacking growth factors before they have passed the restriction point, the cells do not
enter the S phase. But once cells have passed the restriction
point, they are committed to entering the S phase and progressing through the entire cell cycle, which takes about 24
hours for most cultured mammalian cells.

Cyclin A−CDK1
Cyclin B−CDK1

31

G0

M

Cyclin D−CDK4
Cyclin D−CDK6

G2

FPO
S

G1

Restriction
point

Cyclin A−CDK2

Multiple CDKs and Cyclins Regulate Passage
of Mammalian Cells Through the Cell Cycle
Unlike S. pombe and S. cerevisiae, which each produce a single cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) to regulate the cell cycle,
mammalian cells use a small family of related CDKs to regulate progression through the cell cycle. Four CDKs are expressed at significant levels in most mammalian cells and
play a role in regulating the cell cycle. Named CDK1, 2, 4,
and 6, these proteins were identified by the ability of their
cDNA clones to complement certain cdc yeast mutants or
by their homology to other CDKs.
Like S. cerevisiae, mammalian cells express multiple cyclins. Cyclin A and cyclin B, which function in the S phase,
G2, and early mitosis, initially were detected as proteins
whose concentration oscillates in experiments with synchronously cycling early sea urchin and clam embryos (see Figure 21-8). Homologous cyclin A and cyclin B proteins have
been found in all multicellular animals examined. cDNAs encoding three related human D-type cyclins and cyclin E were
isolated based on their ability to complement S. cerevisiae
cells mutant in all three CLN genes encoding G1 cyclins. The
relative amounts of the three D-type cyclins expressed in various cell types (e.g., fibroblasts, hematopoietic cells) differ.
Here we refer to them collectively as cyclin D. Cyclin D and
E are the mammalian G1 cyclins. Experiments in which cultured mammalian cells were microinjected with anti-cyclin D
antibody at various times after addition of growth factors
demonstrated that cyclin D is essential for passage through
the restriction point (Figure 21-27).
Figure 21-28 presents a current model for the periods of
the cell cycle in which different cyclin-CDK complexes act
in G0-arrested mammalian cells stimulated to divide by the
addition of growth factors. In the absence of growth factors,
cultured G0 cells express neither cyclins nor CDKs; the absence of these critical proteins explains why G0 cells do not
progress through the cell cycle and replicate.
Table 21-1, presented early in this chapter, summarizes
the various cyclins and CDKs that we have mentioned and
the portions of the cell cycle in which they are active. The cyclins fall into two major groups, G1 cyclins and B-type cy-

Cyclin E−CDK2

▲ FIGURE 21-28 Activity of mammalian cyclin-CDK
complexes through the course of the cell cycle in cultured G0
cells induced to divide by treatment with growth factors. The
width of the colored bands is approximately proportional to the
protein kinase activity of the indicated complexes. Cyclin D refers
to all three D-type cyclins.

clins, which function in S, G2, and M. Although it is not
possible to draw a simple one-to-one correspondence between the functions of the several cyclins and CDKs in
S. pombe, S. cerevisiae, and vertebrates, the various cyclinCDK complexes they form can be broadly considered in
terms of their functions in mid G1, late G1, S, and M phases.
All B-type cyclins contain a conserved destruction box sequence that is recognized by the APC ubiquitin ligase,
whereas G1 cyclins lack this sequence. Thus the APC regulates the activity only of cyclin-CDK complexes that include
B-type cyclins.

Regulated Expression of Two Classes of Genes
Returns G0 Mammalian Cells to the Cell Cycle
Addition of growth factors to G0-arrested mammalian cells
induces transcription of multiple genes, most of which fall
into one of two classes—early-response or delayed-response
genes—depending on how soon their encoded mRNAs appear (Figure 21-29a). Transcription of early-response genes
is induced within a few minutes after addition of growth factors by signal-transduction cascades that activate preexisting
transcription factors in the cytosol or nucleus. Induction of
early-response genes is not blocked by inhibitors of protein
synthesis (Figure 21-29b) because the required transcription
factors are present in G0 cells and are activated by phosphorylation or removal of an inhibitor in response to stimulation
of cells by growth factors (Chapter 14). Many of the earlyresponse genes encode transcription factors, such as c-Fos
and c-Jun, that stimulate transcription of the delayed-

32

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

(a)
mRNA level

Delayed-response genes

Early-response genes
0

1

2

4

8

12

Time (h)

FPO

Addition of serum

(b)
mRNA level

Early-response genes

Delayed-response
genes do not turn on
0

1

2

4

8

12

cyclins, cyclin E, CDK2, CDK4, and CDK6. The D-type cyclins, CDK4, and CDK6, are expressed first, followed
by cyclin E and CDK2 (see Figure 21-28). If growth factors
are withdrawn before passage through the restriction point,
expression of these G1 cyclins and CDKs ceases. Since these
proteins and the mRNAs encoding them are unstable, their
concentrations fall precipitously. As a consequence, the cells
do not pass the restriction point and do not replicate.
In addition to transcriptional control of the gene encoding cyclin D, the concentration of this mid-G1 cyclin also is
regulated by controlling translation of cyclin D mRNA. In
this regard, cyclin D is similar to S. cerevisiae Cln3. Addition
of growth factors to cultured mammalian cells triggers signal
transduction via the PI-3 kinase pathway discussed in Chapter 14, leading to activation of the translation-initiation factor eIF4 (Chapter 4). As a result, translation of cyclin D
mRNA and other mRNAs is stimulated. Agents that inhibit
eIF4 activation, such as TGF-, inhibit translation of cyclin
D mRNA and thus inhibit cell proliferation.

Time (h)
Addition of serum +
inhibitors of protein
synthesis

▲ FIGURE 21-29 General time course of expression of
early- and delayed-response genes in G0-arrested mammalian
cells after addition of serum. (a) In the absence of inhibitors of
protein synthesis, expression of early-response genes peaks
about 1 hour after addition of serum, which contains several
mitogens, and then falls as expression of late-response genes
begins. (b) Inhibitors of protein synthesis prevent the drop in
expression of early-response genes and completely block
expression of late-response genes. See text for discussion.
[Adapted from A. Murray and T. Hunt, 1993, The Cell Cycle: An
Introduction, W. H. Freeman and Company.]

response genes. Mutant, unregulated forms of both c-Fos
and c-Jun are expressed by oncogenic retroviruses (Chapter
23); the discovery that the viral forms of these proteins
(v-Fos and v-Jun) can transform normal cells into cancer cells
led to identification of the regulated cellular forms of these
transcription factors.
After peaking at about 30 minutes following addition of
growth factors, the concentrations of the early-response
mRNAs fall to a lower level that is maintained as long as
growth factors are present in the medium. Most of the immediate early mRNAs are unstable; consequently, their concentrations fall as their rate of synthesis decreases. This drop
in transcription is blocked by inhibitors of protein synthesis
(see Figure 21-29b), indicating that it depends on production
of one or more of the early-response proteins.
Because expression of delayed-response genes depends on
proteins encoded by early-response genes, delayed-response
genes are not transcribed when mitogens are added to G0arrested cells in the presence of an inhibitor of protein synthesis. Some delayed-response genes encode additional
transcription factors (see below); others encode the D-type

Passage Through the Restriction Point Depends
on Phosphorylation of the Tumor-Suppressor
Rb Protein
Some members of a small family of related transcription factors, referred to collectively as E2F factors, are encoded by
delayed-response genes. These transcription factors activate
genes encoding many of the proteins involved in DNA and deoxyribonucleotide synthesis. They also stimulate transcription
of genes encoding the late-G1 cyclin (cyclin E), the S-phase cyclin (cyclin A), and the S-phase CDK (CDK2). Thus the E2Fs
function in late G1 similarly to the S. cerevisiae transcription
factors SBF and MBF. In addition, E2Fs autostimulate transcription of their own genes. E2Fs function as transcriptional
repressors when bound to Rb protein, which in turn binds histone deacetylase complexes. As discussed in Chapter 11, transcription of a gene is highest when the associated histones are
highly acetylated; histone deacetylation causes chromatin to
assume a more condensed, transcriptionally inactive form.
Rb protein was initially identified as the product of
the prototype tumor-suppressor gene, RB. The
products of tumor-suppressor genes function in
various ways to inhibit progression through the cell cycle
(Chapter 23). Loss-of-function mutations in RB are associated with the disease hereditary retinoblastoma. A child with
this disease inherits one normal RB allele from one parent
and one mutant RB allele from the other. If the RB allele
in any of the trillions of cells that make up the human body
becomes mutated to a RB allele, then no functional protein is expressed and the cell or one of its descendants is
likely to become cancerous. For reasons that are not understood, this generally happens in a retinal cell leading to the
retinal tumors that characterize this disease. Also, in most
human cancer cells Rb function is inactivated, either by mutations in both alleles of RB, or by abnormal regulation of
Rb phosphorylation. ❚

21.6 • Cell-Cycle Control in Mammalian Cells

Cyclin E
Cyclin D
CDK2
CDK4/6
Rb

E2F

Mid G1

P P P

FPO

Rb

+

E2F

Late G1

▲ FIGURE 21-30 Regulation of Rb and E2F activities in
mid-late G1. Stimulation of G0 cells with mitogens induces
expression of CDK4, CDK6, D-type cyclins, and the E2F
transcription factors, all encoded by delayed-response genes. Rb
protein initially inhibits E2F activity. When signaling from
mitogens is sustained, the resulting cyclin D-CDK4/6 complexes
begin phosphorylating Rb, releasing some E2F, which stimulates
transcription of the genes encoding cyclin E, CDK2, and E2F
(autostimulation). The cyclin E-CDK4 complexes further
phosphorylate Rb, resulting in positive feedback loops (blue
arrows) that lead to a rapid rise in the expression and activity of
both E2F and cyclin E-CDK2 as the cell approaches the G1 → S
transition.

Rb protein is one of the most significant substrates of
mammalian G1 cyclin-CDK complexes. Phosphorylation of
Rb protein at multiple sites prevents its association with
E2Fs, thereby permitting E2Fs to activate transcription of
genes required for entry into S phase. As shown in Figure
21-30, phosphorylation of Rb protein is initiated by cyclin
D-CDK4 and cyclin D-CDK6 in mid G1. Once cyclin E and
CDK2 are induced by phosphorylation of some Rb, the resulting cyclin E-CDK2 further phosphorylates Rb in late G1.
When cyclin E-CDK2 accumulates to a critical threshold
level, further phosphorylation of Rb by cyclin E-CDK2 continues even when cyclin D-CDK4/6 activity is removed. This
is one of the principle biochemical events responsible for passage through the restriction point. At this point, further
phosphorylation of Rb by cyclin E-CDK2 occurs even when
mitogens are withdrawn and cyclin D and CDK4/6 levels
fall. Since E2F stimulates its own expression and that of cyclin E and CDK2, positive cross-regulation of E2F and cyclin
E-CDK2 produces a rapid rise of both activities in late G1.
As they accumulate, S-phase cyclin-CDK and mitotic
cyclin-CDK complexes maintain Rb protein in the phosphorylated state throughout the S, G2, and early M phases. After
cells complete anaphase and enter early G1 or G0, the fall in
cyclin-CDK levels leads to dephosphorylation of Rb by unopposed phosphatases. As a consequence, hypophosphorylated Rb is available to inhibit E2F activity during early G1 of
the next cycle and in G0-arrested cells.

Cyclin A Is Required for DNA Synthesis
and CDK1 for Entry into Mitosis
High levels of E2Fs activate transcription of the cyclin A
gene as mammalian cells approach the G1 → S transition.
(Despite its name, cyclin A is a B-type cyclin, not a G1 cyclin;

33

see Table 21-1.) Disruption of cyclin A function inhibits
DNA synthesis in mammalian cells, suggesting that cyclin
A-CDK2 complexes may function like S. cerevisiae S-phase
cyclin-CDK complexes to trigger initiation of DNA synthesis. There is also evidence that cyclin E-CDK2 may contribute to activation of pre-replication complexes.
Three related CDK inhibitory proteins, or CIPs (p27KIP1,
p57KIP2, and p21CIP), appear to share the function of the
S. cerevisiae S-phase inhibitor Sic1 (see Figure 21-24). Phosphorylation of p27KIP1 by cyclin E-CDK2 targets it for polyubiquitination by the mammalian SCF complex (see Figure
21-2, step 5 ). The SCF subunit that targets p27KIP1 is synthesized as cells approach the G1 → S transition. The mechanism for degrading p21CIP and p57KIP2 is less well understood. The activity of mammalian cyclin-CDK2 complexes is
also regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
mechanisms similarly to those controlling the S. pombe
mitosis-promoting factor, MPF (see Figure 21-14). The
Cdc25A phosphatase, which removes the inhibitory phosphate from CDK2, is a mammalian equivalent of S. pombe
Cdc25 except that it functions at the G1 → S transition rather
than the G2 → M transition. The mammalian phosphatase
normally is activated late in G1, but is degraded in the response of mammalian cells to DNA damage to prevent the
cells from entering S phase (see Section 21.7).
Once cyclin A-CDK2 is activated by Cdc25A and the
S-phase inhibitors have been degraded, DNA replication
is initiated at pre-replication complexes. The general mechanism is thought to parallel that in S. cerevisiae (see Figure
21-26), although small differences are found in vertebrates.
As in yeast, phosphorylation of certain initiation factors by
cyclin A-CDK2 most likely promotes initiation of DNA
replication and prevents reassembly of pre-replication complexes until the cell passes through mitosis, thereby assuring
that replication from each origin occurs only once during
each cell cycle. In metazoans, a second small protein, geminin, contributes to the inhibition of re-initiation at origins
until cells complete a full cell cycle.
The principle mammalian CDK in G2 and mitosis is
CDK1 (see Figure 21-28). This CDK, which is highly homologous with S. pombe Cdc2, associates with cyclins A and
B. The mRNAs encoding either of these mammalian cyclins
can promote meiotic maturation when injected into Xenopus
oocytes arrested in G2 (see Figure 21-6), demonstrating that
they function as mitotic cyclins. Thus mammalian cyclin
A-CDK1 and cyclin B-CDK1 are functionally equivalent to
the S. pombe MPF (mitotic cyclin-CDK). The kinase activity of these mammalian complexes also appears to be regulated by proteins analogous to those that control the activity
of the S. pombe MPF (see Figure 21-14). The inhibitory
phosphate on CDK1 is removed by Cdc25C phosphatase,
which is analogous to S. pombe Cdc25 phosphatase.
In cycling mammalian cells, cyclin B is first synthesized
late in the S phase and increases in concentration as cells proceed through G2, peaking during metaphase and dropping
after late anaphase. This parallels the time course of cyclin B
expression in Xenopus cycling egg extracts (see Figure 21-9).

34

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

In human cells, cyclin B first accumulates in the cytosol and
then enters the nucleus just before the nuclear envelope
breaks down early in mitosis. Thus MPF activity is controlled not only by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
but also by regulation of the nuclear transport of cyclin B.
In fact, cyclin B shuttles between the nucleus and cytosol,
and the change in its localization during the cell cycle results
from a change in the relative rates of import and export. As
in Xenopus eggs and S. cerevisiae, cyclins A and B are polyubiquitinated by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC)
during late anaphase and then are degraded by proteasomes
(see Figure 21-2, step 9 ).

Mammalian cells use several CDKs and cyclins to regulate passage through the cell cycle. Cyclin D-CDK4/6 function in mid to late G1; cyclin E-CDK2 in late G1 and early
S; cyclin A-CDK2 in S; and cyclin A/B-CDK1 in G2 and
M through anaphase (see Figure 21-28).

■

Unphosphorylated Rb protein binds to E2Fs, converting
them into transcriptional repressors. Phosphorylation of
Rb by cyclin D-CDK4/6 in mid G1 liberates E2Fs to activate transcription of genes encoding cyclin E, CDK2, and
other proteins required for the S phase. E2Fs also autostimulate transcription of their own genes.

■

Cyclin E-CDK2 further phosphorylates Rb, further activating E2Fs. Once a critical level of cyclin E-CDK2 has
been expressed, a positive feedback loop with E2F results
in a rapid rise of both activities that drives passage through
the restriction print (see Figure 21-30).

■

Two Types of Cyclin-CDK Inhibitors Contribute
to Cell-Cycle Control in Mammals
As noted above, three related CIPs—p21CIP, p27KIP2, and
p57KIP2—inhibit cyclin A-CDK2 activity and must be degraded before DNA replication can begin. These same CDK
inhibitory proteins also can bind to and inhibit the other
mammalian cyclin-CDK complexes involved in cell-cycle
control. As we discuss later, p21CIP plays a role in the response of mammalian cells to DNA damage. Experiments
with knockout mice lacking p27KIP2 have shown that this
CIP is particularly important in controlling generalized cell
proliferation soon after birth. Although p27KIP2 knockouts
are larger than normal, most develop normally otherwise.
In contrast, p57KIP2 knockouts exhibit defects in cell differentiation and most die shortly after birth due to defective development of various organs.
A second class of cyclin-CDK inhibitors called INK4s
(inhibitors of kinase 4) includes several small, closely related
proteins that interact only with CDK4 and CDK6 and thus
function specifically in controlling the mid-G1 phase. Binding
of INK4s to CDK4/6 blocks their interaction with cyclin D
and hence their protein kinase activity. The resulting decreased phosphorylation of Rb protein prevents transcriptional activation by E2Fs and entry into the S phase. One
INK4 called p16 is a tumor suppressor, like Rb protein discussed earlier. The presence of two mutant p16 alleles in a
large fraction of human cancers is evidence for the important
role of p16 in controlling the cell cycle (Chapter 23).

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.6
Cell-Cycle Control in Mammalian Cells
Various polypeptide growth factors called mitogens
stimulate cultured mammalian cells to proliferate by inducing expression of early-response genes. Many of these
encode transcription factors that stimulate expression of
delayed-response genes encoding the G1 CDKs, G1 cyclins,
and E2F transcription factors.

■

Once cells pass the restriction point, they can enter the
S phase and complete S, G2, and mitosis in the absence of
growth factors.

■

The activity of cyclin A-CDK2, induced by high E2F activity, initially is held in check by CIPs, which function like
an S-phase inhibitor, and by the presence of an inhibitory
phosphate on CDK2. Proteasomal degradation of the inhibitors and activation of the Cdc25A phosphatase, as cells
approach the G1 → S transition, generate active cyclin
A-CDK2. This complex activates pre-replication complexes to initiate DNA synthesis by a mechanism similar
to that in S. cerevisiae (see Figure 21-26).
■

Cyclin A/B-CDK1 induce the events of mitosis through
early anaphase. Cyclins A and B are polyubiquitinated by
the anaphase-promoting complex (APC) during late
anaphase and then are degraded by proteasomes.

■

The activity of mammalian mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes also are regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation similar to the mechanism in S. pombe, with
the Cdc25C phosphatase removing inhibitory phosphates
(see Figure 21-14).

■

The activities of mammalian cyclin-CDK complexes also
are regulated by CDK inhibitors (CIPs), which bind to and
inhibit each of the mammalian cyclin-CDK complexes, and
INK4 proteins, which block passage through G1 by specifically inhibiting CDK4 and CDK6.

■

21.7 Checkpoints in Cell-Cycle
Regulation
Catastrophic genetic damage can occur if cells progress to
the next phase of the cell cycle before the previous phase
is properly completed. For example, when S-phase cells
are induced to enter mitosis by fusion to a cell in mitosis,
the MPF present in the mitotic cell forces the chromosomes of the S-phase cell to condense. However, since the
replicating chromosomes are fragmented by the condensation process, such premature entry into mitosis is disastrous for a cell.

21.7 • Checkpoints in Cell-Cycle Regulation

 FIGURE 21-31

Another example concerns attachment of kinetochores to microtubules of the mitotic spindle during
metaphase. If anaphase is initiated before both kinetochores of a replicated chromosome become attached to microtubules from opposite spindle poles, daughter cells are produced
that have a missing or extra chromosome (Figure 21-31). When
this process, called nondisjunction, occurs during the meiotic division that generates a human egg, Down syndrome can occur
from trisomy of chromosome 21, resulting in developmental abnormalities and mental retardation. ❚

Abnormal
spindle

Anaphase

FPO

To minimize the occurrence of such mistakes in cell-cycle
events, a cell’s progress through the cycle is monitored at several checkpoints (Figure 21-32). Control mechanisms that
operate at these checkpoints ensure that chromosomes are
intact and that each stage of the cell cycle is completed before
the following stage is initiated. Our understanding of these
control mechanisms at the molecular level has advanced considerably in recent years.

Cytokinesis

APC-Cdh1
polyubiquitination
of B-type cyclins

APC-Cdc20
polyubiquitination
of securin

Cdc14

Sic1
ATM/R

Telophase
4a
p53

p53

DNA-damage
checkpoint

Anaphase
p21CIP

Cyclin A/B−CDK1
Cdc25C

M-phase
entry

Cyclin D−CDK4/6

G1

M

FPO
G2

S-phase
entry

S
1

Extra
chromosome

Missing
chromosome

3
Chromosome-segregation
checkpoint

Mad2

4d

Nondisjunction. This
abnormality occurs when
chromosomes segregate
in anaphase before the
kinetochore of each sister
chromatid has attached
to microtubules (red lines)
from the opposite spindle
poles. As a result, one
daughter cell contains two
copies of one chromosome,
while the other daughter
cell lacks that chromosome.
[Adapted from A. Murray and
T. Hunt, 1993, The Cell Cycle:
An Introduction, W. H. Freeman
and Company.]

2
Spindle-assembly
checkpoint

ATM/R

35

Chk1

p21CIP

Cyclin E/A−CDK2
p21CIP

Unreplicated-DNA
checkpoint

DNA-damage
checkpoint

Cdc25A

Cyclin A−CDK2

4b

ATR

p53
p21CIP

Cdc25A

ATM/R

4c
DNA-damage
checkpoint

cell cycle. The unreplicated-DNA checkpoint ( 1 ) prevents
activation of cyclin A-CDK1 and cyclin B-CDK1 (i.e., mitosispromoting factor, MPF) by activation of an ATR-Chk1 protein
kinase cascade that phosphorylates and inactivates Cdc25C,
thereby inhibiting entry into mitosis. In the spindle-assembly
checkpoint ( 2 ), Mad2 and other proteins inhibit activation of the
APC specificity factor (Cdc20) required for polyubiquitination of
securin, thereby preventing entry into anaphase. The
chromosome-segregation checkpoint ( 3 ) prevents release of the

Chk1/2

p53
ATM/R

▲ FIGURE 21-32 Overview of checkpoint controls in the

DNA-damage
checkpoint

Chk1/2

Cdc14 phosphatase from nucleoli, thereby blocking activation of
the APC specificity factor (Cdh1) required for polyubiquitination of
B-type cyclins as well as induction of Sic1. As a result, the
decrease in MPF activity required for the events of telophase
does not occur. In the initial phase of the DNA-damage
checkpoint ( 4 ), the ATM or ATR protein kinase (ATM/R) is
activated. The active kinases then trigger two pathways: the ChkCdc25A pathway ( 4a and 4c ), blocking entry into or through the
S phase, and the p53-p21CIP pathway, leading to arrest in G1, S,
and G2 ( 4a – 4b ). See text for further discussion.

36

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

The Presence of Unreplicated DNA Prevents
Entry into Mitosis
Cells that fail to replicate all their chromosomes do not enter
mitosis. Operation of the unreplicated-DNA checkpoint control involves the recognition of unreplicated DNA and inhibition of MPF activation (see Figure 21-32, 1 ). Recent
genetic studies in S. pombe and biochemical studies with
Xenopus egg extracts suggest that the ATR and Chk1 protein
kinases, which also function in the DNA-damage checkpoint, inhibit entry into mitosis by cells that have not completed DNA synthesis.
The association of ATR with replication forks is thought
to activate its protein kinase activity, leading to the phosphorylation and activation of the Chk1 kinase. Active Chk1
then phosphorylates and inactivates the Cdc25 phosphatase
(Cdc25C in vertebrates), which normally removes the inhibitory phosphate from CDKs that function during mitosis. As a result, the cyclin A/B-CDK1 complexes remain
inhibited and cannot phosphorylate targets required to initiate mitosis. ATR continues to initiate this protein kinase
cascade until all replication forks complete DNA replication
and disassemble.

Improper Assembly of the Mitotic Spindle
Prevents the Initiation of Anaphase
The spindle-assembly checkpoint prevents entry into
anaphase when just a single kinetochore of one chromatid
fails to associate properly with spindle microtubules. Clues
about how this checkpoint operates has come from isolation
of yeast mutants in the presence of benomyl, a microtubuledepolymerizing drug. Low concentrations of benomyl
increase the time required for yeast cells to assemble the
mitotic spindle and attach kinetochores to microtubules.
Wild-type cells exposed to benomyl do not begin anaphase
until these processes are completed and then proceed on
through mitosis, producing normal daughter cells. In contrast, mutants defective in the spindle-assembly checkpoint
proceed through anaphase before assembly of the spindle
and attachment of kinetochores is complete; consequently,
they mis-segregate their chromosomes, producing abnormal
daughter cells that die.
Analysis of these mutants identified a protein called Mad2
and other proteins that regulate Cdc20, the specificity factor
required to target the APC to securin (see Figure 21-32, 2 ).
Recall that APC-mediated polyubiquitination of securin and
its subsequent degradation is required for entry into
anaphase (see Figure 21-19). Mad2 has been shown to associate with kinetochores that are unattached to microtubules.
Experiments with Mad2 fused to green fluorescent protein
(GFP) indicate that kinetochore-bound Mad2 rapidly exchanges with a soluble form of Mad2. Current models propose that when Mad2 associates with a kinetochore complex
that is not bound by a microtubule, it is converted to a short-

lived activated form that can interact with and inhibit
Cdc20. Microtubule attachment prevents this activation of
Mad2. Consequently, once all kinetochore complexes bind
a microtubule, generation of the activated form of Mad2
ceases, the inhibition of Cdc20 is relieved, and Cdc20 is free
to direct the APC to polyubiquitinate securin, thereby initiating the onset of anaphase.

Proper Segregation of Daughter Chromosomes Is
Monitored by the Mitotic Exit Network
Once chromosomes have segregated properly, telophase
commences. The various events of telophase and subsequent
cytokinesis, collectively referred to as the exit from mitosis,
require inactivation of MPF. As discussed earlier, dephosphorylation of the APC specificity factor Cdh1 by the Cdc14
phosphatase leads to degradation of mitotic cyclins and loss
of MPF activity late in anaphase (see Figure 21-10). During
interphase and early mitosis, Cdc14 is sequestered in the nucleolus and inactivated. The chromosome-segregation checkpoint, which monitors the location of the segregating
daughter chromosomes at the end of anaphase, determines
whether active Cdc14 is available to promote exit from mitosis (see Figure 21-32, 3 ).
Operation of this checkpoint in S. cerevisiae depends on a
set of proteins referred to as the mitotic exit network. A key
component is a small (monomeric) GTPase, called Tem1. This
member of the GTPase superfamily of switch proteins controls
the activity of a protein kinase cascade similarly to the way
Ras controls MAP kinase pathways (Chapter 14). During
anaphase, Tem1 becomes associated with the spindle pole
body (SPB) closest to the daughter cell bud. (The SPB, from
which spindle microtubules originate, is equivalent to the centrosome in higher eukaryotes.) At the SPB, Tem1 is maintained
in the inactive GDP-bound state by a specific GAP (GTPaseaccelerating protein). The GEF (guanosine nucleotide–
exchange factor) that activates Tem1 is localized to the cortex
of the bud and is absent from the mother cell. When spindle
microtubule elongation at the end of anaphase has correctly
positioned segregating daughter chromosomes into the bud,
Tem1 comes into contact with its GEF and is converted into
the active GTP-bound state. The terminal kinase in the cascade triggered by Tem1 · GTP then phosphorylates the nucleolar anchor that binds and inhibits Cdc14, releasing it into
the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm in both the bud and mother
cell (Figure 21-33, 1 ). Once active Cdc14 is available, a cell
can proceed through telophase and cytokinesis. If daughter
chromosomes fail to segregate into the bud, Tem1 remains in
its inactive state, Cdc14 is not released from the nucleolus,
and mitotic exit is blocked (Figure 21-33, 2 ).
In the fission yeast S. pombe, formation of the septum
that divides daughter cells is regulated by proteins homologous to those that constitute the mitotic exit network in
S. cerevisiae. Genes encoding similar proteins also have been
found in higher organisms where the homologs probably

21.7 • Checkpoints in Cell-Cycle Regulation
Tem1-GEF
Bud

Tem1 . GDP
(inactive)
Tem1-GAP

GDP

Linker protein
Nucleus

Nucleolus

Spindle
microtubule

Cdc14
(inactive)

SPB
Mother

Proper chromosome
segregation

Improper chromosome
segregation

1

2

Tem1 . GTP
(active)

GTP

Cdc14
(active)

Exit from mitosis

GDP

FPO

Late mitotic arrest

▲ FIGURE 21-33 Operation of the chromosome-segregation
checkpoint. In S. cerevisiae, Cdc14 phosphatase activity is
required for the exit from mitosis. (Top ) During interphase and
early mitosis, Cdc14 is sequestered and inactivated in the
nucleolus. Inactive Tem1 · GDP (purple) associates with the
spindle pole body (SPB) nearest to the bud early in anaphase
with the aid of a linker protein (green) and is maintained in the
inactive state by a specific GAP (GTPase-accelerating protein). If
chromosome segregation occurs properly ( 1 ), extension of the
spindle microtubules inserts the daughter SPB into the bud,
causing Tem1 to come in contact with a specific GEF (guanine
nucleotide–exchange factor) localized to the cortex of the bud
(brown). This GEF converts inactive Tim1 · GDP to active
Tem1 · GTP, which triggers a protein kinase cascade leading to
release of active Cdc14 and exit from mitosis. If the spindle
apparatus fails to place the daughter SPB in the bud ( 2 ), Tem1
remains in the inactive GDP-bound state and Cdc14 remains
associated with nucleoli. Arrest in late mitosis results. [Adapted
from G. Pereira and E. Schiebel, 2001, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:762.]

function in an analogous checkpoint that leads to arrest in
late mitosis when daughter chromosomes do not segregate
properly.

Cell-Cycle Arrest of Cells with Damaged DNA
Depends on Tumor Suppressors
The DNA-damage checkpoint blocks progression
through the cell cycle until the damage is repaired.
Damage to DNA can result from chemical agents
and from irradiation with ultraviolet (UV) light or -rays.

37

Arrest in G1 and S prevents copying of damaged bases, which
would fix mutations in the genome. Replication of damaged
DNA also promotes chromosomal rearrangements that can
contribute to the onset of cancer. Arrest in G2 allows DNA
double-stranded breaks to be repaired before mitosis. If a
double-stranded break is not repaired, the broken distal portion of the damaged chromosome is not properly segregated
because it is not physically linked to a centromere, which is
pulled toward a spindle pole during anaphase.
As we discuss in detail in Chapter 23, inactivation of
tumor-suppressor genes contributes to the development of
cancer. The proteins encoded by several tumor-suppressor
genes, including ATM and Chk2, normally function in the
DNA-damage checkpoint. Patients with mutations in both
copies of ATM or Chk2 develop cancers far more frequently
than normal. Both of these genes encode protein kinases.
DNA damage due to UV light somehow activates the
ATM kinase, which phosphorylates Chk2, thereby activating
its kinase activity. Activated Chk2 then phosphorylates the
Cdc25A phosphatase, marking it for polyubiquitination by
an as-yet undetermined ubiquitin ligase and subsequent proteasomal degradation. Recall that removal of the inhibitory
phosphate from mammalian CDK2 by Cdc25A is required
for onset of and passage through the S phase mediated by cyclin E-CDK2 and cyclin A-CDK2. Degradation of Cdc25A
resulting from activation of the ATM-Chk2 pathway in G1
or S-phase cells thus leads to G1 or S arrest (see Figure 21-32,
4b and 4c ). A similar pathway consisting of the protein
kinases ATR and Chk1 leads to phosphorylation and polyubiquitination of Cdc25A in response to -radiation. As discussed earlier for the unreplicated-DNA checkpoint, Chk1
also inactivates Cdc25C, preventing the activation of CDK1
and entry into mitosis.
Another tumor-suppressor protein, p53, contributes to
arrest of cells with damaged DNA. Cells with functional p53
arrest in G1 and G2 when exposed to -irradiation, whereas
cells lacking functional p53 do not arrest in G1. Although the
p53 protein is a transcription factor, under normal conditions it is extremely unstable and generally does not accumulate to high enough levels to stimulate transcription. The
instability of p53 results from its polyubiquitination by a
ubiquitin ligase called Mdm2 and subsequent proteasomal
degradation. The rapid degradation of p53 is inhibited by
ATM and probably ATR, which phosphorylate p53 at a site
that interferes with binding by Mdm2. This and other modifications of p53 in response to DNA damage greatly increase
its ability to activate transcription of specific genes that help
the cell cope with DNA damage. One of these genes encodes
p21CIP, a generalized CIP that binds and inhibits all mammalian cyclin-CDK complexes. As a result, cells are arrested
in G1 and G2 until the DNA damage is repaired and p53 and
subsequently p21CIP levels fall (see Figure 21-32, 4a – 4d).
Under some circumstances, such as when DNA damage
is extensive, p53 also activates expression of genes that lead
to apoptosis, the process of programmed cell death that

38

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

normally occurs in specific cells during the development of
multicellular animals. In vertebrates, the p53 response
evolved to induce apoptosis in the face of extensive DNA
damage, presumably to prevent the accumulation of multiple
mutations that might convert a normal cell into a cancer cell.
The dual role of p53 in both cell-cycle arrest and the induction of apoptosis may account for the observation that nearly
all cancer cells have mutations in both alleles of the p53 gene
or in the pathways that stabilize p53 in response to DNA
damage (Chapter 23). The consequences of mutations in
p53, ATM, and Chk2 provide dramatic examples of the significance of cell-cycle checkpoints to the health of a multicellular organism. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.7
Checkpoints in Cell-Cycle Regulation
Checkpoint controls function to ensure that chromosomes are intact and that critical stages of the cell cycle
are completed before the following stage is initiated.

■

The unreplicated-DNA checkpoint operates during S and
G2 to prevent the activation of MPF before DNA synthesis is complete by inhibiting the activation of CDK1 by
Cdc25C (see Figure 21-32, 1 ).

■

The spindle-assembly checkpoint, which prevents premature initiation of anaphase, utilizes Mad2 and other proteins to regulate the APC specificity factor Cdc20 that targets securin for polyubiquitination (see Figures 21-32, 2 ,
and 21-19).

■

The chromosome-segregation checkpoint prevents telophase
and cytokinesis until daughter chromosomes have been properly segregated, so that the daughter cell has a full set of chromosomes (see Figure 21-32, 3 ).
■

In the chromosome-segregation checkpoint, the small
GTPase Tem1 controls the availability of Cdc14 phosphatase, which in turn activates the APC specificity factor
Cdh1 that targets B-type cyclins for degradation, causing
inactivation of MPF (see Figure 21-10).

■

The DNA-damage checkpoint arrests the cell cycle in response to DNA damage until the damage is repaired. Three
tumor-suppressor proteins (ATM/ATR, Chk1, and p53) are
critical to this checkpoint.

■

Activation of the ATM or ATR protein kinases in response to DNA damage due to UV light or -irradiation
leads to arrest in G1 and the S phase via a pathway that
leads to loss of Cdc25A phosphatase activity. A second
pathway from activated ATM/R stabilizes p53, which stimulates expression of p21CIP. Subsequent inhibition of multiple CDK-cyclin complexes by p21CIP causes prolonged
arrest in G1 and G2 (see Figure 21-32, 4a – 4d ).
■

In response to extensive DNA damage, p53 also activates genes that induce apoptosis.

■

 FIGURE 21-34 Meiosis. Premeiotic cells have two copies
of each chromosome (2n), one derived from the paternal parent
and one from the maternal parent. For simplicity, the paternal
and maternal homologs of only one chromosome are
diagrammed. Step 1 : All chromosomes are replicated during the
S phase before the first meiotic division, giving a 4n
chromosomal complement. Cohesin complexes (not shown) link
the sister chromatids composing each replicated chromosome
along their full lengths. Step 2 : After chromosomes condense
during the first meiotic prophase, replicated homologs become
paired as the result of at least one crossover event between a
paternal and a maternal chromatid. This pairing of replicated
homologous chromosomes is called synapsis. At metaphase,
shown here, both chromatids of one chromosome associate with
microtubules emanating from one spindle pole, but each member
of a homologous chromosome pair associates with microtubules
emanating from opposite poles. Step 3 : During anaphase of
meiosis I, the homologous chromosomes, each consisting of two
chromatids, are pulled to opposite spindle poles. Step 4 :
Cytokinesis yields the two daughter cells (now 2n), which enter
meiosis II without undergoing DNA replication. At metaphase of
meiosis II, shown here, the chromatids composing each
replicated chromosome associate with spindle microtubules from
opposite spindle poles, as they do in mitosis. Steps 5 and 6 :
Segregation of chromatids to opposite spindle poles during the
second meiotic anaphase followed by cytokinesis generates
haploid germ cells (1n) containing one copy of each chromosome
(referred to as chromatids earlier).

21.8 Meiosis: A Special Type
of Cell Division
In nearly all eukaryotes, meiosis generates haploid germ cells
(eggs and sperm), which can then fuse to generate a diploid
zygote (Figure 21-34). During meiosis, a single round of
DNA replication is followed by two cycles of cell division,
termed meiosis I and meiosis II. Crossing over of chromatids, visible in the first meiotic metaphase, produces
recombination between parental chromosomes. This increases the genetic diversity among the individuals of a
species. During meiosis I, both chromatids of each homologous chromosome segregate together to opposite spindle
poles, so that each of the resulting daughter cells contains
one homologous chromosome consisting of two chromatids.
During meiosis II, which resembles mitosis, the chromatids
of one chromosome segregate to opposite spindle poles, generating haploid germ cells. Meiosis generates four haploid
germ cells from one diploid premeiotic cell.

Repression of G1 Cyclins and Meiosis-Specific
Ime2 Prevents DNA Replication in Meiosis II
In S. cerevisiae and S. pombe, depletion of nitrogen and carbon sources induces diploid cells to undergo meiosis, yielding
haploid spores (see Figure 1-5). This process is analogous to

21.8 • Meiosis: A Special Type of Cell Division

the formation of germ cells in higher eukaryotes. Multiple
yeast mutants that cannot form spores have been isolated,
and the wild-type proteins encoded by these genes have been
analyzed. These studies have identified specialized cell-cycle
proteins that are required for meiosis.
Under starvation conditions, expression of G1 cyclins
(Cln1/2/3) in S. cerevisiae is repressed, blocking the normal
progression of G1 in cells as they complete mitosis. Instead, a
set of early meiotic proteins are induced. Among these is
Ime2, a protein kinase that performs the essential G1 cyclinCDK function of phosphorylating the S-phase inhibitor Sic1,
leading to release of active S-phase cyclin-CDK complexes
and the onset of DNA replication in meiosis I (see Figure
21-34, step 1 ). The absence of Ime2 expression during meiosis II and the continued repression of Cln expression account
for the failure to replicate DNA during the second meiotic division (steps 5 and 6 ).

Paternal
homolog

Premeiotic
cell (2n)

Maternal
homolog

1

Replicated
chromosomes
(4n)

2

Meiosis I

Crossing over
and synapsis
(metaphase I)

Crossing Over and Meiosis-Specific Rec8
Are Necessary for Specialized Chromosome
Segregation in Meiosis I

3

Anaphase I

4

FPO

Daughter cells
in metaphase II
(2n)

Meiosis II

5

Anaphase II

6

1n

1n

39

1n

1n

Recall that in mitosis, sister chromatids replicated during
the S phase are initially linked by cohesin complexes at multiple positions along their full length (see Figure 21-19, left).
As chromosomes condense, cohesin complexes become restricted to the region of the centromere, and at metaphase,
the sister chromatids composing each (replicated) chromosome associate with microtubules emanating from opposite
spindle poles. Although motor proteins pull sister chromatids toward opposite spindle poles, their movement
initially is resisted by the cohesin complexes linking them
at the centromere. The subsequent separase-catalyzed cleavage of the Scc1 cohesin subunit permits movement of
the chromatids toward the spindle poles to begin, heralding the onset of anaphase (Figure 21-35a; see also Figure
21-19, right).
In metaphase of meiosis I, both sister chromatids in one
(replicated) chromosome associate with microtubules emanating from the same spindle pole, rather than from opposite
poles as they do in mitosis. Two physical links between homologous chromosomes are thought to resist the pulling
force of the spindle until anaphase: (a) crossing over between
chromatids, one from each pair of homologous chromosomes, and (b) cohesin cross-links between chromatids distal
to the crossover point.
Evidence for the role of crossing over in meiosis in
S. cerevisiae comes from the observation that when recombination is blocked by mutations in proteins essential
for the process, chromosomes segregate randomly during
meiosis I; that is, homologous chromosomes do not necessarily segregate to opposite spindle poles. Such segregation to opposite spindle poles normally occurs because
both chromatids of homologous chromosome pairs associate with spindle fibers emanating from opposite spindle

40

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

(a) Mitosis
Metaphase

Anaphase

Separase
Scc1

(b) Meiosis
Metaphase I

Anaphase I

Separase

FPO

Metaphase II

Anaphase II

Separase

▲ FIGURE 21-35 Cohesin function during mitosis and
meiosis. (a) During mitosis, sister chromatids generated by DNA
replication in the S phase are initially associated by cohesin
complexes along the full length of the chromatids. During
chromosome condensation, cohesin complexes (gold) become
restricted to the region of the centromere at metaphase, as
depicted here. Once separase cleaves the Scc1 cohesin subunit,
sister chromatids can separate, marking the onset of anaphase
(see Figure 21-19). (b) In metaphase of meiosis I, crossing over
between maternal and paternal chromatids produces synapsis of
homologous parental chromosomes. The chromatids of each
replicated chromosome are cross-linked by cohesin complexes
along their full length. Rec8, a meiosis-specific homolog of Scc1,
is cleaved in chromosome arms but not in the centromere,
allowing homologous chromosome pairs to segregate to
daughter cells. Centromeric Rec8 is cleaved during meiosis II,
allowing individual chromatids to segregate to daughter cells.
[Modified from F. Uhlmann, 2001, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:754.]

poles (see Figure 21-34, step 3 ). This in turn requires that
homologous chromosomes pair during meiosis I, a process
called synapsis that can be visualized microscopically in
eukaryotes with large chromosomes. Consequently, the
finding that mutations that block recombination also
block proper segregation in meiosis I implies that recombination is required for synapsis in S. cerevisiae. In higher
eukaryotes, processes in addition to recombination and

chromatid linking through cohesin complexes contribute
to synapsis in meiosis I.
During meiosis I, the cohesin cross-links between chromosome arms are cleaved by separase, allowing the homologous chromosomes to separate, but cohesin complexes at
the centromere remain linked (Figure 21-35b, top). The
maintenance of centromeric cohesion during meiosis I is
necessary for the proper segregation of chromatids during
meiosis II. Recent studies with a S. pombe mutant have
shown that a specialized cohesin subunit, Rec8, maintains
centromeric cohesion between sister chromatids during
meiosis I. Expressed only during meiosis, Rec8 is homologous to Scc1, the cohesin subunit that forms the actual
bridge between sister chromatids in mitosis (see Figure 2119). Immunolocalization experiments in S. pombe have revealed that during early anaphase of meiosis I, Rec8 is lost
from chromosome arms but is retained at centromeres.
However, during early anaphase of meiosis II, centromeric
Rec8 is degraded by separase, so the chromatids can segregate, as they do in mitosis (Figure 21-35b, bottom). A specific protein expressed during meiosis I, but not during
meiosis II, protects centromeric Rec8 from separase cleavage in meiosis I.
S. cerevisiae Rec8 has been shown to localize and function
similarly to S. pombe Rec8. Homologs of Rec8 also have been
identified in higher organisms, and RNA interference (RNAi)
experiments in C. elegans (Chapter 9) indicate that the Rec8
homolog in that organism has a similar function. Recent
micromanipulation experiments during grasshopper spermatogenesis support the hypothesis that kinetochore-bound
proteins protect centromeric Rec8 from cleavage during
meiosis I but not during meiosis II and also direct kinetochore
attachment to microtubules emanating from the correct spindle pole (Figure 21-36). Thus crossing over, Rec8, and special kinetochore-associated proteins appear to function in
meiosis in all eukaryotes.
Recent DNA microarray analyses in S. cerevisiae have revealed other proteins that are required for meiosis. As discussed in other chapters, researchers can monitor
transcription of thousands of genes, indeed entire genomes,
with DNA microarrays (see Figure 9-35). One of the multiple genes found to be expressed in S. cerevisiae cells during
meiosis but not during mitosis is MAM1, which encodes a
protein called monopolin. Subsequent gene-specific mutagenesis studies revealed that deletion of MAM1 causes sister
chromatids in metaphase of meiosis I to associate with the
first meiotic spindle as though they were mitotic chromatids
or chromatids in meiosis II. That is, kinetochores of the sister chromatids composing a single (replicated) chromosome
attached to microtubules emanating from opposite spindle
poles rather than from the same spindle pole. This result indicates that monopolin is required for formation of a specialized kinetochore in meiosis I responsible for the unique
co-orientation of sister chromatids of synapsed homologous
chromosomes in the first meiotic division.

21.8 • Meiosis: A Special Type of Cell Division
Unmanipulated
meiosis I
synapsed
chromosomes

Manipulated
meiosis I
synapsed
chromosomes

Manipulated
meiosis II
chromosomes

Unmanipulated
meiosis II
chromosomes
Meiosis I spindle

41

Meiosis II spindle
70 min

FPO
▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 21-36 Anaphase movements
and cohesion of meiotic chromosomes are determined by
proteins associated with the chromosomes. Grasshopper
spermatocytes in meiosis I and II were fused so that both types
of spindles with their associated chromosomes were present in a
single fused cell. Then a micromanipulation needle was used to
move some meiosis I chromosomes (blue) and meiosis II
chromosomes (red) from one spindle to another; other
chromosomes were left attached to their normal spindles. After
70 minutes, both spindles with their attached chromosomes had
completed anaphase movements. The synapsed meiosis I
chromosomes (blue) separated normally (i.e., one homologous

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 21.8
Meiosis: A Special Type of Cell Division
Meiosis involves one cycle of chromosome replication followed by two cycles of cell division to produce haploid germ
cells from a diploid premeiotic cell (see Figure 21-34). During meiosis I, replicated homologous chromosomes pair
along their lengths in a process called synapsis.

■

At least one recombination between chromatids of homologous chromosomes almost invariably occurs.

■

Most of the cell-cycle proteins that function in mitotically dividing cells also function in cells undergoing meiosis, but some proteins are unique to meiosis.

■

■ In S. cerevisiae, expression of G1 cyclins (Clns) is repressed throughout meiosis. Meiosis-specific Ime2 per-

pair toward one spindle pole and the other homologous pair
toward the other) whether attached to the meiosis I spindle (left )
or meiosis II spindle (right ). Similarly, the meiosis II
chromosomes (red) separated normally (i.e., one chromatid
toward one spindle pole and the other chromatid toward the
opposite pole) independent of which spindle they were attached
to. These results indicate that the association of kinetochores
with spindle microtubules and the stability of cohesins linking
chromosomes are determined by factors that are associated with
the chromosomes and not by the spindles or soluble
components of cells in meiosis I and II. [See L. V. Paliulis and R. B.
Nicklas, 2000, J. Cell Biol. 150:1223.]

forms the function of G1 cyclin-CDK complexes in promoting initiation of DNA replication during meiosis I.
DNA replication does not occur during meiosis II because
neither Ime2 nor G1 cyclins are expressed.
In S. cerevisiae, recombination (crossing over) between
chromatids of homologous parental chromatids and cohesin
cross-links between chromatids distal to the crossover are
responsible for synapsis of homologous chromosomes during prophase and metaphase of meiosis I. A specialized
cohesin subunit, Rec8, replaces the Scc1 cohesin subunit
during meiosis.

■

During early anaphase of meiosis I, Rec8 in the chromosome arms is cleaved, but a meiosis-specific protein associated with the kinetochore protects Rec8 in the region
of the centromere from cleavage. As a result, the chromatids of homologous chromosomes remain associated

■

42

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

during segregation in meiosis I. Cleavage of centromeric
Rec8 during anaphase of meiosis II allows individual chromatids to segregate into germ cells (see Figure 21-35b).
Monopolin, another meiosis-specific protein, is required
for both chromatids of homologous chromosomes to associate with microtubules emanating from the same spindle poles during meiosis I.

■

trols and checkpoints, new strategies for treating p53-minus
cancers might be possible. For instance, some chemotherapeutic agents inhibit microtubule function, interfering with
mitosis. Resistant cells selected during the course of treatment
may be defective in the spindle-assembly checkpoint as the result of mutations in the genes encoding the proteins involved.
Perhaps the loss of this checkpoint could be turned to therapeutic advantage. Only better understanding of the molecular
processes involved will tell. ❚

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
The remarkable pace of cell-cycle research over the last 25
years has led to the model of eukaryotic cell-cycle control
outlined in Figure 21-2. A beautiful logic underlies these molecular controls. Each regulatory event has two important
functions: to activate a step of the cell cycle and to prepare
the cell for the next event of the cycle. This strategy ensures
that the phases of the cycle occur in the proper order.
Although the general logic of cell-cycle regulation now
seems well established, many critical details remain to be discovered. For instance, although researchers have identified
some components of the pre-replication complex that must
be phosphorylated by S-phase CDK-cyclin complexes to initiate DNA replication, other components remain to be determined. Also still largely unknown are the substrates
phosphorylated by mitotic cyclin-CDK complexes, leading to
chromosome condensation and the remarkable reorganization of microtubules that results in assembly of the beautiful mitotic spindle. Relatively little is known about how the
activities of Wee1 kinase and Cdc25 phosphatase are controlled; these proteins in turn regulate the kinase activity of
the CDK subunit in most cyclin-CDK complexes.
Much has been discovered recently about operation of
the cell-cycle checkpoints, but the mechanisms that activate
ATM and ATR in the DNA-damage checkpoint are poorly
understood. Likewise, much remains to be learned about the
control and mechanism of Mad2 in the spindle-assembly
checkpoint and of Cdc14 in the chromosome-segregation
checkpoint in higher cells. As we learn in the next chapter,
asymmetric cell division plays a critical role in the normal development of multicellular organisms. Many questions remain about how the plane of cytokinesis and the localization
of daughter chromosomes are determined in cells that divide
asymmetrically. Similarly, the mechanisms that underlie the
unique segregation of chromatids during meiosis I have not
been elucidated yet.
Understanding these detailed aspects of cell-cycle
control will have significant consequences, particularly for the treatment of cancers. Radiation and
many forms of chemotherapy cause DNA damage and cellcycle arrest in the target cells, leading to their apoptosis. But
this induction of apoptosis depends on p53 function. For this
reason, human cancers associated with mutations of both p53
alleles, which is fairly common, are particularly resistant to
these therapies. If more were understood about cell-cycle con-

KEY TERMS
anaphase-promoting
complex (APC) 000
APC specificity
factors 000
Cdc25 phosphatase 000
checkpoints 000
CIPs 000
cohesins 000
condensin 000
crossing over 000
cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs) 000
destruction box 000
DNA-damage
checkpoint 000
E2F proteins 000
G1 cyclins 000

interphase 000
meiosis 000
mitogens 000
mitosis-promoting
factor (MPF) 000
mitotic cyclin 000
p53 protein 000
quiescent cells 000
Rb protein 000
restriction point 000
S-phase inhibitor 000
S phase–phase promoting
factor (SPF) 000
securin 000
synapsis 000
Wee1 protein-tyrosine
kinase 000

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. What strategy ensures that passage through the cell cycle
is unidirectional and irreversible? What is the molecular
machinery that underlies this strategy?
2. When fused with an S-phase cell, cells in which of the
following phases of the cell cycle will initiate DNA replication prematurely—G1? G2? M? Predict the effect of fusing
a cell in G1 and a cell in G2 with respect to the timing of
S phase in each cell.
3. In 2001, the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was
awarded to three cell cycle scientists. Sir Paul Nurse was recognized for his studies with the fission yeast S. pombe, in
particular for the discovery and characterization of the wee1
gene. What is the wee phenotype? What did the characterization of the wee1 gene tell us about cell cycle control?
4. Tim Hunt shared the 2001 Nobel Prize for his work in the
discovery and characterization of cyclin proteins in eggs and
embryos. What experimental evidence indicates that cyclin B
is required for a cell to enter mitosis? What evidence indicates
that cyclin B must be destroyed for a cell to exit mitosis?

Analyze the Data

5. Leeland Hartwell, the third recipient of the 2001 Nobel
Prize, was acknowledged for his characterization of cell cycle
checkpoints in the budding yeast S. cerevisiae. What is a cell
cycle checkpoint? Where do checkpoints occur in the cell
cycle? How do cell cycle checkpoints help to preserve the
fidelity of the genome?
6. In Xenopus, one of the substrates of MPF is the Cdc25
phosphatase. When phosphorylated by MPF, Cdc25 is activated. What is the substrate of Cdc25? How does this information explain the autocatalytic nature of MPF as described
in Figure 21-6?
7. Explain how CDK activity is modulated by the following proteins: (a) cyclin, (b) CAK, (c) Wee1, (d) p21.
8. Three known substrates of MPF or kinases regulated by
MPF are the nuclear lamins, subunits of condensin, and myosin
light chain. Describe how the phosphorylation of each of these
proteins affects its function and progression through mitosis.
9. Describe the series of events by which the APC promotes
the separation of sister chromatids at anaphase.
10. A common feature of cell cycle regulation is that the
events of one phase ensure progression into a subsequent
phase. In S. cerevisiae, Cdc28-Clns catalyze progression
through G1, and Cdc28-Clbs catalyze progression through
S/G2/M. Name three ways in which the activity of Cdc28Clns promotes the activation of Cdc28-Clbs.
11. For S phase to be completed in a timely manner, DNA
replication initiates from multiple origins in eukaryotes. In
S. cerevisiae, what role do S-phase CDK-cyclin complexes
play to ensure that the entire genome is replicated once and
only once per cell cycle?
12. What is the functional definition of the restriction point?
Cancer cells typically lose restriction point controls. Explain

43

how the following mutations, which are found in some cancer cells, lead to a bypass of restriction point controls:
(a) overexpression of cyclin D, (b) loss of Rb function,
(c) infection by retroviruses encoding v-Fos and v-Jun.
13. Individuals with the hereditary disorder ataxia telangiectasia suffer from neurodegeneration, immunodeficiency,
and increased incidence of cancer. The genetic basis for
ataxia telangiectasia is a loss-of-function mutation in the
ATM gene (ATM ataxia telangiectasia-mutated). Name
two substrates of ATM. How does the phosphorylation of
these substrates lead to inactivation of CDKs to enforce cell
cycle arrest at a checkpoint?
14. Meiosis and mitosis are overall analogous processes involving many of the same proteins. However, some proteins
function uniquely in each of these cell division events. Explain the meiosis-specific function of the following: (a) Ime2,
(b) Rec8, (c) monopolin.

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
As genes encoding cyclin-dependent kinases were cloned
from fission yeast, budding yeast, and animal cells, investigators working in plant systems designed experiments to determine whether plants also possessed CDKs that functioned
as the catalysts for cell cycle progression. To isolate a cDNA
encoding a CDK in maize, investigators aligned the predicted
amino acid sequences of human cdc2, S. pombe cdc2, and
S. cerevisiae cdc28 genes (see the figure below). Degenerate
oligonucleotide PCR primers corresponding to the boxed
amino acids were generated and a DNA fragment of the expected size was synthesized by PCR using these primers and
maize cDNA library as a template. Why were the boxed regions selected as the basis for primer design?

44

CHAPTER 21 • Regulating the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle

The PCR product was then used as a probe to screen the
maize cDNA library, and a full-length cDNA clone was isolated. The clone was sequenced, and the predicted amino
acid sequence was 64% identical to human cdc2 and 63%
identical to S. pombe cdc2 and to S. cerevisiae cdc28. What
does the level of sequence similarity suggest about the evolution of cdc2 genes?
A complementation experiment was performed with
S. cerevisiae cells possessing a temperature-sensitive cdc28
mutation. Wild-type cells, cdc28ts cells, and cdc28ts cells
transformed with the maize cdc2 cDNA under the influence
of a strong promoter were grown at the permissive (25 °C) or
restrictive (37 °C) temperatures. Cell proliferation was monitored by the growth of colonies on the culture plates (shown
in the figure below).

Fang, G., H. Yu, and M. W. Kirschner. 1999. Control of mitotic
transitions by the anaphase-promoting complex. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. London Ser. B 354:1583–1590.
R. Jessberger. 2002. The many functions of SMC proteins in
chromosome dynamics. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:67–78.
Y. Masui. 2001. From oocyte maturation to the in vitro cell cycle: the history of discoveries of Maturation-Promoting Factor (MPF)
and Cytostatic Factor (CSF). Differentiation 69:1–17.

Genetic Studies with S. pombe
Nurse, P. 2002. Cyclin dependent kinases and cell cycle control
(Nobel Lecture). Chembiochem. 3:596–603.

Molecular Mechanisms for Regulating Mitotic Events
Burke, B., and J. Ellenberg. 2002. Remodeling the walls of the
nucleus. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:487–497.
Nelson, W. J. 2000. W(h)ither the Golgi during mitosis? J. Cell
Biol. 149:243–248.
Nigg, E. A. 2001. Mitotic kinases as regulators of cell division
and its checkpoints. Nature. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:21–32.

Genetic Studies with S. cerevisiae

Why do the cdc28ts cells form colonies at 25 °C but not
37 °C? What is the significance of colony formation of the
cdc28ts  maize cdc2 cells at 37 °C? What does this experiment tell us about the functional homology of cyclindependent kinase genes among eukaryotic species?

REFERENCES

Overview of the Cell Cycle and Its Control
Nasmyth, K. 2001. A prize for proliferation. Cell 107: 689–701.

Biochemical Studies with Oocytes, Eggs, and Early Embryos
Doree, M., and T. Hunt. 2002. From Cdc2 to Cdk1: when did
the cell cycle kinase join its cyclin partner? J. Cell Sci. 115:
2461–2464.

Bell, S. P., and A. Dutta. 2002. DNA replication in eukaryotic
cells. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 71:333–374.
Deshaies, R. J. 1999. SCF and Cullin/Ring H2-based ubiquitin
ligases. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 15:435–467.
Diffley, J. F., and K. Labib. 2002. The chromosome replication
cycle. J. Cell Sci. 115:869–872.
Hartwell, L. H. 2002. Yeast and cancer (Nobel Lecture). Biosci.
Rep. 22:373–394.
Kelly, T. J., and G. W. Brown. 2000. Regulation of chromosome
replication. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 69:829–880.
Kitagawa, K., and P. Hieter. 2001. Evolutionary conservation between budding yeast and human kinetochores. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 2:678–687.
Lei, M., and B. K. Tye. 2001. Initiating DNA synthesis: from recruiting to activating the MCM complex. J. Cell Sci. 114:1447–1454.
Nasmyth, K. 2001. Disseminating the genome: joining, resolving, and separating sister chromatids during mitosis and meiosis.
Ann. Rev. Genet. 35:673–745.
Nasmyth, K. 2002. Segregating sister genomes: the molecular biology of chromosome separation. Science 297:559–565.
Uhlmann, F. 2001. Chromosome cohesion and segregation in mitosis and meiosis. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:754–761.

Cell-Cycle Control in Mammalian Cells
Ekholm, S. V., and S. I. Reed. 2000. Regulation of G(1) cyclindependent kinases in the mammalian cell cycle. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
12:676–684.
Harper, J. W., J. L. Burton, and M. J. Solomon. 2002. The
anaphase-promoting complex: it’s not just for mitosis any more.
Genes Devel. 16:2179–2206.
Sears, R. C., and J. R. Nevins. 2002. Signaling networks that
link cell proliferation and cell fate. J. Biol. Chem. 277:11617–11620.
Sherr, C. J. 2001. The INK4a/ARF network in tumour suppression. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:731–737.

Checkpoints in Cell-Cycle Regulation
Bardin, A. J., and A. Amon. 2001. Men and sin: what’s the difference? Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:815–826.

References
Osborn, A. J., S. J. Elledge, and L. Zou. 2002. Checking on the
fork: the DNA-replication stress-response pathway. Trends Cell Biol.
12:509–516.
Pereira, G., and E. Schiebel. 2001. The role of the yeast spindle
pole body and the mammalian centrosome in regulating late mitotic
events. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:762–769.
Shah, J. V., and D. W. Cleveland. 2000. Waiting for anaphase:
Mad2 and the spindle assembly checkpoint. Cell 103:997–1000.

45

Meiosis: A Special Type of Cell Division
Lee, B., and A. Amon. 2001. Meiosis: how to create a specialized cell cycle. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:770–777.
Petronczki, M., M. F. Siomos, and K. Nasmyth. 2003. Un menage
a quatre: the molecular biology of chromosome segregation in meiosis. Cell 112:423–440.

22
CELL BIRTH,
LINEAGE,
AND DEATH

Cells being born in the developing cerebellum. All nuclei are
labeled in red; the green cells are dividing and migrating into
internal layers of the neural tissue. [Tal Raveh, Matthew Scott, and
Jane Johnson.]

D

uring the evolution of multicellular organisms, new
mechanisms arose to diversify cell types, to coordinate their production, to regulate their size and number, to organize them into functioning tissues, and to
eliminate extraneous or aged cells. Signaling between cells
became even more important than it is for single-celled
organisms. The mode of reproduction also changed, with
some cells becoming specialized as germ cells (e.g., eggs,
sperm), which give rise to new organisms, as distinct from all
other body cells, called somatic cells. Under normal conditions somatic cells will never be part of a new individual.
The formation of working tissues and organs during
development of multicellular organisms depends on specific
patterns of mitotic cell division. A series of such cell divisions
akin to a family tree is called a cell lineage, which traces the
progressive differentiation of cells into specialized cell types.
Cell lineages are controlled by intrinsic (internal) factors—cells
acting according to their history and internal regulators—
as well as by extrinsic (external) factors such as cell-cell signals and environmental inputs (Figure 22-1). A cell lineage
begins with stem cells, unspecialized cells that can potentially reproduce themselves and generate more-specialized
cells indefinitely. Their name comes from the image of a
plant stem, which grows upward, continuing to form more
stem, while sending off leaves and branches to the side. A

cell lineage ultimately culminates in formation of terminally
differentiated cells such as skin cells, neurons, or muscle
cells. Terminal differentiation generally is irreversible, and
the resulting highly specialized cells often cannot divide; they
survive, carry out their functions for varying lengths of time,
and then die.
Many cell lineages contain intermediate cells, referred to
as precursor cells or progenitor cells¸ whose potential to form
different kinds of differentiated cells is more limited than
that of the stem cells from which they arise. (Although some
researchers distinguish between precursor and progenitor
cells, we will use these terms interchangeably.) Once a new
precursor cell type is created, it often produces transcription
factors characteristic of its fate. These transcription factors

OUTLINE
22.1 The Birth of Cells
22.2 Cell-Type Specification in Yeast
22.3 Specification and Differentiation of Muscle
22.4 Regulation of Asymmetric Cell Division
22.5 Cell Death and Its Regulation
1

2

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

 FIGURE 22-1 Overview of the birth, lineage, and death
of cells. Following growth, cells are “born” as the result of
symmetric or asymmetric cell division. (a) The two daughter cells
resulting from symmetric division are essentially identical to each
other and to the parental cell. Such daughter cells subsequently
can have different fates if they are exposed to different signals.
The two daughter cells resulting from asymmetric division differ
from birth and consequently have different fates. Asymmetric
division commonly is preceded by the localization of regulatory
molecules (green) in one part of the parent cell. (b) A series of
symmetric and/or asymmetric cell divisions, called a cell lineage,
gives birth to each of the specialized cell types found in a
multicellular organism. The pattern of cell lineage can be under
tight genetic control. Programmed cell death occurs during
normal development (e.g., in the webbing that initially develops
when fingers grow) and also in response to infection or poison.
A series of specific programmed events, called apoptosis, is
activated is these situations.

Cell growth

(a)
Symmetric
division

(b)
Cell
birth

Cell growth

Asymmetric
division

FPO

Cell
death

Cell lineage

coordinately activate, or repress, batteries of genes that complete the differentiation process. For instance, a few key regulatory transcription factors create the different mating types
of budding yeast and coordinate the numerous genes necessary to turn a precursor cell into a muscle cell, two examples that we discuss in this chapter.
Typically we think of cell fates in terms of the differentiated cell types that are formed. A quite different cell fate,
programmed cell death, also is absolutely crucial in the formation and maintenance of many tissues. A precise genetic
regulatory system, with checks and balances, controls cell
death just as other genetic programs control cell differentiation. In this chapter, then, we consider the life cycle of cells—
their birth, their patterns of division (lineage), and their
death. These aspects of cell biology converge with developmental biology and are among the most important processes
regulated by various signaling pathways discussed in earlier
chapters.

22.1

The Birth of Cells

Many descriptions of cell division imply that the parental
cell gives rise to two daughter cells that look and behave
exactly like the parental cell, that is, cell division is symmetric, and the progeny do not change their properties. But
if this were always the case, none of the hundreds of differentiated cell types would ever be formed. Differences
among cells can arise when two initially identical daughter
cells diverge by receiving distinct developmental or environmental signals. Alternatively, the two daughter cells
may differ from “birth,” with each inheriting different
parts of the parental cell (see Figure 22-1). Daughter cells

produced by such asymmetric cell division may differ in
size, shape, and/or composition, or their genes may be in
different states of activity or potential activity. The differences in these internal signals confer different fates on the
two cells.
Here we discuss some general features of how different
cell types are generated, culminating with the best-understood
complex cell lineage, that of the nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans. In later sections, we focus on examples of the molecular mechanisms that determine particular cell types in
yeast, Drosophila, and mammals.

Stem Cells Give Rise to Stem Cells
and to Differentiating Cells
Stem cells, which give rise to the specialized cells composing
the tissues of the body, exhibit several patterns of cell division. A stem cell may divide symmetrically to yield two
daughter stem cells identical to itself (Figure 22-2a). Alternatively, a stem cell may divide asymmetrically to generate a
copy of itself and a derivative stem cell that has morerestricted capabilities, such as dividing for a limited period of
time or giving rise to fewer types of progeny compared with
the parental stem cell (Figure 22-2b). A pluripotent (or multipotent) stem cell has the capability of generating a number of
different cell types, but not all. For instance, a pluripotent
blood stem cell will form more of itself plus multiple types of
blood cells, but never a skin cell. In contrast, a unipotent
stem cell divides to form a copy of itself plus a cell that can
form only one cell type. In many cases, asymmetric division
of a stem cell generates a progenitor cell, which embarks on
a path of differentiation, or even a terminally differentiating
cell (Figure 22-2c, d).

22.1 • The Birth of Cells
Stem
cell
(a)
Symmetric
division

Stem
cell
(b)
Asymmetric
division

More-restricted
potential stem
cell

FPO
(c)

Asymmetric
division

Progenitor cell

(d)
Asymmetric
division

Terminally
differentiating
cell

▲ FIGURE 22-2 Patterns of stem-cell division. Symmetric
division of a stem cell (a) produces two identical daughter cells
with the same potential as the parental stem cell. Asymmetric
division of a stem cell always generates one daughter that is a
functional duplicate of the parental cell and one daughter that
may be a stem cell with a more-restricted set of possible
progeny cells (b), a progenitor (precursor) cell that undergoes
more divisions before the progeny begin differentiating (c), or a
cell that begins differentiating immediately with no further cell
divisions (d).

The two critical properties of stem cells that distinguish them from all other cells are the ability to reproduce
themselves indefinitely by symmetric division, often called
self-renewal, and the ability to divide asymmetrically to
form one daughter stem cell identical to itself and one
daughter cell that is different and usually of morerestricted potential. In this way, mitotic division of stem
cells preserves a population of undifferentiated cells while
steadily producing a stream of differentiating cells. Although some types of precursor cells can divide symmetrically to form more of themselves, they do so only for
limited periods of time. Moreover, in contrast to stem
cells, the asymmetric division of a precursor cell generates
two distinct daughter cells, neither of which is identical to
the parental precursor cell.
The fertilized egg, or zygote, is a single cell with the
capability to generate all the cell types of the body. Although not technically a stem cell because it is not selfrenewing, the zygote does give rise to cells with stem-cell

3

properties. For example, the early mouse embryo passes
through an eight-cell stage in which each cell can give rise
to any cell type of the embryo. If the eight cells are experimentally separated and individually implanted into a suitable foster mother, each can form a whole mouse with no
parts missing. This experiment shows that the eight cells
are all able to form every tissue; that is, they are totipotent.
Thus the subdivision of body parts and tissue fates among
the early embryonic cells has not irreversibly occurred at
the eight-cell stage. At the 16-cell stage, this is no longer
true; some of the cells are committed to particular differentiation paths.
Quite different specialized cell types can arise from a
common precursor cell. A hematopoietic stem cell can give
rise to all the multifarious types of blood cell. However, a
whole series of cell divisions is not required; a single division of a pluripotent precursor cell can yield distinct progeny. For instance, lineage studies in which cells are marked
by stable infection with a detectable retrovirus have shown
that neurons and glial cells arise from a single division of a
particular precursor cell. These cell types are quite different: neurons propagating and transmitting electrical signals and glial cells providing electrical insulation and
support. The precursor that generates neurons and glial
cells is not a stem cell, since it is incapable of selfrenewal; presumably the neuron–glial cell precursor arises
from a stem cell further back in the lineage. Recent observations have raised the interesting possibility that stem
cells for one tissue may be induced under certain conditions to act as stem cells for a rather different tissue. As we
discuss below, postnatal animals contain stem cells for
many tissues including the blood, intestine, skin, ovaries
and testes, muscle, liver, and even the adult brain where little cell division normally occurs. In muscle and liver, stem
cells are most important in healing, as relatively little cell
division occurs in the adult tissues otherwise.

Cultured Embryonic Stem Cells Can Differentiate
into Various Cell Types
Embryonic stem (ES) cells can be isolated from early embryos and grown in culture (Figure 22-3a). Cultured ES cells
can differentiate into a wide range of cell types, either in
vitro or after reinsertion into a host embryo. When grown
in suspension culture, human ES cells first differentiate into
multicellular aggregates, called embryoid bodies, that resemble early embryos. When these are subsequently transferred
to a solid medium, they grow into confluent cell sheets containing a variety of differentiated cell types including neural
cells and pigmented and nonpigmented epithelial cells (Figure 22-3b). Under other conditions, ES cells have been induced to differentiate into precursors for various types of
blood cells.

4

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-3
Embryonic stem (ES) cells can be
maintained in culture and form
differentiated cell types. (a) Human
blastocysts are grown from cleavage-stage
embryos produced by in vitro fertilization.
The inner cell mass is separated from the
surrounding extra-embryonic tissues and
plated onto a layer of fibroblast cells that
help to nourish the embryonic cells.
Individual cells are replated and form
colonies of ES cells, which can be
maintained for many generations and can
be stored frozen. (b) In suspension culture,
human ES cells differentiate into
multicellular aggregates (embryoid bodies)
(top). After embryoid bodies are
transferred to a gelatinized solid medium,
they differentiate further into confluent cell
sheets containing a variety of
differentiated cell types including neural
cells (middle), and pigmented and
nonpigmented epithelial cells (bottom).
[Parts (a) and (b) adapted from J. S. Odorico
et al., 2001, Stem Cells 19:193–204.]

(a)

Cleavage
stage embryo

Inner
cell mass
Cultured
blastocyst

Blastocoel

(b)

FPO

Trophoblast

Embryoid body
Isolated inner
cell mass
Fibroblast
feeder cells

FPO

FPO

Dissociate cells

Replate

New feeder
cells

Established
ES cell cultures

Neurons

FPO
Epithelial cells

The possibility of using stem cells therapeutically
to restore or replace damaged tissue is fueling
much research on how to recognize and culture
these remarkable cells from embryos and from various tissues in postnatal (adult) animals. For example, if neurons
that produce the neurotransmitter dopamine could be generated from stem cells grown in culture, it might be possible
to treat people with Parkinson’s disease who have lost such
neurons. For such an approach to succeed, a way must be
found to direct a population of embryonic or other stem cells
to form the right type of dopamine-producing neurons, and
rejection by the immune system nust be prevented. In one ongoing study in which embryonic neurons were transplanted
into more than 300 Parkinson’s patients, some of the inserted
cells have survived for more than 12 years and have provided
significant clinical improvement. However, the fetal tissue
used in this study is scarce and its use is controversial. Stem
cells grown from very early embryos are another option for
treating Parkinson’s disease and perhaps other neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease. Similar possibilities exist for generating blood, pancreas, and other cell
types. Many important questions must be answered before

the feasibility of using stem cells for such purposes can be assessed adequately. ❚
Apart from their possible benefit in treating disease, ES
cells have already proven invaluable for producing mouse
mutants useful in studying a wide range of diseases, developmental mechanisms, behavior, and physiology. By techniques described in Chapter 9, it is possible to eliminate or
modify the function of a specific gene in ES cells (see Figure
9-38). If the disrupted gene is not required for growth of ES
cells, then the mutated ES cells can be employed to produce
mice with a gene knockout (see Figure 9-39). Analysis of the
effects caused by deleting or modifying a gene in this way
often provides clues about the normal function of the gene
and its encoded protein.

Tissues Are Maintained by Associated
Populations of Stem Cells
Many differentiated cell types are sloughed from the body
or have life spans that are shorter than that of the organism.
Disease and trauma also can lead to loss of differentiated

22.1 • The Birth of Cells

cells. Since these cells generally do not divide, they must be
replenished from nearby stem-cell populations.
Our skin, for instance, is a multilayered epithelium (the
epidermis) underlain by a layer of stem cells that give rise
both to more of themselves and to keratinocytes, the major
cell type in skin. As keratinocytes move toward the outer surface, they become increasingly flattened and filled with keratin intermediate filaments. It normally takes about 15–30
days for a newly “born” keratinocyte in the lowest layer to
differentiate and move to the topmost layer. The “cells”
forming the topmost layer are actually dead and are continually shed from the surface.
In contrast to epidermis, the epithelium lining the small
intestine is a single cell thick (Figure 6-4). This thin layer keeps
toxins and pathogens from entering our bodies and also transports nutrients essential for survival from the intestinal lumen
into the body (Chapter 7). The cells of the intestinal epithelium
(a)
Direction of
cell migration
Villus

Crypt-villus
junction

Crypt

FPO

Differentiated
region

Stem cells
Paneth cells

(b)

Villi

FPO
Crypt

1 day

2 days

continuously regenerate from a stem-cell population located
deep in the intestinal wall in pits called crypts (Figure 22-4a).
The stem cells produce precursor cells that proliferate and differentiate as they ascend the sides of crypts to form the surface layer of the finger-like gut projections called villi, across
which intestinal absorption occurs. Pulse-chase labeling experiments have shown that the time from cell birth in the
crypts to the loss of cells at the tip of the villi is only about 2
to 3 days (Figure 22-4b). Thus enormous numbers of cells
must be produced continually to keep the epithelium intact.
The production of new cells is precisely controlled: too little
division would eliminate villi and lead to breakdown of the intestinal surface; too much division would create an excessively
large epithelium and also might be a step toward cancer.
Specific signals are required for creating and maintaining
stem-cell populations. In the skin and the intestinal epithelium,
stem-cell growth is regulated in part by -catenin, a protein
that helps link certain cell-cell junctions to the cytoskeleton
(see Figure 6-7) and also functions as a signal transducer in
the Wnt pathway (see Figure 15-32). Overproduction of active
-catenin leads to excess proliferation of the intestinal epithelium and of hair follicles, which are specialized structures derived from skin stem cells and embedded in the epidermis.
Blocking the function of -catenin by interfering with the TCF
transcription factor that it activates abolishes the stem cells in
the intestine. In the absence of -catenin function, skin stem
cells form epidermis, but the hair follicles and hair do not
form. It seems likely that Wnt signaling, or at least components of the intracellular pathway, is critical for forming, maintaining, or activating stem cells in a variety of tissues.

Proliferative
region

Stem cell
region

40 min

5

3 days

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-4 Regeneration of the
intestinal epithelium from stem cells can be demonstrated in
pulse-chase experiments. (a) Schematic drawing of the lining of
the small intestine, which contains numerous villi formed from a
column of cells. These epithelial cells are born near the base of
pits (crypts) located between the villi. Located at the very bottom
of crypts are Paneth cells, a type of support cell; just above these
are four to six stem cells, which divide about once a day, forming
precursor cells that also actively divide. As the differentiated cells
enter the epithelium of a villus, they stop dividing and begin
taking up nutrients from the gut. (b) Results from a pulse-chase
experiment in which radioactively labeled thymidine (the pulse)
was added to a tissue culture of the intestinal epithelium.
Dividing cells incorporated the labeled thymidine into their newly
synthesized DNA. The labeled thymidine was washed away and
replaced with nonlabeled thymidine (the chase) after a brief
period; cells that divided after the chase did not become labeled.
These micrographs show that 40 minutes after labeling, all the
label is in cells near the base of the crypt. At later times, the
labeled cells are seen progressively farther away from their point
of birth in the crypt. Cells at the top are shed. This process
ensures contant replenishment of the gut epithelium with new
cells. [Part (a) adapted from C. S. Potten, 1998, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
London, Ser. B 353:821. Part (b) from P. Kaur and C. S. Potten, 1986,
Cell Tiss. Kinet. 19:601.]

6

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

Skin also contains dendritic epidermal T cells, an
immune-system cell that produces a certain form
of the T-cell receptor (see Table 14-1). When dendritic epidermal T cells are genetically modified so they do
not produce T-cell receptors, wound healing is slow and less
complete than in normal skin. Normal healing is restored by
addition of keratinocyte growth factor. The current hypothesis is that when dendritic epidermal T cells recognize antigens on cells in damaged tissue, they respond by producing
stimulating proteins, such as keratinocyte growth factor, that
promote keratinocyte growth and wound healing. Many
other signals also control the growth of skin cells, including
Wnt/-catenin, Hedgehog, calcium, transforming growth

factor  (TGF), and TGF. Discovering how all these signals work together to control growth and stimulate healing
is a substantial challenge that will advance our understanding of diseases such as psoriasis and skin cancer and perhaps
pave the way for effective treatments. ❚
Another continuously replenished tissue is the blood,
whose stem cells are located in the bone marrow in adult animals. The various types of blood cells all derive from a single type of pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell, which gives
rise to the more-restricted myeloid and lymphoid stem cells
(Figure 22-5). The frequency of hematopoietic stem cells is
about 1 cell per 104 bone marrow cells, even lower than the

G-CSF

Granulocytes
IL-3, GM-CSF, SCF, IL-6

GM-CFC

M-CSF

Monocytes
Myeloid
stem cell

IL-3, GM-CSF

Eo-CFC

FPO
Epo, SCF

Eosinophils

Epo

GM-CSF
IL-3

BFU-E
Pluripotent
hematopoietic
stem cell

CFU-E

Erythrocytes

SCF, Tpo, IL-3, GM-CSF

Megakaryocytes
(platelet-forming cells)

CFC-mega
Lymphoid
stem cell

IIL-2, IL-7, IL-12, SDF-1,
FLT-3 ligand, TNF-α,
TGF-β1

T-CFC

▲ FIGURE 22-5 Formation of differentiated blood cells from
hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. Pluripotent
stem cells may divide symmetrically to self-renew (curved arrow)
or divide asymmetrically to form myeloid and lymphoid stem
cells (light green). Although these stem cells are capable of
self-renewal, they are committed to one of the two major
hematopoietic lineages. Depending on the types and amounts of
cytokines present, the myeloid and lymphoid stem cells generate
various precursor cells (dark green), which are incapable of
self-renewal. These cells are detected by their ability to form
colonies containing the differentiated cell types shown at right,
measured as “colony-forming cells (CFCs).” The colonies are
detected on the spleen of animals that have had their own cells

B-CFC

T and B cells of the
immune system

eliminated and the precursor cells introduced. Further
cytokine-induced proliferation, commitment, and differentiation of
the precursor cells give rise to the various types of blood cells.
Some of the cytokines that support this process are indicated
(red labels). GM  granulocyte-macrophage; Eo  eosinophil;
E  erythrocyte; mega  megakaryocyte; T  T-cell; B  B-cell;
CFU  colony-forming unit; CSF  colony-stimulating factor;
IL  interleukin; SCF  stem cell factor; Epo  erythropoietin;
Tpo  thrombopoietin; TNF  tumor necrosis factor; TGF 
transforming growth factor; SDF  stromal cell–derived factor;
FLT-3 ligand  ligand for fms-like tyrosine kinase receptor 3.
[Adapted from M. Socolovsky et al., 1998, Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA
95:6573.]

7

22.1 • The Birth of Cells

frequency of intestinal stem cells in crypts. Numerous extracellular growth factors called cytokines regulate proliferation
and differentiation of the precursor cells for various bloodcell lineages. For example, erythropoietin can activate several
different intracellular signal-transduction pathways, leading
to changes in gene expression that promote formation of
erythrocytes (see Figure 14-7).
The hematopoietic lineage originally was worked out by
injecting the various types of precursor cells into mice whose
precursor cells had been wiped out by irradiation. By observing which blood cells were restored in these transplant
experiments, researchers could infer which precursors or terminally differentiated cells (e.g., erythrocytes, monocytes)
arise from a particular type of precursor. The first step in
these experiments was separation of the different types of
hematopoietic precursors. This is possible because each type
produces unique combinations of cell-surface proteins that
can serve as type-specific markers. If bone marrow extracts
are treated with fluorochrome-labeled antibodies for these
markers, cells with different surface markers can be separated in a fluorescence-activated cell sorter (see Figure 5-34).
To date, bone marrow transplants represent the
most successful and widespread use of stem cells
in medicine. The stem cells in the transplanted
marrow can generate new, functional blood cells in patients with certain hereditary blood diseases and in cancer
patients who have received irradiation and/or chemotherapy, both of which destroy the bone marrow cells as well
as cancer cells. Recent work is directed at exploring
whether embryonic stem cells can be induced to differentiate into cells types that would be useful therapeutically.
For example, mouse stem cells treated with inhibitors of
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, a regulator in one of the
phosphoinositide signaling pathways (Chapter 14), turn
into cells that resemble pancreatic  cells in their production of insulin, their sensitivity to glucose levels, and their
aggregation into structures reminiscent of pancreas structures. Implantation of these cells into diabetic mice restored their growth, weight, glucose levels, and survival
rates to normal. ❚
Stem cells in plants are located in meristems, populations of undifferentiated cells found at the tips
of growing shoots. Shoot apical meristems (SAMs)
produce leaves and shoots, and of course more stem cells
that constitute the nearly immortal meristems. Meristems
can persist for thousands of years in long-lived species such
as redwood trees and bristlecone pines. As a plant grows, the
cells “left behind” the meristems are encased in rigid walls
and can no longer grow. SAMs can split to form branches,
each branch with its own SAM, or be converted into floral
meristems (Figure 22-6). Floral meristems give rise to the
four floral organs—sepals, stamens, carpels, and petals—that
form flowers. Unlike SAMs, floral meristems are gradually
depleted as they give rise to the floral organs.

Numerous genes have been found to regulate the formation, maintenance, and properties of meristems. Many of
these genes encode transcription factors. For instance, a hierarchy of regulators, particularly transcription factors, controls the separation of differentiating cells from SAMs as
leaves form; similarly, three types of regulators control formation of the floral organs from floral meristems (Chapter
15). In both cases, a cascade of gene interactions occurs, with
earlier transcription factors causing production of later ones.
At the same time, cells are dividing and the differentiating
ones are spreading away from their original birth sites. ❚

(a)

(d)

1
1

10 x 8 picas

4
4

(b)

1

1

6

6

8

6

i

6

6

4

4

1
3
8
i
7
4
2

3
5
7
7
5
2

3
5
5
5
2

3
3
2
2

FPO
10 x 8 picas

i

(c)
8

7
1
10 x 8 picas

6

4

3

2
5

▲ FIGURE 22-6 Cell fates in meristems of Arabidopsis. In
these longitudinal sections through a shoot apical meristem, cell
nuclei are revealed by staining with propidium iodide, which
binds to DNA. (a) The shoot apical meristem (SAM) produces
shoots, leaves, and more meristem. Flower production occurs
when the meristem switches from leaf/shoot production to
flower production, concomitant with an increase in the number
of meristem cells to form floral meristems (FMs), as shown
here. (b) Cells in a SAM exhibit different fates and behaviors.
Cells divide rapidly in the peripheral zone (PZ) to produce leaves
and in the rib zone (Rib) to produce central shoot structures.
Cells in the central zone (CZ) divide more slowly, producing an
ongoing source of meristem and contributing cells to the PZ and
Rib. Scale bars, 50 m. [See E. Meyerowitz, 1997, Cell 88:299;
micrographs courtesy Elliot Meyerowitz.]

8

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

Cell Fates Are Progressively Restricted
During Development
The eight cells resulting from the first three divisions of a
mammalian zygote (fertilized egg) all look the same. As
demonstrated experimentally in mice, each of the cells has
the potential to give rise to a complete animal. Additional divisions produce a mass, composed of ≈64 cells, that separates
into two cell types: trophectoderm, which will form extraembryonic tissues like the placenta, and the inner cell mass,
which gives rise to the embryo proper. The inner cell mass
eventually forms three germ layers, each with distinct fates.
One layer, ectoderm, will make neural and epidermal cells;
another, mesoderm, will make muscle and connective tissue;
the third layer, endoderm, will make gut epithelia (Figure
22-7). If cells from any of these layers are transplanted into
one of the other layers, they do not give rise to cells appropriate to their new location. This conclusion is based on experiments with chimeric animals composed of chicken and
quail cells. Embryos composed of cells from both bird species
develop fairly normally, yet the cells derived from each donor
are distinguishable under the microscope. Thus the contributions of the different donor cells to the final bird can be
ascertained.
Once the three germ layers are established, they subsequently divide into cell populations with different fates. For
instance, the ectoderm becomes divided into those cells that
are precursors to the skin epithelium and those that are precursors to the nervous system. There appears to be a progressive restriction in the range of cell types that can be
formed from stem cells and precursor cells as development
proceeds. An early embryonic stem cell, as we’ve seen, can
form every type of cell; an ectodermal cell has a choice between neural and epidermal fates; and a keratinocyte precursor can form skin but not neurons.
Another restriction that occurs early in animal development is the setting aside of cells that will form the germ line,
that is, the stem cells and precursor cells that eventually will
give rise to eggs in a female and sperm in a male. Only the
genome of the germ line will ever be passed on to progeny.
The setting aside of germ-line cells early in development has
been hypothesized to protect chromosomes from damage by
reducing the number of rounds of replication they undergo
or by allowing special packaging of the cells that are critical
to heredity. Whatever the reason, the early segregation of the
germ line is widespread (though not universal) among animals. In contrast, plants do nothing of the sort; most meristems can give rise to germ-line cells.
One consequence of the early segregation of germ-line
cells is that the loss or rearrangement of genes in somatic
cells would not affect the inherited genome of a future zygote. Although segments of the genome are rearranged and
lost during development of lymphocytes from hematopoietic precursors, most somatic cells seem to have an intact
genome, equivalent to that in the germ line. Evidence that at
least some somatic cells have a complete and functional

genome comes from the successful production of cloned animals by nuclear-transfer cloning. In this procedure, the
nucleus of an adult (somatic) cell is introduced into an egg
that lacks its nucleus; the manipulated egg, which contains
the diploid number of chromosomes and is equivalent to a
zygote, then is implanted into a foster mother. The only
source of genetic information to guide development of the
embryo is the nuclear genome of the donor somatic cell. The
frequent failure of such cloning experiments, however, raises
(a)

Primitive node

Primitive streak
Amnioblasts

Epiblast

Yolk sac
Invaginating
mesoderm cells

Hypoblast

(b)

(c)

FPO

ECTODERM
Central nervous system
Retina and lens
Cranial and sensory
Ganglia and nerves
Pigment cells
Head connective tissue
Epidermis
Hair
Mammary glands

MESODERM
Skull
Head, skeletal muscle
Skeleton
Dermis of skin
Connective tissue
Urigential system
Heart
Blood, lymph cells
Spleen

ENDODERM
Liver
Pancreas
Urinary bladder
Epithelial parts of:
trachea
lungs
pharynx
thyroid

▲ FIGURE 22-7 Fates of the germ layers in animals. During
the early period of mammalian development, cells migrate to
create the three germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and
endoderm. Cells in the different layers have largely distinct fates
and therefore represent distinct cell lineages. The detailed cell
lineage, however, is not exactly the same in different individuals.
(a) Shown here is a sketch of a human embryo about 16 days
after fertilization of an egg. The first cells to move from the
epiblast into the interior form endoderm, and they are followed by
invaginating cells that become mesoderm. The remaining epiblast
cells become ectoderm. Hypoblast  covering layer. Amnioblasts 
cells that will line amniotic cavity. Yolk sac  reminder of our
egg-bound ancestors. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of a
cross section of a similar-stage embryo. (c) Some of the tissue
derivatives of the three germ layers are listed. [Part (b) from
T. W. Sadler, 2000, Langman’s Medical Embryology, 8th ed. (Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins), pp. 64–65, Figure 4.3).]

22.1 • The Birth of Cells

questions about how many adult somatic cells do in fact
have a complete functional genome. Even the successes, like
the famous cloned sheep “Dolly,” appear to have some medical problems. Even if differentiated cells have a physically
complete genome, clearly only portions of it are transcriptionally active (Chapter 10). Whether the genome of a differentiated cell can revert to having the full developmental
potential characteristic of an embryonic cell is a matter of
considerable debate. A cell could, for example, have an intact
genome, but be unable to properly reactivate it due to inherited chromatin states.
These observations raise two important questions: How
are cell fates progressively restricted during development?
Are these restrictions irreversible? In addressing these questions, it is important to remember that what a cell in its normal in vivo location will do may differ from what a cell is
capable of doing if it is manipulated experimentally. Thus the
observed limits to what a cell can do may result from natural
regulatory mechanisms or may reflect a failure to find conditions that reveal the cell’s full potential.
Although our focus in this chapter is on how cells become different, their ability to remain the same also is critical to the functioning of tissues and the whole organism.
Nondividing differentiated cells with particular characteristics must retain them, sometimes for many decades. Stem
cells that divide regularly, such as a skin stem cell, must produce one daughter cell with the properties of the parental
cell, retaining its characteristic composition, shape, behavior,
and responses to specific external signals. Meanwhile, the
other daughter cell with its own distinct inheritance, as the
result of asymmetric cell division, embarks on a differentiation pathway, which may be determined by the signals the
cell receives.

The Complete Cell Lineage of C. elegans
Is Known
In the development of some organisms, cell lineages are
under tight genetic control and thus are identical in all individuals of a species. In other organisms the exact number
and arrangement of cells vary substantially among different

Pharynx

individuals. The best-documented example of a reproducible
pattern of cell divisions comes from the nematode C. elegans.
Scientists have traced the lineage of all the somatic cells in
C. elegans from the fertilized egg to the mature worm by following the development of live worms using Nomarski interference microscopy (Figure 22-8).
About 10 rounds of cell division, or fewer, create the
adult worm, which is about 1 mm long and 70 m in diameter. The adult worm has 959 somatic cell nuclei (hermaphrodite form) or 1031 (male). The number of somatic
cells is somewhat fewer than the number of nuclei because
some cells contain multiple nuclei (i.e., they are syncytia).
Remarkably, the pattern of cell divisions starting from a
C. elegans fertilized egg is nearly always the same. As we
discuss later in the chapter, many cells that are generated
during development undergo programmed cell death and
are missing in the adult worm. The consistency of the
C. elegans cell lineage does not result entirely from each
newly born cell inheriting specific information about its
destiny. In some cases, various signals direct initially identical cells to particular fates, and the outcomes of these signals are consistent from one animal to the next. That is,
at their birth cells are not necessarily “hard wired” by
their own internal inherited instructions to follow a particular path of differentiation.
The first few cell divisions in C. elegans produce six different founder cells, each with a separate fate as shown in
Figure 22-9a, b. The initial division is asymmetric, giving rise
to P1 and the AB founder cell. Further divisions in the P lineage form the other five founder cells. Some of the signals
controlling the asymmetry are known. For example, Wnt
signals from the P2 precursor control the asymmetric division of the EMS cell into E and MS founder cells. Wnt signaling (see Figure 15-32) is also used in other asymmetric
divisions in worms.
The bilateral symmetry of the worm implies duplication
of lineages on the two sides; curiously, though, functionally
equivalent cells on each side can arise from a pattern of
division that is different on the two sides. Some of the embryonic cells function as stem cells, dividing repeatedly to
form more of themselves or another type of stem cell, while

Dorsal nerve
cord

Intestinal lumen

Intestine

Mouth

9

Intestinal nuclei

Anus

Excretory
cell

Gonad
Ventral
nerve cord

Ventral nerve cord
nuclei

Rectum
20 m

▲ FIGURE 22-8 Newly hatched larva of C. elegans. Many of

in this micrograph obtained by Nomarski interference microscopy.

the 959 somatic cell nuclei in this hermaphrodite form are visualized

[From J. E. Sulston and H. R. Horvitz, 1977, Devel. Biol. 56:110.]

10

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death
(a)

(b)
P0
AB

P1

Video Animation: Time-Lapse Imaging of C. elegans Embryogenesis

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

neurons
hypodermis
EMS
pharyngeal muscle
MS
body muscle
body muscle
other
pharyngeal muscle
neurons
glands
somatic gonad
other

P2
E

P3

gut

C

FPO

hypodermis
body muscle
neurons

P4

D

germ cells

body muscle

Zygote

(c)

FPO

Pharynx

Germ
line
Intestine

Neurons

Epidermis

▲ FIGURE 22-9 C. elegans lineage. (a) Pattern of the
first few divisions starting with P0 (the zygote) and leading
to formation of the six founder cells (yellow highlights). The
first division, into P1 and AB, is asymmetric. Further
divisions in the P lineage generates the other founder
cells. Note that more than one lineage can lead to the
same tissue type (e.g., muscle or neurons). The EMS cell
is so named because it is the precursor to most of the
endoderm and mesoderm. The lineage beginning with the
P4 cell gives rise to all of the germ-line cells, which are set

spinning off differentiating cells that give rise to a particular
tissue. In one pattern of division, one of the daughter cells
from a division initiates a repeat of the lineage pattern of the
previous few divisions. The complete lineage of C. elegans
is shown in Figure 22-9c. This organism has been a powerful
model system for genetic studies to identify the regulators
that control cell lineages in time and space.

Heterochronic Mutants Provide Clues
About Control of Cell Lineage
Intriguing evidence for the genetic control of cell lineage has
come from isolation and analysis of heterochronic mutants.
In these mutants, a developmental event typical of one stage

Vulva
Somatic gonad

aside very early, as in most animals. All the other lineages give
rise to somatic cells. (b) Light micrographs of the first few
divisions of the embryo that generate the founder cells with cells
labeled as in part (a). The texture of the cells shows the presence
of organelles and is revealed by differential interference contrast
microscopy, sometimes called Nomarski microscopy. (c) Full
lineage of the entire body of the worm, showing some of the
tissues formed. Note that any particular cell undergoes relatively
few divisions, typically fewer than 15. [Einhard Schierenberg
Zoologisches Institut, Universität Köln.]

of development occurs too early (precocious development) or
too late (retarded development). An example of the former is
a premature cell division to yield a cell that differentiates and
a cell that dies; as a result, the lineage that should have followed from the dead cell never happens. In the latter case,
the delayed occurrence of a lineage causes juvenile structures
to be produced, incorrectly, in more mature animals. In both
cases, the character of a parental cell is, in essence, changed
to the character of a cell at a different stage of development.
One example of precocious development in C. elegans
comes from loss-of-function mutations in the lin-14 gene,
which cause premature formation of the PDNB neuroblast
(Figure 22-10a). The lin-14 gene and several others found to
be defective in heterochronic worm mutants encode RNA-

22.1 • The Birth of Cells
(b)

L1

L2

L3/4

lin-14, lin-28
mRNA

lin-14, lin-28
mRNA

lin-14, lin-28
mRNA

lin-4
RNA

(a)
Wild type

lin-14 mutant

LIN-14, LIN-28
proteins

V5

V5
L1

lin-41 mRNA

PDNB
X
PDNB

RNA or protein
level

L2

Adult

lin-14, lin-28
mRNA
lin-4 let-7
RNA RNA

FPO

lin-41 mRNA

LIN-41
protein

lin-29 mRNA

lin-41 mRNA

LIN-41
protein

lin-4
RNA

lin-41 mRNA

LIN-41
protein

_

_

_

lin-29 mRNA

lin-29 mRNA

lin-29 mRNA

11

let-7
RNA

LIN-29
protein

LIN-14, LIN-28
LIN-41

▲ FIGURE 22-10 Timing of specific types of cell division
during development of C. elegans. (a) The pattern of cell
division for the V5 cell of C. elegans is shown for normal worms
and for a heterochronic mutant called lin-14. In the lin-14 mutant,
the pattern of cell division (red arrows) that normally occurs only
in the second larval stage (L2) occurs in the first larval stage (L1),
causing the PDNB neuroblast to be generated prematurely. In
the mutant, the V5 cell behaves during L1 like cell “X” (purple)
normally does in L2. The inference is that the LIN-14 protein
prevents L2-type cell divisions, although precisely how it does so
is unknown. (b) Two small regulatory RNAs, lin-4 and let-7, serve
as coordinating timers of gene expression. Binding of the lin-4

binding or DNA-binding proteins, which presumably coordinate expression of other genes. However, two other genes (lin4 and let-7) involved in regulating the timing of cell divisions
were initially extremely puzzling, as they appeared not to encode any protein. To discover the products of these genes, scientists first determined which pieces of genomic DNA could
restore gene function, and therefore proper cell lineage, to mutants defective in each gene. They then did the same thing with
genomic DNA from the corresponding genomic regions of different species of worm. Comparison of the “rescuing” fragments from the different species revealed that they shared
common short sequences with little protein-coding potential.
The short RNA molecules encoded by lin-4 and let-7 were
subsequently shown to inhibit translation of the mRNAs encoded by lin-14 and other heterochronic genes (Figure 22-10b).
These small RNAs, or micro RNAs (miRNAs), are complementary to sequences in the 3 untranslated parts of target mRNAs
and are believed to control translation of the mNRAs by hybridizing them. Temporal changes in the production of these and

lin-4

let-7

LIN-29

RNA to the 3 untranslated regions (UTRs) of lin-14 and lin-28
mRNAs prevents translation of these mRNAs into protein. This
occurs following the first larval (L1) stage, permitting
development to proceed to the later larval stages. Starting in the
fourth larval stage (L4), production of let-7 RNA begins. It
hybridizes to lin-14, lin-28, and lin-41 mRNAs, preventing their
translation. LIN-41 protein is an inhibitor of translation of the
lin-29 mRNA, so the appearance of let-7 RNA allows production
of LIN-29 protein, which is needed for generation of adult cell
lineages. LIN-4 may also bind to lin-41 RNA at later stages. Only
the 3 UTRs of the mRNAs are depicted. [Adapted from B. J.
Reinhart et al., 2000, Nature 403:901.]

other miRNAs during the life cycle of C. elegans serve as a regulatory clock for cell lineage. Molecules related to let-7 RNA have
been identified in many other animals including vertebrates and
insects; since their production is temporally regulated in these animals as well, they may serve a similar function in their development as in C. elegans. How production of these regulatory
miRNAs is temporally controlled is not yet known, but they have
turned out to play many roles in regulating gene expression
(Chapter 12).

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 22.1
The Birth of Cells
In asymmetric cell division, two different types of daughter cells are formed from one mother cell. In contrast, both
daughter cells formed in symmetric divisions are identical
but may have different fates if they are exposed to different external signals (see Figure 22-1).

■

12

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

Pluripotent stem cells can produce more than one type
of descendant cell, including in some cases a stem cell with
a more-restricted potential to produce differentiated cell
types (see Figure 22-2).

■

Cultured embryonic stem cells (ES cells) are capable of
giving rise to many kinds of differentiated cell types. They
are useful in production of genetically altered mice and
offer potential for therapeutic uses.

■

Populations of stem cells associated with most tissues
(e.g., skin, intestinal epithelium, blood) regenerate differentiated tissue cells that are damaged or sloughed or become aged (see Figures 22-4 and 22-5).

■

Stem cells are prevented from differentiating by specific
controls. A high level of -catenin, a component of the
Wnt signaling pathway, has been implicated in preserving
stem cells in the skin and intestine.

■

Plant stem cells persist for the life of the plant in the
meristem. Meristem cells can give rise to a broad spectrum
of cell types and structures.

■

During development, precursor cells generally lose potential; that is, they become progressively restricted in the
number of different cell types they can form.

■

Early in animal development, the three germ layers—
ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm—form. Each gives
rise to specific tissues and organs (see Figure 22-7).

■

Germ-line cells give rise to eggs or sperm. By definition,
all other cells are somatic cells.

■

■ Embryonic development of C. elegans begins with asymmetric division of the fertilized egg (zygote). The lineage
of all the cells in adult worms is known and is highly reproducible (see Figure 22-9).
■ Short regulatory RNAs control the timing of developmental cell divisions by preventing translation of mRNAs whose
encoded proteins control cell lineages (see Figure 22-10).

22.2

Cell-Type Specification in Yeast

In the previous section, we saw that stem cells and
precursor/progenitor cells produce progeny that embark
upon specific differentiation paths. The elegant regulatory
mechanisms whereby cells become different is referred to as
cell-type specification. Specification usually involves a combination of external signals with internal signal-transduction
mechanisms like those described in Chapters 14 and 15. The
transition from an undifferentiated cell to a differentiating
one often involves the production of one or a small number
of transcription factors. The newly produced transcription
factors serve as powerful switches that trigger the activation
(and sometimes repression) of large batteries of subservient
genes. Thus an initially modest change can cause massive
changes in gene expression that confer a new character on
the cell.

Our first example of cell-type specification comes from
the budding yeast, S. cerevisiae. We introduced this useful
unicellular eukaryote way back in Chapter 1 and have encountered it in several other chapters. S. cerevisiae forms
three cell types: haploid a and  cells and diploid a/ cells.
Each type has its own distinctive set of active genes; many
other genes are active in all three cell types. In a pattern common to many organisms and tissues, cell-type specification in
yeast is controlled by a small number of transcription factors
that coordinate the activities of many other genes. Similar
regulatory features are found in the responses of higher eukaryotic cells to environmental signals and in the specification and patterning of cells and tissues during development.
Recent DNA microarray studies of transcription patterns
in S. cerevisiae have provided a genome-wide picture of the
fluctuations of gene expression in the different cell types and
different stages of the yeast life cycle (see Figure 9-35 for an explanation of the DNA microarray technique). Among other
things, these studies identified 32 genes that are transcribed
at more than twofold higher levels in  cells than in a cells. Another 50 genes are transcribed at more than twofold higher
levels in a cells than in  cells. The products of these 82 genes,
which initially are activated by cell-type specification transcription regulators, convey many of the critical differences between the two cell types. Since transcription of more than
6000 genes was assessed in these experiments, the results
clearly demonstrate that changes in expression of only a small
fraction of the genome can significantly alter the behavior and
properties of cells. Transcription of a much larger number of
genes, about 25 percent of the total assayed, differed substantially in diploid cells compared with haploid cells. A powerful
advantage of the microarray approach is that it systematically
identifies a large fraction of the relevant genes controlling various processes, allowing scientists to concentrate on the most
important players that regulate differences in cell types.

Transcription Factors Encoded at the MAT Locus
Act in Concert with MCM1 to Specify Cell Type
Each of the three S. cerevisiae cell types expresses a unique set
of regulatory genes that is responsible for all the differences
among the three cell types. All haploid cells express certain
haploid-specific genes; in addition, a cells express a-specific
genes, and  cells express -specific genes. In a/ diploid cells,
diploid-specific genes are expressed, whereas haploid-specific,
a-specific, and -specific genes are not. As illustrated in Figure 22-11, three cell type–specific transcription factors (1,
2, and a1) encoded at the MAT locus in combination with
a general transcription factor called MCM1, which is expressed in all three cell types, mediate cell type–specific gene
expression in S. cerevisiae. Thus the actions of just three transcription factors can set the yeast cell on a specific differentiation pathway culminating in a particular cell type. From the
DNA microarray experiments we know one outcome: the activation or repression of many dozens of genes that control
cell characteristics.

22.2 • Cell-Type Specification in Yeast

MCM1 was the first member of the MADS family of
transcription factors to be discovered. (MADS is an acronym
for the initial four factors identified in this family.) The
DNA-binding proteins composing this family dimerize and
contain a similar N-terminal MADS domain. In Section 22.3
we will encounter other MADS transcription factors that
participate in development of skeletal muscle. MADS transcription factors also specify cell types in floral organs (see
Figure 15-28). MCM1 exhibits different activity in haploid a
and  cells due to its association with 1 or 2 protein in 
cells. As a result of this combinatorial action, MCM1 promotes transcription of -specific genes and represses transcription of a-specific genes in  cells. Acting alone, MCM1
activates transcription of a-specific genes in a cells and of
haploid-specific genes in both  and a cells (see Figure
22-11a, b). Now let’s take a closer look at how MCM1 and
the MAT-encoded proteins exert their effects.

(a) a cell
αsg

a1
MCM1

a1

MATa

(b) α cell
α2

FPO
α1

MATα2

α1

+

+

asg

+

+

hsg

+
+

MATα1

+

αsg

−

asg

+

hsg

α2
+
(c) a/α cell
α2

α2

−

MATα2

α2

a1

MCM1 and 1-MCM1 Complexes Activate
Gene Transcription

αsg
+

MATα1

−

asg

−

hsg

13

a1

MATa

▲ FIGURE 22-11 Transcriptional control of cell type–specific
genes in S. cerevisiae. The coding sequences carried at the
MAT locus differ in haploid  and a cells and in diploid cells.
Three type-specific transcription factors (1, 2, and a1) encoded
at the MAT locus act with MCM1, a constitutive transcription
factor produced by all three cell types, to produce a distinctive
pattern of gene expression in each of the three cell types.
asg  a-specific genes/mRNAs; sg  -specific genes/mRNAs;
hsg  haploid-specific genes/mRNAs.

In a cells, homodimeric MCM1 binds to the so-called P box
sequence in the upstream regulatory sequences (URSs) of
a-specific genes, stimulating their transcription (Figure
22-12a). Transcription of -specific genes is controlled by
two adjacent sequences—the P box and the Q box—located
in the URSs associated with these genes. Although MCM1
alone binds to the P box in a-specific URSs, it does not bind
to the P box in -specific URSs. Thus a cells do not transcribe -specific genes.
In  cells, which produce the 1 transcription factor encoded by MAT, the simultaneous binding of MCM1 and
1 to PQ sites occurs with high affinity (Figure 22-12b). This
binding turns on transcription of -specific genes. Therefore
a-specific transcription is a simple matter of a single transcription factor binding to its target genes, while -specific

 FIGURE 22-12 Activity of MCM1 in a

MCM1 dimer

(a) a cells

P

Q

α-specific URS

αsg

α2

P

FPO

(b) α cells

α2

a-specific URS

No transcription of
α-specific genes

asg
Transcription of
a-specific genes

α2 dimer

α1
P

Q

α-specific URS

αsg
Transcription of
α-specific genes

α2

P
α2
a-specific URS

asg
No transcription of
a-specific genes

and  yeast cells. MCM1 binds as a dimer
to the P site in -specific and a-specific
upstream regulatory sequences (URSs),
which control transcription of -specific
genes and a-specific genes, respectively.
(a) In a cells, MCM1 stimulates transcription
of a-specific genes. MCM1 does not bind
efficiently to the P site in -specific URSs in
the absence of 1 protein. (b) In  cells, the
activity of MCM1 is modified by its
association with 1 or 2. The 1-MCM1
complex stimulates transcription of -specific
genes, whereas the 2-MCM1 complex
blocks transcription of a-specific genes. The
2-MCM1 complex also is produced in
diploid cells, where it has the same blocking
effect on transcription of a-specific genes
(see Figure 22-11c).

14

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

transcription requires a combination of two factors—neither
of which can activate target genes alone.

a factor

α factor

Flanking the P box in each a-specific URS are two 2binding sites. Both MCM1 and 2 can bind independently
to an a-specific URS with relatively low affinity. However, in
 cells only the highly cooperative, simultaneous binding of
both 2 and MCM1 proteins occurs with high affinity. This
high-affinity binding represses transcription of a-specific
genes, ensuring that they are not expressed in  cells and
diploid cells (see Figure 22-12b, right). MCM1 promotes
binding of 2 to an a-specific URS by orienting the two DNAbinding domains of the 2 dimer to the 2-binding sequences
in this URS. Since a dimeric 2 molecule binds to both sites in
an -specific URS, each DNA site is referred to as a half-site.
The relative positions of both half-sites and their orientation
are highly conserved among different a-specific URSs.
The presence of numerous 2-binding sites in the genome
and the “relaxed” specificity of 2 protein may expand the
range of genes that it can regulate. For instance, in a/
diploid cells, 2 forms a heterodimer with a1 that represses
both haploid-specific genes and the gene encoding 1 (see
Figure 22-11c). The example of 2 suggests that relaxed
specificity may be a general strategy for increasing the regulatory range of a single transcription factor. Highly specific
binding, then, occurs as a consequence of the interaction of
2 with other transcription factors at different sites in DNA.

α

a

2-MCM1 and 2-a1 Complexes
Repress Transcription
α-factor
receptor

a-factor receptor

Pheremone signaling

α

a

Cell-cycle arrest
Morphogenesis

α

a

FPO
Cell fusion

Nuclear fusion

Pheromones Induce Mating of  and a Cells
to Generate a Third Cell Type
An important feature of the yeast life cycle is the ability of
haploid a and  cells to mate, that is, attach and fuse giving
rise to a diploid a/ cell (see Figure 1-5). Each haploid cell
type secretes a different mating factor, a small polypeptide
pheromone, and expresses a cell-surface G protein–coupled
receptor that recognizes the pheromone secreted by cells of
the other type. Thus a and  cells both secrete and respond to
pheromones (Figure 22-13). Binding of the mating factors
to their receptors induces expression of a set of genes encoding proteins that direct arrest of the cell cycle in G1 and promote attachment/fusion of haploid cells to form diploid cells.
In the presence of sufficient nutrients, the diploid cells will
continue to grow. Starvation, however, induces diploid cells
to progress through meiosis, each yielding four haploid
spores. If the environmental conditions become conducive to
vegetative growth, the spores will germinate and undergo
mitotic division.
Studies with yeast mutants have provided insights into
how the a and  pheromones induce mating. For instance,
haploid yeast cells carrying mutations in the sterile 12
(STE12) locus cannot respond to pheromones and do not

a/α
Diploid cell
+ Nutrients

− Nutrients

Mitotic growth

Meiosis

a/α

a/α
Sporulation
a

α

a

α

▲ FIGURE 22-13 Pheromone-induced mating of haploid
yeast cells. The  cells produce  mating factor and a receptor;
the a cells produce a factor and  receptor. Binding of the
mating factors to their cognate receptors on cells of the opposite
type leads to gene activation, resulting in mating and production
of diploid cells. In the presence of sufficient nutrients, these cells
will grow as diploids. Without sufficient nutrients, cells will
undergo meiosis and form four haploid spores.

22.3 • Specification and Differentiation of Muscle

mate. The STE12 gene encodes a transcription factor that
binds to a DNA sequence referred to as the pheromoneresponsive element, which is present in many different a- and
-specific URSs. Binding of mating factors to cell-surface receptors induces a cascade of signaling events, resulting in
phosphorylation of various proteins including the Ste12 protein (see Figure 14-24). This rapid phosphorylation is correlated with an increase in the ability of Ste12 to stimulate
transcription. It is not yet known, however, whether Ste12
must be phosphorylated to stimulate transcription in response to pheromone.
Interaction of Ste12 protein with DNA has been studied
most extensively at the URS controlling transcription of
STE2, an a-specific gene encoding the receptor for the 
pheromone. Adjacent to this a-specific URS is a pheromoneresponsive element that binds Ste12. When a cells are treated
with  pheromone, transcription of the STE2 gene increases
in a process that requires Ste12 protein. Presumably,
pheromone-induced production of the  receptor encoded by
STE2 increases the efficiency of the mating process. Ste12
protein has been found to bind most efficiently to the
pheromone-responsive element in the STE2 URS when
MCM1 is simultaneously bound to the adjacent P site. We
saw previously that MCM1 can act as an activator or a
repressor at different URSs depending on whether it complexes with 1 or 2. In this case, the function of MCM1
as an activator is stimulated by the binding of yet another
transcription factor, Ste12, whose activity is modified by
extracellular signals.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 22.2
Cell-Type Specification in Yeast
Specification of each of the three yeast cell types—the a
and  haploid cells and the diploid a/ cells—is determined
by a unique set of transcription factors acting in different
combinations at specific regulatory sites in the yeast
genome (see Figure 22-11).

■

Some transcription factors can act as repressors or activators depending on the specific regulatory sites they bind
and the presence or absence of other transcription factors
bound to neighboring sites.

■

Binding of mating-type pheromones by haploid yeast
cells activates expression of genes encoding proteins that
mediate mating, thereby generating the third yeast cell type
(see Figure 22-13).

■

22.3 Specification and Differentiation
of Muscle
As indicated by global expression patterns, yeast cells of different mating types are still rather similar. Developmental

15

biologists do not yet know the complete set of molecules that
distinguishes any one cell type (e.g., muscle) from all the
other cell types in a multicellular organism. The extensive
cell specification and differentiation that occur during
development of animals and plants depend on both quantitative and qualitative differences in gene expression, controlled at the level of transcription, as well as on cell
structures and protein activity states.
An impressive array of molecular strategies, some analogous to those found in yeast cell-type specification, have
evolved to carry out the complex developmental pathways
that characterize multicellular organisms. Muscle cells have
been the focus of many such studies because their development can be studied in cultured cells as well as in intact animals. Early advances in understanding the formation of
muscle cells (myogenesis) came from discovery of regulatory
genes that could convert cultured cells into muscle cells.
Then mouse mutations affecting those genes were created
and studied to learn the functions of the proteins encoded
by these genes, following which scientists have investigated
how the muscle regulatory genes control other genes.
DNA microarray analysis has been applied to understand the function of twist and other regulatory genes in
muscle development. For example, the expression pattern of
normal Drosophila embryos recently has been compared
with that of mutant embryos in which the twist gene is defective. Previous research had shown that the Twist protein
encoded by this gene is a transcription factor necessary to
create muscle cells in flies and other animals. Twist turns
on production of other transcription factors that in turn activate genes encoding myosin, actin, and other musclespecific proteins. To assess how many genes are needed to
specify muscle, researchers determined the expression of
about 4000 fly genes (about 30 percent of the total) in normal fly embryos and in twist mutants. Of the genes included
in the microarray, about 130 (3.3 percent), including many
known muscle differentiation genes, were transcribed at
lower levels (or not at all) in the twist mutants. These results
suggest that transcriptional changes in at least several hundred genes are associated with differentiation of a highly
specialized cell type such as muscle.
Other recent microarray studies have looked for genes
whose transcription differs in various subtypes of muscle in
mice. These have identified 49 genes out of 3000 genes examined that are transcribed at substantially different levels in
red (endurance) muscle and white (fast response) muscle.
Clues to the molecular basis of the functional differences between red and white muscle are likely to come from studying
those 49 genes and their products.
Here we examine the role of certain transcription factors
in creating skeletal muscle in vertebrates. These muscle regulators illustrate how coordinated transcription of sets of
target genes can produce differentiated cell types and how a
cascade of transcriptional events and signals is necessary to
coordinate cell behaviors and functions.

16

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

Embryonic Somites Give Rise to Myoblasts,
the Precursors of Skeletal Muscle Cells
Vertebrate skeletal myogenesis proceeds through three
stages: determination of the precursor muscle cells, called
myoblasts; proliferation and in some cases migration of
myoblasts; and their terminal differentiation into mature
muscle (Figure 22-14). In the first stage, myoblasts arise from
blocks of mesoderm cells, called somites, that are located
next to the neural tube in the embryo. Specific signals from
surrounding tissue play an important role in determining
where myoblasts will form in the developing somite. At the
molecular level, the decision of a mesoderm cell to adopt a
muscle cell fate reflects the activation of genes encoding particular transcription factors.
As myoblasts proliferate and migrate, say to a developing
limb bud, they become aligned, stop dividing, and fuse to
form a syncytium (a cell containing many nuclei but sharing
a common cytoplasm). We refer to this multinucleate cell as
a myotube. Concomitant with cell fusion is a dramatic rise in
the expression of genes necessary for further muscle development and function.
The specific extracellular signals that induce determination of each group of myoblasts are expressed only tran-

siently. These signals trigger production of intracellular factors that maintain the myogenic program after the inducing
signals are gone. We discuss the identification and functions
of these myogenic proteins, and their interactions, in the next
several sections.

Myogenic Genes Were First Identified in Studies
with Cultured Fibroblasts
In vitro studies with the fibroblast cell line designated C3H
10T1⁄2 have played a central role in dissecting the transcriptioncontrol mechanisms regulating skeletal myogenesis. When
these cells are incubated in the presence of 5-azacytidine, a
cytidine derivative that cannot be methylated and therefore
alters transcription, they differentiate into myotubes. Upon
entry into cells, 5-azacytidine is converted to 5-azadeoxycytidine
triphosphate and then is incorporated into DNA in place of
deoxycytidine. Because methylated deoxycytidine residues
commonly are present in transcriptionally inactive DNA regions, replacement of cytidine residues with a derivative that
cannot be methylated may permit activation of genes previously repressed by methylation.
The high frequency at which azacytidine-treated C3H
10T1⁄2 cells are converted into myotubes suggested to early
workers that reactivation of one or a small number of closely
linked genes is sufficient to drive a myogenic program. To test

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-15 Myogenic genes
Myotome
Somite
MyoD/Myf5

1 Determination

FPO
Myoblasts

Myogenin and MEFs

2 Proliferation and/or migration

Premuscle masses
3 Differentiation and cell fusion

Myotube (muscle cell)

▲ FIGURE 22-14 Three stages in development of
vertebrate skeletal muscle. Somites are epithelial spheres of
embryonic mesoderm cells, some of which (the myotome)
become determined as myoblasts after receiving signals from
other tissues ( 1 ). After the myoblasts proliferate and migrate
to the limb buds and elsewhere ( 2 ), they undergo terminal
differentiation into multinucleate skeletal muscle cells, called
myotubes ( 3 ). Key transcription factors that help drive the
myogenic program are highlighted in yellow. See also Figure 22-17.

isolated from azacytidine-treated cells can drive myogenesis
when transfected into other cells. (a) When C3H 10T1⁄2 cells
(a fibroblast cell line) are treated with azacytidine, they develop
into myotubes at high frequency. To isolate the genes responsible
for converting azacytidine-treated cells into myotubes, all the
mRNAs from treated cells first were isolated from cell extracts
on an oligo-dT column. Because of their poly(A) tails, mRNAs are
selectively retained on this column. Steps 1 and 2 : The
isolated mRNAs were converted to radiolabeled cDNAs. Step 3 :
When the cDNAs were mixed with mRNAs from untreated C3H
10T1⁄2 cells, only cDNAs derived from mRNAs (light red)
produced by both azacytidine-treated cells and untreated cells
hybridized. The resulting double-stranded DNA was separated
from the unhybridized cDNAs (dark blue) produced only by
azacytidine-treated cells. Step 4 : The cDNAs specific for
azacytidine-treated cells then were used as probes to screen a
cDNA library from azacytidine-treated cells (Chapter 9). At least
some of the clones identified with these probes correspond to
genes required for myogenesis. (b) Each of the cDNA clones
identified in part (a) was incorporated into a plasmid carrying a
strong promoter. Steps 1 and 2 : C3H 10T1⁄2 cells were
cotransfected with each recombinant plasmid plus a second
plasmid carrying a gene conferring resistance to an antibiotic
called G418; only cells that have incorporated the plasmids will
grow on a medium containing G418. One of the selected clones,
designated myoD, was shown to drive conversion of C3H 10T1⁄2
cells into muscle cells, identified by their binding of labeled
antibodies against myosin, a muscle-specific protein (step 3 ).
[See R. L. Davis et al., 1987, Cell 51:987.]

22.3 • Specification and Differentiation of Muscle
(a) Screen for myogenic genes

Total mRNA from azacytidine-treated cells
1

Incubate with reverse
transcriptase and
[32P]dNTPs

2

Remove mRNAs

32P-labeled

3

Discard

32

cDNAs

Hybridize with
excess of mRNAs
from untreated
C3H 10T1/2 cells
(
)

P-labeled azamyoblastspecific cDNAs

4

Screen cDNA library
from treated cells

Clones enriched
in myogenic genes

FPO

this hypothesis, researchers isolated DNA from C3H 10T1⁄2
cells grown in the presence of 5-azacytidine and transfected it
into untreated cells. The observation that 1 in 104 cells transfected with this DNA was converted into myotubes is consistent with the hypothesis that one or a small set of closely linked
genes is responsible for converting fibroblasts into myotubes.
Subsequent studies led to the isolation and characterization of four genes that can convert C3H 10T1⁄2 cells into
muscle. Figure 22-15 outlines the experimental protocol
for identifying and assaying one of these genes, called the
myogenic determination (myoD) gene. C3H 10T1⁄2 cells
transfected with myoD cDNA and those treated with 5azacytidine both formed myotubes. The myoD cDNA also
was able to convert a number of other cultured cell lines into
muscle. Based on these findings, the myoD gene was proposed to play a key role in muscle development. A similar approach identified three other genes—myogenin, myf5, and
mrf4—that also function in muscle development.

Muscle-Regulatory Factors (MRFs)
and Myocyte-Enhancing Factors (MEFs) Act
in Concert to Confer Myogenic Specificity
The four myogenic proteins—MyoD, Myf5, myogenin, and
MRF4—are all members of the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) family of DNA-binding transcription factors (see
Figure 11-22b). Near the center of these proteins is a DNAbinding basic (B) region adjacent to the HLH domain, which
mediates dimer formation. Flanking this central DNAbinding/dimerization region are two activation domains. We
refer to the four myogenic bHLH proteins collectively as
muscle regulatory factors, or MRFs (Figure 22-16a).
(a) Structure of muscle-regulatory factors (MRFs)
DNA binding/dimerization

(b) Assay for myogenic activity of myoD cDNA
H2N

Transactivation

C3H 10T1/2 cell
1

2

Transfect with a plasmid
carrying myoD cDNA and a
gene conferring resistance
to G418
Select on G418-containing
medium

17

B

HLH

Transactivation

COOH

MEF-interacting domain

FPO

(b) Structure of myocyte-enhancing factors (MEFs)
DNA binding/dimerization
H2N

MADS

MEF

Transactivation

COOH

Myogenin-interacting domain

3

Stain with
labeled antimyosin
antibody ( )

▲ FIGURE 22-16 General structures of two classes of
transcription factors that participate in myogenesis. MRFs
(muscle regulatory factors) are bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix)
proteins produced only in developing muscle. MEFs (myocyteenhancing factors), which are produced in several tissues in
addition to developing muscle, belong to the MADS family.
The myogenic activity of MRFs is enhanced by their interaction
with MEFs.

18

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

bHLH proteins form homo- and heterodimers that bind
to a 6-bp DNA site with the consensus sequence CANNTG
(N = any nucleotide). Referred to as the E box, this sequence
is present in many different locations within the genome
(on a purely random basis the E box will be found every 256
nucleotides). Thus some mechanism(s) must ensure that
MRFs specifically regulate muscle-specific genes and not
other genes containing E boxes in their transcriptioncontrol regions. One clue to how this myogenic specificity is
achieved was the finding that the DNA-binding affinity of
MyoD is tenfold greater when it binds as a heterodimer complexed with E2A, another bHLH protein, than when it binds
as a homodimer. Moreover, in azacytidine-treated C3H
10T1⁄2 cells, MyoD is found as a heterodimer complexed
with E2A, and both proteins are required for myogenesis in
these cells. The DNA-binding domains of E2A and MyoD
have similar but not identical amino acid sequences, and
both proteins recognize E box sequences. The other MRFs
also form heterodimers with E2A that have properties similar to MyoD-E2A complexes.
Since E2A is expressed in many tissues, the requirement
for E2A is not sufficient to confer myogenic specificity. Subsequent studies suggested that specific amino acids in the
bHLH domain of all the MRFs may confer myogenic specificity by allowing MRF-E2A complexes to bind specifically
to another family of DNA-binding proteins called myocyteenhancing factors, or MEFs. MEFs were considered excellent
candidates for interaction with MRFs for two reasons. First,
many muscle-specific genes contain recognition sites for both
MEFs and MRFs. Second, although MEFs cannot induce
myogenic conversion of azacytidine-treated C3H 10T1⁄2
cells, they enhance the ability of MRFs to do so. This enhancement requires physical interaction between a MEF and
MRF-E2A heterodimer. Later, MEFs were found to belong to
the MADS family of transcription factors and to contain a
MEF domain, adjacent to the MADS domain, that mediates
interaction with myogenin (Figure 22-16b). The synergistic
action of the MEF homodimer and MRF-E2A heterodimer is
thought to drive high-level expression of muscle-specific
genes.
Knockout mice and Drosophila mutants have been used
to explore the roles of MRF and MEF proteins in conferring
myogenic specificity in intact animals rather than cell culture. These experiments demonstrated the importance of
three of the MRF proteins and of MEF proteins for distinct
steps in muscle development (see Figure 22-14). The function
of the fourth myogenic protein, Mrf4, is not entirely clear;
it may be expressed later and help maintain differentiated
muscle cells.

Terminal Differentiation of Myoblasts Is Under
Positive and Negative Control
Powerful developmental regulators like the MRFs cannot be
allowed to run rampant. In fact, their actions are circum-

scribed at several levels. First, the muscle regulators are activated only in mesoderm cells, at the right place and time
in the embryo, in response to spatial regulators of the sorts
that are described in Chapter 15. Other proteins mediate additional mechanisms for assuring tight control over myogenesis: chromatin-remodeling proteins are needed to make
target genes accessible to MRFs; inhibitory proteins can restrict when MRFs act; and antagonistic relations between
cell-cycle regulators and differentiation factors like MRFs ensure that differentiating cells will not divide. All these factors
control when and where muscles form.

Activating Chromatin-Remodeling Proteins MRF proteins
control batteries of muscle-specific genes, but can do so only
if chromatin factors allow access. Remodeling of chromatin,
which usually is necessary for gene activation, is carried out
by large protein complexes (e.g., Swi/Snf complex) that have
ATPase and perhaps helicase activity. These complexes are
thought to recruit histone acetylases that modify chromatin
to make genes accessible to transcription factors (Chapter
11). The need for remodeling complexes to help myogenic
factors was tested using dominant-negative versions of the
ATPase proteins that form the cores of these complexes. (Recall from Chapter 9 that a dominant-negative mutation produces a mutant phenotype even when a normal allele of the
gene also is present.) When genes carrying these dominantnegative mutations were transfected into C3H 10T1⁄2 cells,
the subsequent introduction of myogenic genes no longer
converted the cells into myotubes. In addition, a musclespecific gene that is normally activated did not exhibit its
usual pattern of chromatin changes in the doubly transfected
C3H 10T1⁄2 cells. These results indicate that transcription activation by myogenic proteins depends on a suitable chromatin structure in the regions of muscle-specific genes.
Inhibitory Proteins Screens for genes related to myoD led to
identification of a related protein that retains the dimerization region but lacks the basic DNA-binding region and
hence is unable to bind to E box sequences in DNA. By binding to MyoD or E2A, this protein inhibits formation of
MyoD-E2A heterodimers and hence their high-affinity binding to DNA. Accordingly, this protein is referred to as Id, for
inhibitor of DNA binding. Id prevents cells that produce
MyoD and E2A from activating transcription of the musclespecific gene encoding creatine kinase. This finding presumably reflects the formation of MyoD-Id or E2A-Id
complexes, which cannot bind to and activate transcription
of muscle-specific genes. As a result, the cells remain in a
proliferative growth state. When these cells are induced to
differentiate into muscle (for instance, by the removal of
serum, which contains the growth factors required for proliferative growth), the Id concentration falls. MyoD-E2A
dimers now can form and bind to the regulatory regions of
target genes, driving differentiation of C3H 10T1⁄2 cells into
myoblast-like cells.

22.3 • Specification and Differentiation of Muscle

Recent work shows that histone acetylases and deacetylases are crucial for regulating muscle-specific genes. As explained in Chapter 11, acetylation of histones in chromatin
is necessary to activate many genes; in contrast, histone
deacetylases cause transcriptional repression (see Figure
11-32). MEF2 recruits histone acetylases such as p300/CBP,
through another protein that serves as a mediator, to activate
transcription of target genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments with antibodies against acetylated histone H4
show that the acetylated histone level associated with MEF2regulated genes is higher in differentiated myotubes than in
myoblasts (see Figure 11-31). The role of histone deacetylases
in muscle development was revealed in experiments in which
scientists first introduced extra myoD genes into cultured C3H
10T1⁄2 cells to raise the level of MyoD. This resulted in increased activation of target genes and more rapid differentiation of the cells into myotubes. However, when genes encoding
histone deacetylases also were introduced into the C3H 10T1⁄2
cells, the muscle-inducing effect of MyoD was blocked and the
cells did not differentiate into myotubes.
The explanation for how histone deacetylases inhibit
MyoD-induced muscle differentiation came from the surprising finding that MEF2 can bind, through its MADS domain, to a histone deacetylase. This interaction, which can
prevent MEF2 function and muscle differentiation, is normally blocked during differentiation because the histone
deacetylase is phosphorylated by a calcium/calmodulindependent protein kinase; the phosphorylated deacetylase
then is moved from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Taken together, these results indicate that activation of muscle genes
by MyoD and MEF2 is in competition with inactivation of
muscle genes by repressive chromatin structures and that nuclear versus cytoplasmic localization of chromatin factors is
a key regulatory step.

Signals Are Crucial for Muscle Cell-Fate
Determination and Myoblast Migration
As noted already, after myoblasts arise from somites, they
must not only proliferate but also move to their proper locations and form the correct attachments as they differentiate into muscle cells (Figure 22-17). Myogenic gene
expression often follows elaborate organizational events that
tell certain somite cells to delaminate from the somite epithelium and which way to move. A transcription factor,
Pax3, is produced in the subset of somite cells that will form
muscle and appears to be at the top of the regulatory hierarchy controlling muscle formation in the body wall and limbs.
Myoblasts that will migrate, but not cells that remain behind, also produce a transcription factor called Lbx1. If Pax3
is not functional, Lbx1 transcripts are not seen and myoblasts do not migrate. Both Pax3 and Lbx1 can affect expression of myoD.
Departure of myoblasts from somites depends upon a
secreted protein signal appropriately called scatter factor,
or hepatocyte growth factor (SF/HGF). This signal is produced by embryonic connective tissue cells (mesenchyme) in
the limb buds to which myoblasts migrate. Production of
SF/HGF is previously induced by other external signals such
as fibroblast growth factor and Sonic hedgehog, which are
critical to limb development (Chapter 15). The cell-surface
receptor for SF/HGF, which is expressed by myoblasts, belongs to the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) class of receptors
(Chapter 14). Cells migrate from the somites at the head-totail body levels where limbs will form, and not elsewhere,

Neural tube
Dermomyotome
(gives rise to
dermis of skin)

Cell-Cycle Proteins The onset of terminal differentiation in
many cell types is associated with arrest of the cell cycle,
most commonly in G1, suggesting that the transition from
the determined to differentiated state may be influenced by
cell-cycle proteins including cyclins and cyclin-dependent
kinases (Chapter 21). For instance, certain inhibitors of cyclindependent kinases can induce muscle differentiation in cell
culture, and the amounts of these inhibitors are markedly
higher in differentiating muscle cells than in nondifferentiating ones in vivo. Conversely, differentiation of cultured
myoblasts can be inhibited by transfecting the cells with
DNA encoding cyclin D1 under the control of a constitutively
active promoter. Expression of cyclin D1, which normally
occurs only during G1, is induced by mitogenic factors in
many cell types and drives the cell cycle (see Figure 21-28).
The ability of cyclin D1 to prevent myoblast differentiation
in vitro may mimic aspects of the in vivo signals that antagonize the differentiation pathway. The antagonism between
negative and positive regulators of G1 progression is likely to
play an important role in controlling myogenesis in vivo.

19

Myoblasts
(migrate to
limb bud to
form skeletal
muscle)

Epidermis

FPO

Notochord
Sclerotome
(gives rise to skeletal structures
such as vertebrae)

▲ FIGURE 22-17 Embryonic determination and migration
of myoblasts in mammals. After formation of the neural tube,
each somite forms sclerotome, which develops into skeletal
structures, and dermomyotome. The dermomyotome gives rise to
the dermis of the skin and to the muscles. Lateral myoblasts
migrate to the limb bud; medial myoblasts develop into the trunk
muscles. The remainder of a dermomyotome gives rise to the
connective tissue of the skin. [Adapted from M. Buckingham, 1992,
Trends Genet. 8:144.]

20

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

due to the presence of SF/HGF at limb locations and not
elsewhere. If the SF/HGF signal or its receptor is not functional, somite cells will produce Lbx1 but not go on to migrate; thus no muscles will form in the limbs. Expression of
the myogenin gene, which is necessary for myotube formation, and of mrf4, which is necessary for muscle fiber differentiation, does not begin until migrating myoblasts approach
their limb-bud destination; these steps in terminal muscle differentiation are presumably not compatible with migration.
We have touched on just a few of the many external signals and transcription factors that participate in development of a properly patterned muscle. The function of all
these regulatory molecules must be coordinated both in
space and in time during myogenesis.

bHLH Regulatory Proteins Function in Creation
of Other Tissues
Four bHLH transcription factors that are remarkably similar
to the myogenic bHLH proteins control neurogenesis in
Drosophila. Similar proteins appear to function in neurogenesis in vertebrates and perhaps in the determination and differentiation of hematopoietic cells.
The neurogenic Drosophila bHLH proteins are encoded
by an ≈100-kb stretch of genomic DNA, termed the achaetescute complex (AS-C), containing four genes designated
achaete (ac), scute (sc), lethal of scute (l’sc), and asense (a).
Analysis of the effects of loss-of-function mutations indicate
that the Achaete (Ac) and Scute (Sc) proteins participate in
determination of neuronal precursor cells, called neuroblasts,
while the Asense (As) protein is required for differentiation
of these cells into neurons. These functions are analogous to
the roles of MyoD and Myf5 in muscle determination and
of myogenin in differentiation. Two other Drosophila pro-

teins, designated Da and Emc, are analogous in structure and
function to vertebrate E2A and Id, respectively. For example,
heterodimeric complexes of Da with Ac or Sc bind to DNA
better than the homodimeric forms of Ac and Sc. Emc, like
Id, lacks a DNA-binding basic domain; it binds to Ac and
Sc proteins, thus inhibiting their association with Da and
binding to DNA. The similar functions of these myogenic
and neurogenic proteins are depicted in Figure 22-18.
A family of bHLH proteins related to the Drosophila
Achaete and Scute proteins has been identified in vertebrates.
One of these, called neurogenin, which has been identified in
the rat, mouse, and frog, appears to control the formation of
neuroblasts. In situ hybridization experiments showed that
neurogenin is produced at an early stage in the developing nervous system and may induce production of NeuroD, another
bHLH protein that acts later (Figure 22-19a). Injection of large
amounts of neurogenin mRNA into Xenopus embryos further
demonstrated the ability of neurogenin to induce neurogenesis
(Figure 22-19b). These studies suggest that the function of neurogenin is analogous to that of the Achaete and Scute in
Drosophila; likewise, NeuroD and Asense may have analogous
functions in vertebrates and Drosophila, respectively.
In addition to neurons, the nervous system contains a
large number of glial cells, which also arise from the neuroectoderm. Glial cells support and insulate neurons; they also
provide guidance and contact surfaces for migrating neurons
during development and send a signal to neurons that promotes formation of synapses. Neurogenins control the fates
of precursor cells that are capable of making either neurons
or glial cells by promoting neural development and repressing glial development. Neurogenins are therefore switches
that control the decision between two alternative cell fates,
just as the yeast mating-type regulators select among three
cell types.

Fly neurogenesis
ac, sc mRNA

as mRNA

Da (general)
+

achaete
scute

−

Proneural
genes

Jan, 1993, Cell 75:827.]

myf5
myoD
(others)
Promuscular
genes

Neurons

Myogenin

Muscle

FPO

Vertebrate myogenesis
myf5, myoD
mRNA

Asense

Neural
precursor
genes

Emc

 FIGURE 22-18 Comparison of genes
that regulate Drosophila neurogenesis
and mammalian myogenesis. bHLH
transcription factors have analogous
functions in determination of precursor
cells (i.e., neuroblasts and myoblasts) and
their subsequent differentiation into mature
neurons and muscle cells. In both cases,
the proteins encoded by the earliest-acting
genes (left ) are under both positive and
negative control by other related proteins
(blue type). [Adapted from Y. N. Jan and L. Y.

asense
(others)

Ac, Sc

myogenin mRNA

E2A (general)
+

myogenin
mrf4 (?)
(others)

Myf5, MyoD
−
Id

Muscle precursor
genes

Precursor determination

Differentiation

22.4 • Regulation of Asymmetric Cell Division

21

(b)
(a)

FPO
neurogenin mRNA

β-tubulin mRNA

neuroD mRNA

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-19 In situ hybridization
and injection experiments demonstrate that neurogenin acts
before NeuroD in vertebrate neurogenesis. (a) Sections of rat
neural tube were treated with a probe specific for neurogenin
mRNA (left ) or neuroD mRNA (right ). The open space in the
center is the ventricle, and the cells lining this cavity are in the
ventricular layer. All the neural cells are born in the ventricular
layer and then migrate outward. As illustrated in these
micrographs, neurogenin mRNA is produced in proliferating
neuroblasts in the ventricular layer (arrow), whereas neuroD
mRNA is present in migrating neuroblasts that have left the

neurogenin mRNA

ventricular zone (other arrow). (b) One of the two cells in early
Xenopus embryos was injected with neurogenin mRNA (inj) and
then stained with a probe specific for neuron-specific mRNAs
encoding -tubulin (left ) or NeuroD (right ). The region of the
embryo derived from the uninjected cell served as a control
(con). The neurogenin mRNA induced a massive increase in the
number of neuroblasts expressing neuroD mRNA and neurons
expressing -tubulin mRNA in the region of the neural tube
derived from the injected cell. [From Q. Ma et al., 1996, Cell 87:43;
courtesy of D. J. Anderson.]

Migration of myoblasts to the limb buds is induced by
scatter factor/hepatocyte growth factor (SF/HGF), a protein
signal secreted by mesenchymal cells (see Figure 22-17).
Myoblasts must express both the Pax3 and Lbx1 transcription factors to migrate.

■

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 22.3
Specification and Differentiation of Muscle
Development of skeletal muscle begins with the signalinduced determination of certain mesoderm cells in somites
as myoblasts. Following their proliferation and migration,
myoblasts stop dividing and differentiate into multinucleate muscle cells (myotubes) that express muscle-specific
proteins (see Figure 22-14).

■

Four myogenic bHLH transcription factors—MyoD,
myogenin, Myf5, and MRF4, called muscle-regulatory factors (MRFs)—associate with E2A and MEFs to form large
transcriptional complexes that drive myogenesis and expression of muscle-specific genes.

■

Dimerization of bHLH transcription factors with different partners modulates the specificity or affinity of their
binding to specific DNA regulatory sites, and also may prevent their binding entirely.

■

The myogenic program driven by MRFs depends on the
Swi/Snf chromatin-remodeling complex, which makes target genes accessible.

■

The myogenic program is inhibited by binding of Id protein to MyoD, thereby blocking binding of MyoD to DNA,
and by histone deacetylases, which repress activation of
target genes by MRFs.

■

Terminal differentiation of myoblasts and induction of
muscle-specific proteins do not occur until myoblasts stop
dividing and begin migrating.

■

■ Neurogenesis in Drosophila depends upon a set of four neurogenic bHLH proteins that are conceptually and structurally
similar to the vertebrate myogenic proteins (see Figure 22-18).

A related vertebrate protein, neurogenin, is required for
formation of neural precursors and also controls their division into neurons or glial cells.

■

22.4 Regulation of Asymmetric
Cell Division
During embryogenesis, the earliest stage in animal development, asymmetric cell division often creates the initial diversity that ultimately culminates in formation of specific
differentiated cell types. Even in bacteria, cell division may
yield unequal daughter cells, for example, one that remains
attached to a stalk and one that develops flagella used for
swimming. Essential to asymmetric cell division is polarization of the parental cell and then differential incorporation

22

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death
Protein
or mRNA

Cytoplasm

Polarized parental cell

FPO
Mitotic
spindle

Asymmetric daughter cells

▲ FIGURE 22-20 General features of asymmetric cell
division. Various mechanisms can lead to asymmetric distribution
of cytoplasmic components, such as particular proteins or
mRNAs (red dots) to form a polarized parental cell. Division of a
polarized cell will be asymmetric if the mitotic spindle is oriented
so that the localized cytoplasmic components are distributed
unequally to the two daughter cells, as shown here. However, if
the spindle is positioned differently relative to the localized
cytoplasmic components, division of a polarized cell may produce
equivalent daughter cells.

Interestingly, some haploid yeast cells can switch repeatedly between the  and a types. Mating-type switching
occurs when the  allele occupying the MAT locus is replaced
by the a allele, or vice versa. The first step in this process is
catalyzed by HO endonuclease, which is expressed in mother
cells but not in daughter cells. Thus mating-type switching occurs only in mother cells (Figure 22-21). Transcription
of the HO gene is dependent on the Swi/Snf chromatinremodeling complex (see Figure 11-37), the same complex
that we encountered earlier in our discussion of myogenesis.
Daughter yeast cells arising by budding from mother cells
contain a protein called Ash1 that prevents recruitment of
the Swi/Snf complex to the HO gene, thereby preventing its
transcription. The absence of Ash1 from mother cells allows
them to transcribe the HO gene.
Recent experiments have revealed how the asymmetry in
the distribution of Ash1 between mother and daughter cells
is established. ASH1 mRNA accumulates in the growing bud
that will form a daughter cell due to the action of a myosin
motor protein (Chapter 19). This motor protein, called
Myo4p, moves the ASH1 mRNA, as a ribonucleoprotein
complex, along actin filaments in one direction only, toward
the bud (Figure 22-22). Two connector proteins tether ASH1
mRNA to the motor protein. By the time the bud separates
from the mother cell, the mother cell is largely depleted of
ASH1 mRNA and thus can switch mating type in the following G1 before additional ASH1 mRNA is produced and
before DNA replication in the S phase.
Bud



of parts of the parental cell into the two daughters (Figure
22-20). A variety of molecular mechanisms are employed to
create and propagate the initial asymmetry that polarizes the
parental cell. In addition to being different, the daughter cells
must often be placed in a specific orientation with respect to
surrounding structures.
We begin with an especially well-understood example of
asymmetric cell division, the budding of yeast cells, and
move on to recently discovered protein complexes important
for asymmetric cell divisions in multicellular organisms. We
see in this example an elegant system that links asymmetric
division to the process of controlling cell type.

Yeast Mating-Type Switching Depends
upon Asymmetric Cell Division
Whether a haploid yeast cell exhibits the  or a mating type
is determined by which genes are present at the MAT locus
(see Figure 22-11). As described in Chapter 11, the MAT
locus in the S. cerevisiae genome is flanked by two “silent,”
transcriptionally inactive loci containing the alternative  or
a sequences (see Figure 11-28). A specific DNA rearrangement brings the genes that encode the -specific or a-specific
transcription factors from these silent loci to the active MAT
locus where they can be transcribed.

Division

− Ash1
HO transcription
Switching
a
M





M

D

+ Ash1
No HO transcription
No switching

FPO
a





D

M

D





a

a

M

D

M

D

▲ FIGURE 22-21 Specificity of mating-type switching in
haploid yeast cells. Division by budding forms a larger mother
cell (M) and smaller daughter cell (D), both of which have the
same mating type as the original cell ( in this example). The
mother can switch mating type during G1 of the next cell cycle
and then divide again, producing two cells of the opposite a
type. Switching depends on transcription of the HO gene, which
occurs only in the absence of Ash1 protein. The smaller daughter
cells, which produce Ash1 protein, cannot switch; after growing
in size through interphase, they divide to form a mother cell and
daughter cell. Orange cells and arrows indicate switch events.

22.4 • Regulation of Asymmetric Cell Division

23

 FIGURE 22-22 Model for restriction of mating-

Bud
She3p

She2p

Myo4p

FPO

Actin

B. J. Schnapp, 2001, Curr. Biology 11:R166–R168.]

Budding yeasts use a relatively simple mechanism to
create molecular differences between the two cells formed by
division. In higher organisms, polarization of the parental
cell involves many more participants, and, in addition, the
mitotic spindle must be oriented in such a way that each
daughter cell receives its own set of cytoplasmic components.
To illustrate these complexities, we focus on asymmetric
division of neuroblasts in Drosophila. Genetic studies in
C. elegans and Drosophila have revealed the key participants,
a first step in understanding at the molecular level how asymmetric cell division is regulated in multicellular organisms.

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

ASH1
mRNA

Video Animation:
ASH1 mRNA Localization

type switching to mother cells in S. cerevisiae. Ash1
protein prevents a cell from transcribing the HO gene
whose encoded protein initiates the DNA rearrangement
that results in mating-type switching from a to  or 
to a. Switching occurs only in the mother cell, after it
separates from a newly budded daughter cell, because
Ash1 protein is present in the daughter cell but not in
the mother cell. The molecular basis for this differential
localization of Ash1 is the one-way transport of ASH1
mRNA into the bud. A linking protein, She2p, binds
to specific 3 untranslated sequences in the ASH1
mRNA and also binds to She3p protein. This protein in
turn binds to a myosin motor, Myo4p, which moves
along actin filaments into the bud. [See S. Koon and

dermal fate (see Figures 14-29 and 15-36). The delaminating cells move inside and become spherical neuroblasts,
while the prospective epidermal cells remain behind and
close up to form a tight sheet.
Once formed, the neuroblasts undergo asymmetric divisions, at each division recreating themselves and producing a
ganglion mother cell (GMC) at the basal side of the neuroblast (Figure 22-23). A single neuroblast will produce several
GMCs; each GMC in turn forms two neurons. Depending
on where they form in the embryo and consequent regulatory events, neuroblasts may form more or fewer GMCs.

2

3
Neuroblast
4

5

 FIGURE 22-23 Asymmetric cell division during Drosophila
neurogenesis. The ectodermal sheet ( 1 ) of the early embryo gives rise to both
epidermal cells and neural cells. Neuroblasts, the stem cells for the nervous
system, are formed when ectoderm cells enlarge, separate from the ectodermal
epithelium, and move into the interior of the embryo ( 2 – 4 ). Each neuroblast
that arises divides asymmetrically to recreate itself and produce a ganglion
mother cell (GMC) ( 5 ). Subsequent divisions of a neuroblast produce more
GMCs, creating a stack of these precursor cells ( 6 ). Each GMC divides once
to give rise to two neurons ( 7 ). Neuroblasts and their GMC descendants can
have different fates depending on their location.

FPO
GMC

GMC

6
Neurons
GMC
7

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Fly neuroblasts arise from a sheet of ectoderm cells that is
one cell thick. As in vertebrates, the Drosophila ectoderm
forms both epidermis and the nervous system, and many
ectoderm cells have the potential to assume either a neural or
epidermal fate. Under the control of genes that become active
only in certain cells, some of the cells increase in size and
begin to loosen from the ectodermal layer. At this point, the
delaminating cells use Notch signaling to mediate lateral
inhibition of their neighbors, causing them to retain the epi-

Ectodermal
cells

1

Video Animation: Ectodermal Cell Divisions in the
Drosophila Embryo

Large Protein Complexes Are Localized
at Opposite Ends of Dividing Neuroblasts
in Drosophila

24

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

Neuroblasts and GMCs in different locations exhibit different patterns of gene expression, an indicator of their fates.
Analysis of fly mutants led to the discovery of key proteins
that participate in creating specific neuroblasts, inhibiting
epidermal cells from becoming neuroblasts, and directing
neuroblasts to divide asymmetrically.

Apical Baz/Par6/PKC3 Complex A ternary complex of proteins, referred to as the apical complex, is located at the end
of a fly neuroblast that will become the “new” neuroblast

Protein complexes:

Apical (Baz,
Par6, PKC3)

Miranda

(a)

Numb

Neuroblast

FPO
INTERPHASE
NEUROBLAST

GMC

ANAPHASE
NEUROBLAST

Centromere

(b)

Neuroblast

GMC
Cytoskeleton:
Actin microfilaments
Microtubules

Chromosomes

▲ FIGURE 22-24 Localized protein complexes that control
asymmetric cell division in the Drosophila neuroblast. (a) The
apical complex (blue), which consists of three proteins (Baz, Par6,
and PKC3), is localized in ectoderm cells and in delaminating
neuroblasts. As a neuroblast begins dividing, the Miranda
complex (orange) assembles at the apical side and then moves
to the basal side, where it will be incorporated into the ganglion
mother cell (GMC). The second basal complex (green), containing
the Numb protein, is detected only basally. Mutations in genes
that encode polarized proteins disrupt asymmetric cell division.
(b) Motor protein–mediated transport along cytoskeletal filaments
is thought to localize the apical and basal complexes. Actin
microfilaments (red) lie just under the cell surface at all times.
Microtubules (blue) radiate from the centrosome during
interphase and then assemble into the mitotic spindle, attached
to the duplicated centrosomes, during cell division. Note that in
the neuroblast-GMC division the centrosome is skewed to the
neuroblast end of the cell, and the chromosomes (light gray) are
diagrammed lined up on the spindle. [Adapted from C. Q. Doe and
B. Bowerman, 2001, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:68.]

in the process of division. This complex is already localized
in ectoderm cells and stays at the apical end as a prospective
neuroblast delaminates from the ectodermal sheet (Figure
22-24a, left). Three proteins compose the apical complex:
Baz, Par6, and PKC3, the last being an isoform of protein
kinase C. The Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex persists at the apical
end from late interphase (G2 stage) until late anaphase in mitosis and then disperses or is destroyed (see Figure 20-29 for
mitotic stages). After each neuroblast division, the complex
re-forms at the apical end of the progeny neuroblast in the
next interphase. It remains unclear how polarity information
is preserved through telophase, since no known proteins are
localized during that time. As noted previously, the very first
C. elegans cell division after fertilization is asymmetric, forming an AB cell and P1 cell, which have quite different fates
(see Figure 22-9). Remarkably, a protein complex like the
fly Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex controls the asymmetry of the
P1-AB division; similar protein complexes exist in mammals
as well.
Two mechanisms control the apical localization of the
Drosophila Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex: the first operates in the
ectoderm prior to neuroblast delamination; the second is active during the repeating divisions of delaminated neuroblasts. The first mechanism involves another multiprotein
complex composed of at least three proteins, Scribble (Scrib),
Discs-large (Dlg), and Lethal giant larvae (Lgl). This complex
is located in the cortical region of ectoderm cells (i.e., the region just below the plasma membrane), but it is not polarized along the apical-basal axis of these cells. Thus, though
necessary for the apical localization of the Baz/Par6/PKC3
complex, the Scrib/Dlg/Lgl complex probably is not sufficient. Once a neuroblast has separated from the ectoderm,
two other proteins called Inscuteable and Partner of Inscuteable join the Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex, forming a five-protein
complex. These two additional proteins probably stabilize
the Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex. Reassembly of the entire complex at the apical end following each neuroblast division requires microtubules and perhaps microfilaments (Figure
22-24b). This finding suggests that motor protein–mediated
transport of these protein complexes along cytoskeletal elements plays a role in their apical localization.

Basal Complexes In a dividing neuroblast two basal complexes are found at the end that will form a ganglion mother
cell (GMC) at division (see Figure 22-24a, right). Localization of these complexes, called the Miranda complex and the
Numb complex, at the basal end of neuroblasts requires the
apical Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex. The Numb complex is located throughout the cell during interphase; at prophase it
becomes basally located. In contrast, the Miranda complex
initially assembles at the apical end; it then moves to the
basal end at prophase. The apical Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex
forms even when either of the basal complexes cannot assemble due to mutations. Mutations in any of the components of the apical complex, however, prevent the Miranda
and Numb complexes from moving to the basal region.

22.4 • Regulation of Asymmetric Cell Division

Instead they accumulate in the cortical region or in clumps
throughout the cell. The simplest idea, that the basal complexes form wherever the apical complex is absent, is probably wrong, since parts of the cell contain neither of these
complexes.
The basal Miranda complex has four components: Prospero protein, a presumed transcription factor that contains
a DNA-binding homeodomain; Miranda protein, which has
a coiled-coil structure; Staufen, an RNA-binding protein;
and prospero mRNA. During each round of neuroblast division, new Prospero protein is made during interphase and
incorporated into the Miranda basal complex, which is distributed to the GMC at the time of cleavage. In the absence
of Prospero, GMCs do not transcribe the appropriate genes
and do not develop into normal neurons. The participation
of a transcription factor in a localized cytoplasmic complex
provides a link between the asymmetry of the cytoplasm and
subsequent cell-fate determination. Since the apical and basal
complexes are presumably localized by the cytoskeleton in
concert with motor proteins, the involvement of a transcription factor in one of the complexes potentially explains how
a transcription factor is preferentially distributed to one of
two daughter cells. The involvement of an mRNA and a
RNA-binding protein in the Miranda complex suggests that
it also mediates translational control in GMCs.

Orientation of the Mitotic Spindle Is Linked
to Cytoplasmic Cell-Asymmetry Factors
For localized protein complexes to be differentially incorporated into two daughter cells requires that the plane of cell
division be appropriately oriented. In dividing fly neuro-

blasts, the mitotic spindle first aligns perpendicular to the
apical-basal axis and then turns 90 degrees to align with it
at the same time that the basal complexes become localized
to the basal side (Figure 22-25). The apical complex, which
is already in place before spindle rotation, controls the final
orientation of the spindle. This is supported by the finding
that mutations in any of the components of the apical complex eliminate the coordination of the spindle with apicalbasal polarity, causing the spindle orientation to become
random.
Spindle orientation is linked to actin and myosin-related
proteins. Mammalian Par6, a component of the apical complex, can bind two small GTPase proteins, Cdc42 and
Rac1, that control the arrangement of actin microfilaments
in the cytoskeleton (see Figure 19-29). The protein Lethal
giant larvae (Lgl), a component of the Scrib/Dlg/Lgl asymmetry complex, helps to localize the Miranda complex
basally in fly neuroblasts, although Lgl itself is localized
apically. Lgl binds to myosin II, which functions in cytokinesis (see Figure 19-20), suggesting that the location of
the cleavage furrow may be coordinated with localization
of the apical complex.
Two yeast proteins related to Lgl also bind to myosin II;
they have been implicated in exocytosis and secretion, specifically in the docking of post-Golgi vesicles with the plasma
membrane (Chapter 17). Mutations in the two yeast proteins
suppress mutations in the myosin II gene. This observation is
interpreted to mean that the function of myosin II in spindle
orientation is opposite to that of the Lgl-like proteins: reduction of one protein’s function is ameliorated by reduction
of the other, restoring a semblance of the normal balance.
In this case, therefore, myosin and Lgl probably act in

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-25 Time-lapse fluorescence
imaging reveals rotation of the mitotic spindle in
asymmetrically dividing neuroblasts. Early Drosophila embryos
were injected with a hybrid gene composed of the gene
encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) fused to the gene
encoding Tau, a protein that binds to microtubules. At the top
are time-lapse images of a single dividing neuroblast in a live
embryo. The basal side is at the top, and the apical side at the
bottom. At time 0, equivalent to prophase, the two centrosomes

64 s

80 s

are visible on opposite sides of the cell. These
function as the spindle poles; as mitosis proceeds the
microtubules forming the mitotic spindle are assembled
from the poles (see Figure 20-29). In successive
images (at 32, 64, and 80 seconds), the bipolar spindle
can be seem to form and rotate 90 degrees to align
with the apical-basal axis, as schematically depicted at
the bottom. [From J. A. Kaltschmidt et al, 2000, Nature Cell
Biol. 2:7–12.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

32 s

Video Animation: Mitotic Spindle Assymetry
in Drosophila Neuroblast Cell Division

FPO
0s

25

26

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

opposite directions: myosin II moving Miranda or other materials to control spindle orientation and Lgl restraining it.
Further evidence for the importance of myosin in spindle orientation comes the finding that myosin VI binds directly to Miranda. In addition, mutations in myosin VI in
flies prevent basal targeting of Miranda and simultaneously
block proper spindle orientation. These various findings give
us the beginning of a picture of how localized protein complexes are coordinated with cell division, so that each daughter cell receives the appropriate amounts of the various
complexes.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 22.4
Regulation of Asymmetric Cell Division
Asymmetric cell division requires polarization of the dividing cell, which usually entails localization of some cytoplasmic components, and then the unequal distribution of
these components to the daughter cells (see Figure 22-20).

■

In the asymmetric division of budding yeasts, a myosindependent transport system carries ASH1 mRNA into the
bud (see Figure 22-22).
■

Ash1 protein is produced in the daughter cell soon after
division and prevents expression of HO endonuclease,
which is necessary for mating-type switching. Thus a daughter cell cannot switch mating type, whereas the mother cell
from which it arises can (see Figure 22-21).

■

■ Asymmetric cell division in Drosophila neuroblasts depends
on localization of the apical protein complex (Baz/Par6/
PKC3) and two basal complexes. The basal complexes are incorporated into the ganglion mother cell (GMC) and contain
proteins that determine cell fate (see Figure 22-24).

The apical Baz/Par6/PKC3 complex also controls asymmetric cell division in C. elegans and perhaps mammals.

■

Asymmetry factors exert their influence at least in part
by controlling the orientation of the mitotic spindle, so that
asymmetrically localized proteins and structures are differentially incorporated into the two daughter cells. Myosin
proteins bind to proteins that control asymmetry factors of
cells to control spindle orientation.

■

22.5

Cell Death and Its Regulation

Programmed cell death is a cell fate, an odd sort of cell fate
but nonetheless one that is essential. Cell death keeps our
hands from being webbed, our embryonic tails from persisting, our immune system from responding to our own proteins, and our brain from being filled with useless electrical
connections. In fact, the majority of cells generated during
brain development also die during development.
Cellular interactions regulate cell death in two fundamentally different ways. First, most cells, if not all, in multicellular

organisms require signals to stay alive. In the absence of such
survival signals, frequently referred to as trophic factors, cells
activate a “suicide” program. Second, in some developmental
contexts, including the immune system, specific signals induce
a “murder” program that kills cells. Whether cells commit suicide for lack of survival signals or are murdered by killing signals from other cells, recent studies suggest that death is
mediated by a common molecular pathway. In this section, we
first distinguish programmed cell death from death due to tissue injury, then consider the role of trophic factors in neuronal
development, and finally describe the evolutionarily conserved
effector pathway that leads to cell suicide or murder.

Programmed Cell Death Occurs
Through Apoptosis
The demise of cells by programmed cell death is marked by
a well-defined sequence of morphological changes, collectively referred to as apoptosis, a Greek word that means
“dropping off” or “falling off,” as in leaves from a tree.
Dying cells shrink and condense and then fragment, releasing small membrane-bound apoptotic bodies, which generally are engulfed by other cells (Figure 22-26; see also
Figure 1-19). The nuclei condense and the DNA is fragmented. Importantly, the intracellular constituents are not
released into the extracellular milieu where they might have
deleterious effects on neighboring cells. The highly stereotyped changes accompanying apoptosis suggested to early
workers that this type of cell death was under the control of
a strict program. This program is critical during both embryonic and adult life to maintain normal cell number and
composition.
The genes involved in controlling cell death encode proteins with three distinct functions:
“Killer” proteins are required for a cell to begin the
apoptotic process.

■

“Destruction” proteins do things like digest DNA in a
dying cell.

■

“Engulfment” proteins are required for phagocytosis of
the dying cell by another cell.

■

At first glance, engulfment seems to be simply an after-death
cleanup process, but some evidence suggests that it is part
of the final death decision. For example, mutations in killer
genes always prevent cells from initiating apoptosis, whereas
mutations that block engulfment sometimes allow cells to survive that would normally die. That is, cells with engulfmentgene mutations can initiate apoptosis but then sometimes
recover.
In contrast to apoptosis, cells that die in response to tissue damage exhibit very different morphological changes,
referred to as necrosis. Typically, cells that undergo this
process swell and burst, releasing their intracellular contents that can damage surrounding cells and frequently
cause inflammation.

22.5 • Cell Death and Its Regulation

27

 FIGURE 22-26 Ultrastructural

Neurotrophins Promote Survival of Neurons
The earliest studies demonstrating the importance of trophic
factors in cellular development came from analyses of the developing nervous system. When neurons grow to make connections to other neurons or to muscles, sometimes over
considerable distances, more cells grow than will eventually
survive. Those that make connections prevail and survive;
those that fail to connect die.
In the early 1900s the number of neurons innervating the
periphery was shown to depend upon the size of the tissue to
which they would connect, the so-called “target field.” For instance, removal of limb buds from the developing chick embryo leads to a reduction in the number of sensory neurons
and motoneurons innervating the bud (Figure 22-27). Conversely, grafting additional limb tissue to a limb bud leads
to an increase in the number of neurons in corresponding
regions of the spinal cord and sensory ganglia. Indeed, in-

28p (w) X 34p (d)

cremental increases in the target-field size are accompanied
by commensurate incremental increases in the number of
neurons innervating the target field. This relation was found
to result from the selective survival of neurons rather than
changes in their differentiation or proliferation. The observation that many sensory and motor neurons die after reaching their peripheral target field suggested that these neurons
compete for survival factors produced by the target tissue.
Subsequent to these early observations, scientists discovered that transplantation of a mouse sarcoma tumor into a
chick led to a marked increase in the numbers of certain
types of neurons. This finding implicated the tumor as a rich
source of the presumed trophic factor. To isolate and purify
this factor, known simply as nerve growth factor (NGF), scientists used an in vitro assay in which outgrowth of neurites
from sensory ganglia (nerves) was measured. Neurites are extensions of the cell cytoplasm that can grow to become the
long wires of the nervous system, the axons and dendrites

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

1997, Immunology, 3d ed., W. H. Freeman
& Co., p. 53. Part (b) from M. J. Arends
and A. H. Wyllie, 1991, Int’l. Rev. Exp.
Pathol. 32:223.]

Focus Animation: Apoptosis

features of cell death by apoptosis.
(a) Schematic drawings illustrating
the progression of morphologic
changes observed in apoptotic
cells. Early in apoptosis, dense
chromosome condensation occurs
along the nuclear periphery. The cell
body also shrinks, although most
organelles remain intact. Later both
the nucleus and cytoplasm fragment,
forming apoptotic bodies, which are
phagocytosed by surrounding cells.
(b) Photomicrographs comparing
a normal cell (top ) and apoptotic cell
(bottom ). Clearly visible in the latter
are dense spheres of compacted
chromatin as the nucleus begins to
fragment. [Part (a) adapted from J. Kuby,

28

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

NGF

BDNF
NT-4/5

NT-3

NT-3

NT-3

FPO
Exterior

ATP

ATP

P

21p (w) X 28p (d)

P

ADP

ADP

ATP

ATP

P

ADP

Cytosol
TrkA

P

P

ADP

TrkB

ATP

ATP

P

ADP

Tyrosine
kinase

ADP

TrkC

▲ FIGURE 22-28 Specificity of neurotrophins for Trks, a
family of receptor tyrosine kinases. Each neurotrophin binds
with high affinity to one Trk receptor indicated by the solid arrow
from the ligand to the receptor. NT-3 also can bind with lower
affinity to both TrkA and TrkB as indicated by the dashed arrow.
In addition, neurotrophins bind to a distinct receptor called
p75NTR either alone or in combination with Trks. NGF  nerve
growth factor; BDNF  brain-derived neurotrophic factor;
NT-3  neurotrophin-3. [Adapted from W. D. Snider, 1994, Cell 77:627.]

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-27 The survival of motor
neurons depends on the size of the muscle target field they
innervate. (a) Removal of a limb bud from one side of a chick
embryo at about 2.5 days results in a marked decrease in the
number of motor neurons on the affected side. In an amputated
embryo, normal numbers of motor neurons are generated on
both sides (middle ). Later in development, many fewer motor
neurons remain on the side of the spinal cord with the missing
limb than on the normal side (bottom ). Note that only about 50
percent of the motor neurons that originally are generated
normally survive. (b) Transplantation of an extra limb bud into an
early chick embryo produces the opposite effect, more motor
neurons on the side with additional target tissue than on the
normal side. [Adapted from D. Purves, 1988, Body and Brain: A Trophic
Theory of Neural Connections (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press),
and E. R. Kandel, J. H. Schwartz, and T. M. Jessell, 2000, Principles of
Neural Science, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill), p. 1054, Figure 53-11.]

(see Figure 7-29). The later discovery that the submaxillary
gland in the mouse also produces large quantities of NGF enabled biochemists to purify it to homogeneity and to sequence it. A homodimer of two 118-residue polypeptides,
NGF belongs to a family of structurally and functionally related trophic factors collectively referred to as neurotrophins.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) also are members of this protein family.

Neurotrophin Receptors Neurotrophins bind to and activate
a family of receptor tyrosine kinases called Trks (pronounced
“tracks”). (The general structure of receptor tyrosine kinases
and the intracellular signaling pathways they activate are covered in Chapter 14.) As shown in Figure 22-28, NGF binds to
TrkA; BDNF, to TrkB; and NT-3, to TrkC. Binding of these factors to their receptors provides a survival signal for different
classes of neurons. A second type of receptor called p75NTR
(NTR  neurotrophin receptor) also binds to neurotrophins,
but with lower affinity. However, p75NTR forms heteromultimeric complexes with the different Trk receptors; this association increases the affinity of Trks for their ligands. Some studies
indicate that the binding of NGF to p75NTR in the absence of
TrkA may promote cell death rather than prevent it.
Knockouts of Neurotrophins and Their Receptors To critically address the role of the neurotrophins in development, scientists produced mice with knockout mutations in each of the
neurotrophins and their receptors. These studies revealed that
different neurotrophins and their corresponding receptors are
required for the survival of different classes of sensory neurons,
which carry signals from peripheral sensory systems to the
brain (Figure 22-29). For instance, pain-sensitive (nociceptive)
neurons, which express TrkA, are selectively lost from the dorsal root ganglion of knockout mice lacking NGF or TrkA,
whereas TrkB- and TrkC-expressing neurons are unaffected in
such knockouts. In contrast, TrkC-expressing proprioceptive
neurons, which detect the position of the limbs, are missing
from the dorsal root ganglion in TrkC and NT-3 mutants.

22.5 • Cell Death and Its Regulation
Wild Type
Spinal
cord

Mechanoreceptors
Dorsal root
ganglion

Mutant

Mutant

NGF −/−
or
TrkA −/−

NT-3 −/−
or
TrkC −/−

Propioceptive
neurons
Nociceptive
neurons

Skin

Muscle

Motoneurons

Different classes of sensory neurons are
lost in knockout mice lacking different
trophic factors or their receptors. In
animals lacking nerve growth factor (NGF)
or its receptor TrkA, small nociceptive
(pain-sensing) neurons (blue) that innervate
the skin are missing. These neurons
express TrkA receptor and innervate
NGF-producing targets. In animals lacking
either neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) or its receptor
TrkC, large propioceptive neurons (red)
innervating muscle spindles are missing.
Muscle produces NT-3 and the
propioceptive neurons express TrkC.
Mechanoreceptors (brown), another class
of sensory neurons in the dorsal root
ganglion, are unaffected in these mutants.
[Adapted from W. D. Snider, 1994, Cell 77:627.]

(a)

(b)

FPO
▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-30 Mutations in the
ced-3 gene block programmed cell death in C. elegans.
(a) Newly hatched larva carrying a mutation in the ced-1
gene. Because mutations in this gene prevent engulfment
of dead cells, highly refractile dead cells accumulate
(arrows), facilitating their visualization. (b) Newly hatched
larva with mutations in both the ced-1 and ced-3 genes.
The absence of refractile dead cells in these double
mutants indicates that no cell deaths occurred. Thus CED-3
protein is required for programmed cell death. [From H. M.
Ellis and H. R. Horvitz, 1986, Cell 91:818; courtesy of Hilary Ellis.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Key insights into the molecular mechanisms regulating cell
death came from genetic studies in C. elegans. As we noted
in Section 22.1, scientists have traced the lineage of all the
somatic cells in C. elegans from the fertilized egg to the
mature worm (see Figure 22-9). Of the 947 nongonadal cells
generated during development of the adult hermaphrodite
form, 131 cells undergo programmed cell death.
Specific mutations have identified a variety of genes
whose encoded proteins play an essential role in controlling
programmed cell death during C. elegans development. For
instance, programmed cell death does not occur in worms
carrying loss-of-function mutations in the ced-3 gene or the
ced-4 gene; as a result, the 131 “doomed” cells survive (Figure 22-30). CED-4 is a protease-activating factor that
cleaves the CED-3 precursor protein, creating an active
CED-3 protease that initiates cell death. In contrast, in ced9 mutants, all cells die during embryonic life, so the adult
form never develops. These genetic studies indicate that the
CED-3 and CED-4 proteins are required for cell death, that
CED-9 suppresses apoptosis, and that the apoptotic pathway can be activated in all cells. Moreover, the finding that
cell death does not occur in ced-9/ced-3 double mutants suggests that CED-9 acts “upstream” of CED-3 to suppress the
apoptotic pathway.
The confluence of genetic studies in worms and studies
on human cancer cells first suggested that an evolutionarily
conserved pathway mediates apoptosis. The first apoptotic
gene to be cloned, bcl-2, was isolated from human follicular
lymphomas. A mutant form of this gene, created in lymphoma cells by a chromosomal rearrangement, was shown to
act as an oncogene that promoted cell survival rather than
cell death (Chapter 23). The human Bcl-2 protein and worm
CED-9 protein are homologous, and a bcl-2 transgene can

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 22-29

Video Annimation: Programmed Cell Death in C. elegans Embryonic Development

A Cascade of Caspase Proteins Functions
in the Apoptotic Pathway

29

30

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

block the extensive cell death found in ced-9 mutant worms.
Thus both proteins act as regulators that suppress the apoptotic pathway (Figure 22-31). In addition, both proteins contain a single transmembrane domain and are localized to the
outer mitochondrial, nuclear, and endoplasmic reticulum
membranes, where they serve as sensors that control the
apoptotic pathway in response to external stimuli. As we discuss below, other regulators promote apoptosis.
The effector proteins in the apoptotic pathway are enzymes called caspases in vertebrates, so named because they
contain a key cysteine residue in the catalytic site and selectively cleave proteins at sites just C-terminal to aspartate
residues. Humans have 15 different caspases, all of which are
initially made as procaspases that must be cleaved to become
active. Such proteolytic processing of proproteins is used repeatedly in blood clotting, generation of digestive enzymes,
and generation of hormones (Chapter 17). Initiator caspases
(e.g., caspase-9) are activated by autoproteolysis induced by
other types of proteins, which help the initiators to aggregate. Activated initiator caspases cleave effector caspases
(e.g., caspase-3) and thus quickly amplify the total caspase
activity level in the dying cell. The various effector caspases
recognize and cleave short amino acid sequences and differ in
their preferred target sequences. Their specific intracellular
targets include proteins of the nuclear lamina and cytoskeleton whose cleavage leads to the demise of a cell. Seven lines
of knockout mice have been made, each lacking a particular
caspase function. Some homozygotes die as embryos; others
are viable but with subtle defects. Strikingly, some exhibit
an excessive number of neurons (i.e., neuronal hyperplasia),
reaffirming the importance of cell death in development of
the nervous system; other mutants have cells that are resistant to apoptosis. The principal effector protease in C. elegans
is the CED-3 caspase.
Cell-culture studies have yielded important insights about
a group of adapter proteins that coordinate the action of regulators and effectors to control apoptosis (see Figure 22-31).
Regulator

C. elegans

Adapter

Effector

FPO

CED-9

Vertebrates Bcl-2

CED-4

CED-3

Apaf-1

Casp9

Death
Casp3

Death

▲ FIGURE 22-31 Overview of the evolutionarily conserved
apoptotis pathway in C. elegans and vertebrates. Three
general types of proteins are critical in this conserved pathway.
Regulators either promote or suppress apoptosis; two
orthologous regulators shown here, CED-9 and Bcl-2, suppress
apoptosis in the presence of trophic factors. Adapters interact
with both regulators and effectors; in the absence of trophic
factors, they promote activation of effectors. Proteases called
caspases serve as effector proteins; their activation leads to
degradation of various intracellular substrates and eventually
cell death. [Adapted from D. L. Vaux and S. J. Korsemeyer, 1999,
Cell 96:245.]

For instance, expression of C. elegans CED-4 in a human
kidney cell line induces rapid apoptosis. This can be blocked
by co-expression of the negative regulator CED-9 (or mammalian Bcl-2), indicating that CED-9 opposes CED-4 action.
In addition, CED-9 has been shown to directly bind to
CED-4 and move it from the cytosol to intracellular membranes. Thus the pro-apoptotic function of CED-4 is directly
suppressed by the anti-apoptotic function of CED-9. CED-4
also binds directly to the CED-3 caspase (and related mammalian caspases) and promotes activation of its protease activity, as noted previously. Biochemical studies have shown
that CED-4 can simultaneously bind to both CED-9 and
CED-3. These results fit with the genetics, which shows that
the absence of CED-9 has no effect if CED-3 is also missing
(ced-3/ced-9 double mutants have no cell death, like ced-3
mutants).

Pro-Apoptotic Regulators Permit Caspase
Activation in the Absence of Trophic Factors
Having introduced the major participants in the apoptotic
pathway, we now take a closer look at how the effector caspases are activated in mammalian cells. Although the normal
function of CED-9 or Bcl-2 is to suppress the cell-death pathway, other intracellular regulatory proteins promote apoptosis. The first pro-apoptotic regulator to be identified, named
Bax, was found associated with Bcl-2 in extracts of cells expressing high levels of Bcl-2. Sequence analysis demonstrated
that Bax is related in sequence to CED-9 and Bcl-2, but overproduction of Bax induces cell death rather than protecting
cells from apoptosis, as CED-9 and Bcl-2 do. Thus this family
of regulatory proteins comprises both anti-apoptotic members (e.g., CED-9, Bcl-2) and pro-apoptotic members (e.g.,
Bax). All members of this family, which we refer to as the Bcl2 family, are single-pass transmembrane proteins and can participate in oligomeric interactions. In mammals, six Bcl-2
family members prevent apoptosis and nine promote it. Thus
the fate of a given cell—survival or death—may reflect the
particular spectrum of Bcl-2 family members made by that
cell and the intracellular signaling pathways regulating them.
Some Bcl-2 family members preserve or disrupt the integrity of mitochondria, thereby controlling release of mitochondrial proteins such as cytochrome c. In normal healthy
cells, cytochrome c is localized between the inner and outer
mitochondrial membrane, but in cells undergoing apoptosis,
cytochrome c is released into the cytosol. This release can be
blocked by overproduction of Bcl-2; conversely, overproduction of Bax promotes release of cytochrome c into the cytosol
and apoptosis. Moreover, injection of cytochrome c into the
cytosol of cells induces apoptosis. A variety of death-inducing
stimuli cause Bax monomers to move from the cytosol to the
outer mitochondrial membrane where they oligomerize. Bax
homodimers, but not Bcl-2 homodimers or Bcl-2/Bax heterodimers, permit influx of ions through the mitochondrial
membrane. It remains unclear how this ion influx triggers the
release of cytochrome c. Once cytochrome c is released into

22.5 • Cell Death and Its Regulation

the cytosol, it binds to the adapter protein Apaf-1 (the mammalian homolog of CED-4) and promotes activation of a caspase cascade leading to cell death (Figure 22-32a). Bax can
cause cell death by a second pathway that triggers mitochondrial dysfunction independently of any caspase action, at least
in part by stimulating mitochondrial depolarization.
Gene knockout experiments have dramatically confirmed
the importance of both pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family members in neuronal development. Mice lacking
the bcl-xl gene, which encodes an anti-apoptotic protein, have
massive defects in nervous system development with widespread cell death in the spinal cord, dorsal root ganglion, and
brain of developing embryos. In contrast, bax knockouts exhibit a marked increase in neurons in some regions of the
nervous system. These knockouts also demonstrate that the
effects of Bcl-2 family members generally are tissue specific.

(a) Absence of trophic factor: Caspase activation

31

Some Trophic Factors Induce Inactivation
of a Pro-Apoptotic Regulator
We saw earlier that neurotrophins such as nerve growth factor (NGF) protect neurons from cell death. The intracellular
signaling pathways linking such survival factors to inactivation of the cell-death machinery are quite elaborate. The
finding that trophic factors appear to work largely independent of protein synthesis suggested that these external
signals lead to changes in the activities of preexisting proteins
rather than to activation of gene expression. Scientists
demonstrated that in the absence of trophic factors, the nonphosphorylated form of Bad is associated with Bcl-2/Bcl-xl at
the mitochondrial membrane (see Figure 22-32a). Binding of
Bad inhibits the anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-2/Bcl-xl,
thereby promoting cell death. Phosphorylated Bad, however,

(b) Presence of trophic factor: Inhibition of caspase activation
Trophic factor

Plasma membrane

Death
Cleavage of substrates
PI-3 kinase

Procaspase 3

14-3-3

PI-3 kinase

Caspase 3

Caspase 9
Akt

FPO

4
Procaspase 9
Apaf 1

14-3-3
P

ATP

Procaspase 3

Akt

ADP

Bad
2

Procaspase 9
Apaf 1

Cyt c

Cyt c

2

Bax
Bax

Outer mitochondrial
membrane

Bcl-2
Bcl-xl

Bax

Bax

1

Bcl-2

Bad

Bcl-xl

3

Cyt c

3

Ions

▲ FIGURE 22-32 Proposed intracellular pathways leading
to cell death by apoptosis or to trophic factor–mediated cell
survival in mammalian cells. (a) In the absence of a trophic
factor, Bad, a soluble pro-apoptotic protein, binds to the
anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl, which are inserted into
the mitochondrial membrane ( 1 ). Bad binding prevents the
anti-apoptotic proteins from interacting with Bax, a membranebound pro-apoptotic protein. As a consequence, Bax forms
homo-oligomeric channels in the membrane that mediate ion flux
( 2 ). Through an as-yet-unknown mechanism, this leads to the
release of cytochrome c into the cytosol, where it binds to the

adapter protein Apaf-1 ( 3 ), promoting a caspase cascade that
leads to cell death ( 4 ). (b) In some cells, binding of a trophic
factor (e.g., NGF) stimulates PI-3 kinase activity, leading to
activation of the downstream kinase Akt, which phosphorylates
Bad ( 1 ). Phosphorylated Bad then forms a complex with the
14-3-3 protein ( 2 ). With Bad sequestered in the cytosol, the
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2/Bcl-xl proteins can inhibit the activity of
Bax ( 3 ), thereby preventing the release of cytochrome c and
activation of the caspase cascade. [Adapted from B. Pettman
and C. E. Henderson, 1998, Neuron 20:633.]

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

1

Focus Animation: Apoptosis

Trophic factor receptor

32

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

cannot bind to Bcl-2/Bcl-xl and is found in the cytosol complexed to the phosphoserine-binding protein 14-3-3. Hence,
signaling pathways leading to Bad phosphorylation would be
particularly attractive candidates for transmitting survival
signals.
A number of trophic factors including NGF have been
shown to trigger the PI-3 kinase signaling pathway, leading
to activation of a downstream kinase called PKB (see Figure
14-27). Activated PKB phosphorylates Bad at sites known to
inhibit its pro-apoptotic activity. Moreover, a constitutively
active form of PKB can rescue cultured neurotrophindeprived neurons, which otherwise would undergo apoptosis
and die. These findings support the mechanism for the survival action of trophic factors depicted in Figure 22-32b. In
other cell types, different trophic factors may promote cell
survival through post-translational modification of other
components of the cell-death machinery.

Tumor Necrosis Factor and Related Death
Signals Promote Cell Murder by Caspases
Although cell death can arise as a default in the absence of
survival factors, apoptosis can also be stimulated by positively acting “death” signals. For instance, tumor necrosis
factor (TNF), which is released by macrophages, triggers the
cell death and tissue destruction seen in certain chronic inflammatory diseases. Another important death-inducing signal, the Fas ligand, is a cell-surface protein expressed by
activated natural killer cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
This signal can trigger death of virus-infected cells, some
tumor cells, and foreign graft cells.
Both TNF and Fas ligand act through cell-surface
“death” receptors that have a single transmembrane domain
and are activated when ligand binding brings three receptor
molecules into close proximity. The trimeric receptor complex attracts a protein called FADD (Fas-associated death
domain), which serves as an adapter to recruit and in some
way activate caspase-8, an initiator caspase, in cells receiving
a death signal. The death domain found in FADD is a sequence that is present in a number of proteins involved in
apoptosis. Once activated, caspase-8 activates other caspases
and the amplification cascade begins. To test the ability of
the Fas receptor to induce cell death, researchers incubated
cells with antibodies against the receptor. These antibodies,
which bind and cross-link Fas receptors, were found to stimulate cell death, indicating that activation of the Fas receptor is sufficient to trigger apoptosis.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 22.5
Cell Death and Its Regulation
All cells require trophic factors to prevent apoptosis and
thus survive. In the absence of these factors, cells commit
suicide.

■

■ Genetic studies in C. elegans defined an evolutionarily
conserved apoptotic pathway with three major components: regulatory proteins, adapter proteins, and effector
proteases called caspases in vertebrates (see Figure 22-31).

Once activated, apoptotic proteases cleave specific intracellular substrates leading to the demise of a cell. Adapter
proteins (e.g., Apaf-1), which bind both regulatory proteins
and caspases, are required for caspase activation.

■

Pro-apoptotic regulator proteins (e.g., Bax, Bad) promote caspase activation, and anti-apoptotic regulators
(e.g., Bcl-2) suppress activation. Direct interactions between pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic proteins lead to
cell death in the absence of trophic factors. Binding of extracellular trophic factors can trigger changes in these interactions, resulting in cell survival (see Figure 22-32).

■

The Bcl2 family contains both pro-apoptotic and antiapoptotic proteins; all are single-pass transmembrane proteins and engage in protein-protein interactions.

■

Binding of extracellular death signals, such as tumor
necrosis factor and Fas ligand, to their receptors activates
an associated protein (FADD) that in turn triggers the caspase cascade leading to cell murder.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
Cell birth, lineage, and death lie at the heart of the growth
of an organism and are also central to disease processes,
most notably cancer. Few transformations seem more
remarkable than the blooming of cell types during development. A lineage beginning with a fertilized egg, a “plain
vanilla” 200-m sphere, produces neurons a yard long,
pulsating multinucleate muscle cells, exquisitely lightsensitive retina cells, ravenous macrophages that recognize
and engulf germs, and all the hundreds of other cell types.
Regulators of cell lineage produce this rich variety by
controlling two critical decisions: (1) when and where to
activate the cell division cycle (Chapter 21) and (2) whether
the two daughter cells will be the same or different. A
cell may be just like its parent, or it may embark on a new
path.
Cell birth is normally carefully restricted to specific locales and times, such as the basal layer of the skin or the root
meristem. Liver regenerates when there is injury, but liver
cancer is prevented by restricting unnecessary growth at
other times. Cell lineage is patterned by the asymmetric distribution of key regulators to the daughter cells of a division.
Some of these regulators are intrinsic to the parent cell, becoming asymmetrically distributed during polarization of the
cell; other regulators are external signals that differentially
reach the daughter cells. Asymmetry of cells becomes asymmetry of tissues and whole organisms. Our left and right
hands differ only as a result of cell asymmetry.

Review the Concepts

Some cells persist for the life of the organism, but
others such as blood and intestinal cells turn over rapidly.
Many cells live for awhile and are then programmed to die
and be replaced by others arising from a stem-cell population. Programmed cell death is also the basis for the meticulous elimination of potentially harmful cells, such as
autoreactive immune cells, which attack the body’s own
cells, or neurons that have failed to properly connect. Celldeath programs have also evolved as a defense against infection, and virus-infected cells are selectively murdered in
response to death signals. Viruses, in turn, devote much of
their effort to evading host defenses. For example, p53, a
transcription factor that senses cell stresses and damage
and activates transcription of pro-apoptotic members of the
bcl-2 gene family, is inhibited by the adenovirus E1B protein. It has been estimated that about a third of the adenovirus genome is directed at evading host defenses. Cell
death is relevant to toxic chemicals as well as viral infections; malformations due to poisons often originate from
excess apoptosis.
Failures of programmed cell death can lead to uncontrolled cancerous growth (Chapter 23). The proteins that restrain the death of cancer cells therefore become possible
targets for drugs. A tumor may contain a mixture of cells,
some capable of seeding new tumors or continued uncontrolled growth, and some capable only of growing in place or
for a limited time. In this sense the tumor has its own stem
cells, and they must be found and studied, so they become
vulnerable to our medicine. One option is to manipulate the
cell-death pathway to our own advantage, to send the signals
that will make cancer cells destroy themselves.
Much attention is now being given to the regulation of
stem cells in an effort to understand how dividing populations of cells are created and maintained. This has clear implications for repair of tissue, for example, to help damaged
eyes, torn cartilage, degenerating brain tissue, or failing organs. One interesting possibility is that some populations of
stem cells with the potential to generate or regenerate tissue
are normally eliminated by cell death during later development. If so, finding ways to selectively block the death of the
cells could make regeneration more likely. Could the elimination of such cells during mammalian development be the
difference between an amphibian capable of limb regeneration and a mammal that is not?

KEY TERMS
apical complex 000
apoptosis 000
asymmetric cell
division 000
-catenin 000
Bcl-2 family 000

caspases 000
cell lineage 000
death signals 000
determination 000
differentiation 000
ectoderm 000

33

mesoderm 000
embryonic stem (ES)
cells 000
micro RNAs
(miRNAs) 000
endoderm 000
muscle regulatory
ganglion mother
factors (MRFs) 000
cell (GMC) 000
neurotrophins 000
germ line 000
heterochronic mutants 000 pluripotent 000
precursor/progenitor
MAT locus 000
cells 000
mating factor 000
somatic cells 000
mating-type
stem cells 000
switching 000
trophic factors 000
meristems 000

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. What two properties define a stem cell? Distinguish between a totipotential stem cell, a pluripotent stem cell, and
a progenitor cell.
2. Where are stem cells located in plants? Where are stem
cells located in adult animals? How does the concept of stem
cell differ between animal and plant systems?
3. In 1997, Dolly the sheep was cloned by a technique
called somatic cell nuclear transfer. A nucleus from an
adult mammary cell was transferred into an egg from
which the nucleus had been removed. The egg was allowed
to divide several times in culture, then the embryo was
transferred to a surrogate mother who gave birth to
Dolly. Dolly died in 2003 after mating and giving birth
herself to viable offspring. What does the creation of Dolly
tell us about the potential of nuclear material derived from
a fully differentiated adult cell? Does the creation of Dolly
tell us anything about the potential of an intact, fully differentiated adult cell? Name three types of information
that function to preserve cell type. Which of these types
of information was shown to be reversible by the Dolly
experiment?
4. The roundworm C. elegans has proven to be a valuable
model organism for studies of cell birth, cell lineage, and cell
death. What properties of C. elegans render it so well suited
for these studies? Why is so much information from C. elegans
experiments of use to investigators interested in mammalian
development?
5. In the budding yeast S. cerevisiae, what is the role of the
MCM1 protein in the following:
a. transcription of a-specific genes in a cells
b. blocking transcription of -specific genes in a cells
c. transcription of -specific genes in  cells
d. blocking transcription of a-specific genes in  cells

34

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

6. In S. cerevisiae, what ensures that a and  cells mate
with one another rather than with cells of the same mating
type (i.e., a with a or  with )?
7. Exposure of C3H 10T1/2 cells to 5-azacytidine, a nucleotide analog, is a model system for muscle differentiation.
How was 5-azacytidine treatment used to isolate the genes
involved in muscle differentiation?
8. Through the experiments on C3H 10T1/2 cells treated
with 5-azacytidine, MyoD was identified as a key transcription factor in regulating the differentiation of muscle. To
what general class of DNA-binding proteins does MyoD belong? How do the interactions of MyoD with the following
proteins affect its function? (a) E2A, (b) MEFs, (c) Id
9. The mechanisms that regulate muscle differentiation in
mammals and neural differentiation in Drosophila (and
probably mammals as well) bear remarkable similarities.
What proteins function analogous to MyoD, myogenin, Id,
and E2A in neural cell differentiation in Drosophila? Based
on these analogies, predict the effect of microinjection of
MyoD mRNA on the development of Xenopus embryos.
10. Predict the effect of the following mutations on the ability of mother and daughter cells of S. cerevisae to undergo
mating type switching following cell division:
a. loss-of-function mutation in the HO endonuclease
b. gain-of-function mutation that renders HO endonuclease gene constitutively expressed independent of
SWI/SNF
c. gain-of-function mutation in SWI/SNF that renders it insensitive to Ash1
11. Asymmetric cell division often relies on cytoskeletal elements to generate or maintain asymmetric distribution of
cellular factors. In S. cerevisiae, what factor is localized to
the bud by myosin motors? In Drosophila neuroblasts, what
factors are localized apically by microtubules?
12. How do studies of brain development in knockout mice
support the statement that apoptosis is a default pathway in
neuronal cells?
13. What morphologic features distinguish programmed cell
death and necrotic cell death? TNF and Fas ligand bind cell
surface receptors to trigger cell death. Although the death
signal is generated external to the cell, why do we consider
the death induced by these molecules to be apoptotic rather
than necrotic?
14. Predict the effects of the following mutations on the
ability of a cell to undergo apoptosis:
a. mutation in Bad such that it cannot be phosphorylated by
Akt
b. overexpression of Bcl-2
c. mutation in Bax such that it cannot form homodimers

One common characteristic of cancer cells is a loss of function in the apoptotic pathway. Which of the mutations listed
might you expect to find in some cancer cells?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
To better understand the potential of adult stem cells to differentiate into various cell types, the following studies were
performed.
Bone marrow was harvested from adult male mice and
then transplanted into isogeneic female recipient mice that
had been treated with a level of irradiation sufficient to
destroy their own hematopoetic stem cells (see the figure).
Although the dose of irradiation given was lethal to mice
that did not receive a transplant, the majority of the recipient mice receiving the transplant survived. After 4
weeks, peripheral blood from the recipient mice was analyzed. The composition of the blood was normal with respect to all blood cell types. Every blood cell examined
was determined to be positive for the presence of the Y
chromosome.
male mouse
Harvest marrow

Bone
marrow
transplant

Isogeneic female mouse

Lethal irradiation

FPO

"labeled" mouse

a. What was the purpose of using male mice as the bone
marrow donors and female mice as the recipients? Would the
converse experiment (female donors, male recipients) have
worked?
b. What was the purpose of irradiating the recipient mice
prior to transplantation? What outcome might you expect if
bone marrow cells were transplanted to nonirradiated mice?
c. What method could have been used to purify hematopoetic stem cells from bone marrow before transplanting these
cells into the recipient mouse? How might a purification step
have affected the outcome of the experiment?
After 8 weeks, some of the recipient mice were sacrificed and
histochemical analysis was performed on tissue sections of

References

various organs. Occasional Y chromosome–positive cells
were found in the liver, skeletal muscle, and brain. Furthermore, the Y chromosome–positive cells were positive for
markers of liver hepatocytes, skeletal muscle cells, and neurons (albumin, dystrophin, and NeuN, respectively).
d. What does the appearance of Y chromosome–positive
cells in multiple organs and the expression of organ-specific
markers indicate about the localization of cells derived from
bone marrow? About their differentiation potential? About
their function?

35

Reinhart, B. J., et al. 2000. The 21-nucleotide let-7 RNA regulates developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature
403:901–906.
Smith, A. G. 2001. Embryo-derived stem cells: of mice and men.
Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol. 17:435–462.
Thummel, C. S. 2001. Molecular mechanisms of developmental
timing in C. elegans and Drosophila. Devel. Cell 1:453–465.
Verfaillie, C. M. 2002. Adult stem cells: assessing the case for
pluripotency. Trends Cell Biol. 12:502–508.
Zaret, K. S. 2001. Hepatocyte differentiation: from the endoderm and beyond. Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 11:568–574.

Cell-Type Specification in Yeast
REFERENCES

The Birth of Cells
Aurelio, O., T. Boulin, and O. Hobert. 2003. Identification of
spatial and temporal cues that regulate postembryonic expression of
axon maintenance factors in the C. elegans ventral nerve cord.
Development 130:599–610.
Bach, S. P., A. G. Renehan, and C. S. Potten. 2000. Stem cells:
the intestinal stem cell as a paradigm. Carcinogenesis 21:469–476.
Clark, S. E. 2001. Cell signalling at the shoot meristem. Nature
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:276–284.
Edenfeld, G., J. Pielage, and C. Klambt. 2002. Cell lineage specification in the nervous system. Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 12:473–477.
Gerlach, M., et al. 2002. Current state of stem cell research for
the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurol. 249(Suppl. 3):
III33–III35.
Hori, Y., et al. 2002. Growth inhibitors promote differentiation
of insulin-producing tissue from embryonic stem cells. Proc. Nat’l.
Acad. Sci. USA 99:16105–16110.
Huelsken, J., et al. 2001. -Catenin controls hair follicle morphogenesis and stem cell differentiation in the skin. Cell
105:533–545.
Ivanova, N. B., et al. 2002. A stem cell molecular signature. Science 298:601–604.
Lee, R. C., and V. Ambros. 2001. An extensive class of small
RNAs in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 294:862–864.
Lohmann, J. U., et al. 2001. A molecular link between stem cell
regulation and floral patterning in Arabidopsis. Cell 105:793–803.
Marshman, E., C. Booth, and C. S. Potten. 2002. The intestinal
epithelial stem cell. Bioessays 24:91–98.
Mills, J. C., and J. I. Gordon. 2001. The intestinal stem cell niche:
there grows the neighborhood. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA
98:12334–12336.
Niemann, C., and F. M. Watt. 2002. Designer skin: lineage commitment in postnatal epidermis. Trends Cell Biol. 12:185–192.
Okabe, M., et al. 2001. Translational repression determines a
neuronal potential in Drosophila asymmetric cell division. Nature
411:94–98.
Olsen, P. H., and V. Ambros. 1999. The lin-4 regulatory RNA
controls developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans by blocking LIN-14 protein synthesis after the initiation of translation.
Devel. Biol. 216:671–680.
Orkin, S. H. 2000. Diversification of haematopoietic stem cells
to specific lineages. Nature Rev. Genet. 1:57–64.
Pasquinelli, A. E., and G. Ruvkun. 2002. Control of developmental
timing by micro RNAs and their targets. Ann. Rev. Cell Devel. Biol.
18:495–513.
Phillips, R. L., et al. 2000. The genetic program of hematopoietic stem cells. Science 288:1635–1640.

Bagnat, M., and K. Simons. 2002. Cell surface polarization during yeast mating. Proc. Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 99:14183–14188.
Dittmar, G. A., C. R. Wilkinson, P. T. Jedrzejewski, and D. Finley. 2002. Role of a ubiquitin-like modification in polarized morphogenesis. Science 295:2442–2446.
Dohlman, H. G., and J. W. Thorner. 2001. Regulation of G protein-initiated signal transduction in yeast: paradigms and principles.
Ann. Rev. Biochem. 70:703–754.
Hall, I. M., et al. 2002. Establishment and maintenance of a heterochromatin domain. Science 297:2232–2237.
Lau, A., H. Blitzblau, and S. P. Bell. 2002. Cell-cycle control of the
establishment of mating-type silencing in S. cerevisiae. Genes Devel.
16:2935–2945.
Miller, M. G., and A. D. Johnson. 2002. White-opaque switching in Candida albicans is controlled by mating-type locus homeodomain proteins and allows efficient mating. Cell 110:293–302.
Takizawa, P. A., and R. D. Vale. 2000. The myosin motor,
Myo4p, binds Ash1 mRNA via the adapter protein, She3p. Proc.
Nat’l. Acad. Sci. USA 97:5273–5278.

Specification and Differentiation of Muscle
Bailey, P., T. Holowacz, and A. B. Lassar. 2001. The origin of
skeletal muscle stem cells in the embryo and the adult. Curr. Opin.
Cell Biol. 13:679–689.
Buckingham, M. 2001. Skeletal muscle formation in vertebrates.
Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 11:440–448.
Gustafsson, M. K., et al. 2002. Myf5 is a direct target of longrange Shh signaling and Gli regulation for muscle specification. Genes
Devel. 16:114–126.
McKinsey, T. A., C. L. Zhang, and E. N. Olson. 2002. Signaling chromatin to make muscle. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14:763–772.
Perry, R. L., M. H. Parker, and M. A. Rudnicki. 2001. Activated
MEK1 binds the nuclear MyoD transcriptional complex to repress
transactivation. Mol. Cell 8:291–301.
Puri, P. L., et al. 2001. Class I histone deacetylases sequentially
interact with MyoD and pRb during skeletal myogenesis. Mol. Cell
8:885–897.
Wang, D. Z., et al. 2001. The Mef2c gene is a direct transcriptional target of myogenic bHLH and MEF2 proteins during skeletal
muscle development. Development 128:4623–4633.
Yan, Z., et al. 2003. Highly coordinated gene regulation in mouse
skeletal muscle regeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 278:8826–8836.

Regulation of Asymmetric Cell Division
Adler, P. N., and J. Taylor. 2001. Asymmetric cell division: plane
but not simple. Curr. Biol. 11:R233–236.
Ben-Yehuda, S., and R. Losick. 2002. Asymmetric cell division
in B. subtilis involves a spiral-like intermediate of the cytokinetic protein FtsZ. Cell 109:257–266.

36

CHAPTER 22 • Cell Birth, Lineage, And Death

Betschinger, J., K. Mechtler, and J. A. Knoblich. 2003. The Par
complex directs asymmetric cell division by phosphorylating the cytoskeletal protein Lgl. Nature 422:326–330.
Bilder, D., M. Li, and N. Perrimon. 2000. Cooperative regulation of cell polarity and growth by Drosophila tumor suppressors.
Science 289:113–116.
Cayouette, M., and M. Raff. 2002. Asymmetric segregation of
Numb: a mechanism for neural specification from Drosophila to
mammals. Nature Neurosci. 5:1265–1269.
Chia, W., and X. Yang. 2002. Asymmetric division of Drosophila
neural progenitors. Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 12:459–464.
Deng, W., and H. Lin. 2001. Asymmetric germ cell division and
oocyte determination during Drosophila oogenesis. Int’l. Rev. Cytol.
203:93–138.
Doe, C. Q., and B. Bowerman. 2001. Asymmetric cell division:
fly neuroblast meets worm zygote. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:68–75.
Helariutta, Y., et al. 2000. The SHORT-ROOT gene controls radial patterning of the Arabidopsis root through radial signaling. Cell
101:555–567.
Knoblich, J. A. 2001. Asymmetric cell division during animal development. Nature. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2:11–20.
Lin, D., et al. 2000. A mammalian PAR-3-PAR-6 complex
implicated in Cdc42/Rac1 and aPKC signalling and cell polarity.
Nature Cell Biol. 2:540–547.
Mahonen, A. P., et al. 2000. A novel two-component hybrid molecule regulates vascular morphogenesis of the Arabidopsis root.
Genes Devel. 14:2938–2943.
Ohno, S. 2001. Intercellular junctions and cellular polarity: the
PAR-aPKC complex, a conserved core cassette playing fundamental
roles in cell polarity. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13:641–648.
Petritsch, C., et al. 2003. The Drosophila myosin VI Jaguar is
required for basal protein targeting and correct spindle orientation
in mitotic neuroblasts. Devel. Cell 4:273–281.
Plant, P. J., et al. 2003. A polarity complex of mPar-6 and atypical PKC binds, phosphorylates and regulates mammalian Lgl. Nature Cell Biol. 5:301–308.

Roegiers, F., S. Younger-Shepherd, L. Y. Jan, and Y. N. Jan. 2001.
Two types of asymmetric divisions in the Drosophila sensory organ
precursor cell lineage. Nature Cell Biol. 3:58–67.
Sawa, H., H. Kouike, and H. Okano. 2000. Components of the
SWI/SNF complex are required for asymmetric cell division in C. elegans. Mol. Cell 6:617–624.
Shapiro, L., H. H. McAdams, and R. Losick. 2002. Generating
and exploiting polarity in bacteria. Science 298:1942–1946.

Cell Death and Its Regulation
Aderem, A. 2002. How to eat something bigger than your head.
Cell 110:5–8.
Baehrecke, E. H. 2002. How death shapes life during development. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:779–787.
Benedict, C. A., P. S. Norris, and C. F. Ware. 2002. To kill or
be killed: viral evasion of apoptosis. Nature Immunol. 3:1013–1018.
Bergmann, A. 2002. Survival signaling goes BAD. Devel. Cell
3:607–608.
Cheng, E. H., et al. 2001. BCL-2, BCL-X(L) sequester BH3
domain-only molecules preventing BAX- and BAK-mediated mitochondrial apoptosis. Mol. Cell 8:705–711.
Cory, S., and J. M. Adams. 2002. The Bcl2 family: regulators of
the cellular life-or-death switch. Nature Rev. Cancer 2:647–656.
Jacks, T., and R. A. Weinberg. 2002. Taking the study of cancer cell survival to a new dimension. Cell 111:923–925.
Marsden, V. S., and A. Strasser. 2003. Control of apoptosis in
the immune system: Bcl-2, BH3-only proteins and more. Ann. Rev.
Immunol. 21:71–105.
Martin, S. J. 2002. Destabilizing influences in apoptosis: sowing
the seeds of IAP destruction. Cell 109:793–796.
Ranger, A. M., B. A. Malynn, and S. J. Korsmeyer. 2001. Mouse
models of cell death. Nature Genet. 28:113–118.
Vaux, D. L., and S. J. Korsmeyer. 1999. Cell death in development. Cell 96:245–254.
Zuzarte-Luis, V., and J. M. Hurle. 2002. Programmed cell death
in the developing limb. Int’l. J. Devel. Biol. 46:871–876.

23
CANCER

[Margaret Cubberly/Phototake.]

C

ancer causes about one-fifth of the deaths in the
United States each year. Worldwide, between 100 and
350 of each 100,000 people die of cancer each year.
Cancer is due to failures of the mechanisms that usually control the growth and proliferation of cells. During normal development and throughout adult life, intricate genetic
control systems regulate the balance between cell birth and
death in response to growth signals, growth-inhibiting signals, and death signals. Cell birth and death rates determine
adult body size, and the rate of growth in reaching that size.
In some adult tissues, cell proliferation occurs continuously
as a constant tissue-renewal strategy. Intestinal epithelial
cells, for instance, live for just a few days before they die and
are replaced; certain white blood cells are replaced as rapidly,
and skin cells commonly survive for only 2– 4 weeks before
being shed. The cells in many adult tissues, however, normally do not proliferate except during healing processes.
Such stable cells (e.g., hepatocytes, heart muscle cells, neurons) can remain functional for long periods or even the
entire lifetime of an organism.
The losses of cellular regulation that give rise to most or
all cases of cancer are due to genetic damage (Figure 23-1).
Mutations in two broad classes of genes have been implicated in the onset of cancer: proto-oncogenes and tumorsuppressor genes. Proto-oncogenes are activated to become
oncogenes by mutations that cause the gene to be excessively
active in growth promotion. Either increased gene expression
or production of a hyperactive product will do it. Tumorsuppressor genes normally restrain growth, so damage to
them allows inappropriate growth. Many of the genes in
both classes encode proteins that help regulate cell birth (i.e.,
entry into and progression through the cell cycle) or cell
death by apoptosis; others encode proteins that participate in
repairing damaged DNA. Cancer commonly results from

mutations that arise during a lifetime’s exposure to carcinogens, which include certain chemicals and ultraviolet radiation. Cancer-causing mutations occur mostly in somatic cells,
not in the germ-line cells, and somatic cell mutations are not
passed on to the next generation. In contrast, certain inherited mutations, which are carried in the germ line, increase
the probability that cancer will occur at some time. In a destructive partnership, somatic mutations can combine with
inherited mutations to cause cancer.
Thus the cancer-forming process, called oncogenesis or
tumorigenesis, is an interplay between genetics and the environment. Most cancers arise after genes are altered by carcinogens or by errors in the copying and repair of genes. Even if
the genetic damage occurs only in one somatic cell, division of
this cell will transmit the damage to the daughter cells, giving
rise to a clone of altered cells. Rarely, however, does mutation
in a single gene lead to the onset of cancer. More typically, a
series of mutations in multiple genes creates a progressively
more rapidly proliferating cell type that escapes normal growth
restraints, creating an opportunity for additional mutations.

OUTLINE
23.1 Tumor Cells and the Onset of Cancer
23.2 The Genetic Basis of Cancer
23.3 Oncogenic Mutations in Growth-Promoting
Proteins
23.4 Mutations Causing Loss of Growth-Inhibiting
and Cell-Cycle Controls
23.5 The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair
in Cancer
935

936

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer
Self-sufficiency in
growth signals

Evasion of
apoptosis

growth during our lifetimes, a sort of evolutionary selection
for cells that proliferate. Fortunately the tumor itself is not
inherited.
Insensitivity to
anti-growth signals

FPO
Sustained
angiogenesis

Tissue invasion
and metastasis

Limitless replicative
potential

▲ FIGURE 23-1 Overview of changes in cells that cause
cancer. During carcinogenesis, six fundamental cellular properties
are altered, as shown here, to give rise to the complete, most
destructive cancer phenotype. Less dangerous tumors arise
when only some of these changes occur. In this chapter we
examine the genetic changes that result in these altered cellular
properties. [Adapted from D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, 2000,
Cell 100:57.]

Eventually the clone of cells grows into a tumor. In some cases
cells from the primary tumor migrate to new sites, forming secondary tumors, which often have the greatest health impact.
Research on the genetic foundations of a particular type
of cancer often begins by identifying one or more genes that
are mutationally altered in tumor cells. Subsequently it is important to learn whether an altered gene is a contributing
cause for the tumor, or an irrelevant side event. Such investigations usually employ multiple approaches: epidemiological comparisons of the frequency with which the genetic
change is associated with a type of tumor, tests of the growth
properties of cells in culture that have the particular mutation, and the testing of mouse models of the disease to see if
the mutation can be causally implicated. A more sophisticated analysis is possible when the altered gene is known to
encode a component of a particular molecular pathway (e.g.,
an intracellular signaling pathway). In this case it is possible
to alter other components of the same pathway and see
whether the same type of cancer arises.
Because the multiple mutations that lead to formation of
a tumor may require many years to accumulate, most cancers develop later in life. The occurrence of cancer after the
age of reproduction may be one reason that evolutionary restraints have not done more to suppress cancer. The requirement for multiple mutations also lowers the frequency of
cancer compared with what it would be if tumorigenesis
were triggered by a single mutation. However, huge numbers
of cells are, in essence, mutagenized and tested for altered

23.1 Tumor Cells and the Onset
of Cancer
Before examining in detail the genetic basis of cancer, we
consider the properties of tumor cells that distinguish them
from normal cells and the general process of oncogenesis.
The genetic changes that underlie oncogenesis alter several
fundamental properties of cells, allowing cells to evade normal growth controls and ultimately conferring the full cancer
phenotype (see Figure 23-1). Cancer cells acquire a drive to
proliferate that does not require an external inducing signal.
They fail to sense signals that restrict cell division and continue to live when they should die. They often change their
attachment to surrounding cells or the extracellular matrix,
breaking loose to divide more rapidly. A cancer cell may, up
to a point, resemble a particular type of normal, rapidly dividing cell, but the cancer cell and its progeny will exhibit
inappropriate immortality. To grow to more than a small
size, tumors must obtain a blood supply, and they often do so
by signaling to induce the growth of blood vessels into the
tumor. As cancer progresses, tumors become an abnormal
organ, increasingly well adapted to growth and invasion of
surrounding tissues.

Metastatic Tumor Cells Are Invasive
and Can Spread
Tumors arise with great frequency, especially in older individuals, but most pose little risk to their host because they are
localized and of small size. We call such tumors benign; an
example is warts, a benign skin tumor. The cells composing
benign tumors closely resemble, and may function like, normal cells. The cell-adhesion molecules that hold tissues together keep benign tumor cells, like normal cells, localized to
the tissues where they originate. A fibrous capsule usually delineates the extent of a benign tumor and makes it an easy target for a surgeon. Benign tumors become serious medical
problems only if their sheer bulk interferes with normal functions or if they secrete excess amounts of biologically active
substances like hormones. Acromegaly, the overgrowth of
head, hands, and feet, for example, can occur when a benign
pituitary tumor causes overproduction of growth hormone.
In contrast, cells composing a malignant tumor, or cancer, usually grow and divide more rapidly than normal, fail
to die at the normal rate (e.g., chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
a tumor of white blood cells), or invade nearby tissue without a significant change in their proliferation rate (e.g., less
harmful tumors of glial cells). Some malignant tumors, such
as those in the ovary or breast, remain localized and encapsulated, at least for a time. When these tumors progress, the
cells invade surrounding tissues, get into the body’s circulatory system, and establish secondary areas of proliferation,

23.1 • Tumor Cells and the Onset of Cancer
(a)

(b)

Tumor cells

937

Normal cells

▲ FIGURE 23-2 Gross and microscopic views of a tumor
invading normal liver tissue. (a) The gross morphology of a
human liver in which a metastatic lung tumor is growing. The
white protrusions on the surface of the liver are the tumor

masses. (b) A light micrograph of a section of the tumor in
(a) showing areas of small, dark-staining tumor cells invading a
region of larger, light-staining, normal liver cells. [Courtesy of

a process called metastasis. Most malignant cells eventually
acquire the ability to metastasize. Thus the major characteristics that differentiate metastatic (or malignant) tumors
from benign ones are their invasiveness and spread.
Cancer cells can often be distinguished from normal cells
by microscopic examination. They are usually less well differentiated than normal cells or benign tumor cells. In a specific
tissue, malignant cells usually exhibit the characteristics of rapidly growing cells, that is, a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio,
prominent nucleoli, and relatively little specialized structure.
The presence of invading cells in an otherwise normal tissue
section is used to diagnose a malignancy (Figure 23-2).
Normal cells are restricted to their place in an organ or tissue by cell-cell adhesion and by physical barriers such as the
basal lamina, which underlies layers of epithelial cells and also
surrounds the endothelial cells of blood vessels (Chapter 6).
Cancer cells have a complex relation to the extracellular matrix and basal lamina. The cells must degrade the basal lamina to penetrate it and metastasize, but in some cases cells may
migrate along the lamina. Many tumor cells secrete a protein
(plasminogen activator) that converts the serum protein plasminogen to the active protease plasmin. Increased plasmin activity promotes metastasis by digesting the basal lamina, thus
allowing its penetration by tumor cells. As the basal lamina
disintegrates, some tumor cells will enter the blood, but fewer
than 1 in 10,000 cells that escape the primary tumor survive to
colonize another tissue and form a secondary, metastatic
tumor. In addition to escaping the original tumor and entering the blood, cells that will seed new tumors must then adhere
to an endothelial cell lining a capillary and migrate across or
through it into the underlying tissue. The multiple crossings
of tissue layers that underlie malignancy often involve new or
variant surface proteins made by malignant cells.
In addition to important changes in cell-surface proteins,
drastic changes occur in the cytoskeleton during tumor-cell

formation and metastasis. These alterations can result from
changes in the expression of genes encoding Rho and other
small GTPases that regulate the actin cytoskeleton (Chapter
19). For instance, tumor cells have been found to overexpress the RhoC gene, and this increased activity stimulates
metastasis.

J. Braun.]

Cancers Usually Originate in Proliferating Cells
In order for most oncogenic mutations to induce cancer, they
must occur in dividing cells so that the mutation is passed
on to many progeny cells. When such mutations occur in
nondividing cells (e.g., neurons and muscle cells), they generally do not induce cancer, which is why tumors of muscle
and nerve cells are rare in adults. Nonetheless, cancer can
occur in tissues composed mainly of nondividing differentiated cells such as erythrocytes and most white blood cells,
absorptive cells that line the small intestine, and keratinized
cells that form the skin. The cells that initiate the tumors are
not the differentiated cells, but rather their precursor cells.
Fully differentiated cells usually do not divide. As they die
or wear out, they are continually replaced by proliferation
and differentiation of stem cells, and these cells are capable
of transforming into tumor cells.
In Chapter 22, we learned that stem cells both perpetuate
themselves and give rise to differentiating cells that can regenerate a particular tissue for the life of an organism (see
Figure 22-2). For instance, many differentiated blood cells
have short life spans and are continually replenished from
hematopoietic (blood-forming) stem cells in the bone marrow (see Figure 22-5). Populations of stem cells in the intestine, liver, skin, bone, and other tissues likewise give rise to
all or many of the cell types in these tissues, replacing aged
and dead cells, by pathways analogous to hematopoiesis in
bone marrow. Similarly within a tumor there may be only

938

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

certain cells with the ability to divide uncontrollably and
generate new tumors; such cells are tumor stem cells.
Because stem cells can divide continually over the life of
an organism, oncogenic mutations in their DNA can accumulate, eventually transforming them into cancer cells. Cells
that have acquired these mutations have an abnormal proliferative capacity and generally cannot undergo normal
processes of differentiation. Many oncogenic mutations,
such as ones that prevent apoptosis or generate an inappropriate growth-promoting signal, also can occur in more differentiated, but still replicating, progenitor cells. Such
mutations in hematopoietic progenitor cells can lead to various types of leukemia.
Normal animal cells are often classified according to
their embryonic tissue of origin, and the naming of tumors
has followed suit. Malignant tumors are classified as carcinomas if they derive from endoderm (gut epithelium) or ectoderm (skin and neural epithelia) and sarcomas if they
derive from mesoderm (muscle, blood, and connective tissue precursors). The leukemias, a class of sarcomas, grow as
individual cells in the blood, whereas most other tumors are
solid masses. (The name leukemia is derived from the Latin
for “white blood”: the massive proliferation of leukemic cells
can cause a patient’s blood to appear milky.)

Tumor Growth Requires Formation
of New Blood Vessels
Tumors, whether primary or secondary, require recruitment
of new blood vessels in order to grow to a large mass. In the
absence of a blood supply, a tumor can grow into a mass of
about 106 cells, roughly a sphere 2 mm in diameter. At this
(a)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-3 Scanning electron
micrographs reveal the organizational and morphological
differences between normal and transformed 3T3 cells.
(a) Normal 3T3 cells are elongated and are aligned and closely
packed in an orderly fashion. (b) 3T3 cells transformed by an
oncogene encoded by Rous sarcoma virus are rounded and
covered with small hairlike processes and bulbous projections.

point, division of cells on the outside of the tumor mass is
balanced by death of those in the center due to an inadequate
supply of nutrients. Such tumors, unless they secrete hormones, cause few problems. However, most tumors induce
the formation of new blood vessels that invade the tumor
and nourish it, a process called angiogenesis. This complex
process requires several discrete steps: degradation of the
basal lamina that surrounds a nearby capillary, migration of
endothelial cells lining the capillary into the tumor, division
of these endothelial cells, and formation of a new basement
membrane around the newly elongated capillary.
Many tumors produce growth factors that stimulate
angiogenesis; other tumors somehow induce surrounding
normal cells to synthesize and secrete such factors. Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), transforming growth factor
 (TGF), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
which are secreted by many tumors, all have angiogenic
properties. New blood vessels nourish the growing tumor, allowing it to increase in size and thus increase the probability that additional harmful mutations will occur. The
presence of an adjacent blood vessel also facilitates the
process of metastasis.
Several natural proteins that inhibit angiogenesis
(e.g., angiogenin and endostatin) or antagonists of
the VEGF receptor have excited much interest as
potential therapeutic agents. Although new blood vessels are
constantly forming during embryonic development, few
form normally in adults except after injury. Thus a specific
inhibitor of angiogenesis not only might be effective against
many kinds of tumors but also might have few adverse side
effects. ❚
(b)

The transformed cells that grow have lost the side-by-side
organization of the normal cells and grow one atop the other.
These transformed cells have many of the same properties as
malignant cells. Similar changes are seen in cells transfected
with DNA from human cancers containing the rasD oncogene.
[Courtesy of L.-B. Chen.]

23.1 • Tumor Cells and the Onset of Cancer

Cultured Cells Can Be Transformed
into Tumor Cells
The morphology and growth properties of tumor cells clearly
differ from those of their normal counterparts; some of these
differences are also evident when cells are cultured. That mutations cause these differences was conclusively established
by transfection experiments with a line of cultured mouse fibroblasts called 3T3 cells. These cells normally grow only
when attached to the plastic surface of a culture dish and are
maintained at a low cell density. Because 3T3 cells stop
growing when they contact other cells, they eventually form
a monolayer of well-ordered cells that have stopped proliferating and are in the quiescent G0 phase of the cell cycle
(Figure 23-3a).
When DNA from human bladder cancer cells is transfected into cultured 3T3 cells, about one cell in a million
incorporates a particular segment of the exogenous DNA
that causes a distinctive phenotypic change. The progeny
of the affected cell are more rounded and less adherent to
one another and to the dish than are the normal surrounding cells, forming a three-dimensional cluster of cells
(a focus) that can be recognized under the microscope (Figure 23-3b). Such cells, which continue to grow when the
normal cells have become quiescent, have undergone oncogenic transformation. The transformed cells have properties similar to those of malignant tumor cells, including
changes in cell morphology, ability to grow unattached to
an extracellular matrix, reduced requirement for growth
factors, secretion of plasminogen activator, and loss of
actin microfilaments.
Figure 23-4 outlines the procedure for transforming 3T3
cells with DNA from a human bladder cancer and cloning
the specific DNA segment that causes transformation. It was
remarkable to find a small piece of DNA with this capability;
had more than one piece been needed, the experiment would

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-4 Transformation of mouse
cells with DNA from a human cancer cell permits
identification and molecular cloning of the rasD oncogene.
Addition of DNA from a human bladder cancer to a culture of
mouse 3T3 cells causes about one cell in a million to divide
abnormally and form a focus, or clone, of transformed cells. To
clone the oncogene responsible for transformation, advantage is
taken of the fact that most human genes have nearby repetitive
DNA sequences called Alu sequences. DNA from the initial focus
of transformed mouse cells is isolated, and the oncogene is
separated from adventitious human DNA by secondary transfer
to mouse cells. The total DNA from a secondary transfected
mouse cell is then cloned into bacteriophage ; only the phage
that receives human DNA hybridizes with an Alu probe. The
hybridizing phage should contain part of or all the transforming
oncogene. This expected result can be proved by showing either
that the phage DNA can transform cells (if the oncogene has
been completely cloned) or that the cloned piece of DNA is
always present in cells transformed by DNA transfer from the
original donor cell.

939

DNA from human
tumor cells

Transfect mouse 3T3 cells

Culture for 2 weeks

Focus of transformed
NIH/3T3 cells growing
among untransformed
cells

FPO

Extract DNA,
transform new mouse cells

Second cycle

Extract genomic DNA

Surviving
human DNA

Introduce into
phage vector

Phage library

Plate phage
on E. coli

Alu probe
Replica on
filter paper
Oncogene

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

have failed. Subsequent studies showed that the cloned segment included a mutant version of the cellular ras gene, designated rasD. Normal Ras protein, which participates in
many intracellular signal-transduction pathways activated by
growth factors, cycles between an inactive, “off” state with
bound GDP and an active, “on” state with bound GTP. The
mutated RasD protein hydrolyzes bound GTP very slowly
and therefore accumulates in the active state, sending a
growth-promoting signal to the nucleus even in the absence
of the hormones normally required to activate its signaling
function.
The production and constitutive activation of RasD protein are not sufficient to cause transformation of normal cells
in a primary (fresh) culture of human, rat, or mouse fibroblasts. Unlike cells in a primary culture, however, cultured
3T3 cells have undergone a loss-of-function mutation in the
p16 gene, which encodes a cyclin-kinase inhibitor that restricts progression through the cell cycle. Such cells can grow
for an unlimited time in culture if periodically diluted and
supplied with nutrients, which normal cells cannot (see Figure 6-37b). These immortal 3T3 cells are transformed into
full-blown tumor cells only when they produce a constitutively active Ras protein. For this reason, transfection with
the rasD gene can transform 3T3 cells, but not normal cultured primary fibroblast cells, into tumor cells.
A mutant ras gene is found in most human colon, bladder, and other cancers, but not in normal human DNA; thus
it must arise as the result of a somatic mutation in one of the
tumor progenitor cells. Any gene, such as rasD, that encodes
a protein capable of transforming cells in culture or inducing cancer in animals is referred to as an oncogene. The normal cellular gene from which it arises is called a protooncogene. The oncogenes carried by viruses that cause tumors in animals are often derived from proto-oncogenes that
were hijacked from the host genome and altered to be oncogenic. When this was first discovered, it was startling to find
that these dangerous viruses were turning the animal’s own
genes against them.

A Multi-hit Model of Cancer Induction
Is Supported by Several Lines of Evidence
As noted earlier and illustrated by the oncogenic transformation of 3T3 cells, multiple mutations usually are required
to convert a normal body cell into a malignant one. According to this “multi-hit” model, evolutionary (or “survival of the fittest”) cancers arise by a process of clonal
selection not unlike the selection of individual animals in a
large population. A mutation in one cell would give it a
slight growth advantage. One of the progeny cells would
then undergo a second mutation that would allow its descendants to grow more uncontrollably and form a small benign tumor; a third mutation in a cell within this tumor
would allow it to outgrow the others and overcome constraints imposed by the tumor microenvironment, and its

progeny would form a mass of cells, each of which would
have these three mutations. An additional mutation in one
of these cells would allow its progeny to escape into the
blood and establish daughter colonies at other sites, the hallmark of metastatic cancer. This model makes two easily
testable predictions.
First, all the cells in a given tumor should contain at least
some genetic alterations in common. Systematic analysis of
cells from individual human tumors supports the prediction
that all the cells are derived from a single progenitor. Recall
that during the fetal life of a human female each cell inactivates one of the two X chromosomes. A woman is a genetic
mosaic; half the cells have one X inactivated, and the remainder have the other X inactivated. If a tumor did not
arise from a single progenitor, it would be composed of a mix
of cells with one or the other X inactivated. In fact, the cells
from a woman’s tumor have the same inactive X chromosome. Different tumors can be composed of cells with either
the maternal or the paternal X inactive. Second, cancer incidence should increase with age because it can take decades
for the required multiple mutations to occur. Assuming that
the rate of mutation is roughly constant during a lifetime,
then the incidence of most types of cancer would be independent of age if only one mutation were required to convert
a normal cell into a malignant one. As the data in Figure
23-5 show, the incidence of many types of human cancer
does indeed increase drastically with age.
More direct evidence that multiple mutations are required for tumor induction comes from transgenic mice

Prostate
Stomach
Skin
Rectum
Pancreas

500

Annual incidence per 105 males

940

100
50

10
5

FPO

Esophagus

1
0.5

0.1
20

30

40
50
60
Age (years)

70 80

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-5 The incidence of human
cancers increases as a function of age. The marked increase in
the incidence with age is consistent with the multi-hit model of
cancer induction. Note that the logarithm of annual incidence is
plotted versus the logarithm of age. [From B. Vogelstein and
K. Kinzler, 1993, Trends Genet. 9:101.]

Tumor-free mice (%)

23.1 • Tumor Cells and the Onset of Cancer

duces senescence. When the two oncogenes are expressed in
the same cell, these negative cellular responses are neutralized and the cells undergo transformation.

myc

100
80

FPO
ras D

60
40

Successive Oncogenic Mutations Can Be Traced
in Colon Cancers

myc + ras D

20
0

941

0

50

100

150

200

Age (days)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-6 The kinetics of tumor
appearance in female mice carrying either one or two
oncogenic transgenes shows the cooperative nature of
multiple mutations in cancer induction. The transgenes were
driven by the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) breastspecific promoter. The hormonal stimulation associated with
pregnancy activated overexpression of the transgenes. The graph
shows the time course of tumorigenesis in mice carrying either
myc or rasD transgenes as well as in the progeny of a cross of
myc carriers with rasD carriers that contain both transgenes. The
results clearly demonstrate the cooperative effects of multiple
mutations in cancer induction. [See E. Sinn et al., 1987, Cell 49:465.]

carrying both the mutant rasD oncogene and the c-myc protooncogene controlled by a mammary cell–specific promoter/
enhancer from a retrovirus. When linked to this promoter, the
normal c-myc gene is overexpressed in breast tissue
because the promoter is induced by endogenous hormone
levels and tissue-specific regulators. This heightened transcription of c-myc mimics oncogenic mutations that turn up
c-myc transcription, converting the proto-oncogene into an
oncogene. By itself, the c-myc transgene causes tumors only
after 100 days, and then in only a few mice; clearly only a
minute fraction of the mammary cells that overproduce the
Myc protein become malignant. Similarly, production of the
mutant RasD protein alone causes tumors earlier but still
slowly and with about 50 percent efficiency over 150 days.
When the c-myc and rasD transgenics are crossed, however,
such that all mammary cells produce both Myc and RasD,
tumors arise much more rapidly and all animals succumb to
cancer (Figure 23-6). Such experiments emphasize the synergistic effects of multiple oncogenes. They also suggest that
the long latency of tumor formation, even in the doubletransgenic mice, is due to the need to acquire additional
somatic mutations.
Similar cooperative effects between oncogenes can be
seen in cultured cells. Transfection of normal fibroblasts with
either c-myc or activated rasD is not sufficient for oncogenic
transformation, whereas when transfected together, the two
genes cooperate to transform the cells. Deregulated levels of
c-myc alone induce proliferation but also sensitize fibroblasts
to apoptosis, and overexpression of activated rasD alone in-

Studies on colon cancer provide the most compelling evidence to date for the multi-hit model of cancer induction.
Surgeons can obtain fairly pure samples of many human
cancers, but generally the exact stage of tumor progression
cannot be identified and analyzed. An exception is colon cancer, which evolves through distinct, well-characterized morphological stages. These intermediate stages—polyps, benign
adenomas, and carcinomas—can be isolated by a surgeon,
allowing mutations that occur in each of the morphological
stages to be identified. Numerous studies show that colon
cancer arises from a series of mutations that commonly occur
in a well-defined order, providing strong support for the
multi-hit model.
Invariably the first step in colon carcinogenesis involves
loss of a functional APC gene, resulting in formation of
polyps (precancerous growths) on the inside of the colon
wall. Not every colon cancer, however, acquires all the later
mutations or acquires them in the order depicted in Figure
23-7. Thus different combinations of mutations may result in
the same phenotype. Most of the cells in a polyp contain the
same one or two mutations in the APC gene that result in its
loss or inactivation; thus they are clones of the cell in which
the original mutation occurred. APC is a tumor-suppressor
gene, and both alleles of the APC gene must carry an inactivating mutation for polyps to form because cells with one
wild-type APC gene express enough APC protein to function
normally. Like most tumor-suppressor genes, APC encodes
a protein that inhibits the progression of certain types of cells
through the cell cycle. The APC protein does so by preventing the Wnt signal-transduction pathway from activating expression of proto-oncogenes including the c-myc gene. The
absence of functional APC protein thus leads to inappropriate production of Myc, a transcription factor that induces
expression of many genes required for the transition from the
G1 to the S phase of the cell cycle. Cells homozygous for
APC mutations proliferate at a rate higher than normal and
form polyps.
If one of the cells in a polyp undergoes another mutation,
this time an activating mutation in the ras gene, its progeny
divide in an even more uncontrolled fashion, forming a
larger adenoma (see Figure 23-7). Mutational loss of a particular chromosomal region (the relevant gene is not yet
known), followed by inactivation of the p53 gene, results in
the gradual loss of normal regulation and the consequent formation of a malignant carcinoma. About half of all human
tumors carry mutations in p53, which encodes a transcriptional regulator.

Normal colon cells

Loss of APC
tumor-suppressor
gene (chromosome 5)

A polyp (small
growth) forms on
the colon wall

A benign,
precancerous
tumor grows

Activation of K-ras
oncogene
(chromosome 12)

A class II adenoma
(benign) grows

FPO

Loss of tumorsuppressor gene in
region of DCC
(chromosome 18)

A class III adenoma
(benign) grows
Loss of p53
tumor-suppressor
gene (chromosome 17)
A malignant carcinoma
develops

Other changes

The cancer
metastasizes
(spreads to other
tissues)
Lumen
of colon

Polyp
Invasive
tumor cells
Normal colon
epithelial cells
Basal lamina

Wall
of colon

Tumor cells invade
blood vessels, allowing
metastasis to occur
Blood
vessel

▲ FIGURE 23-7 The development and metastasis of human
colorectal cancer and its genetic basis. A mutation in the APC
tumor-suppressor gene in a single epithelial cell causes the cell
to divide, although surrounding cells do not, forming a mass of
localized benign tumor cells, or polyp. Subsequent mutations
leading to expression of a constitutively active Ras protein and
loss of two tumor-suppressor genes—an unidentified gene in the
vicinity of DCC and p53—generate a malignant cell carrying all

942

four mutations. This cell continues to divide, and the progeny
invade the basal lamina that surrounds the tissue. Some tumor
cells spread into blood vessels that will distribute them to other
sites in the body. Additional mutations permit the tumor cells to
exit from the blood vessels and proliferate at distant sites; a
patient with such a tumor is said to have cancer. [Adapted from
B. Vogelstein and K. Kinzler, 1993, Trends Genet. 9:101.]

23.2 • The Genetic Basis of Cancer

DNA from different human colon carcinomas generally
contains mutations in all these genes—loss-of-function mutations in the tumor suppressors APC and p53, the as yet mysterious gene, and an activating (gain-of-function) mutation in the
dominant oncogene K-ras—establishing that multiple mutations in the same cell are needed for the cancer to form. Some
of these mutations appear to confer growth advantages at an
early stage of tumor development, whereas other mutations
promote the later stages, including invasion and metastasis,
which are required for the malignant phenotype. The number
of mutations needed for colon cancer progression may at first
seem surprising, seemingly an effective barrier to tumorigenesis.
Our genomes, however, are under constant assault. Recent estimates indicate that sporadically arising polyps have about
11,000 genetic alterations in each cell, though very likely only
a few of these are relevant to oncogenesis.
Colon carcinoma provides an excellent example of the
multi-hit mode of cancer. The degree to which this model applies to cancer is only now being learned, but it is clear that
multiple types of cancer involve multiple mutations. The advent
of DNA microarray technology is allowing more detailed examination of tumor properties by monitoring the spectrum of
mRNA molecules from tens of thousands of genes, and recent
data have provided some challenges to the multi-hit model. Not
surprisingly, primary tumors can often be distinguishable from
metastatic tumors by the pattern of gene expression. More interestingly, a subset of solid primary tumors has been found to
have characteristics more typical of metastatic tumors, suggesting that it may be possible to identify primary tumors that have
a greater probability of becoming metastatic. This also raises
the possibility that, at least for some types of cancer, the initiating events of the primary tumor may set a course toward
metastasis. This hypothesis can be distinguished from the emergence of a rare subset of cells within the primary tumor acquiring a necessary series of further mutations.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 23.1
Tumor Cells and the Onset of Cancer
Cancer is a fundamental aberration in cellular behavior,
touching on many aspects of molecular cell biology. Most
cell types of the body can give rise to malignant tumor
(cancer) cells.

■

Cancer cells usually arise from stem cells and other proliferating cells and bear more resemblance to these cells
than to more mature differentiated cell types.

■

Cancer cells can multiply in the absence of at least some
of the growth-promoting factors required for proliferation
of normal cells and are resistant to signals that normally
program cell death (apoptosis).

■

■ Certain cultured cells transfected with tumor-cell DNA
undergo transformation (see Figure 23-4). Such transformed
cells share certain properties with tumor cells.

943

Cancer cells sometimes invade surrounding tissues, often breaking through the basal laminae that define the
boundaries of tissues and spreading through the body to
establish secondary areas of growth, a process called metastasis. Metastatic tumors often secrete proteases, which degrade the surrounding extracellular matrix.

■

Both primary and secondary tumors require angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels, in order to grow
to a large mass.

■

The multi-hit model, which proposes that multiple mutations are needed to cause cancer, is consistent with the
genetic homogeneity of cells from a given tumor, the observed increase in the incidence of human cancers with advancing age, and the cooperative effect of oncogenic transgenes on tumor formation in mice.

■

Most oncogenic mutations occur in somatic cells and are
not carried in the germ-line DNA.

■

■ Colon cancer develops through distinct morphological
stages that commonly are associated with mutations in
specific tumor-suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes (see
Figure 23-7).

23.2

The Genetic Basis of Cancer

As we have seen, mutations in two broad classes of genes—
proto-oncogenes (e.g., ras) and tumor-suppressor genes
(e.g., APC)—play key roles in cancer induction. These genes
encode many kinds of proteins that help control cell growth
and proliferation (Figure 23-8). Virtually all human tumors
have inactivating mutations in genes that normally act at
various cell-cycle checkpoints to stop a cell’s progress
through the cell cycle if a previous step has occurred incorrectly or if DNA has been damaged. For example, most cancers have inactivating mutations in the genes coding for one
or more proteins that normally restrict progression through
the G1 stage of the cell cycle. Likewise, a constitutively active Ras or other activated signal-transduction protein is
found in several kinds of human tumor that have different origins. Thus malignancy and the intricate processes
for controlling the cell cycle discussed in Chapter 21 are
two faces of the same coin. In the series of events leading
to growth of a tumor, oncogenes combine with tumorsuppressor mutations to give rise to the full spectrum of
tumor cell properties described in the previous section (see
Figure 23-7).
In this section, we consider the general types of mutations that are oncogenic and see how certain viruses can
cause cancer. We also explain why some inherited mutations
increase the risk for particular cancers and consider the relation between cancer and developmentally important
genes. We conclude this section with a brief discussion of
how genomics methods are being used to characterize and
classify tumors.

944

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

 FIGURE 23-8 Seven types of proteins that
participate in controlling cell growth and
proliferation. Cancer can result from expression
of mutant forms of these proteins. Mutations
changing the structure or expression of proteins
that normally promote cell growth generally give
rise to dominantly active oncogenes. Many, but
not all, extracellular signaling molecules (I), signal
receptors (II), signal-transduction proteins (III), and
transcription factors (IV) are in this category. Cellcycle control proteins (VI) that function to restrain
cell proliferation and DNA-repair proteins (VII) are
encoded by tumor-suppressor genes. Mutations
in these genes act recessively, greatly increasing
the probability that the mutant cells will become
tumor cells or that mutations will occur in other
classes. Apoptotic proteins (V) include tumor
suppressors that promote apoptosis and
oncoproteins that promote cell survival. Virusencoded proteins that activate signal receptors
(Ia) also can induce cancer.

Virus-encoded
activators of
signal
receptors (Ia)

Signaling molecule (I)
Signal receptor (II)

Intracellular
effector
region
(often a
proteintyrosine
kinase)

Intracellular
transducers
(III)

FPO

Intracellular
receptors
(II)

Second messengers
(phosphorylated proteins)

NUCLEUS
Transcription factors (IV)
DNA
Transcription

DNA-repair
proteins (VII)
Cell-cycle control
proteins (VI)

RNA

mRNA
Proteins

Apoptotic
proteins (V)

Gain-of-Function Mutations Convert
Proto-oncogenes into Oncogenes

protein whose activity, unlike that of the parent proteins,
often is constitutive

Recall that an oncogene is any gene that encodes a protein able
to transform cells in culture or to induce cancer in animals.
Of the many known oncogenes, all but a few are derived from
normal cellular genes (i.e., proto-oncogenes) whose products
promote cell proliferation. For example, the ras gene discussed
previously is a proto-oncogene that encodes an intracellular
signal-transduction protein; the mutant rasD gene derived
from ras is an oncogene, whose encoded protein provides an
excessive or uncontrolled growth-promoting signal. Other
proto-oncogenes encode growth-promoting signal molecules
and their receptors, anti-apoptotic (cell-survival) proteins, and
some transcription factors.
Conversion, or activation, of a proto-oncogene into an
oncogene generally involves a gain-of-function mutation. At
least four mechanisms can produce oncogenes from the corresponding proto-oncogenes:

• Chromosomal translocation that brings a growthregulatory gene under the control of a different promoter
that causes inappropriate expression of the gene

• Point mutation (i.e., change in a single base pair) in a
proto-oncogene that results in a constitutively active
protein product
• Chromosomal translocation that fuses two genes
together to produce a hybrid gene encoding a chimeric

• Amplification (i.e., abnormal DNA replication) of a
DNA segment including a proto-oncogene, so that
numerous copies exist, leading to overproduction of the
encoded protein
An oncogene formed by either of the first two mechanisms encodes an “oncoprotein” that differs from the normal
protein encoded by the corresponding proto-oncogene. In
contrast, the other two mechanisms generate oncogenes
whose protein products are identical with the normal proteins; their oncogenic effect is due to production at higherthan-normal levels or in cells where they normally are not
produced.
The localized amplification of DNA to produce as many
as 100 copies of a given region (usually a region spanning
hundreds of kilobases) is a common genetic change seen in
tumors. This anomaly may take either of two forms: the
duplicated DNA may be tandemly organized at a single site
on a chromosome, or it may exist as small, independent

23.2 • The Genetic Basis of Cancer
(a)

945

(b)

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-9 DNA amplifications in
stained chromosomes take two forms, visible under the light
microscope. (a) Homogeneously staining regions (HSRs) in a
human chromosome from a neuroblastoma cell. The
chromosomes are uniformly stained with a blue dye so that all
can be seen. Specific DNA sequences were detected using
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) in which fluorescently
labeled DNA clones are hybridized to denatured DNA in the
chromosomes. The chromosome 4 pair is marked (red) by in
situ hybridization with a large DNA cosmid clone containing

the N-myc oncogene. On one of the chromosome 4’s an HSR is
visible (green) after staining for a sequence enriched in the HSR.
(b) Optical sections through nuclei from a human neuroblastoma
cell that contain double minute chromosomes. The normal
chromosomes are the green and blue structures; the double
minute chromosomes are the many small red dots. Arrows
indicate double minutes associated with the surface or interior
of the normal chromosomes. [Parts (a) and (b) from I. Solovei et al.,

mini-chromosome-like structures. The former case leads to
a homogeneously staining region (HSR) that is visible in the
light microscope at the site of the amplification; the latter
case causes extra “minute” chromosomes, separate from the
normal chromosomes, that pepper a stained chromosomal
preparation (Figure 23-9).

However they arise, the gain-of-function mutations that
convert proto-oncogenes to oncogenes are genetically dominant; that is, mutation in only one of the two alleles is sufficient for induction of cancer.

Gene amplification may involve a small number
of genes, such as the N-myc gene and its neighbor
DDX1 that are amplified in neuroblastoma, or a
chromosome region containing many genes. It can be difficult to determine which genes are amplified, a first step in determining which gene caused the tumor. DNA microarrays
offer a powerful approach for finding amplified regions of
chromosomes. Rather than look at gene expression, the application of microarrays we described earlier, these experiments involve looking for abnormally abundant DNA
sequences. Genomic DNA from cancer cells is used to probe
arrays containing fragments of genomic DNA and spots with
amplified DNA give stronger signals than control spots.
Among the amplified genes, the strongest candidates for the
relevant ones can be identified by also measuring gene expression. A breast carcinoma cell line, with four known amplified chromosome regions, was screened for amplified
genes, and the expression levels of those genes were also
studied on microarrays. Fifty genes were found to be amplified, but only five were also highly expressed. These five are
new candidates as oncogenes. ❚

2000, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 29:297–308, Figure 4 and 17.]

Cancer-Causing Viruses Contain Oncogenes
or Activate Cellular Proto-oncogenes
Pioneering studies by Peyton Rous beginning in 1911 led to
the initial recognition that a virus could cause cancer when
injected into a suitable host animal. Many years later molecular biologists showed that Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) is
a retrovirus whose RNA genome is reverse-transcribed into
DNA, which is incorporated into the host-cell genome (see
Figure 4-43). In addition to the “normal” genes present in all
retroviruses, oncogenic transforming viruses like RSV contain the v-src gene. Subsequent studies with mutant forms
of RSV demonstrated that only the v-src gene, not the other
viral genes, was required for cancer induction.
In the late 1970s, scientists were surprised to find that
normal cells from chickens and other species contain a gene
that is closely related to the RSV v-src gene. This normal cellular gene, a proto-oncogene, commonly is distinguished
from the viral gene by the prefix “c” (c-src). RSV and other
oncogene-carrying viruses are thought to have arisen by
incorporating, or transducing, a normal cellular protooncogene into their genome. Subsequent mutation in the
transduced gene then converted it into a dominantly acting

946

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

oncogene, which can induce cell transformation in the presence of the normal c-src proto-oncogene. Such viruses are
called transducing retroviruses because their genomes contain an oncogene derived from a transduced cellular protooncogene.
Because its genome carries the potent v-src oncogene, the
transducing RSV induces tumors within days. In contrast,
most oncogenic retroviruses induce cancer only after a period of months or years. The genomes of these slow-acting
retroviruses differ from those of transducing viruses in one
crucial respect: they lack an oncogene. All slow-acting, or
“long latency,” retroviruses appear to cause cancer by
integrating into the host-cell DNA near a cellular protooncogene and activating its expression. The long terminal
repeat (LTR) sequences in integrated retroviral DNA can act
as an enhancer or promoter of a nearby cellular gene,
thereby stimulating its transcription. For example, in the
cells from tumors caused by avian leukosis virus (ALV), the
retroviral DNA is inserted near the c-myc gene. These cells
overproduce c-Myc protein; as noted earlier, overproduction
of c-Myc causes abnormally rapid proliferation of cells.
Slow-acting viruses act slowly for two reasons: integration
near a cellular proto-oncogene (e.g., c-myc) is a random, rare
event, and additional mutations have to occur before a fullfledged tumor becomes evident.
In natural bird and mouse populations, slow-acting retroviruses are much more common than oncogene-containing
retroviruses such as Rous sarcoma virus. Thus, insertional
proto-oncogene activation is probably the major mechanism
by which retroviruses cause cancer. Although few human tumors have been associated with any retrovirus, the huge investment in studying retroviruses as a model for human cancer
paid off both in the discovery of cellular oncogenes and in the
sophisticated understanding of retroviruses, which later
accelerated progress on the HIV virus that causes AIDS.
A few DNA viruses also are oncogenic. Unlike most
DNA viruses that infect animal cells, oncogenic DNA viruses
integrate their viral DNA into the host-cell genome. The viral
DNA contains one or more oncogenes, which permanently
transform infected cells. For example, many warts and other
benign tumors of epithelial cells are caused by the DNAcontaining papillomaviruses. Unlike retroviral oncogenes,
which are derived from normal cellular genes and have no
function for the virus except to allow their proliferation in
tumors, the known oncogenes of DNA viruses are integral
parts of the viral genome and are required for viral replication. As discussed later, the oncoproteins expressed from integrated viral DNA in infected cells act in various ways to
stimulate cell growth and proliferation.

function mutations in one or more of these “brakes” contribute to the development of many cancers. Five broad
classes of proteins are generally recognized as being encoded
by tumor-suppressor genes:
• Intracellular proteins that regulate or inhibit progression
through a specific stage of the cell cycle (e.g., p16 and Rb)
• Receptors or signal transducers for secreted hormones
or developmental signals that inhibit cell proliferation
(e.g., TGF, the Hedgehog receptor Patched)
• Checkpoint-control proteins that arrest the cell cycle if
DNA is damaged or chromosomes are abnormal (e.g., p53)
• Proteins that promote apoptosis
• Enzymes that participate in DNA repair
Although DNA-repair enzymes do not directly inhibit
cell proliferation, cells that have lost the ability to repair errors, gaps, or broken ends in DNA accumulate mutations in
many genes, including those that are critical in controlling
cell growth and proliferation. Thus loss-of-function mutations in the genes encoding DNA-repair enzymes prevent
cells from correcting mutations that inactivate tumorsuppressor genes or activate oncogenes.
Since generally one copy of a tumor-suppressor gene suffices to control cell proliferation, both alleles of a tumorsuppressor gene must be lost or inactivated in order to promote tumor development. Thus oncogenic loss-of-function
mutations in tumor-suppressor genes are genetically recessive. In many cancers, tumor-suppressor genes have deletions
or point mutations that prevent production of any protein or
lead to production of a nonfunctional protein. Another mechanism for inactivating tumor-suppressor genes is methylation of cytosine residues in the promoter or other control
elements. Such methylation is commonly found in nontranscribed regions of DNA.

Inherited Mutations in Tumor-Suppressor Genes
Increase Cancer Risk
Individuals with inherited mutations in tumor-suppressor
genes have a hereditary predisposition for certain cancers.
Such individuals generally inherit a germ-line mutation in
one allele of the gene; somatic mutation of the second allele
facilitates tumor progression. A classic case is retinoblastoma, which is caused by loss of function of RB, the first
tumor-suppressor gene to be identified. As we discuss later,
the protein encoded by RB helps regulate progress through
the cell cycle.

Hereditary versus Sporadic Retinoblastoma Children

Loss-of-Function Mutations in Tumor-Suppressor
Genes Are Oncogenic
Tumor-suppressor genes generally encode proteins that
in one way or another inhibit cell proliferation. Loss-of-

with hereditary retinoblastoma inherit a single defective
copy of the RB gene, sometimes seen as a small deletion on
one of the copies of chromosome 13. The children develop
retinal tumors early in life and generally in both eyes. One
essential event in tumor development is the deletion or

23.2 • The Genetic Basis of Cancer
(a) Hereditary retinoblastoma

RB +

RB −

tain mutant RB alleles; most of these arise as the result of
somatic mutations.
RB +

Somatic
mutation

Somatic retinal
cell

RB −

Inherited Forms of Colon and Breast Cancer Similar hered-

Homozygous cell
gives rise to
tumors in retina

FPO

(b) Sporadic retinoblastoma

RB +

RB +

Somatic retinal
cell

RB +
1st
somatic
mutation

947

RB −

RB −
2d
somatic
mutation

RB −

Homozygous cell
gives rise to
tumors in retina

▲ FIGURE 23-10 Role of spontaneous somatic mutation in
retinoblastoma. This disease is marked by retinal tumors that
arise from cells carrying two mutant RB alleles. (a) In hereditary
(familial) retinoblastoma, a child inherits a normal RB allele from
one parent and a mutant RB allele from the other parent. A
single mutation in a heterozygous somatic retinal cell that
inactivates the normal allele will produce a cell homozygous for
two mutant alleles. (b) In sporadic retinoblastoma, a child inherits
two normal RB alleles. Two separate somatic mutations in a
particular retinal cell or its progeny are required to produce a
homozygous RB/RB cell.

mutation of the normal RB gene on the other chromosome, giving rise to a cell that produces no functional Rb
protein (Figure 23-10). Individuals with sporadic
retinoblastoma, in contrast, inherit two normal RB alleles,
each of which has undergone a loss-of-function somatic
mutation in a single retinal cell. Because losing two copies
of the RB gene is far less likely than losing one, sporadic
retinoblastoma is rare, develops late in life, and usually affects only one eye.
If retinal tumors are removed before they become malignant, children with hereditary retinoblastoma often survive until adulthood and produce children. Because their
germ cells contain one normal and one mutant RB allele,
these individuals will, on average, pass on the mutant allele
to half their children and the normal allele to the other half.
Children who inherit the normal allele are normal if their
other parent has two normal RB alleles. However, those
who inherit the mutant allele have the same enhanced predisposition to develop retinal tumors as their affected parent, even though they inherit a normal RB allele from their
other, normal parent. Thus the tendency to develop
retinoblastoma is inherited as a dominant trait. As discussed
below, many human tumors (not just retinal tumors) con-

itary predisposition for other cancers has been associated
with inherited mutations in other tumor-suppressor genes.
For example, individuals who inherit a germ-line mutation in
one APC allele develop thousands of precancerous intestinal
polyps (see Figure 23-7). Since there is a high probability that
one or more of these polyps will progress to malignancy,
such individuals have a greatly increased risk for developing
colon cancer before the age of 50. Likewise, women who inherit one mutant allele of BRCA1, another tumor-suppressor
gene, have a 60 percent probability of developing breast cancer by age 50, whereas those who inherit two normal
BRCA1 alleles have a 2 percent probability of doing so. In
women with hereditary breast cancer, loss of the second
BRCA1 allele, together with other mutations, is required for
a normal breast duct cell to become malignant. However,
BRCA1 generally is not mutated in sporadic, noninherited
breast cancer.

Loss of Heterozygosity Clearly, then, we can inherit a
propensity to cancer by receiving a damaged allele of a tumorsuppressor gene from one of our parents; that is, we are
heterozygous for the mutation. That in itself will not cause
cancer, since the remaining normal allele prevents aberrant
growth; the cancer is recessive. Subsequent loss or inactivation of the normal allele in a somatic cell, referred to as loss of
heterozygosity (LOH), is a prerequisite for cancer to develop.
One common mechanism for LOH involves mis-segregation
during mitosis of the chromosomes bearing the affected
tumor-suppressor gene (Figure 23-11a). This process, also referred to as nondisjunction, is caused by failure of the spindleassembly checkpoint, which normally prevents a metaphase
cell with an abnormal mitotic spindle from completing mitosis (see Figure 21-32, 2 ). Another possible mechanism for
LOH is mitotic recombination between a chromatid bearing
the wild-type allele and a homologous chromatid bearing a
mutant allele. As illustrated in Figure 23-11b, subsequent
chromosome segregation can generate a daughter cell that is
homozygous for the mutant tumor-suppressor allele. A third
mechanism is the deletion or mutation of the normal copy of
the tumor-suppressor gene; such a deletion can encompass a
large chromosomal region and need not be a precise deletion
of just the tumor-suppressor gene.
Hereditary cancers constitute about 10 percent of human
cancers. It is important to remember, however, that the inherited, germ-line mutation alone is not sufficient to cause
tumor development. In all cases, not only must the inherited
normal tumor-suppressor allele be lost or inactivated, but
mutations affecting other genes also are necessary for cancer to develop. Thus a person with a recessive tumorsuppressor-gene mutation can be exceptionally susceptible to
environmental mutagens such as radiation.

948

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer
(b) Mitotic recombination

(a) Mis-segregation
Normal
allele

+ ο

+ ο

Mutant
allele

Heterozygous
for mutant allele

Heterozygous
for mutant allele

Chromosome
duplication

Chromosome
duplication

+ + ο ο

+ + ο ο

FPO
Aberrant 3:1
segregation

Recombination between
homologous chromatids

+ ο ο

+

+ o + o

Normal 2:2
chromosome
segregation

Dies
Random loss of
extra chromosome
+ ο

ο ο

+ +

o o

Homozygous for
mutant allele

Homozygous for
normal allele

Homozygous for
mutant allele

OR

Heterozygous for
mutant allele

▲ FIGURE 23-11 Two mechanisms for loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) of tumor-suppressor genes. A cell
containing one normal and one mutant allele of a tumorsuppressor gene is generally phenotypically normal. (a) If
formation of the mitotic spindle is defective, then the duplicated
chromosomes bearing the normal and mutant alleles may
segregate in an aberrant 3:1 ratio. A daughter cell that receives
three chromosomes of a type will generally lose one, restoring
the normal 2n chromosome number. Sometimes the resultant

cell will contain one normal and one mutant allele, but
sometimes it will be homozygous for the mutant allele. Note that
such aneuploidy (abnormal chromosome constitution) is generally
damaging or lethal to cells that have to develop into the many
complex structures of an organism, but can often be tolerated in
clones of cells that have limited fates and duties. (b) Mitotic
recombination between a chromosome with a wild-type and a
mutant allele, followed by chromosome segregation, can produce
a cell that contains two copies of the mutant allele.

Aberrations in Signaling Pathways That Control
Development Are Associated with Many Cancers

mechanisms from operating are likely to be oncogenic, causing inappropriate or cancerous growth.
Hh signaling, which is used repeatedly during development to control cell fates, is a good example of a signaling
pathway implicated in cancer induction. In the skin and cerebellum one of the human Hh proteins, Sonic hedgehog, stimulates cell division by binding to and inactivating a
membrane protein called Patched1 (Ptc1) (see Figure 15-31).
Loss-of-function mutations in ptc1 permit cell proliferation
in the absence of an Hh signal; thus ptc1 is a tumorsuppressor gene. Not surprisingly, mutations in ptc1 have
been found in tumors of the skin and cerebellum in mice and

During normal development secreted signals such as Wnt,
TGF, and Hedgehog (Hh) are frequently used to direct cells
to particular developmental fates, which may include the
property of rapid mitosis. The effects of such signals must
be regulated so that growth is limited to the right time and
place. Among the mechanisms available for reining in the
effects of powerful developmental signals are inducible intracellular antagonists, receptor blockers, and competing signals (Chapter 15). Mutations that prevent such restraining

23.2 • The Genetic Basis of Cancer

WNT

Disheveled

Frizzled

949

Anti-growth factors
(e.g. TGFβ)

GSK-3β
TGFβR
APC

TCF

β-Catenin
CdC42

P13K

p16
β-Catenin: TCF

Growth Factors
(e.g. TGFn)

Integrins

RTK

FAK
Src

Cas

PKC

Mos

MKKs

JNKs

Ras

Rat

MEK

MAPK

MAPK

EIK

Fos

FPO

MEKK
CdC42

G-Prot

Rac

Cycl E: CDK2

Changes
in gene
expression

Cell
proliferation
(cell cycle)

Ad Cycl

Myc:Max

ARF

CREB

PKA

NF-κβ

PKC
P13K
?

Akt

Akkα

DNA
damage
sensor
p53

MDM2

NHR (e.g. ER)

RTK

p21

Rho

(e.g. Estrogen)

Survival Factors
(e.g. IGF1)

E2Fe

Jun

Mad:Max

7 TMR

p27

PLC

Abl
Hormones
(e.g. Bombesin)

HPV E7

Crk

Fyn
She
NF1
Grb2
SOS

Smads

Rac
Rb

ECM

p16

Cycl D: CDK4

NF-κβ

Mitochondria
Stat 3, 5

Iκβ

Cell death
(apoptosis)

Stat 3, 5

PTEN

Bax

Caspase 9

FAP

Bcl XL

Bcl 2

Bad

Mitochondria

Fas

Decoy R

Cytochrome c
Stat 3, 5

Bcl 2
FADD

Caspase 8

Bld

Death
Factors
(e.g. FasL)

Jaks
Bim, etc.
Cytokines
(e.g. EPO)

Cytokine R

Abnormality
sensor

▲ FIGURE 23-12 Cell circuitry that is affected by
cancer-causing mutations. Growth control and the cell cycle,
the heart of cancer, are influenced by many types of signals, and
the external inputs become integrated as the cell makes its
decision about whether to divide or to continue dividing.

Developmental pathways give cells their identity, and along with
that identity often comes a commitment to proliferate or not.
Genes known to be mutated in cancer cells are highlighted in
red. [From D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, 2000, Cell 100:57.]

humans. Mutations in other genes in the Hh signaling pathway are also associated with cancer. Some such mutations
create oncogenes that turn on Hh target genes inappropriately; others are recessive mutations that affect negative regulators like Ptc1. As is the case for a number of other
tumor-suppressor genes, complete loss of Ptc1 function
would lead to early fetal death, since it is needed for development, so it is only the tumor cells that are homozygous
ptc1/ptc1.
Many of the signaling pathways described in other chapters play roles in controlling embryonic development and cell
proliferation in adult tissues. In recent years mutations af-

fecting components of most of these signaling pathways have
been linked to cancer (Figure 23-12). Indeed, once one gene
in a developmental pathway has been linked to a type of
human cancer, knowledge of the pathway gleaned from
model organisms like worms, flies, or mice allows focused investigations of the possible involvement of additional pathway genes in other cases of the cancer. For example, APC,
the critical first gene mutated on the path to colon carcinoma, is now known to be part of the Wnt signaling pathway, which led to the discovery of the involvement of
-catenin mutations in colon cancer. Mutations in tumorsuppressor developmental genes promote tumor formation

950

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

in tissues where the affected gene normally helps restrain
growth, and not in cells where the primary role of the developmental regulator is to control cell fate but not growth.
Mutations in developmental proto-oncogenes may induce
tumor formation in tissues where an affected gene normally
promotes growth or in another tissue where the gene has become aberrantly active.

DNA Microarray Analysis of Expression Patterns
Can Reveal Subtle Differences Between
Tumor Cells
Traditionally the properties of tumor and normal cells have
been assessed by staining and microscopy. The prognosis for
many tumors could be determined, within certain limits,
from their histology. However the appearance of cells alone
has limited information content, and better ways to discern
the properties of cells are desirable both to understand
tumorigenesis and to arrive at meaningful and accurate decisions about prognosis and therapy.
As we’ve seen, genetic studies can identify the single initiating mutation or series of mutations that cause transforma-

tion of normal cells into tumor cells, as in the case of colon
cancer. After these initial events, however, the cells of a tumor
undergo a cascade of changes reflecting the interplay between
the initiating events and signals from outside. As a result,
tumor cells can become quite different, even if they arise from
the same initiating mutation or mutations. Although these differences may not be recognized from the appearance of cells,
they can be detected from the cells’ patterns of gene expression. DNA microarray analysis can determine the expression
of thousands of genes simultaneously, permitting complex
phenotypes to be defined at the molecular genetic level. (See
Figures 9-35 and 9-36 for an explanation of this technique.)
Microarray analysis recently has been applied to
diffuse large B cell lymphoma, a disease marked by
the presence of abnormally large B lymphocytes
throughout lymph nodes. Affected patients have highly variable outcomes, so the disease has long been suspected to be,

 EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-13 Differences in gene
expression patterns determined by DNA microarray analysis
can distinguish between otherwise phenotypically similar
lymphomas. Samples of mRNA were extracted from normal
lymphocytes at different stages of differentiation and from
malignant lymphocytes obtained from patients with three types
of lymphoma. DNA microarray analysis of the extracted RNA
determined the transcription of about 18,000 genes by each
of the 96 experimental samples of normal and malignant
lymphocytes relative to a control, reference sample. (See Figures
9-35 and 9-36 for description of microarray analysis.) The cluster
diagram shown here includes the data from a selected set of
genes whose expression differs the most in the various
lymphocyte samples. An intense red color indicates that the
experimental cells transcribe the gene represented by a particular
DNA spot at a much higher level than the reference cells; intense
green indicates the opposite. Black indicates similar transcript
levels in the samples compared; gray indicates missing or
excluded data. Each vertical column contains the data for a
particular lymphocyte sample (see sample key). Each horizontal
row contains data for a single gene. The genes were grouped
according to their similar patterns of hybridization. For example,
genes indicated by the green bar on the right are active in
proliferating cells, such as transformed cultured cells (pink bar
at top) or lymphoma cells (purple bar at top). The different cell
samples (along the top of the diagram) also were grouped
according to their similar expression patterns. The resulting
dendrogram (tree diagram) shows that the samples from patients
with diffuse large B cell lymphoma (purple samples) fall into two
groups. One group is similar to relatively undifferentiated B
lymphocytes in germinal centers (orange samples); the other
is similar to more differentiated B cells (light-purple samples).
[From A. A. Alizadeh et al., 2000, Nature 403:505.]

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma
Germinal center B cells
Normal lymph nodes/tonsils
Activated blood B cells
Resting/activated T cells

Transformed cell lines
Follicular lymphoma
Resting blood B cell
Chronic lymphoblastic
lymphoma

23.3 • Oncogenic Mutations in Growth-Promoting Proteins

in fact, multiple diseases. Microarray analysis of lymphomas
from different patients revealed two groups distinguished by
their patterns of gene expression (Figure 23-13). No morphological or visible criteria were found that could distinguish the two types of tumors. Patients with one tumor type
defined by the microarray data survived much longer than
those with the other type. Lymphomas whose gene expression is similar to that of B lymphocytes in the earliest stages
of differentiation have a better prognosis; lymphomas whose
gene expression is closer to that of more differentiated B
lymphocytes have a worse prognosis. Similar analyses of the
gene expression patterns, or “signatures,” of other tumors
are likely to improve classification and diagnosis, allowing
informed decisions about treatments, and also provide insights into the properties of tumor cells. ❚

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 23.2
The Genetic Basis of Cancer
■ Dominant gain-of-function mutations in proto-oncogenes
and recessive loss-of-function mutations in tumor-suppressor
genes are oncogenic.

Among the proteins encoded by proto-oncogenes are
growth-promoting signaling proteins and their receptors,
signal-transduction proteins, transcription factors, and
apoptotic proteins (see Figure 23-8).

■

An activating mutation of one of the two alleles of a protooncogene converts it to an oncogene. This can occur by point
mutation, gene amplification, and gene translocation.
■

The first human oncogene to be identified encodes a constitutively active form of Ras, a signal-transduction protein. This oncogene was isolated from a human bladder
carcinoma (see Figure 23-4).

■

■ Slow-acting retroviruses can cause cancer by integrating
near a proto-oncogene in such a way that transcription of the
cellular gene is activated continuously and inappropriately.

Tumor-suppressor genes encode proteins that directly or
indirectly slow progression through the cell cycle, checkpointcontrol proteins that arrest the cell cycle, components of
growth-inhibiting signaling pathways, pro-apoptotic proteins,
and DNA-repair enzymes.

■

The first tumor-suppressor gene to be recognized, RB,
is mutated in retinoblastoma and some other tumors.

■

■ Inheritance of a single mutant allele of RB greatly increases the probability that a specific kind of cancer will
develop, as is the case for many other tumor-suppressor
genes (e.g., APC and BRCA1).

In individuals born heterozygous for a tumor-suppressor
gene, a somatic cell can undergo loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) by mitotic recombination, chromosome missegregation, mutation, or deletion (see Figure 23-11).

■

951

■ Many genes that regulate normal developmental processes
encode proteins that function in various signaling pathways
(see Figure 23-12). Their normal roles in regulating where
and when growth occurs are reflected in the character of the
tumors that arise when the genes are mutated.

DNA microarray analysis can identify differences in gene
expression between types of tumor cells that are indistinguishable by traditional criteria. Some tumor cells appear
to be related to specific types of normal cells at certain
stages of development based on similarities in their expression patterns.

■

23.3 Oncogenic Mutations
in Growth-Promoting Proteins
Genes encoding each class of cell regulatory protein depicted
in Figure 23-8 have been identified as proto-oncogenes or
tumor-suppressor genes. In this section we examine in more
detail how mutations that result in the unregulated, constitutive activity of certain proteins or in their overproduction
promote cell proliferation and transformation, thereby contributing to carcinogenesis. In each case we see how a rare
cell that has undergone a very particular sort of mutation becomes abundant owing to its uncontrolled proliferation.

Oncogenic Receptors Can Promote Proliferation
in the Absence of External Growth Factors
Although oncogenes theoretically could arise from mutations
in genes encoding growth-promoting signaling molecules,
this rarely occurs. In fact, only one such naturally occurring
oncogene, sis, has been discovered. The sis oncogene, which
encodes a type of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), can
aberrantly autostimulate proliferation of cells that normally
express the PDGF receptor.
In contrast, oncogenes encoding cell-surface receptors
that transduce growth-promoting signals have been associated with several types of cancer. The receptors for many
such growth factors have intrinsic protein-tyrosine kinase activity in their cytosolic domains, an activity that is quiescent
until activated. Ligand binding to the external domains of
these receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) leads to their dimerization and activation of their kinase activity, initiating an intracellular signaling pathway that ultimately promotes
proliferation.
In some cases, a point mutation changes a normal RTK
into one that dimerizes and is constitutively active in the absence of ligand. For instance, a single point mutation converts the normal Her2 receptor into the Neu oncoprotein,
which is an initiator of certain mouse cancers (Figure 23-14,
left). Similarly, human tumors called multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 produce a constitutively active dimeric Gliaderived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) receptor that results

952

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer
Proto-oncogene receptor proteins
Her2 receptor

EGF receptor

Exterior

Valine

Cytosol

Inactive
receptor
tyrosine
kinase

(Val → Gln)

FPO
Oncogenic
mutation

ErbB

Neu

Constitutively
active protein
tyrosine kinase

Glutamine

Exterior

Deletion

Cytosol
ATP

P
ADP

ATP

P
ADP

ATP

P
ADP

ATP

P
ADP

Ligand-independent receptor oncoproteins

▲ FIGURE 23-14 Effects of oncogenic mutations in protooncogenes that encode cell-surface receptors. Left: A mutation
that alters a single amino acid (valine to glutamine) in the
transmembrane region of the Her2 receptor causes dimerization
of the receptor, even in the absence of the normal EGF-related
ligand, making the oncoprotein Neu a constitutively active
kinase. Right: A deletion that causes loss of the extracellular
ligand-binding domain in the EGF receptor leads, for unknown
reasons, to constitutive activation of the kinase activity of the
resulting oncoprotein ErbB.

from a point mutation in the extracellular domain. In other
cases, deletion of much of the extracellular ligand-binding
domain produces a constitutively active oncogenic receptor.
For example, deletion of the extracellular domain of the normal EGF receptor converts it to the dimeric ErbB oncoprotein (Figure 23-14, right).
Mutations leading to overproduction of a normal RTK
also can be oncogenic. For instance, many human breast cancers overproduce a normal Her2 receptor. As a result, the
cells are stimulated to proliferate in the presence of very low
concentrations of EGF and related hormones, concentrations
too low to stimulate proliferation of normal cells.
A monoclonal antibody specific for Her2 has been
a strikingly successful new treatment for the subset
of breast cancers that overproduce Her2. Her2
antibody injected into the blood recognizes Her2 and causes
it to be internalized, selectively killing the cancer cells without any apparent effect on normal breast (and other) cells
that produce moderate amounts of Her2. ❚
Another mechanism for generating an oncogenic receptor
is illustrated by the human trk oncogene, which was isolated
from a colon carcinoma. This oncogene encodes a chimeric
protein as the result of a chromosomal translocation that
replaced the sequences encoding most of the extracellular
domain of the normal Trk receptor with the sequences
encoding the N-terminal amino acids of nonmuscle tropomyosin (Figure 23-15). The translocated tropomyosin
segment can mediate dimerization of the chimeric Trk receptor by forming a coiled-coil structure, leading to activation of the kinase domains in the absence of ligand. The normal Trk protein is a cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase
that binds a nerve growth factor (Chapter 22). In contrast,
the constitutively active Trk oncoprotein is localized in
the cytosol, since the N-terminal signal sequence directing
it to the membrane has been deleted.

 FIGURE 23-15 Domain structures
of normal tropomyosin, the normal Trk
receptor, and chimeric Trk oncoprotein.
A chromosomal translocation results in
replacement of most of the extracellular
domain of the normal human Trk protein,
a receptor tyrosine kinase, with the
N-terminal domain of nonmuscle
tropomyosin. Dimerized by the
tropomyosin segment, the Trk oncoprotein
kinase is constitutively active. Unlike the
normal Trk, which is localized to the
plasma membrane, the Trk oncoprotein is
found in the cytosol. [See F. Coulier et al.,
1989, Mol. Cell Biol. 9:15.]

Extracellular
domain
Transmembrane
domain

Exterior

FPO

Cytosol

Kinase
domain

ATP

P ADP

ATP

P ADP

N
N
Normal Trk receptor

N
N

Normal nonmuscle tropomyosin

C
C

N-terminal region
of tropomyosin

Chimeric Trk oncoprotein

23.3 • Oncogenic Mutations in Growth-Promoting Proteins

Viral Activators of Growth-Factor Receptors Act
as Oncoproteins
Viruses use their own tricks to cause cancer, presumably to
increase the production of virus from the infected cancer
cells. For example, a retrovirus called spleen focus-forming
virus (SFFV) induces erythroleukemia (a tumor of erythroid
progenitors) in adult mice by manipulating a normal developmental signal. The proliferation, survival, and differentiation of erythroid progenitors into mature red cells
absolutely require erythropoietin (Epo) and the corresponding Epo receptor (see Figure 14-7). A mutant SFFV envelope glycoprotein, termed gp55, is responsible for the
oncogenic effect of the virus. Although gp55 cannot function
as a normal retrovirus envelope protein in virus budding and
infection, it has acquired the remarkable ability to bind to
and activate Epo receptors in the same cell (Figure 23-16). By
inappropriately and continuously stimulating the proliferation of erythroid progenitors, gp55 induces formation of excessive numbers of erythrocytes. Malignant clones of
erythroid progenitors emerge several weeks after SFFV infection as a result of further mutations in these aberrantly
proliferating cells.
Another example of this phenomenon is provided by
human papillomavirus (HPV), a DNA virus that causes genital warts. A papillomavirus protein designated E5, which
contains only 44 amino acids, spans the plasma membrane
and forms a dimer or trimer. Each E5 polypeptide can form a
stable complex with one endogenous receptor for PDGF,
thereby aggregating two or more PDGF receptors within
gp55
Epo

Epo
receptor
Exterior

FPO

P

P
ATP

ATP
ADP

Active
JAK
kinase

ADP

P

P
ATP

ATP
ADP

ADP

Cytosol

▲ FIGURE 23-16 Activation of the erythropoietin (Epo)
receptor by the natural ligand, Epo, or a viral oncoprotein.
Binding of Epo dimerizes the receptor and induces formation of
erythrocytes from erythroid progenitor cells. Normally cancers
occur when progenitor cells infected by the spleen focus-forming
virus produce the Epo receptor and viral gp55, both localized to
the plasma membrane. The transmembrane domains of dimeric
gp55 specifically bind the Epo receptor, dimerizing and activating
the receptor in the absence of Epo. [See S. N. Constantinescu et al.,
1999, EMBO J. 18:3334.]

953

the plane of the plasma membrane. This mimics hormonemediated receptor dimerization, causing sustained receptor
activation and eventually cell transformation.

Many Oncogenes Encode Constitutively Active
Signal-Transduction Proteins
A large number of oncogenes are derived from protooncogenes whose encoded proteins aid in transducing signals
from an activated receptor to a cellular target. We describe
several examples of such oncogenes; each is expressed in
many types of tumor cells.

Ras Pathway Components Among the best-studied oncogenes in this category are the rasD genes, which were the first
nonviral oncogenes to be recognized. A point mutation that
substitutes any amino acid for glycine at position 12 in the
Ras sequence can convert the normal protein into a constitutively active oncoprotein. This simple mutation reduces the
protein’s GTPase activity, thus maintaining Ras in the active
GTP-bound state. Constitutively active Ras oncoproteins are
produced by many types of human tumors, including bladder, colon, mammary, skin, and lung carcinomas, neuroblastomas, and leukemias.
As we saw in Chapter 14, Ras is a key component in
transducing signals from activated receptors to a cascade of
protein kinases. In the first part of this pathway, a signal
from an activated RTK is carried via two adapter proteins
to Ras, converting it to the active GTP-bound form (see Figure 14-16). In the second part of the pathway, activated Ras
transmits the signal via two intermediate protein kinases to
MAP kinase. The activated MAP kinase then phosphorylates
a number of transcription factors that induce synthesis of important cell-cycle and differentiation-specific proteins (see
Figure 14-21). Activating Ras mutations short-circuit the
first part of this pathway, making upstream activation triggered by ligand binding to the receptor unnecessary.
Ras proteins are anchored to the inner side of the cell’s
plasma membrane by a covalently attached farnesyl group
lipid anchor (see Figure 5-15b); this attachment is essential
for either normal or oncogenic Ras proteins to function as
signal transducers. Inhibitors of farnesyl transferase, the enzyme that adds the farnesyl group, prevent membrane localization of Ras. Such inhibitors, which have been shown to
reduce the abnormal proliferation of cultured cells transformed by the ras oncogene, are in clinical trials for treatment of several tumors, including colon cancer. Early phases
of these trials, however, have not proved promising.
Oncogenes encoding other altered components of the
RTK-Ras–MAP kinase pathway also have been identified.
One example, found in certain transforming mouse retroviruses, encodes a constitutively activated Raf serine/threonine kinase, which is in the pathway between Ras and MAP
kinase. Another is the crk (pronounced “crack”) oncogene
found in avian sarcoma virus, which causes certain tumors

954

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

when overexpressed. The Crk protein, which contains one
SH2 and two SH3 domains, is similar to the GRB2 adapter
protein that functions between an RTK and Ras (see Figure
14-16). The SH2 and SH3 domains in GRB2 and other
adapter proteins mediate formation of specific protein aggregates that normally serve as signaling units for cellular
events. Overproduction of Crk leads to formation of protein
aggregates that inappropriately transduce signals, thus promoting the growth and metastatic abilities characteristic of
cancer cells.
Constitutive Ras activation can also arise from a recessive loss-of-function mutation in a GTPase-accelerating protein (GAP). The normal GAP function is to accelerate
hydrolysis of GTP and the conversion of active GTP-bound
Ras to inactive GDP-bound Ras (see Figure 3-29). The loss
of GAP leads to sustained Ras activation of downstream
signal-transduction proteins. For example, neurofibromatosis,
a benign tumor of the sheath cells that surround nerves, is
caused by loss of both alleles of NF1, which encodes a GAPtype protein. Individuals with neurofibromatosis have inherited a single mutant NF1 allele; subsequent somatic mutation
in the other allele leads to formation of neurofibromas. Thus
NF1, like RB, is a tumor-suppressor gene, and neurofibromatosis, like hereditary retinoblastoma, is inherited as an
autosomal dominant trait.

(a)
Kinase
(catalytic
domain)

N
SH3

ATP
SH2

P-Tyr
527
C

(b)
Amino
terminus
c-Src

Myr

FPO
SH3

SH2

Kinase

Carboxyl
terminus
Tyr
527 P
Csk
ATP

ADP

Src Protein Kinase Several oncogenes, some initially identified in human tumors, others in transforming retroviruses,
encode cytosolic protein kinases that normally transduce signals in a variety of intracellular signaling pathways. Indeed
the first oncogene to be discovered, v-src from Rous sarcoma
retrovirus, encodes a constitutively active protein-tyrosine
kinase. At least eight mammalian proto-oncogenes encode a
family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases related to the v-Src
protein. In addition to a catalytic domain, these kinases contain SH2 and SH3 protein-protein interaction domains. The
kinase activity of cellular Src and related proteins normally is
inactivated by phosphorylation of the tyrosine residue at
position 527, which is six residues from the C-terminus
(Figure 23-17a, b). Hydrolysis of phosphotyrosine 527 by a
specific phosphatase enzyme normally activates c-Src. Tyrosine 527 is often missing or altered in Src oncoproteins that
have constitutive kinase activity; that is, they do not require
activation by a phosphatase. In Rous sarcoma virus, for instance, the src gene has suffered a deletion that eliminates the
C-terminal 18 amino acids of c-Src; as a consequence the
v-Src kinase is constitutively active (Figure 23-17b). Phosphorylation of target proteins by aberrant Src oncoproteins
contributes to abnormal proliferation of many types of cells.

Abl Protein Kinase Another oncogene encoding a cytosolic
nonreceptor protein kinase is generated by a chromosomal
translocation that fuses a part of the c-abl gene, which encodes
a tyrosine kinase, with part of the bcr gene, whose function is
unknown. The normal c-Abl protein promotes branching of
filamentous actin and extension of cell processes, so it may

v-Src

Myr

SH3

SH2

Kinase

▲ FIGURE 23-17 Structure of Src tyrosine kinases and
activation by an oncogenic mutation. (a) Three-dimensional
structure of Hck, one of several Src kinases in mammals.
Binding of phosphotyrosine 527 to the SH2 domain induces
conformational strains in the SH3 and kinase domains, distorting
the kinase active site so it is catalytically inactive. The kinase
activity of cellular Src proteins is normally activated by removing
the phosphate on tyrosine 527. (b) Domain structure of c-Src
and v-Src. Phosphorylation of tyrosine 527 by Csk, another
cellular tyrosine kinase, inactivates the Src kinase activity. The
transforming v-Src oncoprotein encoded by Rous sarcoma virus
is missing the C-terminal 18 amino acids including tyrosine 527
and thus is constitutively active. [Part (a) from F. Sicheri et al.,
1997, Nature 385:602. See also T. Pawson, 1997, Nature 385:582, and
W. Xu et al., 1997, Nature 385:595.]

function primarily to control the cytoskeleton and cell shape.
The chimeric oncoproteins encoded by the bcr-abl oncogene
form a tetramer that exhibits unregulated and continuous
Abl kinase activity. (This is similar to dimerization and activation of the chimeric Trk oncoprotein shown in Figure
23-15.) Bcr-Abl can phosphorylate and thereby activate many
intracellular signal-transduction proteins; at least some of
these proteins are not normal substrates of Abl. For instance,
Bcr-Abl can activate JAK2 kinase and STAT5 transcription
factor, which normally are activated by binding of growth

23.3 • Oncogenic Mutations in Growth-Promoting Proteins

After a painstaking search, an inhibitor of Abl
kinase named STI-571 (Gleevec) was identified as
a possible treatment for CML in the early 1990s.
Dr. Brian Druker first showed that STI-571 was highly lethal
to CML cells while sparing normal cells. After clinical trials
showing STI-571 is remarkably effective in treating CML despite some side effects, it was approved by the FDA in 2001,
the first cancer drug targeted to a signal-transduction protein
unique to tumor cells. STI-571 inhibits several other tyrosine
kinases that are implicated in different cancers and has been
successful in trials for treating these diseases as well. There
are 96 tyrosine kinases encoded in the human genome, so
drugs related to Gleevec may be useful in controlling the
activities of all these proteins. ❚
The Gleevec story illustrates how genetics—the discovery
of the Philadelphia chromosome and the critical oncogene it
creates—together with biochemistry—discovery of the molecular action of the Abl protein—can lead to a powerful
new therapy. In general, each difference between cancer cells
and normal cells provides a new opportunity to identify a
specific drug that kills just the cancer cells or at least stops
their uncontrolled growth.

Since the most direct effect on gene expression is exerted
by transcription factors, it is not surprising that many oncogenes encode transcription factors. Two examples are jun and
fos, which initially were identified in transforming retroviruses and later found to be overexpressed in some human
tumors. The c-jun and c-fos proto-oncogenes encode proteins
that sometimes associate to form a heterodimeric transcription factor, called AP1, that binds to a sequence found in
promoters and enhancers of many genes (see Figure 11-24).
Both Fos and Jun also can act independently as transcription
factors. They function as oncoproteins by activating transcription of key genes that encode growth-promoting proteins
or by inhibiting transcription of growth-repressing genes.
Many nuclear proto-oncogene proteins are induced when
normal cells are stimulated to grow, indicating their direct
role in growth control. For example, PDGF treatment of
quiescent 3T3 cells induces an ≈50-fold increase in the production of c-Fos and c-Myc, the normal products of the fos
and myc proto-oncogenes. Initially there is a transient rise
of c-Fos and later a more prolonged rise of c-Myc (Figure
23-18). The levels of both proteins decline within a few
hours, a regulatory effect that may, in normal cells, help to
avoid cancer. As discussed in Chapter 21, c-Fos and c-Myc
stimulate transcription of genes encoding proteins that promote progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle and
the G1 to S transition. In tumors, the oncogenic forms of
these or other transcription factors are frequently expressed
at high and unregulated levels.
In normal cells, c-Fos and c-Myc mRNAs and the proteins they encode are intrinsically unstable, leading to their
rapid loss after the genes are induced. Some of the changes

15
c-Fos
Relative activity

factors (e.g., erythropoietin) to cell-surface receptors (see
Figure 14-12).
The chromosomal translocation that forms bcr-abl generates the diagnostic Philadelphia chromosome, discovered
in 1960 (see Figure 10-29). The identity of the genes involved
was discovered by molecular cloning of the relevant translocation “joint,” allowing biochemical study of the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein. If this translocation occurs in a hematopoietic cell
in the bone marrow, the activity of the chimeric bcr-abl oncogene results in the initial phase of human chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), characterized by an expansion in the
number of white blood cells. A second mutation in a cell carrying bcr-abl (e.g., in p53) leads to acute leukemia, which
often kills the patient. The CML chromosome translocation
was only the first of a long series of distinctive, or “signature,” chromosome translocations linked to particular forms
of leukemia. Each one presents an opportunity for greater
understanding of the disease and for new therapies. In the
case of CML, that second step to successful therapy has
already been taken.

10

By one mechanism or another, the proteins encoded by all
proto-oncogenes and oncogenes eventually cause changes in
gene expression. This is reflected in the differences in the
proportions of different mRNAs in growing cells and quiescent
cells, as well as similar differences between tumor cells and their
normal counterparts. As discussed in the last section, we can
now measure such differences in the expression of thousands of
genes with DNA microarrays (see Figure 23-13).

FPO
c-Myc

5

0

Inappropriate Production of Nuclear Transcription
Factors Can Induce Transformation

955

Serum
added

30

60
Minutes

90

2

4

6
Hours

8

10

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-18 Addition of serum to
quiescent 3T3 cells yields a marked increase in the activity
of two proto-oncogene products, c-Fos and c-Myc. Serum
contains factors like platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) that
stimulate the growth of quiescent cells. One of the earliest
effects of growth factors is to induce expression of c-fos and
c-myc, whose encoded proteins are transcription factors.
[See M. E. Greenberg and E. B. Ziff, 1984, Nature 311:433.]

956

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

A single point mutation in Ras, a key transducing protein in many signaling pathways, reduces its GTPase
activity, thereby maintaining it in an activated state.

■

FPO

CH
c–myc

CH

c–myc

VH

8

14

8 q−

VH

14 q+

Burkitt's lymphoma

▲ FIGURE 23-19 Chromosomal translocation in Burkitt’s
lymphoma. As a result of a translocation between chromosomes
8 and 14, the c-myc gene is placed adjacent to the gene for part
of the antibody heavy chain (CH), leading to overproduction of the
Myc transcription factor in lymphocytes and hence their growth
into a lymphoma.

■ The activity of Src, a cytosolic signal-transducing proteintyrosine kinase, normally is regulated by reversible phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of a tyrosine residue
near the C-terminus (see Figure 23-17). The unregulated
activity of Src oncoproteins that lack this tyrosine promotes
abnormal proliferation of many cells.

The Philadelphia chromosome results from a chromosomal translocation that produces the chimeric bcr-abl
oncogene. The unregulated Abl kinase activity of the BcrAbl oncoprotein is responsible for its oncogenic effect. An
Abl kinase inhibitor (Gleevec) is effective in treating
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and may work
against other cancers.

■

Inappropriate production of nuclear transcription factors such as Fos, Jun, and Myc can induce transformation.
In Burkitt’s lymphoma cells, c-myc is translocated close to
an antibody gene, leading to overproduction of c-Myc (see
Figure 23-19).

■

that turn c-fos from a normal gene to an oncogene involve
genetic deletions of sequences that make the Fos mRNA
and protein short-lived. Conversion of the c-myc protooncogene into an oncogene can occur by several different
mechanisms. In cells of the human tumor known as
Burkitt’s lymphoma, the c-myc gene is translocated to a site
near the heavy-chain antibody genes, which are normally
active in antibody-producing white blood cells (Figure
23-19). The c-myc translocation is a rare aberration of the
normal DNA rearrangements that occur during maturation
of antibody-producing cells. The translocated myc gene,
now regulated by the antibody gene enhancer, is continually expressed, causing the cell to become cancerous. Localized amplification of a segment of DNA containing the
myc gene, which occurs in several human tumors, also
causes inappropriately high production of the otherwise
normal Myc protein.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 23.3
Oncogenic Mutations in Growth-Promoting Proteins
Mutations or chromosomal translocations that permit
RTKs for growth factors to dimerize in the absence of their
normal ligands lead to constitutive receptor activity (see
Figures 23-14 and 23-15). Such activation ultimately induces changes in gene expression that can transform cells.
Overproduction of growth factor receptors can have the
same effect and lead to abnormal cell proliferation.

■

Certain virus-encoded proteins can bind to and activate
host-cell receptors for growth factors, thereby stimulating
cell proliferation in the absence of normal signals.

■

Most tumor cells produce constitutively active forms of
one or more intracellular signal-transduction proteins,
causing growth-promoting signaling in the absence of normal growth factors.

■

23.4 Mutations Causing Loss
of Growth-Inhibiting and Cell-Cycle
Controls
Normal growth and development depends on a finely tuned,
highly regulated balance between growth-promoting and
growth-inhibiting pathways. Mutations that disrupt this balance can lead to cancer. Most of the mutations discussed in
the previous section cause inappropriate activity of growthpromoting pathways. Just as critical are mutations that
decrease the activity of growth-inhibiting pathways when
they are needed.
For example, transforming growth factor  (TGF), despite its name, inhibits proliferation of many cell types, including most epithelial and immune system cells. Binding of
TGF to its receptor induces activation of cytosolic Smad
transcription factors (see Figure 14-2). After translocating to
the nucleus, Smads can promote expression of the gene encoding p15, which causes cells to arrest in G1. TGF signaling also promotes expression of genes encoding extracellular
matrix proteins and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1),
which reduces the plasmin-catalyzed degradation of the matrix. Loss-of-function mutations in either TGF receptors or in
Smads thus promote cell proliferation and probably contribute
to the invasiveness and metastasis of tumor cells (Figure
23-20). Such mutations have in fact been found in a variety
of human cancers, as we describe in Chapter 14.
The complex mechanisms for regulating the eukaryotic
cell cycle are prime targets for oncogenic mutations. Both
positive- and negative-acting proteins precisely control the

23.4 • Mutations Causing Loss of Growth-inhibiting and Cell-Cycle Controls
TGFβ

−

Type I
receptors

P
P P

P
P

−
−

FPO

Smad3

Mutations That Promote Unregulated Passage
from G1 to S Phase Are Oncogenic
Once a cell progresses past a certain point in late G1, called
the restriction point, it becomes irreversibly committed to entering the S phase and replicating its DNA (see Figure 21-28).
D-type cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), and the Rb
protein are all elements of the control system that regulate
passage through the restriction point.
The expression of D-type cyclin genes is induced by many
extracellular growth factors, or mitogens. These cyclins
assemble with their partners CDK4 and CDK6 to generate
catalytically active cyclin-CDK complexes, whose kinase
activity promotes progression past the restriction point. Mitogen withdrawal prior to passage through the restriction
point leads to accumulation of p16. Like p15 mentioned
above, p16 binds specifically to CDK4 and CDK6, thereby
inhibiting their kinase activity and causing G1 arrest. Under
normal circumstances, phosphorylation of Rb protein is initiated midway through G1 by active cyclin D-CDK4 and cyclin D-CDK6 complexes. Rb phosphorylation is completed
by other cyclin-CDK complexes in late G1, allowing activation of E2F transcription factors, which stimulate transcription of genes encoding proteins required for DNA synthesis.
The complete phosphorylation of Rb irreversibly commits
the cell to DNA synthesis. Most tumors contain an oncogenic mutation that causes overproduction or loss of one of
the components of this pathway such that the cells are propelled into the S phase in the absence of the proper extracellular growth signals (Figure 23-21).
Elevated levels of cyclin D1, for example, are found
in many human cancers. In certain tumors of antibodyproducing B lymphocytes, for instance, the cyclin D1 gene
is translocated such that its transcription is under control of
an antibody-gene enhancer, causing elevated cyclin D1 production throughout the cell cycle, irrespective of extracellular signals. (This phenomenon is analogous to the c-myc
translocation in Burkitt’s lymphoma cells discussed earlier.)
That cyclin D1 can function as an oncoprotein was shown by
studies with transgenic mice in which the cyclin D1 gene was

Cytosol

Loss-of-function
mutations in
Smads block
TGFβ signal

P

Smad3-P

−

Smad4

Smad4
P
P

−
Decreased production of
p15 increases proliferation

p15 promoter

Nucleus
p15
Transcription of gene
encoding inhibitor of
protease that degrades
extracellular matrix
proteins

Decreased production
of PAI-1 allows increased
extracellular matrix
degradation and, hence,
metastatis

PAI-1 promoter

PAI-1
Transcription of gene
encoding cell-cycle
inhibitor

▲ FIGURE 23-20 Effect of loss of TGF signaling.
Binding of TGF, an antigrowth factor, causes activation
of Smad transcription factors. In the absence of TGF
signaling due to either a receptor mutation or a SMAD
mutation, cell proliferation and invasion of the surrounding
extracellular matrix (ECM) increase. [See X. Hua et al., 1998,
Genes & Develop. 12:3084.]

placed under control of an enhancer specific for mammary
ductal cells. Initially the ductal cells underwent hyperproliferation, and eventually breast tumors developed in these
transgenic mice. Amplification of the cyclin D1 gene and
concomitant overproduction of the cyclin D1 protein is
common in human breast cancer.
The proteins that function as cyclin-CDK inhibitors play
an important role in regulating the cell cycle (Chapter 21). In
particular, loss-of-function mutations that prevent p16 from

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

Loss-of-function
mutations in
receptors block
TGFβ signal

Type II
receptors

Focus Animation: TGF Signaling Pathway

entry of cells into and their progression through the cell
cycle, which consists of four main phases: G1, S, G2, and mitosis (see Figure 21-2). This regulatory system assures the
proper coordination of cellular growth during G1 and G2,
DNA synthesis during the S phase, and chromosome segregation and cell division during mitosis. In addition, cells that
have sustained damage to their DNA normally are arrested
before their DNA is replicated. This arrest allows time for
the DNA damage to be repaired; alternatively, the arrested
cells are directed to commit suicide via programmed cell
death. The whole cell-cycle control system functions to prevent cells from becoming cancerous. As might be expected,
mutations in this system often lead to abnormal development
or contribute to cancer.

957

958

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

p16

CycD
CDK4

Overview Annimation: Cell-Cycle Control

MEDIA CONNECTIONS

p16

CycD

passage through the restriction point is all that is necessary to
subvert normal growth control and set the stage for cancer.

Inactive
kinase
Repressor of transcription
of proteins required
for DNA synthesis

FPO
Rb E2F

CycD
E2F

CDK4
CDK4

p
p
p

Rb

Activator of transcription
of proteins needed for
DNA synthesis

▲ FIGURE 23-21 Restriction point control.
Unphosphorylated Rb protein binds transcription factors
collectively called E2F and thereby prevents E2F-mediated
transcriptional activation of many genes whose products
are required for DNA synthesis (e.g., DNA polymerase).
The kinase activity of cyclin D-CDK4 phosphorylates Rb,
thereby activating E2F; this kinase activity is inhibited by
p16. Overproduction of cyclin D, a positive regulator, or
loss of the negative regulators p16 and Rb, commonly
occurs in human cancers.

inhibiting cyclin D-CDK4/6 kinase activity are common in
several human cancers. As Figure 23-21 makes clear, loss of
p16 mimics overproduction of cyclin D1, leading to Rb hyperphosphorylation and release of active E2F transcription
factor. Thus p16 normally acts as a tumor suppressor. Although the p16 tumor-suppressor gene is deleted in some
human cancers, in others the p16 sequence is normal. In
these latter cancers (e.g., lung cancer), the p16 gene is inactivated by hypermethylation of its promoter region, which
prevents transcription. What promotes this change in the
methylation of p16 is not known, but it prevents production
of this important cell-cycle control protein.
We’ve seen already that inactivating mutations in both
RB alleles lead to childhood retinoblastoma, a relatively rare
type of cancer. However, loss of RB gene function also is
found in more common cancers that arise later in life (e.g.,
carcinomas of lung, breast, and bladder). These tissues, unlike retinal tissue, most likely produce other proteins whose
function is redundant with that of Rb, and thus loss of Rb
is not so critical. Several proteins are known that are related
in structure and probably function to Rb. In addition to
inactivating mutations, Rb function can be eliminated by
the binding of an inhibitory protein, designated E7, that is
encoded by human papillomavirus (HPV), another nasty
viral trick to create virus-producing tissue.
Tumors with inactivating mutations in Rb generally produce normal levels of cyclin D1 and functional p16 protein.
In contrast, tumor cells that overproduce cyclin D1 or have
lost p16 function generally retain wild-type Rb. Thus loss of
only one component of this regulatory system for controlling

Loss-of-Function Mutations Affecting ChromatinRemodeling Proteins Contribute to Tumors
Mutations can undermine growth control by inactivating
tumor-suppressor genes, but these genes can also be silenced
by repressive chromatin structures. In recent years the importance of chromatin-remodeling machines, such as the
Swi/Snf complex, in transcriptional control has become increasingly clear. These large and diverse multiprotein complexes have at their core an ATP-dependent helicase and
often control acetylation of histones. By causing changes in
the positions or structures of nucleosomes, Swi/Snf complexes make genes accessible or inaccessible to DNA-binding
proteins that control transcription (Chapter 11). If a gene is
normally activated or repressed by Swi/Snf-mediated chromatin changes, mutations in the genes encoding the Swi or
Snf proteins will cause changes in expression of the target gene.
Our knowledge of the target genes regulated by Swi/Snf
and other such complexes is incomplete, but the targets evidently include some growth-regulating genes. For example,
studies with transgenic mice suggest that Swi/Snf plays a role
in repressing the E2F genes, thereby inhibiting progression
through the cell cycle. The relationship between the genes
that encode Swi/Snf proteins and the E2F gene was discovered in genetic experiments with flies. Transgenic flies were
constructed to overexpress E2F, which resulted in mild
growth defects. A search for mutations that increase the effect of the E2F overexpression in these flies identified three
components of the Swi/Snf complex. That loss of function
of these genes increases the proliferative effects of E2F indicates that Swi/Snf normally counteracts the function of the
E2F transcription factor. Thus loss of Swi/Snf function, just
like loss of Rb function, can lead to overgrowth and perhaps
cancer. Indeed, in mice, Rb protein recruits Swi/Snf proteins
to repress transcription of the E2F gene.
With chromatin-remodeling complexes involved in so
many cases of transcriptional control, it is expected that
Swi/Snf and similar complexes will be linked to many
cancers. In humans, for example, mutations in Brg1, which
encodes the Swi/Snf catalytic subunit, have been found in
prostate, lung, and breast tumors. Components of the
Swi/Snf complex also have been found to associate with
BRCA1, a nuclear protein that helps suppress human breast
cancer. BRCA-1 is involved in the repair of double-strand
DNA breaks (discussed in the final section of this chapter)
and in transcriptional control, so the Swi/Snf complex may
assist BRCA-1 in these functions.

Loss of p53 Abolishes the DNA-Damage
Checkpoint
A critical feature of cell-cycle control is the G1 checkpoint,
which prevents cells with damaged DNA from entering the

23.4 • Mutations Causing Loss of Growth-inhibiting and Cell-Cycle Controls

959

R249
R248
R273
R175

G245
R282

N

I

II
50

100

III
150

▲ EXPERIMENTAL FIGURE 23-22 Mutations in human
tumors that inactivate the function of p53 protein are highly
concentrated in a few residues. Colored boxes represent
sequences in the p53 gene that are highly conserved in
evolution. Vertical lines represent the frequency at which point
mutations are found at each residue in various human tumors.

S phase (see Figure 21-32, step 4a ). The p53 protein is a sensor essential for the checkpoint control that arrests cells with
damaged DNA in G1. Although p53 has several functions, its
ability to activate transcription of certain genes is most relevant to its tumor-suppressing function. Virtually all p53
mutations abolish its ability to bind to specific DNA sequences and activate gene expression. Mutations in the p53
tumor-suppressor gene occur in more than 50 percent of
human cancers (Figure 23-22).
Cells with functional p53 become arrested in G1 when
exposed to DNA-damaging irradiation, whereas cells lacking
functional p53 do not. Unlike other cell-cycle proteins, p53
is present at very low levels in normal cells because it is extremely unstable and rapidly degraded. Mice lacking p53 are
viable and healthy, except for a predisposition to develop
multiple types of tumors. Expression of the p53 gene is
heightened only in stressful situations, such as ultraviolet or
 irradiation, heat, and low oxygen. DNA damage by 
irradiation or by other stresses somehow leads to the activation of ATM, a serine kinase that phosphorylates and
thereby stabilizes p53, leading to a marked increase in its
concentration (Figure 23-23). The stabilized p53 activates
expression of the gene encoding p21CIP, which binds to and
inhibits mammalian G1 cyclin-CDK complexes. As a result,
cells with damaged DNA are arrested in G1, allowing time
for DNA repair by mechanisms discussed later. If repair is
successful, the levels of p53 and p21CIP will fall, and the cells
then can progress into the S phase.
When the p53 G1 checkpoint control does not operate
properly, damaged DNA can replicate, perpetuating mutations and DNA rearrangements that are passed on to daughter cells, contributing to the likelihood of transformation
into metastatic cells. In addition, p21CIP and two other proteins induced by p53 inhibit the cyclin B-CDK1 complex required for entry into mitosis, thus causing cells to arrest in
G2 (see Figure 21-32, step 4d ). p53 also represses expression

IV
200

C

V

250

300

350

393

These mutations are clustered in conserved regions II–V.
The locations in the protein sequence of the most frequently
occurring point mutations are labeled. In these labels,
R  arginine; G  glycine. [Adapted from C. C. Harris, 1993, Science
262:1980, and L. Ko and C. Prives, 1996, Genes & Develop. 10:1054.]

Damaged DNA

ATM

p

pp
p53

ChK2

FPO

p

Stabilized

Transcription
activation
pp
p53

Cdc25A
Proteasomal
degradation

Apoptosis
Rapid G1/S block

Sustained
G1 and G2
arrest

DNA repair

▲ FIGURE 23-23 G1 arrest in response to DNA damage. The
kinase activity of ATM is activated in response to DNA damage
due to various stresses (e.g., UV irradiation, heat). Activated ATM
then triggers two pathways leading to arrest in G1.
Phosphorylation of p53 stabilizes it, permitting p53-activated
expression of genes encoding proteins that ( 1 ) cause arrest in
G1 and in some cases G2, ( 2 ) promote apoptosis, or ( 3 )
participate in DNA repair. In the other pathway phosphorylated
Chk2 in turn phosphorylates Cdc25A, thereby marking it for
degradation and blocking its role in CDK2 activation. See the text
for a discussion.

960

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

of the genes encoding cyclin B and topoisomerase II, which
also are required for the G2 n mitosis transition. Thus if
DNA is damaged following its replication, p53-induced G2
arrest will prevent its transmission to daughter cells.
The active form of p53 is a tetramer of four identical subunits. A missense point mutation in one of the two p53
alleles in a cell can abrogate almost all p53 activity because
virtually all the oligomers will contain at least one defective
subunit, and such oligomers cannot function as a transcription factor. Oncogenic p53 mutations thus act as dominant
negatives, with mutations in a single allele causing a loss of
function. As we learned in Chapter 9, dominant-negative
mutations can occur in proteins whose active forms are
multimeric or whose function depends on interactions with
other proteins. In contrast, loss-of-function mutations in
other tumor-suppressor genes (e.g., RB) are recessive because
the encoded proteins function as monomers and mutation
of a single allele has little functional consequence.
Under stressful conditions, the ATM kinase also phosphorylates and thus activates Chk2, a protein kinase that phosphorylates the protein phosphatase Cdc25A, marking it for
ubiquitin-mediated destruction. This phosphatase removes the
inhibitory phosphate on CDK2, a prerequisite for cells to enter
the S phase. Decreased levels of Cdc25A thus block progression into and through the S phase (see Figures 23-23 and
21-32, step 4b ). Loss-of-function mutations in the ATM or
Chk2 genes have much the same effect as p53 mutations.
The activity of p53 normally is kept low by a protein
called Mdm2. When Mdm2 is bound to p53, it inhibits the
transcription-activating ability of p53 and catalyzes the addition of ubiquitin molecules, thus targeting p53 for proteasomal degradation. Phosphorylation of p53 by ATM
displaces bound Mdm2 from p53, thereby stabilizing it. Because the Mdm2 gene is itself transcriptionally activated by
p53, Mdm2 functions in an autoregulatory feedback loop
with p53, perhaps normally preventing excess p53 function.
The Mdm2 gene is amplified in many sarcomas and other
human tumors that contain a normal p53 gene. Even though
functional p53 is produced by such tumor cells, the elevated
Mdm2 levels reduce the p53 concentration enough to abolish the p53-induced G1 arrest in response to irradiation.
The activity of p53 also is inhibited by a human papillomavirus (HPV) protein called E6. Thus HPV encodes three
proteins that contribute to its ability to induce stable transformation and mitosis in a variety of cultured cells. Two of
these—E6 and E7—bind to and inhibit the p53 and Rb
tumor suppressors, respectively. Acting together, E6 and E7
are sufficient to induce transformation in the absence of
mutations in cell regulatory proteins. The HPV E5 protein,
which causes sustained activation of the PDGF receptor,
enhances proliferation of the transformed cells.
The activity of p53 is not limited to inducing cell-cycle
arrest. In addition, this multipurpose tumor suppressor stimulates production of pro-apoptotic proteins and DNA-repair
enzymes (see Figure 23-23).

Apoptotic Genes Can Function as ProtoOncogenes or Tumor-Suppressor Genes
During normal development many cells are designated for
programmed cell death, also known as apoptosis (see Chapter 22). Many abnormalities, including errors in mitosis,
DNA damage, and an abnormal excess of cells not needed
for development of a working organ, also can trigger apoptosis. In some cases, cell death appears to be the default situation, with signals required to ensure cell survival. Cells can
receive instructions to live and instructions to die, and a
complex regulatory system integrates the various kinds of
information.
If cells do not die when they should and instead keep proliferating, a tumor may form. For example, chronic lymphoblastic leukemia (CLL) occurs because cells survive when
they should be dying. The cells accumulate slowly, and most
are not actively dividing, but they do not die. CLL cells have
chromosomal translocations that activate a gene called bcl2, which we now know to be a critical blocker of apoptosis
(see Figure 22-31). The resultant inappropriate overproduction of Bcl-2 protein prevents normal apoptosis and allows
survival of these tumor cells. CLL tumors are therefore attributable to a failure of cell death. Another dozen or so
proto-oncogenes that are normally involved in negatively regulating apoptosis have been mutated to become oncogenes.
Overproduction of their encoded proteins prevents apoptosis even when it is needed to stop cancer cells from growing.
Conversely, genes whose protein products stimulate apoptosis behave as tumor suppressors. An example is the PTEN
gene discussed in Chapter 14. The phosphatase encoded by
this gene dephosphorylates phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5trisphosphate, a second messenger that functions in activation
of protein kinase B (see Figure 14-27). Cells lacking PTEN
phosphatase have elevated levels of phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-trisphosphate and active protein kinase B, which promotes cell survival and prevents apoptosis by several pathways. Thus PTEN acts as a pro-apoptotic tumor suppressor
by decreasing the anti-apoptotic effect of protein kinase B.
The most common pro-apoptotic tumor-suppressor gene
implicated in human cancers is p53. Among the genes activated by p53 are several encoding pro-apoptotic proteins
such as Bax (see Figure 22-32). When most cells suffer extensive DNA damage, the p53-induced expression of proapoptotic proteins leads to their quick demise (see Figure
23-23). While this may seem like a drastic response to DNA
damage, it prevents proliferation of cells that are likely to
accumulate multiple mutations.
When p53 function is lost, apoptosis cannot be
induced and the accumulation of mutations required for cancer to develop becomes more likely.
Tumors marked by loss of p53 or another gene needed for
apoptosis are difficult to treat with chemical or radiation
therapy, since the resulting DNA damage is not translated
into programmed cell death. ❚

23.5 • The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair in Cancer

Failure of Cell-Cycle Checkpoints Can Also Lead
to Aneuploidy in Tumor Cells
It has long been known that chromosomal abnormalities
abound in tumor cells. We have already encountered several
examples of oncogenes that are formed by translocation, amplification, or both (e.g., c-myc, bcr-abl, bcl-2, and cyclin
D1). Another chromosomal abnormality characteristic of
nearly all tumor cells is aneuploidy, the presence of an aberrant number of chromosomes—generally too many.
Cells with abnormal numbers of chromosomes form
when certain cell-cycle checkpoints are nonfunctional. As
discussed in Chapter 21, the unreplicated-DNA checkpoint
normally prevents entry into mitosis unless all chromosomes
have completely replicated their DNA; the spindle-assembly
checkpoint prevents entry into anaphase unless all the replicated chromosomes attach properly to the metaphase mitotic
apparatus; and the chromosome-segregation checkpoint prevents exit from mitosis and cytokinesis if the chromosomes
segregate improperly (see Figure 21-32, steps 1 – 3 ). As advances are made in identifying the proteins that detect these
abnormalities and mediate cell-cycle arrest, the molecular
basis for the functional defects leading to aneuploidy in
tumor cells will become clearer.

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 23.4
Mutations Causing Loss of Growth-Inhibiting
and Cell-Cycle Controls
Loss of signaling by TGF, a negative growth regulator,
promotes cell proliferation and development of malignancy
(see Figure 23-20).

■

Overexpression of the proto-oncogene encoding cyclin
D1 or loss of the tumor-suppressor genes encoding p16
and Rb can cause inappropriate, unregulated passage
through the restriction point in late G1. Such abnormalities are common in human tumors.

■

p53 is a multipurpose tumor suppressor that promotes
arrest in G1 and G2, apoptosis, and DNA repair in response
to damaged DNA (see Figure 23-23). Loss-of-function mutations in the p53 gene occur in more than 50 percent of
human cancers.

■

Overproduction of Mdm2, a protein that normally inhibits the activity of p53, occurs in several cancers (e.g.,
sarcomas) that express normal p53 protein.

■

Human papillomavirus (HPV) encodes three oncogenic
proteins: E6 (inhibits p53), E7 (inhibits Rb), and E5 (activates PDGF receptor).

■

Mutations affecting the Swi/Snf chromatin-remodeling
complex, which participates in transcriptional control, are
associated with a variety of tumors. In some cases, interaction of the Swi/Snf complex with a nuclear tumorsuppressor protein may have a repressing effect on gene
expression.

■

961

Overproduction of anti-apoptotic proteins (e.g., Bcl-2)
can lead to inappropriate cell survival and is associated
with chronic lymphoblastic leukemia (CLL) and other cancers. Loss of proteins that promote apoptosis (e.g., p53
transcription factor and PTEN phosphatase) have a similar oncogenic effect.

■

■ Most human tumor cells are aneuploid, containing an abnormal number of chromosomes (usually too many). Failure of cell-cycle checkpoints that normally detect unreplicated DNA, improper spindle assembly, or mis-segregation
of chromosomes permits aneuploid cells to arise.

23.5 The Role of Carcinogens
and DNA Repair in Cancer
In this final section, we examine how alterations in the
genome arise that may lead to cancer and how cells attempt
to correct them. DNA damage is unavoidable and arises by
spontaneous cleavage of chemical bonds in DNA, by reaction with genotoxic chemicals in the environment or with
certain chemical by-products of normal cellular metabolism,
and from environmental agents such as ultraviolet and ionizing radiation. Changes in the DNA sequence can also result
from copying errors introduced by DNA polymerases during
replication and by mistakes made when DNA polymerase attempts to read from a damaged template. If DNA sequence
changes, whatever their cause or nature, are left uncorrected,
both proliferating and quiescent somatic cells might accumulate so many mutations that they could no longer function properly. In addition, the DNA in germ cells might incur
too many mutations for viable offspring to be formed. Thus
the prevention of DNA sequence errors in all types of cells
is important for survival, and several cellular mechanisms for
repairing damaged DNA and correcting sequence errors have
evolved.
As our previous discussion has shown, alterations in
DNA that lead to decreased production of functional tumorsuppressor proteins or increased, unregulated production or
activation of oncoproteins are the underlying cause of most
cancers. These oncogenic mutations in key growth and cellcycle regulatory genes include insertions, deletions, and point
mutations, as well as chromosomal amplifications and
translocations. Most cancer cells lack one or more DNArepair systems, which may explain the large number of mutations that they accumulate. Moreover, some repair mechanisms themselves introduce errors in the nucleotide sequence;
such error-prone repair also contributes to oncogenesis. The
inability of tumor cells to maintain genomic integrity leads to
formation of a heterogeneous population of malignant cells.
For this reason, chemotherapy directed toward a single gene
or even a group of genes is likely to be ineffective in wiping
out all malignant cells. This problem adds to the interest in
therapies that interfere with the blood supply to tumors or in
other ways act upon multiple types of tumor cells.

962

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer
Fingers

5'

5'

Thumb

FPO
Growing
strand

Pol
3'

Thumb

Fingers

Palm

Pol

Palm

5'

5'

3'

3'
Template
strand

Exo

3'
Exo

▲ FIGURE 23-24 Schematic model of the proofreading
function of DNA polymerases. All DNA polymerases have a
similar three-dimensional structure, which resembles a halfopened right hand. The “fingers” bind the single-stranded
segment of the template strand, and the polymerase catalytic
activity (Pol) lies in the junction between the fingers and palm.
As long as the correct nucleotides are added to the 3 end of the
growing strand, it remains in the polymerase site. Incorporation

of an incorrect base at the 3 end causes melting of the newly
formed end of the duplex. As a result, the polymerase pauses,
and the 3 end of the growing strand is transferred to the 3 n
5 exonuclease site (Exo) about 3 nm away, where the mispaired
base and probably other bases are removed. Subsequently, the
3 end flips back into the polymerase site and elongation
resumes. [Adapted from C. M. Joyce and T. T. Steitz, 1995, J. Bacteriol.
177:6321, and S. Bell and T. Baker, 1998, Cell 92:295.]

DNA Polymerases Introduce
Copying Errors and
Also Correct Them

able accuracy is largely due to proofreading by E. coli DNA
polymerases.
Proofreading depends on the 3n5 exonuclease activity
of some DNA polymerases. When an incorrect base is incorporated during DNA synthesis, the polymerase pauses, then
transfers the 3 end of the growing chain to the exonuclease
site, where the incorrect mispaired base is removed (Figure
23-24). Then the 3 end is transferred back to the polymerase
site, where this region is copied correctly. All three E. coli
DNA polymerases have proofreading activity, as do the two
DNA polymerases,  and , used for DNA replication in animal cells. It seems likely that proofreading is indispensable
for all cells to avoid excessive mutations.

The first line of defense in preventing mutations is DNA
polymerase itself. Occasionally, when replicative DNA polymerases progress along the template DNA, an incorrect nucleotide is added to the growing 3 end of the daughter
strand (see Figure 4-34). E. coli DNA polymerases, for instance, introduce about 1 incorrect nucleotide per 104 polymerized nucleotides. Yet the measured mutation rate in
bacterial cells is much lower: about 1 mistake in 109 nucleotides incorporated into a growing strand. This remark-

O

NH2

C

C
C

N

 FIGURE 23-25 Formation
of a spontaneous point
mutation by deamination of
5-methyl cytosine (C) to form
thymine (T). If the resulting T G
base pair is not restored to the
normal C G base pair by base
excision-repair mechanisms
( 1 ), it will lead to a permanent
change in sequence following
DNA replication (i.e., a mutation)

O

2-deoxyribose

FPO

C
N

Deanimation

Thymine

3'

5'

3'
Me
C G

H
CH3

2-deoxyribose

5-methyl cytosine

5'

C

C

N

3'

5'

3'

5'

CG

TA

T G
Replication

Base-excision
repair

( 2 ). After one round of replication,
one daughter DNA molecule will

have the mutant T A base pair
and the other will have the
wild-type C G base pair.

HN

CH

C
O

Deanimation

H
CH3

2

1
3'
Wild-type
DNA

5'

3'

5'

3'

5'
Mutant
DNA

3'

5'

Wild-type
DNA

963

23.5 • The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair in Cancer

Chemical Damage to DNA Can Lead
to Mutations
DNA is continually subjected to a barrage of damaging
chemical reactions; estimates of the number of DNA damage
events in a single human cell range from 104 to 106 per day!
Even if DNA were not exposed to damaging chemicals, DNA
is inherently unstable. For example, the bond connecting a
purine base to deoxyribose is prone to hydrolysis, leaving a
sugar without an attached base. Thus coding information is
lost, and this can lead to a mutation during DNA replication.
Many spontaneous mutations are point mutations, which
involve a change in a single base pair in the DNA sequence.
One of the most frequent point mutations comes from deamination of a cytosine (C) base, which converts it into a uracil (U)
base. In addition, the common modified base 5-methyl cytosine
forms thymine when it is deaminated. If these alterations are
not corrected before the DNA is replicated, the cell will use the
strand containing U or T as template to form a U A or T A
base pair, thus creating a permanent change to the DNA sequence (Figure 23-25). Normal cellular reactions, including the
movement of electrons along the electron-transport chain in
mitochondria and lipid oxidation in peroxisomes, produce several chemicals that react with and damage DNA, including
hydroxyl radicals and superoxide (O2-. ). These too can cause
mutations including those that lead to cancers.

Some Carcinogens Have Been Linked
to Specific Cancers
Environmental chemicals were originally associated with cancer through experimental studies in animals. The classic experiment is to repeatedly paint a test substance on the back of
a mouse and look for development of both local and systemic
tumors in the animal. Likewise, the ability of ionizing radiation to cause human cancer, especially leukemia, was dramatically shown by the increased rates of leukemia among
survivors of the atomic bombs dropped in World War II, and
more recently by the increase in melanoma (skin cancer) in individuals exposed to too much sunlight (UV radiation).
The ability of chemical and physical carcinogens to induce cancer can be accounted for by the DNA damage that
they cause and by the errors introduced into DNA during the
cells’ efforts to repair this damage. Thus all carcinogens also
are mutagens. The strongest evidence that carcinogens act
as mutagens comes from the observation that cellular DNA
altered by exposure of cells to carcinogens can change cultured cells, such as 3T3 cells, into fast-growing cancer-like
cells (see Figure 23-4). The mutagenic effect of carcinogens is
roughly proportional to their ability to transform cells and
induce cancer in animals.
Although substances identified as chemical carcinogens
have a broad range of structures with no obvious unifying
features, they can be classified into two general categories.
Direct-acting carcinogens, of which there are only a few, are
mainly reactive electrophiles (compounds that seek out and
react with negatively charged centers in other compounds).

By chemically reacting with nitrogen and oxygen atoms in
DNA, these compounds can modify bases in DNA so as to
distort the normal pattern of base pairing. If these modified
nucleotides are not repaired, they allow an incorrect nucleotide to be incorporated during replication. This type of
carcinogen includes ethylmethane sulfonate (EMS), dimethyl
sulfate (DMS), and nitrogen mustards.
In contrast, indirect-acting carcinogens generally are unreactive, water-insoluble compounds that can act as potent
cancer inducers only after the introduction of electrophilic
centers. In animals, cytochrome P-450 enzymes localized to
the endoplasmic reticulum of liver cells normally function
to add electrophilic centers to nonpolar foreign chemicals,
such as certain insecticides and therapeutic drugs, in order to
solubilize them so that they can be excreted from the body.
But P-450 enzymes also can turn otherwise harmless chemicals into carcinogens.
Although chemical carcinogens are believed to be risk factors for many human cancers, a direct linkage to specific cancers has been established only in a few cases, the most
important being lung cancer. Epidemiological studies first indicated that cigarette smoking was the major cause of lung cancer, but why this was so was unclear until the discovery that
about 60 percent of human lung cancers contain inactivating
mutations in the p53 gene. The chemical benzo(a)pyrene (Figure 23-26), found in cigarette smoke, undergoes metabolic activation in the liver to a potent mutagen that mainly causes
conversion of guanine (G) to thymine (T) bases, a transversion

H3C

O

Enzymatic
modification
Spontaneous
reaction with
N7 of Guanosine

O

O

O

H3C

O

FPO

O

O

O

Afflatoxin B

O

O

O

HO
O

O
N

HN

+

G
H 2N
Benzo(a )pyrene
(3,4-benzpyrene)

N

NH

DNA

▲ FIGURE 23-26 Two chemical carcinogens that cause
mutations in p53. Like all indirect-acting carcinogens,
benzo(a)pyrene and aflatoxin must undergo enzyme-catalyzed
modification before they can react with DNA. In aflatoxin the
colored double bond reacts with an oxygen atom, enabling it to
react chemically with the N-7 atom of a guanosine in DNA, forming
a large bulky molecule. Both compounds mutate the p53 tumorsuppressor gene and are known risk factors for human cancer.

964

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

mutation. When applied to cultured bronchial epithelial cells,
activated benzo(a)pyrene induces inactivating mutations at
codons 175, 248, and 273 of the p53 gene. These same positions are major mutational hot spots in human lung cancer (see
Figure 23-22). Thus, there is a strong correlation between a
defined chemical carcinogen in cigarette smoke and human
cancer; it is likely that other chemicals in cigarette smoke
induce mutations in other genes, as well.
Lung cancer is not the only major human cancer for
which a clear-cut risk factor has been identified. Aflatoxin,
a fungal metabolite found in moldy grains, induces liver cancer (see Figure 23-26). After chemical modification by liver
enzymes, aflatoxin becomes linked to G residues in DNA
and induces G-to-T transversions. Aflatoxin also causes a
mutation in the p53 gene. Exposure to other chemicals has
been correlated with minor cancers. Hard evidence concerning dietary and environmental risk factors that would help
us avoid other common cancers (e.g., breast, colon, and
prostate cancer, leukemias) is generally lacking.

Loss of High-Fidelity DNA Excision-Repair
Systems Can Lead to Cancer
In addition to proofreading, cells have other repair systems
for preventing mutations due to copying errors and exposure

to carcinogens. Several DNA excision-repair systems that
normally operate with a high degree of accuracy have been
well studied. These systems were first elucidated through a
combination of genetic and biochemical studies in E. coli.
Homologs of the key bacterial proteins exist in eukaryotes
from yeast to humans, indicating that these error-free mechanisms arose early in evolution to protect DNA integrity.
Each of these systems functions in a similar manner—a segment of the damaged DNA strand is excised, and the gap is
filled by DNA polymerase and ligase using the complementary DNA strand as template.
Loss of these systems correlates with increased risk for
cancer. For example, humans who inherit mutations in genes
that encode a crucial mismatch-repair or excision-repair
protein have an enormously increased probability of developing certain cancers (Table 23-1). Without proper DNA
repair, people with xeroderma pigmentosum or hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer have a propensity to accumulate mutations in many other genes, including those that
are critical in controlling cell growth and proliferation.
We will now turn to a closer look at some of the mechanisms of DNA repair, ranging from repair of single base
mutations to repair of DNA broken across both strands. Some
of these effect their repairs with great accuracy; others are
less precise.

TABLE 23-1 Some Human Hereditary Diseases and Cancers Associated with DNA-Repair Defects
Disease

DNA-Repair
System Affected

Sensitivity

Cancer
Susceptibility

Symptoms

PREVENTION OF POINT MUTATIONS, INSERTIONS, AND DELETIONS
Hereditary
nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer

DNA mismatch
repair

UV irradiation,
chemical mutagens

Colon, ovary

Early development of
tumors

Xeroderma
pigmentosum

Nucleotide excision
repair

UV irradiation,
point mutations

Skin carcinomas,
melanomas

Skin and eye
photosensitivity, keratoses

REPAIR OF DOUBLE-STRAND BREAKS
Bloom’s syndrome

Repair of double-strand
breaks by homologous
recombination

Mild alkylating
agents

Carcinomas,
leukemias,
lymphomas

Photosensitivity, facial
telangiectases,
chromosome alterations

Fanconi anemia

Repair of double-strand
breaks by homologous
recombination

DNA crosslinking agents,
reactive oxidant
chemicals

Acute myeloid
leukemia,
squamous-cell
carcinomas

Developmental abnormalities
including infertility and
deformities of the
skeleton; anemia

Hereditary breast
cancer, BRCA-1
and BRCA-2
deficiency

Repair of double-strand
breaks by homologous
recombination

Breast and
ovarian cancer

Breast and ovarian
cancer

SOURCES:

Modified from A. Kornberg and T. Baker, 1992, DNA Replication, 2d ed., W. H. Freeman and Company,
p. 788; J. Hoeijmakers, 2001, Nature 411:366; and L. Thompson and D. Schild, 2002, Mutation Res. 509:49.

23.5 • The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair in Cancer

Base Excision Is Used to Repair Damaged Bases
and Single-Base Mispairs
In humans, the most common type of point mutation is a C to
T, which is caused by deamination of 5-methyl C to T (see
Figure 23-25). The conceptual problem with base excision repair is determining which is the normal and which is the mutant DNA strand, and repairing the latter so that it is properly
base-paired with the normal strand. But since a G · T mismatch is almost invariably caused by chemical conversion of
C to U or 5-methyl C to T, the repair system “knows” to remove the T and replace it with a C. The G · T mismatch is recognized by a DNA glycosylase that flips the thymine base out
of the helix and then hydrolyzes the bond that connects it to
the sugar-phosphate DNA backbone. Following this initial
incision, the segment of the damaged strand containing the
baseless deoxyribose is excised by an AP endonuclease that
cuts the DNA strand near the abasic site. The resultant singlestranded gap in the damaged strand is filled in by a DNA
polymerase and sealed by DNA ligase, restoring the original
G · C base pair.

T
G
DNA glcosylase

T

G

FPO

APEI endonuclease

G
AP lyase
(part of DNA Pol β)
DNA Pol β
G

DNA ligase

G
Repaired
wild-type DNA

▲ FIGURE 23-27 Base excision repair of a GT mismatch
A DNA glycosylase specific for G T mismatches, usually formed
by deamination of 5-methyl C residues (see Figure 23-25), flips
the thymine base out of the helix and then cuts it away from
the sugar-phosphate DNA backbone (step 1 ), leaving just
the deoxyribose (black dot). An endonuclease specific for the
resultant baseless site then cuts the DNA backbone (step 2 ),
and the deoxyribose phosphate is removed by an endonuclease
associated with DNA polymerase  (step 3 ). The gap is then
filled in by DNA Pol  and sealed by DNA ligase (step 4 ),
restoring the original G C base pair. [After O. Schärer, 2003,
Angewandte Chemie, in press.]

965

Human cells contain a battery of glycosylases, each of
which is specific for a different set of chemically modified
DNA bases. For example, one removes 8-oxyguanine, an oxidized form of guanine, allowing its replacement by an undamaged G, and others remove bases modified by alkylating
agents. By a process similar to that shown in Figure 23-27,
the modified base is cleaved (step 1 ); the damaged strand is
then repaired using the “core” enzymes depicted in steps 2
through 4 . A similar mechanism repairs lesions resulting
from depurination, the loss of a guanine or adenine base
from DNA resulting from hydrolysis of the glycosylic bond
between deoxyribose and the base. Depurination occurs
spontaneously and is fairly common in mammals. The resulting abasic sites, if left unrepaired, generate mutations
during DNA replication because they cannot specify the appropriate paired base.

Loss of Mismatch Excision Repair Leads to Colon
and Other Cancers
Another process, also conserved from bacteria to man, principally eliminates base-pair mismatches, deletions, and insertions that are accidentally introduced by polymerases during
replication. As with base excision repair of a T in a T · G
mismatch, the conceptual problem with mismatch excision
repair is determining which is the normal and which is the
mutant DNA strand, and repairing the latter. How this happens in human cells is not known with certainty. It is thought
that the proteins that bind to the mismatched segment of
DNA distinguish the template and daughter strands; then the
mispaired segment of the daughter strand—the one with the
replication error—is excised and repaired to become an exact
complement of the template strand (Figure 23-28).
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, arising from a
common inherited predisposition to cancer, results from an
inherited loss-of-function mutation in one allele of either the
MLH1 or the MSH2 gene; the MSH2 and MLH1 proteins
are essential for DNA mismatch repair (see Figure 23-28).
Cells with at least one functional copy of each of these genes
exhibit normal mismatch repair. However, tumor cells frequently arise from those cells that have experienced a
somatic mutation in the second allele and thus have lost the
mismatch repair system. Somatic inactivating mutations in
these genes are also common in noninherited forms of colon
cancer.
One gene frequently mutated in colon cancers because
of the absence of mismatch repair encodes the type II receptor for TGF (see Figure 23-20 and Chapter 14). The gene
encoding this receptor contains a sequence of 10 adenines in
a row. Because of “slippage” of DNA polymerase during
replication, this sequence often undergoes mutation to a sequence containing 9 or 11 adenines. If the mutation is not
fixed by the mismatch repair system, the resultant frameshift
in the protein-coding sequence abolishes production of the
normal receptor protein. As noted earlier, such inactivating
mutations make cells resistant to growth inhibition by

966

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

1
Template
strand
A

5'

3'

3'

5'

C
Newly synthesized
daughter strand
MSH2

MSH6

MLH1 endonuclease
PMS2

2

FPO

DNA exonuclease
DNA helicase

5'
3'

A

5'

3'

3'
5'

3
Gap repair by DNA
polymerase and ligase

5'

A

3'

ing for bulges or other irregularities in the shape of the
double helix. For example, this mechanism repairs thyminethymine dimers, a common type of damage caused by UV
light (Figure 23-29); these dimers interfere with both replication and transcription of DNA. Nucleotide excision repair
also can correct DNA regions containing bases altered by
covalent attachment of carcinogens such as benzo(a)pyrene
and aflatoxin (see Figure 23-26), both of which cause G-to-T
transversions.
Figure 23-30 illustrates how the nucleotide excisionrepair system repairs damaged DNA. Some 30 proteins are
involved in this repair process, the first of which were identified through a study of the defects in DNA repair in cultured cells from individuals with xeroderma pigmentosum,
a hereditary disease associated with a predisposition to cancer. Individuals with this disease frequently develop the skin
cancers called melanomas and squamous cell carcinomas
if their skin is exposed to the UV rays in sunlight. Cells of
affected patients lack a functional nucleotide excision-repair
system system. Mutations in any of at least seven different
genes, called XP-A through XP-G, lead to inactivation of this
repair system and cause xeroderma pigmentosum; all produce
the same phenotype and have the same consequences. The

3'
5'

O

T

▲ FIGURE 23-28 Mismatch excision repair of newly
replicated DNA in human cells. A complex of the MSH2 and
MSH6 proteins binds to a mispaired segment of DNA in such
a way as to distinguish between the template and newly
synthesized daughter strands (step 1 ). This triggers binding
of the MLH1 endonuclease, as well as other proteins such as
PMS2, which has been implicated in oncogenesis through
mismatch-repair mutations, although its specific function is
unclear. A DNA helicase unwinds the helix and the daughter
strand is cut; an exonuclease then removes several nucleotides,
including the mismatched base (step 2 ). Finally, as with base
excision repair, the gap is then filled in by a DNA polymerase
(Pol , in this case) and sealed by DNA ligase (step 3 ).

C
Deoxyribose

P

Deoxyribose

N

C
C
H

C

C

H
N

O

C
C
H

Cells use nucleotide excision repair to fix DNA regions containing chemically modified bases, often called chemical
adducts, that distort the normal shape of DNA locally. A key
to this type of repair is the ability of certain proteins to slide
along the surface of a double-stranded DNA molecule look-

O

C
CH3

Two thymine residues
UV
irradiation

Deoxyribose

N

C
H
C

H
N
C

C

O

CH3
P
O

Nucleotide Excision Repair Was Elucidated
Through Study of Xeroderma Pigmentosum,
a Hereditary Predisposition to Skin Cancers

O

CH3

N

O

TGF, thereby contributing to the unregulated growth characteristic of these tumors. This finding attests to the importance of mismatch repair in correcting genetic damage that
might otherwise lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation.

H
N

C
Deoxyribose

N

C
H

H
N
C

C

O

CH3

Thymine-thymine dimer residue

▲ FIGURE 23-29 Formation of thymine-thymine dimers.
The most common type of DNA damage caused by UV
irradiation, thymine-thymine dimers can be repaired by an
excision-repair mechanism.

23.5 • The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair in Cancer

5'

3'

T T
A A

3'

5'

1

Initial damage
recognition

23D
5'

T T

3'

3'

A A

5'

XP-C

FPO
2

Opening of α helix

TFtIIH

XP-G

T T

5'

3'

A A

3'

5'

RPA

3

XP-F and XP-G
endonuclease

5'

XP-G cut

3'

5'

3'

A A
3'

5'

4

DNA polymerase
DNA ligase

5'

3'

T T
A A
3'

5'

Wild-type DNA

▲ FIGURE 23-30 Nucleotide excision repair in human cells.
A DNA lesion that causes distortion of the double helix, such as
a thymine dimer, is initially recognized by a complex of the XP-C
(xeroderma pigmentosum C protein) and 23B proteins (step 1 ).
This complex then recruits transcription factor TFIIH, whose
helicase subunits, powered by ATP hydrolysis, partially unwind
the double helix. XP-G and RPA proteins then bind to the
complex and further unwind and stabilize the helix until a bubble
of ≈25 bases is formed (step 2 ). Then XP-G (now acting as an
endonuclease) and XP-F, a second endonuclease, cut the
damaged strand at points 24–32 bases apart on each side of
the lesion (step 3 ). This releases the DNA fragment with the
damaged bases, which is degraded to mononucleotides. Finally
the gap is filled by DNA polymerase exactly as in DNA replication
(Chapter 4), and the remaining nick is sealed by DNA ligase
(step 4 ). [Adapted from J. Hoeijmakers, 2001, Nature 411:366, and
O. Schärer, 2003, Angewandte Chemie, in press.]

roles of most of these XP proteins in nucleotide excision
repair are now well understood (see Figure 23-30).
Remarkably, five polypeptide subunits of TFIIH, a general transcription factor, are required for nucleotide excision
repair in eukaryotic cells, including two with homology to
helicases, as shown in Figure 23-30. In transcription, the
helicase activity of TFIIH unwinds the DNA helix at the start
site, allowing RNA polymerase II to begin (see Figure 11-27).
It appears that nature has used a similar protein assembly in
two different cellular processes that require helicase activity.
The use of shared subunits in transcription and DNA repair may help explain the observation that DNA damage in
higher eukaryotes is repaired at a much faster rate in regions
of the genome being actively transcribed than in nontranscribed regions—so-called transcription-coupled repair. Since
only a small fraction of the genome is transcribed in any one
cell in higher eukaryotes, transcription-coupled repair efficiently directs repair efforts to the most critical regions. In
this system, if an RNA polymerase becomes stalled at a lesion on DNA (e.g., a thymine-thymine dimer), a small protein, CSB, is recruited to the RNA polymerase; this triggers
opening of the DNA helix at that point, recruitment of
TFIIH, and the reactions of steps 2 through 4 depicted in
Figure 23-30.

Two Systems Repair Double-Strand Breaks
in DNA

T T

XP-F cut

967

Ionizing radiation and some anticancer drugs (e.g.,
bleomycin) cause double-strand breaks in DNA. A cell that
has suffered a particular double-strand break usually contains other breaks. These are particularly severe lesions because incorrect rejoining of double strands of DNA can lead
to gross chromosomal rearrangements and translocations
such as those that produce a hybrid gene or bring a growthregulatory gene under the control of a different promoter.
The B and T cells of the immune system are particularly susceptible to DNA rearrangements caused by double-strand
breaks created during rearrangement of their immunoglobulin or T cell receptor genes, explaining the frequent involvement of these gene loci in leukemias and lymphomas.
Two systems have evolved to repair double-strand
breaks—homologous recombination and DNA end-joining.
The former is used during and after DNA replication, when
the sister chromatid is available for use as a template to repair the damaged DNA strand; homologous recombination
is error-free. The alternative mechanism, DNA end-joining,
is error-prone, since several nucleotides are invariably lost
at the point of repair. This and other error-prone repair systems are thought to mediate much of if not all the carcinogenic effects of chemicals and radiation.

Error-Free Repair by Homologous Recombination Yeasts
can repair double-strand breaks induced by -irradiation.
Isolation and analysis of radiation-sensitive (RAD) mutants
that are deficient in this homologous recombination repair

968

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

 FIGURE 23-31 Repair of double-strand breaks by
homologous recombination. During S phase cells copy each
chromosome to create two identical sister chromatids that later
segregate into daughter cells. The black and red DNAs represent
the homologous sequences on these sister chromatids. Step 1 :
A double-strand DNA break forms in the chromatids. Step 2 :
The double-strand break activates the ATM kinase (see Figure
23-23); this leads to activation of a set of exonucleases that
remove nucleotides at the break first from the 3 and then from
the 5 ends of both broken strands, ultimately creating singlestranded 3 ends. In a process that is dependent on the BRCA1
and BRCA2 proteins, as well as others, the Rad51 protein (green
ovals) polymerizes on single-stranded DNA with a free 3 end to
form a nucleoprotein filament. Step 3 : Aided by yet other
proteins, one Rad51 nucleoprotein filament searches for the
homologous duplex DNA sequence on the sister chromatid, then
invades the duplex to form a joint molecule in which the singlestranded 3 end is base-paired to the complementary strand
on the homologous DNA strand. Step 4 : The replicative
DNA polymerases elongate this 3 end of the damaged DNA
(green strand), templated by the complementary sequences in
the undamaged homologous DNA segment. Step 5 : Next this
repaired 3 end of the damaged DNA pairs with the singlestranded 3 end of the other damaged strand. Step 6 : Any
remaining gaps are filled in by DNA polymerase and ligase
(light green), regenerating a wild-type double helix in which an
entire segment (dark and light green) has been regenerated
from the homologous segment of the sister chromatid. [Adapted
from D. van Gant et al., 2001, Nature Rev. Genet. 2:196.]

system facilitated study of the process. Virtually all the yeast
Rad proteins have homologs in the human genome, and the
human and yeast proteins function in an essentially identical fashion (Figure 23-31). At one time homologous recombination was thought to be a minor repair process in human
cells. This changed when it was realized that several human
cancers are potentiated by inherited mutations in genes essential for homologous recombination repair (see Table 23-1).
For example, the vast majority of women with inherited susceptibility to breast cancer have a mutation in one allele of
either the BCRA-1 or the BCRA-2 genes that encode proteins
participating in this repair process. Loss or inactivation of
the second allele inhibits the homologous recombination repair pathway and thus tends to induce cancer in mammary
or ovarian epithelial cells.
Repair of a double-strand break by homologous recombination involves reactions between three DNA molecules—
the two DNA ends and the intact DNA strands from the
sister chromatid (see Figure 23-31). In this process singlestranded DNAs with 3 ends are formed from the ends of the
broken DNAs and then coated with the Rad51 protein. One
Rad51 nucleoprotein filament searches for the homologous
duplex DNA sequence in the sister chromatid. This 3 end
is then elongated (green in Figure 23-31) by DNA polymerase, templated by the complementary strand on the homologous DNA. When sufficiently long, this single strand

23.5 • The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair in Cancer

base-pairs with the single-stranded 3 end of the other broken DNA, and DNA polymerase and DNA ligase fill in the
gaps. This process regenerates a wild-type double helix with the
correct sequence, and in general no mutations are induced
during repair by homologous recombination.

Error-Prone Repair by End-Joining In multicellular organisms, the predominant mechanism for repairing doublestrand breaks involves rejoining the nonhomologous ends of
two DNA molecules. Even if the joined DNA fragments come
from the same chromosome, the repair process results in loss
of several base pairs at the joining point (Figure 23-32). Formation of such a possibly mutagenic deletion is one example
of how repair of DNA damage can introduce mutations.
Since movement of DNA within the protein-dense nucleus is fairly minimal, the correct ends are generally rejoined

DSB

DNA-PK
1
KU80/KU70
heterodimer

FPO
2

Other
proteins

3

Ligase

▲ FIGURE 23-32 Repair of double-strand breaks by
end-joining. In general, nucleotide sequences are butted
together that were not apposed in the unbroken DNA. These
DNA ends are usually from the same chromosome locus, and
when linked together, several base pairs are lost. Occasionally,
ends from different chromosomes are accidentally joined
together. A complex of two proteins, Ku and DNA-dependent
protein kinase, binds to the ends of a double-strand break ( 1 ).
After formation of a synapse, the ends are further processed by
nucleases, resulting in removal of a few bases ( 2 ), and the two
double-stranded molecules are ligated together ( 3 ). As a result,
the double-strand break is repaired, but several base pairs at the
site of the break are removed. [Adapted from G. Chu, 1997, J. Biol.
Chem. 272:24097; M. Lieber et al., 1997, Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 7:99;
and D. van Gant et al., 2001, Nature Rev. Genet. 2:196.]

969

together, albeit with loss of base pairs. However, occasionally
broken ends from different chromosomes are joined together,
leading to translocation of pieces of DNA from one chromosome to another. As we have seen, such translocations
may generate chimeric oncogenes or place a proto-oncogene
next to, and thus under the inappropriate control of, a promoter from another gene. The devastating effects of doublestrand breaks make these the “most unkindest cuts of all,” to
borrow a phrase from Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar.

Telomerase Expression Contributes
to Immortalization of Cancer Cells
Telomeres, the physical ends of linear chromosomes, consist
of tandem arrays of a short DNA sequence, TTAGGG in
vertebrates. Telomeres provide the solution to the endreplication problem—the inability of DNA polymerases to
completely replicate the end of a double-stranded DNA molecule. Telomerase, a reverse transcriptase that contains an
RNA template, adds TTAGGG repeats to chromosome ends
to lengthen or maintain the 5- to 20-kb regions of repeats
that decorate the ends of human chromosomes (see Figure
10-34). Germ-line cells and rapidly dividing somatic cells
(e.g., stem cells) produce telomerase, but most human somatic cells lack telomerase. As a result, their telomeres
shorten with each cell cycle. Complete loss of telomeres leads
to end-to-end chromosome fusions and cell death. Extensive
shortening of telomeres is detected as a kind of DNA damage, with consequent stabilization and activation of p53
protein, leading to p53-triggered apoptosis.
Most tumor cells, despite their rapid proliferation rate,
overcome this fate by expressing telomerase. Many researchers believe that telomerase expression is essential for
a tumor cell to become immortal, and specific inhibitors of
telomerase have been suggested as cancer therapeutic agents.
Introduction of telomerase-producing transgenes into cultured human cells that otherwise lack the enzyme can extend
their lifespan by more than 20 doublings while maintaining
telomere length. The initial finding that mice homozygous
for a deletion of the RNA subunit of telomerase are viable
and fertile was surprising. However, after four to six generations defects began to appear in the telomerase-null mice
as their very long telomeres (40–60 kb) became significantly
shorter. The defects included depletion of tissues that require
high rates of cell division, like skin and intestine, and
infertility.
When treated with carcinogens, telomerase-null mice
develop tumors less readily than normal mice do. For example, papillomas induced by a combination of chemical carcinogens occur 20 times less frequently in mice lacking a
functional telomerase than in normal mice. Mice with an
APC mutation normally develop colon tumors, and these too
are reduced if the mice lack telomerase. Some other tumors
are less affected by loss of telomerase. These studies demonstrate the relevance of telomerase for unbridled cell division
and make the enzyme a possible target for chemotherapy.

970

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

KEY CONCEPTS OF SECTION 23.5
The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair in Cancer
Changes in the DNA sequence result from copying errors and the effects of various physical and chemical agents,
or carcinogens. All carcinogens are mutagens; that is, they
alter one or more nucleotides in DNA.

■

Many copying errors that occur during DNA replication
are corrected by the proofreading function of DNA polymerases that can recognize incorrect (mispaired) bases at
the 3 end of the growing strand and then remove them
by an inherent 3n5 exonuclease activity (see Figure
23-24).

■

Indirect carcinogens, the most common type, must be
activated before they can damage DNA. In animals, metabolic activation occurs via the cytochrome P-450 system,
a pathway generally used by cells to rid themselves of noxious foreign chemicals.

■

Benzo(a)pyrene, a component of cigarette smoke, causes
inactivating mutations in the p53 gene at the same positions that are mutated in many human lung tumors.

■

Eukaryotic cells have three excision-repair systems for
correcting mispaired bases and for removing UV-induced
thymine-thymine dimers or large chemical adducts from
DNA. Base excision repair, mismatch repair, and nucleotide
excision repair operate with high accuracy and generally
do not introduce errors.

■

Inherited defects in the nucleotide excision-repair pathway, as in individuals with xeroderma pigmentosum, predispose them to skin cancer. Inherited colon cancer frequently is associated with mutant forms of proteins
essential for the mismatch repair pathway.

■

Error-free repair of double-strand breaks in DNA is accomplished by homologous recombination using the undamaged sister chromatid as template.

■

Defects in repair by homologous recombination are associated with inheritance of one mutant allele of the BRCA1 or BRCA-2 gene and result in predisposition to breast
cancer.

■

Repair of double-strand breaks by the end-joining pathway can link segments of DNA from different chromosomes, possibly forming an oncogenic translocation. The
repair mechanism also produces a small deletion, even
when segments from the same chromosome are joined.

■

Inherited defects in other cellular DNA-repair processes
found in certain human diseases are associated with an increased susceptibility for certain cancers (see Table 23-1).

■

Cancer cells, like germ cells and stem cells but unlike
most differentiated cells, produce telomerase, which prevents shortening of chromosomes during DNA replication
and may contribute to their immortalization. The absence
of telomerase is associated with resistance to generation of
certain tumors.

■

PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
The recognition that cancer is fundamentally a genetic disease has opened enormous new opportunities for preventing
and treating the disease. Carcinogens can now be assessed
for their effects on known steps in cell-cycle control. Genetic
defects in the checkpoint controls for detecting damaged
DNA and in the systems for repairing it can be readily recognized and used to explore the mechanisms of cancer. The
multiple changes that must occur for a cell to grow into a
dangerous tumor present multiple opportunities for intervention. Identifying mutated genes associated with cancer
points directly to proteins at which drugs can be targeted.
Diagnostic medicine is being transformed by our newfound ability to monitor large numbers of cell characteristics.
The traditional methods of assessing possible tumor cells,
mainly microscopy of stained cells, will be augmented or replaced by techniques for measuring the expression of tens of
thousands of genes, focusing particularly on genes whose activities are identified as powerful indicators of the cell’s
growth properties and the patient’s prognosis. Currently,
DNA microarray analysis permits measurement of gene transcription. In the future, techniques for systematically measuring protein production, modification, and localization, all
important measures of cell states, will give us even more refined portraits of cells. Tumors now viewed as identical or
very similar will instead be recognized as distinctly different
and given appropriately different treatments. Earlier detection of tumors, based on better monitoring of cell properties,
should allow more successful treatment. A focus on that particularly destructive process, metastasis, should be successful
in identifying more of the mechanisms used by cells to
migrate, attach, and invade. Manipulation of angiogenesis
continues to look hopeful as a means of suffocating tumors.
The molecular cell biology of cancer provides avenues for
new therapies, but prevention remains crucial and preferable
to therapy. Avoidance of obvious carcinogens, in particular
cigarette smoke, can significantly reduce the incidence of
lung cancer and perhaps other kinds as well. Beyond minimizing exposure to carcinogens such as smoke or sunlight,
certain specific approaches are now feasible. New knowledge
of the involvement of human papillomavirus 16 in most
cases of cervical cancer holds promise for developing a cancer vaccine that will prevent viral action. Antibodies against
cell surface markers that distinguish cancer cells are a source
of great hope, especially after successes with the clinical use
of monoclonal antibodies against human EGF receptor 2
(Her2), a protein involved in some cases of human breast
cancer. Further steps must involve medicine and science. Understanding the cell biology of cancer is a critical first step toward prevention and cure, but the next steps are hard. The
success with Gleevec (STI-571) against leukemia is exceptional; many cancers remain difficult to treat and cause enormous suffering. Since cancer is a term for a group of highly
diverse diseases, interventions that are successful for one type
may not be useful for others. Despite these daunting realities,

Review the Concepts

we are beginning to reap the benefits of decades of research
exploring the molecular biology of the cell. We hope that
many of the readers of this book will help to overcome the
obstacles that remain.

KEY TERMS
aflatoxin 000
aneuploidy 000
benign 000
Burkitt’s lymphoma 000
carcinogens 000
carcinomas 000
deamination 000
DNA end-joining 000
excision-repair
systems 000
leukemias 000
loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) 000
malignant 000
metastasis 000
mutagens 000

nondisjunction 000
oncogene 000
p53 protein 000
Philadelphia
chromosome 000
proto-oncogene 000
sarcomas 000
slow-acting
retroviruses 000
thymine-thymine
dimers 000
transducing
retroviruses 000
transformation 000
tumor-suppressor
gene 000

REVIEW THE CONCEPTS
1. What characteristics distinguish benign from malignant
tumors? With respect to gene mutations, what distinguishes
benign colon polyps from malignant colon carcinoma?
2. Ninety percent of cancer deaths are caused by metastatic
rather than primary tumors. Define metastasis. Explain the
rationale for the following new cancer treatments: (a) batimastat, an inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases and of the plasminogen activator receptor, (b) antibodies that block the
function of integrins, integral membrane proteins that mediate
attachment of cells to the basal laminae and extracellular matrices of various tissues, and (c) bisphosphonate, which inhibits the function of bone-digesting osteoclasts.
3. Because of oxygen and nutrient requirements, cells in a
tissue must reside within 100 m of a blood vessel. Based
on this information, explain why many malignant tumors
often possess gain-of-function mutations in one of the following genes: bFGF, TGF, and VEGF.
4. What hypothesis explains the observations that incidence of human cancers increases exponentially with age?
Give an example of data that confirm the hypothesis.
5. Distinguish between proto-oncogenes and tumorsuppressor genes. To become cancer promoting, do protooncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes undergo gain-offunction or loss-of-function mutations? Classify the follow-

971

ing genes as proto-oncogenes or tumor-suppressor genes:
p53, ras, Bcl-2, telomerase, jun, and p16.
6. Hereditary retinoblastoma generally affects children in
both eyes, while spontaneous retinoblastoma usually occurs
during adulthood only in one eye. Explain the genetic basis for
the epidemiologic distinction between these two forms of
retinoblastoma. Explain the apparent paradox: loss-of-function
mutations in tumor-suppressor genes act recessively, yet hereditary retinoblastoma is inherited as an autosomal dominant.
7. Explain the concept of loss of heterozygosity (LOH).
Why do most cancer cells exhibit LOH of one or more
genes? How does failure of the spindle assembly checkpoint
lead to loss of heterozygosity?
8. Many malignant tumors are characterized by the activation of one or more growth factor receptors. What is the catalytic activity associated with transmembrane growth factor
receptors such as the EGF receptor? Describe how the following events lead to activation of the relevant growth factor
receptor: (a) expression of the viral protein gp55, (b) translocation that replaces the extracellular domain of the Trk receptor with the N-terminal region of tropomyosin, (c) point
mutation that converts a valine to glutamine within the
transmembrane region of the Her2 receptor.
9. Describe the common signal-transduction event that is
perturbed by cancer-promoting mutations in the genes encoding Ras and NF-1. Why are mutations in Ras more commonly found in cancers than mutations in NF-1?
10. What is the structural distinction between the proteins
encoded by c-src and v-src? How does this difference render
v-src oncogenic?
11. Describe the mutational event that produces the myc
oncogene in Burkitt’s lymphoma. Why does the particular
mechanism for generating oncogenic myc result in a lymphoma rather than another type of cancer? Describe another
mechanism for generating oncogenic myc.
12. Pancreatic cancers often possess loss-of-function mutations in the gene that encodes the SMAD4 protein. How does
this mutation promote the loss of growth inhibition and
highly metastatic phenotype of pancreatic tumors?
13. Loss of p53 function occurs in the majority of human
tumors. Name two ways in which loss of p53 function
contributes to a malignant phenotype. Explain the mechanism by which the following agents cause loss of p53
function: (a) human papillomavirus and (b) benzo(a)pyrene.
14. DNA-repair systems are responsible for maintaining genomic fidelity in normal cells despite the high frequency with
which mutational events occur. What type of DNA mutation
is generated by (a) UV irradiation and (b) ionizing radiation?
Describe the system responsible for repairing each of these
types of mutations in mammalian cells. Postulate why a loss
of function in one or more DNA-repair systems typifies
many cancers.

972

CHAPTER 23 • Cancer

15. Which human cell types possess telomerase activity?
What characteristic of cancer is promoted by expression of
telomerase? What concerns does this pose for medical therapies involving stem cells?

A N A LY Z E T H E DATA
In a recent study by Elizabeth Snyderwine and colleagues,
cDNA microarray profiling was used to compare the expression profiles for 6900 genes in normal and malignant breast tissues from rats. RNA was extracted from the following tissues:

2. What characteristic of cancer is promoted by the overexpression of PDGF-A, Cdk4, and cyclin D?
3. What characteristic of cancer might be promoted by the
repression of extracellular matrix genes?
4. STAT5a is a transcription factor that regulates the expression of cyclin D, Bcl-XL, and other genes. Why is it possible for these carcinomas that no mutation occurs in the
cyclin D gene despite its overexpression? Why are mutations
in transcription-factor genes like STAT5a commonly found
in cancer cells?

d. Breast carcinoma induced by the meat-derived
carcinogen PhIP

In comparison 2, expression profiles of carcinomas induced by PhIP and DMBA were compared with each other.
In this analysis, some distinctions were found, but the number of differentially expressed genes was far less than the
number of genes identified when comparing the grouped
“normal” samples (a, b, and c) to the grouped “carcinoma”
samples (d and e).

e. Breast carcinoma induced by the experimental
carcinogen DMBA

5. On the basis of this information, what can be generalized
about the molecular profile of breast carcinomas?

a. Breast tissue from virgin rats
b. Breast tissue from pregnant rats
c. Breast tissue from lactating rats

After the microarray slides were hybridized with labeled
cDNAs derived from these 5 populations of RNAs, the data
were analyzed by several different comparisons.
In comparison 1, tissues a, b, and c were grouped together as “normal” tissue samples, and d and e were grouped
as “carcinoma” samples. Genes that were either induced
(more than twofold increase in expression) or repressed
(more than twofold decrease in expression) in both carcinoma samples relative to all three normal samples were determined. A partial listing of differentially expressed genes
is shown in the accompanying table.
Induced Genes
Cell-Growth and Cell-Cycle-related Genes
Platelet-derived growth factor A chain (PDGF-A)
Cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4)
Cyclin D
Signal-Transduction and Transcription-Related Genes
STAT5a

Repressed Genes
Extracellular Matrix Genes
Alpha 1 type V collagen
Fibronectin 1
Desmin

1. What was the purpose of analyzing breast tissue from
pregnant and lactating rats?

6. Would you anticipate greater or fewer differences in gene
expression if two distinct types of cancer (e.g., breast carcinoma vs. B-cell lymphoma) induced by the same carcinogen
were compared by microarray analysis?

REFERENCES

Tumor Cells and the Onset of Cancer
Folkman, J. 2002. Role of angiogenesis in tumor growth and
metastasis. Semin. Oncol. 29:15–18.
Hanahan, D., and R. A. Weinberg. 2000. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100:57–70.
Jain, M., et al. 2002. Sustained loss of a neoplastic phenotype
by brief inactivation of MYC. Science 297:102–104.
Kinzler, K. W., and B. Vogelstein. 1996. Lessons from hereditary
colo-rectal cancer. Cell 87:159–170.
Klein, G. 1998. Foulds’ dangerous idea revisited: the multistep
development of tumors 40 years later. Adv. Cancer Res. 72:1–23.
Rafii, S., et al. 2002. Vascular and haematopoietic stem cells:
novel targets for anti-angiogenesis therapy? Nature Rev. Cancer
2:826–835.
Ramaswamy, S., et al. 2003. A molecular signature of metastasis in primary solid tumors. Nature Genet. 33:49–54.
Trusolino, L., and P. M. Comoglio. 2002. Scatter-factor and semaphorin receptors: cell signalling for invasive growth. Nature Rev.
Cancer 2:289–300.
Yancopoulos, G., M. Klagsburn, and J. Folkman. 1998. Vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, and growth factors: ephrins enter the fray at
the border. Cell 93:661–664.

The Genetic Basis of Cancer
Bienz, M., and H. Clevers. 2000. Linking colorectal cancer to
Wnt signaling. Cell 103:311–320.
Clark, J., et al. 2002. Identification of amplified and expressed
genes in breast cancer by comparative hybridization onto microarrays of randomly selected cDNA clones. Genes Chrom. Cancer
34:104–114.

References
Classon, M., and E. Harlow. 2002. The retinoblastoma tumour
suppressor in development and cancer. Nature Rev. Cancer
2:910–917.
Hesketh, R., ed. 1997. The Oncogene and Tumor Suppressor
Gene Facts Book, 2d ed. Academic Press.
Hunter, T. 1997. Oncoprotein networks. Cell 88:333–346.
Moon, R. T., et al. 2002. The promise and perils of Wnt signaling through beta-catenin. Science 296:1644–1646.
Nevins, J. R. 2001. The Rb/E2F pathway and cancer. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 10:699–703.
Polakis, P. 2000. Wnt signaling and cancer. Genes Devel.
14:1837–1851.
Sasaki, T., et al. 2000. Colorectal carcinomas in mice lacking the
catalytic subunit of PI(3)Kgamma. Nature 406:897–902.
Sherr, C. J., and F. McCormick. 2002. The RB and p53 pathways in cancer. Cancer Cell 2:103–112.
Taipale, J., and P. A. Beachy. 2001. The Hedgehog and Wnt signalling pathways in cancer. Nature 411:349–354.
van ’t Veer, L. J., et al. 2002. Gene expression profiling predicts
clinical outcome of breast cancer. Nature 415:530–536.
West, M., et al. 2001. Predicting the clinical status of human
breast cancer by using gene expression profiles. Proc. Nat’l. Acad.
Sci. USA 98:11462–11467.
White, R. 1998. Tumor suppressor pathways. Cell 92:591–592.

Oncogenic Mutations in Growth-Promoting Proteins
Capdeville, R., et al. 2002. Glivec (STI571, imatinib), a rationally developed, targeted anticancer drug. Nature Rev. Drug Discov.
1:493–502.
Downward, J. 2003. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. Nature Rev. Cancer 3:11–22.
Rowley, J. D. 2001. Chromosome translocations: dangerous
liaisons revisited. Nature Rev. Cancer 1:245–250.
Sahai, E., and C. J. Marshall. 2002. RHO-GTPases and cancer.
Nature Rev. Cancer 2:133–142.
Shaulian, E., and M. Karin. 2002. AP-1 as a regulator of cell life
and death. Nature Cell Biol. 4:E131–E136.
Shawver, L. K., D. Slamon, and A. Ullrich. 2002. Smart drugs:
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 1:117–123.

Mutations Causing Loss of Growth-Inhibiting
and Cell-Cycle Controls
Chau, B. N., and J. Y. Wang. 2003. Coordinated regulation of
life and death by RB. Nature Rev. Cancer 3:130–138.
Malumbres, M., and M. Barbacid. 2001. To cycle or not to cycle: a critical decision in cancer. Nature Rev. Cancer 1:222–231.

973

Mathon, N. F., and A. C. Lloyd. 2001. Cell senescence and cancer. Nature Rev. Cancer 1:203–213.
Paulovich, A. G., D. P. Toczyski, and L. H. Hartwell. 1997. When
checkpoints fail. Cell 88:315–321.
Planas-Silva, M. D., and R. A. Weinberg. 1997. The restriction
point and control of cell proliferation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
9:768–772.
Sherr, C. J. 2000. Cell cycle control and cancer. Harvey Lect.
96:73–92.
Westphal, C. H. 1997. Cell-cycle signaling: Atm displays its many
talents. Curr. Biol. 7:R789–R792.
Zhang, L., et al. 2000. Role of BAX in the apoptotic response
to anticancer agents. Science 290:989–992.

The Role of Carcinogens and DNA Repair in Cancer
Batty, D., and R. Wood. 2000. Damage recognition in nucleotide
excision repair of DNA. Gene 241:193–204.
D’Andrea, A., and M. Grompe. 2003. The Fanconi
anemia/BRCA pathway. Nature Rev. Cancer 3:23–34.
Fishel, R. 1998. Mismatch repair, molecular switches, and signal transduction. Genes Devel. 12:2096–2101.
Flores-Rozas, H., and R. Kolodner. 2000. Links between replication, recombination and genome instability in eukaryotes. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 25:196–200.
Friedberg, E. 2003. DNA damage and repair. Nature 421:436–440.
Friedberg, E., G. Walker, and W. Siede. 1995. DNA Repair and
Mutagenesis. ASM Press.
Hoeijmakers, J. 2001. Genome maintenance mechanisms for preventing cancer. Nature 411:366–374.
Lindahl, T. 2001. Keynote: past, present, and future aspects of
base excision repair. Prog. Nucl. Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 68:xvii–xxx.
Muller, A., and R. Fishel. 2002. Mismatch repair and the hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer syndrome (HNPCC). Cancer
Invest. 20:102–109.
Schärer, O. 2003. Chemistry and biology of DNA repair. Angewandte Chemie, in press.
Schärer, O., and J. Jiricny. 2001. Recent progress in the biology,
chemistry and structural biology of DNA glycosylases. Bioessays
23:270–281.
Somasundaram, K. 2002. Breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1): role in
cell cycle regulation and DNA repair—perhaps through transcription. J. Cell Biochem. 88:1084–1091.
Thompson, L., and D. Schild. 2002. Recombinational DNA repair and human disease. Mut. Res. 509:49–78.
van Gant, D., J. Hoeijmakers, and R. Kanaar. 2001. Chromosomal stability and the DNA double-stranded break connection.
Nature Rev. Genet. 2:196–205.

