THE MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
OF FLOWERING
Second Edition

AND

BIOTECHNOLOGY

This page intentionally left blank

THE MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
AND BIOTECHNOLOGY OF
FLOWERING
Second Edition

Edited by

Brian R. Jordan
Lincoln University
Canterbury, New Zealand

CABI is a trading name of CAB International
CABI Head Office
Nosworthy Way
Wallingford
Oxfordshire OX10 8DE
UK
Tel: þ44 (0)1491 832111
Fax: þ44 (0)1491 833508
E-mail: cabi@cabi.org
Website: www.cabi.org

CABI North American Office
875 Massachusetts Avenue
7th Floor
Cambridge, MA 02139
USA
Tel: þ1 617 395 4056
Fax: þ1 617 354 6875
E-mail: cabi-nao@cabi.org

ßCAB International 2006. All rights reserved. No part of this
publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means,
electronically, mechanically, by photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owners.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library,
London, UK.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of
Congress, Washington, DC.
The molecular biology and biotechnology of flowering / edited by
Brian R. Jordan. -- 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Rev. ed. of: The molecular biology of flowering. c1993.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN-13: 978-1-84593-042-4 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-84593-042-8 (alk. paper)
1. Plants, Flowering of. 2. Plant molecular biology. 3. Plant
biotechnology. I. Jordan, Brian R. II. Molecular biology of
flowering. III. Title.
QK830.M64 2006
575.6--dc22
2005017931

ISBN-10:
1-84593-042-8
ISBN-13: 978-1-84593-042-4
Typeset by SPI Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
Printed and bound in the UK by Biddles Ltd, King’s Lynn.

Contents

Contributors

vii

Preface

ix

Part I: External and Internal Regulation of Flowering

1

1.

Photoperiodism and Flowering
B. Thomas, I. Carré and S. Jackson

3

2.

Vernalization
A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

26

3.

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development
R.G. Anthony

50

Part II: Floral Development

79

4.

Floral Meristem Identity Genes
B. Davies

81

5.

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis
B. Krizek

100

6.

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers
G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

124

7.

Flower Senescence
S. Verlinden

150

8.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
K. Davies and K. Schwinn

178

v

vi

Contents
9.

Biotechnology of Floral Development
C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

237

Part III: Fertilization and Gametophyte Development

267

10.

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms
T. Gaude, I. Fobis-Loisy and C. Miège

269

11.

Stamen Development: Primordium to Pollen
R.J. Scott, M. Spielman and H.G. Dickinson

298

12.

Genes Regulating Ovule Development
J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

332

13.

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis
R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

354

Index

391

Contributors

Anthony, R.G., School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of
London, Egham, Surrey TW20 0EX, UK; e-mail: r.g.anthony@rhul.ac.uk
Bicknell, R.A., New Zealand Institute for Crop and Food Research Ltd, Private
Bag 4704, Christchurch, New Zealand; e-mail: bicknellr@crop.cri.nz
Broadhvest, J., Bayer BioScience NV, Technologie Park 38, B-9052 Ghent,
Belgium; e-mail: jean.broadhvest@bayercropscience.com
Carré, I., Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK; e-mail: icarre@bio.warwick.ac.uk
Catanach, A., New Zealand Institute for Crop and Food Research Ltd, Private
Bag 4704, Christchurch, New Zealand; e-mail: catanacha@crop.cri.nz
Davies, B., Centre for Plant Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT,
UK; e-mail: bdavies@bmbaxp.leeds.ac.uk
Davies, K., New Zealand Institute for Crop and Food Research Ltd, Private
Bag 11600, Palmerston North, New Zealand; e-mail: daviesk@crop.cri.nz
Dickinson, H.G., Department of Plant Sciences, South Parks Road, Oxford,
OX1 3RB, UK
Fobis-Loisy, I., Reproduction et Développement des Plantes, Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, UMR 5667 CNRS-INRA-ENSL-UCB, Lyon I, IFR
128 BioSciences Lyon-Gerland, 46 allée d’Italie, 69364, Lyon cedex 07,
France; e-mail: isabelle.fobis-loisy@ens-lyon.fr
Gaude, T., Reproduction et Développement des Plantes, Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, UMR 5667 CNRS-INRA-ENSL-UCB, Lyon I, IFR
128 BioSciences Lyon-Gerland, 46 allée d’Italie, 69364, Lyon cedex 07,
France; e-mail: thierry.gaude@ens-lyon.fr
Gendall, A.R., Department of Botany, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia; e-mail: gendall@latrobe.edu.au
Hauser, B.A., Department of Botany, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32611-8526, USA; e-mail: bahauser@botany.ufl.edu

vii

viii

Contributors

Jackson, S., Warwick HRI, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, Warwick,
CV35 9EF, UK.
Jordan, B.R., Cell Biology Group, Agriculture and Life Sciences Division,
Lincoln University, PO Box 84, Canterbury, New Zealand; e-mail:
jordanb@lincoln.ac.nz
Kaufmann, K., Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Philosophenweg 12, D-07743, Jena, Germany.
Krizek, B., Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC 29208, USA; e-mail: krizek@sc.edu
Miège, C., Reproduction et Développement des Plantes, Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, UMR 5667 CNRS-INRA-ENSL-UCB, Lyon I, IFR
128 BioSciences Lyon-Gerland, 46 allée d’Italie, 69364, Lyon cedex 07,
France.
Schwinn, K., New Zealand Institute for Crop and Food Research Ltd, Private
Bag 11600, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
Scott, R.J., Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath
BA2 7AY, UK; e-mail: bssrjs@bath.ac.uk
Simpson, G.G., Dundee University, c/o Gene Expression Programme, SCRI,
Invergowrie, Dundee, DD2 5DA, UK; e-mail: gsimps@scri.sari.ac.uk
Spielman, M., Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath,
Bath, BA2 7AY, UK.
Theissen, G., Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Philosophenweg 12, D-07743 Jena, Germany; e-mail: guenter.theissen
@uni-jena.de
Thomas, B., Warwick HRI, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, Warwick,
CV35 9EF, UK; e-mail: brian.thomas@hri.ac.uk
Verlinden, S., Division of Plant and Soil Sciences, West Virginia University,
PO Box 6108, Morgantown, WV 26506-6108, USA; e-mail: Sverlind@wvu.edu
Winefield, C., Agriculture and Life Sciences Division, Lincoln University,
PO Box 84, Canterbury, New Zealand; e-mail: winefiec@lincoln.ac.nz

Preface

In 1993 The Molecular Biology of Flowering was published. At that time the
physiological events associated with flowering had been well characterized and
yet the underlying molecular mechanisms remained unknown. This book captured the spirit of molecular research that was beginning to provide a greater
understanding of the flowering process. In the late 1980s and early 1990s,
homeotic genes such as floricaula ( flo) had been isolated and established as
playing important roles in the transition of the vegetative to the floral apex.
Furthermore, genes that are involved in organogenesis had been identified and
provided insight for the development of the ABC model of floral morphogenesis. The advent of molecular approaches opened new avenues of research and
seemed to provide the ‘Dawn of a New Age’.
This second edition of the book (with slightly modified title) documents the
progress that has been made since those early days. In developing the overall
theme for the book, I have tried to update the research for subject areas
covered by the original book and, whenever possible, involve the same authors.
Using this approach I hope to allow the reader to appreciate the developments
that have taken place in the last 12 years. Two examples will emphasize this
point. In Chapter 1, Brian Thomas et al. cite recent molecular studies that
provide convincing evidence that F T mRNA induced in the leaf is then transferred to the apex where it initiates flowering. Has the molecular mechanism of
florigen or anti-florigen action now been discovered after 80 years of investigation? In Chapter 11, Rod Scott et al. state ‘Twelve years ago little was known
about genetic control of stamen development beyond specification of stamen
primordia by floral homeotic genes. New footholds have been established in
several areas, notably patterning of the microsporangium, regulation of meiosis
and anther dehiscence’. This increase in knowledge, both in breadth and depth,
is clearly reflected in these reviews. In addition, it is very apparent that since
1993, molecular genetics has been applied to a much wider range of related
areas. Thus, topics such as the evolution of flowers, floral senescence and
ix

x

Preface

apomixis have been included in the new edition. These reviews add different
perspectives and provide further stimulus to investigate and enhance our
understanding. To some extent I feel research on flowering has not had the
prominence it deserves; molecular biology and the commercial opportunities of
biotechnology have started to redress this situation. There is still much to learn,
but I believe that this volume will contribute substantially to increase the understanding of this vitally important process.
Most importantly, I would like to thank the authors for their time and
considerable effort in producing these excellent reviews. In a period when
scientists are under considerable work pressure, with a variety of demands on
their time, I am very appreciative of their willingness to contribute their knowledge and expertise to this volume. It is also particularly rewarding for me to
read the contributions from colleagues working on flowering from all parts of
the world. Thanks, once again, to Tim Hardwick of CABI for his support.
Finally, I would like to thank my invaluable assistant, Bronwyn Hamilton,
without whose patient endeavours the smooth preparation of this book would
not have taken place.
Brian R. Jordan
Professor of Plant Biotechnology
Lincoln University
New Zealand
September 2005

I

External and Internal Regulation
of Flowering

This page intentionally left blank

1

Photoperiodism and Flowering
B. THOMAS,1 I. CARRÉ 2 AND S. JACKSON1
1

Warwick HRI, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, Warwick, CV35 9EF,
UK; 2Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry,
CV4 7AL, UK

Introduction
Photoperiodism can be defined as the response to changes in daylength that
enables plants (or any other living organism) to adapt to seasonal changes in
their environment. Except at the equator, the passage of the year is marked by
a continuous but highly reproducible variation in the length of the day. In order
to locate the time of year accurately, a timekeeping mechanism operates with
precision as part of the plant’s photoperiodic sensing mechanism in a way that
is insensitive to less predictable variations in the environment such as temperature. Photoperiod alone is not an unambiguous signal as any particular daylength occurs twice in an annual cycle. Progressive changes in daylength, which
are at their greatest around the equinoxes in spring and autumn, do, however,
provide a certain environmental signal for the passage of the seasons (Thomas
and Vince-Prue, 1997). The seasonal range and rate of change of daylength is
lower in the tropics than at higher latitudes and photoperiodic mechanisms
need to be sufficiently precise and flexible to operate across the entire range of
daylengths.
The ability to detect seasonal change and respond to it confers a selective
advantage to plants because it provides a means of anticipating, and consequently preventing, the adverse effects of a particular seasonal environment.
Photoperiodic plants are common, even in tropical latitudes where the seasonal
daylength changes are small, and daylength is used to synchronize reproductive
or other activities with seasonal events such as dry or rainy periods. Coincident
flowering in members of a population increases the chances of outbreeding and
hence genetic recombination. For this reason, synchronization of floral initiation
through photoperiodic sensitivity can confer advantages independently of
whether reproduction is matched with a particular favourable environment.
A further potential benefit of photoperiodic responses is that they can enable
organisms to occupy an ecological niche in space and time. For example,
ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

3

4

B. Thomas et al.

a response to short days can enable a woodland plant to flower and seed before
the dense leaf canopy is formed in the spring.
Photoperiodic control of flowering is also important in agriculture and
horticulture. Breeding to extend latitudinal range or altered timing of flowering
involves understanding and exploiting variation in the photoperiodic responses
of a particular species. Daylength manipulation in order to schedule flower
production is also a common practice.
This chapter deals with mechanisms underlying the photoperiodic control
of flowering and is divided into three sections: (i) the first describes the physiological background to molecular and genetic studies of the photoperiodic
control of flowering; (ii) the second details recent progress in understanding
the genetic regulatory networks controlling flowering in response to daylength;
and (iii) the third covers the molecular and genetic basis of the underlying
timekeeping mechanisms for plant photoperiodism.

Physiology of Photoperiodism
Discovery and variation
The response of plants to the daily duration of light was proposed independently by Julien Tournois and Hans Klebs at the beginning of the 20th century. It
was the American physiologists Garner and Allard (1920), however, who first
saw clearly that flowering and many other responses in plants could be accelerated either by long days (LDs) or by short days (SDs), depending on the plant.
They were led to their discoveries by studies on ‘Maryland Mammoth’ variety of
tobacco that failed to flower and grew large in summer, while plants grew under
glass during winter and early spring, and soybean, in which for a particular
variety, flowering tended to occur at the same time in the field, irrespective of
planting date. After experimentally eliminating temperature and light intensity
as causal factors they concluded that the tobacco and soybean plants would
only flower if the duration of the daylight period was sufficiently short.
They introduced the terms photoperiod and photoperiodism and classified
plants into the photoperiodic groups in use today. Short-day plants (SDPs)
are those that flower or in which flowering is accelerated by days which are
shorter than a critical daylength. Long-day plants (LDPs) are plants that
flower or in which flowering is accelerated when the daylight period exceeds
a critical daylength. Plants that flower at the same time irrespective of the
photoperiodic conditions are called day-neutral plants (DNPs). Plants that
respond to daylength can be further subdivided into obligate (or qualitative)
types, where a particular daylength is essential for flowering, or facultative
(or quantitative) types, where a particular daylength accelerates but is not
essential for flowering. Many important crop species are potentially photoperiodic, e.g. many cereals such as wheat and barley are LDPs, while SDPs
include rice and soybean (see Table 1.1). The model plant for molecular
genetic studies, Arabidopsis thaliana, is a typical facultative LDP under this
classification.

Photoperiodism and Flowering

5

Table 1.1. Examples of LDP and SDP, including some important crop species. (Modified
from Thomas and Vince-Prue, 1997.)
SDP (qualitative or absolute)

SDP (quantitative)

Coffea arabica
Fragaria  ananassa
Glycine max Biloxi
Hibiscus cannabinus; esculentus
Humulus japonicus; lupulus
Kalanchoë blossfeldiana
Nicotiana tabacum Maryland Mammoth
Oryza sativa
Perilla (red)
Pharbitis nil
Xanthium strumarium

Cannabis sativa
Cucumis sativus (some cvs)
Glycine max
Gossypium
Helianthus annuus; tuberosus
Nicotiana tabacum
Oryza sativa
Rhododendron spp. (florist’s azalea)
Ricinus communis
Rosa gallica; rugosa
Sesamum indicum
Sorghum bicolor ; halepense
Zea mays

LDP (qualitative or absolute)
Avena sativa (spring strains)
Brassica juncea carinata; pekinensis
Delphinium elatum, garden hybrids
Fuchsia hybrida

LDP (quantitative)
Allium ampeloprasum
Antirrhinum majus
Arabidopsis thaliana
Dianthus carthusianorum Napoleon III;
caryophyllus (glasshouse carnations)
Eustoma grandiflorum
Hemerocallis fulva
Hordeum vulgare (spring strains)
Linum usitatissimum
Lolium temulentum Ba 3081
Medicago sativa
Petunia hybrida
Pisum sativum
Secale cereale (spring cvs)
Solanum tuberosum
Triticum aestivum (spring cvs)
Vicia faba

Hyoscyamus niger (annual)
Jasminium grandiflorum
Lemna gibba; minor
Lolium temulentum Ceres
Nicotiana sylvestris
Papaver somniferum
Silene armeria; coeli-rosa
Trifolium pratense (English Montmorency)

The length of the day and night are mutually linked within the 24-h daily
cycle. Photoperiodic responses could therefore be theoretically determined by
either the length of the day or the length of the night. Classic experiments with
SDP Xanthium revealed that flowering only occurred if the night length was
greater than 8.5 h, irrespective of the relative durations of light and darkness in
the experimental cycle (Hamner and Bonner, 1938). SDs did not cause flowering if they were coupled with short nights but when the night was sufficiently
long, flowering occurred even when the accompanying light periods were long.
However, although a sufficiently long dark period appeared to be the decisive
factor for flowering to occur, the level of flowering was also affected by the
length of the light period. This indicated that the interaction between light and
darkness formed part of the daylength-sensing mechanism. If a long night is

6

B. Thomas et al.

interrupted by a short (e.g. 30 min) period of light (or night break, NB) near the
middle, SDPs respond as if they have been exposed to an LD. For LDPs, such
NBs are only effective if given in combination with daylengths that are just
longer than those needed to permit flowering or if they are of several hours
duration. Also, in LDPs, unlike in SDPs, the amount and spectral composition
of the light given during the day period, especially in the latter part, has a large
effect on flowering. If the response to daylength depends primarily on the
length of the dark period, the plants are called dark-dominant and conversely,
if the light period is the main influence, they are called light-dominant (Thomas
and Vince-Prue, 1997). In general, most SDPs are dark-dominant and most
LDPs are light-dominant.

Transmissible signals
A common feature of photoperiodism appears to be that daylength perception
is a separate process from the response to photoperiod. When either the leaves
or the shoot tips of photoperiodically sensitive plants are exposed to different
daylengths, flowering depends on the daylength given to the leaves and not to
the apex (Knott, 1934). In several instances, leaves from plants, which have
been given a daylength treatment that initiates flowering have been grafted on
to plants that have not been exposed to permissive daylengths, with the result
being flowering in the receptor plants. Daylength therefore is perceived in
leaves and results in a localized change in the properties of that leaf. Flowering
then occurs as a result of a signal transmitted from the leaves to the apex. The
change in the leaf is termed induction, while the response at the apex leading to
the initiation of flowering is sometimes called evocation.
From grafting experiments, it is known that in some species, induced
leaves are independently capable of generating a flowering stimulus over
many days or even weeks while in others, favourable cycles must be continued
until the apex has become recognizably floral, indicating the need for a continual supply of a floral stimulus (presumably from the leaf) if flower development
is to be sustained. An intact and functioning nutrient transport system is a
requirement for communication between the sites of perception in the leaves
and the sites of response. Daylength response is lost when the pathway is
disrupted by removing the source leaf, inhibiting transport by localized heat or
cold treatments applied at intermediate points in the transport path or stem
girdling. Also, when leaves taken from an induced plant are grafted on to a
receptor plant, promotion of flowering or other responses occurs only when a
graft union has developed.
It was proposed by Chailakhyan (1936) more than half a century ago that
the signal passing between leaves and response sites is a specific flowering
hormone: florigen. This idea was based on a series of experiments showing that
grafting of leaves from one donor species to a separate receptor species could
cause flowering (see Table 1.2). This strongly suggested the participation of
common signals in different species. Other grafting experiments suggested that
other substances inhibiting flowering may be involved; the appropriate day-

Photoperiodism and Flowering

7

Table 1.2. Examples of successful transfer of flowering stimulus between species or
genera following grafting. (After Thomas and Vince-Prue, 1997.)
Donor
Intraspecific grafts
Glycine max Agate
Chenopodium rubrum 608 47 N
Pisum sativum various genetic lines
Interspecific grafts
Gossypium hirsutum
Nicotiana tabacum Delcrest
Intergeneric grafts
Blitum virgatum
Chenopodium polyspermum
Cucumis sativus
Centauria cyanus

Response
type

Receptor

Response
type

DNP
SDP*
DNP or LDP*

G. max Biloxi
C. rubrum 348 90 N
P. sativum line G

SDP
SDP
LDP

DNP
DNP

G. davidsonii
N. sylvestris

SDP
LDP

LDP
SDP
DNP
LDP

Chenopodium rubrum
Blitum capitatum
Sicyos angulatus
Xanthium strumarium

SDP
LDP
SDP
SDP

length would then lead to removal of an antiflorigen rather than (or in addition
to) synthesis of a floral hormone.

Genes Controlling Floral Initiation
Pathways to flowering in Arabidopsis
Flowering is generally regarded as a default process that will occur at some
point in the plant’s life. The time that a plant flowers, however, is affected by
many environmental and endogenous factors and consequently there are numerous genetic pathways that are involved in the control of flowering time.
These pathways interact in different ways depending upon endogenous signals
and the environmental conditions thus enabling the plant to flower in the most
favourable conditions. Our understanding of the genetic and signalling pathways controlling flowering has increased dramatically over the last decade,
based largely on the analysis of the flowering responses of winter- and springannual genotypes of A. thaliana, a facultative LDP.
The predominance of the different pathways changes with the developmental state of the plant. Early on in the life cycle of the plant flowering is
actively repressed to enable the plant to grow sufficiently large to be able to
support the development of flowers, fruits and seeds. As the plant develops this
repression is gradually lifted by what have been termed floral-enabling pathways such as the vernalization and autonomous pathways (Boss et al., 2004).
In certain environments there is also activation of floral-promotion pathways
such as the photoperiodic, gibberellin (GA), ambient temperature and lightquality pathways. At some stage the point is reached when promotion is

8

B. Thomas et al.

Floral-promotion pathways
FRI
Light
quality

GA

Photoperiod
FLC

Ambient
temperature

Floral-enabling
pathways
Vernalization
pathway
Autonomous
pathway

Floral-integrator genes
LFY, FT, SOC1

Floral meristem
identity genes
Flower development

Fig. 1.1. Integration of the photoperiodic flowering pathway with other environmental and
developmental pathways to flowering in Arabidopsis.

greater than repression and the flowering transition occurs. All the different
flowering pathways converge on a small group of genes called floral-pathway
integrators. These genes are FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT ), LEAFY (LFY )
and SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 1 (SOC1),
and they are responsible for the activation of the floral meristem identity
genes that direct floral organ formation (see Fig. 1.1). Activation of the floral
integrators will thus directly result in flowering.
Expression of the floral-integrator genes is actively repressed by the floral
inhibitor FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC). Consequently flowering is prevented
until this repression is lifted by the floral-enabling pathways, thus allowing
activation of the floral-pathway integrators by the floral-promotion pathways.
The levels of FLC are maintained at a high level by the FRIGIDA (FRI) gene.
The activity of the FRI gene and consequently the resulting levels of FLC are
major determinants in flowering time in Arabidopsis. Mutations in the FRI
gene are responsible for most of the variation in flowering time observed in
different ecotypes of Arabidopsis (Johanson et al., 2000). Loss-of-function
mutations in the FRI gene are found in early flowering ecotypes of Arabidopsis, such as Landsberg erecta and Colombia. These mutations result in low FLC
levels and only mild repression of the floral-pathway integrators. This low-level
repression can be directly overridden by activation of a floral-promotion pathway, e.g. the photoperiodic pathway, without the need for a floral-enabling
pathway to first lift the repression by FLC. In addition to FRI other genes
are involved in the upregulation of FLC. These include EARLY IN SHORT
DAYS 4 (ESD4), PHOTOPERIOD INDEPENDENT FLOWERING 1 (PIE1),
EARLY FLOWERING IN SHORT DAYS (EFS) and VERNALIZATION
INDEPENDENCE (VIP) genes. The mechanism of action of these genes is
currently poorly understood.

Photoperiodism and Flowering

9

Floral-enabling pathways
Two floral-enabling pathways result in the downregulation of the FLC repressor,
the vernalization pathway and the autonomous pathway (Fig. 1.1). Vernalization,
resulting from exposure to low temperatures (between 08C and 108C), is a
quantitative response and causes progressive downregulation of the FLC gene
until the response is saturated after several weeks (Chapter 2, this volume for
further details). Once the vernalized state has been established it is stable throughout the life of the plant even if returned to warmer temperatures. It is thus
mitotically stable through numerous cell divisions indicating that the repression
of FLC expression is epigenetic. This epigenetic silencing of FLC is mediated by
the VERNALIZATION 1 (VRN1) and VERNALIZATION 2 (VRN2) genes,
which are involved in histone methylation and the formation of mitotically stable
transcriptionally silent heterochromatin. Mutations in these genes prevent the
stable repression of the FLC gene, and in the vrn1 and vrn2 mutants FLC
expression increases back to normal as soon as the plant is returned to warm
temperatures. The initial decrease in FLC expression is mediated in part by the
VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3 (VIN3) gene (Sung and Amasino, 2004).
The VIN3 gene is induced by long periods of cold treatment and is thought to
be an early step in the vernalization process.
The autonomous pathway is the other floral-enabling pathway that acts to
reduce the levels of FLC expression. There are several genes in this pathway,
FCA, FLOWERING LOCUS D (FLD), FPA, FVE, FY, LUMINIDEPENDENS
(LD) and FLOWERING LOCUS K (FLK), which act in different ways to repress
FLC. FVE is thought to act together with FLD in a histone deacetylation
complex and repress FLC expression by deacetylating FLC chromatin. FCA,
FPA, FY and FLK all appear to have roles in RNA processing although there is
no direct evidence that they directly affect FLC RNA. Active FCA mRNA levels
are low at germination but increase significantly in meristems 4–5 days after
germination, at a time when the floral-enabling pathways are likely to become
active (Macknight et al., 2002).

Floral-promotion pathways
Of the floral-promotion pathways, the photoperiodic pathway is probably the
best understood. Key elements include a gene named CONSTANS, or CO,
which encodes a nuclear protein with two zinc fingers at the amino terminus
and a conserved carboxyl-terminal domain, known as the CCT domain for the
three plant proteins in which it was identified (CO, COL, TIMING OF CAB1
(TOC1)). CO is regulated both transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally.
Transcription of the CO mRNA is controlled by the circadian clock and it is
also upregulated by the nuclear protein GIGANTEA (GI). CO protein stability is
affected by the action of different photoreceptors. Under SD conditions, CO
protein levels remain low at all times, but under LD conditions, the combined
action of the blue light photoreceptor CRYPTOCHROME 2 and of the far-red
light photoreceptor PHYTOCHROME A (PHYA) promotes accumulation of

10

B. Thomas et al.

the CO protein at the end of the light period. This in turn activates transcription
of the floral-pathway integrators FT and SOC1 (Suarez-Lopez et al., 2001;
Valverde et al., 2004). The mechanism by which accumulation of the CO
protein is modulated by daylength will be described in further detail below.
Recently evidence has emerged for the existence of a light-quality pathway
that acts independently of CO and the photoperiodic pathway. This pathway
acts through PHYTOCHROME B (PHYB) and a nuclear protein called
PHYTOCHROME AND FLOWERING TIME 1 (PFT1) to upregulate FT levels
in response to low red light to far-red light (R/FR) ratios (Cerdan and Chory,
2003). The effects of light quality on the activation of FT (either acting through
CO or PFT1) can explain the promotion of flowering by vegetative shade which
is part of the shade-avoidance response observed when plants are grown in
environments with low R/FR ratios.
Temperature has also been shown to affect PHYB-mediated control of
flowering. At 228C PHYB is the predominant photoreceptor mediating the
repression of flowering by red light, but at 168C this repression is mediated
through PHYTOCHROME E (PHYE) (Halliday et al., 2003). PHYA-mediated
promotion of flowering through the photoperiodic pathway is also temperature-dependent and PHYA promotes flowering at 238C but not at 168C
(Blazquez et al., 2003).
The other floral-promotion pathway is the GA pathway. In Arabidopsis
GA promotes flowering, and mutations in genes involved in GA biosynthesis or
response, such as gibberellic acid 1 (ga1) or gibberellic acid insensitive (gai),
respectively, cause late flowering in SDs. The effect of these mutations is not
observed in LDs because the photoperiodic pathway is actively promoting
flowering in these conditions, however in SDs the GA pathway is the major
floral-promotion pathway (Reeves and Coupland, 2001). It is thought that GA
acts by inducing the expression of a MYB-like transcription factor AtMYB33
that binds to a motif in the LFY promoter and induces LFY expression. This
GA-responsive element is distinct from a photoperiod-responsive element,
which is also present in the LFY promoter. Thus, LFY acts to integrate signals
from the GA and from the photoperiodic-response pathways. GA may regulate
the expression of the other floral-integrator genes SOC1 and FT as well.
Interestingly, the expression of GA 20-oxidase, an enzyme involved in GA
biosynthesis, is reported to be higher in LDs than SDs; and genes encoding
both GA 20-oxidase and 3b-hydroxylase (which catalyses a later step in the
pathway) are induced by red light and downregulated by far-red light. Whether
the influence of photoperiod and light quality on GA biosynthesis results in
altered control of flowering by the GA pathway is not yet known.
Floral-promotion pathways do not act in isolation but interact with floralenabling pathways. The photoperiodic pathway promotes flowering through
activation of the floral-integrator genes FT and SOC1, but this is not possible
when high levels of FLC are present. Thus, activation of the SOC1 gene by
overexpression of CO can be blocked by overexpression of FLC. The FLC
protein binds to an element in the SOC1 promoter that presumably prevents
induction of the gene by CO (Hepworth et al., 2002). FLC also directly
downregulates the photoperiodic pathway as high levels of FLC repress

Photoperiodism and Flowering

11

CRY2 expression thus preventing the CRY2-mediated promotion of CO
activity (El-Assal et al., 2003). The photoperiodic pathway can thus only
induce flowering once the FLC-mediated repression has been alleviated by
the floral-enabling pathways, or in early flowering ecotypes where mutations
to the FRI gene result in only low levels of FLC expression. This interaction
between FLC and the photoperiodic pathways provides a mechanism for
plants such as winter annual or biennials to delay flowering until winter has
passed (and vernalization has reduced the levels of FLC) and the warm weather
of late spring or summer has arrived (when LDs will activate the photoperiodicpromotion pathway).

Mechanism of Photoperiodic Time Perception
The circadian clock as the timing mechanism
The timing mechanism used in photoperiodism seems in most cases to be
based on endogenous circadian rhythms in light sensitivity, as first postulated
by Bünning (1936). He suggested that the circadian clock consisted of two half
cycles, photophil and scotophil. When light was received in the scotophilic
phase, the daily cycle was perceived as an LD, but the absence of light during
the scotophilic phase produced an SD response. This idea was further refined
by Pittendrigh and Minis (1964) to form the external coincidence model. In this
model, a signal was produced when an environmental signal (light) coincided
with the sensitive phase of an endogenous circadian rhythm of photoresponsiveness.
Support for these circadian clock-based models was initially provided by
physiological studies (reviewed in Thomas and Vince-Prue, 1997). Thus, responsiveness to NBs was rhythmic in SD species and oscillated with a period of
approximately 24 h. Results obtained with LDPs also supported this model, but
suggested that the characteristics of the interaction of light and circadian
rhythms were not the same in SDPs and LDPs. SDPs often exhibit a qualitative
requirement for inductive photoperiods and can frequently be induced to flower
in response to a single inductive light–dark cycle. In such plants the circadian
rhythm of responsiveness to NBs is entrained by the dusk signal, so that the
photoinducible phase always occurs at about the same time in darkness (Lumsden et al., 1982). Light received during the photoinducible phase (dawn or an
NB) prevents the SD response. Thus it is easy to think that the circadian rhythm
in light sensitivity provides the timing base that allows the length of the dark
period to be distinguished by the plant.
For LDPs or light-dominant plants the situation is not quite as straightforward. Because sensitivity to NBs is much reduced, it is very difficult to do NB
experiments. Rhythms in response to an NB have been described in the LDPs
but the pattern of response varies with the duration of the experimental dark
period (Perilleux et al., 1994) suggesting an interaction with the subsequent
light period. A circadian rhythm in light sensitivity in constant light can be seen
when far-red light is added to a background of white fluorescent or red light

12

B. Thomas et al.

(Deitzer et al., 1982) indicating that the rhythm in light sensitivity continues to
run in constant light.
The link between circadian rhythms and the circadian clock has been firmly
established by recent studies using Arabidopsis, a facultative LDP. First, abnormal function of the circadian clock in Arabidopsis mutants was correlated
with defective floral responses to photoperiod. For example, the short-period
mutant timing of cab 1-1 (toc1-1) flowered earlier than wild-type under SD
conditions, whereas the long-period mutant zeitlupe (ztl) exhibited delayed
flowering under LD conditions (Somers et al., 1998b, 2004). The complete
arrhythmia of the lhy-1 and elf3 mutants, observed in constant light, was
correlated with daylength-insensitive flowering (Hicks et al., 1996; Schaffer
et al., 1998). Yet the causal link between the circadian clock defect and the
flowering-time phenotype remained unclear as seemingly equivalent circadian
phenotypes were in some cases associated with opposite effects on flowering
times. In order to address this question, Roden et al. (2002) investigated the
effects of experimental conditions that artificially altered the phase of circadian
rhythms relative to the light and dark portion of the environmental cycle. One
of the fundamental properties of the circadian clock is that it will advance or
delay its phase (that is, shift its rhythm forward or back relative to dawn and
dusk) when entrained to light–dark cycles that are either longer or shorter than
24 h, respectively. When Arabidopsis plants were exposed to a range of these
atypical light–dark cycles, floral responses were not determined by the number
of light or dark hours within a cycle but reflected how much transcription of the
clock-controlled gene CO coincided with light. These results were consistent
with a model in which expression of CO under the control of the circadian clock
mediates rhythmic changes in photoresponsiveness and perception of external
coincidence with light.

Clock mechanism
Circadian rhythms (from circa, approximately, and dies, day) have been described in a wide range of organisms ranging from cyanobacteria to mammals
and at every level of organization. These rhythms all share the same fundamental
properties: (i) their ability to become entrained, or synchronized, to diurnal
changes in environmental conditions; (ii) persistence upon transfer to constant
conditions; and (iii) a constant period over the physiological range of temperatures. In plants, the circadian clock controls expression of approximately 6% of
the transcriptome (Harmer et al., 2000). This includes genes encoding components of all major metabolic pathways as well as genes involved in hormone
biosynthesis, photoreceptors and floral regulators such as CO, FT and GI.
The circadian oscillator of higher plants comprises transcriptional–
translational feedback loops similar to those described earlier for fungal and
animal clocks (Young and Kay, 2001). In Arabidopsis, the central oscillator
comprises three key components named LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL
(LHY), CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) and TIMING OF
CAB1 (TOC1). The LHY and CCA1 genes encode single MYB transcription

Photoperiodism and Flowering

13

factors with largely overlapping functions. Expression of the LHY and CCA1
mRNA levels oscillates and levels of both transcripts peak shortly after dawn. The
LHY and CCA1 proteins also are synthesized rhythmically with a lag of approximately 2 h after their cognate mRNAs. Both transcription factors bind to a
promoter element known as the evening element and act to inhibit transcription
of evening-specific genes, including TOC1. In the evening, the level of both
repressors declines and transcription of the TOC1 gene resumes. Accumulation
of the TOC1 protein at night promotes transcription from the LHY and
CCA1 promoters, thus initiating a new cycle (Alabadi et al., 2001). It is not
clear at this point how TOC1 performs this function as the TOC1 protein does
not comprise a DNA-binding domain and does not exhibit features typical of any
transcription-factor family. The TOC1 protein comprises an N-terminal domain
similar to response-regulator proteins of plant and bacterial two-component
signalling systems, but lacks an aspartate residue that is required for phosphotransfer (Makino et al., 2000; Strayer et al., 2000). Another domain known as
the CCT-domain is thought to play a role in protein–protein interactions since in
yeast it mediated binding of CO and TOC1 to the transcriptional regulator ABI3
(Kurup et al., 2000). TOC1 may regulate transcription through its interaction
with ABI3. It has also been shown to interact with a number of basic helixloop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors including the phytochrome-interacting
protein PIF3 (Makino et al., 2002; Yamashino et al., 2003). This is interesting
because PIF3 binds a G-box motif (CCACTG?) within the promoters of the
LHY and CCA1 genes (Martinez-Garcia et al., 2000). TOC1 may therefore
regulate expression of the LHY and CCA1 mRNAs by modulating the activity of
a light-responsive transcription factor, thus placing the oscillator very close
to light-response mechanisms.
Disruption of the LHY/CCA1/TOC1 feedback loop severely affected the
ability of the oscillator to free-run in constant conditions. Thus, lhy cca1 double
mutants became gradually arrhythmic upon transfer to constant light or darkness, whereas plants in which expression of TOC1 was inhibited using RNA
interference (RNAi) technology also became arrhythmic in constant darkness
and in constant red light but not under blue or white light (Alabadi et al., 2002;
Mizoguchi et al., 2002; Mas et al., 2003a). These results suggest that the
LHY/CCA1/TOC1 feedback loop functions as part of the oscillatory mechanism of the clock, but that its importance for self-sustained rhythmicity may vary
with light conditions.
Evidence is accumulating that the plant circadian clock comprises additional
interlocking feedback loops, similar to those described in animal and fungal
clocks (Young and Kay, 2001). A number of other elements of the circadian
systems have been identified that contribute to the positive regulation of LHY
and CCA1 expression. The ELF3, ELF4 and GI transcripts are expressed at
night with phases similar to TOC1 (Fowler et al., 1999; Hicks et al., 2001;
Doyle et al., 2002). The ELF3 gene is particularly interesting because its
function is essential for rhythmicity in constant light, but not in constant darkness. ELF3 has been proposed to negatively regulate light signals to the clock
and to act to dampen effects of light at times when its effects on the clock might
be deleterious (Covington et al., 2001). A set of four rhythmically expressed

14

B. Thomas et al.

pseudo response-regulator proteins related to TOC1 has also been proposed to
compose a regulatory feedback loop within the oscillator mechanism (Matsushika et al., 2000). Expression of the PRR9 transcript peaks shortly after dawn,
followed at approximately 3-h intervals by PRR7, PRR5 and PRR3. The TOC1
transcript, also described as PRR1, describes the latest wave of gene expression.
An increasing body of evidence suggests that all of the PRR genes function as
part of the clock mechanism. Mutations in each of these genes caused relatively
subtle effects on circadian period (Eriksson et al., 2003; Michael et al., 2003).
However, plants lacking function of both PRR7 and PRR9 exhibited very longperiod phenotypes in constant light and severely dampened rhythmicity in
constant darkness (Farré et al., 2005). Expression of PRR7 and PRR9 was
increased in LHY- and CCA1-overexpressing plants and decreased in double
loss-of-function mutants, suggesting a positive effect of CCA1 and LHY on
PRR7 and PRR9 expression levels. Despite its dramatic long-period phenotype
the prr7 prr9 double mutant exhibited nearly normal levels of LHY, CCA1
and TOC1 expression. Further work is therefore required to determine the
organization of the multiple feedback loops within the plant circadian clock.
Synchronization of circadian clocks to light–dark cycles (often described as
entrainment) is mediated by the action of multiple photoreceptors. In Arabidopsis, this includes at least four of the five phytochromes (PHYA, B, D and E)
and both cryptochromes (CRY1, 2) (Somers et al., 1998a,b; Devlin and Kay,
2000). In most organisms, effects of light on the clock are mediated by lightinduced changes in the level of one of the oscillator components. Plants are
unusual in this respect because light affects the oscillator at several levels. First,
light promotes transcription of the LHY and CCA1 genes in the morning
(Martinez-Garcia et al., 2000; Kim et al., 2003). Expression of the LHY
protein is boosted further by light-stimulated translation of the LHY mRNA
(Kim et al., 2003). Light also modulates the accumulation of the TOC1 protein
through the effect of the F-box, Kelch-repeat LOV-domain protein ZEITLUPE
(ZTL) (Somers et al., 2000; Mas et al., 2003b). The LOV domain of the ZTL
protein is related to that found in the blue light photoreceptors CRYPTOCHROMES and PHOTOTROPINS and is thought to bind a flavin chromophore. F-box proteins act to target specific molecules for ubiquitination and
degradation by the 26S proteasome. ZTL promotes degradation of the TOC1
protein in darkness but not in the light, suggesting that light may act to inhibit
ZTL activity. It is likely that light modulates proteolytic degradation of additional
clock molecules through the effects of DEETIOLATED 1 (DET1) and CONSTITUTIVELY MORPHOGENETIC 1 (COP1), since plants lacking either of
these activities exhibit short-period phenotypes and since both of these proteins participate in the proteasome-mediated degradation of positive effectors
of morphogenesis in the dark (Millar et al., 1995; Schwechheimer and Deng,
2000).

Photoperception
The multiple effects of light on the timing mechanism are important determinants of photoperiodic responses as they serve to set the phase of the

Photoperiodism and Flowering

15

photoperiodic-response rhythm. Yet they must be distinguished from separate
effects of light mediating the floral response downstream of the clock. Two
types of photoreceptors have a role in the latter: (i) phytochromes, which have
maximum sensitivity in the red and far-red parts of the spectrum; and (ii)
cryptochromes, the blue light photoreceptors.
There are five members of the phytochrome gene family in Arabidopsis and
equivalent gene families in other species (Kendrick and Weller, 2004). Phytochromes are chromoproteins that contain identical tetrapyrrole chromophores
(Lagarias and Rapoport, 1980). Mutants or transgenic plants in which chromophore biosynthesis is impaired will be incapacitated with regard to all of the
functional phytochromes. Such plants show altered daylength responses,
usually flowering earlier than wild types (Montgomery et al., 1999, 2001;
Sawers et al., 2002). Different phytochromes have different roles in controlling
plant development and this is the case for the photoperiodic-perception process.
Thus, PHYA is required for normal daylength perception in Arabidopsis and in
the LDP, pea (Johnson et al., 1994; Weller et al., 2001). PHYB is also essential
for daylength perception in barley since the BMDR-1 mutant of barley, which
contains a defective PHYB is insensitive to photoperiod (Hanumappa et al.,
1999). In contrast, Arabidopsis mutants deficient in PHYB flower earlier than
wild type in both SD and LD but retain sensitivity to daylength (Reed et al.,
1994). PHYB, along with PHYD and PHYE promotes early flowering in Arabidopsis in response to low-red to far-red ratios (Halliday and Whitelam, 2003).
This response plays a role in shade avoidance and is distinct from the role of
PHYB in photoperiodism, which is inhibitory (Mockler et al., 2003).
The cryptochromes are flavoproteins that mediate plant responses to blue
light (Kendrick and Weller, 2004). Two members of the cryptochrome gene
family (CRY1 and CRY2) are present in Arabidopsis. CRY2 is thought to be
the major blue photoreceptor for flowering in Arabidopsis, although cry1 cry2
double mutants flowered earlier in blue light than the single mutants, indicating
that both cryptochromes play a role to promote flowering (Mockler et al.,
1999). Further evidence for a role for CRY2 comes from a study by El-Assal
et al. (2001) in which a quantitative trait loci (QTL) for flowering time in
Arabidopsis was accounted for by an allele of CRY2. The early flowering
phenotype resulted from a single amino acid substitution that reduces the
light-induced turnover of the CRY2 protein under short photoperiods. The
participation of cryptochromes in the control of flowering in Arabidopsis is
consistent with physiological studies, which have shown that blue light has a
promotive effect on flowering for LDP of the Cruciferae, however, this is not
necessarily true for other families (Thomas and Vince-Prue, 1997; Runkle and
Heins, 2001). There is no physiological evidence for a specific role for blue
light, and by inference cryptochromes, in SDP, but this remains to be confirmed in genetic and comparative genomic studies.

Perception of external coincidence
One of the genes whose expression is under control of the circadian clock is CO,
which is a key regulator of the photoperiodic pathway (Suarez-Lopez et al.,

16

B. Thomas et al.

2001). The rhythmic expression of CO cycles such that low levels of transcripts
are observed during the day. Expression begins to increase approximately 8 h
after dawn, followed by a broad peak between 12 and 16 h after dawn (Fig. 1.2).
In SD conditions this increase coincides with the beginning of the night, however, in LD the CO transcript accumulates to relatively high levels in the light. CO
directly activates transcription of the floral integrators FT and SOC1, but only
when expression of its mRNA coincides with the light period under LD conditions (Fig. 1.2). This is because the CO protein is subject to post-transcriptional
regulation and is ubiquitinated and degraded by the 26S proteasome in the dark
(Valverde et al., 2004). Consequently, the protein does not accumulate when
expression of the CO transcript takes place in darkness and FT transcription is
not induced. Accumulation of the CO protein is promoted under monochromatic far-red and blue light by the action of PHYA- and CRY2-mediated pathways, respectively, but is prevented in red light via a PHYB-dependent pathway.
Thus under natural conditions of white light where all of these photoreceptors
are stimulated at the same time, the balance between the activity of these
different pathways must determine the floral response. This is in good agreement with mutant analyses, which suggested that far-red light acting through
PHYA and blue light acting through CRY1 and CRY2 may act to antagonize the
repression of flowering mediated by PHYB (Mockler et al., 2003).
A surprising observation is that plants that expressed the CO mRNA at a
constant level from a heterologous promoter (35S::CO) only accumulate high
levels of the CO protein towards the end of the day (Valverde et al., 2004).
This pattern was proposed to result from a gradual shift in the balance of
different photoreceptor pathways through the course of the day so that
PHYB promoted the degradation of CO in the morning but this effect was
antagonized about 12 h onwards through the effects of CRY2 and PHYA, thus
allowing the accumulation of CO protein in the light. This gradual shift in the

Day
0

Night

8 h 16 h 24 h

CO
Long
days
Flowering
FT
expression
Day
0

8h

Night
24 h

CO
Short
days
FT
expression

No
flowering

Fig. 1.2. Proposed rhythmic expression of CO under long- and short-daylight/dark cycles and
the resulting expression of FT.

Photoperiodism and Flowering

17

balance of photoreceptor pathways may result from the circadian patterns of
expression of the photoreceptors, since expression of the PHYB mRNA peaks
in the morning whereas that of PHYA and CRY2 mRNAs peak later in the day
(Tóth et al., 2001). The levels of the cognate proteins do not oscillate significantly, but it is possible that post-translational modifications alter the properties
of these photoreceptors over time and that the older proteins are inactive with
regard to photoperiodic induction.
In addition to its effects on CO protein turnover, light promotes expression
of the CO mRNA at the end of an LD through the action of a rhythmically
expressed protein known as FKF1 (Imaizumi et al., 2003). FKF1 is part of a
family of three flavin-binding, Kelch-repeat, F-box proteins (FKF1, ZTL and
LKP2) that regulate circadian rhythms by targeting specific proteins for degradation by the proteasome. Interestingly, the FKF1 protein has an LOV domain,
which is the light-sensing module of phototropin blue light photoreceptors, and
this was shown to bind a flavin-mononucleotide chromophore and to exhibit blue
light–induced changes in absorbance. FKF1 thus has properties of a blue light
photoreceptor and may be able to perceive blue light. In wild-type plants grown
under LD cycles, FKF1 protein levels reach maximum levels before dusk and the
peak of FKF1 expression coincides with a shoulder of the broad peak of CO
mRNA at the end of the light interval. This shoulder was not detected in a T-DNA
insertion allele, fkf1-2, indicating that FKF1 activity was required to promote
this particular aspect of CO transcription. As a result, the onset of CO transcription was delayed into the dark interval and this correlated with low expression of
FT and late flowering. The effect of FKF1 on CO transcription required exposure to light, since no difference in CO expression patterns was observed between
wild-type and fkf1 mutant plants upon transfer to shorter photoperiods where
FKF1 expression does not coincide with light.
Rhythmic transcription of CO under the control of the circadian clock
provides the basis for rhythmic responsiveness to light in photoperiodism,
since the effects of CRY2 and PHYA on CO protein accumulation can take
place only when the CO mRNA is expressed and actively translated. Photoperiodic time perception in Arabidopsis involves more than one rhythm of
light sensitivity, however, since the peak of FKF1 protein must also coincide
with light in order to promote CO transcription. Levels of accumulation of the
CO protein have been shown to closely correlate with the transcriptional
induction of the floral integrator FT. A combination of approaches including
grafting and tissue-specific expression have shown that CO acts in the phloem
to regulate a systemic flowering signal through cell-autonomous activation of
the flowering integrator FT (An et al., 2004). The FT gene encodes a 23 kD
protein with amino acid sequence similarity to mammalian RAF kinase inhibitor
proteins (Kardailsky et al., 1999; Kobayashi et al., 1999). Recent work has
provided convincing support for the concept of a systemic flowering signal
(florigen or antiflorigen) as described earlier in this chapter. FT mRNA induced
locally in the leaf, moves to the apex where the FT protein interacts with the
shoot apex-expressed transcription factor FD to initiate flowering (Huang et.
al., 2005). This strongly suggests that FT mRNA itself constitutes an important
part of the floral stimulus (i.e. florigen).

18

B. Thomas et al.

Daylength perception in short-day plants
With the recent completion of its genome project, rice has emerged as a
powerful genetic system and an excellent SD plant counterpart to Arabidopsis.
Genes that control photoperiodic flowering have been identified through QTL
analysis of flowering time, also described as heading date. Fourteen loci controlling heading date (labelled Hd1 to Hd14) were identified, five of which were

ELF3

LHY mRNA
CCA1 mRNA

PRR9

PHYA,B,D,E

LHY protein
CCA1 protein

CRY 1,2

PRR7

PRR5
ZTL

TOC1 protein
PRR3

Proteasomal
degradation

TOC1 mRNA
Circadian oscillator

FKF1
mRNA

PHYB

FKF1
protein

CO mRNA
CRY1,2
PHYA
CO protein

Proteasomal
degradation
FT mRNA

Floral transition

Photoperiodism and Flowering

19

shown to control photoperiodic responses, including Hd1, Hd2, Hd3, Hd5
and Hd6 (Lin et al., 2000; Yamamoto et al., 2000). Hd6 identified the
a-subunit of casein kinase 2 (CK2), a protein that interacts with and phosphorylates CCA1 in Arabidopsis and is thought to regulate the function of the
circadian clock (Sugano et al., 1998, 1999; Takahashi et al., 2001). Hd1 was
allelic to Se1, a flowering-time locus identified through mutant analyses. Mapbased cloning of Hd1 identified a homologue of CO in Arabidopsis. Another
QTL, Hd3a, identified a gene related to Arabidopsis FT that functions as a
positive effector of flowering (Kojima et al., 2002).
The rice counterpart of CO (Hd1 or Se1) is expressed rhythmically with a
phase similar to that of CO in Arabidopsis. As in Arabidopis, expression of
Hd3a and the related rice genes RFT1, FTL are regulated by CO. A key
difference, however, is that Hd1 inhibits expression of Hd3a under LDs and
promotes it under SD conditions (Izawa et al., 2002; Kojima et al., 2002).
Unlike Arabidopsis CO, which only plays a role to promote FT expression and
flowering under LD conditions, Hd1 may also have differing functions under
SD and LD conditions. The se1 mutant flowered earlier than wild-type under
LDs but later than wild-type under SDs, suggesting that the wild-type gene
product may be required to delay flowering in one condition while promoting it
in the other (Yano et al., 2000).
In addition to these components, which are closely related to genes identified in Arabidopsis, Early Heading Date1 (Ehd1) promotes early flowering
under SD conditions (Doi et al., 2004). The Ehd1 gene encodes a protein
containing a B-type response-regulator domain, which may be involved in
relaying a phosphorylation signal, as well as a GARP DNA-binding domain.
No orthologue of Edh1 was detected in the Arabidopsis genome. Edh1

Fig. 1.3. Mechanism of photoperiodic timing in Arabidopsis. Perception of daylength is mediated
by an interaction of a light and a circadian rhythm. The timing mechanism of the clock is
composed of multiple transcriptional–translational feedback loops, whose oscillations are
entrained to diurnal light–dark cycles through the action of phytochrome and cryptochrome
photoreceptors. Light resets the clock through at least two mechanisms, including transcriptional
induction of LHY and CCA1 expression and light-induced degradation of the TOC1 protein.
Effects of light on the clock are dampened at night through the action of the rhythmically
expressed protein ELF3.
Downstream of the clock, expression of the floral regulator CO is rhythmic under diurnal light–
dark cycles. Light promotes expression of the CO mRNA at the end of a long day through the
action of the rhythmically expressed photoreceptor FKF1. In addition, the circadian oscillator
mediates light-independent expression of the CO mRNA at night.
The CO protein does not accumulate in the dark because it is subject to proteasomal
degradation. Blue light acting through cryptochromes and far-red light acting through PHYA
prevent this degradation and allow accumulation of CO protein, which can then activate
transcription of FT and promote the conversion of vegetative meristems to floral meristems.
This action of CRY1 and CRY2 photoreceptors is antagonized by red light acting through the
PHYB photoreceptor. Thus, photoperiodic induction of flowering in Arabidopsis takes place
when the circadian rhythm of CO transcription coincides with a blue or far-red light signal.

20

B. Thomas et al.

induces transcription of FT-like genes independently of Hd1 and probably
represents a second mechanism by which Hd3a expression is increased in an
SD-specific manner.
The photoreceptor mediating photoperiodic responses in rice is the red/
far-red photoreceptor phytochrome. As for cry2 mutants of Arabidopsis, loss
of phytochrome (SE5) function in rice abolished responses to LDs. The se5
mutant plants flowered as early under inhibitory LDs and as wild-type under
inductive SD conditions (Izawa et al., 2002).
Thus, under LD conditions, coincidence between light and Hd1 expression
may lead to inhibition of Hd3a transcription and suppression of flowering.
Rhythmic expression of Hd1 is not altered in the se5 mutant, suggesting that
phytochrome may act downstream to mediate perception of external coincidence (Izawa et al., 2002). The mechanism by which Edh1 participates in
daylength responses independently of Hd1 remains to be elucidated.

Conclusions
Genetic and molecular studies, largely with the model plant A. thaliana, over
the last decade have gone a long way to confirm and explain the essential
elements of photoperiodism as it applies to flowering in plants. The physiological conclusions that photoperiodic mechanisms involve multiple interactions between photoreceptors and an underlying circadian rhythm in light
sensitivity through an external-coincidence model have been borne out. However, the level of complexity in these interactions is much greater than conceived in classical physiology (Fig. 1.3). Homologues of the central genetic
elements of the model in the LDP Arabidopsis have been shown to affect
photoperiodic regulation in SDPs such as rice and Pharbitis, implying a common photoperiodic mechanism for all plants. The role of a florigenic signal has
also been confirmed and although its exact nature is still unknown, there are
prospects of it being discovered in the foreseeable future. We can also soon
expect to understand more fully the basis for the different requirements for light
quantity and quality in different species. This understanding will be of great
benefits to breeders and agronomists in designing and growing plants with
flowering properties tailored to the food and ornamental industries and the
wider needs of society.

References
Alabadi, D., Oyama, T., Yanovsky, M.J.,
Harmon, F.G., Mas, P. and Kay, S.A.
(2001) Reciprocal regulation between
TOC1 and LHY/CCA1 within the
Arabidopsis circadian clock. Science
293, 880–883.
Alabadi, D., Yanovsky, M.J., Mas, P.,
Harmer, S.L. and Kay, S.A. (2002)

Critical role for CCA1 and LHY in
maintaining circadian rhythmicity in
Arabidopsis. Current Biology 12,
757–761.
An, H.L., Roussot, C., Suarez-Lopez, P.,
Corbesler, L., Vincent, C., Pineiro, M.,
Hepworth, S., Mouradov, A., Justin,
S., Turnbull, C. and Coupland, G.

Photoperiodism and Flowering
(2004) CONSTANS acts in the phloem
to regulate a systemic signal that
induces photoperiodic flowering of
Arabidopsis. Development 131,
3615–3626.
Blazquez, M.A., Ahn, J.H. and Weigel, D.
(2003) A thermosensory pathway controlling flowering time in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Nature Genetics 33,
168–171.
Boss, P.K., Bastow, R.M., Mylne, J.S. and
Dean, C. (2004) Multiple pathways in
the decision to flower: enabling, promoting, and resetting. Plant Cell 16,
S18–S31.
Bünning, E. (1936) Die endogene Tagesrhythmik als Grundlage der photoperiodischen Reaktion. Berichte der
Deutschen Botanischen Gesellschaft
54, 590–607.
Cerdan, P.D. and Chory, J. (2003) Regulation of flowering time by light quality.
Nature 423(6942), 881–885.
Chailakhyan, M.Kh. (1936) On the hormonal theory of plant development.
Doklady Academy of Science USSR
12, 443–447.
Covington, M.F., Panda, S., Liu, X.L.,
Strayer, C.S., Wagner, D.R. and Kay,
S.A. (2001) ELF3 modulates resetting
of the circadian clock in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 13, 1305–1315.
Deitzer, G.F., Hayes, R. and Jabben, M.
(1982) Phase shift in the circadian
rhythm of floral promotion by far-red
light in Hordeum vulgare L. Plant
Physiology 69, 597–601.
Devlin, P.F., and Kay, S.A. (2000) Cryptochromes are required for phytochrome signalling to the circadian
clock but not for rhythmicity. Plant
Cell 12, 2499–2509.
Doi, K., Izawa, T., Fuse, T., Yamanouchi,
U., Kubo, T., Shimatani, Z. and Yano,
M. (2004) EhD1, a B-type response
regulator in rice, confers short-day promotion of flowering and controls Ft-like
gene expression independently of
Hd1. Genes and Development 18,
926–936.

21
Doyle, M.R., Davis, S.J., Bastow, R.M.,
McWatters, H.G., Kozma-Bognar, L.,
Nagy, F., Millar, A.J. and Amasino,
R.M. (2002) The ELF4 gene controls
circadian rhythms and flowering time
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 419,
74–77.
El-Assal, S.E.D., Alonso-Blanco, C.,
Peeters, A.J.M., Raz, V. and Koornneef, M. (2001) A QTL for flowering
time in Arabidopsis reveals a novel
allele of CRY2. Nature Genetics 29,
435–440.
El-Assal, S.E.D., Alonso-Blanco, C.,
Peeters, A.J.M., Wagemaker, C.,
Weller, J.L. and Koornneef, M.
(2003) The role of cryptochrome 2 in
flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 133, 1504–1516.
Eriksson, M.E., Hanano, S., Southern,
M.M., Hall, A. and Millar, A.J. (2003)
Response regulator homologues have
complementary, light-dependent functions in the Arabidopsis circadian
clock. Planta 218, 159–162.
Farré, E.M., Harmer, S.L., Harmon,
F.G., Yanovsky, M.J. and Kay, S.A.
(2005) Overlapping and distinct roles
of PRR7 and PRR9 in the Arabidopsis clock. Current Biology 15,
47–54.
Fowler, S., Lee, K., Onouchi, H.,
Samach, A., Richardson, K., Morris,
B., Coupland, G. and Putterill, J.
(1999) GIGANTEA: a circadian clockcontrolled gene that regulates photoperiodic flowering in Arabidopsis and
encodes a protein with several possible
membrane-spanning domains. EMBO
Journal 18, 4679–4688.
Garner, W.W. and Allard, H.A. (1920)
Effect of the relative length of the day
and night and other factors of the environment on growth and reproduction
in plants. Journal of Agricultural Research 18, 533–603.
Halliday, K.J. and Whitelam, G.C. (2003)
Changes in photoperiod or temperature alter the functional relationships
between phytochromes and reveal

22

B. Thomas et al.
roles for phyD and phyE. Plant Physiology 131, 1913–1920.
Halliday, K.J., Salter, M.G., Thingnaes,
E. and Whitelam, G.C. (2003) Phytochrome control of floweritemperature
sensitive and correlates with expression of the floral integrator FT. Plant
Journal 33, 875–885.
Hamner, K.C. and Bonner, J. (1938)
Photoperiodism in relation to hormones as factors in floral initiation.
Botanica Gazette 100, 388–431.
Hanumappa,
M.,
Pratt,
L.H.,
Cordonnier-Pratt, M.M. and Deitzer,
G.F. (1999) A photoperiod-insensitive
barley line contains a light-labile phytochrome B. Plant Physiology 119,
1033–1039.
Harmer, S.L., Hogenesch, J.B., Straume,
M., Chang, H.-S., Han, B., Zhu, T.,
Wang, X., Kreps, J. A. and Kay, S.A.
(2000) Orchestrated transcription of
key pathways in Arabidopsis by the
circadian clock. Science 290, 2110–
2113.
Hepworth, S.R., Valverde, F., Ravenscroft, D., Mouradov, A. and Coupland,
G.
(2002)
Antagonistic
regulation of flowering-time gene
SOC1 by CONSTANS and FLC via
separate promoter motifs. EMBO
Journal 21, 4327–4337.
Hicks, K.A., Millar, A.J., Carré, I.A.,
Somers, D.E., Straume, M., MeeksWagner, D.R. and Kay, S.A.
(1996) Conditional circadian dysfunction of the Arabidopsis earlyflowering 3 mutant. Science 274,
790–792.
Hicks, K.A., Albertson, T.M. and Wagner,
D.R. (2001) EARLY FLOWERING 3
encodes a novel protein that regulates
circadian clock function and flowering
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 13, 1281–
1292.
Huang, T., Böhlenius, H., Eriksson, S.,
Parcy, F. and Nilsson, O. (2005) The
mRNA of the Arabidopsis gene FT
moves from leaf to shoot apex and
induces flowering. Science 309,
1694–1696.

Imaizumi, T., Tran, H.G., Swartz, T.E.,
Briggs, W.R. and Kay, S.A. (2003)
FKF1 is essential for photoperiodicspecific light signalling in Arabidopsis.
Nature 426(6964), 302–306.
Izawa, T., Oikawa, T., Sugiyama, N.,
Tanisaka, T., Yano, M. and Shimamoto, K. (2002) Phytochrome mediates the external light signal to repress
FT orthologs in photoperiodic flowering of rice. Genes and Development
16, 2006–2020.
Johanson, U., West, J., Lister, C.,
Michaels, S., Amasino, R. and Dean,
C. (2000) Molecular analysis of FRIGIDA, a major determinant of natural
variation in Arabidopsis flowering
time. Science 290, 344–347.
Johnson, E., Bradley, M., Harberd, N.P.
and Whitelam, G.C. (1994) Photoresponses of light-grown Phya mutants
of Arabidopsis – Phytochrome-a is required for the perception of daylength
extensions. Plant Physiology 105,
141–149.
Kardailsky, I., Shukla, V.K., Ahn, J.H.,
Dagenais, N., Christensen, S.K.,
Nguyen, J.T., Chory, J., Harrison,
M.J. and Weigel, D. (1999) Activation
tagging of the floral inducer FT. Science 286, 1962–1965.
Kendrick, R.E. and Weller, J.L. (2004)
Phytochromes and other photoreceptors. In: Thomas, B., Murphy, D.J. and
Murray, B.G. (eds) Encyclopedia of
Applied Plant Sciences. Elsevier, Oxford, UK, pp. 1063–1069.
Kim, J.Y., Song, H.R., Taylor, B.L. and
Carre, I.A. (2003) Light-regulated
translation mediates gated induction
of the Arabidopsis clock protein
LHY. EMBO Journal 22, 935–944.
Knott, J.E. (1934) Effect of a localized
photoperiod on spinach. Proceedings
of the American Society for Horticultural Science 31, 152–154.
Kobayashi, Y., Kaya, H., Goto, K., Iwabuchi, M. and Araki, T. (1999) A pair
of related genes with antagonistic roles
in mediating flowering signals. Science
286, 1960–1962.

Photoperiodism and Flowering
Kojima, S., Takahashi, Y., Kobayashi, Y.,
Monna, L., Sasaki, T., Araki, T. and
Yano, M. (2002) Hd3a, a rice orthologue of the Arabidopsis FT gene, promotes flowering downstream of Hd1
under short day conditions. Plant Cell
Physiology 43, 1096–1105.
Kurup, S., Jones, H.D. and Holdsworth,
M.J. (2000) Interactions of the
developmental regulator ABI3 with
proteins identified from developing
Arabidopsis seed. Plant Journal 21,
143–155.
Lagarias, J.C. and Rapoport, H. (1980)
Chromopeptides from phytochrome.
The structure and linkage of the Pr
form of the phytochrome chromophore. Journal of American Chemical Society 102, 4821–4828.
Lin, H.X., Yamamoto, T., Sasaki, T. and
Yano, M. (2000) Characterisation and
detection of epistatic interactions of
3QTLs, Hd1, Hd2, and Hd3, controlling heading date in rice using nearly
isogenic lines. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 101(7), 1021–1028.
Lumsden, P.J., Thomas, B. and VincePrue, D. (1982) Photoperiodic control
of flowering in dark grown seedlings of
Pharbitis nil Choisy. The effect of skeleton and continuous light photoperiods. Plant Physiology 70, 277–
282.
Macknight, R., Duroux, M., Laurie, R.,
Dijkwel, P., Simpson, G. and Dean,
C. (2002) Functional significance of
the alternative transcript processing of
the Arabidopsis floral promoter FCA.
Plant Cell 14, 877–888.
Makino, S., Matsushika, A., Kojima, M.,
Yamashino, T. and Mizuno, T. (2002)
The APRR1/TOC1 quintet implicated
in circadian rhythms of Arabidopsis
thaliana: I. Characterization with
APRR1-overexpressing plants. Plant
Cell Physiology 43, 58–69.
Martinez-Garcia, J.F., Huq, E. and Quail,
P.H. (2000) Direct targeting of light
signals to a promoter element-bound
transcription factor. Science 288,
859–863.

23
Mas, P., Alabadi, D., Yanovsky, M.J.,
Oyama, T. and Kay, S.A. (2003a)
Dual role of TOC1 in the control of
circadian and photomorphogenic responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
15, 223–236.
Mas, P., Kim, W.Y., Somers, D.E. and
Kay, S.A. (2003b) Targeted degradation of TOC1 by ZTL modulates circadian function in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Nature 426, 567–570.
Matsushika, A., Makino, S., Kojima, M.
and Mizuno, T. (2000) Circadian
waves of expression of the APRR1/
TOC1 family of pseudo-response regulators in Arabidopsis thaliana: insight
into the plant circadian clock. Plant
and Cell Physiology 41, 1002–
1012.
Michael, T.P., Salome, P.A., Yu, H.J.,
Spencer, T.R., Sharp, E.L., McPeek,
M.A., Alonso, J.M., Ecker, J.R. and
McClung, C.R. (2003) Enhanced fitness conferred by naturally occurring
variation in the circadian clock. Science 302, 1049–1053.
Millar, A.J., Straume, M., Chory, J.,
Chua, N.H. and Kay, S.A. (1995) The
regulation of circadian period by
phototransduction pathways in Arabidopsis. Science 267, 1163–1166.
Mizoguchi, T., Wheatley, K., Hanzawa,
Y., Wright, L., Mizoguchi, M., Song,
H.R., Carre, I.A. and Coupland, G.
(2002) LHY and CCA1 are partially
redundant genes required to maintain
circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis. Developmental Cell 2, 629–641.
Mockler, T.C., Guo, H.W., Yang, H.Y.,
Duong, H. and Lin, C.T. (1999) Antagonistic actions of Arabidopsis cryptochromes and phytochrome B in the
regulation of floral induction. Development 126, 2073–2208.
Mockler, T., Yang, H.Y., Yu, X.H., Parikh, D., Cheng, Y.C., Dolan, S. and
Lin, C.T. (2003) Regulation of photoperiodic flowering by Arabidopsis
photoreceptors. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of
USA 100, 2140–2145.

24

B. Thomas et al.
Montgomery, B.L., Yeh, K.C., Crepeau,
M.W. and Lagarias, J.C. (1999)
Modification of distinct aspects of photomorphogenesis via targeted expression
of mammalian biliverdin reductase in
transgenic Arabidopsis plants. Plant
Physiology 121, 629–639.
Montgomery, B.L., Franklin, K.A., Terry,
M.J., Thomas, B., Jackson, S.D., Crepeau, M.W. and Lagarias, J.C. (2001)
Biliverdin reductase-induced phytochrome chromophore deficiency in
transgenic tobacco. Plant Physiology
125, 266–277.
Perilleux, C., Bernier, G. and Kinet, J.M.
(1994) Circadian-rhythms and the induction of flowering in the long-day
grass Lolium-Temulentum L. Plant
Cell and Environment 17, 755–761.
Pittendrigh, C.S. and Minis, D.H. (1964)
The entrainment of circadian clocks by
light and their role as photoperiodic
clocks. The American Naturalist 98,
261–294.
Reed, J.W., Nagatani, A., Elich, T.D.,
Fagan, M. and Chory, J. (1994) Phytochrome-a and Phytochrome-b have
overlapping but distinct functions in
Arabidopsis
development.
Plant
Physiology 104, 1139–1149.
Reeves, P.H. and Coupland, G. (2001)
Analysis of flowering time control in
Arabidopsis by comparison of double
and triple mutants. Plant Physiology
126(3), 1085–1091.
Roden, L.C., Song, H.-R., Jackson, S.,
Morris, K. and Carré, I.A. (2002) Floral
responses to photoperiod are correlated with the timing of rhythmic gene
expression relative to dawn and dusk,
in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
99, 13313–13318.
Runkle, E.S. and Heins, R.D. (2001) Specific functions of red, far red, and blue
light in flowering and stem extension of
long-day plants. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science
126, 275–282.
Sawers, R.J.H., Linley, P.J., Farmer, P.R.,
Hanley, N.P., Costich, D.E., Terry, M.J.

and Brutnell, T.P. (2002) Elongated
mesocotyl1, a phytochrome-deficient
mutant of maize. Plant Physiology
130, 155–163.
Schaffer, R., Ramsay, N., Samach, A.,
Corden, S., Putterill, J., Carré, I.A.
and Coupland, G. (1998) The late
elongated hypocotyl mutation of Arabidopsis disrupts circadian rhythms
and the photoperiodic control of
flowering. Cell 93, 1219–1229.
Schwechheimer, C. and Deng, X.-W.
(2000) The COP/DET/FUS proteins
– regulators of eukaryotic growth and
development. Seminars in Cell and
Developmental Biology 11, 495–
503.
Somers, D.E., Devlin, P.F. and Kay, S.A.
(1998a) Phytochromes and cryptochromes in the entrainment of the Arabidopsis circadian clock. Science 282,
1488–1490.
Somers, D.E., Webb, A.A., Pearson, M.
and Kay, S.A. (1998b) The shortperiod mutant, toc1-1, alters circadian
clock regulation of multiple outputs
throughout development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 125, 485–
494.
Somers, D.E., Schultz, T.F., Milnamow,
M. and Kay, S.A. (2000) ZEITLUPE
encodes a novel clock-associated PAS
protein from Arabidopsis. Cell 101,
319–329.
Somers, D.E., Kim, W.Y. and Geng, R.S.
(2004) The F-box protein ZEITLUPE
confers dosage-dependent control on
the circadian clock, photomorphogenesis, and flowering time. Plant Cell
16, 769–782.
Strayer, C., Oyama, T., Schultz, T.F.,
Raman, R., Somers, D.E., Mas, P.,
Panda, S., Kreps, J.A. and Kay, S.A.
(2000) Cloning of the Arabidopsis
clock gene TOC1, an autoregulatory
response regulator homolog. Science
289, 768–771.
Suarez-Lopez, P., Wheatley, K., Robson,
F., Onouchi, H., Valverde, F. and
Coupland, G. (2001) CONSTANS
mediates between the circadian clock

Photoperiodism and Flowering
and control of flowering in Arabidopsis. Nature 410, 1116–1120.
Sugano, S., Andronis, C., Green, R.M.,
Wang, Z.Y. and Tobin, E.M. (1998)
Protein kinase CK2 interacts with and
phosphorylates the Arabidopsis circadian clock-associated 1 protein. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 95, 11020–11025.
Sugano, S., Andronis, C., Ong, M.S.,
Green, R.M. and Tobin, E.M. (1999)
The protein kinase CK2 is involved in
regulation of circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 96,
12362–12366.
Sung, S. and Amasino, R.M. (2004) Vernalization in Arabidopsis thaliana is
mediated by the PHD finger protein
VIN3. Nature 427(6970), 159–164.
Takahashi, Y., Yomura, A., Sasaki, T. and
Yano, M. (2001) Hd6, a rice quantitative trait locus involved in photoperiod
sensitivity, encodes the alpha subunit
of protein kinase CK2. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 98, 7922–7927.
Thomas, B. and Vince-Prue, D. (1997)
Photoperiodism in Plants. Academic
Press, San Diego, California.
Tóth, R., Kevei, E., Hall, A., Millar, A.J.,
Nagy, F. and Kozma-Bognar, L.
(2001) Circadian clock-regulated expression of phytochrome and cryptochrome genes in Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiology 127, 1607–1616.
Valverde, F., Mouradov, A., Soppe, W.,
Ravenscroft, D., Samach, A. and

25
Coupland, G. (2004) Photoreceptor
regulation of CONSTANS protein in
photoperiodic flowering. Science
303, 1003–1006.
Weller, J.L., Beauchamp, N., Kerckhoffs,
L.H.J., Platten, J.D. and Reid, J.B.
(2001) Interaction of phytochromes A
and B in the control of de-etiolation
and flowering in pea. Plant Journal
26, 283–294.
Yamamoto, T., Lin, H.X., Sasaki, T. and
Yano, M. (2000) Identification of heading date quantitative trait locus Hd6
and characterization of its epistatic
interactions with Hd2 in rice using advanced backcross progeny. Genetics
154, 885–891.
Yamashino, T., Matsushika, A., Fujimori,
T., Sato, S., Kato, T., Tabata, S. and
Mizuno, T. (2003) A link between circadian-controlled bHLH factors and
the APRR1/TOC1 quintet in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant and Cell Physiology 44, 619–629.
Yano, M., Katayose, Y., Motoyuki, A.,
Yamanouchi, U., Monna, L., Fuse,
T., Baba, T., Yamamoto, K., Umehara, Y., Nagamura, Y. and Sasaki,
T. (2000) Hd1, a major photoperiod
sensitivity quantitative trait locus in
rice, is closely related to the Arabidopsis flowering time gene CONSTANS.
Plant Cell 12, 2473–2483.
Young, M.W. and Kay, S.A. (2001) Time
zones: a comparative genetics of circadian clocks. Nature Reviews. Genetics
2, 702–715.

2

Vernalization
A.R. GENDALL1 AND G.G. SIMPSON2
1

Department of Botany, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia;
Dundee University, Gene Expression Programme, Scottish Crop
Research Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee, UK
2

Introduction
Some definitions
For clarity, we begin this chapter with some definitions. The term vernalization
is derived from the Latin word vernus meaning ‘of the spring’. Chouard (1960)
defined vernalization as ‘the acquisition or acceleration of the ability to flower
by a chilling treatment’. The promotion of flowering by vernalization is the
result of subjecting an imbibed seed or young plant to a long period of cold
(typically weeks). Floral initiation does not occur in the cold treatment but only
after returning the plant to a higher temperature and in many cases a specific
photoperiod. Therefore, cold temperatures do not cause plants to initiate floral
primordia, but create the capacity for subsequent flowering.
Vernalization can be facultative or obligate. Winter annuals have a facultative vernalization requirement, as cold accelerates, but this is not required for
flowering. Biennials, however, cannot flower without cold treatment and therefore have an obligate requirement for vernalization. Summer annuals flower
rapidly without a vernalization treatment. Some Arabidopsis summer-annual
accessions may complete more than one life cycle in the same growing season
in the wild and as such a more appropriate term for them may be ‘rapid
cyclers’.
It is the connection to the acceleration of floral initiation that distinguishes vernalization from other cold-related phenomena such as dormancy
chilling and stratification. In woody perennials, floral primordia are formed
during a growing season, but further development is arrested as plants enter
dormancy in winter. The chilling of winter breaks dormancy, resulting in bud
burst and the subsequent appearance of fully developed flowers. Stratification
is the promotion of seed germination by cold, usually of only a few days
duration.
26

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Vernalization

27

Vernalization and flowering time control
Plants meet the challenge of environmental change with developmental change
as an adaptation to their sessile lifestyle. For example, many plants control the
time at which they flower by monitoring and responding to environmental
stimuli like light quality, daylength and temperature (Yanovsky and Kay,
2003; Boss et al., 2004). In this way, plants ensure that they reproduce in
favourable conditions. This developmental plasticity is made possible by the
supply of undifferentiated stem cells from shoot meristems through the course
of a plant’s life (Baurle and Laux, 2003). The floral transition is executed by the
product of genes that confer floral meristem identity (Ferrándiz et al., 2000).
Therefore, at the molecular level, the control of flowering time ultimately
depends on the activation of floral meristem-identity genes. Precision and
robustness in this regulation is delivered by genetically separable pathways
that provide for the quantitative integration of multiple environmental responses with an endogenous programme of development (Yanovsky and
Kay, 2003; Boss et al., 2004).
Temperate environments are characterized by seasonal changes in rainfall,
temperature and daylength. These cues provide relatively reliable indicators of
the prevailing season and plants respond to them in controlling flowering time.
For example, many plants promote flowering in response to long-day (LD)
photoperiods as this can distinguish late spring from midwinter (Mouradov
et al., 2002; Yanovsky and Kay, 2003). However, the predictability as well
as the reliability of these seasonal changes can provide information not only on
the prevailing season but also on the seasonal progression. This is important,
for although daylength and ambient temperature at the spring and autumn
equinoxes may be similar, the conditions that follow are strikingly different. The
importance of monitoring seasonal progression is evident in winter annuals
that germinate prior to winter, but actively repress flowering until winter has
passed. If winter annuals are grown in otherwise favourable conditions, but not
exposed to a long cold treatment, the transition to flowering is extremely
delayed. However, if exposed to a long cold treatment, such plants show
accelerated flowering. By invoking a default delay in flowering from germination until winter has passed, winter annuals in effect ‘predict’ that winter is yet
to come (Simpson and Dean, 2002). Likewise, by responding to favourable
environmental cues only after exposure to a long cold treatment, they effectively ‘remember’ that winter has passed.
The close connection of flower development to seasonal progression
makes flowering-time control an important aspect of how plants adapt to
their environment and logically, therefore, is an important part of crop plantbreeding programmes. Consistent with this, ecotypes and agritypes of the
same species show different flowering responses and one of the most striking
distinctions relates to winter/summer annualism. The widespread uptake of
Arabidopsis thaliana as the laboratory-based model of modern plant biology is
partly due to its rapid life cycle. However, in the wild, most Arabidopsis
ecotypes are winter annuals that exhibit extremely delayed flowering unless
exposed to a vernalization treatment (Johanson et al., 2000). The adaptive

28

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

value of winter annualism may derive both from preventing flowering in winter
and from providing a mechanism to monitor seasonal progression. Several
potential explanations may account for the evolution of summer and winter
annualism and the selective forces may depend on different local environmental
conditions (see below). It is important to mention that winter- and summerannual classifications cover extremes of flowering behaviour. In reality, considerable variation exists in flowering time and vernalization requirement, and this
is also likely to relate to adaptation to particular environments.
These distinctions are clearly pertinent to agriculture and winter/summer
annualism is an important trait in breeding programmes as it influences the
geographical range in which crop plants can be grown. Vernalization-requiring
crops are typically sown in the autumn and are known as winter types. In
contrast, non-vernalization-requiring agritypes are typically sown in the spring
and known as spring types. The availability of both winter and spring crops can
influence the dynamic management of multiple crops on one farm in 1 year.

Dissecting the Molecular Processes Involved in Vernalization
The process of vernalization has two essential features: (i) requirement; and (ii)
response. Vernalization requirement must involve a mechanism by which
flowering is repressed in a manner that can be overcome by a long period of
cold. Vernalization response depends on the ability to sense cold temperature
and to signal this to factors that execute the vernalization response. An important feature of vernalization is its quantitative nature: plants must measure
the duration of cold in order to distinguish an occasional cold-spell from the true
passage of winter, requiring then, the measurement and recording of temperature over a period of weeks. Plants show a progressive acceleration of flowering
time that is correlated with the duration of the cold treatment they received.
Finally, plants remember that winter has passed – vernalization does not
directly promote flowering but facilitates or enables the response to genuinely
promotive cues like daylength. Therefore, there is a significant intervening
period between exposure to low temperatures and subsequent floral development that means that the memory of winter is maintained through mitotic
divisions (but reset after meiosis). This has long indicated an epigenetic basis to
this aspect of the vernalization response.

Addressing the mechanisms of vernalization using Arabidopsis as a model
Our understanding of the molecular processes that underpin much of plant
biology has been transformed in the last 10 years through molecular genetic
approaches and the use of Arabidopsis as a model. This is especially true of
recent progress in dissecting the mechanisms of flowering-time control. Arabidopsis is native to temperate latitudes and its flowering is promoted in response
to LDs and vernalization (Yanovsky and Kay, 2003; Boss et al., 2004; Henderson and Dean, 2004). Flowering in Arabidopsis is controlled by genetically

Vernalization

29

separable pathways that include light quality, photoperiod, gibberellin signal
transduction, autonomous and (in winter annuals), vernalization requirement
and response pathways (Yanovsky and Kay, 2003; Boss et al., 2004; Henderson and Dean, 2004). Activity through these pathways is integrated in a
quantitative manner by the upregulation of an overlapping set of target genes
known as floral pathway integrators that include FLOWERING LOCUS T
(FT ), AGAMOUS-LIKE (AGL20) and LEAFY (LFY) (Yanovsky and Kay,
2003; Henderson and Dean, 2004). These factors in turn activate floral
meristem-identity genes like APETALA1 (AP1) that execute the floral transition. The study of vernalization in Arabidopsis has facilitated the discovery
and characterization of components involved in this process. In addition, the
wider exploitation of Arabidopsis as a model has meant that the understanding of vernalization can be embedded and integrated with other aspects of
flowering-time control.

Vernalization Requirement
A genetic approach has been used to determine the molecular basis of vernalization requirement in several plant species. By crossing vernalization-requiring
accessions with non-vernalization-requiring accessions of the same species,
F2 populations segregating for this trait have been generated that have allowed
a map-based cloning approach to identify the genes involved. This strategy has
been successful in identifying major genes controlling vernalization requirement
in Arabidopsis, brassicas and temperate cereals.

Arabidopsis vernalization requirement
Early characterization of the vernalization requirement of Arabidopsis was
described by Napp-Zinn during the 1960s (Napp-Zinn, 1987). These physiological and genetic experiments established that the process of vernalization in
Arabidopsis was similar to that observed in other species, and that only a few
genes with large effects determined vernalization requirement. Recent discoveries have revealed many of the underlying mechanisms regulating this phenotypic response, and are largely consistent with these early observations. Since
1999, there has been rapid progress in the identification and characterization
of many genes that regulate vernalization. For ease of discussion, these genes
are described in a table (Table 2.1) and their effects presented in a model
(Fig. 2.1).
The model proposed is the result of a large number of laboratories’ efforts
to identify and characterize flowering-time genes in Arabidopsis. Our model
only includes genes that have been shown to have an effect on vernalization or
the expression of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), a major regulatory point of
vernalization, and does not include other flowering time–control pathways.
Here we will divide the genes affecting vernalization into two broad categories:
(i) those that confer a vernalization requirement by controlling the ‘constitutive

30

Table 2.1. Genes determining vernalization requirement and mediating response in Arabidopsis.
Normal effect on FLC

Requirementa
FRI family
Autonomous pathway

Partially FLC independent

Unclear/unknown
a

Protein function/type

Interactions/complex

mRNA expression

Chromatin

FLC

MADS domain

Homo/heterodimers?d

n.a.

n.a.

FRI
FRL1, FRL2
FCA
FY
FPA
LD

n.d.
n.d.
Direct interaction

Increase
Increasef
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease

No change in H4Ac
n.d.
No change in H3Ac or H4Ac
n.d.
No change in H4Ac
No change in H4Ac

FLK
FVE
FLD
ELF5
ESD4
PIE1
VIP3
VIP4

Coiled-coil
Coiled-coil
RNA binding
Polyadenylation
RNA binding
Homeodomain
(RNA binding?)
RNA binding
WD-repeat
Polyamine oxidase
Nuclear localized
SUMOylation
ISWI
WD-repeat
Novel hydrophilic protein


Histone deacetylasee
e direct
Histone deacetylase
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.

Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Slight increase?
Increase
Increase
Increase
Increase

n.d.
# H3Ac, # H4Ac
# H4Ac
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.

VIN3
VRN1
VRN2

PHD finger
B3 DNA–binding
Polycomb group

Chromatin remodelling

(Decrease during cold)
(Maintain after cold)
(Maintain after cold)

MAF2
FLH

MADS domain
Not clonedc

Homo/heterodimers?d

#H3Ac, "H3K27Me, "H3K9Me,
#H3Ac, "H3K9Me
Decreases DNase I accessibility;
#H3Ac, "H3K27Me, "H3K9Me
n.d
n.d.

Polycomb

No effect
n.d.

Genes determining the level of FLC expression prior to vernalization.
Genes mediating the cold-induced reduction or post-cold level of FLC expression.
c
FLH is a quantitative trait locus (QTL) with some alleles that enhance the vernalization response.
d
MADS-domain proteins often act as homodimers or with other MADS proteins as heterodimers.
e
Inferred on the basis of homology to other species.
f
In conjunction with FRI.
Abbreviations: n.d. – not determined, H3 – Histone H3, H4 – Histone H4, Ac – acetylation, Me – methylation, K9 – Lysine 9, K27 – Lysine 27.
b

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

Responseb
Cold-induced repression
Maintenance

Gene

Vernalization

31

Vernalization
Post-cold
maintenance

Cold-induced
repression
Cold

VRN1
VRN2

VIN3

AGL20
FLC expression

FT
LFY
Floral pathway
integration

FRL1

FRI
Autonomous
pathway
FLD, FVE,
FPA, FY,
FCA, LD,
FLK

ESD4,
ELF5
PIE1
VIP3
VIP4

‘Constitutive’ expression

Fig. 2.1. The regulation of FLC expression controls Arabidopsis vernalization requirement and
response. Genes that promote elevated levels of FLC mRNA expression are indicated by an arrow,
while genes that repress FLC mRNA accumulation are indicated with a crossed bar.

level’ of FLC expression; and (ii) those that mediate the vernalization response
by repressing FLC expression in response to cold (see Fig. 2.1). The demarcation or distinction between these categories is not absolute, but seems to fit
the current data well.
The characterization of loci that confer a vernalization requirement in
Arabidopsis led to the discovery of FRIGIDA (FRI) and FLC (Michaels and
Amasino, 1999; Sheldon et al., 1999; Johanson et al., 2000). Arabidopsis
accessions with active alleles of both of these genes are generally late flowering
and are very responsive to a vernalization treatment. Molecular analysis has
revealed that the presence of active FRI alleles leads to an increased level of
FLC mRNA expression. This accounts for the function of FRI, as early flowering null alleles of flc are epistatic to FRI (Michaels and Amasino, 2001). FRI
encodes a plant-specific coiled-coil domain protein, and is a member of a small
group of related genes (FRIGIDA LIKE, FRL) (Johanson et al., 2000; Michaels
et al., 2004). The activity of one of these genes (FRL1) is required for FRI
to upregulate FLC expression, but FRL1 itself is not sufficient to delay flowering as the overexpression of FRL1 does not delay flowering in an early
flowering accession (Michaels et al., 2004). FLC encodes a member of the

32

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

MADS-domain family of transcription factors, a large family with over 100
members in Arabidopsis (Parenicova et al., 2003).
The importance of FLC in determining the vernalization requirement of
Arabidopsis is a consequence of its strong repressive effect on flowering time,
and its ability to be downregulated by exposure to low temperatures (Michaels
and Amasino, 1999; Sheldon et al., 1999). The comparison of winter- and
summer-annual (or rapid cycling) Arabidopsis accessions has revealed that the
rapid-cycling habit of Arabidopsis evolved from a winter-annual habit most
commonly through loss of FRI function or, more rarely, as a result of weak
alleles of flc. Several different FRI and FLC alleles have been described
(Johanson et al., 2000; LeCorre et al., 2002; Gazzani et al., 2003; Michaels
et al., 2003, 2004). Inactive fri alleles are usually found in early flowering
accessions and active FRI alleles are generally associated with late-flowering,
vernalization-responsive accessions. However, in some cases the lateness that
can be conferred by active FRI alleles is masked by weak flc alleles (Gazzani
et al., 2003; Michaels et al., 2004). Naturally occurring allelic variation at FLC
was identified first in the Landsberg erecta (Ler) accession in a series of elegant
genetic experiments (Lee et al., 1993). Recently, the nature of this allelic
variation was attributed to the insertion of a transposon within the first intron
of FLC, a region previously shown to be important for FLC regulation (Sheldon
et al., 2002; Gazzani et al., 2003; Michaels et al., 2003). This insertion
reduces the ability of FLC to be upregulated by FRI, but exactly how this occurs
is unclear. Presumably, this is the result of altered transcription, pre-mRNA
maturation or turnover of FLC mRNA. The weak flc allele of the Da(1)-12
accession also appears to be due to a large retrotransposon insertion within
intron 1 of FLC (Michaels et al., 2003). Analysis of crosses and recombinant
inbred line (RIL) populations using the Shahdara accession has also revealed
that it too carries a weak flc allele – the exact nature of this flc allele has not yet
been resolved but it is not the result of any large insertions or deletions as it is in
Ler and Da(1)-12 (Johanson et al., 2000; Loudet et al., 2002; Michaels et al.,
2003). Other accessions with as yet unexplained weak flc alleles include the
C24 and Niederzenz accessions (Sanda and Amasino, 1996; Schlappi, 2001).
Further study of allelic variation at these loci will undoubtedly inform us on both
the evolution of flowering-time variation and the function of these important
genes. It is notable that, in contrast to FRI, no naturally occurring null FLC
alleles have been identified. This may indicate that in the wild Arabidopsis
requires a low level of FLC activity (as experimentally induced flc null mutations
are not lethal). It is not clear why this may be, but one additional function for
FLC is in regulating circadian-clock function (Swarup et al., 1999).
FLC is part of a smaller subgroup of six very closely related genes named
MADS AFFECTING FLOWERING (MAFs), some of which also affect flowering time (Ratcliffe et al., 2001; Scortecci et al., 2001). FLC appears to be the
most important of these with respect to vernalization requirement and
response. It is important to mention that although the regulation of FLC is
the most important feature of Arabidopsis vernalization requirement, it is not
the only one; flc null mutants exhibit a vernalization response (Michaels and
Amasino, 2001). Interestingly, some of the MAF genes are also regulated by

Vernalization

33

vernalization in a manner similar to FLC, while others are regulated in the
reciprocal pattern – i.e. upregulated by vernalization (Ratcliffe et al., 2003).
The second group of factors determining FLC mRNA expression levels is the
autonomous pathway which was originally described as a genetic pathway that
regulates flowering time independently of photoperiod (Koornneef et al., 1991;
Simpson, 2004). The autonomous pathway consists of at least seven members
including FCA, FY, FPA, FVE (these genes do not have complete names),
LUMINIDEPENDENS (LD), FLOWERING LOCUS D (FLD) and FLOWERING LOCUS K (FLK). While most of the corresponding mutants have been
known for some time, FLK (Lim et al., 2004) was only recently identified,
suggesting that additional components are yet to be discovered. None of the
autonomous pathway components appear to regulate one another, revealing
that this is a genetically defined ‘pathway’ and not a pathway in the sense of a
sequential series of biochemical changes (Simpson, 2004). All autonomous
pathway components prevent the accumulation of FLC mRNA (Michaels and
Amasino, 2001). The corresponding loci of all seven known members have now
been identified, but it is still unclear how they regulate FLC. FCA, FY, FPA and
FLK encode RNA-binding or RNA-processing factors, suggesting that they may
act to regulate FLC mRNA synthesis or stability – however, a direct effect on FLC
mRNA has not been demonstrated (Macknight et al., 1997; Schomburg et al.,
2001; Simpson et al., 2003; Lim et al., 2004). LD encodes a homeodomain
protein (Lee et al., 1994), but it remains unclear what DNA target (if any) LD
binds. The observation that many other autonomous pathway genes bind or
regulate RNA might indicate that LD interacts with RNA as has been demonstrated for some homeodomain proteins (Dubnau and Struhl, 1996; RiveraPomar et al., 1996). Both FVE and FLD encode putative components of a
histone deacetylase complex and have recently been shown to be required for
the normal deacetylation of histone 3 and/or histone 4 at the FLC gene (He et al.,
2003; Ausin et al., 2004). The association of histone deacetylation with reduced
levels of gene expression is well established in many systems (Carrozza et al.,
2003). Neither FCA, FY, FPA nor LD affects the acetylation status of histones
around the FLC locus revealing that multiple mechanisms are used in the
autonomous pathway to control FLC expression (He et al., 2003).
Autonomous pathway mutants flower late because they have elevated
levels of FLC mRNA (Michaels and Amasino, 2001). Like active FRIcontaining winter-annual accessions, this lateness can be overcome by vernalization as this reduces FLC mRNA levels (Koornneef et al., 1991; Michaels and
Amasino, 1999; Sheldon et al., 1999). Mutations in autonomous pathway
genes effectively confer a ‘synthetic’ vernalization requirement and such similar
mutations could theoretically account for winter annualism in some Arabidopsis accessions. However, there is no evidence that this occurs. This may be
because these genes play other essential roles (Simpson, 2004) and so the
selective pressure on these functions may reduce allelic variation. As most
recent attention has focused on extreme accessions that flower particularly
late or early, weak allelic variation of autonomous pathway genes may account
for quantitative trait loci (QTL) that modify vernalization requirement or flowering time through more modest effects on FLC expression levels.

34

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

Some additional genes, although not similar to each other in sequence or
function, affect FLC expression. These genes – EARLY FLOWERING 5
(ELF5), EARLY IN SHORT DAYS 4 (ESD4), PHOTOPERIOD-INDEPENDENT EARLY FLOWERING 1 (PIE1), VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE
3 (VIP3) – are required for the promotion of FLC expression. As a result, the
early flowering phenotype of these mutants is clearer in FRI-containing
or autonomous pathway-mutant backgrounds, when FLC mRNA levels
would otherwise be elevated. All of these genes except ELF5 affect floralorgan development also, indicating that they regulate the expression of genes
other than FLC (Reeves et al., 2002; Zhang and van Nocker, 2002; Noh and
Amasino, 2003; Zhang et al., 2003; Noh et al., 2004). Such genes may be
intermediate targets by which FRI or autonomous pathway components regulate FLC expression, but currently there is no evidence for this. Genes that
affect AGAMOUS pre-mRNA maturation also affect FLC levels, as hua1 hua2
double mutants (hua is Chinese for flower) have reduced FLC expression
(Cheng et al., 2003).

A role for FLC in controlling flowering time is conserved in brassicas
Flowering-time variation in an F2 population derived from a cross between
an annual and a biennial cultivar of oilseed Brassica rapa identified two
major QTLs: vernalization-responsive flowering in B. rapa 1 (VFR1) and
vernalization-responsive flowering in B. rapa 2 (VFR2). The VFR2 phenotype
co-segregates with a marker derived from Arabidopsis FLC (Kole et al.,
2001). The expression of B. rapa FLC-like sequences is elevated in biennials
compared to annuals and reduced by vernalization (Kole et al., 2001). These
observations indicate that vernalization requirement in B. rapa is controlled by
allelic variation at genes related to Arabidopsis FLC. The molecular basis of the
allelic variation that might account for this is currently unknown. Multiple FLClike genes have been identified in Brassica napus that delay flowering when
expressed from the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter in transgenic
Arabidopsis plants (Tadege et al., 2001). Multiple FLC-like genes have
been identified in B. rapa and display an additive effect on flowering time
(Schranz et al., 2002). There is no evidence yet for a role of a gene related
to Arabidopsis FRI in controlling vernalization requirement in Brassica.

Vernalization requirement evolved independently in temperate cereals
Temperate cereals like wheat, barley, rye and oats exhibit a vernalization
requirement, whereas rice and maize, which are of a more subtropical origin,
do not. The analysis of vernalization requirement in cereals reveals that it
involves different genes to Arabidopsis, indicating that this requirement has
evolved independently. The major loci controlling vernalization requirement in
the diploid wheat Triticum monococcum are VRN1 and VRN2 (in cereals the
VERNALIZATION, VRN, designation applies to genes conferring a vernaliza-

Vernalization

35

tion requirement and differs from Arabidopsis genes of the same name that are
involved in vernalization response, see below). These two genes have strong
epistatic interactions and are likely to be part of the same regulatory pathway
(Tranquilli and Dubcovsky, 2000). VRN1 is located on wheat chromosome 5.
Genes controlling vernalization requirement in barley (Spring growth habit2
[Sgh2]) and rye (Spring growth habit1 [Sp1]) map to syntenic regions, as
judged by their co-segregation with common markers, indicating that related
genes control vernalization requirement in these different cereals. Wheat
VRN2 also maps to chromosome 5 and a gene influencing vernalization
requirement in barley maps to a syntenic region on barley chromosome 4H
(Sgh1). VRN1 is the major determinant of vernalization requirement in hexaploid wheat. No VRN2 equivalent has been detected in hexaploid wheat,
presumably because homozygosity for recessive alleles on all three genomes
would be needed for the phenotype to be seen. A third gene controlling
vernalization requirement in barley, Sgh3, has been mapped to the long arm
of chromosome 1H (Shahla and Tsuchiya, 1990).
Significant progress in characterizing the molecular basis of temperate
cereal vernalization requirement has been made by Jorge Dubcovsky and coworkers using diploid wheat, T. monococcum, as a genetically tractable background. VRN2 was identified by positional cloning (Yan et al., 2004) and
encodes a protein with a putative zinc finger and a so-called CCT (CO, COlike, TOC1) domain. A related gene lies adjacent to VRN2 and the pair are
also known as ZCCT1 and ZCCT2, with VRN2 corresponding to ZCCT1 (Yan
et al., 2004). VRN2 mRNA levels are reduced by vernalization treatment and
this is consistent with the idea that VRN2 is a repressor of flowering eliminated
by vernalization (Yan et al., 2004). The function of the CCT domain is
unknown, but it is essential for the function of CONSTANS (CO), an Arabidopsis protein that controls flowering in response to daylength (Robson et al.,
2001). Among the 49 spring T. monococcum accessions tested, 22 of them
carry a point mutation at position 35 of the CCT domain that replaced an
arginine (R) with a tryptophan (W). This R is highly conserved in CCT domains
and is essential for CO function as evidenced by the late-flowering phenotype
of the Arabidopsis co-7 allele that carries a point mutation at this position
(Robson et al., 2001). A further 17 spring accessions harboured a deletion of
the entire VRN2 gene. These data indicate that in wheat, spring habit can
evolve from winter habit through loss of VRN2 function. Consistent with this,
transgenic RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knock-down of VRN2 expression in a hexaploid winter-wheat background resulted in earlier flowering in the
absence of a vernalization treatment (Yan et al., 2004).
A clue to the independent evolution of vernalization requirement came
from the absence of Arabidopsis FLC-related sequences in cereals. However,
the discovery of VRN2 and analysis of the relatedness of known CCT domains
underlines the independent evolution of this regulatory mechanism. The CCT
domains of T. monococcum ZCCT1 and ZCCT2, and homologues from
winter barley fall into a group that do not include any Arabidopsis or rice
proteins (Yan et al., 2004). This group is most closely related to a group
comprised only of grass species CCT domains. This indicates that the ancestor

36

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

of VRN2 originated in the grasses and diverged substantially in the temperate
cereal species. This may have occurred through duplication of a related CCT
protein as ZCCT orthologues are absent from the colinear region of rice.
Dubcovsky’s group also identified a candidate gene for T. monococcum
VRN1 (Yan et al., 2003). Using a positional-cloning approach, a gene encoding
a MADS-box transcription factor that most closely resembles the Arabidopsis
floral meristem-identity gene, AP1, was found to co-segregate with vernalization requirement (allelic variation at AP1 or its paralogues, FRUITFULL and
CAULIFLOWER, has not been associated with Arabidopsis vernalization
requirement). This gene was expressed in apices and the level of expression
increased after a vernalization treatment. Three spring accessions of T. monococcum showed deletions of sequence within the promoter of this gene that a
winter accession did not (Yan et al., 2003). Therefore on the basis of map
position, expression pattern in response to vernalization and promoter sequence differences between spring and winter wheat accessions, this MADSbox protein was putatively identified as VRN1 (Yan et al., 2003). Caveats to the
definitive identification of this gene as VRN1 remain: (i) it has not yet proved
possible to generate complete physical coverage of the chromosomal region
flanked by markers that co-segregate with the VRN1 phenotype; (ii) no loss-offunction VRN1 mutation has been described that might reveal a phenotype
consistent with a role in flowering-time control; and (iii) no functional or
causal connection between the promoter deletions and an effect on VRN1
regulation by VRN2 has yet been established. This does not mean that this is
not VRN1, but simply that there are gaps in our knowledge. Brian Fowler,
Fathey Sarhan and co-workers identified the same MADS-domain transcription
factor as being associated with vernalization in hexaploid wheat at around the
same time as the Dubcovsky group were working with T. monococcum (Danyluk
et al., 2003). Using near-isogenic lines of wheat and working also with barley,
they showed that the expression of mRNA encoding this gene (which they
named TaVRT-1) was dependent on a vernalization treatment in winter genotypes, but could be detected in the absence of vernalization in spring genotypes.
Furthermore, they demonstrated that expression of TaVRT-1 was sensitive to
photoperiod, with expression being higher in LDs than in short day (SD) photoperiods (Danyluk et al., 2003). Using wheat deletion lines they mapped this
gene to the same region as Vrn-A1 and Vrn-D1. The analysis of expression of
the same gene in multiple barley cultivars revealed a less clear pattern. However,
Trevaskis et al. (2003) detected expression of the same gene (which they
referred to as BM5) in a winter barley that had not been vernalized and failed
to detect expression levels similar to vernalized material in several spring barleys.
The characterization of VRN2 has made it possible to conceive a model
to explain aspects of cereal vernalization at the molecular level. VRN2 is
a repressor of flowering. Vernalization reduces VRN2 mRNA expression,
removing this repression (Yan et al., 2004). VRN1 expression then increases
and VRN1 promotes the floral transition. This interpretation is consistent with
genetic data revealing epistasis between VRN1 and VRN2 (Tranquilli and
Dubcovsky, 2000). In addition, transgenic RNAi knock-down of VRN2
mRNA results in elevated levels of VRN1 mRNA expression, providing

Vernalization

37

molecular evidence that VRN1 lies downstream of VRN2 and is ultimately
repressed by VRN2 (Yan et al., 2004). VRN2 may repress VRN1 directly by
binding to the VRN1 promoter through its zinc-finger domain. Spring habit has
evolved from winter habit either through loss of VRN2 function (Yan et al.,
2004) (through either mutation of the VRN2 CCT domain or deletion of VRN2
entirely) or through loss of VRN1 sensitivity to VRN2-mediated repression. It
has been proposed that this may be the result of deletion of sequences in the
VRN1 promoter required for VRN2-mediated regulation (Yan et al., 2003).
A model depicting these interactions is shown in Fig. 2.2.
As vernalization requirement in barley maps to positions syntenic with
VRN1 and VRN2 known as Sgh2 and Sgh1, respectively or VRN-H1 and
VRN-H2, this indicates that vernalization requirement involves related genes in
wheat and barley and that differences between winter and spring habit involved
mutation of similar genes. A gene homologous to VRN2 (ZCCT1) is present in
a colinear region of winter barley and can be identified by DNA hybridization
using ZCCT1 as a probe (Yan et al., 2004). All but one spring barley examined
by Yan et al. (2004) has a deletion of ZCCT-like sequences. Research with
barley reveals another gene interacting with VRN-H1 and VRN-H2, known as
Sgh3. Winter alleles at all three loci are required for a strong vernalization
response to be shown (Takahashi and Yasuda, 1971). Perhaps VRN-H2 also
represses Sgh3. Allelic variation at three loci would provide for considerable
flexibility or variation in the quantitative nature of the vernalization requirement. Sgh3 may be restricted to barley, or it may simply be that allelic variation
at the corresponding locus in T. monococcum has not yet been identified.

Vernalization
Daylength
VRN2

FRI
Vernalization

FLC
MADS domain

Daylength
FLC

VRN1

VRN2
Zinc finger,
CCT domain

Flowering

Flowering

FRI
Novel, coiled-coil
domains

VRN1
MADS domain
Arabidopsis

Wheat

Fig. 2.2. Vernalization requirement evolved independently in Arabidopsis and temperate
cereals. Different genes control vernalization requirement in wheat and Arabidopsis. Promotive
functions are indicated by arrows and repressive functions are indicated by crossed bars.

Vernalization Response
Progress towards the characterization of the molecular basis of vernalization
response has so far depended on induced mutations and the analysis of natural
variation in this trait. Arabidopsis mutants have been identified that no longer

38

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

display accelerated flowering in response to a long cold treatment (Chandler
et al., 1996). In addition, QTLs in vernalization response have been identified
in RIL populations of Arabidopsis (Alonso-Blanco et al., 1998). Currently,
nothing is known of the mechanisms of vernalization response in species other
than Arabidopsis.

Arabidopsis vernalization response
Consistent with the expectation that vernalization response has an epigenetic
component, the few Arabidopsis genes so far identified as being involved in
this process are required for the epigenetic regulation of FLC. One of the
genes that mediates the vernalization response, VERNALIZATION-INSENSITIVE 3 (VIN3), appears to be important for the perception of long periods of
low temperature (Sung and Amasino, 2004). VIN3 encodes a putatively nuclear-localized protein containing both a plant homeodomain (PHD) and fibronectin type II domain (Sung and Amasino, 2004). The expression of VIN3
mRNA increases slowly during the cold, and thus correlates with the quantitative nature of vernalization. vin3 mutants are unable to repress FLC during
exposure to low temperatures, and as a consequence flower late (Sung and
Amasino, 2004). Exactly how VIN3 represses FLC under these conditions is
not known, but it is likely that VIN3 acts directly on FLC, as FLC DNA can be
immunoprecipitated with an anti-VIN3 antibody in a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay (Sung and Amasino, 2004).
The cold-induced reduction in FLC mRNA levels is accompanied by
changes in histone modification that are indicators of chromatin structure.
However, the sequence of these events is not entirely resolved. Two recent
reports examined FLC chromatin structure by ChIP using antibodies against
modified histones. Following vernalization, there is apparently a decrease in
the level of acetylation of histone 3 (on lysine 9, H3K9 and lysine 14, H3K14)
(Sung and Amasino, 2004), but this result is not entirely consistent as other
work has shown no significant alterations in histone acetylation near FLC
(Bastow et al., 2004). This apparent discrepancy may be the result of the
different ages of the plants used in the experiments – as it is clear that changes
in histone modifications take place both during and subsequent to the exposure
to low temperatures (Sung and Amasino, 2004). More clear-cut are the increases in H3K9 methylation and histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27) dimethylation in
regions near the start of FLC transcription (Bastow et al., 2004; Sung and
Amasino, 2004). Regions within intron 1 of FLC are also modified by vernalization, as exhibited by a decrease in methylation of H3K4; but interestingly
H3K4 methylation was not altered in other regions of FLC, indicating localized
changes in chromatin modifications (Fig. 2.3) (Bastow et al., 2004).
Exactly how long exposure to low temperature induces changes in
histone modifications remains unknown. VIN3 certainly contributes, as these
vernalization-induced changes are not observed in a vin3 mutant (Sung and
Amasino, 2004), indicating that VIN3 is required (perhaps indirectly) for the
acetylation and methylation changes of histones. What is clear is that the

Vernalization

39

FLC
transcription

FLC
expression
+++

Low temperature

VIN3

-

Return to warm
temperature

K27
K9

VRN2-containing
H3-methylating
complex

-

Acetylation
Lysine
dimethylation

recruitment?
K27
K9

VRN1-containing
complex?

VRN1 repression?

-

K27
K9

Fig. 2.3. Chromatin changes during and after vernalization. The diagram indicates a region of
chromatin near the start of FLC transcription, with histones shown as spheres bound to DNA
indicated as a black line. The decrease in histone acetylation observed in some experiments is
indicated by unfilled flags. The precise sequence of histone modifications and complex
recruitment, and the composition of the modifying complexes are yet to be fully determined.

products of two genes VRN1 and VRN2 are required to maintain FLC in a
repressed state (Gendall et al., 2001; Levy et al., 2002). The Arabidopsis VRN
genes are involved in mediating the vernalization response, and as such are
distinct functionally and genetically from the wheat VRN genes. VRN1 and
VRN2 act to stably repress FLC upon the transition to warm temperatures – in
vrn1 and vrn2 mutants FLC expression begins to rise when plants are returned

40

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

to warm conditions rather than remaining low as it would in a wild-type plant.
VRN1 encodes a B3 DNA–binding protein and VRN2 encodes a Polycombgroup protein (Gendall et al., 2001; Levy et al., 2002). The VRN2-related
protein from Drosophila, Su(z)12, functions as part of a chromatin-remodelling
complex that induces H3K9 methylation (Czermin et al., 2002; Kuzmichev
et al., 2002; Muller et al., 2002). It is perhaps not surprising then that the
histone modifications in vrn1 and vrn2 mutants are altered when compared to
the wild-type – with VRN2 and VRN1 being required for increased methylation
of H3K9, and VRN2 also required for methylation of H3K27 (Fig. 2.3).
The model from this biochemical and genetic analysis suggests that the
exposure to low temperature probably induces changes in histone acetylation,
mediated by VIN3. This is accompanied by (or may induce) reduced FLC
expression. These acetylated histone tails at FLC may then serve as markers
for the recruitment or activation of a histone methylating-complex, probably
containing VRN2. This may then also recruit VRN1 specifically to FLC, as
VRN1 has been shown to bind DNA non-sequence specifically in vitro, but
appears to regulate relatively few genes apart from FLC in planta (Levy et al.,
2002). The binding of VRN1 and a VRN2-containing Polycomb complex
would be required for the normal repression of FLC after vernalization (Fig. 2.3).
Two other loci have been implicated in vernalization response in Arabidopsis. The MADS AFFECTING FLOWERING 2 (MAF2) gene was recently
shown to be a repressor of the response to vernalization, as maf2 mutants
flower earlier after vernalization than wild-type plants, particularly when exposed to short durations (up to 21 days) of low temperature (Ratcliffe et al.,
2003). This acceleration of flowering was not correlated with lower than
normal FLC levels, suggesting that MAF2 acts independently of FLC to repress
flowering induced by vernalization. In addition, plants overexpressing MAF2
were unresponsive to vernalization, despite being able to repress FLC normally. It appears then that MAF2 represses flowering, particularly during
relatively short exposure to low temperature by an FLC-independent pathway
or perhaps by acting downstream of FLC.
The second locus implicated in vernalization response in Arabidopsis is the
FLH QTL (Alonso-Blanco et al., 1998). Alleles from the Cape Verde Island
(CVI) accession enhanced the vernalization response, relative to alleles from the
Ler accession (Alonso-Blanco et al., 1998). It is not known whether this effect
is FLC independent like the maf2 acceleration, but interestingly, the FLH QTL
maps to the same region of the Arabidopsis genome as MAF2 (ARG, unpublished). Why the CVI accession that originates from close to the equator might
have alleles to enhance the vernalization response is not clear, but perhaps it
evolved as a survival mechanism to trigger flowering prior to the harsh conditions of summer.

Vernalization response in species other than Arabidopsis
Nothing is currently known of the molecular mechanisms involved in the
vernalization response of species other than Arabidopsis. Sequences highly

Vernalization

41

related to Arabidopsis VRN1 do not appear to be conserved in cereals. It is less
clear how conserved Arabidopsis VRN2 may be. This is because there are
three related genes in Arabidopsis, EMBRYONIC FLOWER 2, FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT SEED 2 and VRN2, that control the epigenetic regulation of several genes and function in different processes (Gendall et al.,
2001). It is, however, not clear that this is true of all plants – so the existence
of genes related to VRN2 is not necessarily indicative of a function in vernalization response. In contrast, genes related to VIN3 appear to be widely
conserved. The isolation of mutations in sequences related to VIN3 may
provide a means to determine if a similar epigenetic mechanism controls
vernalization response in other species. In addition, the identification of
T. monococcum VRN2 as a target of vernalization will make it possible to
determine whether histone modifications, consistent with the epigenetic regulation that is an essential feature of the vernalization response of Arabidopsis,
also control the vernalization response in cereals.

Connecting cold to vernalization
While we have recently acquired insight into the molecular basis of vernalization
requirement and response, a fundamental gap in our knowledge remains the
elucidation of how cold is perceived and signalled to factors that execute
vernalization. Although work with Arabidopsis has recently shed light on the
process of cold acclimation, which prepares the plant to withstand cold (Thomashow, 2001), there is little to indicate that this cold response connects with
vernalization. First, cold acclimation is a short-term response that is not
remembered after return to warmer conditions. In contrast, vernalization
takes place over a period of weeks and the memory of cold exposure is retained
through mitosis. Second, the overexpression of CBF1, a transcription factor
required for the cold-acclimation response, does not affect FLC expression,
and none of the mutations so far identified that affect vernalization response
affect cold acclimation (Liu et al., 2002). The discovery, however, that the
expression of VIN3 mRNA (but not Arabidopsis VRN1 or VRN2 mRNA) is
upregulated in response to cold may provide the key to unlocking this process.
By focusing on the factors required for the cold-dependent upregulation of
VIN3, it should be possible to define the signal transduction cascade that links
cold perception to FLC chromatin modification in the Arabidopsis vernalization response.

Evolution of Vernalization
Some aspects of flowering-time control appear to be widely conserved. For
example, although Arabidopsis promotes flowering in response to LDs, and
rice does so in response to SDs, many of the genes involved in photoperiod
response are conserved (Hayama et al., 2003). Furthermore, the order in
which these genes act is also conserved, with only a small reversal of function

42

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

of one component in the pathway in rice conferring floral repression rather
than floral promotion in LDs (Hayama et al., 2003). As a result, Arabidopsis is
a useful model for the study of photoperiodism. In contrast, vernalization
requirement has evolved independently in Arabidopsis and cereals. This difference in the conservation of different aspects of flowering-time control might
be explained by the number of potential alternative targets that could confer a
vernalization requirement. As flowering-time control features a network of
multiple pathways feeding into overlapping floral pathway integrators, which
in turn control floral meristem-identity genes, there are many alternative
mechanisms by which floral repression could evolve. If these were sensitive to
cold, they could establish independent mechanisms of conferring a vernalization requirement. In contrast, the photoperiodic control of flowering is dependent on a circadian clock time measurement mechanism (Mouradov et al.,
2002; Yanovsky and Kay, 2003). The complexity of the clock and its role in
controlling many other processes may make it recalcitrant to reinvention
(Simpson, 2003).
A second consideration may be the distinct rationales that provide a
selective advantage for winter-annual versus summer-annual habit. This
may have led to the independent evolution of winter- or summer-annual habit
on multiple occasions, but in different environments for different reasons.
At higher latitudes, where the growing season is relatively short, winter annualism can provide a head start in development. Plants that germinate prior
to winter and overwinter in the vegetative state may be able to complete their
life cycle in the relatively short growing season of the following spring and
summer. At lower temperate latitudes, like North Africa, this head start in
development can provide a drought-avoidance mechanism that allows life
cycle completion in spring, prior to the hazardous dry and hot conditions
of summer. In contrast, higher-latitude environments with winters too extreme
for overwintering survival may favour a rapid-cycling habit. This rapidcycling strategy can also provide a mechanism by which opportunists can
complete their life cycle on disturbed ground. This is not an exhaustive list,
but conjecture on different potential drivers that may favour winter- or summerannual habit.
A survey of 749 landraces of wheat from different parts of the world
revealed that winter wheat is typically grown in regions with relatively mild
mean midwinter temperatures (78C to þ48C). Lower mean winter temperatures result in frost damage, while higher mean winter temperatures do not
satisfy vernalization requirement. In these environments, spring varieties dominate (Iwaki et al., 2001). Similar analyses of Arabidopsis accessions failed
to identify latitudinal clines between winter and rapid-cycling accessions
(Johanson et al., 2000). However, a latitudinal cline has been identified within
FRI-containing accessions; Arabidopsis accessions from southern latitudes
flowered faster than accessions isolated from northern latitudes when grown
together in a garden experiment in Vermont, USA (Stinchcombe et al., 2004).
A strong correlation between flowering time in the garden experiment and
January precipitation levels at the site of accession collection was identified.
It is therefore possible that southern accessions are more responsive to

Vernalization

43

vernalization as this may align flowering more closely with rainfall. In such
cases, flowering in mild winters may not be as disadvantageous as flowering
in hot, dry summers (Stinchcombe et al., 2004).
The adaptation to the environment that winter and summer annualism
provides may also be linked to other responses. For example, overwintering in
the vegetative state may require cold tolerance and if early flowering is a
drought-avoidance mechanism, late flowering may be associated with increased
water-use efficiency. Consistent with this, there is some evidence that lowtemperature tolerance in wheat is associated with the same chromosomal
region that contains VRN1 (Danyluk et al., 2003) and it has been suggested
that water-use efficiency may be related to Arabidopsis flowering time in
FRI- and FLC-containing backgrounds (McKay et al., 2003). It is possible
that these phenomena involve pleiotropy of function of genes involved in
vernalization.

Short-day Vernalization
While vernalization is the acquisition or acceleration of the ability to flower
following a chilling treatment, a similar effect has been observed by exposing
some plants, like wheat and barley, to SDs. Flowering of wheat and barley is
promoted in response to LDs; spring varieties and vernalized winter varieties
generally accelerate flowering in response to LDs. However, the response of
unvernalized winter varieties to daylength is less consistent. Some winter varieties of wheat (such as cv Templar and Huntsman) (Evans, 1987) and barley
(such as the landrace Arabi Abiad) (Roberts et al., 1988) display earlier flowering if growth in SDs precedes transfer to LD conditions. In some cases, SD
treatment can completely suppress a requirement for low temperaturemediated vernalization (Evans, 1987). This phenomenon has been referred to
as SD vernalization (Purvis and Gregory, 1937). All winter wheat varieties
tested accelerate flowering in response to a low-temperature treatment, but
only a subset respond to short-day vernalization (Evans, 1987). Although it has
been identified in several temperate cereal species, we are not aware of any
report of a similar phenomenon occurring in Arabidopsis.
The process of SD vernalization has not been characterized beyond observation. Therefore, although it indicates a dependence on both daylength and
temperature to monitor seasonal progression, the nature of this is not understood. For example, one interpretation is that SD vernalization is indicative of
positive responses to independent cues signalling the passage of winter. Alternatively, this effect may be restricted to varieties that carry loss-of-function
alleles of a gene that normally inhibits flowering in SDs. For example, two
lines derived from a barley winter (cv Igri)  spring (cv Triumph) cross that
showed a SD vernalization response had loss-of-function alleles of a gene that
inhibits flowering in SD, PpdH1 (Laurie et al., 1995). The phenomenon is
mechanistically distinct from low temperature-mediated vernalization as wheat
floral primordia are produced in SD vernalization, but not low-temperature
vernalization (Evans, 1987).

44

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson

Perspective
The cloning of Arabidopsis FLC and wheat VRN2 has identified floral repressors that confer a vernalization requirement in these plants. In addition, the
characterization of these genes has revealed that they are the targets of quantitative vernalization response and that vernalization requirement evolved independently in Arabidopsis and cereals. Therefore, the identification of genes
conferring a vernalization requirement in other species will probably require a
forward genetic approach rather than depending on a model-derived candidate
gene approach. The memory, however, of vernalization involves epigenetic
control, executed in part by factors that modify chromatin in many eukaryotes.
It is entirely possible therefore that this mechanism confers memory of winter
in other plants as well. Nothing is yet known of the mechanisms by which cold
is perceived and signalled to mediate the vernalization response. It will be
interesting to dissect these mechanisms in other species and also to compare
the molecular basis of bud break through dormancy chilling in woody perennials to determine the distinctive mechanisms and unifying themes by which
plants control reproductive development through sensing and remembering
winter.

Acknowledgements
Work in ARG’s laboratory on natural variation and flowering time is supported
by the Australian Research Council (DP0210592 and DP0449651). SCRI is
supported by a grant-in-aid from the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural
Affairs Department. Thanks to Ben Ong for comments on the manuscript and
to Trevor Phillips for help with artwork.

References
Alonso-Blanco, C., El Assal, S.E., Coupland, G. and Koornneef, M. (1998)
Analysis of natural allelic variation at
flowering time loci in the Landsberg
erecta and Cape Verde Islands ecotypes of Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics 149, 749–764.
Ausı́n, I., Alonso-Blanco, C., Jarillo, J.A.,
Ruiz-Garcı́a, L. and Martı́nez-Zapater,
J.M. (2004) Regulation of flowering
time by FVE, a retinoblastoma-associated protein. Nature Genetics 36,
162–166.
Bastow, R., Mylne, J.S., Lister, C.,
Lippman, Z., Martienssen, R.A. and
Dean, C. (2004) Vernalization re-

quires epigenetic silencing of FLC by
histone methylation. Nature 427,
164–167.
Baurle, I. and Laux, T. (2003) Apical meristems: the plant’s fountain of youth.
Bioessays 25, 961–970.
Boss, P.K., Bastow, R.M., Mylne, J.S. and
Dean, C. (2004) Multiple pathways in
the decision to flower: enabling, promoting, and resetting. Plant Cell 16
(Suppl.), S18–S31.
Carrozza, M.J., Utley, R.T., Workman,
J.L. and Cote, J. (2003) The diverse
functions of histone acetyltransferase
complexes. Trends in Genetics 19,
321–329.

Vernalization
Chandler, J., Wilson, A. and Dean, C.
(1996) Arabidopsis mutants showing
an altered response to vernalization.
Plant Journal 10, 637–644.
Cheng, Y., Kato, N., Wang, W., Li, J. and
Chen, X. (2003) Two RNA binding
proteins, HEN4 and HUA1, act in the
processing of AGAMOUS pre-mRNA
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Developmental Cell 4, 53–66.
Chouard, P. (1960) Vernalization and its
relations to dormancy. Annual Review
of Plant Physiology 11, 191–238.
Czermin, B., Melfi, R., McCabe, D., Seitz,
V., Imhof, A. and Pirrotta, V. (2002)
Drosophila enhancer of Zeste/ESC
complexes have a histone H3 methyltransferase activity that marks chromosomal Polycomb sites. Cell 111, 185–
196.
Danyluk, J., Kane, N.A., Breton, G.,
Limin, A.E., Fowler, D.B. and Sarhan,
F. (2003) TaVRT-1, a putative transcription factor associated with vegetative to reproductive transition in
cereals. Plant Physiology 132,
1849–1860.
Dubnau, J. and Struhl, G. (1996) RNA
recognition and translational regulation
by a homeodomain protein. Nature
379, 694–699.
Evans, L.T. (1987) Short day induction of
inflorescence initiation in some winter
wheat varieties. Australian Journal of
Plant Physiology 14, 277–286.
Ferrándiz, C., Gu, Q., Martienssen, R.
and Yanofsky, M.F. (2000) Redundant
regulation of meristem identity and
plant architecture by FRUITFULL,
APETALA1 and CAULIFLOWER.
Development 127, 725–734.
Gazzani, S., Gendall, A.R., Lister, C. and
Dean, C. (2003) Analysis of the molecular basis of flowering time variation
in Arabidopsis accessions. Plant
Physiology 132, 1107–1114.
Gendall, A.R., Levy, Y.Y., Wilson, A. and
Dean, C. (2001) The VERNALIZATION 2 gene mediates the epigenetic
regulation of vernalization in Arabidopsis. Cell 107, 525–535.

45
Hayama, R., Yokoi, S., Tamaki, S., Yano,
M. and Shimamoto, K. (2003) Adaptation of photoperiodic control pathways
produces short-day flowering in rice.
Nature 422, 719–722.
He, Y., Michaels, S.D. and Amasino,
R.M. (2003) Regulation of flowering
time by histone acetylation in Arabidopsis. Science 302, 1751–1754.
Henderson, I.R. and Dean, C. (2004)
Control of Arabidopsis flowering: the
chill before the bloom. Development
131, 3829–3838.
Iwaki, K., Haruna, S., Niwa, T. and Kato,
K. (2001) Adaptation and ecological
differentiation in wheat with special
reference to geographical variation of
growth habit and Vrn genotype. Plant
Breeding 120, 107–114.
Johanson, U., West, J., Lister, C.,
Michaels, S., Amasino, R. and Dean,
C. (2000) Molecular analysis of FRIGIDA, a major determinant of natural
variation in Arabidopsis flowering
time. Science 290, 344–347.
Kole, C., Quijada, P., Michaels, S.D.,
Amasino, R.M. and Osborn, T.C.
(2001) Evidence for homology of
flowering-time genes VFR2 from Brassica rapa and FLC from Arabidopsis
thaliana. Theoretical and Applied
Genetics 102, 425–430.
Koornneef, M., Hanhart, C.J. and van der
Veen, J.H. (1991) A genetic and
physiological analysis of late flowering
mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular and General Genetics 229,
57–66.
Kuzmichev, A., Nishioka, K., ErdjumentBromage, H., Tempst, P. and Reinberg, D. (2002) Histone methyltransferase activity associated with a
human multiprotein complex containing the enhancer of Zeste protein.
Genes and Development 16, 2893–
2905.
Laurie, D.A., Pratchett, N., Bezant, J.H.
and Snape, J.W. (1995) RFLP mapping of five major genes and eight
quantitative trait loci controlling flowering time in a winter  spring barley

46

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson
(Hordeum vulgare L.) cross. Genome
38, 575–585.
LeCorre, V., Roux, F. and Reboud, X.
(2002) DNA polymorphism at the FRIGIDA gene in Arabidopsis thaliana:
extensive nonsynonymous variation is
consistent with local selection for
flowering time. Molecular Biology
and Evolution 19, 1261–1271.
Lee, I., Bleecker, A. and Amasino, R.
(1993) Analysis of naturally occurring
late flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Molecular and General Genetics
237, 171–176.
Lee, I., Aukerman, M.J., Gore, S.L., Lohman, K.N., Michaels, S.D., Weaver,
L.M., John, M.C., Feldmann, K.A.
and Amasino, R.M. (1994) Isolation
of LUMINIDEPENDENS: a gene involved in the control of flowering time
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 6, 75–83.
Levy, Y.Y., Mesnage, S., Mylne, J.S.,
Gendall, A.R. and Dean, C. (2002)
Multiple roles of Arabidopsis VRN1
in vernalization and flowering time
control. Science 297, 243–246.
Lim, M.H., Kim, J., Kim, Y.S., Chung,
K.S., Seo, Y.H., Lee, I., Kim, J.,
Hong, C.B., Kim, H.J. and Park,
C.M. (2004) A new Arabidopsis
gene, FLK, encodes an RNA-binding
protein with K homology motifs and
regulates flowering time via FLOWERING LOCUS C. Plant Cell 16, 731–
740.
Liu, J., Gilmour, S.J., Thomashow, M.F.
and van Nocker, S. (2002) Cold signalling associated with vernalization in
Arabidopsis thaliana does not involve
CBF1 or abscisic acid. Physiology
Plantarum 114, 125–134.
Loudet, O., Chaillou, S., Camilleri, C.,
Bouchez, D. and Daniel-Vedele, F.
(2002) Bay-0  Shahdara recombinant
inbred line population: a powerful tool
for the genetic dissection of complex
traits in Arabidopsis. Theoretical and
Applied Genetics 104, 1173–1184.
Macknight, R., Bancroft, I., Page, T.,
Lister, C., Schmidt, R., Love, K., Westphal, L., Murphy, G., Sherson, S.,

Cobbett, C. and Dean, C. (1997)
FCA, a gene controlling flowering
time in Arabidopsis, encodes a protein
containing RNA-binding domains. Cell
89, 737–745.
McKay, J.K., Richards, J.H. and MitchellOlds, T. (2003) Genetics of drought
adaptation in Arabidopsis thaliana: I.
Pleiotropy contributes to genetic correlations among ecological traits. Molecular Ecology 12, 1137–1151.
Michaels, S.D. and Amasino, R.M. (1999)
FLOWERING LOCUS C encodes a
novel MADS domain protein that acts
as a repressor of flowering. Plant Cell
11, 949–956.
Michaels, S.D. and Amasino, R.M. (2001)
Loss of FLOWERING LOCUS C activity eliminates the late-flowering
phenotype of FRIGIDA and autonomous pathway mutations but not responsiveness to vernalization. Plant
Cell 13, 935–941.
Michaels, S.D., He, Y., Scortecci, K.C.
and Amasino, R.M. (2003) Attenuation of FLOWERING LOCUS C activity as a mechanism for the evolution of
summer-annual flowering behavior in
Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
100, 10102–10107.
Michaels, S.D., Bezerra, I.C. and Amasino, R.M. (2004) FRIGIDA-related
genes are required for the winterannual habit in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 101, 3281–3285.
Mouradov, A., Cremer, F. and Coupland,
G. (2002) Control of flowering time:
interacting pathways as a basis for diversity. Plant Cell 14 (Suppl.), S111–
S130.
Muller, J., Hart, C.M., Francis, N.J., Vargas, M.L., Sengupta, A., Wild, B.,
Miller, E.L., O’Connor, M.B., Kingston, R.E. and Simon, J.A. (2002) Histone methyltransferase activity of a
Drosophila Polycomb group repressor
complex. Cell 111, 197–208.
Napp-Zinn, K. (1987) Vernalization: environmental and genetic regulation.

Vernalization
In: Atherton, J.G. (ed.) Manipulation
of Flowering. Butterworths, London,
pp. 123–132.
Noh, Y.S. and Amasino, R.M. (2003)
PIE1, an ISWI family gene, is required
for FLC activation and floral repression
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 15, 1671–
1682.
Noh, Y.S., Bizzell, C.M., Noh, B., Schomburg, F.M. and Amasino, R.M. (2004)
EARLY FLOWERING 5 acts as a
floral repressor in Arabidopsis. Plant
Journal 38, 664–672.
Pařenicová, L., de Folter, S., Kieffer, M.,
Horner, D.S., Favalli, C., Busscher, J.,
Cook, H.E., Ingram, R.M., Kater,
M.M., Davies, B., Angenent, G.C.
and Colombo, L. (2003) Molecular
and phylogenetic analyses of the complete MADS-box transcription factor
family in Arabidopsis: new openings
to the MADS world. Plant Cell 15,
1538–1551.
Purvis, O.N. and Gregory, F.G. (1937)
Studies in vernalization of cereals. I. A
comparative study of vernalization of
winter rye by low temperature and by
short days. Annals of Botany 1, 569–
592.
Ratcliffe, O.J., Nadzan, G.C., Reuber,
T.L. and Riechmann, J.L. (2001)
Regulation of flowering in Arabidopsis
by an FLC homologue. Plant Physiology 126, 122–132.
Ratcliffe, O.J., Kumimoto, R.W., Wong,
B.J. and Riechmann, J.L. (2003) Analysis of the Arabidopsis MADS
AFFECTING FLOWERING gene family: MAF2 prevents vernalization by
short periods of cold. Plant Cell 15,
1159–1169.
Reeves, P.H., Murtas, G., Dash, S. and
Coupland, G. (2002) early in short
days 4, a mutation in Arabidopsis
that causes early flowering and reduces
the mRNA abundance of the floral repressor FLC. Development 129,
5349–5361.
Rivera-Pomar, R., Niessing, D., SchmidtOtt, U., Gehring, W.J. and Jackle, H.
(1996) RNA binding and translational

47
suppression by bicoid. Nature 379,
746–749.
Roberts, E.H., Summerfield, R.J.,
Cooper, J.P. and Ellis, R.H. (1988)
Environmental control of flowering in
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). I. Photoperiod limits to long-day responses,
photoperiod-insensitive phases and effects of low-temperature and short-day
vernalization. Annals of Botany 62,
127–144.
Robson, F., Costa, M.M., Hepworth, S.R.,
Vizir, I., Pineiro, M., Reeves, P.H.,
Putterill, J. and Coupland, G. (2001)
Functional importance of conserved
domains in the flowering-time gene
CONSTANS demonstrated by analysis
of mutant alleles and transgenic plants.
Plant Journal 28, 619–631.
Sanda, S.L. and Amasino, R.M. (1996)
Ecotype-specific expression of a
flowering mutant phenotype in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiology
111, 641–644.
Schlappi, M. (2001) RNA levels and
activity of FLOWERING LOCUS C
are modified in mixed genetic backgrounds of Arabidopsis thaliana.
International Journal of Plant
Science 162, 527–537.
Schomburg, F.M., Patton, D.A., Meinke,
D.W. and Amasino, R.M. (2001) FPA,
a gene involved in floral induction in
Arabidopsis, encodes a protein containing RNA-recognition motifs. Plant
Cell 13, 1427–1436.
Schranz, M.E., Quijada, P., Sung, S.B.,
Lukens, L., Amasino, R. and Osborn,
T.C. (2002) Characterization and effects of the replicated flowering time
gene FLC in Brassica rapa. Genetics
162, 1457–1468.
Scortecci, K.C., Michaels, S.D. and Amasino, R.M. (2001) Identification of
a MADS-box gene, FLOWERING
LOCUS M, that represses flowering.
Plant Journal 26, 229–236.
Shahla, A. and Tsuchiya, T. (1990) Genetic analysis in six telotrisomic lines
in barley. Journal of Heredity 81,
127–130.

48

A.R. Gendall and G.G. Simpson
Sheldon, C.C., Burn, J.E., Perez, P.P.,
Metzger, J., Edwards, J.A., Peacock,
W.J. and Dennis, E.S. (1999) The
FLF MADS box gene: a repressor of
flowering in Arabidopsis regulated by
vernalization and methylation. Plant
Cell 11, 445–458.
Sheldon, C.C., Conn, A.B., Dennis, E.S.
and Peacock, W.J. (2002) Different
regulatory regions are required for
the vernalization-induced repression of
FLOWERING LOCUS C and for the
epigenetic maintenance of repression.
Plant Cell 14, 2527–2537.
Simpson, G.G. (2003) Evolution of
flowering in response to day length:
flipping the CONSTANS switch.
Bioessays 25, 829–832.
Simpson, G.G. (2004) The autonomous
pathway:
epigenetic
and
posttranscriptional gene regulation in the
control of Arabidopsis flowering time.
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 7,
570–574.
Simpson, G.G. and Dean, C. (2002) Arabidopsis, the Rosetta stone of flowering time? Science 296, 285–289.
Simpson, G.G., Dijkwel, P.P., Quesada,
V., Henderson, I. and Dean, C.
(2003) FY is an RNA 3’ end-processing
factor that interacts with FCA to control the Arabidopsis floral transition.
Cell 113, 777–787.
Stinchcombe, J.R., Weinig, C., Ungerer,
M., Olsen, K.M., Mays, C., Halldorsdottir, S.S., Purugganan, M.D. and
Schmitt, J. (2004) A latitudinal cline
in flowering time in Arabidopsis thaliana modulated by the flowering time
gene FRIGIDA. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
101, 4712–4717.
Sung, S. and Amasino, R.M. (2004) Vernalization in Arabidopsis thaliana is
mediated by the PHD finger protein
VIN3. Nature 427, 159–164.
Swarup, K., Alonso-Blanco, C., Lynn,
J.R., Michaels, S.D., Amasino, R.M.,
Koornneef, M. and Millar, A.J. (1999)
Natural allelic variation identifies new

genes in the Arabidopsis circadian system. Plant Journal 20, 67–77.
Tadege, M., Sheldon, C.C., Helliwell,
C.A., Stoutjesdijk, P., Dennis, E.S.
and Peacock, W.J. (2001) Control of
flowering time by FLC orthologues in
Brassica napus. Plant Journal 28,
545–553.
Takahashi, R. and Yasuda, S. (1971) Genetics of earliness and growth habit in
barley. In: Nilan, R.A. (ed.) Proceedings of the 2nd International Barley
Genetics Symposium. Washington
State University Press, Washington,
pp. 388–408.
Thomashow, M.F. (2001) So what’s new
in the field of plant cold acclimation?
Lots! Plant Physiology 125, 89–93.
Tranquilli, G. and Dubcovsky, J. (2000)
Epistatic interaction between vernalization genes Vrn-Am1 and Vrn-Am2 in
diploid wheat. Journal of Heredity
91, 304–306.
Trevaskis, B., Bagnall, D.J., Ellis, M.H.,
Peacock, W.J. and Dennis, E.S.
(2003) MADS box genes control
vernalization-induced flowering in cereals. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 100,
13099–13104.
Yan, L., Loukoianov, A., Tranquilli, G.,
Helguera, M., Fahima, T. and Dubcovsky, J. (2003) Positional cloning of the
wheat vernalization gene VRN1. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 100, 6263–6268.
Yan, L., Loukoianov, A., Blechl, A., Tranquilli, G., Ramakrishna, W., SanMiguel, P., Bennetzen, J.L., Echenique,
V. and Dubcovsky, J. (2004) The
wheat VRN2 gene is a flowering repressor down-regulated by vernalization. Science 303, 1640–1644.
Yanovsky, M.J. and Kay, S.A. (2003) Living by the calendar: how plants know
when to flower. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 4, 265–275.
Zhang, H. and van Nocker, S. (2002) The
VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE
4 gene encodes a novel regulator of

Vernalization
FLOWERING LOCUS C. Plant Journal 31, 663–673.
Zhang, H., Ransom, C., Ludwig, P. and
van Nocker, S. (2003) Genetic analysis
of early flowering mutants in Arabi-

49
dopsis defines a class of pleiotropic
developmental regulator required for
expression of the flowering-time switch
flowering locus C. Genetics 164,
347–358.

3

Signal Transduction Regulating
Floral Development
R.G. ANTHONY
School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham,
Surrey, TW20 0EX UK, e-mail: r.g.anthony@rhul.ac.uk

Introduction
The emergence of complete genome sequences from strategic eukaryote
models and recent advances in the molecular analysis of plant signalling pathways allow comparative analysis of the signal transduction pathways in plants
and animals. It is now clear that the logic of signalling is combinatorial and
modular rather than built around linear chains of events (Pawson, 2004). At
present, we have insight only into a limited number of floral signalling modules.
Furthermore, these modules, when treated individually, appear rather aspecific
to stimuli and are clearly utilized in many signalling events. The components
need to be considered in the network as a whole because complex systems have
emergent properties that are not entirely obvious when the elements are
considered in isolation. Research over the last decade has resulted in major
advances in elucidating the mechanisms that regulate gene expression and in
identifying the components of floral signal transduction. This chapter outlines
our current knowledge of the genetically defined signal transduction pathways
and the mechanisms by which signals are relayed.
Before we can consider the mechanisms surrounding intracellular signalling
and the cell–cell communication processes that lead to flowering, it is important
to consider flowering in a whole environmental context. The precise moment in
a growing season when a plant initiates flowering is a critical developmental
decision, if the plant is to ensure reproductive success. In flowering plants, the
timing of the transition from vegetative growth to flowering is controlled by the
prevailing environmental conditions and/or intrinsic developmental signals
(Colasanti and Sundaresan, 2000; Mouradov et al., 2002; Simpson and
Dean, 2002). For some plants the timing of flowering and the subsequent seed
set appear more critical than others. For annuals, such as Arabidopsis thaliana
that flower once, set seed and die, the timing is obviously extremely important. It
is now well known that flowering in Arabidopsis is induced by long-day (LD)
50

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

51

photoperiods (Hayama and Coupland, 2003), exposure to cold, vernalization
(Henderson and Dean, 2004), and by internal factors: the autonomous pathway
(Boss et al., 2004) and plant hormones such as gibberellin (GA) (Boss et al.,
2004). In contrast, temperate maize is day neutral and flowers after a specific
number of leaves are produced. Thus in many species the signalling pathways
that control flowering have evolved to provide considerable flexibility. Built into
this flexibility is the requirement that plants not only have to sense and respond to
appropriate signals but also have the ability to remain unaltered by environmental fluctuations that do not represent a signal.
The control of flowering has been intensively studied by genetic analysis in
several plant species, particularly Arabidopsis (Koornneef et al., 1998; Amasino, 2003). These studies have revealed many of the genes involved in
regulating flowering, but research into the biochemical processes in which the
products of these genes participate is currently lagging behind. Furthermore,
although many of the elements that trigger the floral signal transduction cascade have been identified, the specific downstream pathways and their interactions are still largely unknown. It is now evident that the pathway to flowering
is highly redundant and this explains why no single mutation that prevents
flowering under all conditions has been identified. However, the triple mutant
co-2 fca1 ga1–3 compromised in the photoperiod-dependent, autonomous
and GA-dependent pathways does not flower under either short-day (SD) or LD
conditions (Reeves and Coupland, 2001). The different floral-induction pathways are ‘bottlenecked’ by a small set of genes that integrates the signals
coming from all four major pathways into a unitary output. The strongest
output signal arises when all four pathways are activated. This output in turn
regulates the downstream floral homeotic genes which in turn produce the
floral organs (Boss et al., 2004).
The signalling events that ultimately result in flowering involve an extremely complex system of interacting factors that regulate the genetic elements within different signalling modules. This chapter outlines the principal
signalling events regulating floral development focusing on the internal biochemical and genetic pathways and highlighting the biochemical steps that
occur following reception of the signal and which ultimately lead to altered
gene expression and enzyme activity.

The Genetic Signalling Pathways in Arabidopsis
External stimuli/receptors
Numerous environmental factors influence plant development. Temperature,
light, touch, water and gravity are among the stimuli that serve as signals for
the activation of endogenous developmental programmes. Of these, light
and temperature have an especially important role in floral induction, although
other stimuli such as water stress can also induce early flowering providing a
strategic mechanism to ensure seed set before plant death. The decision to
flower is based on the coordination of the different environmental signals.

52

R.G. Anthony

How do photoreceptors affect floral initiation?
The photoperiodic stimulus in both LD plants and SD plants is perceived by the
leaves. The pathway involves the interaction of the photoreceptors (phytochrome and cryptochrome) with a circadian clock initiating a pathway that
eventually results in the expression of the gene CONSTANS (CO), which
encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor that promotes flowering. CO acts
through other genes to increase the expression of the floral meristem-identity
gene LEAFY (LFY) (Fig. 3.1) (Izawa et al., 2002; Mouradov et al., 2002;
Hayama and Coupland, 2003; Yanovsky and Kay, 2003). Thus, in response to
the photoperiod, the leaf transmits a signal that regulates the transition to
flowering at the shoot apex. Detailed experiments on the involvement of CO
are now beginning to shed light on the nature of this floral stimulus (florigen),
which has eluded researchers for decades (see below).
The role and mode of action of the photoreceptors is now very well
understood and is dealt with in more detail (see Chapter 1, this volume). In
brief, the phytochromes (PHY) are red and far-red light photoreceptors and can
exist in two photoreversible forms that are able to detect light using a covalently
bound tetrapyrrole chromophore. The carboxy-terminal domain of PHY functions in dimerization and contains a region that resembles prokaryotic twocomponent histidine kinases (see below). The amino-terminal region is thought
to define the photosensory activity of the PHY molecule. The cryptochromes
(CRY1 and CRY2 in Arabidopsis) perceive blue/UV-A light and are found in
various taxa and are thought to have evolved from photolyases. The photochemical mechanism of signal capture and transfer by CRY is likely to involve a
redox reaction (Gyula et al., 2003). After activation by light, receptors initiate
downstream signal propagation that results in transient or sustained physiological responses. Current models postulate that PHY induces a signalling
cascade mediated by the second messengers Ca2þ and cyclic 3’,5’-GMP
(cGMP) in the cytoplasm and also functions as a light-regulated kinase (Neuhaus
et al., 1997; Wang and Deng, 2003). Its Pfr conformer can rapidly translocate
into the nucleus, where it interacts with transcription factors and thus can
directly regulate light-induced gene transcription (Nagy and Schafer, 2002).
This complex signalling network is attractive and is supported by considerable
data (Gyula et al., 2003). According to current interpretation of the data, the
signalling cascade controlled by CRY1 and CRY2 is organized differently from
that controlled by PHY. It is postulated that the blue-light perception by CRY
photoreceptors triggers the rapid deactivation/degradation of COP (constitutive photomorphogenesis1: the COP1 gene represses photomorphogenesis in
seedlings and flowering in darkness) by an unknown mechanism, allowing the
accumulation of PHY5 in the nucleus, which in turn enhances the transcription
of target genes ( (Nakagawa and Komeda, 2004). Although this model highlights the role of proteolysis, it is likely that other molecular mechanisms
also play a significant role in CRY1- and CRY2-mediated signalling. It is clear
that the different photoreceptors can induce different signalling cascades that
partly overlap. The terminal step of signalling, the regulation of target-gene

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

53

Cold
vernalization
pathway

External cues

FRI, FRL1

Photoperiod pathway
FRL2, VIP3
Circadian clock
VIP4, ART1
Ambient PIE1, ESD4
temperature
Florigen
pathway
/CO

VRN1
VRN2
VIN3

FLC
CO

Internal cues
FCA, FY
FLD, FVE
FPA, LD
FLK

Leaf
number
autonomous
pathway
Gibberellin
pathway

Floral integration

FT

SOC1

LFY

Floral meristem
identity

AP1 CAL FUL LFY

Floral homeotic
genes

AP2, AG, AP3, PI

AGL24

ADG1
SEX1 Sucrose
PGM pathway
TOE1, TOE2
SMZ, SNZ, FLM
SVP, TFL1, TFL2
EMF1, EMF2

Floral organs

Fig. 3.1. An overview of the major floral signalling pathways in Arabidopsis.
The photoperiod, autonomous/vernalization, gibberellin, sucrose, light quality and ambient
temperature pathways activate floral-pathway integrators. The CONSTANS (CO) gene
functions in the photoperiod pathway, long-day photoperiods promote flowering by
circadian clock-dependent and -independent mechanisms, which control the activity of
CO. FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) is the primary upstream target of a large number of
repressor and activator genes in the vernalization and autonomous pathways. See text for
details.
Vernalization pathway: VERNALIZATION1 (VRN1), VERNALIZATION2 (VRN2),
VERNALIZATION INSENSITVE3 (VIN3). Genes promoting FLC expression and resulting in
delayed flowering: FRIGIDA (FRI), FRIGIDA-LIKE1 (FRL1), FRIGIDA-LIKE2 (FRL2)
VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE3 (VIP3), VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE4 (VIP4),
AERIAL ROSETTE1 (ART1), PHOTOPERIOD INSENSITIVE EARLY FLOWERING (PIE1), EARLY
UNDER SHORT DAYS4 (ESD4). The autonomous pathway: FCA, FY, FLOWERING LOCUS D
(FLD) FVE, FPA, LUMINIDEPENDENS (LD), FLOWERING LOCUS K (FLK). Floral integrators:
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT), SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CO1 (SOC1) AND LEAFY
(LFY). Floral repressing genes: TARGET OF EAT1 (TOE1), TARGET OF EAT2 (TOE2),
SCHLAFMUTZE (SMZ), SCHNARCHZAPFEN (SNZ), FLOWERING LOCUS M (FLM), SHORT
VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), TFL1, TFL2, EMBRYONIC FLOWER1 (EMF1), EMBRYONIC
FLOWER2 (EMF2). Meristem-identity genes: APETALA1 (AP1), CAULFLOWER (CAL), FRUITFUL
(FUL), LFY. Floral homeotic genes: APETALA2 (AP2), AGAMOUS (AG), APETALA3 (AP3),
PISTILLATA (PI). Floral promoter independent of FLC: AGAMOUS LIKE 24 (AGL24). Adapted
from Henderson and Dean (2004).

54

R.G. Anthony

expression occurs predominately at the level of transcription but signal relay is
significantly affected by regulated degradation and the compartmentalization of
the signalling intermediates.
The vernalization pathway
Extended periods of cold temperature can accelerate flowering later in development in a process known as vernalization. The genetic analysis of natural
variation of flowering among different geographical Arabidopsis ecotypes
revealed two major genes, FRIGIDA (FRI) and FLOWERING LOCUS C
(FLC), that confer the winter-annual flowering habit (Henderson and Dean,
2004). FRI encodes a novel protein with two coiled-coil domains, whereas FLC
encodes a MADs-box transcription factor (Michaels and Amasino, 1999; Sheldon et al., 1999). In Arabidopsis the pathways that regulate vernalization
converge on FLC (Fig. 3.1). The identification of the FLC gene has helped
address a long-standing question in flowering-time research: how do plants that
have been vernalized remember this signal and flower perhaps months later?
The perception of cold occurs in the cells of the shoot apex and, after an
extended exposure to cold, a vernalized state is induced in these cells. This state
can be passed on through mitotic cell divisions even in the absence of cold, but
is lost after meiosis. The recent identification and molecular analysis of two
genes, VERNALIZATION1 (VRN1) and VERNALIZATION2 (VRN2), and
their effects on FLC expression, suggests that epigenetic changes in chromatin
structure at the FLC locus are the basis of this cellular memory of vernalization
(Sung and Amasino, 2004a). Although the vrn1 and vrn2 mutants are able to
perceive cold and respond by downregulating FLC mRNA levels, they are
defective in their ability to remember the cold as once exposed to warm
temperatures FLC mRNA returns to prevernalization levels (Gendall et al.,
2001).
Good clues to the mechanism of action of VRN2 come from its structure.
VRN2 encodes a nuclear-localized zinc-finger protein with similarity to the
Drosophila Polycombgroup (PcG) protein SU(Z)12 (Gendall et al., 2001).
PcG proteins are components of complexes that repress gene expression by
maintaining the chromatin in a state incompatible with transcription. This state
is maintained after mitotic but not meiotic cell divisions. It is therefore proposed
that VRN2 functions in a similar manner to other PcG proteins, to maintain the
vernalization-induced repression of FLC. It is possible that VRN1 functions in a
chromatin-modifying complex as it encodes a protein with B3 DNA-binding
domains and, in vitro, binds DNA in a strong, but non-sequence-specific
manner (Levy et al., 2002).
A major unanswered question is how do plants perceive cold? Cold perception is required for the vernalization process and the induction of freezing
tolerance (cold acclimation). Genetic analysis suggests that cold may be perceived by a common mechanism; however, cold acclimation and vernalization
probably use different downstream signal transduction pathways. Intriguingly,
cortical microtubules that have an intimate association with the plasma membrane, the major platform for signal perception and transduction, may play a

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

55

role in sensing temperature, and have recently been shown to induce cold
acclimation (Abdrakhamanova et al., 2003).
Activation of the flowering signalling network by environmental stress
The decision to flower is based on the fine-tuned coordination of different
environmental signals, in an interactive network that ensures the onset of
flowering at the proper time of the year. In the unfavourable conditions
imposed by crowding, for example, these coordinated cues can be overruled
allowing rapid flowering in response to low red to far-red ratios (Martinez et al.,
2004). Other stress factors that can promote flowering include drought, high
irradiation, extreme temperature and pathogen infection. These stresses lead
to increased levels of several metabolites including ethylene, abscisic acid
(ABA), oxylipins and phenylpropanoid derivatives such as salicyclic acid (SA)
(Pastori and Foyer, 2002). Recent work demonstrates that UV-C light stress
activates the transition to flowering in Arabidopsis through SA. Moreover, SA
also regulates the flowering time in non-stressed plants, as SA-deficient plants
are late flowering. The regulation of flowering time by SA involves the photoperiod and autonomous pathways, but it does not require the function of the
flowering-time gene CO, FCA or FLC (Martinez et al., 2004). It is possible that
SA may be a link between stress-activated responses and developmental programmes in Arabidopsis.
External signals influence the balance between positive and negative regulators
In the absence of a relevant environmental cue to flower, the initiating response
is actively repressed at multiple levels including chromatin structure, mRNA
stability and protein degradation. The environmental signal to flower will
normally initiate several pathways that share signalling elements. Positive
and/or negative regulatory loops are also activated. Such complex networks
can provide robustness and buffer the system against environmental noise
(Hasty et al., 2002).
There is increasing evidence that certain floral-inductive signals can exert
their influence by antagonizing negative regulators thus allowing the positive
regulator to exert its response (Casal et al., 2004). For example, vernalization
downregulates the expression of FLC and the maintenance of this repression
requires epigenetic regulation mediated by VRN2 (Gendall et al., 2001). The
levels of FLC are crucial for the vernalization response and the interaction
between the two autonomous genes FCA and FY appears to regulate FLC
mRNA 3’-end formation providing a fine-tuning mechanism for the levels of
FLC (Simpson et al., 2003).
Mutations in EARLY BOLTING IN SHORT DAYS (EBS) and TERMINAL FLOWER 2 (TFL2) accelerate flowering by specifically derepressing
FT (Pineiro et al., 2003; Takada and Goto, 2003). EBS and TFL2 contain
domains that are normally involved in chromatin remodelling. Thus the response to environmental signals, such as daylength, requires FT expression to
be repressed by EBS and TFL2 to allow for upregulation of FT by these signals.
Mutant analysis shows that negative regulators not only prevent the response in
the absence of the signal but also ensure that in the presence of the signal an

56

R.G. Anthony

exaggerated response does not occur (Casal et al., 2004). Some of the negative regulation is enhanced by the signal itself as part of a feedback loop.
Mathematical modelling and experiments with engineered gene circuits indicate that a network with negative feedback is more stable than an unregulated
network, and that complex networks involving multiple feedback loops provide
robustness, control, exploitation and tolerance of intracellular noise (Hasty
et al., 2002).

Endogenous factors affect transition
The autonomous pathway
The autonomous pathway of Arabidopsis appears to regulate flowering independently of environmental cues and as such is especially important for Arabidopsis ecotypes that are rapid cyclers, i.e. they will complete a life cycle of
vegetative and reproductive growth more than once a growing season. The
pathway was identified via a group of mutants that are late flowering under all
photoperiods and are highly responsive to vernalization (Mouradov et al.,
2002). All of the genes associated with the pathway are expressed in the
meristem. The autonomous pathway acts in parallel to vernalization to repress
FLC expression (Koornneef et al., 1991). In the absence of FRI, this pathway
is the major regulator of FLC levels and therefore confers a vernalization
requirement (Koornneef et al., 1991). Seven genes that are components of
this pathway have now been identified (FCA, FY, FLOWERING LOCUS D
(FLD), FVE, FPA, LUMINIDEPENDENS (LD), FLOWERING LOCUS K
(FLK)) that, when mutated, produce late-flowering phenotypes, which have
higher levels of FLC mRNA (Fig. 3.1) (Boss et al., 2004). Although all members of this pathway act to limit FLC expression, genetic analysis has revealed
that they have distinct functions (Mouradov et al., 2002). The notion that the
‘autonomous pathway’ is a typical linear pathway by which a signal leads to a
response is now questioned because both genetic and molecular analyses
suggest that the autonomous genes function in different subgroups to promote
flowering. Several of the genes have been cloned and structural analysis reveals
that these genes signal by a process of RNA processing (see below).
A thermosensory pathway
Most studies on the effects of environmental cues have focused on the importance of photoperiod and vernalization; it is also well known that ambient growth
temperature has similarly profound and extremely complex effects on flowering
(Blazquez et al., 2003). A most notable example of this is the increase in spring
temperatures in temperate zones which has caused an acceleration of the onset
of flowering in many plants, despite an unchanged photoperiod (Fitter and Fitter,
2002). Ambient temperature affects the flowering of the Arabidopsis strain
Landsberg. At 238C Landsberg flowers after having produced ten leaves but at
168C flowering is delayed until 15 leaves have formed. It appears that ambient
temperature is sensed through a genetic pathway requiring FCA and FVE and
this is integrated with the environmental signals such as daylength by FT, a strong

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

57

promoter of flowering (Blazquez et al., 2003). Although there are several genetically distinct temperature-response pathways in Arabidopsis, the primary
mechanism for detecting temperature changes is not known for any of these
pathways. It has been suggested that it might be similar to thermosensing in other
organisms, e.g. microbes, where one of the mechanisms involves changes in
mRNA conformation (Johansson et al., 2002). This is interesting as FCA
encodes an RNA-binding protein.

Biochemical Signalling to the Shoot Apical Meristem
Phytohormones influence many diverse developmental processes ranging from
seed germination to root, shoot and flower formation. Mutational analysis
using Arabidopsis has been instrumental in determining the individual components of specific hormone signal transduction pathways. While no hormone
transduction pathway is completely understood, the genes identified to date
suggest that simple molecular rules can be established to explain how plant
hormone signals are transduced (McCourt, 1999; Hay et al., 2004).

Gibberellins
Floral initiation and floral-organ development are both regulated by the phytohormone GA in some but not all species. GA is diffusible and accelerates
flowering in wild type particularly in SDs and thus would be a potential candidate for a flowering signal. However, because it is synthesized throughout the
plant, it is unlikely to serve as the long-sought after universal and primary longdistance flowering signal (Colasanti and Sundaresan, 2000). Moreover, the fact
that GA mutants can still flower in response to photoperiod implies that the
daylength pathway must use signals additional to GA. Nevertheless the role for
GA as a major signal in the floral process is indisputable. GA control of
flowering has been studied in many species, most importantly in Arabidopsis.
This is crucial for understanding and connecting the hormone signalling pathways to the well-established floral genetic development routes. Additionally,
research in the grasses highlights the importance of the GA signal.
Gibberellins promote flowering of Arabidopsis by activating the
LFY promoter
Arabidopsis mutants defective in GA biosynthesis or signalling have demonstrated that endogenous GAs are involved in the promotion of flowering,
although the requirement for GAs in SDs is more critical (Jacobsen and Olszewski, 1993). It has previously been shown that LFY promoter activity is
reduced in mutants defective in GA biosynthesis and that the failure of ga1–3
mutants to flower in SDs can be overcome by constitutive expression of LFY.
Conversely, constitutive GA signalling in SPINDLY (SPY) mutants causes an
increase in LFY promoter activity. GA thus affects flowering through a pathway that controls LFY transcription (Fig. 3.2A) (Blazquez et al., 1998). The

58

R.G. Anthony

Fig. 3.2. (A) gibberellin (GA) signalling pathway that regulates flowering in Arabidopsis.
Activation of a hypothetical transmembrane receptor by GA inhibits repressors of GA signalling.
These repressors are encoded by the DELLA proteins. The SPINDLY (SPY) gene also represses GA
signalling and genetically acts upstream of RGA and GAI. It may act to promote the activity of
GAI/RHA/RGL by N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) modification, in which case GA signalling may
inhibit GAI/RGA/RGL by repressing SPY function. LFY is upregulated at the transcriptional level
by GA. The flowering-time gene SOC1 is also upregulated by GA. GAMYB is proposed to
mediate between GAs and the regulation of flowering time.
(B) Molecular and GA signalling events following a single long-day in Lolium temulentum.
Timing of events of daylength response including GA increase related to shoot apex molecular
change. See text for details.

first protein that has been directly implicated in the transcriptional control of
downstream target genes is the barley transcription factor GAMYB, whose
RNA accumulation is under the control of GAs and which positively regulates

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

59

an a-amylase promoter in the aleurone (Gubler et al., 2002). GAMYB binds
specifically to a GA-response element (GARE) in the 5’ regulatory region of
GA-activated genes. Binding of GAMYB to the GARE activates the transcription of genes encoding the hydrolytic enzymes that release seed nutrients from
the endosperm during seed germination (Gubler et al., 1995). There are three
genes in Arabidopsis that resemble GAMYB: AtMYB33, AtMYB65 and
AtMYB101 (Gocal et al., 2001b). AtMYB33 has been shown to bind
in vitro to a GARE in the LFY promoter suggesting that GAMYB plays a key
role in LFY activation (Blazquez and Weigel, 2000; Gocal et al., 2001b).
Upstream of GAMYB, GA regulates various plant developmental programmes by suppressing a group of DELLA protein nuclear repressors (GAI,
RGA, RGL1, RGL2 and RGL3) (Yu et al., 2004b). These proteins contain a
conserved N-terminal DELLA domain, which is possibly involved in the inactivation of these proteins by GA signals (Yu et al., 2004b). GAI and RGA are
negative regulators of GA responses in the control of stem elongation, flowering time and root growth. Removing both gene functions causes a synergistic
suppression of the corresponding defects in ga1–3 mutants (Fu and Harberd,
2003). In a similar way, RGL2 is a major repressor of seed germination
because rgl2 null mutations can significantly promote germination (Lee et al.,
2002). GA is able to overcome repression by DELLA by targeting the DELLA
protein for destruction in the 26S proteosome (Fu and Harberd, 2003; McGinnis et al., 2003). Because DELLA proteins function in a wide range of plant
developmental programmes, their involvement in flower development may be
mediated by additional flower-specific regulators. For example, the floral integrator SOC1 plays an important role in GA promotion (Moon et al., 2003).
Additional regulators have also been identified such as microRNAs.
These are single-stranded molecules of 20–22 nucleotides that can cause
complementary-dependent cleavage (or translational inhibition) of target RNA
molecules. The microRNA, miR159, directs cleavage of AtMYB33-encoding
transcripts, and elevated expression of miR159 results in delayed flowering
in SD photoperiods that were associated with a reduction in the levels of
LFY transcripts. In addition, miR159 modulates GA-dependent development
regulation via its effects on GAMYB activity.
The precise role of second messengers in GA signal transduction is largely
unknown, although the GA-dependent transduction pathway in barley aleurone cells involves cytosolic Ca2þ and cGMP. Mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathways have also been implicated in GA signal transduction and
these protein kinase cascades probably contribute to the floral response.
Gibberellin and the grasses
There have been many studies implicating the importance of GAs in floral
induction in both grasses and cereals. Flowering of the grass Lolium temulentum is strictly regulated, occurring rapidly on exposure to a single LD; there is
now considerable data linking GA to the photoperiodic induction of leaves, to
floral evocation and to floral differentiation (Fig. 3.2B). The GA content increases in the leaf early in the LD and then, hours later, at the shoot apex. In
rosette dicot species, LDs increase shoot contents of highly bioactive GAs that

60

R.G. Anthony

results in rapid elongation of stems (bolting) (King and Evans, 2003). In grasses
and cereals there is little early stem elongation in LDs, a potentially adaptive
response for survival of close grazing by herbivores. It has now been demonstrated that GAs with low effectiveness for stem elongation, GA5 and GA6,
that reach the shoot apex are not degraded by 2-oxidase enzymes. By contrast,
GA1 and GA4 cause stem elongation and appear to be inactive for floral
evocation, and do not reach the vegetative shoot apex because they are
susceptible to degradation (King and Evans, 2003). How does the increase in
GA relate to the potential molecular events? Exposure of the leaf blade to one
LD increases GA5 content fourfold and, 8–16 h later, GA5 and GA6 double in
the shoot apex to a concentration known to be inductive for apices in vitro.
Following the critical photoperiod, leaf GA20 and GA5 increase within 16 h, 1
day after the start of the LD and apex GA5 and GA6 also begin to rise with a
corresponding increase in metabolism and gene expression. At time point
36 h, GA5 and GA6 reach maximal value at the apex, which correlates with
a dramatic increase in LtCDC2 indicating rapid cell division (King and Evans,
2003). Then 48 h after the start of the original LD, expression of LtMADS1
and LtMADS2 (APETALA1 (AP1)-like genes) increases (Gocal et al., 2001a).
Other genes downstream including LtGAMYB and LtLFY increase at the time
of inflorescence formation, which correlates with a rapid rise in GA1 and GA4
at the shoot apex. Thus GAs may regulate the increased expression of LtGAMYB at this time. It is interesting that LtLFY is detected quite late (about
12 days after LD induction) within the spikelet meristems, glumes and lemma
primordial. These patterns of expression contrast with Arabidopsis, where
LFY and AP1 are consecutively activated early during flower formation (King
and Evans, 2003).

The influence of cytokinin signalling on flowering
Cytokinins are essential plant hormones that control cell division, shoot meristem initiation, leaf and root differentiation, chloroplast biogenesis, stress
tolerance and senescence. Recent rapid advances have discovered hybrid histidine protein kinases (HKs) as cytokinin receptors, histidine phosphotransfer
proteins (HPTs) and nuclear response regulators (RRs) as transcription activators and repressors in the cytokinin signal transduction pathway (Sheen,
2002). There are four major steps of the cytokinin phosphorelay: HK sensing
and signalling, HPT nuclear translocation, RR transcription activation and a
negative feedback loop through cytokinin-inducible RR gene products. Despite
our knowledge of the mechanisms and importance of this central signalling
pathway, the participation of cytokinins in the control of the floral transition of
shoot apical meristems (SAMs) is still a controversial issue. The clearest example is found in Sinapis alba. In S. alba induced to flower by exposure to a
single LD, the phloem sap feeding the apex is enriched in cytokinins of the
isopentenylade-nine-type (iP-type) between 9 h and 25 h after start of the LD
(Leujeune, 1994). One of the earliest events observed at the shoot apex
following photoperiodic induction is a transitory increase in the number of

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

61

cells undergoing mitosis. Interestingly, cytokinin causes stimulation of the cell
division rate and transcription of the SaMADS A gene, responses that are
identical to those normally occurring after LD induction (Bonhomme et al.,
2000; Jacqmard et al., 2002).
Research on the participation of cytokinins in the control of flowering time
in Arabidopsis is relatively scarce. Exogenous applications have been reported
to accelerate flowering in various ecotypes (He and Loh, 2002). In the Columbia ecotype, cytokinin stimulation is observed only when light irradiance is low
(Dennis et al., 1996). Alternatively, high endogenous levels of cytokinins are
associated with early flowering in Columbia plants treated with triacontanol,
cerium and lanthanum (He and Loh, 2002). Corbesier et al. (2003) recently
analysed cytokinins in leaf extracts, leaf phloem exudate and in the SAM at
different times during the floral transition. It was found that, in leaf tissues and
leaf exudate, isopentenyladenine forms of cytokinins increased from 16 h after
the start of the LD. At 30 h, the SAM of induced plants contained more
isopentenyladenine and zeatin than vegetative controls. These cytokinin increases correlate well with the early events of floral transition. Thus these
results suggest that endogenous cytokinins might play a role in the control of
floral transition in Arabidopsis and act as a component of the floral stimulus of
leaf origin (Corbesier et al., 2003).

Other hormones implicated in flowering
In addition to cytokinin and GAs, other growth hormones can either inhibit
or promote flowering. Mutants that reduce ABA biosynthesis are earlier flowering under non-inductive conditions, suggesting that ABA inhibits flowering
(Martinez-Zapater et al., 1994). In support of this, abi1 and abi2 (ABA
signalling mutants) have been shown to reduce the flowering time of fca-1
mutants (Chandler et al., 2000; Boss et al., 2004). Ethylene signalling mutants
(Ogawara et al., 2003), the brassinosteroid biosynthesis mutant det2 (Chory
et al., 1991) and plants altered in SA biosynthesis (Martinez et al., 2004) are
late flowering, implicating these plant growth regulators in floral signalling
pathways.

The Transmission of Long-distance Flowering Signals
Attempts to isolate the transmissible floral regulators
Perception of daylength in the leaf suggested that a systemic signal, often called
the floral stimulus or florigen, is synthesized in the leaf and transmitted to the
SAM where it triggers flower development (An et al., 2004). Early physiological studies showed that mobile signals travelled in the vasculature of the
plant, specifically, through the phloem, which also transports nutrients and
other molecules from source tissues to sink tissues (Zeevaart, 1976). The many
attempts to isolate and characterize the floral stimulus have been largely

62

R.G. Anthony

unsuccessful. The most common approach has been to make extracts from
induced leaf tissue and test for their ability to elicit flowering in non-induced
plants (Colasanti and Sundaresan, 2000). More sophisticated approaches have
recently been undertaken involving mass spectrometry studies of phloem sap
(see below). Most of these extractions have focused on small molecules. Recent
studies using fluorescent tracers have shown that in Arabidopsis there is
actually a decrease in the movement of small molecules from the leaf-to-apex
via the symplast at the time of floral induction (Gisel et al., 2002). The lack of
tracer movement from the leaf to the shoot apex may indicate either a reduction in overall symplastic transport to the shoot apex or a change in the
selectivity of the plasmodesmata during floral induction. There is increasing
evidence that macromolecular traffic between cells via plasmodesmata plays
essential roles in normal meristem development and function. It is possible that
the floral stimulus is a macromolecule, such as RNA or protein that is translocated via the phloem from the leaf to the apical meristem, where it functions as
a regulator of gene expression (Zambryski, 2004).

Are CO and florigen connected?
CO plays a central role in the photoperiodic perception pathway (Hayama and
Coupland, 2003; Yanovsky and Kay, 2003; Valverde et al., 2004). It is
expressed in leaves, yet can activate the expression of two genes, LFY and
AP1, expressed in reproductive meristems that directly control the initiation of
flower development. Therefore CO could regulate the synthesis of a chemical
that might fit the definition of florigen. Alternatively, CO could control the
levels of several substances, which together regulate the flowering transition
(Hayama and Coupland, 2003). Similar arguments can be made for a role of
the maize gene INDETERMINATE in regulating the synthesis of transportable
substances because of its function in regulating floral initiation and its expression in leaves.
CO activates the transcription of FT, which encodes a RAF-kinaseinhibitor-like protein. Recent data suggest that CO acts in the phloem companion cells to trigger floral development at the apex, and controls a systemic
signal that crosses graft junctions (An et al., 2004). The mechanism by which
CO acts in the phloem involves cell-autonomous activation of its target gene FT
and, based on analysis of a green fluorescent protein (GFP), CO fusion protein
does not require movement of the CO protein. Thus CO, partly through
the activation of FT, regulates the synthesis or transport of a systemic flowering signal, thereby positioning this signal within the established hierarchy of
regulatory proteins that controls flowering (An et al., 2004).

Redefining ‘florigen’ clues from microarrays and mass spectrometry
Rapid advances in proteomic techniques will make it possible to identify proteins in specific signalling pathways from different species that have similar

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

63

function in the initiation of flowering and allow the analysis of global protein
function. For example, it will be possible to determine which genes have been
co-opted by plants for the unique purpose of mediating flowering in response
to a particular environmental stimulus (Colasanti and Sundaresan, 2000).
How floral-inductive signals are transmitted from genes such as CO and FT
to downstream effectors such as LFY and AP1 is not well understood; a recent
microarray experiment has shed some light on potential downstream targets
(Schmid et al., 2003). Schmid et al. (2003) used the parallel analysis of many
known floral-regulatory genes, along with the analysis of a large group of newly
identified genes that respond to a change in photoperiod. A new subset of
genes dependent on CO and FT but not LFY has been identified. Within this
group there are several paralogous gene pairs with very similar CO and FT
responses, which suggest that many of these genes were not identified in
forward genetic screens because of redundancy (Schmid et al., 2003). Within
this there exist two groups of potential microRNA (miRNA) targets, a clade of
AP2 domain-encoding genes and a large group of SPOROCYTELESS (SPL)
genes as being regulated by CO and FT. This observation raises the possibility
that miRNAs perform a critical function in mediating the effects of floral
induction, which is supported by a recent report on the consequences of
miR172 overexpression (Chen, 2004).
A recent approach using microbore HPLC-MALDI-TOF-MS overcomes
the problems of bioassaying phloem sap. Using this approach HoffmannBenning et al. (2002) compared the contents of the phloem sap from flowering
and non-flowering Perilla and lupin plants. The microbore HPLC separations
allowed detection of proteins/peptides that were very small and present at very
low levels. This approach allowed the identification of more than 100 components in the phloem sap of both Perilla and lupin; of these, four small
proteins potentially play a role in the induction of flowering, one of which
showed no similarity to any known protein sequences. Furthermore, a second
small protein in exudates of induced plants was similar to Ser/Thr receptor-like
protein kinases. Two additional protein sequences appeared to be related to
two different purine permeases. These may be important for the transport
of nucleic acid bases or related signalling molecules, such as cytokinins, into
and within the sieve elements. The kinase and purine permeases may act in
concert to induce flowering directly or facilitate the transport of the signal.
These data clearly demonstrate the power of this approach and similar studies
in other species with differing flowering requirements would be of considerable
value.

Integration of Pathways Controlling Signalling
Current genetic models propose that multiple promotion signalling pathways
converge. The different floral-induction pathways are integrated by a small set
of genes, including FT, SOC1 and LFY (Blazquez and Weigel, 2000; Lee et al.,
2000; Samach et al., 2000). The SOC1 (or AGL20) gene that encodes a
MADS-box protein is both activated by CO and repressed by FLC, suggesting

64

R.G. Anthony

that the pathways represented by these genes converge on SOC1 (Michaels
and Amasino, 2001). SOC1 is also regulated by GA and therefore is a common
target of all three flowering pathways (Borner et al., 2000). In contrast to
SOC1, the GA pathway does not regulate expression of other flowering
integrators, FLC and FT (Moon et al., 2003). The role of SOC1 is conserved
in other plants (Kim et al., 2003).
FT is an immediate target of CO, and the expression of FT is negatively
regulated by FLC, suggesting that FT integrates the LD and autonomous
pathways (Samach et al., 2000). Recent microarray data have indicated
that FRUITFUL (FUL) may also act as a floral integrator (Schmid et al.,
2003).
LFY was one of the first genes to be identified as a floral integrator. LFY is
the earliest of the known floral identity genes to be expressed and directly
activates one of the later genes AP1 (Wagner et al., 1999). LFY mRNA levels
remain low and the floral transition is abolished in co ga1 double mutants in
which both the photoperiod pathway and the GA pathway are blocked (Blazquez and Weigel, 2000). Thus LFY expression during the vegetative phase is
regulated by both photoperiod and GA signalling pathways. Deletion analysis
demonstrated that the photoperiod pathway and the GA pathway act on
different cis elements in the LFY promoter (Blazquez and Weigel, 2000).
Thus signalling appears to converge on several parallel transcription factors
rather than just a single component.

Mechanistic Aspects of Floral Signal Transduction
We are rapidly gaining insight into the genetic make-up that comprises the
major signalling routes employed by plants for flowering, the continued use of
forward and reverse genetics and global expression strategies will add new
elements to the skeletal networks already established. Detailed analysis of
specific gene to gene interactions is now starting to reveal some of the
mechanisms and strategies that are employed to convey the signal message
within the cell and from cell to cell.

Control of gene expression: chromatin structure
Genetic analysis of flowering has identified a large source of transcription
factors including MADS-box transcription factors (e.g. AGL24, SOC1, FLC),
MYB transcription factors (e.g. CCA1) and zinc-finger transcription factors
(e.g. CO). Recent research is showing how the signal transduction mechanism
can impinge directly on to the control of gene expression. Methylation of DNA,
especially 5-methylcytosine, is a specific structural modification that regulates
gene expression. Methylation generally results in inactivation and demethylation in activation. There is clear evidence that chromatin remodelling can
affect flowering by changing the methylation patterns. The histones are the
most abundant protein in chromatin and primarily responsible for the

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

65

folding and packaging of DNA. The N-terminal tails of histones H3 and H4
undergo extensive post-translational modifications including acetylation and
methylation, which are two intensively studied alterations with well-defined
roles in the control of gene-expression states (Henderson and Dean, 2004).
Specific residues of histone H3 tails are modified by acetylation and methylation and changes in these modifications serve as part of a histone code specifying active or repressed gene activity states (Fischle, 2003). Vernalization
increases histone H3 deacetylation in the 5’ region of FLC and increased
methylation of histone H3 lysine residues 9 and 27 (histone methylation
marks) after cold exposure, all modifications associated with gene repression
(Sung and Amasino, 2004b). The histone methylation marks can act as signals
to recruit further mediators of gene expression (Orlando, 2003).
Further evidence for the control of transcription-factor expression by chromatin remodelling has come to light from the autonomous pathway gene FLD.
FLD encodes a protein with homology to a human protein that functions in the
histone deacetylase 1,2 (HDAC1/2) corepressor complex (He et al., 2003).
The FLD protein possesses a SWIRM domain, which is associated with chromatin-remodelling enzymes. In fld mutants, the 5’-end of FLC displays hyperacteylation of histone H3, indicating that FLD is required to deacetylate FLC
chromatin and thereby repress its expression (He et al., 2003).

RNA-binding and processing
Several genes implicated in the autonomous pathway interact to repress the
activity of FLC (Fig. 3.1). There is strong evidence to suggest that the primary
mechanism of repression is at the RNA level. The expression of FLC is complex
and exhibits an autoregulatory mechanism involving the choice of polyadenylation site. FCA and FY interact by virtue of a WW protein-interaction domain at
the C-terminus. In addition, FCA possesses two RNA recognition-motif domains
(Sudol and Hunter, 2000). In contrast to FCA, FY is highly conserved throughout eukaryotes. The yeast homologue Pfs2p acts as a scaffold protein in the CPF
(cleavage and polyadenylation factor) complex, which is required for 3’ cleavage
and polyadenylation of pre-mRNA transcripts (Ohnacker et al., 2000). It is
therefore possible that FY may perform a similar function, in Arabidopsis, in
RNA processing while also functioning in regulated polyadenylation through
interaction with FCA. FPA, another autonomous pathways gene, also possesses
a RNA recognition-motif domain (Schomburg et al., 2001) and FLK encodes
a nuclear KH-type RNA-binding protein (Lim et al., 2004). The mechanism
of RNA processing is best understood for FCA. There are four FCA transcripts,
and intron 3 is a major site of alternative processing. Premature cleavage and
polyadenylation within this intron generates the truncated, non-functional
FCA transcript. FCA is able to negatively autoregulate its own expression
by promoting intron 3 polyadenylation (Quesada et al., 2003). There is recent
evidence to suggest that non-coding RNA may have a role in chromatin regulation. It is possible to speculate that PHOTOPERIOD INSENSITIVE EARLY
FLOWERING (PIE1) and VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE (VIP),

66

R.G. Anthony

positive upregulators of FLC, may act to promote active chromatin, whereas
FVE and FLD act to deacetylate histones, thus promoting a silent chromatin
state (Henderson and Dean, 2004).
Thus multiple RNA-binding proteins are required for repression of FLC
expression by the autonomous pathway, whether this reflects a cascade of
post-transcriptional regulators or a complex of RNA-binding factors remains
uncertain.

A role for receptor-like kinases
The mechanisms used by plants to transmit extracellular signals into the cytoplasm require receptors located in the plasma membrane. Receptor-like
kinases (RLKs) are an important group of protein kinases with direct functions
in transmission of signals across the plasma membrane. They undergo autophosphorylation on the intracellular kinase domain in a reaction thought to
result from homologous dimerization of the receptors in the plasma membrane
when the ligand binds (Takasaki et al., 2000; Becraft, 2002). It is now apparent that plants contain a much larger complement of receptor-kinase genes
than other organisms. Current counts reveal that there are over 400 genes
predicted to encode RLKs in the genome and that LRR (leucine-rich repeat)type RLKs are the largest class, containing over 200 genes (Shiu and
Bleecker, 2001). The possibility exists that plants use hundreds of receptors
as entry points into signalling pathways and this has broad implications for
developmental and environmental responses. Fewer than 2% of the total RLKs
identified have known functions and much less is known about their signalling
components or ligands. RLKs participate in a diverse range of processes,
including self versus non-self recognition, disease resistance, hormone perception and regulation of floral development (Shiu and Bleecker, 2001).
Maintenance of shoot and floral meristem cell proliferation and fate
Plants have adopted unique developmental mechanisms that allow them to
make the commitment to flowering in response to external signals. The key
structure that provides this flexibility is the SAM, which gives rise to the aerial
structures of the plant such as leaves, stems and ultimately, flowers (Baurle and
Laux, 2003; Veit, 2004). It forms organs continuously by carefully balancing
two activities. The first is the maintenance of a constant sized pool of undifferentiated stem cells; the second is the commitment of appropriately positioned
progeny cells towards differentiation, so that they are competent to form
specialized lateral organs such as leaves. Although some components of signalling within the shoot meristem have been uncovered by genetic analysis,
intracellular mechanisms connecting growth and development signals to the
activation of specific genes are largely unknown.
The differentiation of stem cells is regulated by the CLAVATA genes
(CLV1, CLV2, CLV3), which code for components of a signal transduction
pathway (Fig. 3.3). Mutation in any of the CLAVATA loci leads to a progressive overgrowth of the SAM and floral meristems. Genetic analysis revealed

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

67

CLV3
ligand

CLV2
CLV1

KAPP
ROP

MAPKs?
POL
?
WUS

AG
LFY

Meristem
proliferation

Floral
meristem
AG
Gynoecium
differentiation

Fig. 3.3. Signal transduction pathways of the receptor-like kinase (RLK) Clavata (CLV).
The model predicts that a CLV1-CLV2 heterodimer binds to a CLV3 multimer. This ligand–
receptor interaction drives the transphosphorylation of the CLV1-kinase domain. Phosphorylated
residues on the kinase domain act as direct or indirect binding sites for downstream effector
molecules such as kinase-associated protein phosphatase (KAPP) and a Rho GTPase-related
protein (ROP). How signalling is transmitted from the plasma membrane is unclear, although it
could involve a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. This signalling inactivates
WUS expression and is negatively regulated by POL.

that these genes function in the same pathway (Clark et al., 1995; Kayes and
Clark, 1998). CLV1 encodes a LRR transmembrane receptor with an intracellular serine/threonine-kinase domain (Clark et al., 1997). CLV2 codes for a
similar protein lacking the kinase domain. The model predicts that a CLV1CLV2 heterodimer binds to a small peptide CLV3 (Fletcher et al., 1999;
Trotochaud et al., 1999). The CLV3 ligand functions in a non-cell autonomous
manner; it is transported through the secretory pathway to the apoplast and
this export to the extracellular space is essential for its function in activating the
CLV1/CLV2 receptor complex (Rojo et al., 2002). Thus CLV3 relays a signal

68

R.G. Anthony

from the summit of the meristem to the underlying tissues and activates the
CLV1 receptor to keep cells mitotically active.
This ligand–receptor interaction drives the transphosphorylation of the
CLV1-kinase domain. Phosphorylated residues on the kinase domain act as
direct or indirect binding sites for downstream effector molecules such as
kinase-associated protein phosphatase (KAPP) and a Rho GTPase-related
protein (ROP), indicating that CLV1 may relay signal transduction through
this small GTPase (Trotochaud et al., 1999). How signalling is transmitted
from the plasma membrane is unclear, although it could involve a MAPK
cascade. This signalling inactivates the WUSCHEL (WUS) gene and is negatively regulated by POL. WUS is required to initiate and maintain stem cells in
the central zone of the meristem. WUS encodes a novel homeodomain-like
transcription factor expressed in few cells beneath the CLV1 expression zone
(Mayer et al., 1998). WUS and CLV3 establish a feedback regulatory loop,
such that WUS signal promotes CLV3 expression and specifies stem cell
maintenance in the apex of the meristem through the CLV pathway (via noncell autonomy of CLV3), which in turn restricts the strength and expression of
WUS to the underlying tissues (Gross-Hardt et al., 2002). This ensures a tight
control of stem-cell number through carefully balanced WUS and CLV3 activities of promotion and restriction of stem-cell identity, respectively. This regulatory loop operates through the communication between the apical stem cells
and the underlying organizing centre.
Regulation of floral meristem cell fate
Developmental signals that cause the vegetative to floral transition originate
outside the SAM and so the SAM remains uncommitted to flowering prior to its
perception of external signals. Floral induction then causes a cascade of processes within the SAM that result in its restructuring, accompanied by changes
in the rate and pattern of cell division, and the formation of floral structures
instead of leaves (Carles and Fletcher, 2003). At the structural and organizational level, both the SAM and the floral meristem are similar, because both
contain a stem-cell reservoir at the apex that contributes cells to organogenesis
on the flanks. Floral meristems develop from the flanks of the SAM similar to
leaf primordial, but with different fates. The central pool of stem cells is
maintained by the CLV pathway. Signalling by CLV3 through the CLV1
receptor complex limits the size of the WUS-expression domain in the interior
of the meristem. In turn WUS activity, perhaps with the help of an unknown
diffusible signal (X), preserves the population of CLV3-expressing stem cells in
the superficial cell layers (Fig. 3.3). TFL simultaneously represses the expression of the floral meristem-identity gene LFY in the SAM. LFY is then upregulated in early floral meristem and along with WUS; it activates AGAMOUS
(AG) in the centre of the floral meristem where the stamens and carpels will
form. LFY and WUS may require another factor (Y) to activate AG in the
correct expression domain. Later in floral development, when the carpel
primordials are due to form, AG and another unidentified factor (Z) repress
the expression of WUS, terminating stem cell maintenance and allowing
gynoecium differentiation.

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

69

RLKs can transduce signals directly to transcription factors
AGL24 is a gene with similar properties to SOC1; data suggest that it is
a flowering-time target of vernalization. Like SOC1, it is upregulated by
vernalization but unlike SOC1, this upregulation is independent of FLC activity.
Mutants of agl24 are late flowering, but this is not strongly suppressed by
vernalization (Yu et al., 2004b). AGL24 appears to act downstream of
SOC1 but upstream of LFY, but overexpression of AGL24 increases SOC1
expression indicating that the relationship between these genes may not be
straightforward (Michaels et al., 2003a,b). Indeed, both AP1 and LFY repress
AGL24 activity (Yu et al., 2004a). Two-hybrid analysis indicates that AGL24 is
a substrate of meristematic receptor-like kinase (MRLK). MRLK encodes an
RLK with LRRs in its extracellular domain. The precise function of MRLK is still
unclear. The AGL24 protein specifically interacted with, and was phosphorylated by, the MRLK kinase domain in in vitro assays. The simultaneous expression of AGL24 and MRLK in shoot apices during floral transition suggests that
the interaction occurs in plants. Furthermore, use of GFP markers indicates
that MRLK signalling promotes translocation of AGL24 from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus. It is possible that AGL24 may form complexes with other MADSbox transcription factors, which play a role in floral transition and that the
formation and/or subcellular localization of this complex may in part be regulated by MRLK (Fujita et al., 2003).

The two-component Ehd1 signalling cascade in the short-day promotion pathway
The sensory and transduction systems evolved by bacteria enable them
to survive and adapt to various different environmental conditions. Twocomponent systems have also emerged as important sensing/response mechanisms in higher plants (Grefen and Harter, 2004). The first component of
a two-component system is usually a receptor protein. The receptor contains a
periplasmic domain that binds ligands, includes a variable number of transmembrane domains and has a C-terminal extension. When activated by binding a
ligand, a kinase activity located in the C-terminus autophosphorylates the
receptor, transferring orthophosphate from ATP to a histidine residue. The
active receptor is a homodimer in which each monomer phosphorylates
the other. The second component, a response-regulator protein is activated
when the receptor kinase transfers phosphate from its histidine residue to a
conserved aspartate residue on the regulator. Removal of the phosphate group
inactivates the response regulator. Two-component systems play a major role
in cytokinin perception and signalling and contribute to ethylene signal transduction, osmosensing and function as components of the Arabidopsis circadian clock (Urao et al., 2001). Furthermore, developmental processes like
megametogenesis in A. thaliana and flowering promotion in rice (Oryza
sativa) involve elements of two-component systems (Grefen and Harter,
2004). Because of the molecular mode of signalling, plant two-component
systems appear to serve as intensive crosstalk and signal-integration machinery. In a recent study, Doi et al. (2004) showed that a B-type response

70

R.G. Anthony

regulator, the gene for which has been named Early heading date 1 (Ehd1),
promotes flowering under SD conditions in rice (Oryza sativa). Interestingly,
although Ehd1 has a classical receiver domain and a functional GARP (Golden2,
Arabidopsis RESPONSE REGULATOR (ARR)) DNA-binding motif, it very
likely has no orthologue in Arabidopsis. Ehd1 transcript accumulates under
SD conditions but, in contrast to ARRs, Ehd1 appears not to be an intrinsic
circadian clock component. Ehd1 very likely promotes flowering by direct
regulation of certain MADS-box genes and of Flowering Locus T group-like
inducer genes, which are implicated in the regulation of photoperiodic flowering. These findings indicate that a novel two-component signalling cascade,
which is different from the systems of Arabidopsis, is integrated into the conserved pathway of photoperiodic control of flowering in rice (Doi et al., 2004).

Cell–cell communication: the trafficking of transcription factors
It is clear that floral development and indeed development of multicellular
organisms in general depends on the communication of reliable information
among neighbouring cells. In plants cell fate is generally determined by position
rather than cell lineage, and both cellular differentiation and organ development depend on intercellular signalling. It is widely accepted that the control of
gene expression during development by intercellular signalling is normally
specified by the release of small signal molecules by the signalling cell, followed
by perception by the target cell, transduction to the nucleus, followed by
modulation of transcriptional control of target genes. An alternative hypothesis
proposes that transcription factors themselves can act as signal molecules
moving between cells to activate gene expression at a distance from the site
where they were originally produced. This hypothesis was proposed based on
the observation that plant viruses could mediate intercellular movement of viral
proteins by physical interaction with plasmodesmata. The communication of
information between the cell layers of the meristem and its influence on
meristem function can be studied by exploiting periclinal chimeras in which a
developmental gene has been inactivated in one or more meristems. (Vincent
et al., 2003). Two transcription factors KNOTTED1 (KN1) in maize and
DEFICIENS (DEF) in Antirrhinum have been shown to move to cells in
which their RNAs are not found (Perbal et al., 1996). The trafficking of
transcription factors is now thought to be a widespread phenomenon in plants.
To address the question of functional activity of a transcription factor after
intercellular movement, Sessions et al. (2000) investigated the cellular autonomy of action of LFY and AP1. Both LFY and AP1 encode transcription
factors that regulate overlapping sets of target genes. Sessions et al. used two
approaches to study cell autonomy: (i) heat-inducible, site-specific recombination to produce AP1þ or LFYþ clonal sectors, marked by corresponding loss
of a visible marker gene (b-glucuronidase (GUS)); and (ii) expression of AP1 or
LFY under the control of an L1 cell layer-specific promoter in ap1 or lfy
mutant plants. LFY and AP1 are able to directly activate the expression of
AP3 and AG. Analysis of the RNA expression patterns of these target genes by

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

71

in situ hybridization indicates that AP1 activates its targets only in cells expressing AP1, whereas LFY activates the same target genes throughout all cell
layers of the developing flower, even when LFY expression is confined to a
single cell layer. Although LFY RNA is found only in cells that are genetically
capable of expressing LFY, LFY protein is detectable in all cell layers of the
developing flower. Most importantly LFY was shown to act in lfy mutant cells
(possessing LFY protein, but not LFY RNA) on a reporter transgene, whose
expression requires that LFY bind directly on the target gene’s promoter. This
result proves that LFY protein is active as a DNA-binding transcription factor
after moving between cells. Also LFY acts not only between adjacent cells, but
also at long range because it can reorganize an entire meristem even if expressed in only half of the meristem.
Wu et al. (2003) recently characterized the mode of LFY movement in
Arabidopsis SAMs and floral primordial. Using functional LFY–GFP fusion
proteins, they showed that LFY moves more readily from the L1 into deeper
cell layers than laterally into adjacent, clonally related cells (Fig. 3.4). By

Fig. 3.4. Confocal images of green fluorescence protein (GFP) fluorescence in Arabidopsis
inflorescence apices (A, C, D) and leaf epidermis (B). AP1:GFP does not move from the L1
meristematic layer (A). C-terminal and N-terminal GFP fusion of LFY move several cell layers into
the underlying tissues from the L1 in the apex. The LFY–GFP fusions are localized to both the
nucleus and the cytoplasm in leaf epidermal cells and localize with plasmodesmata pit fields
(arrows). Movement occurs by diffusion rather than active translocation. Photo copyright
Xuelin Wu and Detlef Weigel, Salk Institute.

72

R.G. Anthony

contrast, a functional AP1–GFP fusion is unable to move from its source
cells. Comparison of the dynamics of LFY–GFP fusion proteins with other
GFP fusion suggests that this movement is driven by diffusion. Deletion experiments failed to identify a specific movement signal in LFY, which is compatible
with the conclusion that LFY movement is non-targeted. The hypothesis of
non-targeted movement is also supported by the finding of a correlation
between cytoplasmic localization and the ability of these proteins to move
to adjacent cells (Wu et al., 2003). Furthermore, Wu et al. propose that
movement is a default mechanism for many proteins in the Arabidopsis
shoot apex unless they are either efficiently targeted to specific subcellular
locations or retained through formation of protein complexes, although
more case studies are needed to determine the universal application of this
hypothesis.

Conclusions and Future Perspectives
Genetic analysis in Arabidopsis has enabled the isolation of genes that control
flowering time, and the identification of interacting pathways that promote
flowering in response to different environmental conditions. However, our
present understanding of these pathways represents only a minimal framework
and future work will concentrate on understanding the biochemical function of
pathway components and the manner in which the signalling pathways convey
information that ultimately regulates flowering time. Bacterial receptor and
transduction systems provide models for plant receptors including proteins
that sense phytochrome for example. Investigations into the roles of GTPases
in plant signal transduction are still in their infancy, but already a strong
relationship is implicated between GTPase activity and phospholipid signalling.
Phosholipases A, C and D influence many aspects of plant development and
signalling and are likely to play a role in floral signal transduction. Cyclic
nucleotides act as second messengers in plant cells and are implicated in
phytochrome and GA signalling; they most likely interact with Ca2þ signalling
network in plants, although how the second messenger activity interacts with
the multitude of floral transcription factors is unknown. Post-translational
modifications, such as phosphorylation, have been implicated in the regulation
of floral-specific proteins and are likely to involve MAPK signalling cascades,
although this has yet to be demonstrated. It is clear that the complexity of the
data regarding the network of flowering pathways will increase dramatically
with the continued development of sophisticated imaging techniques for the
visualization of signalling pathways and the increasing use of proteomic research to characterize signalling modules.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Dr Xuelin Wu and Professor Detlef Weigel for providing
Fig. 3.4, and colleagues at Royal Holloway for their helpful comments.

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

73

References
Abdrakhamanova, A., Wang, Q.Y.,
Khokhlova, L. and Nick, P. (2003) Is
microtubule disassembly a trigger for
cold acclimation? Plant & Cell Physiology 44, 676–686.
Amasino, R.M. (2003) Flowering time: a
pathway that begins at the 3’ end. Current Biology 13, R670–672.
An, H., Roussot, C., Suarez-Lopez, P.,
Corbesier, L., Vincent, C., Pineiro,
M., Hepworth, S., Mouradov, A., Justin, S., Turnbull, C. and Coupland, G.
(2004) CONSTANS acts in the phloem
to regulate a systemic signal that induces photoperiodic flowering of Arabidopsis. Development 131, 3615–
3626.
Baurle, I. and Laux, T. (2003) Apical meristems: the plant’s fountain of youth.
Bioessays 25, 961–970.
Becraft, P.W. (2002) Receptor kinase signalling in plant development. Annual
Review of Cell Developmental Biology 18, 163–192.
Blazquez, M.A. and Weigel, D. (2000) Integration of floral inductive signals in
Arabidopsis. Nature 404, 889–892.
Blazquez, M.A., Green, R., Nilsson, O.,
Sussman, M.R. and Weigel, D. (1998)
Gibberellins promote flowering of Arabidopsis by activating the LEAFY promoter. Plant Cell 10, 791–800.
Blazquez, M.A., Ahn, J.H. and Weigel, D.
(2003) A thermosensory pathway controlling flowering time in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Nature Genetics 33, 168–
171.
Bonhomme, F., Kurz, B., Melzer, S., Bernier, G. and Jacqmard, A. (2000)
Cytokinin and gibberellin activate
SaMADS A, a gene apparently involved in regulation of the floral transition in Sinapis alba. Plant Journal
24, 103–111.
Borner, R., Kampmann, G., Chandler, J.,
Gleissner, R., Wisman, E., Apel, K. and
Melzer, S. (2000) A MADS domain
gene involved in the transition to

flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 24, 591–599.
Boss, P.K., Bastow, R.M., Mylne, J.S. and
Dean, C. (2004) Multiple pathways in
the decision to flower: enabling, promoting, and resetting. Plant Cell 16
(Suppl.), S18–31.
Carles, C.C. and Fletcher, J.C. (2003)
Shoot apical meristem maintenance:
the art of a dynamic balance. Trends
in Plant Science 8, 394–401.
Casal, J.J., Fankhauser, C., Coupland, G.
and Blazquez, M.A. (2004) Signalling
for developmental plasticity. Trends in
Plant Science 9, 309–314.
Chandler, J., Martinez-Zapater, J.M. and
Dean, C. (2000) Mutations causing defects in the biosynthesis and response
to gibberellins, abscisic acid and phytochrome B do not inhibit vernalization
in Arabidopsis fca-1. Planta 210,
677–682.
Chen, X. (2004) A microRNA as a translational repressor of APETALA2 in
Arabidopsis flower development. Science 303, 2022–2025.
Chory, J., Nagpal, P. and Peto, C.A.
(1991) Phenotypic and genetic
analysis of det2, a new mutant that
affects light regulated seedling development in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 3,
445–459.
Clark, S.E., Running, M.P. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1995) CLAVATA3 is a specific regulator of shoot and floral
meristem development affecting the
same processes as CLAVATA1. Development 121, 2057–2067.
Clark, S.E., Williams, R.W. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1997) The CLAVATA1
gene encodes a putative receptor kinase
that controls shoot and floral meristem
size in Arabidopsis. Cell 89, 575–585.
Colasanti, J. and Sundaresan, V. (2000)
‘Florigen’ enters the molecular age:
long-distance signals that cause plants
to flower. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 25, 236–240.

74

R.G. Anthony
Corbesier, L., Prinsen, E., Jacqmard, A.,
Lejeune, P., Van Onckelen, H., Perilleux, C. and Bernier, G. (2003) Cytokinin levels in leaves, leaf exudate and
shoot apical meristem of Arabidopsis
thaliana during floral transition. Journal of Experimental Botany 54,
2511–2517.
Dennis, E., Finnegan, E.J., Bilodeau, P.,
Chaudhury, A., Genger, R., Helliwell,
C., Sheldon, C.C., Bagnall, D.J. and
Peacock, W.J. (1996) Vernalization
and the initiation of flowering. Seminars in Cell and Developmental
Biology 7, 441–448.
Doi, K., Izawa, T., Fuse, T., Yamanouchi,
U., Kubo, T., Shimatani, Z., Yano, M.
and Yoshimura, A. (2004) Ehd1, a
B-type response regulator in rice, confers short-day promotion of flowering
and controls FT-like gene expression
independently of Hd1. Genes & Development 18, 926–936.
Fischle, W., Wang, Y. and Allis, C.D.
(2003) Binary switches and modification cassettes in histone biology and
beyond. Nature 425, 475–479.
Fitter, A.H. and Fitter, R.S. (2002)
Rapid changes in flowering time in
British plants. Science 296, 1689–
1691.
Fletcher, J.C., Brand, U., Running, M.P.,
Simon, R. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1999) Signalling of cell fate decisions
by CLAVATA3 in Arabidopsis shoot
meristems [see comments]. Science
283, 1911–1914.
Fu, X. and Harberd, N.P. (2003) Auxin
promotes Arabidopsis root growth by
modulating gibberellin response. Nature 421, 740–743.
Fujita, H., Takemura, M., Tani, E.,
Nemoto, K., Yokota, A. and Kohchi,
T. (2003) An Arabidopsis MADS-box
protein, AGL24, is specifically bound
to and phosphorylated by meristematic
receptor-like kinase (MRLK). Plant
Cell Physiology 44, 735–742.
Gendall, A.R., Levy, Y.Y., Wilson, A. and
Dean, C. (2001) The VERNALIZATION 2 gene mediates the epigenetic

regulation of vernalization in Arabidopsis. Cell 107, 525–535.
Gisel, A., Hempel, F.D., Barella, S. and
Zambryski, P. (2002) Leaf-to-shoot
apex movement of symplastic tracer is
restricted coincident with flowering in
Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 99,
1713–1717.
Gocal, G.F., King, R.W., Blundell, C.A.,
Schwartz, O.M., Andersen, C.H. and
Weigel, D. (2001a). Evolution of floral
meristem identity genes: analysis of
Lolium temulentum genes related to
APETALA1 and LEAFY of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 125, 1788–
1801.
Gocal, G.F., Sheldon, C.C., Gubler, F.,
Moritz, T., Bagnall, D.J., MacMillan,
C.P., Li, S.F., Parish, R.W., Dennis,
E.S., Weigel, D. and King, R.W.
(2001b). GAMYB-like genes, flowering, and gibberellin signalling in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 127, 1682–
1693.
Grefen, C. and Harter, K. (2004) Plant
two-component systems: principles,
functions, complexity and cross talk.
Planta 219, 733–742.
Gross-Hardt, R., Lenhard, M. and Laux, T.
(2002) WUSCHEL signalling functions
in interregional communication during
Arabidopsis ovule development. Genes
& Development 16, 1129–1138.
Gubler, F., Kalla, R., Roberts, J.K. and
Jacobsen, J.V. (1995) Gibberellinregulated expression of a myb gene in
barley aleurone cells: evidence for Myb
transactivation of a high-pI alphaamylase gene promoter. Plant Cell 7,
1879–1891.
Gubler, F., Chandler, P.M., White, R.G.,
Llewellyn, D.J. and Jacobsen, J.V.
(2002) Gibberellin signalling in barley
aleurone cells. Control of SLN1 and
GAMYB expression. Plant Physiology
129, 191–200.
Gyula, P., Schafer, E. and Nagy, F. (2003)
Light perception and signalling in
higher plants. Current Opinion in
Plant Biology 6, 446–452.

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

75

Hasty, J., McMillen, D. and Collins, J.J.
(2002) Engineered gene circuits. Nature 420, 224–230.
Hay, A., Craft, J. and Tsiantis, M. (2004)
Plant hormones and homeoboxes:
bridging the gap? Bioessays 26,
395–404.
Hayama, R. and Coupland, G. (2003)
Shedding light on the circadian clock
and the photoperiodic control of
flowering. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 6, 13–19.
He, Y.W. and Loh, C.S. (2002) Induction
of early bolting in Arabidopsis thaliana by triacontanol, cerium and lanthanum is correlated with increased
endogenous concentration of isopentenyl adenosine (iPAdos). Journal of
Experimental Botany 53, 505–512.
He, Y., Michaels, S.D. and Amasino,
R.M. (2003) Regulation of flowering
time by histone acetylation in Arabidopsis. Science 302, 1751–1754.
Henderson, I.R. and Dean, C. (2004)
Control of Arabidopsis flowering: the
chill before the bloom. Development
131, 3829–3838.
Hoffmann-Benning, S., Gage, D.A.,
McIntosh, L., Kende, H. and Zeevaart,
J.A. (2002) Comparison of peptides in
the phloem sap of flowering and nonflowering Perilla and lupine plants
using microbore HPLC followed by
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
Planta 216, 140–147.
Izawa, T., Oikawa, T., Sugiyama, N.,
Tanisaka, T., Yano, M. and Shimamoto, K. (2002) Phytochrome mediates the external light signal to repress
FT orthologs in photoperiodic flowering of rice. Genes & Development 16,
2006–2020.
Jacobsen, S.E. and Olszewski, N.E.
(1993) Mutations at the SPINDLY
locus of Arabidopsis alter gibberellin
signal transduction. Plant Cell 5,
887–896.
Jacqmard, A., Detry, N., Dewitte, W.,
Van Onckelen, H. and Bernier, G.
(2002) In situ localisation of cytokinins

in the shoot apical meristem of Sinapis
alba at floral transition. Planta 214,
970–973.
Johansson, J., Mandin, P., Renzoni, A.,
Chiaruttini, C., Springer, M. and Cossart, P. (2002) An RNA thermosensor
controls expression of virulence genes
in Listeria monocytogenes. Cell 110,
551–561.
Kayes, J.M. and Clark, S.E. (1998) CLAVATA2, a regulator of meristem and
organ development in Arabidopsis.
Development 125, 3843–3851.
Kim, K.W., Shin, J.H., Moon, J., Kim, M.,
Lee, J., Park, M.C. and Lee, I. (2003)
The function of the flowering time gene
AGL20 is conserved in crucifers. Molecules and Cells 16, 136–141.
King, R.W. and Evans, L.T. (2003) Gibberellins and flowering of grasses and
cereals: prizing open the lid of the
‘Florigen’ black box. Annual Review
of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 54, 307–328.
Koornneef, M., Hanhart, C.J. and van der
Veen, J.H. (1991) A genetic and
physiological analysis of late flowering
mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular and General Genetics 229,
57–66.
Koornneef, M., Alonso-Blanco, C.,
Peeters, A.J. and Soppe, W. (1998)
Genetic control of flowering time in
Arabidopsis. Annual Review of
Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 49, 345–370.
Lee, H., Suh, S.S., Park, E., Cho, E.,
Ahn, J.H., Kim, S.G., Lee, J.S.,
Kwon, Y.M. and Lee, I. (2000) The
AGAMOUS-LIKE 20 MADS domain
protein integrates floral inductive pathways in Arabidopsis. Genes & Development 14, 2366–2376.
Lee, S., Cheng, H., King, K.E., Wang,
W., He, Y., Hussain, A., Lo, J., Harberd, N.P. and Peng, J. (2002) Gibberellin regulates Arabidopsis seed
germination via RGL2, a GAI/RGAlike gene whose expression is up-regulated following imbibition. Genes &
Development 16, 646–658.

76

R.G. Anthony
Leujeune, P., Bernier, G. Requier M-C.,
Kinet, J-M. (1994) Cytokinins in
phloem and xylem saps of Sinapis
alba during floral induction. Physiologia Plantarum 90, 522–528.
Levy, Y.Y., Mesnage, S., Mylne, J.S.,
Gendall, A.R. and Dean, C. (2002)
Multiple roles of Arabidopsis VRN1
in vernalization and flowering time
control. Science 297, 243–246.
Lim, M.H., Kim, J., Kim, Y.S., Chung,
K.S., Seo, Y.H., Lee, I., Hong, C.B.,
Kim, H.J. and Park, C.M. (2004) A
new Arabidopsis gene, FLK, encodes
an RNA binding protein with K homology motifs and regulates flowering
time via FLOWERING LOCUS C.
Plant Cell 16, 731–740.
Martinez, C., Pons, E., Prats, G. and
Leon, J. (2004) Salicylic acid regulates
flowering time and links defence responses and reproductive development. Plant Journal 37, 209–217.
Martinez-Zapater, J.M., Coupland, G.,
Dean, C. and Koornneef, M. (1994)
The Transition to Flowering in Arabidopsis. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press , Cold Spring Harbor, New York.
Mayer, K.F., Schoof, H., Haecker, A.,
Lenhard, M., Jurgens, G. and Laux,
T. (1998) Role of WUSCHEL in regulating stem cell fate in the Arabidopsis
shoot meristem. Cell 95, 805–815.
McCourt, P. (1999) Genetic analysis of
hormone signalling. Annual Review
of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 50, 219–243.
McGinnis, K.M., Thomas, S.G., Soule,
J.D., Strader, L.C., Zale, J.M., Sun,
T.P. and Steber, C.M. (2003) The Arabidopsis SLEEPY1 gene encodes a putative F-box subunit of an SCF E3
ubiquitin ligase. Plant Cell 15, 1120–
1130.
Michaels, S.D. and Amasino, R.M. (1999)
FLOWERING LOCUS C encodes a
novel MADS domain protein that acts
as a repressor of flowering. Plant Cell
11, 949–956.
Michaels, S.D. and Amasino, R.M. (2001)
Loss of FLOWERING LOCUS C activ-

ity eliminates the late-flowering phenotype of FRIGIDA and autonomous
pathway mutations but not responsiveness to vernalization. Plant Cell 13,
935–941.
Michaels, S.D., He, Y., Scortecci, K.C.
and Amasino, R.M. (2003a) Attenuation of FLOWERING LOCUS C activity as a mechanism for the evolution of
summer-annual flowering behavior in
Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
100, 10102–10107.
Michaels, S.D., Ditta, G., GustafsonBrown, C., Pelaz, S., Yanofsky, M.
and Amasino, R.M. (2003b) AGL24
acts as a promoter of flowering in Arabidopsis and is positively regulated by
vernalization. Plant Journal 33, 867–
874.
Moon, J., Suh, S.S., Lee, H., Choi, K.R.,
Hong, C.B., Paek, N.C., Kim, S.G.
and Lee, I. (2003) The SOC1 MADSbox gene integrates vernalization and
gibberellin signals for flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 35, 613–
623.
Mouradov, A., Cremer, F. and Coupland,
G. (2002) Control of flowering time:
interacting pathways as a basis for diversity. Plant Cell 14 (Suppl.), S111–
S130.
Nagy, F. and Schafer, E. (2002) Phytochromes control photomorphogenesis
by differentially regulated, interacting
signalling pathways in higher plants.
Annual Review of Plant Biology 53,
329–355.
Nakagawa, M. and Komeda, Y. (2004)
Flowering of Arabidopsis cop1 mutants in darkness. Plant Cell Physiology 45, 398–406.
Neuhaus, G., Bowler, C., Hiratsuka, K.,
Yamagata, H. and Chua, N.H. (1997)
Phytochrome-regulated repression of
gene expression requires calcium and
cGMP. EMBO Journal 16, 2554–
2564.
Ogawara, T., Higashi, K., Kamada, H.
and Ezura, H. (2003) Ethylene advances the transition from vegetative

Signal Transduction Regulating Floral Development

77

growth to flowering in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Journal of Plant Physiology
160, 1335–1340.
Ohnacker, M., Barabino, S.M., Preker,
P.J. and Keller, W. (2000) The
WD-repeat protein pfs2p bridges
two essential factors within the yeast
pre-mRNA 3’-end-processing complex. EMBO Journal 19, 37–47.
Orlando, V. (2003) Polycomb, epigenomes, and control of cell identity. Cell
112, 599–606.
Pastori, G.M. and Foyer, C.H. (2002)
Common components, networks, and
pathways of cross-tolerance to stress.
The central role of ‘redox’ and abscisic
acid-mediated controls. Plant Physiology 129, 460–468.
Pawson, T. (2004) Specificity in signal
transduction: from phosphotyrosineSH2 domain interactions to complex
cellular systems. Cell 116, 191–203.
Perbal, M.C., Haughn, G., Saedler, H.
and Schwarz-Sommer, Z. (1996)
Non-cell-autonomous function of the
Antirrhinum floral homeotic proteins
DEFICIENS and GLOBOSA is exerted
by their polar cell-to-cell trafficking.
Development 122, 3433–3441.
Pineiro, M., Gomez-Mena, C., Schaffer,
R., Martinez-Zapater, J.M. and Coupland, G. (2003) EARLY BOLTING IN
SHORT DAYS is related to chromatin
remodeling factors and regulates
flowering in Arabidopsis by repressing
FT. Plant Cell 15, 1552–1562.
Quesada, V., Macknight, R., Dean, C. and
Simpson, G.G. (2003) Autoregulation
of FCA pre-mRNA processing controls
Arabidopsis flowering time. EMBO
Journal 22, 3142–3152.
Reeves, P.H. and Coupland, G. (2001)
Analysis of flowering time control in
Arabidopsis by comparison of double
and triple mutants. Plant Physiology
126, 1085–1091.
Rojo, E., Sharma, V.K., Kovaleva, V., Raikhel, N.V. and Fletcher, J.C. (2002)
CLV3 is localized to the extracellular
space, where it activates the Arabidop-

sis CLAVATA stem cell signalling pathway. Plant Cell 14, 969–977.
Samach, A., Onouchi, H., Gold, S.E.,
Ditta, G.S., Schwarz-Sommer, Z.,
Yanofsky, M.F. and Coupland, G.
(2000) Distinct roles of CONSTANS
target genes in reproductive development of Arabidopsis. Science 288,
1613–1616.
Schmid, M., Uhlenhaut, N.H., Godard,
F., Demar, M., Bressan, R., Weigel,
D. and Lohmann, J.U. (2003) Dissection of floral induction pathways using
global expression analysis. Development 130, 6001–6012.
Schomburg, F.M., Patton, D.A., Meinke,
D.W. and Amasino, R.M. (2001) FPA,
a gene involved in floral induction in
Arabidopsis, encodes a protein containing RNA-recognition motifs. Plant
Cell 13, 1427–1436.
Sessions, A., Yanofsky, M.F. and Weigel,
D. (2000) Cell–cell signalling and
movement by the floral transcription
factors LEAFY and APETALA1. Science 289, 779–782.
Sheen, J. (2002) Phosphorelay and transcription control in cytokinin signal
transduction. Science 296, 1650–
1652.
Sheldon, C.C., Burn, J.E., Perez, P.P.,
Metzger, J., Edwards, J.A., Peacock,
W.J. and Dennis, E.S. (1999) The
FLF MADS box gene: a repressor of
flowering in Arabidopsis regulated by
vernalization and methylation. Plant
Cell 11, 445–458.
Shiu, S. and Bleecker, A.B. (2001) Plant
receptor-like kinase gene family: diversity, function, and signalling. Science’s
STKE. Available at: www.stke.org/
cgi/content/full/OC_sigtrans;2001/
113/re22, 1–13
Simpson, G.G. and Dean, C. (2002) Arabidopsis, the Rosetta stone of flowering time? Science 296, 285–289.
Simpson, G.G., Dijkwel, P.P., Quesada,
V., Henderson, I. and Dean, C.
(2003) FY is an RNA 3’ end-processing
factor that interacts with FCA to con-

78

R.G. Anthony
trol the Arabidopsis floral transition.
Cell 113, 777–787.
Sudol, M. and Hunter, T. (2000) New
wrinkles for an old domain. Cell 103,
1001–1004.
Sung, S. and Amasino, R.M. (2004a) Vernalization and epigenetics: how plants
remember winter. Current Opinion in
Plant Biology 7, 4–10.
Sung, S. and Amasino, R.M. (2004b).
Vernalization in Arabidopsis thaliana
is mediated by the PHD finger protein
VIN3. Nature 427, 159–164.
Takada, S. and Goto, K. (2003) Terminal
flower2, an Arabidopsis homolog of
heterochromatin protein1, counteracts
the activation of flowering locus T by
constans in the vascular tissues of
leaves to regulate flowering time.
Plant Cell 15, 2856–2865.
Takasaki, T., Hatakeyama, K., Suzuki, G.,
Watanabe, M., Isogai, A. and Hinata,
K. (2000) The S receptor kinase determines self-incompatibility in Brassica
stigma. Nature 403, 913–916.
Trotochaud, A.E., Hao, T., Wu, G., Yang,
Z.B. and Clark, S.E. (1999) The CLAVATA1 receptor-like kinase requires
CLAVATA3 for its assembly into a signalling complex that includes KAPP
and a Rho-related protein. Plant Cell
11, 393–405.
Urao, T., Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K. and
Shinozaki, K. (2001) Plant histidine
kinases: an emerging picture of twocomponent signal transduction in hormone and environmental responses.
Science’s STKE 2001, RE18.
Valverde, F., Mouradov, A., Soppe, W.,
Ravenscroft, D., Samach, A. and
Coupland, G. (2004) Photoreceptor
regulation of CONSTANS protein in
photoperiodic flowering. Science
303, 1003–1006.

Veit, B. (2004) Determination of cell fate
in apical meristems. Current Opinion
in Plant Biology 7, 57–64.
Vincent, C.A., Carpenter, R. and Coen,
E.S. (2003) Interactions between gene
activity and cell layers during floral development. Plant Journal 33, 765–774.
Wagner, D., Sablowski, R.W. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1999) Transcriptional activation of APETALA1 by LEAFY.
Science 285, 582–584.
Wang, H. and Deng, X.W. (2003) Dissecting the phytochrome A-dependent signalling network in higher plants.
Trends in Plant Science 8, 172–178.
Wu, X., Dinneny, J.R., Crawford, K.M.,
Rhee, Y., Citovsky, V., Zambryski,
P.C. and Weigel, D. (2003) Modes of
intercellular transcription factor movement in the Arabidopsis apex. Development 130, 3735–3745.
Yanovsky, M.J. and Kay, S.A. (2003)
Living by the calendar: how plants
know when to flower. Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology 4, 265–275.
Yu, H., Ito, T., Wellmer, F. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004a) Repression of
AGAMOUS-LIKE 24 is a crucial step
in promoting flower development.
Nature Genetics 36, 157–161.
Yu, H., Ito, T., Zhao, Y., Peng, J., Kumar,
P. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004b) Floral
homeotic genes are targets of gibberellin signalling in flower development.
Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 101, 7827–7832.
Zambryski, P. (2004) Cell-to-cell transport
of proteins and fluorescent tracers via
plasmodesmata during plant development. Journal of Cell Biology 164,
165–168.
Zeevaart, J. (1976) Physiology of flower
formation. Annual Review of Plant
Physiology 27, 321–348.

II

Floral Development

This page intentionally left blank

4

Floral Meristem Identity Genes
B. DAVIES
Centre for Plant Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK,
e-mail: b.h.davies@leeds.ac.uk

Introduction
The flexibility of plant development, which enables plants to modify their
development in response to environmental conditions, derives from groups of
pluripotent cells maintained in the meristems. Meristems are organized structures that must both maintain themselves and provide a source of cells that can
differentiate into a variety of tissues and organs, in response to internal and
external cues (Carles and Fletcher, 2003). The exact pattern and type of lateral
structure produced by the meristems at each stage of development dictates the
overall growth habit of the plant. Meristems are defined by the types of
differentiated structures produced on their flanks. The shoot apical meristem
(SAM) is formed during embryogenesis and, following seed germination, is
maintained at the apex of the shoot giving rise to the leaves and branches
that form during the vegetative phase of plant development. A whole host of
signals, including such factors as the age of the plant, daylength, temperature
and light quality and intensity, are combined by a complex signal-integration
network to initiate the flowering process (Simpson and Dean, 2002). One of
the first steps in this process is the conversion of the SAM into an inflorescence
meristem (IM). In some plant species the apical meristem becomes a floral
meristem (FM) without the production of further lateral IMs. In many other
species the IM produces FMs on its flanks whilst retaining its IM identity to
produce an indeterminate inflorescence. The transition from SAM to IM is
often accompanied by a variety of characteristic morphological changes such
as an altered spatial distribution of lateral organs (phylotaxis). The FM, unlike
the SAM and IM, is a determinate structure and will produce the characteristic
floral organ primordia, which will form sepals, petals and stamens on its flanks
before differentiating to produce the carpels of the flower.
For consistency, the Arabidopsis gene names and models have been
predominantly used in this chapter, but the reader is encouraged to consider
ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

81

82

B. Davies

Fig. 4.1. The transition to flowering in Arabidopsis. A shoot apical meristem (A) forms leaf
primordia on its flanks. The inflorescence meristem (B) forms floral meristems (C) on its flanks,
which eventually develop into flowers.

the differences that exist between species, in terms of both gene complement
and mechanisms. Arabidopsis is an example of a plant that maintains an
IM and produces many lateral flowers from FMs produced on the flanks of
the IM (Fig. 4.1), a type of growth habit known as monopodial. Therefore, the
stages leading up to the formation of an Arabidopsis flower can be crudely
summarized as the sequential conversion of a SAM (an indeterminate structure
producing leaves) to an IM (an indeterminate structure producing cauline leaves
and FMs) followed by the establishment and maintenance of FMs (determinate
structures producing floral organs). The purpose of this chapter is to examine
what is known about the processes involved in this conversion. Obviously, there
is a potential for considerable overlap between this chapter and others in this
volume, especially those concerning external and internal regulation of flowering and the molecular biology of floral organogenesis. This is particularly the
case because some of the genes that play an early role in FM identity may also
have a later role in floral organ development. In order to minimize these
potential overlaps, detailed views into floral induction and the establishment
of floral organ identity have been restricted and any additional functions of the
key genes involved have largely been ignored.

Genes Promoting Floral Meristem Identity: LEAFY is the Driving Force
In order to study the genes that act to specify FM identity, it is first necessary
to identify mutants in which the normal steps in the establishment of meristem identity are affected. Such mutants have long been known in several

Floral Meristem Identity Genes

83

plant species, but it was the floricaula ( flo) mutant of Antirrhinum majus
that was the first to reveal its molecular secrets (Coen et al., 1990). In
normal Antirrhinum development the indeterminate IM gives rise to a spiral
of lateral, determinate FMs, each flanked by a leaf-like bract. It is this developmental pattern that gives rise to the characteristic flower spike observed in
this species. Inflorescence development in the flo mutant is clearly blocked
at the point of initiation of lateral FMs, because further IMs form where FMs
are expected. These secondary IMs form mutant inflorescence shoots that in
turn produce tertiary inflorescences in place of flowers. The result of this
developmental defect is a proliferation of inflorescence shoots bearing no
flowers – FMs are never established. The FLORICAULA (FLO) gene was
cloned by transposon tagging and found to encode a novel protein of unknown
function.
A mutant, leafy (lfy), had already been described in Arabidopsis that
showed some similarity to the flo mutant of Antirrhinum (Haughn and
Somerville, 1988). Subsequent isolation of the gene affected in this mutant
showed that it encoded a protein that was closely related to FLO and demonstrated that the mechanism of establishment of FM identity is similar in diverse
plant species (Weigel et al., 1992). LFY/FLO has now been shown to be
a transcription factor with a dual role in flower development (Parcy et al.,
1998). On the one hand, LFY promotes FM identity but, on the other, it also
has a later role in the activation of the homeotic floral organ identity genes.
Further confirmation of the important role of LFY in promoting flowering
was obtained by constitutive-expression experiments. Constitutive expression
of LFY in Arabidopsis, or in a variety of other plant species, resulted in
precocious flowering often accompanied by conversion of IMs to FMs (Weigel
and Nilsson, 1995; Nilsson and Weigel, 1997; He et al., 2000; Pena et al.,
2001).
The feature common to both mutants, lfy in Arabidopsis and flo in
Antirrhinum, is the inappropriate adoption of IM identity by lateral meristems,
which should be floral. However, the two mutants differ markedly in terms of
severity. The flo mutant shows a complete conversion of FMs into IMs whereas
the conversion in lfy is only partial. Initially, IMs form in lfy mutants at positions
where FMs would form in wild-type plants. However, meristems arising later
develop as FMs, although these give rise to abnormal flowers with inflorescence-like characteristics (Weigel et al., 1992) (Fig. 4.2). One explanation for
this difference is that a greater degree of redundancy exists in the Arabidopsis
genome for the specification of FM identity. Redundancy is often caused by the
existence of related genes with overlapping function. We shall see later that
although the specification of FM identity in Arabidopsis is complicated by
redundancy, in this case the redundancy is not caused by multiple LFY-like
genes. LFY is a single copy gene in Arabidopsis. Unlike some of the other
meristem identity genes, LFY-like genes, with an apparently analogous function in promoting reproductive shoots, have been identified outside of the
angiosperm lineage (Mellerowicz et al., 1998; Mouradov et al., 1998). This
suggests that LFY had an ancient role in reproduction and confirms its position
as a central regulator of flowering.

84

B. Davies

Wild-type

ap1

cal

ful

ap1 cal

ap1 ful

ful cal

ap1 calful

IM
Flower
ap1-like flower
lfy

lfy ap1

lfy cal

lfy ful

lfy ap1 cal lfy ap1 cal
ful

lfy-like flower
Proliferating IM

Fig. 4.2. Schematic of inflorescence phenotypes. The inflorescence phenotypes seen in single
mutants and mutant combinations of genes affecting floral meristem (FM) identity are shown. In
the interests of clarity many important details have been omitted. The two lateral positions shown
give an indication of the type of structure (wild-type flower, mutant flower, proliferating
meristem, inflorescence) that might be anticipated at early and late stages of inflorescence
development. The designation of a flower as wild-type ignores defects apparently unrelated to FM
identity, such as altered carpel valves in ful mutants and mutant combinations. Flowers shown as
ap1-like have bract-like or leaf-like sepals and often lack second whorl organs, instead forming
further mutant FMs in the axils of the first whorl organs. Flowers shown as lfy-like are often
formed in the axils of bracts and have more leaf-like floral organs with a tendency towards spiral
phylotaxis. Mutant combinations lfy ap1, lfy ap1 cal, lfy ap1 cal ful and ap1 cal ful are depicted
without flowers, although they all eventually flower under some conditions (see text). Other
effects, such as the effect of ful on flowering time, are not shown.

As a transcription factor, LFY would be expected to influence the expression of downstream target genes. A few of these target genes were identified by
genetic and transgenic experiments (Parcy et al., 1998; Busch et al., 1999;
Wagner et al., 1999; Lamb et al., 2002; Schmid et al., 2003). Some of these
genes, such as APETALA3 (AP3), AGAMOUS (AG) and the SEPALLATA
genes (SEP1, SEP2 and SEP3) belong to a subset of LFY targets that relate to
LFY’s later role in organ identity. Until recently, only a single LFY target gene,
APETALA1 (AP1), was known to be involved in the establishment of FM
identity. The use of sophisticated molecular techniques for the controlled
induction of gene expression, combined with transcriptomics, has both verified
existing targets and identified new ones (Wagner et al., 1999, 2004; William
et al., 2004). At present few of these targets can be integrated into our
understanding of the determination of meristem identity, but the relative over
abundance of transcription factors amongst the list of candidates supports
the view that LFY is a master regulatory gene. LFY’s fundamental role in the
promotion of flowering is also apparent from its ability to contribute to the
production of flowers in inappropriate places. Expression of LFY together with
WUSCHEL (WUS), a homeodomain-encoding gene that specifies shoot identity, in Arabidopsis roots is sufficient to produce floral organs and tissues at
root tips (Gallois et al., 2004).

Floral Meristem Identity Genes

85

Genes Promoting Floral Meristem Identity: APETALA-1 and
CAULIFLOWER the Supporting Cast
As suggested above, the fact that later-arising meristems on lfy inflorescences
adopt a more floral character suggests that other genes, which are activated
later than LFY, can partially compensate for the lack of LFY activity and confer
FM identity. AP1 was a prime candidate for such a gene, since the flowers
formed in ap1 mutants also show inflorescence characteristics (Irish and Sussex, 1990) (Fig. 4.2). LFY is expressed in the periphery of the SAM at about
the time of the switch to IM. A couple of days later both LFY and AP1
expression is boosted in the cells on the flanks of the IM that are destined to
become FMs (Ratcliffe et al., 1999). Mutations in AP1 enhance the lfy phenotype and make it look more like that of flo, but even these plants do not show
the total absence of FMs seen in flo mutants (Huala and Sussex, 1992; Weigel
et al., 1992; Bowman et al., 1993). The flowers which form in lfy ap1 double
mutants contain mainly leaf-like or carpeloid organs, with a tendency towards
spiral phylotaxis and often have secondary mutant flowers in the axils of the
floral organs. In addition to AP1 and LFY, there are other factors that contribute to the establishment of FM identity in Arabidopsis. AP1 has been shown to
be a direct target of LFY (Wagner et al., 1999). Since lfy mutants are more
severe than ap1 mutants it is clear, however, that AP1 cannot be the only
target of LFY.
The AP1 gene encodes a MADS-box transcription factor (SchwarzSommer et al., 1990; Mandel et al., 1992), one of several members of this
large plant family of transcription factors that are important for flowering
(Parenicova et al., 2003). The phenotype of ap1 single mutants is itself
enhanced in double mutants with cauliflower (cal), a mutant affecting another
AP1-like MADS-box gene (Kempin et al., 1995). Inflorescences formed in ap1
cal double mutants produce a heading phenotype, reminiscent of cauliflower
heads, composed of a proliferation of multiple higher order IMs (Bowman
et al., 1993). Despite the fact that cal enhances ap1, the lfy ap1 cal triple
mutant looks like the lfy ap1 double mutant and proliferation of lateral IMs is
not observed (Fig. 4.2). Therefore cal does not appear to enhance lfy mutants
(Bowman et al., 1993) (Fig. 4.2).
Once again, like LFY, further evidence that AP1 and CAL are involved in
the establishment of FM identity comes from overexpression experiments.
Transgenic plants that constitutively express either AP1 or CAL flower early
and show transformations of IMs to FMs, although the effect is stronger in
35S::AP1 than 35S::CAL (Mandel and Yanofsky, 1995b, Liljegren et al.,
1999). Interestingly, the effects of overexpression of AP1 are not suppressed
by lfy mutants, whereas the effects of overexpression of LFY are partially
suppressed by mutations in AP1 (Mandel and Yanofsky, 1995b, Weigel and
Nilsson, 1995).
The early expression patterns of AP1 and CAL are similar, both becoming
first detectable in the earliest visible floral primordia (Mandel et al., 1992;
Kempin et al., 1995). Single cal mutants show no detectable differences

86

B. Davies

from wild-type plants (Fig. 4.2), suggesting that AP1 acts redundantly with
CAL and can compensate for the loss of CAL activity. CAL can partially
compensate for the loss of AP1 in the FM, with the absence of both AP1
and CAL causing a proliferation of IM tissue in place of flowers. Since this is not
observed in lfy ap1 cal triple mutants, LFY is required for the meristemproliferation phenotype. CAL cannot replace later AP1 activity in the flower,
possibly because of differences in expression patterns in developing floral
organs (Yanofsky, 1995). Expression of both AP1 and CAL is reduced in lfy
mutants and it has now been shown that both AP1 and CAL are likely to be
direct targets of LFY ( Wagner et al., 2004; William et al., 2004). Furthermore, the enhancement in expression of LFY, AP1 and CAL, that is normally
observed as flower production begins, does not happen in ap1 cal mutants
(Ferrándiz et al., 2000). Thus, LFY directly activates AP1 and CAL, which in
turn boost expression of LFY. Even so, the fact that flowering is not completely
abolished in lfy ap1 or lfy ap1 cal mutants suggests even more redundant
control.
AP1-like genes, unlike LFY, appear to be confined to the angiosperms
(Litt and Irish, 2003). Some functional analysis has been carried out in other
angiosperm models and, whilst the role of AP1-like genes in FM identity is
conserved, some differences remain. In Antirrhinum the closest MADS-box
gene to AP1 is SQUAMOSA (SQUA). Mutants in SQUA are much more
severe than ap1 mutants and very rarely flower. As in the case of LFY/FLO,
this suggests a greater degree of redundancy in the control of FM identity in
Arabidopsis. However, a more significant difference exists in the later role of
AP1/SQUA in flower development (Schwarz-Sommer et al., 2003). Floral
organs are specified by the combinatorial activity of a series of genes that
have become familiar as the A, B and C class organ identity genes (Coen and
Meyerowitz, 1991; Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies, 2000). The A-function
genes, usually identified as APETALA2 (AP2) and AP1, are supposed to
specify the identity of the sepals and, together with the B-function genes, the
petals. It has been proposed, however, that the main role of AP1 in this
process is the repression of AG and activation of UNUSUAL FLORAL ORGANS (UFO), a gene involved in floral patterning (Durfee et al., 2003).
Whatever the mechanism, Arabidopsis is still the only species where mutations
in AP1-like genes have been shown to play a direct role in organ identity. The
rare flowers produced on squa mutant inflorescences are often normal and
show no evidence of homeotic conversion of the perianth organs (Huijser et al.,
1992). The control of FM identity shows a higher degree of redundancy in
Arabidopsis and ap1 mutants display only a partial conversion of floral to IM. It
is therefore possible that apparent homeotic conversions of the perianth,
observed in ap1 mutants, are in fact simply a result of a failure to properly
establish FM identity (Motte et al., 1998; Davies et al., 1999; Litt and Irish,
2003).
AP1 and CAL can be seen to form a partially redundant autoregulatory
gene network with LFY (Fig. 4.3). Much of the downstream activity of LFY is
accounted for by the action of AP1 and CAL. AP1 and CAL also, in part,
account for the boost in LFY expression that is observed at the transition to

Floral Meristem Identity Genes

A

87

B

C

TFL1
FUL AGL24

TFL1

FM

FUL AGL24

LFY
AP1
CAL

LFY
TFL1
FUL

AGL24
SAM

TFL1, FUL and AGL24
become independently
activated in the SAM.
AGL24 promotes IM
identity. AGL24
activates LFY.

IM

LFY is excluded from
IM by TFL1. T FL1 is
excluded from FM
precursor by LFY. LFY
activates AP1 and CAL.

IM
AP1/CAL boosts LFY,
which boosts AP1/CAL.
AP1 and CAL exclude
FUL and AGL24 from
FM. AP1, CAL and LFY
promote FM identity.

Fig. 4.3. A model for the establishment and maintenance of the floral meristem (FM). Initially the
genes TFL1, FUL and AGL24 become independently activated in the shoot apical meristem (SAM)
as a result of the action of the floral pathway–integrator genes (Simpson and Dean, 2002), shown
by open arrows (A). The activity of these genes is described in the text. LFY is activated by AGL24,
but is excluded from the inflorescence meristem (IM) by the action of TFL1, which is already
established there (B). LFY expression therefore becomes restricted to the founder cells that will
become the FM. LFY, in turn, ensures that TFL1 is not expressed in the establishing FM. LFY
activates AP1 and CAL in the developing FM (C). AP1 and CAL boost LFY expression and exclude
expression of FUL and AGL24 from the FM. AP1, CAL, LFY and other unidentified genes promote
further floral development and the activation of the organ identity genes. AGL24 promotes IM
identity. Thick lines indicate the activation and repression signals that are already known to be
direct.

flowering. LFY activity is not abolished in ap1 cal double mutants and this
indicates that other genes can enhance LFY expression in their absence.

Genes Promoting Floral Meristem Identity: FRUITFULL an
Unexpected Influence
A third AP1-like gene, originally called AGL8, exists in the Arabidopsis
genome (Mandel and Yanofsky, 1995a). Initial functional analysis of this gene
revealed a role in fruit development and the gene was renamed FRUITFULL
(FUL) (Gu et al., 1998). Mutations in the FUL gene affect the development of
the valve, replum and style. It was noted, however, that in addition to its later
expression, FUL is expressed early in the SAM and is upregulated on induction

88

B. Davies

of flowering. Consistent with this expression pattern, ful mutants flower slightly
later than wild type and have abnormal cauline leaves (Gu et al., 1998;
Ferrándiz et al., 2000). Although FUL is expressed before both AP1 and
CAL and plays a role in the induction of flowering, it took extensive and careful
genetic analysis to reveal its true position in the network of genes that promote
FM identity (Ferrándiz et al., 2000).
There is no change in the expression of LFY in ful mutants, indicating that
the delayed flowering in these mutants is not a consequence of reduced LFY.
On the face of it this would indicate that FUL is not involved in the activation of
LFY. However, LFY expression, which is already reduced in ap1 cal mutants,
is even further reduced in ap1 cal ful triple mutants. Therefore FUL is capable
of activating LFY expression in the absence of AP1 and CAL. This probably
occurs because AP1 and CAL repress FUL in the floral primordia of wild-type
plants and FUL becomes ectopically expressed there in ap1 or ap1 cal mutants. It is therefore not clear whether the ability of FUL to activate LFY plays a
significant role in wild-type plants where AP1 and CAL would exclude FUL
from the FM. The ap1 cal ful triple mutants produce a proliferation of shoots
bearing cauline leaves and axillary cauliflower-like meristems and never flower
under normal growth conditions (Fig. 4.2), although flowers can still form
under extreme conditions. The ful mutation does not enhance ap1 and ful
cal double mutants look like ful single mutants (Fig. 4.2). Double mutants
between lfy and ful flower later than either single mutant, showing that both
genes act independently on flowering time.
To test whether the reduction in LFY expression was responsible for the
lack of flowering observed in ap1 cal ful triple mutants, the triple mutant was
crossed to plants constitutively expressing LFY (Ferrándiz et al., 2000). These
plants produced ap1 cal-like flowers showing that LFY overexpression can
compensate for the loss of AP1 CAL and FUL. However, although enforced
LFY expression causes the non-flowering ap1 cal ful triple mutant to flower,
flowering time varies in the different mutant combinations. Hence 35S::LFY
flowers earlier than 35S::LFY ap1, which flowers earlier than 35S::LFY ap1
cal that flowers earlier than 35S::LFY ap1 cal ful. This indicates that the AP1,
CAL and FUL MADS-box genes are required for the early flowering effect seen
in 35S::LFY.
LFY expression, though reduced, still plays a role in ap1 cal ful triple
mutants (Fig. 4.2). This was demonstrated by making the lfy ap1 cal ful
quadruple mutant (Ferrándiz et al., 2000). This mutant looks similar to lfy
ap1 double mutants, showing that neither FUL nor CAL contributes to FM
identity in the absence of LFY and AP1. In contrast to ap1 cal ful triple
mutants, the lfy ap1 cal ful quadruple mutant does not have leafy cauliflowers,
confirming that LFY is necessary for the proliferation of meristems observed in
the triple mutant. Unexpectedly, the lfy ap1 cal ful quadruple mutant, although seriously impaired in its ability to flower, is more likely to flower
eventually than the ap1 cal ful triple mutant. This is probably because the
triple mutant, even though it expresses LFY at a low level, becomes blocked at
the stage of proliferation of multiple IMs. The quadruple mutant does not
express LFY and so does not produce a proliferation of IMs and eventually

Floral Meristem Identity Genes

89

produces some inflorescence-like flowers. The ability of lfy ap1 cal ful quadruple mutants to flower suggests that we still have not identified all of the FMpromoting factors. In fact, there are two further MADS-box genes in the AP1/
CAL/FUL clade (AGL79 and AGL12) that might be good candidates for this
role (Parenicova et al., 2003).

Other Genes Affecting Floral Meristem Identity
Many other genes are known to affect FM identity. It is currently difficult to fit
these into the model shown in Fig. 4.3 and this might reflect their indirect
relationship or a lack of knowledge. Examples of such genes are AP2 and
UFO (Jofuku et al., 1994; Ingram et al., 1995; Wilkinson and Haughn,
1995). Mutations in ap2 and ufo have been reported to enhance the FM
to IM transformations observed in ap1 or lfy mutants (Bowman et al.,
1993; Pidkowich et al., 1999). UFO is involved in the regulation of B-function
organ identity genes and AP2 is part of the mechanism that regulates the
spatial expression pattern of the C-function organ identity gene (Jofuku et al.,
1994; Ingram et al., 1995; Wilkinson and Haughn, 1995). This makes it
problematic to establish whether potential roles for UFO and AP2 in meristem
identity are distinct from their later activities in the control of floral organ
identity.
Earlier in development, genes that promote or repress flowering also
obviously influence expression of the meristem identity genes. LFY has been
identified as one of the flowering-pathway integrators, a gene at which multiple
flowering input signals converge (Simpson and Dean, 2002). Recently, a pair
of paralogous homeodomain-encoding genes, PENNYWISE (PNY) and
POUND-FOOLISH (PNF ) have been shown to act redundantly between the
flowering-time genes and the FM identity genes like LFY (Smith et al., 2004).
However, the exact connections between flowering-time genes and the activation of the FM identity genes is still not fully understood.
Two of the best-known mutants that affect flowering in a very dramatic way
are embryonic flower 1 (emf1) and embryonic flower 2 (emf2). Mutations in
EMF1 and EMF2, which encode a predicted transcriptional regulator and a
Polycomb-group (PcG) protein (Aubert et al., 2001; Yoshida et al., 2001),
result in flowering immediately after germination. PcG-group proteins repress
gene expression in Drosophila by a chromatin-remodelling mechanism. Since
mutations in EMF1 and EMF2 cause precocious flowering, it is likely that
EMF1 and EMF2 act to repress flowering in wild-type plants. Recent transcriptomic analysis of emf1 and emf2 mutants suggests that the targets of EMFmediated repression are likely to be the organ identity genes, acting later than
the FM identity genes (Moon et al., 2003). The idea that floral organs can form
directly as a result of expression of the floral organ identity genes, without
going through the transition of IM and FM stages, is supported by ectopic
expression experiments (Honma and Goto, 2001; Pelaz et al., 2001b). EMF1
and EMF2, therefore, appear to be genes involved in the epigenetic repression
of the floral organ identity genes throughout plant development.

90

B. Davies

Differentiating the IM from the FM: TERMINAL FLOWER 1
an Enigmatic Regulator of Phase Change
So far, we have considered only the establishment of FMs on the flanks of IMs.
Independent, early expression of LFY in incipient FMs results in the establishment of FM identity by inducing expression of the genes introduced above.
What prevents the IM from also adopting FM identity? Again the first clue came
from analysis of mutants of both Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis. Both of these
plants normally have an indeterminate inflorescence in which the IM maintains
itself whilst producing FMs on its flanks. Mutants exist in both species, in which
the IM becomes converted into an FM and inflorescence development terminates in a flower. The centroradialis (cen) mutant of Antirrhinum was the first
to be cloned (Bradley et al., 1996) and subsequently, the Arabidopsis terminal
flower 1 (tfl1) mutant was found to be caused by a lesion in a related gene
(Bradley et al., 1997). Unlike all the foregoing genes, CEN/TFL1 does not
encode a transcription factor but shows similarity to mammalian RAF-like
kinase inhibitor (RKIP) proteins. In mammals RKIP is involved in the regulation
of a kinase cascade that transmits a signal from growth factor receptors to
effect changes in growth and differentiation (Corbit et al., 2003). RKIP homologues are found in plants, animals, fungi and bacteria, but little is known about
their mode of action (Serre et al., 2001). The connection between the LFY and
MADS-box transcription factors described above and such a signalling system is
not understood but, however, it works; the interaction between these FM and
IM genes has a profound effect on inflorescence architecture.
Weak TFL1 expression is first detectable in the centre of the SAM during
the vegetative phase when LFY expression is also weakly detectable in the
periphery (Ratcliffe et al., 1999) (Fig. 4.3). As the SAM becomes an IM, TFL1
expression is enhanced in the centre of the IM and, a few days later, LFY and
AP1 expression increases in the incipient FMs. Secondary shoot meristems
also show strong central expression of TFL1 and weak peripheral LFY expression. Thus, from very early stages of inflorescence development the IM is
distinguished from the FM by the expression of TFL1 in the IM and LFY/
AP1/CAL in the FMs. This separation of expression of TFL1 and LFY/AP1/
CAL is maintained throughout the life of the plant. In plants constitutively
expressing LFY, TFL1 expression is not detected, suggesting that LFY acts
to restrict expression of TFL1 in wild-type plants (Ratcliffe et al., 1999).
35S::LFY plants flower early and show conversion of IMs to FMs. These effects
are partly reversed in 35S::LFY 35S::TFL1 double transgenic plants, showing
that TFL1 can actively prevent the FM-promoting activity of LFY in addition to
its role in simply repressing LFY in the IM. If LFY expression is responsible for
excluding TFL1 from the developing FMs, TFL1 should become ectopically
expressed there in lfy mutants. In fact, this is only the case at lower nodes that
would develop as secondary shoots in lfy plants. Ectopic expression of TFL1 is
also not observed in ap1 mutants, but in ap1 cal double mutants ectopic TFL1
expression is found at very early stages in the development of the lateral
meristems. TFL1 is thus excluded from developing FMs in wild-type plants by

Floral Meristem Identity Genes

91

the combined action of LFY and AP1/CAL (Fig. 4.3). Terminal flowers
produced in the tfl1 mutant are the result of the loss of repression of LFY
and AP1 in the IM, which results in the ectopic expression of these FM identity
genes in the IM.
It is not currently known how LFY and AP1/CAL act to restrict expression
of TFL1. Experiments in Antirrhinum, using periclinal chimeras expressing
FLO in different cell layers, have shown that FLO can act non-cell-autonomously (Carpenter and Coen, 1995; Hantke et al., 1995). Assuming that the
same is true for LFY, it is possible to speculate that TFL1 expression is
restricted by an unknown signalling mechanism involving cell–cell movement
of either the LFY protein itself or some other signalling molecule. Cell–cell
movement has already been shown for other plant transcription factors (Lucas
et al., 1995; Perbal et al., 1996; Jackson and Hake, 1997; Wu et al., 2003).
Perhaps, the answer to this mystery lies amongst the potential LFY target
genes that have already been identified (Wagner et al., 2004; William et al.,
2004).
TFL1 can be seen to have two roles. It acts as part of a system of mutual
repression to exclude LFY and AP1/CAL from the IM and is itself restricted to
the IM by the action of LFY and AP1/CAL in the FMs (Fig. 4.3). TFL1 is also
capable of countering the flower-promoting activity of LFY independently of its
control of LFY expression. In fact, TFL1 acts to slow down phase changes
from early stages of plant development (Ratcliffe et al., 1998; Michaels et al.,
2003). Analysis of the duration of the vegetative, inflorescence and floral
phases of development in wild-type, tfl1 mutant and 35S::TFL1 overexpressing plants showed that all phases were shorter than wild-type in the mutant
and longer than wild-type in the 35S::TFL1 plants. Manipulating TFL1 expression can have huge consequences for the overall pattern of plant development. Loss of TFL1 in Arabidopsis results in early flowering plants that
produce few leaves, lateral shoots and flowers, whilst overexpression of TFL1
delays flowering and produces large bushy plants with numerous flowers.
The formation of cauliflower-like heads in ap1 cal and ap1 cal ful mutants
and their absence from lfy ap1 cal ful quadruple mutants can also be related to
TFL1 (Ratcliffe et al., 1999; Ferrándiz et al., 2000). In both ap1 cal and ap1
cal ful mutants, TFL1 becomes ectopically expressed and overlaps with the
reduced expression of LFY in what would have been the FMs. In fact, the
further loss of either LFY (in lfy ap1 cal ful mutants) or TFL1 (in tfl1 ap1 cal
ful mutants) prevents cauliflower formation, supporting the view that coexpression of LFY and TFL1 causes this phenotype. Evidence that the ratio of
LFY to TFL1 is the deciding factor for the developmental pathway that follows
is provided by ap1 cal ful mutants that are heterozygous for tfl1 (Ferrándiz
et al., 2000). In contrast to the ap1 cal ful mutants, these plants flower and set
seeds under normal conditions. This supports the view that flowering can be
promoted even when LFY expression is reduced, by reducing the levels
of TFL1.
TFL1-like genes have also been studied in plants with different shoot patterns to that of Arabidopsis. Unlike the monopodial habit of Arabidopsis and
Antirrhinum, tomato shows a sympodial growth habit in which reproductive

92

B. Davies

and vegetative stages alternate. The initial vegetative shoot terminates in
an inflorescence and a new vegetative shoot arises in the axil of a leaf below
the inflorescence. Subsequently, the new vegetative shoot terminates in another
inflorescence and a further new vegetative shoot arises from an axil of a lower
leaf on that shoot. The developmental pattern reiterates, in effect producing a
series of linked alternating vegetative and reproductive shoots. The tomato selfpruning (sp) mutation, caused by a defect in a CEN/TFL1-like gene, results in a
shortening of the intervening vegetative phases resulting in termination of
development by the production of two consecutive inflorescences (Pnueli et al.,
1998). Two pea mutants have also been shown to result from the loss of TFL1like gene expression (Foucher et al., 2003). In this case one gene, DETERMINATE (DET) was shown to be involved in the transition from IM to FM, whilst the
other, LATE FLOWERING (LF) slowed down the transition from vegetative to
IM. TFL1-like genes exist as small gene families in different plant species
(Carmel-Goren et al., 2003) and their demonstrated effects on growth habit in
mutant and transgenic experiments suggests that variation in TFL1-like gene
activity could be a major influence in natural variation between species.

Promoting IM Identity: AGL24 the First IM Identity Gene?
AP1, CAL and FUL are all MADS-box transcription factors that act to promote
FM identity. AGL24 is another member of this gene family, but its role in
flowering is slightly more complicated. Mutants in AGL24, or AGL24 RNA
interference (RNAi) lines, flower late and overexpression of AGL24 results in
early flowering, suggesting that AGL24 promotes flowering (Yu et al., 2002;
Michaels et al., 2003). Using an LFY reporter line, in which the b-glucuronidase (GUS)-expression marker gene is driven by the LFY promoter, it was
shown that LFY upregulation is delayed in lines with reduced AGL24 expression. It is therefore possible that the late-flowering phenotype observed in
agl24 plants results from a failure to boost LFY expression at the floral
transition. This is supported by the finding that overexpression of LFY can
rescue the late-flowering phenotype of lines deficient in AGL24 (Yu et al.,
2002). Despite this delay, LFY manages to attain wild-type levels of expression
in AGL24 RNAi lines later in flower development, indicating that other factors
are able to compensate for a loss of AGL24 (Yu et al., 2002).
However, constitutive expression of AGL24 has another effect on flower
development. Flowers formed on 35S::AGL24 plants showed a partial reversion to inflorescence fate, similar to the effect seen in ap1 mutants (Yu et al.,
2004). Floral reversion can be viewed as a reversal of the normal developmental pathway such that the FM identity is lost after the production of the
outermost organs and vegetative organs are initiated. Floral reversion is observed particularly clearly in some species, such as Impatiens, but is only
observed in Arabidopsis in defined mutant backgrounds (Pouteau et al.,
1997, 1998; Parcy et al., 2002). Floral reversion indicates that the acquisition
of FM identity is reversible and the FM state must be maintained by the activity
of genes. The partial conversion of FMs to IMs caused by overexpression of

Floral Meristem Identity Genes

93

AGL24 indicated that AGL24 might be promoting IM identity. In wild-type
plants during vegetative development, AGL24 is expressed throughout the
SAM and leaf primordia (Yu et al., 2004). After the floral transition, AGL24
expression can still be observed in the IM and cauline leaves, but becomes
excluded from the central layers of the emerging FMs (Yu et al., 2004). In both
lfy and ap1 mutants this exclusion fails to occur, suggesting that LFY and AP1
repress AGL24 expression in part of the FMs (Yu et al., 2004). Using an
inducible expression system, Yu et al. (2004) were able to demonstrate that
although both AP1 and LFY are capable of repressing ALG24, only in the case
of AP1 is this repression likely to be direct. It is therefore possible that the
indirect repression of AGL24 by LFY takes place by the LFY-induced activation of AP1, which is a direct repressor of AGL24.
The AGL24 protein has been shown to associate with a meristematic
receptor-like kinase, MRLK, which is predominantly expressed in SAM and
root apical meristems (Fujita et al., 2003). Since AGL24 is not expressed in
root apical meristems, this interaction is only likely to have a biological function
in the SAM. MRLK can phosphorylate the AGL24 protein and AGL24 is only
localized to the nucleus in meristematic tissue, raising the possibility that
phosphorylation might be used to regulate its cellular localization. Other plant
MADS-box transcription factors have also been suggested to be subject to
regulation by control of their subcellular localization (McGonigle et al., 1996;
Perry et al., 1996; Zachgo et al., 1997; Immink et al., 2002).
The results above are consistent with a model of FM establishment and
maintenance in which AGL24 is involved early in flowering in the SAM to IM
switch, is subsequently instrumental in activating LFY expression (which in turn
activates AP1) and later becomes repressed in the developing FMs by the
activity of AP1 (Fig. 4.3). As yet it is unclear exactly how AGL24 promotes
IM identity, or what significance its cellular localization and modification might
play in this process.

Conclusions
It is apparent that enormous progress has been made in understanding the way
in which the FM is established and maintained. At least in Arabidopsis, we
have a very robust framework on which to base future studies (Fig. 4.3). This
model is already sufficient to begin to use genes in this pathway to manipulate
flowering and inflorescence architecture. Despite this, more research is required. Some of the genetic interactions are direct, but many are not and we
currently have no idea how these are mediated. The exact mechanism by which
TFL1 regulates phase change and acts in the mutual exclusion of LFY and AP1
is still a mystery. Even the interactions between the many MADS-box genes
that act sequentially throughout the flowering pathway are still far from fully
understood. MADS-box genes such as FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS (SOC1), FLOWERING
LOCUS M (FLM) and SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP) are involved
in the initiation of flowering (Michaels and Amasino, 1999; Sheldon et al.,

94

B. Davies

1999; Borner et al., 2000; Hartmann et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2000; Samach
et al., 2000; Ratcliffe et al., 2001; Scortecci et al., 2001). Similarly, most of
the later acting ‘ABC’ floral organ identity genes, PISTILLATA (PI), AP3, AG,
SEP1, SEP2 and SEP3 are also members of the same gene family (Yanofsky
et al., 1990; Jack et al., 1992; Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994; Pelaz et al.,
2000). MADS-box factors are known to form dimers, heterodimers and higher
order complexes with each other (Davies et al., 1996; Fan et al., 1997; EgeaCortines et al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Immink et al., 2002). Many of
these flowering time and organ-identity factors will be coexpressed with the
meristem identity MADS-box genes at some stages during the transition from
SAM to developing flower. Indeed, specific interactions have already been
shown to take place between both meristem-identity factors, AP1 and CAL,
and factors involved in the early initiation of flowering (SOC1, SVP and
AGL24) and the later determination of floral organ identity (SEP3) (Pelaz
et al., 2001a). It is therefore likely that specificity in spatial and temporal
expression, protein–protein interaction, protein–DNA interaction and interaction with cofactors will play an important role in this developmental pathway.
Given the very large number of potential interactions, sorting this out represents a huge challenge for the future. It also remains to be seen to what extent
the Arabidopsis model holds true for other species and thorough evolutionary
developmental analyses of other model species are eagerly awaited.

Acknowledgements
Trying to review FM identity without trampling too much on the related areas
of floral induction and flower development inevitably means that these important topics will receive little attention. I apologize for not discussing or citing
important work in these areas and for having to omit some primary references
in order to save space. Grateful thanks go to Zsuzsanna Schwarz-Sommer,
Martin Kieffer, Barry Causier and Cristina Ferrándiz for their critical reading
and helpful comments on this chapter.

References
Aubert, D., Chen, L., Moon, Y.H.,
Martin, D., Castle, L.A., Yang, C.H.
and Sung, Z.R. (2001) EMF1, a novel
protein involved in the control of
shoot architecture and flowering in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 13, 1865–
1875.
Borner, R., Kampmann, G., Chandler, J.,
Gleissner, R., Wisman, E., Apel, K.
and Melzer, S. (2000) A MADS domain gene involved in the transition to

flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 24, 591–599.
Bowman, J.L., Alvarez, J., Weigel, D.,
Meyerowitz, E. and Smyth, D.R.
(1993) Control of flower development
in Arabidopsis thaliana by APETALA1 and interacting genes. Development 119, 721–743.
Bradley, D., Carpenter, R., Copsey, L.,
Vincent, C., Rothstein, S. and Coen, E.
(1996) Control of inflorescence

Floral Meristem Identity Genes
architecture in Antirrhinum. Nature
379, 791–797.
Bradley, D., Ratcliffe, O., Vincent, C.,
Carpenter, R. and Coen, E. (1997)
Inflorescence commitment and architecture in Arabidopsis. Science 275,
80–83.
Busch, M.A., Bomblies, K. and Weigel, D.
(1999) Activation of a floral homeotic
gene in Arabidopsis. Science 285,
585–587.
Carles, C.C. and Fletcher, J.C. (2003)
Shoot apical meristem maintenance:
the art of a dynamic balance. Trends
in Plant Science 8, 394–401.
Carmel-Goren, L., Liu, Y.S., Lifschitz, E.
and Zamir, D. (2003) The self-pruning
gene family in tomato. Plant Molecular Biology 52, 1215–1222.
Carpenter, R. and Coen, E.S. (1995)
Transposon induced chimeras show
that floricaula, a meristem identity
gene, acts non-autonomously between
cell layers. Development 121, 19–26.
Coen, E.S. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991)
The war of the whorls: genetic interactions controlling flower development. Nature 353, 31–37.
Coen, E.S., Romero, J.M., Doyle, S., Elliott, R., Murphy, G. and Carpenter, R.
(1990) Floricaula: a homeotic gene
required for flower development in
Antirrhinum majus. Cell 63, 1311–
1322.
Corbit, K.C., Trakul, N., Eves, E.M., Diaz,
B., Marshall, M. and Rosner, M.R.
(2003) Activation of Raf-1 signaling
by protein kinase C through a mechanism involving Raf kinase inhibitory protein. Journal of Biological Chemistry
278, 13061–13068.
Davies, B., Egea-Cortines, M., de Andrade
Silva, E., Saedler, H. and Sommer, H.
(1996) Multiple interactions amongst
floral homeotic proteins. EMBO Journal 15, 4330–4343.
Davies, B., Sommer, H. and SchwarzSommer, Zs. (1999) Floral development: genetic views and molecular
news. In: Russo, V.A.E. (ed.) Development: Genetics, Epigenetics and En-

95
vironmental Regulation. Springer,
Berlin, pp. 167–183.
Durfee, T., Roe, J.L., Sessions, R.A.,
Inouye, C., Serikawa, K., Feldmann,
K.A., Weigel, D. and Zambryski, P.C.
(2003) The F-box-containing protein
UFO and AGAMOUS participate in
antagonistic pathways governing early
petal development in Arabidopsis.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 100, 8571–
8576.
Egea-Cortines, M., Saedler, H. and Sommer, H. (1999) Ternary complex formation between the MADS-box
proteins SQUAMOSA, DEFICIENS
and GLOBOSA is involved in the control of floral architecture in Antirrhinum majus. EMBO Journal 18,
5370–5379.
Fan, H.Y., Hu, Y., Tudor, M. and Ma, H.
(1997) Specific interactions between
the K domains of AG and AGLs, members of the MADS domain family of
DNA binding proteins. Plant Journal
12, 999–1010.
Ferrándiz, C., Gu, Q., Martienssen, R.
and Yanofsky, M.F. (2000) Redundant
regulation of meristem identity and
plant architecture by FRUITFULL,
APETALA1 and CAULIFLOWER.
Development 127, 725–734.
Foucher, F., Morin, J., Courtiade, J.,
Cadioux, S., Ellis, N., Banfield, M.J.
and Rameau, C. (2003) DETERMINATE and LATE FLOWERING are two
TERMINAL FLOWER1/CENTRORADIALIS homologs that control two
distinct phases of flowering initiation
and development in pea. Plant Cell
15, 2742–2754.
Fujita, H., Takemura, M., Tani, E.,
Nemoto, K., Yokota, A. and Kohchi,
T. (2003) An Arabidopsis MADS-box
protein, AGL24, is specifically bound
to and phosphorylated by meristematic
receptor-like kinase (MRLK). Plant
Cell Physiology 44, 735–742.
Gallois, J.L., Nora, F.R., Mizukami, Y.
and Sablowski, R. (2004) WUSCHEL
induces shoot stem cell activity and

96

B. Davies
developmental plasticity in the root
meristem. Genes & Development 18,
375–380.
Goto, K. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1994)
Function and regulation of the Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene PISTILLATA. Genes & Development 8,
1548–1560.
Gu, Q., Ferrándiz, C., Yanofsky, M.F. and
Martienssen, R. (1998) The FRUITFULL MADS-box gene mediates cell
differentiation during Arabidopsis
fruit development. Development 125,
1509–1517.
Gutierrez-Cortines, M.E. and Davies, B.
(2000) Beyond the ABCs: ternary
complex formation in the control of
floral organ identity. Trends in Plant
Science 5, 471–476.
Hantke, S.S., Carpenter, R. and Coen,
E.S. (1995) Expression of floricaula
in single cell layers of periclinal chimeras activates downstream homeotic
genes in all layers of floral meristems.
Development 121, 27–35.
Hartmann, U., Hohmann, S., Nettesheim, K., Wisman, E., Saedler, H.
and Huijser, P. (2000) Molecular cloning of SVP: a negative regulator of the
floral transition in Arabidopsis. Plant
Journal 21, 351–360.
Haughn, G.W. and Somerville, C.R.
(1988) Genetic control of morphogenesis in Arabidopsis. Developmental
Genetics 9, 73–89.
He, Z., Zhu, Q., Dabi, T., Li, D., Weigel,
D. and Lamb, C. (2000) Transformation of rice with the Arabidopsis floral
regulator LEAFY causes early heading.
Transgenic Research 9, 223–227.
Honma, T. and Goto, K. (2001) Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral
organs. Nature 409, 525–529.
Huala, E. and Sussex, I.M. (1992) LEAFY
interacts with floral homeotic genes to
regulate Arabidopsis floral development. Plant Cell 4, 901–913.
Huijser, P., Klein, J., Lönnig, W.-E., Meijer, H., Saedler, H. and Sommer, H.
(1992) Bractomania, an inflorescence

anomaly, is caused by the loss of function of the MADS-box gene squamosa
in Antirrhinum majus. EMBO Journal 11, 1239–1249.
Immink, R.G., Gadella, T.W. Jr, Ferrario,
S., Busscher, M. and Angenent, G.C.
(2002) Analysis of MADS box protein–
protein interactions in living plant cells.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 99, 2416–
2421.
Ingram, G.C., Goodrich, J., Wilkinson,
M.D., Simon, R., Haughn, G.W. and
Coen, E.S. (1995) Parallels between
unusual floral organs and fimbriata,
genes controlling flower development
in Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum.
Plant Cell 7, 1501–1510.
Irish, V.F. and Sussex, I.M. (1990) Function of the apetala-1 gene during Arabidopsis floral development. Plant
Cell 2, 741–753.
Jack, T., Brockman, L.L. and Meyerowitz,
E.M. (1992) The homeotic gene APETALA3 of Arabidopsis thaliana encodes a MADS box and is expressed
in petals and stamens. Cell 68, 683–
697.
Jackson, D. and Hake, S. (1997) Morphogenesis on the move: cell-to-cell trafficking of plant regulatory proteins.
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 7, 495–500.
Jofuku, K.D., den Boer, B.G.W., Van
Montagu, M. and Okamuro, J.K.
(1994) Control of Arabidopsis flower
and seed development by the homeotic
gene APETALA2. Plant Cell 6,
1211–1225.
Kempin, S.A., Savidge, B. and Yanofsky,
M.F. (1995) Molecular basis of the
cauliflower phenotype in Arabidopsis.
Science 267, 522–525.
Lamb, R.S., Hill, T.A., Tan, Q.K. and
Irish, V.F. (2002) Regulation of APETALA3 floral homeotic gene expression by meristem identity genes.
Development 129, 2079–2086.
Lee, H., Suh, S.S., Park, E., Cho, E.,
Ahn, J.H., Kim, S.G., Lee, J.S.,
Kwon, Y.M. and Lee, I. (2000) The

Floral Meristem Identity Genes
AGAMOUS-LIKE 20 MADS domain
protein integrates floral inductive pathways in Arabidopsis. Genes & Development 14, 2366–2376.
Liljegren, S.J., Gustafson-Brown, C.,
Pinyopich, A., Ditta, G.S. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (1999) Interactions
among APETALA1, LEAFY, and
TERMINAL FLOWER1 specify meristem fate. Plant Cell 11, 1007–1018.
Litt, A. and Irish, V.F. (2003) Duplication
and diversification in the APETALA1/
FRUITFULL floral homeotic gene lineage: implications for the evolution of
floral development. Genetics 165,
821–833.
Lucas, W.J., Bouché-Pillon, S., Jackson,
D.P., Nguyen, L., Baker, L., Ding, B.
and Hake, S. (1995) Selective trafficking of KNOTTED1 homeodomain
protein and its mRNA through plasmodesmata. Science 270, 1980–1983.
Mandel, M.A. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(1995a) The Arabidopsis AGL8
MADS box gene is expressed in inflorescence meristems and is negatively
regulated by APETALA1. Plant Cell
7, 1763–1771.
Mandel, M.A. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(1995b) A gene triggering flower formation in Arabidopsis. Nature 377,
522–524.
Mandel, M.A., Gustafson-Brown, C.,
Savidge, B. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(1992) Molecular characterization of
the Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene
APETALA1. Nature 360, 273–277.
McGonigle, B., Bouhidel, K. and Irish,
V.F. (1996) Nuclear localization of the
Arabidopsis APETALA3 and PISTILLATA homeotic gene products depends
on
their
simultaneous
expression. Genes & Development
10, 1812–1821.
Mellerowicz, E.J., Horgan, K., Walden,
A., Coker, A. and Walter, C. (1998)
PRFLL – a Pinus radiata homologue
of FLORICAULA and LEAFY is expressed in buds containing vegetative
shoot and undifferentiated male cone
primordia. Planta 206, 619–629.

97
Michaels, S.D. and Amasino, R.M. (1999)
FLOWERING LOCUS C encodes a
novel MADS domain protein that acts
as a repressor of flowering. Plant Cell
11, 949–956.
Michaels, S.D., Ditta, G., GustafsonBrown, C., Pelaz, S., Yanofsky, M. and
Amasino, R.M. (2003) AGL24 acts as a
promoter of flowering in Arabidopsis
and is positively regulated by vernalization. Plant Journal 33, 867–874.
Moon, Y.H., Chen, L., Pan, R.L., Chang,
H.S., Zhu, T., Maffeo, D.M. and Sung,
Z.R. (2003) EMF genes maintain vegetative development by repressing the
flower program in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 15, 681–693.
Motte, P., Saedler, H. and SchwarzSommer, Zs. (1998) STYLOSA and
FISTULATA: regulatory components
of the homeotic control of Antirrhinum floral organogenesis. Development 125, 71–84.
Mouradov, A., Glassick, T., Hamdorf, B.,
Murphy, L., Fowler, B., Marla, S. and
Teasdale, R.D. (1998) NEEDLY, a
Pinus radiata ortholog of FLORICAULA/LEAFY genes, expressed in
both reproductive and vegetative meristems. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 95,
6537–6542.
Nilsson, O. and Weigel, D. (1997) Modulating the timing of flowering. Current
Opinion in Biotechnology 8, 195–
199.
Parcy, F., Bomblies, K. and Weigel, D.
(2002) Interaction of LEAFY, AGAMOUS and TERMINAL FLOWER1 in
maintaining floral meristem identity
in Arabidopsis. Development 129,
2519–2527.
Parcy, F., Nilsson, O., Busch, M.A., Lee,
I. and Weigel, D. (1998) A genetic
framework for floral patterning. Nature 395, 561–566.
Parenicova, L., de Folter, S., Kieffer, M.,
Horner, D.S., Favalli, C., Busscher, J.,
Cook, H.E., Ingram, R.M., Kater,
M.M., Davies, B., Angenent, G.C.
and Colombo, L. (2003) Molecular

98

B. Davies
and phylogenetic analyses of the complete MADS-box transcription factor
family in Arabidopsis: new openings
to the MADS world. Plant Cell 15,
1538–1551.
Pelaz, S., Ditta, G.S., Baumann, E., Wisman, E. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2000)
B and C floral organ identity functions
require SEPALLATA MADS-box
genes. Nature 405, 200–203.
Pelaz, S., Gustafson-Brown, C., Kohalmi,
S.E., Crosby, W.L. and Yanofsky,
M.F. (2001a) APETALA1 and SEPALLATA3 interact to promote flower
development. Plant Journal 26,
385–394.
Pelaz, S., Tapia-Lopez, R., AlvarezBuylla, E.R. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(2001b) Conversion of leaves into
petals in Arabidopsis. Current Biology 11, 182–184.
Pena, L., Martin-Trillo, M., Juarez, J.,
Pina, J.A., Navarro, L. and MartinezZapater, J.M. (2001) Constitutive expression of Arabidopsis LEAFY or
APETALA1 genes in citrus reduces
their generation time. Nature Biotechnology 19, 263–267.
Perbal, M.-C., Haughn, G., Saedler, H.
and Schwarz-Sommer, Zs. (1996) Noncell-autonomous function of the Antirrhinum floral homeotic proteins
DEFICIENS and GLOBOSA is exerted
by their polar cell-to-cell trafficking.
Development 122, 3433–3441.
Perry, S.E., Nichols, K.W. and Fernadez,
D.E. (1996) The MADS domain protein AGL15 localizes to the nucleus
during early stages of seed development. Plant Cell 8, 1977–1989.
Pidkowich, M.S., Klenz, J.E. and Haughn,
G.W. (1999) The making of a flower:
control of floral meristem identity in
Arabidopsis. Trends in Plant Science
4, 64–70.
Pnueli, L., Carmel-Goren, L., Hareven,
D., Gutfinger, T., Alvarez, J., Ganal,
M., Zamir, D. and Lifschitz, E. (1998)
The SELF-PRUNING gene of tomato
regulates vegetative to reproductive
switching of sympodial meristems and

is the ortholog of CEN and TFL1. Development 125, 1979–1989.
Pouteau, S., Nicholls, D., Tooke, F.,
Coen, E. and Battey, N. (1997) The
induction and maintenance of flowering in Impatiens. Development 124,
3343–3351.
Pouteau, S., Tooke, F. and Battey, N.
(1998) Quantitative control of inflorescence formation in Impatiens balsamina. Plant Physiol 118, 1191–
1201.
Ratcliffe, O.J., Amaya, I., Vincent, C.A.,
Rothstein, S., Carpenter, R., Coen,
E.S. and Bradley, D.J. (1998) A common mechanism controls the life cycle
and architecture of plants. Development 125, 1609–1615.
Ratcliffe, O.J., Bradley, D.J. and Coen,
E.S. (1999) Separation of shoot and
floral identity in Arabidopsis. Development 126, 1109–1120.
Ratcliffe, O.J., Nadzan, G.C., Reuber,
T.L. and Riechmann, J.L. (2001)
Regulation of flowering in Arabidopsis
by an FLC homologue. Plant Physiology 126, 122–132.
Samach, A., Onouchi, H., Gold, S.E.,
Ditta, G.S., Schwarz-Sommer, Zs.,
Yanofsky, M.F. and Coupland, G.
(2000) Distinct roles of CONSTANS
target genes in reproductive development of Arabidopsis. Science 288,
1613–1616.
Schmid, M., Uhlenhaut, N.H., Godard,
F., Demar, M., Bressan, R., Weigel,
D. and Lohmann, J.U. (2003) Dissection of floral induction pathways using
global expression analysis. Development 130, 6001–6012.
Schwarz-Sommer, Zs., Huijser, P.,
Nacken, W., Saedler, H. and Sommer,
H. (1990) Genetic control of flower
development by homeotic genes in
Antirrhinum majus. Science 250,
931–936.
Schwarz-Sommer, Zs., Davies, B. and
Hudson, A. (2003) An everlasting pioneer: the story of Antirrhinum research. Nature Reveiws Genetics 4,
657–666.

Floral Meristem Identity Genes
Scortecci, K.C., Michaels, S.D. and
Amasino, R.M. (2001) Identification
of a MADS-box gene, FLOWERING
LOCUS M, that represses flowering.
Plant Journal 26, 229–236.
Serre, L., Pereira de Jesus, K., Zelwer, C.,
Bureaud, N., Schoentgen, F. and Benedetti, H. (2001) Crystal structures of
YBHB and YBCL from Escherichia
coli, two bacterial homologues to a
Raf kinase inhibitor protein. Journal
of Molecular Biology 310, 617–634.
Sheldon, C.C., Burn, J.E., Perez, P.P.,
Metzger, J., Edwards, J.A., Peacock,
W.J. and Dennis, E.S. (1999) The
FLF MADS box gene: a repressor of
flowering in Arabidopsis regulated by
vernalization and methylation. Plant
Cell 11, 445–458.
Simpson, G.G. and Dean, C. (2002) Arabidopsis, the Rosetta stone of flowering time? Science 296, 285–289.
Smith, H.M., Campbell, B.C. and Hake,
S. (2004) Competence to respond to
floral inductive signals requires the
homeobox genes PENNYWISE and
POUND-FOOLISH. Current Biology
14, 812–817.
Wagner, D., Sablowski, R.W. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1999) Transcriptional activation of APETALA1 by LEAFY.
Science 285, 582–584.
Wagner, D., Wellmer, F., Dilks, K., William, D., Smith, M.R., Kumar, P.P.,
Riechmann, J.L., Greenland, A.J. and
Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004) Floral induction in tissue culture: a system for
the analysis of LEAFY-dependent
gene regulation. Plant Journal 39,
273–282.
Weigel, D., Alvarez, J., Smyth, D.R.,
Yanofsky, M.F. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1992) LEAFY controls floral meristem identity in Arabidopsis. Cell 69,
843–859.
Weigel, D. and Nilsson, O. (1995) A developmental switch sufficient for flower
initiation in diverse plants. Nature
377, 495–500.
Wilkinson, M.D. and Haughn, G.W.
(1995) UNUSUAL FLORAL OR-

99
GANS controls meristem identity and
organ primordia fate in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 7, 1485–1499.
William, D.A., Su, Y., Smith, M.R., Lu,
M., Baldwin, D.A. and Wagner, D.
(2004) Genomic identification of direct
target genes of LEAFY. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 101, 1775–1780.
Wu, X., Dinneny, J.R., Crawford, K.M.,
Rhee, Y., Citovsky, V., Zambryski,
P.C. and Weigel, D. (2003) Modes of
intercellular transcription factor movement in the Arabidopsis apex. Development 130, 3735–3745.
Yanofsky, M.F. (1995) Floral meristems
to floral organs: genes controlling
early events in Arabidopsis flower development. Annual Review of Plant
Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 46, 167–188.
Yanofsky, M.F., Ma, H., Bowman, J.L.,
Drews, G.N., Feldmann, K.A. and
Meyerowitz, E.M. (1990) The protein
encoded by the Arabidopsis homeotic
gene agamous resembles transcription
factors. Nature 346, 35–39.
Yoshida, N., Yanai, Y., Chen, L., Kato, Y.,
Hiratsuka, J., Miwa, T., Sung, Z.R. and
Takahashi, S. (2001) EMBRYONIC
FLOWER2, a novel polycomb group
protein homolog, mediates shoot development and flowering in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 13, 2471–2481.
Yu, H., Xu, Y., Tan, E.L. and Kumar, P.P.
(2002) AGAMOUS-LIKE 24, a dosage-dependent mediator of the flowering signals. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
99, 16336–16341.
Yu, H., Ito, T., Wellmer, F. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004) Repression of AGAMOUS-LIKE 24 is a crucial step in
promoting flower development. Nature Genetics 36, 157–161.
Zachgo, S., Saedler, H. and SchwarzSommer, Z. (1997) Pollen-specific expression of DEFH125, a MADS-box
transcription factor in Antirrhinum
with unusual features. Plant Journal
11, 1043–1050.

5

Molecular Biology of Floral
Organogenesis
B. KRIZEK
Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia,
SC 29208, USA, e-mail: krizek@sc.edu

Introduction
Our understanding of the molecular nature of floral organ development has
increased tremendously over the last 15 years. In the early 1990s, genetic
studies on Arabidopsis thaliana and Antirrhinum majus led to the isolation
and characterization of floral organ-identity genes (also called floral homeotic
genes) and the establishment of the seminal ABC model for flower development. This model proposed that different organ-identity genes act alone and in
various combinations to specify each of the four types of floral organs. Tests
using ectopic expression support the basic tenets of the model. More recent
work has addressed additional issues regarding floral organogenesis. What is
the molecular basis for the combinatorial nature of the ABC model? How are
the spatially restricted expression patterns of the floral organ-identity genes
established and maintained? What factors act downstream of the floral organidentity genes to actually build each floral organ? This chapter focuses primarily
on studies carried out in Arabidopsis because these studies have provided the
most detailed picture of floral organogenesis. The availability of important tools
and resources for this model plant (including a completely sequenced genome,
large numbers of insertional mutant lines and DNA microarrays) has contributed greatly to the fantastic progress made in flower development over the last
several years.

Floral Organ-identity Genes and the ABC Model
During reproductive development, the shoot apical meristem (SAM) initiates
floral meristems (FMs) along its flanks. From each FM, organ primordia arise in
a characteristic pattern with different organ types forming in each of the four
concentric rings (called whorls) (Fig. 5.1). In Arabidopsis flowers, four sepal
100

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

101

Fig. 5.1. Schematic of a wild-type Arabidopsis flower. The black circle indicates the position
of the inflorescence meristem.

primordia are initiated from cells corresponding to the outermost whorl (whorl
one). Four petal primordia initiate in whorl two at locations between each of the
four sepal primordia. Six stamen primordia are initiated in whorl three with
four longer medial stamens and two shorter lateral stamens. Two congenitally
fused carpel primordia are formed from cells in the innermost fourth whorl.
The FM is determinate with all meristematic cells being used up in the process
of organ initiation.
The identities of these different organs are specified by the actions of floral
organ-identity genes in different regions of a developing flower. The ABC
model for flower development proposed that three classes of these organidentity genes function in overlapping domains to specify sepals in whorl one,
petals in whorl two, stamens in whorl three and carpels in whorl four (Carpenter and Coen, 1990; Schwarz-Sommer et al., 1990; Bowman et al., 1991;
Meyerowitz et al., 1991) (Fig. 5.2). The A class genes APETALA1 (AP1) and
APETALA2 (AP2) act to specify sepal and petal development, the B class
genes APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI) act to specify petal and
stamen development and the C class gene AGAMOUS (AG) acts to specify
stamen and carpel development (Table 5.1). Thus, sepal identity is conferred by
class A activity, petal identity by the combined action of A þ B, stamen identity
by the combined action of B þ C and carpel identity by C activity.
The region-specific activities of the class A and C genes result from antagonism between these genes (Fig. 5.2). Mutations in the class A gene AP2 result
in C activity spreading into whorls one and two and consequently homeotic
transformations in organ identity with carpels replacing sepals in whorl one and
stamens replacing petals in whorl two. Mutations in the class C gene AG result
in class A activity in all four whorls. The ag mutants produced indeterminate
flowers repeating the pattern of organs (Se Pe Pe)n indicating that AG is
required for floral determinacy as well as reproductive organ development.
Mutations in the class B genes result in flowers with sepals in the outer two
whorls and carpels in the inner two whorls. ABC triple mutants produce
indeterminate flowers consisting only of leaf-like organs indicating that the
developmental ground state of a floral organ is a leaf and that the activities of
the ABC genes are required to convert leaves into floral organs.
In all but one case, the organ-identity genes are expressed at the RNA level
in spatially restricted regions of a FM consistent with the activities of these

102

B. Krizek

Wild type
AP3
B
PI

Se
1

AP2
A AP1

AG

Pe
2

St
3

Ca
4

St
3

Ca
4

C

Class A mutant

Ca
1

AP3
PI

B

AG

C

St
2

Class B mutant

AP2
A AP1
Se
1

AG C

Se
2

Ca
3

Ca
4

Class C mutant
AP3
PI

B
AP2
A AP1

Se
1

Pe
2

Pe
3

Sa
4

Fig. 5.2. The ABC model of flower development. The class A, B and C genes function in different
regions of a floral meristem to specify the identities of each type of floral organ. Mutations in
these genes result in homeotic transformations in organ identity as indicated for each class.
Note: Se, sepals; Pe, petals; St, stamens; Ca, carpels.

genes as proposed in the ABC model (Fig. 5.3). These genes are expressed
prior to the emergence of organ primordia and their expression is maintained
during organ development. The class C gene AG is expressed in cells that will
give rise to the third and fourth whorls of a flower and subsequently in developing stamen and carpel primordia (Yanofsky et al., 1990). The two class
B genes are expressed in largely overlapping domains that correspond to
second and third whorl cells and later in petal and stamen primordia (Jack
et al., 1992, 1994; Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994). In addition to second and
third whorl expression, AP3 mRNA is detected at later stages at the base of
sepals (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1993). PI mRNA is present in some fourth
whorl cells during stages 3 and 4 but is not maintained in these cells at later
developmental stages (Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994). The class A gene AP1 is
expressed throughout very young FMs (stages 1 and 2), consistent with its early

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

103

Table 5.1. Genes involved in floral organogenesis.

Floral meristem–identity genes
LEAFY (LFY)
APETALA1 (AP1)
ABC genes
APETALA1 (AP1)
APETALA2 (AP2)
APETALA3 (AP3)
PISTILLATA (PI)
AGAMOUS (AG)
Caa identity
CRABS CLAW (CRC)
SPATULA (SPT)
ABC cofactors
SEPALLATA1 (SEP1)
SEPALLATA2 (SEP2)
SEPALLATA3 (SEP3)
ABC regulators
UNUSUAL FLORAL ORGANS
(UFO)
WUSCHEL (WUS)
LEUNIG (LUG)
SEUSS (SEU)
STERILE APETALA (SAP)
CURLY LEAF (CLF)
INCURVATA2 (ICU2)
BELLRINGER (BLR)
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT)
HUA1
HUA2
HUA ENHANCER2 (HEN2)
HUA ENHANCER4 (HEN4)
HUA ENHANCER1 (HEN1)
Downstream targets genes
NAC-like, activated by AP3/PI
(NAP)
SHATTERPROOF2 (SHP2)
SPOROCYTELESS (SPL)

Function

Gene product

Specify floral meristem identity
Specify floral meristem identity

DNA binding
MADS domain

Class
Class
Class
Class
Class

MADS domain
AP2/ERF
MADS domain
MADS domain
MADS domain

A gene
A gene
B gene
B gene
C gene

Ca development
Ca development

YABBY domain
bHLH

Specify Pe, St, Ca identitya
Specify Pe, St, Ca identitya
Specify Pe, St, Ca identitya

MADS domain
MADS domain
MADS domain

Activate class B expression

F box

Activate class C expression
Repress AG expression
Repress AG expression
Repress AG expression
Repress AG expression
Repress AG expression
Repress AG expression
Repress AG expression
Processing of AG RNA
Processing of AG RNA
Processing of AG RNA
Processing of AG RNA
miRNA metabolism

Homeodomain
Tup1-like corepressor
Ldb-like
Plant specific
Polycomb group
Homeodomain
AP2/ERF
CCCH zinc finger
RPR domain
RNA helicase?
KH domain
Novel

Regulate petal growth

NAC

Fruit dehiscence zone development
Sporogenesis, ovule patterning

MADS domain
Nuclear

a

Note: Se, sepals; Pe, petals; St, stamens; Ca, carpels.

role in specification of FM identity (Mandel et al., 1992b). By stage 3, AP1
mRNA becomes restricted to the just-arising sepal primordia and cells corresponding to the second whorl (Mandel et al., 1992b). The only floral organidentity gene whose mRNA pattern is not spatially localized within a flower is
AP2 (Jofuku et al., 1994). The restriction of AP2 activity to whorls one and
two appears to occur at the translational level and involves regulation by a
microRNA (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2004).

104

B. Krizek

Fig. 5.3. Expression patterns of the class ABC MADS-box genes in stage 3. Sepal primordia
have initiated in stage 3 flowers. All organ primordia have initiated by stage 6 of flower
development.
Note: Se, sepals; Pe, petals; St, stamens; Ca, carpels.

Ectopic Expression Studies Provide Support for the ABC Model
The basic hypotheses of the ABC model have been supported by several
ectopic expression studies. Misexpression of the class C gene AG, under the
control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter, demonstrated that this
gene is sufficient to turn off class A function when it is expressed in the outer
two floral whorls (Mandel et al., 1992a; Mizukami and Ma, 1992). 35S::AG
plants closely resemble ap2 mutants. Combined misexpression of both of the
class B genes has shown that AP3 and PI are sufficient to specify petal and
stamen identity (Krizek and Meyerowitz, 1996). 35S::PI 35S::AP3 plants
produce flowers with petals in whorls one and two and stamens in whorls
three and four.

SPT and CRC Promote Carpel Identity Independently of AG
Carpelloid features are present on floral organs of ap2-2 ag-1 double mutants
and ap2-2 pi-1 ag-1 triple mutants, suggesting that other genes besides AG can
specify certain aspects of carpel development. These features are lost when the
triple mutant is combined with mutations in SPATULA (SPT) and CRABS
CLAW (CRC) (Table 5.1) (Alvarez and Smyth, 1999). Individual mutations in
either SPT or CRC show defects in carpel fusion in the upper part of the organ
and small effects on carpel morphology. The crc spt double mutants show a
much more severe phenotype with further reductions in carpel fusion and
decreased amounts of many carpel tissue types including stigma, style, septum,
transmitting tract and ovules. CRC is a member of the YABBY gene family that
specifies abaxial identity while SPT encodes a bHLH transcription factor
(Bowman and Smyth, 1999; Heisler et al., 2001).

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

105

SEPALLATA Genes Work with ABC Genes to Specify Organ Identity
A significant revision of the ABC model was the addition of the class E or
SEPALLATA (SEP) genes, which were first identified in tomato and petunia.
Decreased expression of the TM5 gene in tomato and the FBP2 and FBP5
genes in petunia resulted in partial homeotic transformations in the second,
third and fourth whorls of the flower (Angenent et al., 1994; Pnueli et al.,
1994; Ferrario et al., 2003). The specific role of these genes in flower
development, however, was not well defined until corresponding genes in
Arabidopsis were mutated. Arabidopsis has three SEP genes (SEP1, SEP2
and SEP3) that are functionally redundant (Table 5.1). SEP1 and SEP2 are
expressed in all four whorls of the flower (Flanagan and Ma, 1994; Savidge
et al., 1995) while SEP3 mRNA is detected in whorls two, three and four
(Mandel and Yanofsky, 1998). Mutations in any one or two of these genes do
not significantly alter floral organ identity but sep1 sep2 sep3 triple mutants
produce indeterminate flowers consisting only of sepals (Pelaz et al., 2000).
These flowers resemble those produced in ap3 ag and pi ag double mutants,
indicating that the B and C functions are not active. The initial expression
patterns of AP3, PI and AG are normal in sep1 sep2 sep3 triple mutants
showing that the SEP genes are not required for activation of the B and C class
genes (Pelaz et al., 2000). Conversely, the SEP genes do not function downstream of the class B and C genes as they are still expressed in class B and C
mutants. Thus the three SEP genes function in combination with the ABC
genes to specify petal, stamen and carpel identity. With the addition of the
SEP genes to the classical ABC model, sepal identity is conferred by A function
alone, petal identity by A þ B þ E, stamen identity by B þ Cþ E and carpel
identity by C þ E (Fig. 5.4).
Although floral organs are thought to be derived from leaves, misexpression of different combinations of the ABC genes in leaves did not significantly
convert these vegetative organs into reproductive organs. Other factors required to specify a floral fate must be missing from leaves. The flower-specific
expression of the SEP genes suggested that these genes might be such factors
and this was shown to be the case. Misexpression of AP1, AP3, PI and SEP is
sufficient to convert rosette leaves into petal-like organs (Honma and Goto,
2001; Pelaz et al., 2001b) while misexpression of AP3, PI, AG and SEP3 is
sufficient to convert cauline leaves into stamen-like organs (Honma and Goto,
2001).

MADS-domain Protein Complexes
All of the class A, B, C and E genes except for AP2 code for members of the
MADS-domain family of dimeric transcription factors. MADS is an acronym
for the first four identified members of the family: MCM1 in yeast, AG in
Arabidopsis, DEFICIENS (DEF) in Antirrhinum and SRF in humans. These
proteins share a 56 amino acid DNA-binding domain called the MADS domain
and bind to CArG box [CC(A/T)6GG] sequences (reviewed in Riechmann and

106

B. Krizek

Fig. 5.4. The ABCE model of flower development. SEPALLATA genes (class E genes) act with the
class A, B and C genes to specify organ identity. Shown below each whorl are the complexes of
MADS-domain proteins that have been proposed to specify organ identity in the quartet model of
flower development.
Note: Se, sepals; Pe, petals; St, stamens; Ca, carpels.

Meyerowitz, 1997). In plants, there are two classes of MADS-domain proteins
based on sequence similarity outside of the MADS domain (Alvarez-Buylla
et al., 2000). AP1, AP3, PI, AG, SEP1, SEP2 and SEP3 are all members of
the MIKC-type (or type II), which share a characteristic sequence of domains
(I, K and C) in addition to the MADS domain. The less conserved I (intervening)
region contributes to dimerization specificity. The K (keratin-like) domain is
predicted to form a coiled-coil structure and is also involved in dimerization
of these proteins. The carboxy-terminal region (C) acts as a transcriptionalactivation domain in some family members.
Each whorl of the flower contains a unique combination of MADS-domain
organ-identity proteins that act as transcription factors regulating the expression of different sets of target genes. The precise molecular nature of these
MADS-domain protein complexes, however, has still not been defined. Early
studies showed that although all of the class A, B and C MADS-domain proteins
could interact with each other; only certain combinations (AP1 homodimers,
AP3/PI heterodimers and AG homodimers in Arabidopsis) could bind DNA
in vitro (Riechmann et al., 1996). Heterodimers formed between A and B
class proteins and those between B and C class proteins did not bind to DNA,
suggesting that unique heterodimers between A, B and C class proteins are not
present within each whorl. However, more recent data suggest that unique
higher order protein complexes involving A, B, C and E class proteins may
form in each of the four whorls.
Interactions between the class A proteins AP1 and SEP3 have been
detected using the yeast two-hybrid system (Pelaz et al., 2001a) and by immunoprecipitation (Honma and Goto, 2001). Likewise, the class C protein AG can
interact with SEP1, SEP2 and SEP3 in the yeast two-hybrid assay (Fan et al.,
1997) and similar interactions have been detected with the corresponding

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

107

proteins in Antirrhinum (Davies et al., 1996). Protein–protein interactions are
also detected when AP3 and PI are coexpressed with either SEP3 or AP1 in
yeast and when AP3 and PI are coexpressed with both AG and SEP3 in yeast
(Honma and Goto, 2001). These results suggest that floral organ-identity
proteins may regulate gene expression as higher order multimeric complexes.
The quartet model proposes that distinct complexes of four MADS-domain
proteins function in each whorl of the flower (Theissen, 2001) (Fig. 5.4). An
AP3-PI-AP1-SEP complex is proposed to function in second whorl cells and
confer petal identity, an AP3-PI-AG-SEP complex is proposed to function in
the third whorl and specify stamen identity and an AG-AG-SEP-SEP complex is
proposed to act in the fourth whorl cells to specify carpel identity. These
proposed tetramers may correspond to a pair of dimers with each dimer
binding to adjacent CArG box sequences in the promoters of target genes.
Different protein domains appear to mediate the formation of these complexes. While the I and K regions are crucial for dimerization of MADS-domain
proteins (Riechmann et al., 1996), the formation of higher order MADSdomain complexes requires the C domain (Egea-Cortines et al., 1999). The
actual stoichiometry and structural nature of these proposed complexes awaits
experimental determination.
Interactions between different MADS-domain protein dimers could have
several consequences for the activities of these proteins. Some MADS-domain
proteins such as AP3 and PI do not have transcriptional-activation domains.
The ability of an AP3/PI heterodimer to regulate target gene expression may
therefore be dependent upon the formation of a complex with MADS-domain
proteins possessing transcriptional-activation activity. Both AP1 and SEP3
have C-terminal domains capable of transcriptional activation (Cho et al.,
1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Pelaz et al., 2001a). Thus the activation of
petal genes may require interaction between an AP3/PI heterodimer and an
AP1/SEP heterodimer. Alternatively, interactions between MADS-domain
proteins may alter the DNA-binding properties of the component dimers.
Such interactions could increase the overall affinity of dimers for binding to
DNA or may lead to cooperative binding of dimers to DNA. In support of this
idea, interactions between the Antirrhinum class A protein (SQUAMOSA
(SQUA)) and class B proteins (DEF and GLOBOSA (GLO)) were shown to
lead to increased in vitro DNA-binding affinity compared to either the DEF/
GLO heterodimer or SQUA homodimer alone (Egea-Cortines et al., 1999).

Regulation of Floral Organ-identity Gene Expression
A key advance in the field of flower development has been the uncovering
of a direct role for the FM-identity gene LEAFY (LFY ) in activation of the
floral organ-identity genes (Table 5.1). LFY encodes a novel plant-specific
DNA-binding protein that can bind in vitro to the promoters of several floral
organ-identity genes (Parcy et al., 1998; Busch et al., 1999; Lamb et al.,
2002). While LFY possesses DNA-binding activity, it does not appear to have
intrinsic transcriptional-activation activity. Thus LFY may need to interact with

108

B. Krizek

additional proteins to function in transcriptional regulation. LFY can directly
regulate the transcription of at least one representative of each of the class A, B
and C genes but uses distinct mechanisms to activate expression of each of
these genes in a region-specific manner. LFY alone is sufficient to activate
expression of the class A gene AP1 throughout the flower. In contrast, the
spatially localized induction of the class B and C genes appears to result from
interactions between globally expressed LFY and region-specific factors. Experiments using a constitutively activated form of LFY (LFY containing the
transcriptional-activation domain of VP16) (Parcy et al., 1998) as well as
promoter dissection studies have made important contributions to our understanding of floral organ-identity gene activation.
Expression of each of the floral organ-identity genes continues throughout
most of flower development (Yanofsky et al., 1990; Bowman et al., 1991;
Drews et al., 1991; Jack et al., 1992; Mandel et al., 1992b; Goto and
Meyerowitz, 1994). Since LFY is not expressed after stage 5, other factors
presumably act to maintain their expression (Weigel et al., 1992). The plant
hormone gibberellin (GA) appears to be an important regulator of homeotic
gene expression in later stages of flower development (Yu et al., 2004). The GAdeficient mutant ga1 produces flowers that have organs with the correct identity
but which are growth arrested and immature (Goto and Pharis, 1999). Signalling
through the GA pathway involves inactivation of a family of DELLA proteins that
act as negative regulators of GA responses (reviewed in Sun, 2000). Mutations in
these DELLA genes can repress the floral defects of ga1–3, suggesting that GA
responses are essential for completion of floral organ development. Expression
of AP3, PI and AG is increased in ga1 flowers after GA treatment and decreased
in dexamethasone-treated plants expressing a steroid-inducible DELLA protein.
Thus GA promotes expression of the class B and C genes and the continued
development of floral organs by negatively regulating DELLA proteins.

Regulation of AP1 expression
AP1 mRNA is initially detected throughout a young FM and later becomes
restricted to sepal primordia and adjacent second whorl cells. Expression of
AP1 is delayed in lfy mutants (Liljegren et al., 1999), increased in flowers
expressing a constitutively active LFY (LFY::LFY-VP16) (Parcy et al., 1998)
and activated ectopically in the young leaves of plants misexpressing LFY
(Parcy et al., 1998). These results suggest that LFY is both necessary and
sufficient to activate AP1 expression (Fig. 5.5). This activation appears to be
direct as LFY can bind a sequence within the AP1 promoter (Parcy et al.,
1998) and activation of AP1 by LFY does not require protein synthesis
(Wagner et al., 1999).
By stage 3 of flower development, AP1 mRNA is only detected in the first
and second whorls of the flower. The restriction of AP1 expression requires
AG activity as AP1 mRNA is detected in all four whorls of ag mutants
(Gustafson-Brown et al., 1994). It is not known whether the repression of
AP1 by AG is direct.

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

109

LFY
WUS
AP1

UFO

AG
AP3

Fig. 5.5. Activation of the ABC class genes by LFY. LFY directly activates AP1. LFY acts in
combination with UFO to activate expression of the class B gene AP3. LFY and WUS together
activate expression of the class C gene AG.

Initiation of B class gene expression by LFY, UFO and AP1
Both LFY and AP1 act in the initiation of AP3 expression in the second and
third whorl cells of a stage 3 flower. Expression of both of the class B genes is
somewhat reduced in lfy mutants and more severely reduced in lfy ap1 double
mutants (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1993). Class B gene expression is also
reduced in the unusual floral organ (ufo) mutant suggesting that UFO is
another positive regulator of B class gene expression (Levin and Meyerowitz,
1995) (Table 5.1). Several pieces of evidence indicate that LFY and UFO work
together in activation of the class B genes (Fig. 5.5). UFO is expressed in
stage 2 FMs in a pattern suggesting that it could be the region-specific
factor that functions with globally expressed LFY (Samach et al., 1999).
LFY is not sufficient for AP3 and PI activation as 35S::LFY and LFY::LFYVP16 plants do not activate AP3 and PI in vegetative tissues or throughout
flowers (Parcy et al., 1998). On the other hand, ectopic expression of UFO
activates AP3 at a slightly earlier time in development and in an expanded
domain as compared to wild-type (Parcy et al., 1998). 35S::UFO plants
produce extra petals and stamens at the expense of sepals and carpels, similar
to the phenotype resulting from misexpression of both of the class B genes.
The induction of AP3 expression in 35S::UFO plants is dependent upon LFY
activity. Misexpression of both LFY and UFO activates AP3 expression in
seedlings suggesting that these two factors are sufficient for AP3 activation
(Parcy et al., 1998). The steroid-inducible LFY::GR fusion has been used to
show that LFY acts both directly and indirectly to induce AP3 expression. AP3
expression is increased after treatment of 35S::LFY-GR 35S::UFO seedlings
with dexamethasone but to a lesser extent after treatment with both cycloheximide and dexamethasone (Lamb et al., 2002). Although an LFY-binding
site has been identified within an AP3 promoter element required for early
expression, mutation of this site did not affect AP3 expression in vivo
(Lamb et al., 2002).
It is not clear how LFY and UFO work in combination to activate AP3
expression. UFO is an F-box protein that is a component of SCF (Skp1-cullin-F
box) protein complex that acts as an E3 ubiquitin-ligating enzyme (Samach

110

B. Krizek

et al., 1999; Wang et al., 2003). E3 enzymes serve as bridges between E2
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and specific protein substrates, catalysing the
transfer of ubiquitin from the E2 to a target protein. Such ubiquitinated proteins
are typically targeted for proteasome-mediated degradation. SCFUFO can interact with the COP9 signalosome (CSN) and CSN is required for UFO-mediated
activation of AP3 expression (Wang et al., 2003). It has been hypothesized
that UFO’s role in AP3 activation involves the targeted degradation of a
negative regulator of AP3 expression.
AP1 also participates in activation of class B gene expression in petals.
AP1 is not sufficient for class B gene activation as 35S::AP1 plants do not
show transformations in organ identity (Mandel and Yanofsky, 1995). However, an activated AP1 (AP1-VP16) can turn on AP3 and PI expression in the
first whorl (Ng and Yanofsky, 2001). Furthermore, AP3 expression in
35S::LFY 35S::UFO seedlings is modulated by mutations in AP1 (Parcy
et al., 1998). AP1 can bind in vitro to three CArG box sequences in the
AP3 promoter (Hill et al., 1998; Tilly et al., 1998).
Maintenance of class B gene expression
The maintenance of AP3 and PI expression in flowers requires the activity of
both AP3 and PI indicating that these two proteins function in a positive
autoregulatory loop. The existence of such a loop was first postulated when it
was observed that AP3 expression was not maintained in the third whorl
of pi mutants (Jack et al., 1992). PI expression is not maintained in ap3 or
pi mutants and the early fourth whorl expression of PI in wild-type flowers is
also not maintained in older flowers (Goto and Meyerowitz, 1994). When AP3
is misexpressed in fourth whorl cells, PI expression is maintained in this region
(Jack et al., 1994). Because the AP3 promoter but not the PI promoter
contains CArG boxes, it has been speculated that the autoregulation of AP3
is direct while that of PI is indirect. This is supported by the binding of AP3/PI
heterodimers to CArG boxes within the AP3 promoter (Hill et al., 1998; Tilly
et al., 1998) and the requirement of de novo protein synthesis for PI autoregulation (Honma and Goto, 2000). In addition to transcriptional control,
AP3 is regulated post-transcriptionally (Jack et al., 1994). This level of regulation also requires PI and could be explained by an instability of the AP3
protein when not found in a complex with PI.
Initiation of AG expression by LFY and WUS
AG mRNA is first detected in the central region of a stage 3 FM (Yanofsky
et al., 1990). In lfy mutants, AG expression is reduced and delayed suggesting
that LFY is a positive regulator of AG expression (Weigel and Meyerowitz,
1993). Plants expressing an activated form of LFY exhibit homeotic transformations in organ identity similar to those resulting from AG misexpression
(Parcy et al., 1998). AG expression is activated in all four whorls of these
LFY::LFY-VP16 flowers as well as in vegetative tissues of 35S::LFY-VP16

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

111

plants. Because AG is normally expressed in just a subset of LFY-expressing
cells, it was proposed that LFY requires a cofactor to activate AG expression in
just the third and fourth whorls of a flower.
The meristem regulatory protein WUSCHEL (WUS) has been identified as
an LFY cofactor (Table 5.1). The wus mutants have defective SAMs that
cannot serve as permanent sources of stem cells for organ initiation (Laux
et al., 1996). These mutants undergo a stop and go pattern of development
in which shoot meristems produce a few leaves and then stop with subsequent
adventitious meristems producing a few leaves and then stopping. During
reproductive development, wus mutants produce flowers that largely lack
third and fourth whorl organs. WUS encodes a homeodomain protein that is
expressed in the central region of shoot meristems and young FMs (Mayer
et al., 1998). That WUS might be an LFY cofactor was suggested by the
35S::AG-like phenotype of plants misexpressing WUS under the control of the
LFY or AP3 promoter (Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001). These
phenotypes are dependent upon LFY activity (Lenhard et al., 2001), lending
support to a model in which LFY and WUS work in combination to activate
AG specifically in the inner floral whorls (Fig. 5.5).
Both LFY and WUS bind AG regulatory sequences in vitro (Busch et al.,
1999; Lohmann et al., 2001). Two LFY and two WUS binding sites are found
in close proximity within the AG second intron. All elements required for
proper spatial and temporal regulation of AG expression are contained within
this intron (Sieburth and Meyerowitz, 1997; Busch et al., 1999; Deyholos and
Sieburth, 2000). Although the LFY- and WUS-binding sites are physically
close, LFY and WUS appear to bind independently to their respective sites.
No physical interaction or cooperation of binding was observed in gel shift
experiments (Lohmann et al., 2001). Mutations that disrupt binding by either
LFY or WUS to these sites in vitro result in significantly reduced in vivo
expression of reporter genes that are under the control of these elements
(Busch et al., 1999; Lohmann et al., 2001). Coexpression of LFY and WUS
in yeast stimulated the expression of a reporter gene under the control of AG
regulatory sequence (Lohmann et al., 2001). This transcriptional activity required binding of both factors to the DNA.
After being activated by WUS, AG in turn downregulates the expression
of WUS in the centre of the FM (Lenhard et al., 2001; Lohmann et al., 2001).
WUS expression is at its highest levels during stages 2 and 3 of flower development and is not expressed after stage 6 of flower development when all FM
cells have been used for organ initiation. In indeterminate ag flowers, WUS
expression is maintained in the central region of the FM. It is not known
whether AG regulates WUS expression directly or indirectly.

Transcriptional repression of AG
The lack of AG expression in vegetative tissues and the outer two floral whorls
is a consequence of both the absence of AG activators and the activity of AG
repressors. Repressors of AG expression include APETALA2 (AP2), LEUNIG

112

B. Krizek

(LUG), SEUSS (SEU), STERILE APETALA (SAP), CURLY LEAF (CLF),
INCURVATA2 (ICU2) and BELLRINGER (BLR) (Table 5.1; Fig. 5.6)
(Drews et al., 1991; Jofuku et al., 1994; Liu and Meyerowitz, 1995; Goodrich
et al., 1997; Byzova et al., 1999; Serrano-Cartagena et al., 2000; Franks
et al., 2002; Bao et al., 2004). Mutations in any of these genes result in
ectopic AG expression in the first and second whorl cells leading to partial or
complete homeotic transformations of first whorl sepals into carpels and
second whorl petals into stamens or the loss of second whorl organs. These
factors also function in AG repression in other tissues and at other times in
development. AP2, LUG and SEU act to prevent precocious expression of AG
in stage 2 FMs. SAP acts to repress AG expression in inflorescence stems while
BLR acts to repress AG in the inflorescence meristem (IM) of older shoots. CLF
and ICU2 act to prevent AG expression in leaves. Another factor likely to be
involved in AG regulation is AINTEGUMENTA (ANT). Homeotic changes in
organ identity are not usually observed in ant mutants. However, AG is
expressed precociously in stage 2 ant-9 mutants (Liu et al., 2000) and enhanced AG misexpression is observed in second whorl organs of ap2-1 ant-6
mutants compared to weak ap2-1 single mutants (Krizek et al., 2000).
Several of the known AG repressors encode proteins that are likely to play
roles in transcriptional repression including DNA-binding proteins, transcriptional corepressors and chromatin-modifying factors. AP2 and ANT are members of the AP2/ERF family of plant-specific transcription factors (Jofuku et al.,
1994; Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996). ANT has been shown to
have both DNA-binding (Nole-Wilson and Krizek, 2000) and transcriptionalactivation functions (Vergani et al., 1997; Krizek, 2003). Other potential
transcription factors that may bind directly to AG regulatory sequence are
BLR, a homeodomain protein of the BELL1 class (Byrne et al., 2003; Roeder
et al., 2003; Smith and Hake, 2003) and SAP, a novel protein with similarity
to transcriptional regulators (Byzova et al., 1999). LUG and SEU may function together as a transcriptional corepressor complex. LUG has sequence
similarity with Tup1 in yeast and has recently been demonstrated to possess

Fig. 5.6. Mechanisms regulating AP2 and AG activity. AG is negatively regulated by a number of
factors including AP2, LUG, SEU, SAP, ANT, BLR, CLF and ICU2. These genes act to prevent AG
from being transcribed in the outer two whorls of a flower. HUA1, HUA2, HEN2 and HEN4
promote AG activity by participating in the processing of AG RNA. AP2 activity is restricted to the
outer two floral whorls by the presence of miRNA172 in the inner whorls.

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

113

transcriptional-repression activity in both yeast and plants (Conner and Liu,
2000; Sridhar et al., 2004). This activity was inhibited by incubation with
trichostatin A suggesting that AG repression involves histone deacetylation
(Sridhar et al., 2004). The SEU protein contains two glutamine-rich regions
and a putative dimerization domain similar to that found in the Ldb family
of transcriptional coregulators (Franks et al., 2002). SEU does not have
transcriptional-repression activity on its own but can interact with LUG and
may function as an adapter protein, recruiting LUG to AG regulatory sequences by interacting with DNA-bound transcription factors (Sridhar et al.,
2004). Currently, no physical interactions between LUG (or SEU) and any of
the above-mentioned transcription factors have been described, although it
seems likely that multi-protein transcriptional-repression complexes are formed
at AG regulatory sequences. The specific subunit composition of these complexes may vary with tissue type and developmental time. An additional AG
regulator, CLF, is likely to function in modification of chromatin structure as it
encodes a protein with homology to Polycomb-group proteins like Enhancer of
Zeste (Goodrich et al., 1997).

Post-transcriptional regulation of AG
In addition to transcriptional regulation, AG is regulated post-transcriptionally.
Two different genetic screens have identified several factors that act in the
processing of AG pre-mRNA. The first was an enhancer screen utilizing the
partial loss-of-function ag-4 allele. The ag-4 flowers have a normal third whorl
but the fourth whorl carpel is replaced by a new flower repeating the pattern of
organs: sepals, petals and stamens. Two partially redundant genes, HUA1 and
HUA2 (hua is Chinese for flower), were identified that when mutated in
combination with ag-4 cause a strong ag-like phenotype (Chen and Meyerowitz, 1999). Mutations in either HUA1 or HUA2 alone do not have any
phenotype while hua1 hua2 double mutants have slight defects in stamen
and carpel development. The hua1 hua2 double mutant was the basis for a
second enhancer screen that identified several hua enhancers (hen) mutants,
which in combination with hua1 hua2 cause a more severe ag-like phenotype.
Subsequent cloning and characterization of the HUA and HEN genes identified
in these screens is starting to shed light on their roles in AG regulation.
Four of these genes (HUA1, HUA2, HEN2 and HEN4) appear to play
roles in maturation of AG pre-mRNA (Table 5.1; Fig. 5.6). HUA2 is a novel
protein with low overall similarity to transcriptional coactivators (Chen and
Meyerowitz, 1999). In addition, HUA2 contains an RPR (regulation of premRNA processing) domain that is sometimes found in proteins involved in
RNA metabolism. HEN2 is a putative nuclear RNA helicase homologous to
yeast Dob1p, which can act in RNA degradation (Western et al., 2002). HUA1
encodes a CCCH zinc finger RNA-binding protein while HEN4 encodes a K
homology (KH) domain-containing putative RNA-binding protein ( Li et al.,
2001; Cheng et al., 2003). The two RNA-binding proteins HEN4 and
HUA1 associate together in nuclear speckles. Several RNA bands of larger

114

B. Krizek

size than the fully processed AG mRNA were present at increased levels
in single, double and triple mutant combinations involving hua1, hua2 and
hen4 as well as in hua1 hua2 hen2 triples. These larger transcripts correspond
to RNAs that include the first two exons of AG as well as part of the second
intron but lack exons three to seven and are polyadenylated. It has been
proposed that HUA1, HUA2 and HEN4 proteins act by inhibiting the use of
cryptic polyadenylation sites within the AG second intron or by promoting
proper splicing of AG pre-mRNA. Because HUA1 can bind to AG RNA
in vitro, it is likely that HUA1 and HEN4 bind directly to AG pre-mRNA to
carry out their function.

Translational repression of AP2
The only floral organ-identity gene that does not encode a MADS-domain
protein is the class A gene AP2. Although AP2 is expressed at the mRNA
level in all four whorls of developing flowers, its activity is restricted to the outer
two whorls of the flower. The mechanism behind this spatial restriction of AP2
activity is now becoming clearer. AP2 is regulated post-transcriptionally by
the activity of a microRNA (miRNA). miRNAs are non-coding RNAs of
21–22 nucleotides that are processed from longer hairpin transcripts and are
thought to play important roles in development (reviewed in Mallory and
Vaucheret, 2004). The miRNAs may regulate target gene expression by binding to regions of complementarity in the target transcripts and causing RNA
cleavage and/or translational inhibition. A clue that miRNAs might be involved
in regulation of floral homeotic genes came from the isolation and characterization of an enhancer of the hua1 hua2 double mutant called HEN1. The
single mutants hen1 have a pleiotropic phenotype with defects in organ size,
leaf shape, number of axillary inflorescences and fertility (Chen et al., 2002).
A role for HEN1 in miRNA metabolism was suggested by the similarity of the
hen1 phenotype with carpel factory (caf ) mutants (Table 5.1). CAF encodes
the Arabidopsis homologue of Dicer, a protein with RNase III activity that is
involved in processing of miRNA precursors. The mutants caf and hen1 have
reduced levels of a number of miRNAs (Park et al., 2002).
One of the miRNAs (miRNA172) affected in hen1 has significant sequence
homology to AP2 and three related genes, matching the AP2 sequence in 19 of
the 21 positions. Although AP2 RNA is present in similar amounts in wild-type
and hen1 mutants, AP2 protein is present at higher levels in hen1 mutants
than wild type. The reduced amount of miRNA172 and increased levels of AP2
protein in hen1 suggested that AP2 might be negatively regulated by
miRNA172. Experiments in which miRNA172 was overexpressed under the
control of the 35S promoter confirm this hypothesis. 35S::miRNA172 plants
produce flowers with phenotypes similar to ap2 mutants (Aukerman and Sakai,
2003; Chen, 2004). While normal levels of AP2 mRNA were present in these
overexpression lines, AP2 protein was not detectable. A possible model for
AP2 regulation by miRNA172 can be envisioned in which expression of
miRNA172 in the inner two floral whorls causes translational inhibition

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

115

of AP2 mRNA in these whorls (Fig. 5.6). In this way, AP2 protein (and thus
activity) could be restricted to the outer two floral whorls. This model is supported by the higher levels of miRNA172 in the inner two whorls of the flower
(Chen, 2004); however, the spatial pattern of expression of AP2 protein in
inflorescences has not yet been determined.

Downstream Targets of Floral Organ-identity Genes
Although we have a good understanding of how floral organ identity is specified
by the ABC class genes and how the ABC class genes are regulated, we know
far less about the events occurring downstream of these factors. Few direct
targets of the ABC class transcription factors have been identified. Several
types of transcriptional profiling techniques such as differential screening,
subtractive hybridization, differential display and expression microarrays have
been performed using transgenic and mutant flowers with altered organ identity
(Nacken et al., 1991; Rubinelli et al., 1998; Hu et al., 2003; Zik and Irish,
2003; Hennig et al., 2004; Wellmer et al., 2004). Such studies have identified
a number of genes expressed in flowers that are likely to play important
developmental roles. Some of these genes show organ-specific expression
patterns and may be direct targets of the floral organ-identity proteins. In
most cases, however, such evidence is still lacking.

Genes regulated by the B function
One target of the class B genes was identified via a combined use of differential
display and a steroid-regulated AP3 protein (Sablowski and Meyerowitz, 1998).
To identify genes directly regulated by AP3 and PI that function in petal
organogenesis, a genetic background of ap3-3 ag-3 35S::PI 35S::AP3-GR
was used. In the absence of steroid these plants produce sepals in all four
whorls because they do not have active class B and C functions. After steroid
treatment, these plants produce petals in all four whorls. Inflorescences of these
plants were treated with steroid and cycloheximide or cycloheximide alone and
RNA populations from both treatments were compared using differential display. NAP (NAC-like, activated by AP3/PI), a gene with homology to petunia
NO APICAL MERISTEM (NAM) and Arabidopsis CUP SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC) genes was identified as being positively regulated by AP3 and PI
(Table 5.1). NAP is expressed in both petals and stamens and has been
hypothesized to function in these organs during the developmental transition
from growth due to cell division versus growth due to cell expansion.
A global analysis of genes induced by AP3 and PI was carried out by Zik
and Irish (2003). By comparing gene expression data among mutants that
don’t make petals and stamens (ap3-3 and pi-1), those that only make petals
(steroid treated ap3-3 ag-3 35S::PI 35S::AP3-GR), those that don’t make
stamens (D6::DTA) and wild-type, 47 genes likely to be regulated by AP3/PI
in either petal or stamen development were identified. Some of these genes are

116

B. Krizek

expressed in both petals and stamens while others are petal or stamen specific.
Since the array used in this study represented approximately 25% of the
Arabidopsis genome, the authors estimate that approximately 200 genes
may be regulated by AP3/PI either directly or indirectly. Very few transcription
factors were identified in their experiment suggesting that AP3 and PI might
directly regulate most of the genes needed to make petals and stamens.
However, another global expression experiment using mutants in each of the
class ABC genes identified a much larger number of genes (including a large
number of transcription factors) whose expression is affected by activity of the
floral organ-identity proteins (Wellmer et al., 2004).

Targets of AG regulation
A putative direct target of AG in the fourth whorl is SHATTERPROOF2
(SHP2). SHP1 and SHP2 are closely related and redundant MADS-domain
proteins that are expressed in thin stripes at the boundaries between carpel
valves and replums (Flanagan and Ma, 1994; Savidge et al., 1995). These
valve margin cells develop into the dehiscence zone where cell separation
events lead to detachment of the valve from the replum and subsequent
pod shatter. shp1 shp2 double mutants produce indehiscent fruit that do not
shatter to release seeds (Liljegren et al., 2000). SHP2 has been proposed to be
a direct target of AG. There are several CArG box sites in the SHP2 promoter
to which AG binds in vitro and ectopic expression of AG can activate a SHP2::
b-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene in cauline leaves (Savidge et al., 1995).
Microarray experiments using 35S::AG-GR ag-1 plants have shown that
SPOROCYTELESS (SPL)/NOZZLE (NZZ) is a direct target of the class C
protein AG (Ito et al., 2004). 35S::AG-GR ag-1 plants given a single treatment
with dexamethansone produce locules containing pollen grains on the margins
of the third whorl petaloid organs. SPL/NZZ is known to be required for
microsporogenesis as well as playing roles in ovule patterning, megasporogenesis and anther wall development (Table 5.1) (Schiefthaler et al., 1999; Yang
et al., 1999; Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000, 2002). The activation of
SPL/NZZ in the steroid-activated 35S::AG-GR ag-1 plants is independent of
cycloheximide suggesting that AG directly regulates the expression of this gene.
AG binds to a site within the 3’ region of SPL/NZZ that nearly matches a CArG
box consensus. Mutations in this site that destroy AG binding in vitro also result
in reduced levels and a smaller domain of SPL/NZZ expression in vivo. Based
on a comparison of the expression patterns of AG and SPL, it was proposed
that AG is responsible for the initiation but not the maintenance of SPL
expression. SPL encodes a protein that may function as a transcription factor
and ectopic expression of SPL in an ag-1 background is sufficient to induce
microsporogenesis. This suggests that additional transcriptional regulators
turned on by AG mediate various aspects of AG function in stamen and carpel
organogenesis.

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis

117

Summary
The last 15 years have been an exciting time for plant biologists studying floral
organogenesis. The ABC model for flower development was proposed approximately 13 years ago. Since that time a new class of genes (SEP) have
been added to the model and a new level of understanding of class A, B and C
activity at the protein level has been achieved. Investigations into the regulation
of the floral organ-identity genes have revealed a large number of factors and
complex interactions that regulate these genes at both the transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels.
Despite progress in many areas, several aspects of floral organogenesis
remain relatively uncharacterized. We know little about very early patterning
events that establish the sites of floral organ initiation. What genes establish this
pre-pattern? How are spatial and temporal patterns of cell division controlled
within these meristematic cells such that discrete organ primordia are initiated
at defined positions? New technologies that can monitor cell division and
growth in real time have been described recently (Grandjean et al., 2004;
Reddy et al., 2004). These methods will prove extremely useful in defining
the alterations in cell behaviour that occur in mutants with altered patterns of
floral organ initiation.
Another continuing challenge is to identify components of the regulatory
cascades initiated by the floral organ-identity proteins that lead to the elaboration and final form of each floral organ. The few direct targets of the ABC
class proteins that have been identified up to now function at relatively late
stages in floral organ development. This suggests that the floral organ-identity
proteins function throughout floral organogenesis, first to specify organ identity
and then later to control specific aspects of organogenesis such as regional
growth or differentiation of particular cell types. Several new techniques are
likely to contribute significantly to progress in this area as well. The continued
use of DNA microarrays especially when used in combination with new
technologies such as laser capture microdissection (LCM), which allow gene
profiling within specific cell types rather than whole organs, should be particularly useful (Schnable et al., 2004). Direct targets of transcription factors
can also be identified using chromatin immunoprecipitation. Finally, more
in depth characterizations of genes already identified by microarray and differential screening methods will help to provide a clearer picture of how each
floral organ type acquires its unique morphology and pattern of cell and
tissue types.

Acknowledgement
I acknowledge support for my work from the United States Department of
Energy.

118

B. Krizek

References
Alvarez, J. and Smyth, D.R. (1999)
CRABS CLAW and SPATULA, two
Arabidopsis genes that control carpel
development in parallel with AGAMOUS. Development 126, 2377–
2386.
Alvarez-Buylla, E.R., Pelaz, S., Liljegren,
S.J., Gold, S.E., Burgeff, C., Ditta,
G.S., Ribas de Pouplana, L., Martinez-Castilla, L. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(2000) An ancestral MADS-box gene
duplication occurred before the divergence of plants and animals. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 97, 5328–5333.
Angenent, G.C., Franken, J., Busscher,
M., Weiss, D. and van Tunen, A.J.
(1994) Co-suppression of the petunia
homeotic gene fbp2 affects the identity
of the generative meristem. Plant
Journal 5, 33–44.
Aukerman, M.J. and Sakai, H. (2003)
Regulation of flowering time and floral
organ identity by a microRNA and its
APETALA2-like target genes. Plant
Cell 15, 2730–2741.
Balasubramanian, S. and Schneitz, K.
(2000) NOZZLE regulates proximaldistal pattern formation, cell proliferation and early sporogenesis during
ovule development in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Development 127, 4227–
4238.
Balasubramanian, S. and Schneitz, K.
(2002) NOZZLE links proximal-distal
and adaxial-abaxial pattern formation
during ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 129,
4291–4300.
Bao, X., Franks, R.G., Levin, J.Z. and Liu,
Z. (2004) Repression of AGAMOUS
by BELLRINGER in floral and inflorescence meristems. Plant Cell 16,
1478–1489.
Bowman, J.L. and Smyth, D.R. (1999)
CRABS CLAW, a gene that regulates
carpel and nectary development in
Arabidopsis, encodes a novel protein

with zinc finger and helix-loop-helix domains. Development 126, 2387–
2396.
Bowman, J.L., Smyth, D.R. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991) Genetic interactions
among floral homeotic genes of Arabidopsis. Development 112, 1–20.
Busch, M.A., Bomblies, K. and Weigel, D.
(1999) Activation of a floral homeotic
gene in Arabidopsis. Science 285,
585–587.
Byrne, M.E., Groover, A.T., Fontana,
J.R. and Martienssen, R.A. (2003)
Phyllotactic pattern and stem cell fate
are determined by the Arabidopsis
homeobox gene BELLRINGER. Development 3941–3950.
Byzova, M.V., Franken, J., Aarts,
M.G.M., de Almeida-Engler, J., Engler, G., Mariana, C., Van Lookeren
Campagne, M.M. and Angenent,
G.C. (1999) Arabidopsis STERILE
APETALA, a multifunctional gene
regulating inflorescence, flower, and
ovule development. Genes & Development 13, 1002–1014.
Carpenter, R. and Coen, E.S. (1990)
Floral homeotic mutations produced
by transposon-mutagenesis in Antirrhinum majus. Genes & Development 4, 1483–1493.
Chen, X. (2004) A microRNA as a translational repressor of APETALA2 in
Arabidopsis flower development. Science 303, 2022–2025.
Chen, X. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1999)
HUA1 and HUA2 are two members
of the floral homeotic AGAMOUS
pathway. Molecular Cell 3, 349–360.
Chen, X., Liu, J., Cheng, Y. and Jia, D.
(2002) HEN1 functions pleiotropically
in Arabidopsis development and acts
in C function in the flower. Development 129, 1085–1094.
Cheng, Y., Kato, N., Wang, W., Li, J. and
Chen, X. (2003) Two RNA binding
proteins, HEN4 and HUA1, act in the
processing of AGAMOUS pre-mRNA

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Developmental Cell 4, 53–66.
Cho, S., Jang, S., Chae, S., Chung, K.M.,
Moon, Y.-H., An, G. and Jang, S.K.
(1999) Analysis of the C-terminal region of Arabidopsis thaliana APETALA1 as a transcriptional activation
domain. Plant Molecular Biology 40,
419–429.
Conner, J. and Liu, Z. (2000) LEUNIG, a
putative transcriptional corepressor
that regulates AGAMOUS expression
during flower development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 97, 12902–12907.
Davies, B., Egea-Cortines, M., de
Andrade Silva, E., Saedler, H. and
Sommer, H. (1996) Multiple interactions amongst floral homeotic
MADS box proteins. EMBO Journal
15, 4330–4343.
Deyholos, M.K. and Sieburth, L.E. (2000)
Separable whorl-specific expression
and negative regulation by enhancer
elements within the AGAMOUS second intron. Plant Cell 12, 1799–
1810.
Drews, G.N., Bowman, J.L. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991) Negative regulation
of the Arabidopsis homeotic gene AGAMOUS by the APETALA2 product.
Cell 65, 991–1002.
Egea-Cortines, M., Saedler, H. and Sommer, H. (1999) Ternary complex formation between the MADS-box
proteins SQUAMOSA, DEFICIENS
and GLOBOSA is involved in the control of floral architecture in Antirrhinum majus. EMBO Journal 18,
5370–5379.
Elliott, R.C., Betzner, A.S., Huttner, E.,
Oakes, M.P., Tucker, W.Q.J., Gerentes, D., Perez, P. and Smyth, D.R.
(1996) AINTEGUMENTA, an APETALA2-like gene of Arabidopsis with
pleiotropic roles in ovule development
and floral organ growth. Plant Cell 8,
155–168.
Fan, H.-Y., Hu, Y., Tudor, M. and Ma, H.
(1997) Specific interactions between
the K domains of AG and AGLs, mem-

119
bers of the MADS domain family of
DNA binding proteins. Plant Journal
12, 999–1010.
Ferrario, S., Immink, R.G.H., Shchennikova, A., Busscher-Lange, J. and
Angenent, G.C. (2003) The MADS
box gene FBP2 is required for SEPALLATA function in petunia. Plant Cell
15, 914–925.
Flanagan, C.A. and Ma, H. (1994) Spatially and temporally regulated expression of the MADS box gene AGL2 in
wild-type and mutant Arabidopsis
flowers. Plant Molecular Biology 26,
581–595.
Franks, R.G., Wang, C., Levin, J.Z. and
Liu, Z. (2002) SEUSS, a member of a
novel family of plant regulatory proteins, represses floral homeotic gene
expression with LEUNIG. Development 129, 253–263.
Goodrich, J., Puangsomlee, P., Martin,
M., Long, D., Meyerowitz, E.M. and
Coupland, G. (1997) A Polycombgroup gene regulates homeotic gene
expression in Arabidopsis. Nature
386, 44–51.
Goto, K. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1994)
Function and regulation of the Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene PISTILLATA. Genes & Development 8,
1548–1560.
Goto, N. and Pharis, R.P. (1999) Role of
gibberellins in the development of floral
organs of the gibberellin-deficient mutant, ga1-1, of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Canadian Journal of Botany 77,
944–954.
Grandjean, O., Vernoux, T., Laufs, P.,
Belcram, K., Mizukami, Y. and Traas,
J. (2004) In vivo analysis of cell division, cell growth, and differentiation
at the shoot apical meristem in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16, 74–87.
Gustafson-Brown, C., Savidge, B. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (1994) Regulation of
the Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene
APETALA1. Cell 76, 131–143.
Heisler, M.G.B., Atkinson, A., Bylstra,
Y.H., Walsh, R. and Smyth, D.R.
(2001) SPATULA, a gene that

120

B. Krizek
controls development of carpel margin
tissues in Arabidopsis, encodes a
bHLH protein. Development 128,
1089–1098.
Hennig, L., Gruissem, W., Grossniklaus,
U. and Kohler, C. (2004) Transcriptional programs of early reproductive
stages in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 135, 1765–1775.
Hill, T.A., Day, C.D., Zondlo, S.C.,
Thackeray, A.G. and Irish, V.F.
(1998) Discrete spatial and temporal
cis-acting elements regulate transcription of the Arabidopsis floral homeotic
gene APETALA3. Development 125,
1711–1721.
Honma, T. and Goto, K. (2000) The Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene PISTILLATA is regulated by discrete ciselements responsive to induction and
maintenance signals. Development
127, 2021–2030.
Honma, T. and Goto, K. (2001) Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral
organs. Nature 409, 525–529.
Hu, W., Wang, Y., Bowers, C. and Ma, H.
(2003) Isolation, sequence analysis,
and expression studies of florally expressed cDNAs in Arabidopsis. Plant
Molecular Biology 53, 545–563.
Ito, T., Wellmer, F., Yu, H., Das, P., Ito,
N., Alves-Ferreira, M., Riechmann,
J.L. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004)
The homeotic protein AGAMOUS
controls microsporogenesis by regulation of SPOROCYTELESS. Nature
430, 356–360.
Jack, T., Brockman, L.L. and Meyerowitz,
E.M. (1992) The homeotic gene
APETALA3 of Arabidopsis thaliana
encodes a MADS box and is expressed
in petals and stamens. Cell 68,
683–687.
Jack, T., Fox, G.L. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1994) Arabidopsis homeotic gene
APETALA3 ectopic expression: transcriptional and posttranscriptional
regulation determine floral organ identity. Cell 76, 703–716.

Jofuku, K.D., den Boer, B.G.W., Van
Montagu, M. and Okamuro, J.K.
(1994) Control of Arabidopsis flower
and seed development by the homeotic
gene APETALA2. Plant Cell 6,
1211–1225.
Klucher, K.M., Chow, H., Reiser, L. and
Fischer, R.L. (1996) The AINTEGUMENTA gene of Arabidopsis required
for ovule and female gametophyte development is related to the floral
homeotic gene APETALA2. Plant
Cell 8, 137–153.
Krizek, B.A. (2003) AINTEGUMENTA
utilizes a mode of DNA recognition
distinct from that used by proteins
containing a single AP2 domain.
Nucleic Acids Research 31, 1859–
1868.
Krizek, B.A. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1996)
The Arabidopsis genes APETALA3
and PISTILLATA are sufficient to specify the B class organ identity function.
Development 122, 11–22.
Krizek, B.A., Prost, V. and Macias, A.
(2000) AINTEGUMENTA promotes
petal identity and acts as a negative
regulator of AGAMOUS. Plant Cell
12, 1357–1366.
Lamb, R.S., Hill, T.A., Tan, Q.K.-G. and
Irish, V.F. (2002) Regulation of APETALA3 floral homeotic gene expression by meristem identity genes.
Development 129, 2079–2086.
Laux, T., Mayer, K.F.X., Berger, J. and
Jurgens, G. (1996) The WUSCHEL
gene is required for shoot and floral
meristem integrity in Arabidopsis. Development 122, 87–96.
Lenhard, M., Bohnert, A., Jurgens, G.
and Laux, T. (2001) Termination of
stem cell maintenance in Arabidopsis
floral meristems by interactions between WUSCHEL and AGAMOUS.
Cell 105, 805–814.
Levin, J.Z. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1995) UFO: an Arabidopsis gene
involved in both floral meristem and
floral organ development. Plant Cell
7, 529–548.

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis
Li, J., Jia, D. and Chen, X. (2001) HUA1,
a regulator of stamen and carpel identities in Arabidopsis, codes for a nuclear RNA binding protein. Plant Cell
13, 2269–2281.
Liljegren, S.J., Gustafson-Brown, C.,
Pinyopich, A., Ditta, G.S. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (1999) Interactions
among APETALA1, LEAFY, and
TERMINAL FLOWER1 specify meristem fate. Plant Cell 11, 1007–1018.
Liljegren, S.J., Ditta, G.S., Eshed, Y.,
Savidge, B., Bowman, J. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (2000) SHATTERPROOF MADS-box genes control
seed dispersal in Arabidopsis. Nature
404, 766–770.
Liu, Z. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1995) LEUNIG regulates AGAMOUS expression
in Arabidopsis flowers. Development
121, 975–991.
Liu, Z., Franks, R.G. and Klink, V.P.
(2000) Regulation of gynoecium marginal tissue formation by LEUNIG and
AINTEGUMENTA. Plant Cell 12,
1879–1891.
Lohmann, J.U., Hong, R.L., Hobe, M.,
Busch, M.A., Parcy, F., Simon, R.
and Weigel, D. (2001) A molecular
link between stem cell regulation and
floral patterning in Arabidopsis. Cell
105, 793–803.
Mallory, A.C. and Vaucheret, H. (2004)
MicroRNAs: something important between the genes. Current Opinion in
Plant Biology 7, 120–125.
Mandel, M.A. and Yanofsky, M.Y. (1995)
A gene triggering flower formation
in Arabidopsis. Nature 377, 522–
524.
Mandel, M.A. and Yanofsky, M.F. (1998)
The Arabidopsis AGL9 MADS box
gene is expressed in young flower
primordia. Sexual Plant Reproduction 11, 22–28.
Mandel, M.A., Bowman, J.L., Kempin,
S.A., Ma, H., Meyerowitz, E.M. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (1992a) Manipulation
of flower structure in transgenic tobacco. Cell 71, 133–143.

121
Mandel, M.A., Gustafson-Brown, C.,
Savidge, B. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(1992b) Molecular characterization
of the Arabidopsis floral homeotic
gene APETALA1. Nature 360,
273–277.
Mayer, K.F.X., Schoof, H., Haecker, A.,
Lenhard, M., Jurgens, G. and Laux, T.
(1998) Role of WUSCHEL in regulating stem cell fate in the Arabidopsis
shoot meristem. Cell 95, 805–815.
Meyerowitz, E.M., Bowman, J.L., Brockman, L.L., Drews, G.N., Jack, T.J.,
Sieburth, L. and Weigel, D. (1991) A
genetic and molecular model for flower
development in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Development Supplement 1, 157–
167.
Mizukami, Y. and Ma, H. (1992) Ectopic
expression of the floral homeotic gene
AGAMOUS in transgenic Arabidopsis
plants alters floral organ identity. Cell,
119–131.
Nacken, W.K.F., Huijser, P., Beltran,
J.-P., Saedler, H. and Sommer, H.
(1991) Molecular characterization of
two stamen-specific genes, tap1 and
fil1, that are expressed in the wildtype, but not in the deficiens mutant
of Antirrhinum majus. Molecular and
General Genetics 229, 129–136.
Ng, M. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2001) Activation of the Arabidopsis B class homeotic genes by APETALA1. Plant Cell
13, 739–753.
Nole-Wilson, S. and Krizek, B.A. (2000)
DNA binding properties of the Arabidopsis floral development protein AINTEGUMENTA.
Nucleic
Acids
Research 28, 4076–4082.
Parcy, F., Nilsson, O., Busch, M.A., Lee,
I. and Weigel, D. (1998) A genetic
framework for floral patterning. Nature 395, 561–566.
Park, W., Li, J., Song, R., Messing, J. and
Chen, X. (2002) CARPEL FACTORY,
a dicer homolog, and HEN1, a novel
protein, act in microRNA metabolism
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Current Biology 12, 1484–1495.

122

B. Krizek
Pelaz, S., Ditta, G.S., Baumann, E., Wisman, E. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2000) B
and C floral organ identity functions
require SEPALLATA MADS-box
genes. Nature 405, 200–203.
Pelaz, S., Gustafson-Brown, C., Kohalmi,
S.E., Crosby, W.L. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(2001a) APETALA1 and SEPALLALTA3 interact to promote flower
development. Plant Journal 26,
385–394.
Pelaz, S., Tapia-Lopez, R., AlvarezBuylla, E.R. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(2001b) Conversion of leaves into
petals in Arabidopsis. Current Biology 11, 182–184.
Pnueli, L., Hareven, D., Broday, L., Hurwitz, C. and Lifschitz, E. (1994) The
TM5 MADS box gene mediates organ
differentiation in the three inner whorls
of tomato flowers. Plant Cell 6, 175–
186.
Reddy, G.V., Heisler, M.G., Ehrhardt,
D.W. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004)
Real-time lineage analysis reveals
oriented cell divisions associated with
morphogenesis at the shoot apex of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Development
131, 4225–4237.
Riechmann, J.L. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1997) MADS domain proteins in
plant development. Biological Chemistry 378, 1079–1101.
Riechmann, J.L., Wang, M. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1996) DNA-binding properties of Arabidopsis MADS domain
homeotic proteins APETALA1, APETALA3, PISTILLATA, and AGAMOUS. Nucleic Acids Research 24,
3134–3141.
Roeder, A.H., Ferrandiz, C. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (2003) The role of the
REPLUMLESS homeodomain protein
in patterning the Arabidopsis fruit.
Current Biology 13, 1630–1635.
Rubinelli, P., Hu, Y. and Ma, H. (1998)
Identification, sequence analysis and
expression studies of novel anther-specific genes of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Plant Molecular Biology 37, 607–
619.

Sablowski, R.W.M. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1998) A homolog of NO APICAL
MERISTEM is an immediate target of
the floral homeotic genes APETALA3/PISTILLATA. Cell 92, 93–
103.
Samach, A., Klenz, J.E., Kohalmi, S.E.,
Risseeuw, E., Haughn, G.W. and
Crosby, W.L. (1999) The UNUSUAL
FLORAL ORGANS gene of Arabidopsis thaliana is an F-box protein
required for normal patterning and
growth in the floral meristem. Plant
Journal 20, 433–445.
Savidge, B., Rounsley, S.D. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (1995) Temporal relationship between the transcription of
two Arabidopsis MADS box genes
and the floral organ identity genes.
Plant Cell 7, 721–733.
Schiefthaler, U., Balasubramanian, S.,
Sieber, P., Chevalier, D., Wisman, E.
and Schneitz, K. (1999) Molecular analysis of NOZZLE, a gene involved in
pattern formation and early sporogenesis during sex organ development in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences
USA 96, 11664–11669.
Schnable, P.S., Hochholdinger, F. and
Nakazono, M. (2004) Global expression profiling applied to plant development. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 7, 50–56.
Schwarz-Sommer, Z., Huijser, P.,
Nacken, W., Saedler, H. and Sommer,
H. (1990) Genetic control of flower
development: homeotic genes of
Antirrhinum majus. Science 250,
931–936.
Serrano-Cartagena, J., Candela, H.,
Robles, P., Ponce, M.R., Perez-Perez,
J.M., Piqueras, P. and Micol, J.L.
(2000) Genetic analysis of incurvata
mutants reveals three independent
genetic operations at work in Arabidopsis leaf morphogenesis. Genetics
156, 1363–1377.
Sieburth, L.E. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1997) Molecular dissection of the AGAMOUS control region shows that cis

Molecular Biology of Floral Organogenesis
elements for spatial regulation are located intragenically. Plant Cell 9,
355–365.
Smith, H.M.S. and Hake, S. (2003) The
interaction of two homeobox genes,
BREVIPEDICELLUS and PENNYWISE, regulates internode patterning
in the Arabidopsis inflorescence.
Plant Cell 15, 1717–1727.
Sridhar, V.V., Surendrarao, A., Gonzalez,
D., Conlan, R.S. and Liu, Z. (2004)
Transcriptional repression of target
genes by LEUNIG and SEUSS, two
interacting regulatory proteins for Arabidopsis flower development. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 101, 11494–
11499.
Sun, T. (2000) Gibberellin signal transduction. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 3, 374–380.
Theissen, G. (2001) Development of floral
organ identity: stories from the MADS
house. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 4, 75–85.
Tilly, J.J., Allen, D.W. and Jack, T. (1998)
The CArG boxes in the promoter of
the Arabidopsis floral organ identity
gene APETALA3 mediate diverse
regulatory effects. Development 125,
1647–1657.
Vergani, P., Morandinin, P. and Soave, C.
(1997) Complementation of a yeast
Dpkc1 mutant by the Arabidopsis protein ANT. FEBS Letters 400, 243–
246.
Wagner, D., Sablowski, R.W.M. and
Meyerowitz, E.M. (1999) Transcriptional activation of APETALA1 by
LEAFY. Science 285, 582–584.
Wang, X., Feng, S., Nakayama, N.,
Crosby, W.L., Irish, V., Deng, X.W.
and Wei, N. (2003) The COP9 signalosome interacts with SCFUFO and
participates in Arabidopsis flower

123
development. Plant Cell 15, 1071–
1082.
Weigel, D. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1993)
Activation of floral homeotic genes in
Arabidopsis. Science 261, 1723–
1726.
Weigel, D., Alvarez, J., Smyth, D.R.,
Yanofsky, M.F. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1992) LEAFY controls floral meristem
identity in Arabidopsis. Cell 69, 843–
859.
Wellmer, F., Riechmann, J.L., Alves-Ferreira, M. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004)
Genome-wide analysis of spatial gene
expression in Arabidopsis flowers.
Plant Cell 16, 1314–1326.
Western, T.L., Cheng, Y., Liu, J. and
Chen, X. (2002) HUA ENHANCER2,
a putative DExH-box RNA helicase,
maintains homeotic B and C gene expression in Arabidopsis. Development 129, 1569–1581.
Yang, W.-C., Ye, D., Xu, J. and Sundaresan, V. (1999) The SPOROCYTELESS gene of Arabidopsis is required
for initiation of sporogenesis and encodes a novel nuclear protein. Genes
& Development 13, 2108–2117.
Yanofsky, M.F., Ma, H., Bowman, J.L.,
Drews, G.N., Feldman, K.A. and
Meyerowitz, E.M. (1990) The protein
encoded by the Arabidopsis homeotic
gene AGAMOUS resembles transcription factors. Nature 346, 35–39.
Yu, H., Ito, T., Zhao, Y., Peng, J., Kumar,
P. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2004) Floral
homeotic genes are targets of gibberellin signaling in flower development.
Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 101, 7827–7832.
Zik, M. and Irish, V.F. (2003) Global identification of target genes regulated by
APETALA3 and PISTILLATA floral
homeotic gene action. Plant Cell 15,
207–222.

6

Molecular Developmental Genetics
and the Evolution of Flowers
G. THEISSEN

AND

K. KAUFMANN

Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Philosophenweg 12,
D-07743 Jena, Germany

Introduction
Origin and diversification of angiosperms: an ‘abominable perplexing phenomenon’
The structural diversity of multicellular organisms on our planet originated to a
large extent in two major ‘bursts’. During the ‘Cambrian Explosion’ about 540
million years ago (MYA) the body plans of (almost) all animal taxa (extant and
extinct) originated within a few million years (Valentine et al., 1999); in many
respects, such as number of species, the insects became by far the most
successful group of animals. More than 300 million years later the origin and
diversification of the flowering plants (angiosperms) provided the second example of an apparently ‘sudden’ origin and rapid early morphological radiation. The origin and early diversification of angiosperms was considered an
‘abominable mystery’ and ‘perplexing phenomenon’ by Charles Darwin about
150 years ago, and remained very speculative until today (Crepet, 1998,
2000; Theissen et al., 2002; Frohlich, 2003; Stuessy, 2004).
The contributions of the origin and early diversification of angiosperms to
biodiversity in terrestrial ecosystems were profound. Moreover, angiosperms
provide us, directly or indirectly, with most human food (such as vegetables,
fruits and cereal grains) and a lot of other important products (e.g. used to
prepare clothes, furniture and drugs). Due to the obvious ecological and economic importance of angiosperms, considerable efforts have been made by
botanists and evolutionary biologists to clarify their evolution.
However, understanding the evolutionary origin and diversification of
flowers has remained a considerable scientific challenge (Crepet, 1998,
2000; Frohlich, 1999, 2003; Frohlich and Parker, 2000; Ma and dePamphilis, 2000; Theissen et al., 2002; Winter et al., 2002a; Stuessy, 2004; Theissen and Becker, 2004). Major reasons for this are a quite uninformative (and
probably extremely incomplete) fossil record and the great morphological gap
124

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

125

Fig. 6.1. Diversity of reproductive cones and flowers in spermatophytes. Upper row from left to
right: flower of Arabidopsis thaliana (core eudicot); zygomorphic flower of Antirrhinum majus
(core eudicot); Tulipa turkestanica, a monocot, with petaloid tepals in both outer whorls. Lower
row from left to right: Nymphaea odorata, a basal angiosperm, with undifferentiated perianth;
male cone of Cycas circinalis, a gymnosperm; female cone of Gnetum gnemon, another
gymnosperm.

between angiosperm flowers and the reproductive structures of angiosperms’
closest relatives, the gymnosperms, which leads to problems with homology
assignments between reproductive organs from flowering plants and their
putative ancestors (Frohlich, 2003). Gymnosperms comprise extant conifers
(the most species-rich group), gnetophytes (Fig. 6.1), cycads (Fig. 6.1), Ginkgos, and diverse extinct groups such as Bennettitales, Cordaitales, corystosperms, glossopterids and some others (Doyle, 1998).
There is no perfect agreement among students of flower evolution as to
which are the key characters that distinguish angiosperms from gymnosperms;
however, the presence of carpels enclosing the ovules is generally considered
essential (Crane et al., 1995; Endress, 2001; Stuessy, 2004). Another feature
that distinguishes typical angiosperm flowers from most of the reproductive
cones of gymnosperms is the fact that male and female reproductive organs are
usually united in one structure (or secondarily separated, as in the unisexual
flowers of monoecious and dioecious angiosperms), while they might be primarily separated in different structures in gymnosperms (Fig. 6.1). Yet another
typical feature of angiosperm flowers distinguishing them from gymnosperm
cones is the presence of a perianth surrounding the reproductive organs, often
including attractive organs of petaloid appearance (petals or tepals) (Fig. 6.1).

126

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

The origin of organ types and the series of morphological changes by
which the floral organs of angiosperms originated are largely unknown. Equally
unknown is how they have been assembled into flowers. Despite the sudden
appearance of the combination of all angiosperm features (and hence angiosperms) in the fossil record, the origin of flowering plants was not necessarily a
rapid process. On the contrary, Stuessy (2004) suggested that angiosperms
may have evolved slowly from seed ferns in the Jurassic, beginning first with the
carpel followed later by double fertilization and lastly by the appearance of
flowers, a process that may well have taken more than 100 million years to
complete. Only when the final combination of the essential angiosperm features was achieved, an ‘explosive’ evolutionary diversification may have set in.
This raises the question as to why the angiosperms have been so ‘successful’ during evolution. One important aspect may have been that the arrangement of male and female organs in hermaphroditic flowers facilitated
outcrossing by animal pollinators (mainly insects such as flies, butterflies,
moths and beetles). Optimization of outcrossing and attendant modifications
in compatibility, breeding systems and seed dispersal (often also employing
animal vectors) might have enabled angiosperms to colonize even scattered and
rare but diverse and manifold ecological niches due to the avoidance of inbreeding suppression at remote habitats (and thus helped to establish many
more niches). Such niches may not have been accessible by the gymnosperms
due to their simple pollination and seed dispersal systems. The ability to exist at
scattered and rare places might have boosted speciation and thus might have
significantly contributed to the enormous diversity within angiosperms. Coevolution with their pollinators might thus have catalysed waves of radiation of both
angiosperms and insects, which eventually allowed them to dominate the vast
majority of terrestrial ecosystems (Behrensmeyer et al., 1992). In addition to
animal pollinators, selection from animal predators might very well have played
a great role during angiosperm radiation (Stuessy, 2004).
Testing such hypotheses about flower origin and diversification may require many more well-preserved fossils documenting the floras and faunas of
past times, and providing ‘missing links’ between extant forms. But even if we
knew the precise evolutionary series of morphological transitions and the
‘ultimate’ causes of the evolution of angiosperm flowers, the molecular genetic
mechanisms of the different evolutionary innovations that generated floral
structures and led to their diversification in the first place would remain unknown. These ‘proximate’ causes of the evolution of flowers that provided the
raw material for selection are the major focus of this chapter.

Phylogeny of spermatophytes
Understanding the evolution of flowers requires clarification of the phylogeny
of the clade of angiosperms þ gymnosperms (spermatophytes, seed plants).
During recent years the use of molecular markers has considerably changed our
view on the evolution of spermatophytes. Nevertheless, the deep evolutionary
relationships among the major groups of seed plants and the identification of

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

127

the most basal angiosperms have remained quite controversial. Unfortunately,
these are the most relevant topics for a better understanding of the origin of
angiosperm flowers.
Extant gymnosperms are a structurally very diverse group and hence have
usually been considered to be paraphyletic by traditional botanists, with gnetophytes often regarded as the sister group of the angiosperms (Doyle, 1998).
However, quite a number of independent molecular marker studies rather
surprisingly suggested that gnetophytes are more closely related to conifers
than to angiosperms (Winter et al., 1999), and that all extant gymnosperms
constitute a monophyletic group (see e.g. Chaw et al., 1997, 2000; Bowe
et al., 2000; Frohlich and Parker, 2000). According to these studies extant
gymnosperms and angiosperms are sister groups. They separated about 300
million years ago, as also suggested by molecular evidence (see e.g. Goremykin
et al., 1997). Only recently, an about 270 million-year-old fossil cone has been
reported that shares morphological features with both gnetophytes and conifers, suggesting a close relationship between both groups of gymnosperms
(Wang, 2004). Moreover, investigations on the morphogenesis of the male
reproductive structures of two gnetalean species (Welwitschia mirabilis and
Ephedra distachya) proposed that conifers, Gnetales and Cordaitales originated from a common ancestor (Mundry and Stutzel, 2004). Thus palaeobotanical, neobotanical and molecular evidence has eventually started to converge
on the same view of seed plant evolution.
According to a number of investigations employing molecular data to
reconstruct angiosperm phylogeny, the most basal extant angiosperm is
Amborella trichopoda followed by Nymphaeales (water lilies) as the next
branch, and then by a clade uniting Illiciaceae, Schisandraceae, Trimeniaceae
and Austrobaileyaceae (Fig. 6.2) (for a review, see Kuzoff and Gasser, 2000;
Bremer et al., 2003; Soltis and Soltis, 2003). For this grade of possibly most
basal flowering plants the term ‘ANITA’ has been coined (Qiu et al., 1999).
However, the basal position of the ANITA taxa is not undisputed. Some studies
favour a clade of Amborella þ Nymphaeales as basal (Barkman et al., 2000;
Graham and Olmstead, 2000), and studies based on whole chloroplast genome
sequences even consider Amborella and Nymphaeales as eudicots and the
monocots as closer to the base of the angiosperm tree (Goremykin et al.,
2003, 2004).
If the ANITA taxa are indeed the most basal angiosperms, the most recent
common ancestor of extant angiosperms probably already had hermaphroditic
flowers with an undifferentiated perianth, in which organs were arranged in
more than two cycles or a spiral. Differentiated sepals and petals may have
evolved later during the evolution of angiosperms (Kuzoff and Gasser, 2000). If
so, and assuming monophyly of extant gymnosperms, the morphological gap
between the most basal angiosperms and their closest living relatives appears
even wider than previously often assumed (Theissen et al., 2002). In any case,
employing molecular markers to reconstruct seed plant phylogeny could not
solve the mystery of the origin of angiosperm flowers so far.
The same is true for palaeobotanical approaches. The oldest known unequivocal angiosperm fossils represent two species of the genus Archaefructus

128

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

Asteridae: Antirrhinum,
Petunia
Cornales

Eudicots

Rosidae: Arabidopsis
Saxifragales
Caryophyllales
Gunnerales
Proteales
Ranunculales
Ceratophyllaleles

Monocots: Oryza,
Tulipa

Magnoliidae
Chloranthaceae
Austrobaileyales (ITA)

Nymphaeales

ANITA
grade

Amborellaceae

Gymnosperms: Gnetum

Fig. 6.2. Outline of the angiosperm phylogeny according to the APGII system (Bremer et al.,
2003). Larger groups of angiosperms are marked in bold. Genus names of model plant species
and species that are mentioned in this publication are placed in the groups they belong to.
Gymnosperms form the sister group to angiosperms.

from the uppermost Jurassic about 125 million years ago, at most (Sun et al.,
2002). Its only moderate age and a combination of both primitive and nonprimitive characters, however, do not qualify Archaefructus as a plausible very
early angiosperm. It has even been argued that Archaefructus is a crowngroup angiosperm specialized for aquatic habit rather than a more primitive
relative (Friis et al., 2003).
In the framework of the ANITA hypothesis, the clade comprising all
flowering plants except the ANITA grade is called the ‘euangiosperms’, comprising the Magnoliidae, monocots, Chloranthaceae, Ceratophyllales and

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

129

eudicots (Fig. 6.2). The eudicots comprise a grade of successive branches, with
Ranunculales as sister to all other eudicots, and a large clade of ‘core eudicots’
containing the majority of all angiosperm species including the model plants
thale cress (Arabidopsis thaliana; henceforth termed Arabidopsis), snapdragon (Antirrhinum majus; Antirrhinum) and petunia (Petunia hybrida;
Petunia) (Kuzoff and Gasser, 2000; Soltis and Soltis, 2003).

Why evo-devo, and how?
The difficulties of traditional botany and palaeobotany to explain flower origin
and diversification led to the application of alternative approaches such as
evolutionary developmental genetics (‘evo-devo’, for short). Its rationale in the
context of flower evolution has been outlined in quite some detail elsewhere
(Theissen and Saedler, 1995; Theissen et al., 2000, 2002). Briefly, multicellular organisms usually develop from single cells (zygotes) in each generation
anew, implying that morphological changes in evolution always occur by
changes in developmental processes. Since development is largely under genetic control, the basic corollary of evo-devo follows, i.e. that novel morphological forms in evolution usually result from changes in function of genes that
control developmental processes. Thus typical evo-devo projects investigate
the phylogeny of developmental-control genes and its role in the evolution of
morphological features. Concerning flower development and evolution, some
classes of MADS-box genes are of special interest (Theissen et al., 2000),
because they specify the identity of floral organs in some core eudicotyledonous
model plants such as Arabidopsis, Antirrhinum and Petunia, and probably
also in most (if not all) other angiosperms.
The typical flower of a core eudicot is composed of four different classes of
organs arranged in four whorls: there are usually small, green sepals in the first
and outermost whorl; often large and showy petals in the second whorl; male
reproductive organs (stamens) in the third whorl; and female reproductive
organs (carpels) in the fourth and innermost whorl. However, outside of the
core eudicots floral architecture is much more diverse (Fig. 6.1).
Based on the analysis of three different classes of homeotic mutants in
which the identity of the floral organs has changed in a systematic way, simple
hypotheses were suggested to explain how the identity of organs is specified
during flower development by unique combinations of the activities of three
different classes of ‘floral organ-identity genes’ (Fig. 6.3B–F). These genes are
subdivided into class A, B and C genes and are expressed in the organ
primordia of whorls one and two (class A), two and three (class B) and three
and four (class C), respectively (Fig. 6.3H) (for a review, see Theissen, 2001).
According to the ‘ABC model’ (Coen and Meyerowitz, 1991), expression of
class A genes alone leads to sepal formation. The combination of A with B
specifies the development of petals. The combination B and C leads to the
formation of stamens, and expression of C alone determines the development
of carpels. The ABC model also proposes that the class A and class C genes
regulate each other in an antagonistic way, such that the class A genes become

130

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

Fig. 6.3. Class A (C), B (D, E) and C mutants (F) in Arabidopsis compared to wild-type flower (B), the
ABCDE model (H upper part) and the ‘floral quartet’ model of flower development in Arabidopsis
(H lower part; G); (A–F: from Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997 with kind permission from the
publisher (Walter de Gruyter, Berlin); G: from Theissen and Saedler, 2001 with kind permission
from the publisher (Nature Publishing Group); H: modified from Theissen, 2001).

expressed throughout the flower when the class C gene is defective, and vice
versa (for a review of the ABC model, see Theissen, 2001). The ABC genes are
considered as encoding developmental switches that activate the entire genetic
programme for one particular organ, and repress non-appropriate genetic
programmes. In Arabidopsis there are two different class A genes, APETALA1 (AP1) and APETALA2 (AP2), two class B genes, APETALA3 (AP3)
and PISTILLATA (PI), but just one class C gene, AGAMOUS (AG). All these
genes encode putative transcription factors (for a review, see Theissen and
Saedler, 1999; Theissen, 2001), and except AP2, they are all members of the
MADS box-gene family (for reviews about MADS box genes in plants, see
Riechmann and Meyerowitz, 1997; Theissen et al., 2000, 2002; Ng and
Yanofsky, 2001; Becker and Theissen, 2003; De Bodt et al., 2003).
The ABC model was a milestone in the progress of our understanding of
flower development, but it has two major shortcomings: the ABC genes are
required, but not sufficient for the specification of floral organ identity. Moreover, the ABC model did not provide a molecular mechanism for the interaction of floral homeotic genes during the specification of floral organ identity.
The ABC model was later extended by class D genes involved in ovule
development (Angenent and Colombo, 1996), and class E genes (Theissen,
2001) required for petal, stamen and carpel development (Fig. 6.3H) (Pelaz
et al., 2000). Furthermore, the gene-based ‘ABCDE’ model obtained this
way was transformed into a protein-based ‘floral quartet model’ (Fig. 6.3G)
(Theissen, 2001; Theissen and Saedler, 2001). It explains the interaction of

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

131

floral homeotic genes at the molecular level by the capacity of floral homeotic
proteins to form tetrameric complexes of transcription factors (floral quartets).
Some of these protein complexes are not only required but also sufficient to
superimpose floral organ identity upon the developmental programme of
vegetative leaves (Honma and Goto, 2001). Thus understanding the evolutionary origin of these protein complexes might be quite revealing with respect to
understanding flower origin and diversification (Theissen and Saedler, 2001).
In the following sections, the unfolding drama of floral evolution is presented in two major acts: (i) flower origin; and (ii) floral diversification.

Flower Origin
Since the identity of floral organs is specified by conserved floral organ-identity
genes, clarifying the phylogeny of these genes and their protein products may
provide us with valuable insights into the evolution of flowers (for reviews, see
Theissen and Saedler, 1995; Theissen et al., 2000, 2002). Analysis of numerous MADS box genes from mosses and ferns suggested that orthologues of
floral homeotic genes are absent in non-seed plants (for a review, see Theissen
et al., 2000). However, orthologues of class B and class C floral homeotic
genes were identified in different conifers and in the gnetophyte Gnetum
gnemon, orthologues of class C floral homeotic genes were also reported
for Cycas and Ginkgo (Tandre et al., 1995, 1998; Rutledge et al., 1998;
Mouradov et al., 1999; Sundstrom et al., 1999; Winter et al., 1999; Theissen
et al., 2000; Fukui et al., 2001; Jager et al., 2003; Theissen and Becker,
2004; Zhang et al., 2004). This suggests that B- and C-type genes were
established by gene duplications and sequence divergence in the lineage that
led to extant seed plants, after the lineage that led to extant ferns had already
branched off, i.e. 300–400 million years ago, even though some molecular
clock estimates suggested a considerably earlier origin of these genes (Nam
et al., 2003).
The expression patterns of gymnosperm B and C genes are characteristically similar to those of class B and class C genes in angiosperms; while C genes
are generally expressed in both male and female reproductive organs, B genes
are predominantly expressed in male reproductive organs (and angiosperm
petals) (for a review, see Theissen et al., 2000; Theissen and Becker, 2004).
When expressed in the flowering plant Arabidopsis under the control of constitutive promoters, some B and C genes from Gnetum and Picea (representing
gnetophytes and conifers, respectively) can at least partially substitute for their
angiosperm orthologues in different kinds of experiments (Sundstrom and
Engstrom, 2002; Winter et al., 2002a). Even complementation of class B and
class C gene null mutants of Arabidopsis could be achieved with a B gene from
Gnetum and a C gene from Cycas, respectively; complementation of the class B
gene mutant by the Gnetum B gene was only partial, however (Winter et al.,
2002a; Zhang et al., 2004). Together with the expression data in gymnosperms, these findings suggest that the ABC system specifying floral organ
identity evolved from a precursor system (BC system) that was already

132

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

established in the most recent common ancestor of extant seed plants about 300
million years ago (Winter et al., 1999). The BC system may have specified
female reproductive organs by the expression of C genes and male reproductive
organs by the expression of both C and B genes (Theissen et al., 2002; Theissen
and Becker, 2004). Alternatively, the floral homeotic function of B and C class
genes may have been recruited from an ancestral non-homeotic function in
reproductive organ development in gymnosperms.
If differential expression of B genes specifying male organ identity represents the primary sex-determination mechanism of all seed plants (Winter et al.,
1999), switching from male to female organ identity, or vice versa, could in
principle result from changes in the expression of just one gene. This B gene
might encode a transcription factor that controls, directly or indirectly, all the
target genes required to bring about male rather than female organ identity
during development. Assuming such a simple switch mechanism allowed the
development of novel hypotheses on the origin of flowers (Theissen et al.,
2002). These hypotheses start with truly unisexual axes as existing in most
extant gymnosperms.
The ‘out-of-male’ scenario assumes that hermaphroditic flowers originated
from a male gymnosperm cone, and that reduction of B gene expression in the
upper region of the male cone led to the development of female instead of male
reproductive units in this upper region (Theissen et al., 2002). The ‘outof-female’ scenario maintains that flowers originated from a female cone.
Under this hypothesis ectopic expression of B genes in the basal region of
the female cone led to the development of male rather than female reproductive units in this basal region (Theissen et al., 2002). In both scenarios, a
perianthless flower-like structure with male reproductive units in the basal
region (outer whorls) and female reproductive units in the apical region (inner
whorls) would have been established. Mutant analysis indicates that the structural transition predicted in these hypotheses is developmentally possible. In
the conifer, Picea abies ‘acrocona’ hermaphroditic cones with female reproductive units at the top and male organs underneath have occasionally been
observed (Theissen and Becker, 2004).
Among the molecular changes, which might have caused the modifications
in B gene expression are changes in genes that control B gene expression
(encoding ‘trans-acting factors’) or changes in the cis-regulatory elements of
the B genes themselves (for a more detailed discussion, see Theissen and
Becker, 2004). Accordingly, conserved differences in upstream regulators of
B gene expression between angiosperms and gymnosperms, specifically those
that prevent B gene expression in the central part of the floral meristem or
promote B gene expression specifically in the second and third whorl could
provide evidence for the ‘out-of-male’ scenario.
Under the hypotheses discussed here the perianth originated later than the
arrangement of both male and female reproductive organs in flowers. A major
reason for this assumption is that the identity of all the organs of perianthless
flowers could be specified by organ-identity genes (B and C genes) that were
probably established already in the most recent common ancestor of extant seed
plants. In line with this, the flowers of Archaefructus, the oldest unequivocal

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

133

angiosperm fossils known, have no recognizable perianth and they display
flowers as predicted by the out-of-male and out-of-female hypotheses, with
female organs (carpels) at the top of floral axes and male organs (stamens)
attached underneath (Sun et al., 2002). Even though Archaefructus may not
really represent an ancestral angiosperm (Friis et al., 2003), perianthless
flowers may well represent a character state that was more common in the
early days of angiosperm evolution than it is today (Taylor and Hickey, 1996).
Class A floral homeotic genes from the MADS box-gene family (so-called
SQUAMOSA-like genes), specifying the identity of sepals and petals in core
eudicots, originated later during seed plant evolution, i.e. after the lineage that
led to extant angiosperms had split off from the gymnosperm lineage, probably
by recruitment from floral meristem-identity genes (Theissen et al., 2000).
Even later class B genes, in addition to their ancestral function in specifying
male reproductive organs, may have been recruited to specify petaloid perianth
organs (Theissen et al., 2002).
The out-of-male and out-of-female hypotheses are not the only scenarios on
flower origin that can be considered from molecular evidence. Two alternative
hypotheses have been inspired by phylogeny reconstructions of the floral meristem-identity gene FLORICAULA (FLO)/LEAFY (LFY) and its orthologues
(Frohlich and Parker, 2000; Albert et al., 2002). Extant gymnosperms have
two paralogous copies of the LFY gene, termed LEAF and NEEDLE genes
(Frohlich, 2003). Phylogenetic reconstructions suggest that the most recent
common ancestor of extant gymnosperms and angiosperms had both a LEAF
and a NEEDLE gene, but that the NEEDLE paralogue was lost in the angiosperm lineage shortly after its separation from the gymnosperm lineage
(Frohlich and Parker, 2000). This, and the expression patterns of the LEAF
(PRFLL) and NEEDLE (NLY) genes from the conifer Pinus radiata (mainly in
male or female cones, respectively), has been taken as evidence that flower
organization derives more from the male structure of ancestral gymnosperms
than from the female structure – hence this hypothesis has been termed the
‘Mostly Male Theory’ (Frohlich and Parker, 2000; Frohlich, 2003). Though this
aspect is similar to the out-of-male hypothesis, their supposed molecular mechanisms are quite different. The ‘Mostly Male Theory’ maintains that female
organs (ovules) develop ectopically in male cones, caused by, e.g. the ectopic
expression of ovule-identity genes (such as D genes, or C/D gene precursors) in
male cones. In contrast, under the out-of-male hypothesis, spatial changes in B
gene expression caused the initial morphological change (as outlined above).
Yet another hypothesis of the origin of flowers, though based on the same
data, comes to conclusions that are quite different from those of the Mostly
Male Theory. Albert et al. (2002) consider the fact that both LEAF and
NEEDLE paralogues from gymnosperms can complement lfy null mutants of
Arabidopsis. The authors conclude thus that the male–female segregation in
gymnosperms is not determined by differences in the coding regions of the
LFY-like genes, but by differential regulation of LEAF (male) and NEEDLE
(female) promoters. They propose that ‘sexual condensation’ (hermaphroditism) in angiosperms might have originated when previously distinct spatial
regulation of copies of LFY-like genes in separate male and female apices

134

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

was amalgamated into singular LEAF control in all reproductive meristems
following loss of the NEEDLE gene. Albert et al. (2002) hypothesize that
positive selection on the partly redundant LEAF paralogue trapped reproductively unisexual angiosperm ancestors into a condensed, bisexual state. In clear
contrast to the Mostly Male Theory and the out-of-male hypothesis (or the outof-female hypothesis, respectively), the hypothesis by Albert et al. (2002) does
not predict that early stages of flower development are controlled mainly by
genes orthologous to those expressed in male (or female) structures of gymnosperms.
A more detailed comparison of current hypotheses on flower origin that
take molecular genetic evidence into account is given by Theissen and Becker
(2004). Unfortunately, all these hypotheses suffer from our very limited knowledge about the developmental genetics of gymnosperms. However, in contrast
to previous hypotheses they make predictions that can be tested by applying
molecular biology tools to extant plants (Soltis et al., 2002; Frohlich, 2003).

Floral diversification
The flowers of the 250,000 or so extant angiosperm species on Earth vary in
many different ways such as the identity, number, arrangement and shape of
floral organs, and the symmetry of the flower as a whole (see, e.g. Fig. 6.1).
These differences are all of great potential interest for future evo-devo studies
aiming at understanding the developmental genetic basis of floral biodiversity.
Mutants in model plants exist for all of these characters. However, detailed
studies have been carried out so far only on organ identity and shape and floral
symmetry, which are hence also the focus of this chapter.

Organ identity
Changes in the expression patterns of floral homeotic genes
Changes in the expression domains of floral homeotic genes in mutant or
transgenic plants can bring about homeotic transformations of floral organs
(Fig. 6.3C–F). For example, the expression of class C genes in the whorls of the
perianth leads to a transformation of sepals into carpelloid organs and of petals
into staminoid organs (Bradley et al., 1993). The ectopic expression of class B
genes in the first and fourth floral whorls of Arabidopsis leads to a transformation of sepals into petaloid organs and of carpels into staminoid organs (Krizek
and Meyerowitz, 1996). But are such changes suitable models for evolutionary
processes?
Under a paradigm of gradualistic evolution homeotic transformations are
generally considered as of little evolutionary importance. It is assumed that they
undermine the fitness of the affected organisms in such a serious way that there
is always strong selection against them. However, in an evo-devo framework
drastic (saltational), yet coordinated morphological changes appear more
likely (Theissen et al., 2000, 2002; Bateman and DiMichele, 2002; Kramer

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

135

et al., 2003), and they possibly appear more plausible in the case of plants
whose growth form is more ‘open’ and modular than that of animals. In line
with this, De Craene (2003) provided morphological evidence for the evolutionary significance of homeosis in the flowers of diverse angiosperms such as
Rosaceae, Papaveraceae and Lacandonia. For example, there is strong phylogenetic and morphological evidence that the petals of the Rosaceae (comprising well-known cultivated plants such as roses, strawberries and apples) were
derived from stamens (De Craene, 2003).
To determine whether changes in the spatial or temporal expression of
floral homeotic genes have contributed to the structural diversification of the
flower during angiosperm evolution, comparative expression studies in flowers
with different architectures are required. In the following we discuss a few
molecular case studies that corroborate the view that homeotic transitions
played a role during the evolution of flowers.
The perigon of Liliaceae
Tulip (e.g. Tulipa gesneriana), lily (e.g. Lilium regale) and most of their
relatives in the lily family (Liliaceae) have flowers displaying organ identities
quite similar to the ones of higher eudicots. However, first whorl organs are
typically petaloid like second whorl organs rather than sepaloid, i.e. the perianth is a perigon composed of two whorls of tepals (Fig. 6.1). This suggests a
‘modified ABC model’ showing expression of class B genes not only in the
organs of whorls two and three, but also in the organs of the first whorl. When
class B genes were investigated in lily and tulip, they were found to be
expressed in the organs of the first three whorls of the flower, as predicted by
the modified ABC model (Theissen et al., 2000; Kanno et al., 2003). Defining
the exact roles of class B genes in tulip and lily flower development still requires
mutant analysis. However, these findings already support the view that shifts in
the boundaries of class B floral homeotic gene expression and hence floral
homeotic changes contributed to the difference between typical eudicot and
monocot flowers.
However, in the flowers of garden asparagus (Asparagus officinalis),
another member of the lily family, class B genes are only expressed in the
third (stamen) and second (inner tepal) whorl but not in the first (outer tepal)
whorl, although asparagus has also two whorls of almost identical petaloid
tepals (Park et al., 2003, 2004a). How asparagus specifies the identity of
first whorl tepals, and whether presence or absence of B gene expression in
the first whorl of flowers of the lily family represents the ancestral state, remains
to be seen.
Petaloid organs in Ranunculaceae
Many flowers of the basal eudicot family Ranunculaceae have distinctly different petaloid organs in the first two whorls (even though the first whorl organs
are usually called ‘sepals’). Kramer et al. (2003) identified many duplication
events of class B genes at different phylogenetic levels, with AP3-like genes
displaying early duplications near the base of eudicots and PI-like genes more
recent duplications. Expression studies suggest not only that petaloidy of first

136

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

whorl organs is due to a shift of B gene expression towards the first floral whorl
(as in lily and tulip) but also that differential expression of a particular lineage of
AP3-like genes has contributed to the distinction of the petaloid organs in the
first and second floral whorl (Kramer et al., 2003). Again, future mutant
analysis will be required to corroborate or falsify these hypotheses.

Changes in floral homeotic proteins
Translational frameshifts
Besides changes in expression patterns, differentiation in the coding regions of
floral homeotic genes also may have contributed to the evolution of flowers
(Vandenbussche et al., 2003). Most B proteins including all from gymnosperms, basal angiosperms, monocots and the TM6-like proteins from eudicots
contain a conserved C-terminal sequence named ‘paleoAP3 motif’ (Kramer
et al., 1998). However, some B proteins from core eudicots – including all class
B floral homeotic proteins known to date – have an ‘euAP3 motif’ that differs
strongly in its sequence from the paleoAP3 motif. Vandenbussche et al. (2003)
provided evidence strongly suggesting that the euAP3 motif originated from
the paleoAP3 motif by a translational frameshift mutation in a DEF-like class B
gene at the base of the core eudicots. Both paleoAP3 (TM6 lineage) and
euAP3 genes have been isolated from several core eudicots, suggesting
that euAP3 genes originated by duplication of a paleoAP3 ancestral gene
followed by a frameshift mutation in one of the copies.
The two motifs are functionally not equivalent. When a paleoAP3 motif
replaced the euAP3 motif, the respective chimerical AP3 construct could partly
substitute stamens in the third whorl of Arabidopsis ap3-3 (class B gene)
mutants but second whorl organs remained mutant, i.e. sepaloid (Lamb
and Irish, 2003). This finding is quite reminiscent of the observations made
with GGM2, a B gene from the gymnosperm G. gnemon, which has
also a paleoAP3 motif (Winter et al., 2002a). It thus seems that a euAP3
motif is required for the formation of petals in core eudicots. Interestingly,
Vandenbussche et al. (2003) and Litt and Irish (2003) identified an additional
C-terminal frameshift mutation in another subfamily of MADS-box genes,
termed ‘SQUA-like genes’, including also class A genes. Similar to the situation
in class B proteins, SQUA-like proteins with ‘paleoAP3 motifs’ were found in
all types of flowering plants, but proteins with ‘euAP1 motifs’ only in core
eudicots. Thus genes encoding class B proteins with euAP3 motifs, genes
encoding class A proteins with euAP1 motifs and the type of petal present in
core eudicots probably all originated almost simultaneously (on evolutionary
time scales) near the base of core eudicots (Litt and Irish, 2003; Vandenbussche
et al., 2003). Remarkably, class A and B proteins constitute multimeric transcription factor complexes involved in petal formation in core eudicots, making
it conceivable that the two translational frameshift mutations, the formation of
multimeric transcription factor complexes, the origin of petals in core eudicots
and the recruitment of these complexes for the specification of petal identity
were somehow linked events.

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

137

Protein–protein interactions
MADS-domain proteins bind as dimers to DNA sequences known as CArGboxes (consensus sequence: 5’-CC(A/T)6GG-3’), or to very similar sequences.
The well-studied class B proteins from some eudicot model plants are stable and
functional in the cell only as heterodimers of a DEF/AP3-like and a GLO/PIlike protein. These obligate heterodimers regulate their own expression at the
transcriptional level by binding to CArG-boxes in the promoters of their own
genes, and are thus co-expressed in petals and stamens during flower development. Heterodimerization is also absolutely required for movement of B proteins into the nucleus and DNA binding in vitro (reviewed by Theissen and
Becker, 2004).
In contrast, a diversity of interaction patterns, including obligate and facultative heterodimerization as well as homodimerization, has been found for class
B proteins from monocots such as tulip (T. gesneriana) and lily (L. regale)
(Winter et al., 2002b; Kanno et al., 2003). All orthologous proteins from
gymnosperms tested so far, comprising proteins from the gnetophyte
G. gnemon and the conifer P. abies, revealed the ability to homodimerize
(Sundstrom and Engstrom, 2002; Winter et al., 2002b).
These data suggest that the interaction of B proteins evolved from homodimerization in gymnosperms via facultative and obligate heterodimerization in
monocots to exclusively obligate heterodimerization in core eudicots (Winter
et al., 2002b). But why did B protein interaction evolve in this intriguing way?
One hypothesis maintains that by restricting functional class B gene expression
to sharp domains (whorls) within the flower; obligate heterodimerization may
have contributed to the evolution of standardized and canalized structures of
core eudicot flowers (Winter et al., 2002b).
Another intriguing topic is the origin of multimeric complexes of MADSdomain proteins. The ‘floral quartet model’ explains the interaction of floral
homeotic genes at the molecular level by the capacity of floral homeotic proteins
to form tetrameric complexes of transcription factors (Theissen, 2001; Theissen
and Saedler, 2001). Up to now, such complexes have only been shown in vitro
and in yeast-3-hybrid and yeast-4-hybrid systems, so demonstrating their relevance in planta will be an important goal for the near future. But assuming that
these higher order complexes are of functional relevance, the question arises as to
when during evolution did dimers of MADS-domain protein get the capacity to
form multimeric complexes? So far such complexes are only known from core
eudicots (Egea-Cortines et al., 1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Ferrario et al.,
2003), so one hypothesis may hold that they are restricted to the angiosperms (or
even restricted to some groups of angiosperms); an extreme alternative is the
assumption that higher order complex formation is an intrinsic property of all
MIKC-type MADS-domain proteins (Kaufmann et al., 2005). These proteins
have been named after their conserved domain structure (Munster et al., 1997).
MIKC-type genes have been found so far in all major groups of green plants (but
nowhere else), and they include all of the plant MADS-box genes for which
detailed information about their function (as revealed by a mutant phenotype) is
available. It appears likely that clarifying the evolution of these protein complexes

138

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

will help to better understand flower origin and diversification (Theissen and
Saedler, 2001; Kaufmann et al., 2005).

Carpel structure
The carpel represents the most outstanding key innovation in angiosperm
evolution (Taylor and Kirchner, 1996; Endress, 2001; Stuessy, 2004). The
primary function of the carpel is to protect the ovules, to mediate and regulate
pollination and to facilitate seed dispersal. The origin of the carpel is still
unclear. According to one scenario the carpel originated from a ‘megasporophyll’, a leaf-like structure bearing ovules on the adaxial surface. Another
theory suggests a composite nature of the carpel, consisting of an ovule-bearing
shoot system that is surrounded by a bract-like organ (Friis and Endress, 1990;
Taylor and Kirchner, 1996; Endress, 2001).
Carpel morphology is highly variable among angiosperms. Number and
positioning of ovules may influence carpel morphology, as do coevolution with
pollinators and seed dispersal strategies. A pioneer study of Yamaguchi et al.
(2003, 2004) suggests that the morphological difference of Arabidopsis and
rice carpels is reflected in differences at the level of gene regulation. Here the
functions of CRABS CLAW (CRC) and related genes in Arabidopsis and rice
are reviewed as a case study for variation in molecular programmes directing
carpel development in angiosperms.
CRC is a member of a small gene family in Arabidopsis, termed the
YABBY genes, encoding transcription factors (Bowman and Smyth, 1999).
YABBY (YAB) genes have been proposed to promote abaxial cell fates in
leaves and reproductive organs (Siegfried et al., 1999; Bowman, 2000; Eshed
et al., 2001). They act together with and are regulated by KANADI (KAN)
genes, which constitute another gene family important for promoting abaxial
cell identity (Eshed et al., 2001).
In contrast to other members of this gene family, CRC is specifically
expressed in the carpels and nectaries of Arabidopsis flowers (Bowman and
Smyth, 1999). In the carpel, CRC expression becomes restricted to two
domains: an epidermal and an internal one. Epidermal expression is mostly,
but not exclusively, in the outer layer (abaxial), similar to other members of this
family like FILAMENTOUS FLOWER (FIL), YAB2 or YAB3 (Bowman and
Smyth, 1999; Siegfried et al., 1999; Watanabe and Okada, 2003). Internal
expression is adjacent to where the placental tissue develops; no expression is
detectable in placentas, septum, stigma or ovules (Bowman and Smyth, 1999).
Single mutants of CRC do not show a polarity phenotype in the carpel, but
suggest a role of CRC in suppression of early radial growth and promotion of
longitudinal growth. The mutant carpels are furthermore unfused at the apex.
When combined with kan-2, crc mutations result in adaxial tissues developing
in abaxial positions in the carpel, leading to ovule formation at the abaxial side
of the carpel (Eshed et al., 1999). There may be redundancy of CRC with other
members of the YAB gene family (Eshed et al., 1999). The fil mutants also
show regular deformation of carpels (Chen et al., 1999; Sawa et al., 1999a,b).

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

139

They have multiple defects in flower development and may provide an interesting link between the specification of abaxial–adaxial identity and the establishment of the posterior-distal axis in the flower (Chen et al., 1999). Double
and triple mutant analyses have identified genetic interactions between floral
homeotic genes and CRC. CRC is negatively regulated by class B genes
(Alvarez and Smyth, 1999; Bowman and Smyth, 1999). These data suggest
that CRC has an important function in shaping the carpel morphology of
Arabidopsis.
Carpel morphology in the monocot rice (Oryza sativa) is quite different
from that in Arabidopsis. The Arabidopsis carpel consists of specialized
structures such as septa, abaxial repla, transmitting tissues and placenta
(Bowman and Smyth, 1999; Bowman et al., 1999; Alvarez and Smyth,
2002), which are adaptations for a larger number of ovules and for seed
dispersal. In contrast, the rice carpel is relatively simply organized. It consists
of a single compound pistil of two carpels and a superior ovary with one locule
containing a single ovule. Accordingly, the CRC orthologue in rice, DROOPING LEAF (DL) is expressed in all the carpel except from the central part from
which the ovule arises (Yamaguchi et al., 2004). Unlike Arabidopsis, severe
loss-of-function mutations of DL in rice result in the homeotic transformation
of carpels into stamens and loss of determinacy (Nagasawa et al., 2003;
Yamaguchi et al., 2003, 2004). Similar to CRC, however, DL acts antagonistically to class B floral homeotic genes.
So at which level has functional diversification occurred between CRC and
DL? It appears that DL expression is clearly more evenly distributed throughout
the carpel. Some basic regulatory circuits like the antagonistic interaction with
class B genes are apparently conserved. Yamaguchi et al. (2004) speculate that
DL may have been recruited to acquire critical functions in the specification of
carpel identity during grass evolution. Another aspect of functional diversification between CRC and DL is the role of DL outside the flower. Unlike CRC,
DL is expressed in leaves, particularly in central regions of leaf primordia
(Yamaguchi et al., 2004). Accordingly, dl mutants fail to form the midrib in
the leaf. Similar ‘drooping leaf’ phenotypes have been observed in other grass
species, which may suggest that orthologues with similar functions are present
at least in the grass family.
Recent data from a basal angiosperm support the view that the additional
roles of DL in rice are derived rather than ancestral and may have originated in
the monocot lineage. Fourquin et al. (2005) studied the expression pattern of a
CRC orthologue in the putative basal angiosperm Amborella trichopoda.
They found expression in the carpel wall very similar to the situation in
Arabidopsis. Thus the important role of CRC orthologues in the determination
of carpel morphology may be largely conserved among angiosperms, while
additional functions have evolved later associated with floral diversification.
The expression of another member of the YAB gene family, related to the
Arabidopsis ovule-specific regulator of abaxial identity, INNER NO OUTER
(INO) (Baker et al., 1997; Villanneva et al., 1999), has been studied in a basal
angiosperm, Nymphaea (Yamada et al., 2003). Interestingly, the expression
of this gene also appears to be conserved with respect to Arabidopsis.

140

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

YAB genes are also present in gymnosperms, and there is evidence that
the diversification in this gene family predates angiosperm origin. Studying the
evolution of YAB genes in more detail may significantly contribute to our
understanding of carpel origin and diversification.

Floral symmetry
The evolution and diversification of floral symmetry was dynamic and variable
throughout angiosperm history. Taxa belonging to the ANITA clade of basal
angiosperms have usually acyclic or partially acyclic flowers, caused by spiral
arrangement of floral organs (Fig. 6.1). The number of floral organs is variable.
Spiral arrangement of floral organs in mature flowers and variable organ
number may represent ancestral conditions in angiosperms.
Aside from the ANITA group, a polysymmetric (actinomorphic, radial) or
monosymmetric (zygomorphic) cyclical arrangement of floral organs is most
frequent (Fig. 6.1). Floral symmetry is not fixed in development; early stages of
flower initiation may differ from mature flowers (Endress, 1999). This emphasizes the need to integrate morphological and molecular approaches to flower
development to draw valid conclusions about evolutionary scenarios (Endress,
1999; Buzgo et al., 2004).
Flowers of the model plant A. thaliana (Fig. 6.1) are radially symmetric
(actinomorphic) with respect to perianth organs, but bilaterally symmetric
(disymmetric) with respect to stamen and carpel whorls. Full actinomorphy of
all floral whorls is infrequent among higher eudicots and mainly confined
to groups of monocots and some basal eudicots (Rudall and Bateman, 2004).
This morphological diversity is reflected in a dynamic evolutionary pattern
in changes of symmetry across angiosperms (Neal et al., 1998; Reeves
and Olmstead, 2003; Rudall and Bateman, 2004). Its flexibility is a major
determinant in the coevolution of plants and their pollinators (Neal et al.,
1998).
Key regulators of floral symmetry have been identified by the analysis of
peloric mutants, which have radially symmetric flowers in species with otherwise bilaterally symmetric flowers. In Antirrhinum, bilateral symmetry is
mainly controlled by CYCLOIDEA (CYC) and its paralogue DICHOTOMA
(DICH) (Luo et al., 1996, 1999). These genes determine dorsal organ identity
by affecting growth rate and primordium initiation. Mutations in CYC produce
an intermediate (semipeloric) phenotype; cyc dich double mutants are fully
ventralized and radially symmetrical.
CYC and DICH belong to the TCP family of plant-specific transcription
factors, which is named after its first characterized members: TEOSINTE
BRANCHED1 (TB1) from maize, CYC from Antirrhinum and PCF1 from
O. sativa. CYC/DICH and TB1 belong to a subfamily of TCP genes, which is
additionally characterized by an arginine-rich R domain additional to the
DNA-binding TCP domain (Cubas, 2002). The putative orthologue of CYC
in Arabidopsis, TCP1, is expressed transiently at the adaxial base of floral
and axillary meristems (Cubas et al., 2001). This suggests that asymmetric

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers

141

expression of CYC-like genes may predate the divergence of rosids and
asterids, the major clades of core eudicots (Fig. 6.2).
TB1 has been identified as a key gene involved in maize domestication
(Doebley et al., 1995, 1997) that prevents outgrowth of axillary buds at lower
nodes and promotes ear development at upper nodes (Hubbard et al., 2002).
Interestingly, gene expression is conserved among CYC, TCP1 and TB1 in
second and third whorl floral organs, whose identity is controlled by class B
floral homeotic genes.
The phylogenetic relationships of TCP genes at the level of angiosperms
are not well resolved, due to lineage and site-specific differences in evolutionary
rates as well as large gaps in gene sampling (Citerne et al., 2003). This may
reflect a general pattern for genes that have undergone multiple adaptive
changes in response to modifications of internal and external functional constraints. Studying patterns of molecular evolution of this gene family in relation
to morphological differentiation at a lower evolutionary time scale has become
very attractive (Citerne et al., 2000; Gubitz et al., 2003; Hileman and Baum,
2003; Reeves and Olmstead, 2003; Rudall and Bateman, 2003, 2004; Ree
et al., 2004; Smith et al., 2004). Developmental changes in the evolution of
zygomorphy have been mostly studied in relatives of Antirrhinum (Scrophulariaceae, order Lamiales) so far. Lamiales show an interesting distribution of
different levels of zygomorphy (Endress, 1998). Linnaeus already described a
naturally occurring peloric mutant in Linaria vulgaris (Scrophulariaceae) more
than 250 years ago (reviewed by Theissen, 2000). The plants reproduce
vegetatively as the mutant flowers are inaccessible to pollinators. Cubas et al.
(1999) could show that this mutation was caused by hypermethylation at the
LCYC locus, the CYC orthologue of Linaria. Partial demethylation causes
recovery of the LCYC transcription and the flowers revert to wild type (for a
more detailed review and discussion, especially of the evolutionary implications, see Theissen, 2000).
In general, the evolutionary contribution of peloric mutants to floral diversification and speciation is still not well understood. Rudall and Bateman (2003)
surveyed complete or partial peloric mutants in natural populations and found
examples throughout the angiosperms with an enhanced number of examples
in mints and orchids. In some cases these mutants may have kept their ability to
reproduce to form populations and could be regarded as ‘hopeful monsters’ for
the establishment of new evolutionary lineages (Rudall and Bateman, 2003).
The successful establishment of peloric mutants in the wild may in many cases
require co-adaptation of pollinators to the new floral forms. Alternatively,
additional mutations are required to allow access of generalist pollinators to
the flowers (Cronk and Moller, 1997; Cubas, 2002). An example may be the
genus Ramonda (Gesneriaceae) with its nearly actinomorphic flowers, which
has a much reduced corolla tube compared to its close relatives with zygomorphic flowers (Cubas, 2002).
CYC-like genes may have a conserved function in the establishment of
zygomorphy in the order Lamiales. Citerne et al. (2000) studied CYC-like
genes in the family Gesneriaceae. They found a frameshift mutation in
a CYC-like gene of a naturally occurring homeotic mutant of Sinningia

142

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann

speciosa. Genetic analyses will have to reveal whether there is a correlation
between the mutant locus and the peloric phenotype. The phylogeny of CYClike genes in Gesneriaceae is characterized by the occurrence of family-specific
gene duplications. Hileman and Baum (2003) studied the expression of CYC
and DICH orthologues in Mohavea confertifolia (Scrophulariaceae). They
found slight shifts in expression domains in both genes, which they correlate
to differences in flower morphology between Mohavea and Antirrhinum. In
particular, they correlate lateral stamen abortion to an expansion of CYC and
DICH expression, and changes in adaxial petal symmetry to a reduction of
DICH expression. This analysis may represent a good case study to show that
simple changes in the expression of regulatory genes may relate to floral
diversification and coevolution with pollinators.
A still open question is whether floral asymmetry is also outside the
Lamiales controlled by CYC-like genes. For example, it would be particularly
interesting to determine whether CYC-like genes are involved in the establishment of zygomorphy in the capitulum (flower head) of the Asteraceae (Cubas,
2002).

Outlook
There is evidence that changes in both regulatory and coding regions of
developmental control genes, modifying the expression patterns of these
genes and the function of the proteins they encode, have contributed to the
origin as well as the diversification of flowers during the evolution of angiosperms. Many of these genes are members of moderate to large families
encoding transcription factors, important examples being the MADS-box,
YAB and TCP genes. Further investigations on these ‘evo-devo genes’ thus
promise a significant leap forwards towards a better understanding of flower
origin and diversification.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Hannelore Simon and Rainer Melzer for providing pictures
of tulip and Gnetum, respectively.

References
Albert, V.A., Oppenheimer, D.G. and
Lindqvist, C. (2002) Pleiotropy,
redundancy and the evolution of
flowers. Trends in Plant Science 7,
297–301.
Alvarez, J. and Smyth, D.R. (1999)
CRABS CLAW and SPATULA, two

Arabidopsis genes that control carpel
development in parallel with AGAMOUS. Development 126, 2377–
2386.
Alvarez, J. and Smyth, D.R. (2002) Crabs
claw and Spatula genes regulate
growth and pattern formation during

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers
gynoecium development in Arabidopsis thaliana. International Journal of
Plant Sciences 163, 17–41.
Angenent, G.C. and Colombo, L. (1996)
Molecular control of ovule development. Trends in Plant Science 1,
228–232.
Baker, S.C., RobinsonBeers, K., Villanueva, J.M., Gaiser, J.C. and Gasser,
C.S. (1997) Interactions among genes
regulating ovule development in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics 145,
1109–1124.
Barkman, T.J., Chenery, G., McNeal,
J.R., Lyons-Weiler, J., Ellisens, W.J.,
Moore, G., Wolfe, A.D. and dePamphilis, C.W. (2000) Independent and
combined analyses of sequences from
all three genomic compartments converge on the root of flowering plant
phylogeny. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
97, 13166–13171.
Bateman, R.M. and DiMichele, W.A.
(2002) Generating and filtering major
phenotypic novelties: neoGoldschmidtian saltation revisited. In: Cronk,
Q.C., Bateman, R.M. and Hawkins,
J.M. (eds) Developmental Genetics
and Plant Evolution. Taylor & Francis, London, pp. 109–159.
Becker, A. and Theissen, G. (2003) The
major clades of MADS-box genes and
their role in the development and evolution of flowering plants. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 29,
464–489.
Behrensmeyer, A.K., Damuth, J.D., DiMichele, W.A., Potts, R., Sues, H.D. and
Wing, S.L. (1992) Terrestrial Ecosystems Through Time. Chicago University Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Bowe, L.M., Coat, G. and dePamphilis,
C.W. (2000) Phylogeny of seed plants
based on all three genomic compartments: extant gymnosperms are
monophyletic and Gnetales’ closest relatives are conifers. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
97, 4092–4097.

143

Bowman, J.L. (2000) The YABBY gene
family and abaxial cell fate. Current
Opinion in Plant Biology 3, 17–22.
Bowman, J.L. and Smyth, D.R. (1999)
CRABS CLAW, a gene that regulates
carpel and nectary development in
Arabidopsis, encodes a novel protein
with zinc finger and helix-loop-helix domains. Development 126, 2387–
2396.
Bowman, J.L., Baum, S.F., Eshed, Y., Putterill, J. and Alvarez, J. (1999) Molecular
genetics of gynoecium development in
Arabidopsis. Current Topics in Developmental Biology 45, 155–205.
Bradley, D., Carpenter, R., Sommer, H.,
Hartley, N. and Coen, E. (1993) Complementary floral homeotic phenotypes result from opposite orientations
of a transposon at the Plena-Locus of
Antirrhinum. Cell 72, 85–95.
Bremer, B., Bremer, K., Chase, M.W.,
Reveal, J.L., Soltis, D.E., Soltis, P.S.,
Stevens, P.F., Anderberg, A.A., Fay,
M.F., Goldblatt, P., Judd, W.S.,
Kallersjo, M., Karehed, J., Kron,
K.A., Lundberg, J., Nickrent, D.L.,
Olmstead, R.G., Oxelman, B., Pires,
J.C., Rodman, J.E., Rudall, P.J., Savolainen, V., Sytsma, K.J., van der Bank,
M., Wurdack, K., Xiang, J.Q.Y.,
Zmarzty, S. and Grp, A.P. (2003) An
update of the angiosperm phylogeny
group classification for the orders and
families of flowering plants: APG II.
Botanical Journal of the Linnean
Society 141, 399–436.
Buzgo, M., Soltis, D.E., Soltis, P.S. and
Ma, H. (2004) Towards a comprehensive integration of morphological and
genetic studies of floral development.
Trends in Plant Science 9, 164–173.
Chaw, S.M., Zharkikh, A., Sung, H.M.,
Lau, T.C. and Li, W.H. (1997) Molecular phylogeny of extant gymnosperms
and seed plant evolution: analysis of
nuclear 18S rRNA sequences. Molecular Biology and Evolution 14, 56–68.
Chaw, S.M., Parkinson, C.L., Cheng,
Y.C., Vincent, T.M. and Palmer, J.D.

144

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann
(2000) Seed plant phylogeny inferred
from all three plant genomes: monophyly of extant gymnosperms and
origin of Gnetales from conifers. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 97, 4086–4091.
Chen, Q.Y., Atkinson, A., Otsuga, D.,
Christensen, T., Reynolds, L. and
Drews, G.N. (1999) The Arabidopsis
FILAMENTOUS FLOWER gene is required for flower formation. Development 126, 2715–2726.
Citerne, H.L., Moller, M. and Cronk,
Q.C.B. (2000) Diversity of cycloidealike genes in Gesneriaceae in relation
to floral symmetry. Annals of Botany
86, 167–176.
Citerne, H.L., Luo, D., Pennington, R.T.,
Coen, E. and Cronk, Q.C. (2003)
A phylogenomic investigation of
CYCLOIDEA-like TCP genes in the
Leguminosae. Plant Physiology 131,
1042–1053.
Coen, E.S. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991)
The war of the whorls: genetic interactions controlling flower development. Nature 353, 31–37.
Crane, P.R., Friis, E.M. and Pedersen,
K.R. (1995) The origin and early diversification of angiosperms. Nature 374,
27–33.
Crepet, W.L. (1998) The abominable
mystery. Science 282, 1653–1654.
Crepet, W.L. (2000) Progress in understanding angiosperm history, success,
and relationships: Darwin’s abominably ‘perplexing phenomenon’. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 97, 12939–12941.
Cronk, Q.C. and Moller, M. (1997) Genetics of floral asymmetry revealed.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution
12, 85–86.
Cubas, P. (2002) Role of TCP genes in the
evolution of morphological characters
in angiosperms. In: Hawkins, J.M. (ed.)
Developmental Genetics and Plant
Evolution. Taylor & Francis, London
and New York, pp. 247–266.
Cubas, P., Vincent, C. and Coen, E.
(1999) An epigenetic mutation respon-

sible for natural variation in floral symmetry. Nature 401, 157–161.
Cubas, P., Coen, E. and Zapater, J.M.M.
(2001) Ancient asymmetries in the
evolution of flowers. Current Biology
11, 1050–1052.
De Bodt, S., Raes, J., Van de Peer, Y.
and Theissen, G. (2003) And then
there were many: MADS goes genomic. Trends in Plant Science 8,
475–483.
De Craene, L.P.R. (2003) The evolutionary significance of homeosis in flowers:
morphological perspective. International Journal of Plant Sciences
164, S225–S235.
Doebley, J., Stec, A. and Gustus, C.
(1995) Teosinte Branched1 and the
origin of maize – evidence for epistasis
and the evolution of dominance. Genetics 141, 333–346.
Doebley, J., Stec, A. and Hubbard, L.
(1997) The evolution of apical dominance in maize. Nature 386, 485–488.
Doyle, J.A. (1998) Phylogeny of vascular
plants. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics 29, 567–599.
Egea-Cortines, M., Saedler, H. and
Sommer, H. (1999) Ternary complex
formation between the MADS-box
proteins SQUAMOSA, DEFICIENS
and GLOBOSA is involved in the
control of floral architecture in
Antirrhinum majus. EMBO Journal
18, 5370–5379.
Endress, P.K. (1998) Antirrhinum and
Asteridae – evolutionary changes of
floral symmetry. Symposium of the
Society of Experimental Biology 51,
133–140.
Endress, P.K. (1999) Symmetry in
flowers: diversity and evolution. International Journal of Plant Sciences
160, S3–S23.
Endress, P.K. (2001) Origins of flower
morphology. Journal of Experimental Zoology 291, 105–115.
Eshed, Y., Baum, S.F. and Bowman, J.L.
(1999) Distinct mechanisms promote
polarity establishment in carpels of
Arabidopsis. Cell 99, 199–209.

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers
Eshed, Y., Baum, S.F., Perea, J.V. and
Bowman, J.L. (2001) Establishment
of polarity in lateral organs of plants.
Current Biology 11, 1251–1260.
Ferrario, S., Immink, R.G., Shchennikova,
A., Busscher-Lange, J. and Angenent,
G.C. (2003) The MADS box gene
FBP2 is required for SEPALLATA
function in petunia. Plant Cell 15,
914–925.
Fourquin, C., Vinauger-Douard, M.,
Fogliani, B., Dumas C. and Scutt,
C.P. (2005) Evidence that CRABS
CLAW and TOUSLED have conserved
their roles in carpel development since
the ancestor of the extant angiosperms. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 102,
4649–4654.
Friis, E.M. and Endress, P.K. (1990) Origin and evolution of angiosperm
flowers. Advances in Botanical Research Incorporating Advances in
Plant Pathology 17, 99–162.
Friis, E.M., Doyle, J.A., Endress, P.K. and
Leng, Q. (2003) Archaefructus –
angiosperm precursor or specialized
early angiosperm? Trends in Plant
Science 8, 369–373.
Frohlich, M.W. (1999) MADS about Gnetales. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 96,
8811–8813.
Frohlich, M.W. (2003) An evolutionary
scenario for the origin of flowers.
Nature Reviews Genetics 4, 559–566.
Frohlich, M.W. and Parker, D.S. (2000)
The mostly male theory of flower evolutionary origins: from genes to fossils.
Systematic Botany 25, 155–170.
Fukui, M., Futamura, N., Mukai, Y.,
Wang, Y.Q., Nagao, A. and Shinohara, K. (2001) Ancestral MADS box
genes in sugi, Cryptomeria japonica
D. Don (Taxodiaceae), homologous to
the B function genes in angiosperms.
Plant and Cell Physiology 42,
566–575.
Goremykin, V.V., Hansmann, S. and
Martin, W.F. (1997) Evolutionary an-

145

alysis of 58 proteins encoded in six
completely sequenced chloroplast genomes: revised molecular estimates of
two seed plant divergence times.
Plant Systematics and Evolution
206, 337–351.
Goremykin, V.V., Hirsch-Ernst, K.I.,
Wolfl, S. and Hellwig, F.H. (2003) Analysis of the Amborella trichopoda
chloroplast genome sequence suggests
that Amborella is not a basal angiosperm. Molecular Biology and Evolution 20, 1499–1505.
Goremykin, V.V., Hirsch-Ernst, K.I.,
Wolfl, S. and Hellwig, F.H. (2004)
The chloroplast genome of Nymphaea
alba: whole-genome analyses and the
problem of identifying the most basal
angiosperm. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 21, 1445–1454.
Graham, S.W. and Olmstead, R.G. (2000)
Utility of 17 chloroplast genes for inferring the phylogeny of the basal angiosperms. American Journal of
Botany 87, 1712–1730.
Gubitz, T., Caldwell, A. and Hudson, A.
(2003) Rapid molecular evolution of
CYCLOIDEA-like genes in Antirrhinum
and its relatives. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 20, 1537–1544.
Hileman, L.C. and Baum, D.A. (2003)
Why do paralogs persist? Molecular
evolution of CYCLOIDEA and related
floral symmetry genes in Antirrhineae
(Veronicaceae). Molecular Biology
and Evolution 20, 591–600.
Honma, T. and Goto, K. (2001) Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral
organs. Nature 409, 525–529.
Hubbard, L., McSteen, P., Doebley, J. and
Hake, S. (2002) Expression patterns
and mutant phenotype of teosinte
branched1 correlate with growth suppression in maize and teosinte. Genetics 162, 1927–1935.
Jager, M., Hassanin, A., Manuel, M., Le
Guyader, H. and Deutsch, J. (2003)
MADS-box genes in Ginkgo biloba
and the evolution of the AGAMOUS

146

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann
family. Molecular Biology and Evolution 20, 842–854.
Kanno, A., Saeki, H., Kameya, T., Saedler,
H. and Theissen, G. (2003) Heterotopic
expression of class B floral homeotic genes supports a modified ABC
model for tulip (Tulipa gesneriana).
Plant Molecular Biology 52, 831–841.
Kaufmann, K., Melzer, R. and Theißen,
G. (2005) MIKC-type MADS-domain
proteins: structural modularity, protein
interactions and network evolution in
land plants. Gene 347, 183–198.
Kramer, E.M., Di Stilio, V.S. and Schluter,
P.M. (2003) Complex patterns of gene
duplication in the APETALA3 and PISTILLATA lineages of the Ranunculaceae. International Journal of Plant
Sciences 164, 1–11.
Kramer, E.M., Dorit, R.L. and Irish, V.F.
(1998) Molecular evolution of genes
controlling petal and stamen development: duplication and divergence
within the APETALA3 and PISTILLATA MADS-box gene lineages. Genetics 149, 765–783.
Krizek, B.A. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1996)
The Arabidopsis homeotic genes APETALA3 and PISTILLATA are sufficient
to provide the B class organ identity
function. Development 122, 11–22.
Kuzoff, R.K. and Gasser, C.S. (2000) Recent progress in reconstructing angiosperm phylogeny. Trends in Plant
Science 5, 330–336.
Lamb, R.S. and Irish, V.F. (2003)
Functional divergence within the
APETALA3/PISTILLATA
floral
homeotic gene lineages. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 100, 6558–6563.
Litt, A. and Irish, V.F. (2003) Duplication
and diversification in the APETALA1/
FRUITFULL floral homeotic gene lineage: implications for the evolution of
floral development. Genetics 165,
821–833.
Luo, D., Carpenter, R., Vincent, C.,
Copsey, L. and Coen, E. (1996) Origin
of floral asymmetry in Antirrhinum.
Nature 383, 794–799.

Luo, D., Carpenter, R., Copsey, L., Vincent,
C., Clark, J. and Coen, E. (1999) Control
of organ asymmetry in flowers of
Antirrhinum. Cell 99, 367–376.
Ma, H. and dePamphilis, C. (2000) The
ABCs of floral evolution. Cell 101, 5–8.
Mouradov, A., Hamdorf, B., Teasdale,
R.D., Kim, J.T., Winter, K.U. and
Theissen, G. (1999) A DEF/GLO-like
MADS-box gene from a gymnosperm:
Pinus radiata contains an ortholog of
angiosperm B class floral homeotic
genes. Developmental Genetics 25,
245–252.
Mundry, M. and Stutzel, T. (2004) Morphogenesis of the reproductive shoots
of Welwitschia mirabilis and Ephedra
distachya (Gnetales), and its evolutionary implications. Organisms Diversity
& Evolution 4, 91–108.
Munster, T., Pahnke, J., Di Rosa, A.,
Kim, J.T., Martin, W., Saedler, H.
and Theissen, G. (1997) Floral homeotic genes were recruited from homologous MADS-box genes preexisting in
the common ancestor of ferns and
seed plants. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
94, 2415–2420.
Nagasawa, N., Miyoshi, M., Sano, Y.,
Satoh, H., Hirano, H., Sakai, H. and
Nagato, Y. (2003) SUPERWOMAN1
and DROOPING LEAF genes control
floral organ identity in rice. Development 130, 705–718.
Nam, J., dePamphilis, C.W., Ma, H. and
Nei, M. (2003) Antiquity and evolution
of the MADS-box gene family controlling flower development in plants. Molecular Biology and Evolution 20,
1435–1447.
Neal, P.R., Dafni, A. and Giurfa, M.
(1998) Floral symmetry and its role in
plant-pollinator systems: terminology,
distribution, and hypotheses. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics
29, 345–373.
Ng, M. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2001)
Function and evolution of the plant
MADS-box gene family. Nature
Reviews Genetics 2, 186–195.

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers
Park, J.H., Ishikawa, Y., Ochiai, T.,
Kanno, A. and Kameya, T. (2004a)
Two GLOBOSA-like genes are
expressed in second and third whorls
of homochlamydeous flowers in
Asparagus officinalis L. Plant and
Cell Physiology 45, 325–332.
Park, J.H., Ishikawa, Y., Yoshida, R.,
Kanno, A. and Kameya, T. (2003) Expression of AODEF, a B-functional
MADS-box gene, in stamens and
inner tepals of the dioecious species
Asparagus officinalis L. Plant Molecular Biology 51, 867–875.
Pelaz, S., Ditta, G.S., Baumann, E.,
Wisman, E. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(2000) B and C floral organ identity
functions require SEPALLATA MADSbox genes. Nature 405, 200–203.
Qiu, Y.L., Lee, J.H., BernasconiQuadroni, F., Soltis, D.E., Soltis, P.S.,
Zanis, M., Zimmer, E.A., Chen, Z.D.,
Savolainen, V. and Chase, M.W.
(1999) The earliest angiosperms: evidence from mitochondrial, plastid and
nuclear genomes. Nature 402, 404–
407.
Ree, R.H., Citerne, H.L., Lavin, M. and
Cronk, Q.C.B. (2004) Heterogeneous
selection on LEGCYC paralogs in relation to flower morphology and the
phylogeny of Lupinus (Leguminosae).
Molecular Biology and Evolution 21,
321–331.
Reeves, P.A. and Olmstead, R.G. (2003)
Evolution of the TCP gene family in
Asteridae: cladistic and network approaches to understanding regulatory
gene family diversification and its impact on morphological evolution. Molecular Biology and Evolution 20,
1997–2009.
Riechmann, J.L. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1997) MADS domain proteins in
plant development. Biological Chemistry 378, 1079–1101.
Rudall, P.J. and Bateman, R.M. (2003)
Evolutionary change in flowers and inflorescences: evidence from naturally
occurring terata. Trends in Plant Science 8, 76–82.

147

Rudall, P.J. and Bateman, R.M. (2004)
Evolution of zygomorphy in monocot
flowers: iterative patterns and developmental constraints. New Phytologist
162, 25–44.
Rutledge, R., Regan, S., Nicolas, O.,
Fobert, P., Cote, C., Bosnich, W., Kauffeldt, C., Sunohara, G., Seguin, A. and
Stewart, D. (1998) Characterization of
an AGAMOUS homologue from the
conifer black spruce (Picea mariana)
that produces floral homeotic conversions when expressed in Arabidopsis.
Plant Journal 15, 625–634.
Sawa, S., Ito, T., Shimura, Y. and Okada,
K. (1999a) FILAMENTOUS FLOWER
controls the formation and development of Arabidopsis inflorescences
and floral meristems. Plant Cell 11,
69–86.
Sawa, S., Watanabe, K., Goto, K.,
Kanaya, E., Morita, E.H. and
Okada, K. (1999b) FILAMENTOUS
FLOWER, a meristem and organ identity gene of Arabidopsis: encodes a
protein with a zinc finger and HMGrelated domains. Genes & Development 13, 1079–1088.
Siegfried, K.R., Eshed, Y., Baum, S.F.,
Otsuga, D., Drews, G.N. and Bowman,
J.L. (1999) Members of the YABBY
gene family specify abaxial cell fate
in Arabidopsis. Development 126,
4117–4128.
Smith, J.F., Hileman, L.C., Powell, M.P.
and Baum, D.A. (2004) Evolution of
GCYC, a Gesneriaceae homolog of
CYCLOIDEA, within Gesnerioideae
(Gesneriaceae). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 31, 765–779.
Soltis, D.E. and Soltis, P.S. (2003) The
role of phylogenetics in comparative
genetics. Plant Physiology 132,
1790–1800.
Soltis, D.E., Soltis, P.S., Albert, V.A.,
Oppenheimer, D.G., dePamphilis,
C.W., Ma, H., Frohlich, M.W.,
Theissen, G. and Grp, F.G.P.R. (2002)
Missing links: the genetic architecture of
flower and floral diversification. Trends
in Plant Science 7, 22–31.

148

G. Theissen and K. Kaufmann
Stuessy, T.F. (2004) A transitional-combinational theory for the origin of
angiosperms. Taxon 53, 3–16.
Sun, G., Ji, Q., Dilcher, D.L., Zheng,
S.L., Nixon, K.C. and Wang, X.F.
(2002) Archaefructaceae, a new basal
angiosperm family. Science 296,
899–904.
Sundstrom, J. and Engstrom, P. (2002)
Conifer reproductive development involves B-type MADS-box genes with
distinct and different activities in male
organ primordia. Plant Journal 31,
161–169.
Sundstrom, J., Carlsbecker, A., Svensson,
M.E., Svenson, M., Johanson, U.,
Theissen, G. and Engstrom, P. (1999)
MADS-box genes active in developing
pollen cones of Norway spruce (Picea
abies) are homologous to the B-class
floral homeotic genes in angiosperms.
Developmental Genetics 25, 253–
266.
Tandre, K., Albert, V.A., Sundas, A. and
Engstrom, P. (1995) Conifer homologs
to genes that control floral development in angiosperms. Plant Molecular
Biology 27, 69–78.
Tandre, K., Svenson, M., Svensson, M.E.
and Engstrom, P. (1998) Conservation
of gene structure and activity in the
regulation of reproductive organ development of conifers and angiosperms.
Plant Journal 15, 615–623.
Taylor, D.W. and Hickey, L.J. (1996)
Flowering plant origin, early evolution
and phylogeny. In: Taylor, D.W. and
Hickey, L.J. (eds) Flowering Plant Origin, Evolution and Phylogeny. Chapman & Hall, New York, pp. 1–7.
Taylor, D.W. and Kirchner, K. (1996) The
origin and evolution of the angiosperm
carpel. In: Taylor, D.W. and Hickey,
L.J. (eds) Flowering Plant Origin,
Evolution and Phylogeny. Chapman
& Hall, New York, pp. 116–140.
Theissen, G. (2000) Evolutionary developmental genetics of floral symmetry:
the revealing power of Linnaeus’
monstrous flower. Bioessays 22,
209–213.

Theissen, G. (2001) Development of floral
organ identity: stories from the MADS
house. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 4, 75–85.
Theissen, G. and Becker, A. (2004) Gymnosperm orthologues of class B floral
homeotic genes and their impact on
understanding flower origin. Critical
Reviews in Plant Sciences 23, 129–
148.
Theissen, G. and Saedler, H. (1995)
MADS-box genes in plant ontogeny
and phylogeny: Haeckel’s ‘biogenetic
law’ revisited. Current Opinion in
Genetics and Development 5, 628–
639.
Theissen, G. and Saedler, H. (1999) The
golden decade of molecular floral development (1990–1999): a cheerful
obituary. Developmental Genetics
25, 181–193.
Theissen, G. and Saedler, H. (2001) Plant
biology: floral quartets. Nature 409,
469–471.
Theissen, G., Becker, A., Di Rosa, A.,
Kanno, A., Kim, J.T., Munster, T.,
Winter, K.U. and Saedler, H. (2000)
A short history of MADS-box genes in
plants. Plant Molecular Biology 42,
115–149.
Theissen, G., Becker, A., Winter, K.U.,
Munster, T., Kirchner, C. and Saedler,
H. (2002) How the land plants learned
their floral ABCs: the role of MADS
box genes in the evolutionary origin of
flowers. In: Cronk, Q.C., Bateman,
R.M. and Hawkins, J.M. (eds) Developmental Genetics and Plant Evolution. Taylor & Francis, London.
Valentine, J.W., Jablonski, D. and Erwin,
D.H. (1999) Fossils, molecules and
embryos: new perspectives on the
Cambrian explosion. Development
126, 851–859.
Vandenbussche, M., Theissen, G., Van de
Peer, Y. and Gerats, T. (2003) Structural diversification and neo-functionalization during floral MADS-box gene
evolution by C-terminal frameshift
mutations. Nucleic Acids Research
31, 4401–4409.

Molecular Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of Flowers
Villanneva, J.M., Broadhvest, J., Hauser,
B.A., Meister, R.J., Schneitz, K. and
Gasser, C.S. (1999) INNER NOOUTER regulates abaxial–adaxial patterning in Arabidopsis ovules. Genes &
Development 13, 3160–3169.
Wang, Z.-Q. (2004) A new Permian Gnetalean cone as fossil evidence for supporting current molecular phylogeny.
Annals of Botany 94, 281–288.
Watanabe, K. and Okada, K. (2003) Two
discrete cis elements control the abaxial side-specific expression of the
FILAMENTOUS FLOWER gene in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 15, 2592–
2602.
Winter, K.U., Becker, A., Munster, T.,
Kim, J.T., Saedler, H. and Theissen,
G. (1999) MADS-box genes reveal
that gnetophytes are more closely related to conifers than to flowering
plants. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 96,
7342–7347.
Winter, K.U., Saedler, H. and Theissen,
G. (2002a) On the origin of class B
floral homeotic genes: functional substitution and dominant inhibition in
Arabidopsis by expression of an orthologue from the gymnosperm Gnetum.
Plant Journal 31, 457–475.
Winter, K.U., Weiser, C., Kaufmann, K.,
Bohne, A., Kirchner, C., Kanno, A.,

149

Saedler, H. and Theissen, G. (2002b)
Evolution of class B floral homeotic
proteins: obligate heterodimerization
originated from homodimerization.
Molecular Biology and Evolution
19, 587–596.
Yamada, T., Ito, M. and Kato, M. (2003)
Expression pattern of INNER NOOUTER homologue in Nymphaea (water
lily family, Nymphaeaceae). Development Genes and Evolution 213,
510–513.
Yamaguchi, T., An, G., Hirochika, H. and
Hirano, H.Y. (2003) Genetic interactions of the DROOPING LEAF
gene and the ABC genes in floral
organ specification in rice. Plant and
Cell Physiology 44, S183-S183.
Yamaguchi, T., Nagasawa, N., Kawasaki,
S., Matsuoka, M., Nagato, Y. and
Hirano, H.Y. (2004) The YABBY
gene DROOPING LEAF regulates carpel specification and midrib development in Oryza sativa. Plant Cell 16,
500–509.
Zhang, P.Y., Tan, H.T.W., Pwee, K.H.
and Kumar, P.P. (2004) Conservation
of class C function of floral organ development during 300 million years
of evolution from gymnosperms to
angiosperms. Plant Journal 37,
566–577.

7

Flower Senescence
S. VERLINDEN
Division of Plant and Soil Sciences, West Virginia University, PO Box 6108,
Morgantown, WV 26506-6108, USA, e-mail: Sverlind@wvu.edu

Introduction
Flowers, no matter their size, shape, colour or structure, have one important
function for plants: sexual reproduction. Sexual reproduction consists of several distinct developmental processes including pollen production, ovule formation, pollination, fusion of gametes and the development and dispersal of
viable seeds. Many flowers have the additional function of attracting pollinators.
The initial attraction between flowers and their pollinators can be the result of
petal or corolla colour or shape, or chemical composition of the flower,
whereas the end of a flower’s attraction to pollinators is the result of petal or
corolla inrolling or closure, colour changes, changes in chemical composition
of flower scent or nectar, and ultimately withering or abscission of the petals.
Therefore, pollination and subsequent changes in the flower corolla can be
seen as a way of communication between the flower and pollinators. Disposing
of the petals or corollas has the additional benefit of decreasing the chance of
herbivory of the developing ovary and seeds. These combined processes
following pollination are often referred to as flower senescence.
The opportunity for pollination depends on flower longevity, the time a
flower remains open and functional. In order to maintain floral structures for
considerable amounts of time a lot of resources have to be expended by the
plant. Therefore, flower longevity can be understood in terms of a cost–benefit
analysis. In other words, plants have evolved a mechanism for flowers to
remain open and functional in order to facilitate pollen dissemination and
ovule fertilization as long as the resources used by the plant to maintain a
flower are less than the resources expended to construct a new flower. Flower
senescence in this context will happen when it becomes more advantageous for
the plant to construct a new flower – including renewed odds of getting
pollinated – than to maintain an existing one (Ashman and Schoen, 1994).

150

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Flower Senescence

151

Flower senescence can therefore be defined as the events that lead to the
death of flower parts signalling the end of an open and functional disseminator
and/or receptor of pollen. It should be noted here that the most visible and
largest flower part to senesce is the corolla or petals and that this organ will
receive most attention in this chapter. However, other flower parts such as
styles, anthers, and in the case of unpollinated flowers, ovaries, sepals and
pedicels, will also in time senesce. Flower senescence or petal senescence in the
context of this chapter will refer to a genetically based programme that leads to
programmed cell death (PCD). PCD is an integral part of plant growth and
development and can lead to the death of individual cells, tissue, organs and the
whole plant. Petal senescence has been studied extensively as a type of
PCD because of the distinctive morphological, physiological, biochemical and
molecular changes associated with the demise of the petals (Rubinstein, 2000;
Xu and Hanson, 2000; Wagstaff et al., 2003).

Categories of Flower Senescence
Several categories of flower senescence have been used to describe how a
flower senesces. Three categories can be distinguished in the literature: (i) age
related versus pollination induced; (ii) ethylene sensitive versus ethylene insensitive; and (iii) abscised versus persistent petals. These are somewhat artificial
divisions but are based on distinct morphological, biochemical or molecular
changes associated with each type of senescence.
Age related versus pollination induced
Pollination is the most obvious external factor to affect flower longevity and as
such this type of flower senescence is one of the most widely studied. Pollination leads to dramatic accelerated flower senescence in a number of commercially important plants. In some plants, however, pollination does not lead to
flower senescence or may even prolong the life of the flower. The effect of
pollination is most pronounced in long-lived flowers and seems absent from
ephemeral flowers such as daylily and morning glory (Stead, 1992).
Ethylene sensitive versus ethylene insensitive
Flower senescence can be categorized as ethylene sensitive or ethylene insensitive based on the exogenous application of ethylene. Ethylene-sensitive species
have flowers that react to exogenous ethylene by wilting, withering or abscising
petals or corollas. This is thought to be an indication that endogenous ethylene
plays a role in their natural age-related or pollination-induced senescence
process (Woltering and van Doorn, 1988; van Doorn, 2001). These categories
of senescence are for the most part consistent within plant families. Most
monocotyledonous species are ethylene insensitive, whereas dicotyledonous
species tend to be ethylene sensitive. However, exceptions to these generalizations can be found in both groups (van Doorn, 2001).

152

S. Verlinden

An additional category was established more recently and further divides
ethylene-insensitive flower senescence into lipoxygenase-dependent and
lipoxygenase-independent flower senescence. Alstroemeria was found to
senesce without the accumulation of significant lipoxygenase activity and can
therefore be distinguished from daylily, and other ethylene-insensitive
senescence which is associated with a significant increase in lipoxygenase
activity throughout development and senescence (Leverentz et al., 2002).
Abscised versus persistent petals
The rapid shedding of petals or corolla, referred to as petal or corolla abscission, occurs both in ethylene-sensitive and -insensitive flowers and should be
distinguished from flower abscission where the whole flower is shed by the
plant (van Doorn, 2001, 2002b). Most petal abscission is mediated by ethylene. Here, we will discuss mostly persistent petals or petals that abscise after
most of the petal tissues have senesced since abscission is clearly different from
senescence in both temporal and spatial aspects and therefore not within the
scope of this chapter (Rubinstein, 2000).

From Anthesis to Senescence: Setting the Stage
The development of the flower from anthesis to senescence often receives little
attention. However, the internal changes that occur during this phase of development set the stage for flower senescence. It should be noted here that ephemeral flowers such as morning glory and daylily enter into senescence almost
immediately following anthesis and therefore do not have the maintenance
phase of flower development often observed in other species (Suttle and Kende,
1980; Bieleski and Reid, 1992; K. Smith and S. Verlinden, unpublished).
Physiological changes
Physiological changes that have been observed between anthesis and senescence include changes in the ultrastructure of flower tissues, fresh weight, dry
weight and nutrient content. Ultrastructural observations of carnation petals
indicate that vacuolar and cytoplasmic vesiculation starts in pre-climacteric
petals (Paliyath and Thompson, 1990; Smith et al., 1992). However, most
studies on ultrastructural changes have concluded that these changes are limited compared to changes observed in senescing tissues (Rubinstein, 2000).
After the rapid development of the petals and corolla up to anthesis, associated
with an enormous influx of water, carbohydrates and other solutes, the petals
often continue an albeit smaller increase in fresh weight and dry weight of
varying duration (Borochov and Woodson, 1989; Bieleski, 1993; Rubinstein,
2000; Verlinden, 2003). The growth phase is followed by a maintenance
phase for longer-lived species or the immediate entry into a senescence
phase for ephemeral flower species (Bieleski, 1993, 1995; K. Smith and

Flower Senescence

153

S. Verlinden, unpublished). The maintenance phase is associated with a gradual
decline in fresh weight, dry weight, carbon content and phosphorus content
(Verlinden, 2003; K. Smith and S. Verlinden, unpublished).

Biochemical changes
Most of the biochemical changes that have been described from anthesis to
senescence are related to membranes and their constituents. Plasmalemma
protein content decreases in both rose and petunia during petal and corolla
development (Borochov et al., 1994, 1997; Itzhaki et al., 1990). Throughout
flower development, increases in lipid order and phase-transition temperature
of lipids in rose petals have been observed with nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) and X-ray diffraction measurement of isolated membranes (Faragher
et al., 1987; Borochov et al., 1995; Itzhaki et al., 1995). These changes
are associated with a decrease in phospholipids, fluidity and the ratio of
unsaturated to saturated lipids (Suttle and Kende, 1980; Itzhaki et al., 1990;
Leverentz et al., 2002). Sterol levels do not change throughout development
and therefore lead to ever increasing sterol to phospholipids ratios (Itzhaki
et al., 1990). Increased sterol to phospholipids ratios have been described
before and were suggested to decrease fluidity throughout petal development
(Thompson et al., 1982). Decreases in fluidity in turn are thought to lead to
membrane malfunctions and ion leakage and ultimately senescence and death
of the tissue.
Other mechanisms responsible for the rigidification or decrease in fluidity
of the membranes during petal development such as increased saturation of
lipids (Fobel et al., 1987; Sylvestre and Paulin, 1987), possibly due to lipid
peroxidation (Paulin et al., 1986; Paulin and Droillard, 1989), have been
suggested. Indeed increasing levels of lipoxygenase activity and peroxidized
lipids are observed from anthesis until early senescence in daylily (Rubinstein,
2000). Lipoxygenases have been correlated to decreases in membrane fluidity
and inhibitors of lipoxygenase activity prevent these membrane-fluidity changes
indicating that they may play an important role in events leading up to senescence (Fobel et al., 1987). However, at least one study showed that lipoxygenases may not be directly involved in senescence or the events leading up to
it. Application of linoleic and linolenic acids, substrates for lipoxygenases,
enhanced senescence and only unsaturated lipids showed this effect in orchid
flowers. Interestingly, no increases in lipoxygenase activities were observed
during pollination-induced senescence, and inhibitors of lipoxygenase activity
did not delay senescence (Porat et al., 1995b). It has been suggested that other
lipid oxidases may play a role in peroxidation of lipids in orchids and this may
still lead to the same outcome (Rubinstein, 2000). In contrast, specific lipoxygenase activity increases prior to wilting in tulip and carnation and subsequently declines during wilting symptoms. Here, again the massive and
catastrophic loss of water during senescence was not associated with lipoxygenase activity (Jones and McConchie, 1995). Taken together, these observations suggest that lipoxygenases may play a role, at least in some species, in

154

S. Verlinden

events leading up to senescence. Interestingly, acyl chain desaturation by
desaturases has been suggested throughout development as a possible way to
counteract the negative effects of an increasingly rigid plasma membrane
(Brown et al., 1990). This in turn would present more possible substrate for
lipoxygenases leading to enhanced catabolism. Clearly, lipid metabolism during
petal development is very active and complex.
A lipoxygenase-independent senescence mechanism has been described in
Alstroemeria peruviana, somewhat similar to the observations made in orchids where increases in lipoxygenase activity were absent following pollination
(Porat et al., 1995b; Leverentz et al., 2002). However, in this species lipoxygenase activity declined significantly throughout petal development and did
not increase leading up to senescence. This is in contrast to some other
ethylene-sensitive and -insensitive species where lipoxygenase activity peaks
at early to midsenescent stages of development (Peary and Prince, 1990;
Rouet-Mayer et al., 1992). In Alstroemeria, an ethylene-insensitive species,
lipoxygenase activity could not be correlated with the loss of membrane semipermeability indicating that it falls into a new class of flower senescence
(Leverentz et al., 2002).
Studies on the metabolism of membrane lipids show that phospholipid
catabolic activity does not change from early flower development through
senescence, despite changes in lipoxygenase activity, and that all classes of
phospholipids decline in parallel (Borochov et al., 1990b; Brown et al.,
1991a,b). In addition, studies have shown that cells maintain the ability to
biosynthesize lipids well into senescence (Borochov et al., 1990b). However,
phospholipids decline threefold relative to sterols suggesting that some species
of lipids are more susceptible to catabolism than others and that the pool of
those substrates gets replenished. A preference in degradation was observed
for phospholipids containing two di-unsaturated or at least one polyunsaturated
acyl chain (Brown et al., 1987). In addition, acyl chain composition has been
shown to determine if phospholipase D will catabolize phosphatidylcholine
(Brown et al., 1990). Indeed, varying susceptibility to degradation based on
head group and acyl chain composition has been demonstrated (Brown et al.,
1991a,b). Especially lipids with unsaturated acyl chains are prone to degradation (Brown et al., 1987).
An important role for calcium in membrane catabolic activity has been
demonstrated (Leshem, 1987). Phospholipase D activity, for example, is enhanced by the application of a calmodulin antagonist leading to possible
increased levels of cytosolic calcium in carnation (de Vrije and Munnik,
1997). Direct and indirect evidence also supports a role for calcium and
calmodulin in the activation of phospholipases A, B and C. The ability of
microsomal vesicles from carnation petals to maintain ATP-dependent uptake
of calcium decreases throughout development. This suggests that the cell’s
ability to maintain low calcium levels in the cytoplasm may be impaired and
could possibly lead to phospholipase activation (Paliyath and Thompson, 1988).
However, it should be noted that phospholipase D activity, and maybe others,
decreases throughout development (Suttle and Kende, 1980), a process that
could counteract the overall observed in vivo catabolic activity. Calcium has

Flower Senescence

155

also been shown to decrease membrane fluidity possibly by increasing the order
of polar heads of membrane lipids; however, this ordering effect is limited to
the membrane surface and therefore different from the reduced molecular
motion associated with development and senescence (Drory et al., 1992). It
should be clear from a number of studies that calcium has both positive and
negative effects on the progression towards petal senescence, depending on
location and concentration and that both of those are tightly regulated
(Leshem, 1987).
Action of phospholipase C results in the formation of diacylglycerol (DAG)
and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), both implicated in secondary signalling
(Leshem, 1987). Other phospholipases, such as phospholipase A, have also
been implicated in the release of secondary messengers (Borochov et al.,
1994). Further breakdown after lipoxygenase and phospholipase action results
in a number of compounds including jasmonates that can elicit senescence
(Halaba and Rudnicki, 1989; Porat et al., 1993, 1995b). DAG, the result of
phospholipase activity has been shown to accumulate well before the ethylene
climacteric in petunia. Application of the elicitor PMA, which acts similarly in
kinase activation to DAG, showed that DAG has a role to play in enhancing
senescence (Borochov et al., 1997). In addition, rapid turnover rates of polyphosphoinositides versus structural lipids in carnation flowers suggest that the
catabolic products of phospholipases behave like typical signal precursors in
flowers (Munnik et al., 1994).

Molecular changes
Very little attention has been given to molecular changes from anthesis through
senescence with the exception of one recent study (van Doorn et al., 2003).
Most genes isolated from petals or corollas of ethylene-sensitive and -insensitive
species have been cloned from early to mid-senescent plant materials (Lawton
et al., 1989; Meyer et al., 1991; Wang et al., 1993; Fukuchi-Mizutani et al.,
1995, 2000; Jones et al., 1995; Panavas et al., 1999). Therefore, most of the
transcripts of these genes are found to accumulate during senescence and not
in the events leading up to senescence. A few of these genes have shown
developmental regulation independent of senescence in both ethylene-sensitive
and -insensitive species, even though their highest transcript levels are observed
during senescence. The putative beta-glucosidase and cysteine proteinase from
carnation, SR5 and DCCP1, the putative desaturase from rose, RP4, and the
putative aspartic proteinase and allene oxide synthase from daylily, DSA4 and
DSA5, among others are all examples of this class of genes (Lawton et al.,
1990; Jones et al., 1995; Panavas et al., 1999; Fukuchi-Mizutani et al.,
2000). More recently, microarray analysis of tepal-specific genes of Iris
showed that the expression patterns of isolated genes falls into three clusters.
At least two of these clusters of genes showed increased expression during
growth and development well before senescence set in, again suggesting that
major changes occur during development well before senescence (van Doorn
et al., 2003).

156

S. Verlinden

Summary
Membranes are by far the most widely studied cell component during flower
development from anthesis through senescence. Membranes are also one of
the few cell structures that show significant changes leading up to senescence.
These observations also suggest that they may play an important role in
triggering flower senescence in both ethylene-sensitive and -insensitive petals
and corollas. Flower senescence may therefore be due to the release of signalling molecules and/or changes in the lipid environment of a number of membrane-residing enzymes.

Timing of Senescence: the Opening Act
Genotypes
The fact that petal senescence is under genetic control is well established.
Genotypes with varying flower longevity have been identified in Dianthus
caryophyllus (Wu et al., 1989; Brandt and Woodson, 1992), Dianthus
barbatus (Friedman et al., 2001), Antirrhinum majus (Schroeder and Stimart,
2001), Petunia  hybrida (Porat et al., 1993, Krahl and Randle, 1999),
Lilium longiflorum (van der Meulen-Muisers et al., 1998), Gerbera  hybrida
(Wernett et al., 1996) and Hatoria  graeseri (Easter cactus) (Karle and Boyle,
1999) among others. These studies showed significant additive gene effects
for a number of species (Wernett, et al., 1996; Krahl and Randle, 1999;
Schroeder and Stimart, 2001), suggesting that flower longevity in these species
is under the control of at least two genes and in at least one case epistatic effects
are absent (Schroeder and Stimart, 2001). More detailed studies of genotypes
of ethylene-sensitive species showed an important role for the ability to produce ethylene (Wu et al., 1989; Brandt and Woodson, 1992) and/or respond
to exogenous ethylene as factors affecting flower longevity (Brandt and Woodson, 1992; Porat et al., 1993; Friedman et al., 2001). However, other genes
must play a role in flower longevity since genotypic variation in flower longevity
was also observed in flowers that are ethylene insensitive and either have the
ability to produce an ethylene climacteric (Friedman et al., 2001) or are
naturally non-climacteric (Wernett et al., 1996; van der Meulen-Muisers
et al., 1998; Krahl and Randle, 1999). The overall conclusion of these studies
was that flower longevity can be significantly improved through classical breeding efforts (van der Meulen-Muisers et al., 1998) often because improvements
in flower longevity have not been focused on before (Krahl and Randle, 1999).

Carbohydrates
Significant changes in carbohydrate levels can be observed throughout the
development of petals and corollas. In most petals and corollas, starch (Ho
and Nichols, 1977; Ferreira et al., 1986; Tirosh and Mayak, 1988), sucrose

Flower Senescence

157

(Nichols 1973; van der Meulen-Muisers et al., 2001) and a number of other
sugars (van der Meulen-Muisers et al., 2001) decline after anthesis in both cut
and uncut flowers (Tirosh and Mayak, 1988; van Doorn, 2004). However,
relatively high levels of sugars are maintained through senescence in several
species (van Doorn, 2004).
Exogenously applied sugars, especially sucrose and glucose, have long been
shown to delay flower senescence (Nichols, 1973; Borochov and Woodson,
1989; van Doorn, 2001). It was widely thought that sugar treatments prolonged
vase life by increasing levels of respiratory substrate to levels that allow for
prolonged flower maintenance (Borochov and Woodson, 1989; van Doorn,
2001). However, the fact that in multiple species significant amounts of sugars
remain in floral tissues at the end of senescence seems to contradict this hypothesis (Nichols, 1973; Bieleski, 1993; Eason et al., 1997; Ichimura, 1998;
Ichimura and Suto, 1999; van der Meulen-Muisers et al., 2001; van Doorn,
2004). Several studies have shown that flowers treated with sucrose show
decreased ethylene sensitivity (Mayak and Dilley, 1976; van Doorn, 2004;
Verlinden and Garcia, 2004). 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC)
synthase and ACC oxidase transcript accumulation is lower when pre-senescent
sucrose-treated flowers are exposed to ethylene when compared to untreated
control flowers. A direct effect on ethylene biosynthesis through a decrease in
ethylene responsiveness of the transcription of ethylene biosynthetic genes has
therefore been postulated (Verlinden and Garcia, 2004). Recent work in Arabidopsis thaliana showed a close interaction between glucose, sucrose and ethylene signalling pathways that supports these observations (Smeekens, 2000;
Gibson et al., 2001; Leon and Sheen, 2003). We have some evidence that
certain ethylene-signalling components are regulated by sucrose application to
flowers. Carnation flowers treated continuously with sucrose showed a delay in
transcript accumulation during petal development of at least one EIN3-like (EIL)
gene (Iordachescu and Verlinden, 2005). EILs have been shown to be an integral
part of ethylene signalling in a number of species (see below). Although this may
explain the role for sucrose in ethylene-sensitive flower senescence, it is not clear
how sugars prolong flower longevity, although to a lesser extent, in ethyleneinsensitive species. The suggested role of abscisic acid (ABA) in this type of
senescence (Panavas et al, 1998b) and the link between glucose and ABA
signalling established in Arabidopisis (Leon and Sheen, 2003) may provide
answers to this question. However, as long as it is not clear where and how
sugars accumulate, are mobilized and used within the flowers and cells, it will
be difficult to pinpoint the specific role of sugars in triggering senescence
(van Doorn, 2004). However, it is clear that changes in ethylene sensitivity
mediated through changes in the ethylene signalling pathway play an important
role (van Doorn, 2004; Verlinden and Garcia, 2004).

Circadian rhythms
Several lines of evidence suggest that circadian rhythms are involved in the
timing of petal or corolla senescence of a number of species. The precise time

158

S. Verlinden

of flower opening followed by a predetermined time span to petal senescence
has been established for a number of plant species with ephemeral flowers,
suggesting that plants use their internal clock to dictate timing of senescence
(Bieleski and Reid, 1992). However, except for a few studies showing the effect
of light on longevity and ethylene production, or a circadian rhythm in ethylene
production, very little is known about the mechanism that may involve the
plants’ internal clock in flower senescence.
Interorgan communication
A significant role in timing of senescence of petals and corollas has been
attributed to the style (Gilissen, 1976; Lovell et al., 1987; Woltering et al.,
1997) and the gynoecium (Sacalis and Lee, 1985; Woodson and Brandt,
1991; Shibuya et al., 2000; Nukui et al., 2004). Some studies report prolonged vase life (Shibuya et al., 2000; Nukui et al., 2004) while others
observed faster senescence when the gynoecium is removed (Mor et al.,
1980; Sacalis and Lee, 1985; Woodson and Brandt, 1991). Expression studies
of the ethylene biosynthetic genes in flowers showing prolonged vase life
indicate that repressed ethylene production in the gynoecium is a major determining longevity factor (Nukui et al., 2004). Applications of plant growth
hormones that stimulate ethylene production in the gynoecium lead to shorter
flower longevity. Removal of the gynoecium before the application of these
substances prevented the earlier senescence symptoms indicating that the
gynoecium may have a regulatory role to play in triggering flower senescence
(Woodson and Brandt, 1991; Shibuya et al., 2000; Nukui et al., 2004). In
addition, the ovary is the first flower organ to produce detectable levels of
ethylene after the flower is exposed to ethylene (Jones, 2002).
A role for styles in triggering age-related flower senescence has been
suggested beyond pollination-induced senescence (Gilissen, 1976; Lovell
et al., 1987; Woltering et al., 1997). The evidence here is based mostly on
the fact that wounding or removal of the style can cause accelerated wilting
independent of pollination. A healthy, undamaged stigma and style therefore
seem essential in maximizing flower longevity (Lovell et al., 1987). Further
investigations have shown that wound or stress ethylene is the most likely
translocated signal in this type of accelerated flower senescence (Woltering
et al., 1997). Interorgan communication in ethylene-insensitive flowers has
not been studied as far as we can ascertain.
Abiotic stresses
A number of external stimuli can either enhance or delay petal or corolla
senescence. In many cases the intensity and timing of these external stimuli
dictate enhanced or delayed petal or corolla senescence. High temperatures
(Hansen et al., 1992), water stress (Coker et al., 1985; Spikman, 1986), low
light (Heo et al., 2004), UV light exposure (Borochov and Faragher, 1983),
metal halide light exposure during production (Garello et al., 1995), high

Flower Senescence

159

relative humidity (Torre et al., 1999), wounding of the stigma (Woltering et al.,
1997) and severing from the plant (Borochov et al., 1997) have all been
implicated in decreasing flower longevity. On the other hand, brief exposure
to high temperatures after harvest (Panavas et al., 1998a; Verlinden and
Woodson, 1998), exposure to red light (Heo et al., 2004) and low relative
humidity during production (Torre et al., 1999) delayed flower senescence. In
most cases the exact mechanisms that lead to enhanced or delayed senescence
are not known or highly speculative. High calcium levels and heat shock have
apparent stabilizing effects and have been used to explain enhanced flower
longevity of plants grown in low relative humidity environments and flowers
exposed to high temperatures for brief periods of time, respectively. Red light
from light-emitting diodes delays senescence whereas the extra red light from
metal halide versus high pressure sodium lights enhanced petal senescence.
No clear explanation was given in either study for the observed effect. In all
cases where decreased flower longevity was observed, a role for ethylene or
ABA was evoked.

Pollination
Successful pollination is perhaps the most dramatic external factor affecting the
timing of flower senescence and has received by far the most attention of all
external factors affecting flower senescence. Pollination can reduce flower
longevity in longer-lived flowers such as orchids by 90% or more. The effect
is less dramatic or absent for short-lived flowers such as daylily or Tradescantia
(Stead, 1992; Larsen et al., 1993). The two factors that determine successful
pollination are pollen load and pollen compatibility (Gilissen, 1976, 1977;
Stead and Moore, 1979; Hoekstra and van Roekel, 1986; Singh, et al.,
1992; Stead, 1992; Kao and McCubbin, 1996). A minimum amount of pollen
has to land on the stigma to induce senescence in the pollinated flower
(Gilissen, 1977; Stead and Moore, 1979). Self-incompatibility results in unsuccessful pollination and therefore no senescence of the floral tissues. Therefore,
recognition of self and non-self pollen, and the rejection of self is essential in
pollination-induced senescence. Although the early events, generally a small
ethylene peak produced by the style, are the same in either type of pollination,
further ethylene production is non-existent in self-incompatible pollinations.
This observation indicates that complex recognition and rejection signals
beyond ethylene are at play (O’Neil and Nadeau, 1997).

Hormones
All classical hormones, cytokinin, ABA, gibberellins, auxins and ethylene, have
at one point or another been implicated in timing of flower senescence and
their individual roles and possible interactions have not, by far, been settled.
In ethylene-sensitive flowers, ABA has been shown to increase during
flower development. However, major increases seem to be tied to ethylene

160

S. Verlinden

production and therefore most likely do not play a major role in triggering
senescence (Hanley and Bramlage, 1989; Muller et al., 1999). Exogenous
application of ABA and induction by applying water stress decreases flower
longevity, but no cause and effect relationship has been established (Vardi and
Mayak, 1989; Muller et al., 1999). ABA accumulation in pollinated transgenic
cytokinin-overproducing petunia was much lower than wild-type plants, again
suggesting that ABA is a primary response and not an initiator of senescence
(Chang et al., 2003). In ethylene-sensitive flowers, on the other hand, ABA
seems to play an important role in the signalling that leads to PCD (Panavas
et al., 1998b).
Cytokinin levels decrease throughout petal and corolla development suggesting a role for cytokinins in maintaining the fitness of the flower (van Staden,
1989). In addition, both the exogenous application and transgenic plants
overproducing cytokinins have shown that cytokinins can delay petal and
corolla senescence (Cook et al., 1985; Upfold and van Staden, 1990;
Lukaszewska et al., 1994; Taverner et al., 1999; Chang et al., 2003). In
ethylene-sensitive flowers cytokinins, both exogenous and endogenous,
decrease ethylene sensitivity thereby delaying senescence (Chang et al.,
2003; Cook et al., 1985). Cytokinins and concentration changes during
development have not been studied in ethylene-insensitive flowers.
Exogenous auxin applications have, in most cases, been shown to induce
ethylene production thereby resulting in faster petal or corolla senescence
(Nichols and Manning, 1986; Harel, et al., 1989; van Staden, 1995). No
significant changes in the levels of auxins throughout flower development have
been observed (Harel et al., 1989). However, some evidence suggests significant movement, interaction with cytokinins and changes in metabolism of
auxins throughout flower development (Nichols and Manning, 1986; van
Staden, 1995). None the less, no clear role in changing timing of senescence
has been attributed to these changes.
Gibberellin application to ethylene-sensitive flowers delays flower senescence and is only effective in delaying senescence when applied to young
flowers (Saks et al., 1992; Saks and van Staden, 1993a,b). Limited evidence
for changes in gibberellin content during flower development exists (Saks et al.,
1992). However, it has been suggested that there is negative correlation
between gibberellin content and petal senescence in carnation. No evidence
was presented, however, to indicate a causal role for declining gibberellin
content in triggering petal senescence.

Regulation of Senescence
Age-related senescence
Ethylene sensitive
Ethylene-sensitive flower senescence has received most attention by far in
studies of flower longevity, most likely because a number of highly valuable
flower crops fall into this category (Reid and Wu, 1992). Ethylene

Flower Senescence

161

measurements are relatively easy to make, and the clear link between senescence and ethylene production in ethylene-sensitive plants has contributed to
the increased attention paid to them (Borochov and Woodson, 1989; van
Altvorst and Bovy, 1995). However, it should be clear that many flowers
senesce without involvement of ethylene.
The fact that the climacteric rise in ethylene plays a regulatory role in the
events leading to the demise of the flowers of ethylene-sensitive species has
been established for many years (Borochov and Woodson, 1989). Studies of
the expression of genes in the ethylene biosynthetic pathway and senescencerelated (SR) genes have shown that they are clearly regulated by this ethylene
and have confirmed the importance of ethylene in ethylene-sensitive flowers
(Lawton et al., 1990; Woodson et al., 1992).
In addition to the mandatory perception of ethylene to complete the
senescence programme, a large increase in ethylene responsiveness has been
observed in petals during flower development (Lawton et al., 1990, Verlinden
et al., 2002). It is thought that this increase in responsiveness ultimately results
in the ethylene climacteric. As ethylene responsiveness in petals increases
during development, it presumably reaches a threshold at which the flower
tissues respond to the low basal levels of ethylene production of the flower,
triggering the ethylene climacteric (Lawton et al., 1990; Woodson et al.,
1992; Verlinden et al., 2002). In this section we will discuss some of the recent
work dealing with ethylene biosynthesis and signalling during development and
age-related senescence of ethylene-sensitive flowers.
Ethylene biosynthesis
The early work on ethylene biosynthesis has been nicely reviewed by Borochov
and Woodson (1989) and others (Reid and Wu, 1992; van Altvorst and Bovy,
1995). Briefly, a continued and increased induction of the ethylene biosynthetic genes, ACC synthase and ACC oxidase, during flower senescence results
in autocatalytic or ‘self-induced’ ethylene. The autocatalytic ethylene is responsible for the climacteric rise in ethylene seen during flower senescence. Continued perception of ethylene is necessary to sustain the climacteric ethylene
production and the expression of several SR genes (Borochov and Woodson,
1989; Lawton et al., 1990).
Both ACC synthase and ACC oxidase are members of multigene families
in all higher plants studied to date. Most studies have followed ACC synthase
and ACC oxidase transcript levels in flower organs upon pollination (O’Neil
et al., 1993; Tang and Woodson, 1996; Jones and Woodson, 1997; Bui and
O’Neil, 1998; Jones and Woodson, 1999a,b; Lindstrom et al., 1999; LlopTous et al., 2000; Wang et al., 2001; Sanchez and Mariani, 2002; Weterings,
et al., 2002) (see below for further discussion). Only a handful of studies have
observed the patterns of mRNA accumulation of ACC synthase and ACC
oxidase genes in flower tissues before and during age-related senescence
(Woodson et al., 1992; ten Have and Woltering, 1997; Jones and Woodson,
1999b; Muller et al., 2000a; Jones, 2002). These experiments have led to the
conclusion that several members of the ACC synthase and ACC oxidase gene
families are differentially expressed in highly coordinated spatial and temporal

162

S. Verlinden

patterns. The observations in these studies also support an important role for
the ovary in interorgan signalling in flower longevity. The ovary is the first
organ that shows accumulation of ACC synthase transcript during age-related
senescence (ten Have and Woltering, 1997) and is also the organ that shows
increased ethylene responsiveness well before the petals and styles (ten Have
and Woltering, 1997; Jones, 2002).
Ethylene signalling
As stated above, mandatory ethylene perception is crucial for the senescence
programme to take effect in ethylene-sensitive flowers. Both the use of ethyleneaction inhibitors and more recently transgenic plants lacking the ability
to perceive ethylene show delayed flower senescence supporting this observation (Borochov and Woodson, 1989; Wilkinson et al., 1997; Jones et al.,
2001).
In the last decade, great strides have been made in elucidating ethylene
signalling in a number of model systems. A number of ethylene signalling
components, among them ETR, ERS, CTR, EIN2, EIN3, EIL and EREBP
genes have as a result become available to study flower senescence. Studies of
the expression of some of these genes have confirmed early observations on
ethylene signalling during flower senescence but also added new insights.
Both ETR and ERS genes are ethylene-receptor genes cloned from
Arabidopsis, and a number of other species, and their function has been
extensively reviewed (Guo and Ecker, 2004). These genes are negative regulators of ethylene responses. In other words, ethylene exposure abolishes their
kinase activity resulting in ethylene responses (Hua and Meyerowitz, 1998).
Changes in transcript accumulation of ethylene receptors have been observed
for carnation, rose, pea and Pelargonium (Orzaez et al., 1999; Dervinis et al.,
2000; Muller et al., 2000a,b; Shibuya et al., 2002). The observations in these
studies ranged from little to no regulation of mRNA levels for some ethylene
receptors (Orzaez et al., 1999; Dervinis et al., 2000) to a significant decrease
during senescence (Muller et al., 2000a; Shibuya et al., 2002) or increase in
mRNA levels upon ethylene or ABA exposure (Muller et al., 2000a,b) in flower
tissues. These observations point to complex regulation of ethylene-receptor
expression that integrates a number of internal and external cues. More data
are clearly needed not only at the level of expression of the genes but also their
products and ability to bind ethylene in vivo. Interesting to note here is that no
significant changes in ethylene binding were observed in carnation petals
throughout development in earlier studies (Brown et al., 1986) and that at
least one protein accumulates to similar levels throughout development, when
petals are exposed to ethylene apparently independent of changes in ethylene
responsiveness of the petals (Woodson, 1987).
Even less is known about CTR1-like genes encoding the second step in
ethylene signalling and also negative regulators of ethylene responses, and
EIN2, a downstream positive regulator of ethylene signalling. To date EIN2like genes have not been studied in relationship to ethylene-sensitive flower
senescence. In rose, two CTR1-like genes have been cloned and both show
increased mRNA accumulation in response to ethylene exposure in flower

Flower Senescence

163

tissues. The expression of at least one of these CTR1-like genes seems to be
upregulated during senescence (Muller et al., 2002).
One of the last steps in ethylene signalling, encoded by EIN3 and EIL
genes, are transcriptional activators of ethylene responses. In rose at least one
EIL gene is constitutively expressed (Muller et al., 2003), while at least one EIL
in carnation shows a decrease in mRNA levels during senescence (Waki et al.,
2001). We have cloned three additional EIL genes from carnation and have
shown significant developmental regulation of one of these EIL genes.
DC-EIL3 is regulated developmentally and its mRNA levels are correlated
with the increased responsiveness observed during petal development, suggesting that this gene could play a role in triggering the flower senescence programme (Iordachescu and Verlinden, 2005). Changes in mRNA levels of all
three genes were observed upon pollination. These changes may play a role in
changes in ethylene production and responsiveness that have been observed
upon pollination in several species (Halevy and Whitehead, 1989; Whitehead
and Halevy, 1989; Porat et al., 1994, 1995a; Halevy, 1995; Ketsa and
Rugkong, 2000; Iordachescu and Verlinden, 2005).
Carnation ERE–binding protein (CEBP) was cloned from carnation petals
and shown to interact with an ethylene-response enhancer element (ERE) in
the promoter of an SR gene, GST1, a putative glutathione-S-transferase
(Maxson and Woodson, 1996). Interestingly, the ERE is in the same region
that putatively binds the EILs. Since the expression of CEBP declines during
development (Maxson and Woodson, 1996) and the mRNA levels of at least
one EIL, DC-EIL3, increase (Iordaschescu and Verlinden, 2005), it is tempting
to speculate that there may be a novel transcriptional mechanism at work in
ethylene signalling during flower development and senescence.
Ethylene and other gene expression
Pioneering work by Woodson and co-workers resulted in the cloning of a
number of SR genes of which mRNA accumulation is clearly regulated by
ethylene (Lawton et al., 1989, 1990). These genes can be categorized in
several ways. Some of the SR gene mRNAs accumulate only in response to
ethylene whereas others accumulate based on developmental cues, but their
expression is enhanced by endogenous or exogenous ethylene exposure of the
tissue (Lawton et al., 1990). The first category includes SR8 and SR12, a
putative glutathione-S-transferase and beta-galactosidase, respectively.
The latter category includes genes such as SR5 and DCCP, a putative betaglucosidase and cysteine proteinase, respectively (Lawton et al., 1990; Jones
et al., 1995). A different system, and possibly easier and more universally
applicable, is to categorize the cloned genes by function or timing of expression
(Rubinstein, 2000; van Doorn et al., 2003). Based on these qualifications,
genes that are involved in membrane metabolism, protein metabolism, nucleic
acid metabolism, cell wall metabolism, signal transduction, volatile production,
defence and ethylene biosynthesis or signalling can be classified separately.
A number of additional SR genes since the original work by Woodson and
co-workers have been cloned from ethylene-sensitive species. However, it is
remarkable how very few have been characterized when ethylene biosynthetic

164

S. Verlinden

and signalling genes are excluded from this list. Two cysteine proteinases, a
desaturase, a lipase, a lipoxygenase and a defender against death are some of
the additional genes documented (Fukuchi-Mizutani et al., 1995, 2000; Jones
et al., 1995; Orzaez and Gannell, 1997; Hong et al., 2000; Sugawara et al.,
2002; Chang et al., 2003). These genes can be easily classified in the previously described categories of SR or senescence-associated senescence.
Biotechnology: controlling ethylene-regulated flower senescence
Several successful attempts have been made to create transgenic plants with
increased flower longevity. These attempts fall into two categories. The first
category includes transgenic plants with altered ethylene biosynthesis (Savin
et al., 1995; Aida et al., 1998). ACC oxidase has been the main target in these
studies, although ACC synthase and ACC deaminase have been used successfully
in creating transgenic plants showing altered fruit ripening (Klee and Clark,
2002). The second category consists of plants with altered ethylene perception
(Wilkinson et al., 1997; Bovy et al., 1999; Shaw et al., 2002). Heterologous
expression of mutated ethylene-receptor genes is the only approach that has
been reported to date. In addition, many plants engineered for altered patterns of
fruit ripening through decreased ethylene biosynthesis or ethylene responsiveness show extended flower longevity (Klee and Clark, 2002). This observation
also points to one of the major drawbacks of the approaches used to date. Since
the effect of ethylene is pleiotropic in nature, many unintended and often negative
attributes are observed in transgenic plants. Poor rooting, delayed and poor fruit
set, decreased pollen viability, root dry weight, seed weight and seed germination
have all been observed in transgenic ethylene-insensitive plants (Clark et al.,
1999; Gubrium et al., 2000; Klee and Clark, 2002; Clevenger et al., 2004). In
addition, increased susceptibility to soil-borne pathogens has been noted in
ethylene-insensitive plants (Knoester et al., 1998). It has been suggested that
these negative effects can be overcome by directed expression of the transgenes
to flower tissues (Klee and Clark, 2002). However, correct timing of the expression will also be essential to create the desired effect. In addition, downstream
ethylene signalling components, such as EIN3, should be considered as targets of
transgenic approaches since they only affect a subset of ethylene responses.
Other approaches to delay flower senescence in plant species showing
ethylene-regulated flower senescence may be on the horizon. In Arabidopsis
flower longevity was extended by constitutive and tissue-specific expression of
the MADS-domain factor AGL15. These studies showed that the effect of this
gene was independent of ethylene effects in flowers (Fernandez et al., 2000;
Fang and Fernandez, 2002). The observations suggest that timing of flower
senescence may be regulated by factors other than ethylene biosynthesis and
perception very similar to the observations of studies on the genetics of flower
senescence (Friedman et al., 2001).
Ethylene insensitive
Significant work established daylily as an excellent model flower to study
ethylene-insensitive petal or corolla senescence (Bieleski and Reid, 1992;
Lay-Lee et al., 1992; Bieleski, 1993, 1995; Panavas and Rubenstein, 1998;

Flower Senescence

165

Panavas et al., 1998a,b). Daylily was shown to switch from a sink to a source in
less than 12 h. Most soluble carbohydrates and amino acids and additional
materials from proteins, nucleic acids and cell walls were transported out of the
senescing tissue. Most of these materials wound up in newly developing buds.
The rapidly senescing parenchyma in the petals was shown to be distinct from
the vascular tissue, especially the phloem that largely escapes the senescence
process (Bieleski and Reid, 1992; Bieleski, 1993). In addition, increases in
hydrogen peroxide, lipid peroxidation, hydrolases, proteinases and RNase
activity (Panavas and Rubinstein, 1998; Panavas et al., 1998a,b; Rubinstein,
2000), and decreases of the enzymatic components of the ubiquitin-proteosome pathway, catalase and ascorbate peroxidase (Panavas and Rubinstein,
1998; Stephenson and Rubinstein, 1998) have been observed.
In recent years, tremendous strides have also been made in the molecular
arena in understanding ethylene-insensitive flower senescence. A number of
senescence-associated genes have been cloned and characterized from daylily
(Valpuesta, et al., 1995; Guerrero et al., 1998; Panavas et al., 1999), Iris (van
Doorn et al., 2003), daffodil (Hunter et al., 2002) and Alstroemeria (Wagstaff
et al., 2001; Leverentz et al., 2002). These also fall in the above-described
categories for SR or senescene-associated genes. However, Hunter et al.
(2002) describe a transport function category, which includes genes such as
nitrate and auxin transporters. This additional category should be included in a
gene classification system, especially in light of the rapid export of materials in
a number of ethylene-sensitive and -insensitive flowers during senescence.
The coordinated events leading up to, and during, ethylene-insensitive
senescence indicate tight control and suggest that an intricate interorgan,
intraorgan and intracellular signalling mechanism is at work. However, no
plant growth hormone has been shown to play the same crucial role as ethylene
in ethylene-sensitive flower senescence. Abscisic acid is the most likely candidate for a similar but possibly lesser role in ethylene-insensitive flower senescence. In addition, a delicate interplay with other plant growth hormones
should not be excluded as part of a complex regulatory mechanism.
ABA has the ability to prematurely induce flower senescence in ethyleneinsensitive daylily petals. Increases in lipid peroxidation, membrane permeability, proteinase and RNase activities have been observed upon ABA treatment
with a high degree of similarity to natural senescence. A decrease in RNA
content is also observed earlier in ABA-treated petals than naturally senescing
petals. Changes in the mRNA population of ABA-treated flowers also mimic
changes observed during natural petal senescence, although the changes appear approximately 24 h earlier. In addition, transcript levels of five distinct
genes increase earlier in response to ABA treatment (Panavas et al., 1998b,
1999). Transcriptional regulation by ABA of senescence – enhanced or –
associated genes in other ethylene-insensitive flowers has to date not been
reported. Gibberellins are the only other plant growth hormone with a putative
role in ethylene-insensitive flower senescence. The transcript levels of two thiol
proteases increased prematurely, compared to natural senescence upon exposure to gibberellic acid, indicating a possible role for gibberellins in the events
leading up to petal senescence (Guerrero et al., 1998).

166

S. Verlinden

Pollination-induced senescence
Early work on pollination-induced senescence has been reviewed in detail by
Stead (1992) and additional insight in the occurrence and significance of
pollination-induced senescence and abscission has been provided by van
Doorn (1997). A number of others have contributed significantly to the field
of post-pollination development and detailed models of post-pollination interorgan signalling exist (O’Neil and Nadeau, 1997; Bui and O’Neil, 1998; Jones
and Woodson, 1999b). Here, we want to focus on events triggered by pollination that lead to senescence and that are different from events during agerelated senescence.
Pollination signals
Pollination-induced senescence is the result of highly coordinated events that
start with pollen germinating on the stigma and result in changes in the ovary
and petals before the pollen tubes reach the ovary. This observation clearly
indicates a role for rapidly moving signals.
Both ACC and auxin, found in relatively large quantities in pollen, have
been suggested as a primary signal that elicits ethylene production in the
stigma. An initial burst of ethylene promotes the early phase of pollen tube
growth and is present in both compatible and incompatible pollination events
(Holden et al., 2003). However, a second burst of ethylene or a third as seen in
carnation (Jones and Woodson, 1997) that leads to petal senescence occurs
only upon compatible pollination events. The first burst of ethylene, possibly
initiated by auxin, is not causally involved in triggering the second or third larger
ethylene production event (Singh et al., 1992; Holden et al., 2003). It is clear
from a number of species that ethylene, and possibly but to a lesser extent ACC
from this second or third ethylene peak, is the signal that is propagated through
the flower and leads to senescence of the perianth (Porat et al., 1993, 1995a;
Jones and Woodson, 1997; O’Neil and Nadeau, 1997; Jones and Woodson,
1999b). However, the nature of the pollen factor that induces the second and/
or third burst of signalling ethylene has not been unequivocally established
(Porat et al., 1998) but may well be related to the compatibility reaction that
distinguishes between self and non-self. Short-chain fatty acids and electrical
pulses have also been implicated as signals in the changes following pollination
and may be candidates for secondary signals induced by pollen (Woltering et al.,
1997).
Changes upon pollination
Although petal senescence is the ultimate result of a compatible pollination
event, and in that respect very similar to age-related senescence, there are
changes associated with pollination uniquely related to this developmental
process. The rapid increase in ethylene sensitivity that has been observed
following pollination in several species is one of those unique characteristics
(Halevy and Whitehead, 1989; Whitehead and Halevy, 1989; Porat et al.,
1994, 1995a,b; Halevy, 1995a,b; Ketsa and Rugkong, 2000). The increased
ethylene responsiveness associated with pollination and independent of ethylene

Flower Senescence

167

production observed upon pollination is thought to result in enhanced flower
senescence. The increase in EIL transcript levels observed upon pollination in
styles indicates that the increase in sensitivity to ethylene may be mediated by
changes in ethylene signalling components (Iordachescu and Verlinden, 2005).
A number of compounds in the pollen have been looked at as the putative
‘sensitivity factor’. However, to date, no conclusive evidence has been presented for any compound to unequivocally claim the title of ‘sensitivity factor’.

Concluding Remarks
Clearly, great strides have been made in our understanding of flower senescence in the last two decades. As the picture of flower senescence grows even
more complex and divergent forms of flower senescence are discovered, certain overriding similarities are noteworthy. First, the rapid conversion from sink
to source is apparently a very common theme in both ethylene-sensitive and
-insensitive flowers that do not senesce through rapid abscission. Second, gene
expression in all types of flower senescence can be classified in similar functional categories. Third, changes in membrane composition and function are
found in all types of flower development and senescence studied to date.
Despite this remarkable progress a number of processes are not well
understood and need additional attention. The use of flower senescence mutants and transgenic plants with altered SR gene expression will certainly help
solidify our understanding and open up new areas of research in flower senescence. The use of easily transformed and genetically well-mapped model plants
would definitely aid in this effort.

References
Aida, R., Yoshida, T., Ichimura, K., Goto,
R. and Shibata, M. (1998) Extension of
flower longevity in transgenic torenia
plants incorporating ACC oxidase
transgene. Plant Science 138, 91–
101.
Ashman, T. and Schoen, D.J. (1994)
How long should flowers live? Nature
371, 788–790.
Bieleski, R.L. (1993) Fructan hydrolysis
drives petal expansion in the ephemeral daylily flower. Plant Physiology
103, 213–219.
Bieleski, R.L. (1995) Onset of phloem export from senescent petals of daylily.
Plant Physiology 109, 557–565.
Bieleski, R.L. and Reid, M.S. (1992)
Physiological changes accompanying

senescence in the ephemeral daylily
flower. Plant Physiology 98, 1042–
1049.
Borochov, A. and Faragher, J. (1983)
Comparison between ultraviolet irradiation and ethylene effects on senescence parameters in carnation flowers.
Plant Physiology 71, 536–540.
Borochov, A. and Woodson, W.R. (1989)
Physiology and biochemistry of flower
petal
senescence.
Horticultural
Reviews 11, 15–43.
Borochov, A., Drori, A., Tirosh, T.,
Borochov-Neori, H. and Mayak, S.
(1990a) Quantitative and qualitative
changes in membrane proteins during
petal senescence. Journal of Plant
Physiology 136, 203–207.

168

S. Verlinden
Borochov, A., Itzhaki, H. and Mayak, S.
(1990b) Age-related changes in petal
membranes from attached and detached rose flowers. Plant Physiology
94, 1233–1236.
Borochov, A., Cho, M.H. and Boss, W.F.
(1994) Plasma membrane lipid metabolism of petunia petals during senescence. Physiologia Plantarum 90,
279–284.
Borochov, A., Itzhaki, H., Mayak, S.
Davis, J.H. and Pauls, K.P. (1995)
Deuterium magnetic resonance studies
of senscence-related changes in the
physical properties of rose petal membrane lipids. Plant Physiology 108,
1029–1033.
Borochov, A., Spiegelstein, H. and
Philosoph-Hadas, S. (1997) Ethylene
and flower petal senescence: interrelationship with the membrane lipid
catabolism. Physiologia Plantarum
100, 606–612.
Bovy, A.G, Angenent, G.C., Dons, H.
and van Altvorst, A. (1999) Heterologous expression of the Arabidopsis
etr1–1 allele inhibits the senescence
of carnation flowers. Molecular Breeding 5, 301–308.
Brandt, A.S. and Woodson, W.R. (1992)
Variation in flower senescence and
ethylene biosynthesis among carnations. HortScience 27, 1100–1102.
Brown, J.H., Legge, R.L., Sisler, E.C.,
Baker, J.E. and Thompson, J.E.
(1986) Ethylene binding to senescing
carnation petals. Journal of Experimental Botany 37(177), 526–534.
Brown, J.H., Lynch, D.V. and Thompson, J.E. (1987) Molecular species specificity of phospholipid breakdown in
microsomal membranes of senescing
carnation flowers. Plant Physiology
85, 679–683.
Brown, J.H., Paliyath, G. and Thompson,
J.E. (1990) Influence of acyl chain
composition on the degradation of
phosphatidylcholine by phospholipase
D in carnation microsomal membranes. Journal of Experimental
Botany 41(229), 979–986.

Brown, J.H., Chambers, J.A. and
Thompson, J.E. (1991a) Acyl chain
and head group regulation of phospholipids catabolism in senescing carnation
flowers. Plant Physiology 95, 909–
916.
Brown, J.H., Chambers, J.A. and
Thompson, J.E. (1991b) Distinguishable patterns of phospholipids susceptibility to catabolism in senescing
carnation petals. Phytochemistry
30(8), 2537–2543.
Bui, A.Q. and O’Neill, S.D. (1998) Three
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate
synthase genes regulated by primary
and secondary pollination signals in orchid flowers. Plant Physiology 116,
419–428.
Chang, H., Jones, M.L., Banowetz, G.M.
and Clark, D.G. (2003) Overproduction of cytokinins in Petunia flowers
with PSAG12-IPT delays corolla senescence and decreases sensitivity to ethylene. Plant Physiology 132, 2174–
2183.
Clark, D.G., Gubrium, E.K., Barrett, J.E.,
Nell, T.A. and Klee, H.J. (1999) Root
formation
in
ethylene-insensitive
plants. Plant Physiology 121, 53–59.
Clevenger, D.J., Barrett, J.E., Klee, H.J.
and Clark, D.G. (2004) Factors affecting seed production in transgenic ethylene-insensitive petunias. Journal of
the American Society for Horticultural Science 129, 401–406.
Coker, T., Mayak, S. and Thompson, J.E.
(1985) Effect of water stress on ethylene production and on membrane
microviscosity in carnation flowers.
Scientia Horticulturae 27, 317–324.
Cook, D., Rasche, M. and Eisinger, W.
(1985) Regulation of ethylene biosynthesis and action in cut carnation
flower senescence by cytokinins. Journal of the American Society for
Horticultural Science 110, 24–27.
Dervinis, C., Clark, D.G., Barrett, J.E.
and Nell, T.A. (2000) Effect of pollination and exogenous ethylene on
accumulation of ETR1 homologue
transcripts during flower petal abscis-

Flower Senescence
sion in geranium (Pelargonium 
hortorum L.H. Bailey). Plant Molecular Biology 42, 847–856.
de Vrije, T. and Munnik, T. (1997) Activation of phospholipase D by calmodulin
antagonists and mastoparan in carnation petals. Journal of Experimental
Botany 48(314), 1631–163.
Drory, A., Thompson, J.E., Mayak, S.
and Borochov, A. (1992) Carnation
petal membranes: a study of surface
properties using dansyl pyrrolidine, a
new fluorescent probe. Journal of
Plant Physiology 140, 544–549.
Eason, J.R., Heyes, J.A., Somerfield,
S.D. and de Vre, L.A. (1997) Physiological changes associated with
Sandersonia
aurantiaca
flower
senescence in response to sugar.
Postharvest Biology and Technology
12, 43–50.
Fang, S. and Fernandez, D.E. (2002)
Effect of regulated overexpression of
the MADS domain factor AGL15 on
flower senescence and fruit maturation. Plant Physiology 130, 78–89.
Faragher, J.D., Wachtel, E. and Mayak, S.
(1987) Changes in the physical state of
membrane lipids during senescence of
rose petals. Plant Physiology 83,
1037–1042.
Fernandez, D.E., Heck, G.R., Perry, S.E.,
Patterson, S.E., Bleecker, A.B. and
Fang, S. (2000) The embryo MADS
domain factor AGL15 acts postembryonically: inhibition of perianth senescence and abscission via constitutive
expression. Plant Cell 12, 183–197.
Ferreira, D.I., van der Merwe, J.J. and de
Swardt, G.H. (1986) Starch metabolism in flowers of senescing gladioli inflorescences. Acta Horticultura 177,
203–210.
Fobel, M., Lynch, D.V. and Thompson,
J.E. (1987) Membrane deterioration
in senescing carnation flowers. Plant
Physiology 85, 204–211.
Friedman, H., Barak, A., Umiel, N.,
Hagiladi, A. and Resnick, N. (2001)
Ethylene-insensitive related phenotypes exist naturally in a genetically

169
variable population of Dianthus barbatus. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 103, 282–287.
Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Savin, K., Cornish,
E., Tanaka, Y., Ashikari, T., Kusumi,
T. and Murata, N. (1995) Senescenceinduced expression of a homologue
of D9 desaturase in rose petals. Plant
Molecular Biology 29, 627–635.
Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Ishiguro, K.,
Nakayama, T., Utsunomiya, Y.,
Tanaka, Y., Kusumi, T. and Ueda, T.
(2000) Molecular and functional characterization of a rose lipoxygenase
cDNA related to flower senescence.
Plant Science 160, 129–137.
Garello, G., Menard, C., Dansereau, B.
and Le Page-Degivry, M. (1995) The
influence of light quality on rose flower
senescence: involvement of abscisic
acid. Plant Growth Regulation 16,
135–139.
Gibson, S.I., Laby, R.J. and Kim, D.
(2001) The sugar sensitive1 (sis1)
mutant of Arabidopsis is allelic to
ctr1. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications. 280,
196–203.
Gilissen, L. (1976) The role of the style as
a sense-organ in relation to wilting of
the flower. Planta 131, 201–202.
Gilissen, L. (1977) Style-controlled
wilting of the flower. Planta 133,
275–280.
Gubrium, E.K., Clevenger, D.J., Clark,
D.G., Barrett, J.E. and Nell, T.A.
(2000) Reproduction and horticultural
performance of transgenic ethyleneinsensitive petunias. Journal of the
American Society for Horticultural
Science 125, 277–281.
Guo, H. and Ecker, J.R. (2004) The ethylene signaling pathway: new insights.
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 7,
40–49.
Guerrero, C., de la Calle, M., Reid, M.S.
and Valpuesta, V. (1998) Analysis of
the expression of two thiolprotease
genes from daylily (Hemerocallis
spp.) during flower senescence. Plant
Molecular Biology 36, 565–571.

170

S. Verlinden
Halaba, J. and Rudnicki, RM. (1989) Jasmonate stimulates ethylene emanation
by carnation flowers. Acta Horticulturae 251, 65–66.
Halevy, A.H. (1995) The role of sensitivity
to ethylene in pollination-induced corolla senescence syndrome. Acta Horticulturae 405, 210–215.
Halevy, A.H. and Whitehead, C.S. (1989)
Pollination-induced corolla abscission
and senescence and the role of shortchain fatty acids in the process.
In: Osborne, D.J. and Jackson, M.B.
(eds) Cell Separation in Plants.
NATO ASI Series, Vol. H35,
pp. 221–232.
Hanley, K.M. and Bramlage, W.J. (1989)
Endogenous levels of abscisic acid in
aging carnation flower parts. Journal
of Plant Growth Regulation 8,
225–236.
Hansen, J.D., Hara, A.H. and Tenbrink,
V.L. (1992) Vapor heat: a potential
treatment to disinfest tropical cut
flowers and foliage. HortScience 27,
139–143.
Harel, R., Mayak, S. and Riov, J. (1989)
Involvement of auxin in the control of
senescence in Petunia flowers. Acta
Horticulturae 261, 113–117.
Heo, J.W., Chakrabarty, D. and Paek,
K.Y. (2004) Longevity and quality of
cut ‘Master’ carnation and ‘Red Sandra’ rose flowers as affected by red
light. Plant Growth Regulation 42,
169–174.
Ho, L.C. and Nichols, R. (1977) Translocation of 14C-sucrose in relation to
changes in carbohydrate content in
rose corollas cut at different stages of
development. Annals of Botany 41,
227–242.
Hoekstra, F.A. and van Roekel, T. (1986)
Effects of interspecific pollination on
stylar ethylene production and flower
longevity in Petunia hybrida. Acta
Horticulturae 181, 105–112.
Holden, M.J., Marty, J.A. and SinghCundy, A. (2003) Pollination-induced
ethylene promotes the early phase of
pollen tube growth in Petunia inflata.

Journal of Plant Physiology 160,
261–269.
Hong, Y., Wang, T., Hudak, K.A.,
Schade, F., Froese, C.D. and Thompson, J.E. (2000) An ethylene-induced
cDNA encoding a lipase expressed at
the onset of senescence. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 97, 8717–8722.
Hua, J., Meyerowitz and E.M. (1998)
Ethylene responses are negatively
regulated by a receptor gene family in
Arabidopsis. Cell 94, 261–271.
Hunter, D.A., Steele, B.C. and Reid, M.S.
(2002) Identification of genes associated
with perianth senescence in daffodil
(Narcissus pseudonarcissus L. ‘Dutch
Master’). Plant Science 163, 13–21.
Ichimura, K. (1998) Improvement of postharvest life in several cut flowers by the
addition of sucrose. Japanese Agricultural Research Quarterly 32, 275–
280.
Ichimura, K. and Suto, K. (1999) Effects
of the time of sucrose treatment on
vase life, soluble carbohydrate concentrations, and ethylene production in cut
sweet pea flowers. Plant Growth
Regulation 28, 117–122.
Iordachescu, M. and Verlinden, S. (2005)
Transcriptional regulation of three
EIN3-like genes of carnation (Dianthus
caryophyllus L.) during flower development and upon wounding, pollination, and ethylene exposure. Journal
of Experimental Botany 56 (418),
2011–2018.
Itzhaki, H., Borochov, A. and Mayak, S.
(1990) Age-related changes in petal
membranes from attached and detached rose flowers. Plant Physiology
94, 1233–1236.
Itzhaki, H., Davis, J.H., Borochov, A.,
Mayak, S. and Pauls, P.K. (1995) Deuterium magnetic resonance studies of
senescence-related changes in the
physical properties of rose petal membrane lipids. Plant Physiology 108,
1029–1033.
Jones, M. (2002) Ethylene responsiveness
in carnation styles is associated with

Flower Senescence
stigma receptivity. Sexual Plant
Reproduction 15, 107–112.
Jones, M.L. and Woodson, W.R. (1997)
Pollination-induced ethylene in carnation. Plant Physiology 115, 205–212.
Jones, M.L. and Woodson, W.R. (1999a)
Differential expression of three members of the 1-aminocyclopropane1-carboxylate synthase gene family in
carnation. Plant Physiology 119,
755–764.
Jones, M.L. and Woodson, W.R. (1999b)
Interorgan signaling following pollination in carnations. Journal of the
American Society for Horticultural
Science 124, 598–604.
Jones, M.L., Larsen P.B. and Woodson,
W.R. (1995) Ethylene-regulated expression of a carnation cysteine proteinase
during flower petal senescence. Plant
Molecular Biology 28, 505–512.
Jones, M.L., Kim, E. and Newman, S.E.
(2001) Role of ethylene and 1-MCP in
flower development and petal abscission in zonal geraniums. HortScience
36, 1305–1309.
Jones, R. and McConchie, R. (1995)
Characteristics of petal senescence in
a non-climacteric cut flower. Acta
Horticulturae 405, 216-–223.
Kao, T. and McCubbin, A.G. (1996) How
flowering plants discriminate between
self and non-self pollen to prevent
inbreeding. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
93, 12059–12065.
Karle, R. and Boyle, T.H. (1999) Relationships between floral morphology,
breeding behavior and flower longevity
in Easter cactus. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science
124, 296–300.
Ketsa, S. and Rugkong, A. (2000) Ethylene
production, senescence and ethylene
sensitivity of Dendrobium ‘Pompadour’ flowers following pollination.
Journal of Horticultural Science and
Biotechnology 75, 149–153.
Klee, H.J. and Clark, D.G. (2002) Manipulation of ethylene synthesis and

171
perception in plants: the ins and outs.
HortScience 37, 450–452.
Knoester, M., Bol, J.F., Linthorst, H.J.M.
Hennig, J., van Loon, L.C. and van
den Heuvel, J. (1998) Ethylene-insenstive tobacco lacks nonhost resistance
against soil-borne fungi. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 95, 1933–1937.
Krahl, K.H. and Randle, W.M. (1999)
Genetics of floral longevity in Petunia.
HortScience 34, 339–340.
Larsen, P.B. Woltering, E.J. and Woodson, W.R. (1993) Ethylene and interorgan signaling in flowers following
pollination. In: Raskin, I. and Schultz,
J. (eds) Plant Signals in Interactions
with Other Organisms. American Society of Plant Physiologists, Rockville,
Maryland, pp. 171–181.
Lawton, K.A., Huang, B., Goldsbrough,
P.B. and Woodson, W.R. (1989) Molecular cloning and characterization of
senescence-related genes from carnation flower petals. Plant Physiology
90, 690–696.
Lawton, K.A., Raghothama, K.G., Goldsbrough, P.B. and Woodson, W.R.
(1990) Regulation of senescenceelated gene expression in carnation
flower petals by ethylene. Plant Physiology 93, 1370–1375.
Lay-Lee, M., Stead, A.D. and Reid, M.S.
(1992) Flower senescence in daylily
(Hemerocallis). Physiologia Plantarum 84, 308–314.
Leon, P. and Sheen, J. (2003) Sugar and
hormone connections. Trends in
Plant Science 8, 110–116.
Leshem, Y.Y. (1987) Membrane phospholipid catabolism and Ca2þ activity
in control of senescence. Physiologia
Plantarum 69, 551–559.
Leverentz, M.K., Wagstaff, C., Rogers,
H.J., Stead, A.D., Chanasut, U., Silkowski, H., Thomas, B., Weichert, H.,
Feussner, I. and Griffiths, G. (2002)
Characterization
of
a
novel
lipoxygenase-independent senescence
mechanism in Alstroemeria peruviana

172

S. Verlinden
floral tissue. Plant Physiology 130,
273–283.
Lindstrom, J.T. Woodson, W.R., Jones,
M.L. and Lei, C.H. (1999) Accumulation of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) in Petunia pollen is
associated with expression of a pollenspecific ACC synthase late in development. Journal of the American
Society for Horticultural Science
124, 145–151.
Llop-Tous, I., Barry, C.S. and Grierson,
D. (2000) Regulation of ethylene biosynthesis in response to pollination in
tomato flowers. Plant Physiology
123, 971–978.
Lovell, P.J., Lovell, P.H. and Nichols, R.
(1987) The control of flower senescence in petunia (Petunia hybrida).
Annals of Botany 60, 49–59.
Lukaszewska, A.J., Bianco, J., Barthe, P.
and LePage-Degivry, M.T. (1994) Endogenous cytokinins in rose petals
and the effect of exogenously applied
cytokinins on flower senescence.
Plant Growth Regulation 14, 119–
126.
Maxson, J.M. and Woodson, W.R. (1996)
Cloning of a DNA-binding protein that
interacts with the ethylene-responsive
enhancer element of the carnation
GST1 gene. Plant Molecular Biology
31, 751–759.
Mayak, S. and Dilley, D.R. (1976) Effect
of sucrose on response of cut carnation
(Dianthus caryophyllus) to kinetin,
ethylene, and abscisic acid. Journal of
the American Society for Horticultural Science 101, 583–585.
Meyer, R.C., Woodson, W.R. and Goldsbrough, P.B. (1991) An ethyleneresponsive flower senescence-related
gene from carnation encodes a
protein homolgous to glutathione-stransferases. Plant Molecular Biology
17, 277–281.
Mor, Y. Porat, D. and Halevy, A.H.
(1980) Characterization of the light
reaction in promoting the mobilizing
ability of rose shoot tips. Plant
Physiology 66, 996–1000.

Muller, R., Stummann, B., Andersen,
A.S. and Serek, M. (1999) Involvement of ABA in postharvest life of
miniature potted roses. Plant Growth
Regulation 29, 143–150.
Muller, R., Lind-Iversen, S., Stummann,
B. and Serek, M. (2000a) Expression
of genes for ethylene biosynthetic enzymes and an ethylene receptor in senescing flowers of miniature potted
rose. Journal of Horticultural
Science Biotechnology. 75, 12–18.
Muller, R., Stummann, B. and Serek, M.
(2000b) Characterization of an ethylene receptor family with differential
regulation in rose (Rosa hybrida L.)
flowers. Plant Cell Reports 19,
1232–1239.
Muller, R., Owen, C.A., Xue, Z., Welander,
M. and Stummann, B. (2002) Characterization of two CTR-like protein
kinases in Rosa hybrida and their
expression during flower senescence
and in response to ethylene. Journal
of Experimental Botany 53(371),
1223–1225.
Muller, R., Owen, C.A., Xue, Z., Welander,
M. and Stummann, B. (2003) The transcription factor EIN3 is constitutively
expressed in miniature roses with differences in postharvest life. Journal of
Horticultural Science Biotechnology
78, 10–14.
Munnik, T., Musgrave, A. and de Vrije., T.
(1994) Rapid turnover of polyphosphoinositides in carnation flower
petals. Planta 193, 89–98.
Nichols, R. (1973) Senescence of the
cut carnation flower: respiration and
sugar status. Journal of Horticultural
Science 48, 111–121.
Nichols., R. and Manning, K. (1986)
Growth substances and post harvest
flower senescence. Acta Horticulturae 181, 161–167.
Nukui, H., Kudo, S., Yamashita, A. and
Satoh, S. (2004) Repressed ethylene
production in the gynoecium of longlasting flowers of the carnation ‘White
Candle’: role of the gynoecium in carnation flower senescence. Journal of

Flower Senescence
Experimental Botany 55(397), 641–
650.
O’Neil, S.D. and Nadeau, J.A. (1997)
Postpollination flower development.
Horticultural Reviews 19, 1–44.
O’Neil, S.D., Nadeau, J.A., Zhang, X.S.,
Bui, A.Q. and Halevy, A.H. (1993)
Interorgan regulation of ethylene biosynthetic genes by pollination. Plant
Cell 5, 419–432.
Orzaez, D. and Granell, A. (1997) The
plant homologue of the defender
against apoptotic death gene is downregulated during senescence of flower
petals. FEBS Letters 404, 275–278.
Orzaez, D., Blay, R. and Granell, A.
(1999) Programme of senescence in
petals and carpels of Pisum sativum
L. flowers and its control by ethylene.
Planta 208, 220–226.
Paliyath, G. and Thompson, J.E. (1988)
Senescence-related changes in ATPdependent uptake of calcium in microsomal vesicles from carnation petals.
Plant Physiology 88, 295–302.
Paliyath, G. and Thompson, J.E. (1990)
Evidence of early changes in membrane structure during postharvest development of cut carnation (Dianthus
caryophyllus L.) flowers. New
Phytologist 114, 555–562.
Panavas, T. and Rubinstein, B. (1998) Oxidative events during programmed cell
death of daylily (Hemerocallis hybrid)
petals. Plant Science 133, 125–138.
Panavas, T., Reid, P.D. and Rubinstein, B.
(1998a) Programmed cell death of daylily petals: activities of wall-based enzymes and effects of heat shock.
Plant Physiology Biochemical 36,
379–388.
Panavas, T., Walker, E.L. and Rubinstein,
B. (1998b) Possible involvement of abscisic acid in senescence of daylily
petals. Journal of Experimental
Botany 49(329), 1987–1997.
Panavas, T., Pikula, A., Reid, P.D.,
Rubinstein, B. and Walker, E.L. (1999)
Identification of senescence-associated
genes from daylily petals. Plant
Molecular Biology 40, 237–248.

173
Paulin, A. and Droillard, M.J. (1989)
Membrane lipids peroxidation during
the senescence of cut carnation
(Dianthus caryophyllus L.) Acta Horticulturae 261, 51–57.
Paulin, A., Droillard, M.J. and Bureau,
J.M. (1986) Effect of a free radical
scavenger, 3,4,5-trichlorophenol, on
ethylene production and on changes
in lipids and membrane integrity
during senescence of petals of cut
carnations (Dianthus caryophyllus).
Physiologia Plantarum 67, 465–
471.
Peary, J.S. and Prince, T.A. (1990) Floral
lipoxygenase activity during senescence and inhibition by phenidone.
Journal of the American Society for
Horticultural Science 115, 455–457.
Porat, R., Reuveny, Y., Borochov, A. and
Halevy, A.H. (1993) Petunia flower
longevity: the role of sensitivity to
ethylene. Physiologia Plantarum 89,
291–294.
Porat, R., Borochov, A., Halevy, A.H.
and O’Neill, S.D. (1994) Pollinationinduced senescence of Phalaenopsis
petals. Plant Growth Regulation 15,
129–136.
Porat, R., Halevy, A.H., Serek, M. and
Borochov, A. (1995a) An increase in
ethylene sensitivity following pollination is the intitial event triggering
an increase in ethylene production
and enhanced senescence of Phalaenopsis orchid flowers. Physiologia
Plantarum 93, 778–784.
Porat, R., Reiss, N., Atzorn, R., Halevy,
A.H. and Borochov, A. (1995b) Examination of the possible involvement of
lipoxygenase and jasmonates in pollination-induced senescence of Phalaenopsis and Dendrobium orchid
flowers. Physiologia Plantarum 94,
205–210.
Porat, R., Nadeau, J.A., Kirby, J.A.,
Sutter, E.G. and O’Neill, S.D. (1998)
Characterization of the primary pollen
signal in the postpollination syndrome
of Phalaenopsis flowers. Plant
Growth Regulation 24, 109–117.

174

S. Verlinden
Reid, M.S. and Wu, M.J. (1992) Ethylene
and flower senescence. Plant Growth
Regulation 11, 37–43.
Rouet-Mayer, M.A., Bureau, J.M. and
Lauriere, C. (1992) Identification and
characterization of lipoxygenase isoforms in senescing carnation petals.
Plant Physiology 98, 971–978.
Rubinstein, B. (2000) Regulation of cell
death in flower petals. Plant Molecular Biology 44, 303–318.
Sacalis, J.N. and Lee, J.S. (1985) Effects
of gynoecium excision on vase life of
cut carnation flowers. Acta Horticulturae 167, 141–145.
Saks, Y. and van Staden, J. (1993a) Effect
of gibberellic acid on ACC content,
EFE activity and ethylene release by
floral parts of the senescing carnation
flower. Plant Growth Regulation 12,
99–104.
Saks, Y. and van Staden, J. (1993b) Evidence for the involvement of gibberellins in developmental phenomena
associated with carnation flower senescence. Plant Growth Regulation 12,
105–110.
Saks, Y., van Staden, J. and Smith, M.T.
(1992) Effect of gibberellic acid on carnation flower senescence: evidence
that the delay in flower senescence by
gibberellic acid depends on the stage of
flower development. Plant Growth
Regulation 11, 45–51.
Sanchez, A.M. and Mariani, C. (2002)
Expression of the ACC synthase and
ACC oxidase coding genes after selfpollination and incongruous pollination
of tobacco pistils. Plant Molecular
Biology 48, 351–359.
Savin, K.W., Baudinette, S.C., Graham,
M.W., Michael, M.Z., Nugent, G.D.,
Lu, C., Chandler, S.F. and Cornish,
E.C. (1995) Antisense ACC oxidase
mRNA delays carnation petal senescence. HortScience 30, 970–972.
Schroeder, K.R. and Stimart, D.P. (2001)
Genetic analysis of cut-flower longevity
in Antirrhinum majus. Journal of the
American Society for Horticultural
Science 126, 200–204.

Shaw, J., Chen, H., Tsai, M., Kuo, C. and
Huang, L. (2002) Extended flower longevity of Petunia hybrida plants transformed with boers, a mutated ERS
gene of Brassica oleracea. Molecular
Breeding 9, 211–216.
Shibuya, K., Yoshioka, T., Hashiba, T.
and Satoh, S. (2000) Role of the gynoecium in natural senescence of carnation (Dianthus caryophyllus L.).
Journal of Experimental Botany
51(353), 2067–2073.
Shibuya, K., Nagata, M., Tanikawa, N.,
Yoshioka, T., Hashiba, T. and Satoh.,
S. (2002) Comparison of mRNA levels
of three ethylene receptors in senescing flowers of carnation (Dianthus
caryophyllus L.). Journal of Experimental Botany 53(368), 399–406.
Singh, A., Evensen, K.B. and Kao, T.
(1992) Ethylene synthesis and floral
senescence following compatible and
incompatible pollinations in Petunia
inflata. Plant Physiology 99, 38–45.
Smeekens, S. (2000) Sugar-induced signal
transduction in plants. Annual Review
of Plant Physiology and Molecular
Biology 51, 49–81.
Smith, M.T., Saks, Y. and van Staden,
J. (1992) Ultrastructural changes in
the petals of flowers of Dianthus
caryphyllus L. Annals of Botany 69,
277–285.
Spikman, G. (1986) The effect of water
stress on ethylene production and
ethylene sensitivity of Freesia inflorescences. Acta Horticulturae 181,
135–140.
Stead, A.D. (1992) Pollination-induced
flower senescence: a review. Plant
Growth Regulation 11, 13–20.
Stead, A.D. and Moore, K.G. (1979)
Studies on flower longevity in Digitalis.
Planta 146, 409–414.
Stephenson, P.T. and Rubinstein, B.
(1998) Characterization of proteolytic
activity during senescence of daylily.
Physiologia Plantarum 104, 463–
473.
Sugawara, H., Shibuya, K., Yoshioka, T.,
Hashiba, T. and Satoh, S. (2002) Is a

Flower Senescence
cysteine proteinase inhibitor involved
in the regulation of petal wilting in
senescing
carnation
(Dianthus
caryophyllus L.) flowers? Journal
of Experimental Botany 53(368),
407–413.
Suttle, J.C. and Kende, H. (1980) Ethylene action and loss of membrane
integrity during petal senescence in
Tradescantia. Plant Physiology 65,
1067–1072.
Sylvestre, I. and Paulin, A. (1987) Accelerated ethylene production as related to
changes in lipids and electrolyte leakage
during senescence of petals of cut
carnations (Dianthus caryophyllus).
Physiologia Plantarum 70, 530–536.
Tang, X. and Woodson, W.R. (1996)
Temporal and spatial expression of 1aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase mRNA following pollination of
immature and mature Petunia flowers.
Plant Physiology 112, 503–511.
Taverner, E., Letham, D.S., Wang, J.,
Cornish., E. and Willcocks, D.A.
(1999) Influence of ethylene on cytokinin metabolism in relation to Petunia
corolla senescence. Phytochemistry
51, 341–347.
ten Have, A. and Woltering, E.J. (1997)
Ethylene biosynthetic genes are differently expressed during carnation
(Dianthus caryophyllus L.) flower
senescence. Plant Molecular Biology
34, 89–97.
Thompson, J.E., Mayak, S., Shinitzky,
M. and Halevy, A.H. (1982) Acceleration of membrane senescence in cut
carnation flowers by treatment
with ethylene. Plant Physiology 69,
859–863.
Tirosh, T. and Mayak, S. (1988) Changes
in starch content during the development of carnation petals. Journal of
Plant Physiology 133, 361–363.
Torre, S., Borochov, A. and Halevy, A.H.
(1999) Calcium regulation of senescence in rose petals. Physiologia
Plantarum 107, 214–219.
Upfold, S.J. and van Staden, J. (1990)
Cytokinins in cut carnations. VII. The

175
effect of zeatin and dihydrozeatin derivatives on flower longevity. Plant
Growth Regulation 9, 77–81.
Valpuesta, V, Lange, N.E., Guerrero, C.
and Reid, M.S. (1995) Up-regulation
of a cysteine protease accompanies
the ethylene insensitive senescence of
daylily (Hemerocallis) flowers. Plant
Molecular Biology 28, 575–582.
van Altvorst, A.C. and Bovy, A.G. (1995)
The role of ethylene in the senescence
of carnation flowers, a review. Plant
Growth Regulation 16, 43–53.
van Doorn, W.G. (1997) Effects of pollination on floral attraction and longevity.
Journal of Experimental Botany
48(314), 1615–1622.
van Doorn, W.G. (2001) Categories
of petal senescence and abscission: a
re-evaluation. Annals of Botany 87,
447–456.
van Doorn, W.G. (2002a) Does ethylene
treatment mimic the effects of pollination on floral lifespan and attractiveness. Annals of Botany 89, 375–383.
van Doorn, W.G. (2002b) Effect of ethylene on flower abscission: a survey.
Annals of Botany 89, 689–693.
van Doorn, W.G. (2004) Is petal senescence due to sugar starvation? Plant
Physiology 134, 35–42.
van Doorn, W.G., Balk, P.A., van Houwelingen, A.M., Hoeberichts, F.A., Hall,
R.D., Vorst, O., van der Schoot, C.
and van Wordragen, M.F. (2003)
Gene expression during anthesis and
senescence in Iris flowers. Plant
Molecular Biology 53, 845–863.
van der Meulen-Muisers, J., van Tuyl, J.M.
and van Oeveren, J.C. (1998) Genotypic variation in postharvest longevity
of Asiatic hybrid lilies. Journal of the
American Society for Horticultural
Science 123, 283–287
van der Meulen-Muisers, J., van Tuyl,
J.M., van der Plas, L.H.W. and van
Oeveren, J.C. (2001) Postharvest
flower development in Asiatic hybrid
lilies as related to tepal carbohydrate
status. Postharvest Biology and
Technology 21, 201–211.

176

S. Verlinden
van Staden, J. (1989) Cytokinins and
auxins in carnation senescence as related to chemical treatments. Acta
Horticulturae 261, 69–80.
van Staden, J. (1995) Hormonal control
of carnation flower senescence. Acta
Horticulturae 405, 232–239.
Vardi, Y. and Mayak, S. (1989) Involvement of abscisic acid during water
stress and recovery in Petunia flowers.
Acta Horticulturae 261, 107–112.
Verlinden, S. (2003) Changes in mineral
nutrient concentrations in Petunia
corollas during development and senescence. Hort Science 38, 71–74.
Verlinden, S. and Garcia, J.J. (2004) Sucrose loading decreases ethylene responsiveness in carnation (Dianthus
caryophyllus cv, White Sim.) petals.
Postharvest Biology and Technology
31, 305–312.
Verlinden, S. and Woodson, W.R. (1998)
The physiological and molecular responses of carnation flowers to high
temperatures. Postharvest Biology
and Technology 14, 185–192.
Verlinden, S., Boatright, J. and Woodson,
W.R. (2002) Changes in ethylene responsiveness of senescence-related
genes during carnation flower development. Physiologia Plantarum 116,
503–511.
Wagstaff, C., Leverentz, M.K., Griffiths,
G., Thomas, B., Chanasut, U., Stead,
A.D. and Rogers, H.J. (2001) Cysteine
protease gene expression and proteolytic activity during senescence of
Alstroemeria petals. Journal of Experimental Botany 53(367), 233–
240.
Wagstaff, C., Leverentz, M.K., Griffiths,
G., Thomas, B., Chanasut, U., Stead,
A.D. and Rogers, H.J. (2003) Programmed cell death (PCD) processes
begin extremely early in Alstroemeria
petal senescence. New Phytologist
160, 49–59.
Waki, K. Shibuya, K., Yoshioka, T.,
Hashiba, T. and Satoh, S. (2001) Cloning of a cDNA encoding EIN3-like protein (DC-EIL1) and decrease in its

mRNA level during senescence in carnation flower tisues. Journal of
Experimental Botany 52(355), 377–
379.
Wang, H., Woodson, W.R. and Brandt,
A.S. (1993) A flower senescencerelated mRNA from carnation encodes
a novel protein related to enzymes involved in phosphonate biosynthesis.
Plant Molecular Biology 22, 719–
724.
Wang, N.N., Yang, S.F. and Charng, Y.
(2001) Differential expression of
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate
synthase genes during orchid flower
senescence induced by the protein
phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid.
Plant Physiology 126, 253–260.
Wernett, H.C., White, T.L., Powell, G.L.,
Wilcox, C.J., Martin, F.G., Wifret,
G.J., Sheehan, T.J. and Lyrene, P.M.
(1996) Postharvest longevity of cutflower Gerbera. II: heritability of vase
life. Journal of the American Society
for Horticultural Science 121, 222–
224.
Weterings, K., Pezzotti, M., Cornelissen,
M. and Mariani, C. (2002) Dynamic
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylatesynthase and -oxidase transcript
accumulation patterns during pollen
tube growth in tobacco styles. Plant
Physiology 130, 1190–1200.
Whitehead, C.S. and Halevy, A.H. (1989)
Ethylene sensitivity: the role of shortchain saturated fatty acids in pollination-induced senescence of Petunia
hybrida flowers. Plant Growth
Regulation 8, 41–54.
Wilkinson, J.Q., Lanahan, M.B., Clark,
D.G., Bleecker, A.B., Chang, C.,
Meyerowitz, E.M. and Klee, H.J.
(1997) A dominant mutant receptor
from Arabidopsis confers insensitivity
in heterologous plants. Nature Biotechnology 15, 444–448.
Woltering, E.J., de Vrije, T., Harren, F.
and Hoekstra, F.A. (1997) Pollination
and stigma wounding: same response,
different signal? Journal of Experimental Botany 48(310), 1027–1033.

Flower Senescence
Woltering, E.J. and Van Doorn, W.G.
(1988) Role of ethylene in senescence
of petals: morphological and taxonomical relationships. Journal of Experimental Botany 39(208), 1605–1616.
Woodson, W.R. (1987) Changes in protein and mRNA populations during carnation petal senescence. Plant
Physiology 71, 445–502.
Woodson, W.R. and Brandt, A.S. (1991)
Role of the gynoecium in cytokinininduced carnation petal senescence.
Journal of the American Society
for Horticultural Science 116,
676–679.

177
Woodson, W.R., Park, K.Y., Drory, A.,
Larsen, P.B. and Wang, H. (1992) Expression of ethylene biosynthetic pathway transcripts in senescing carnation
flowers. Plant Physiology 99, 526–
532.
Wu, M., Van Doorn, W., Mayak, S. and
Reid, M.S. (1989) Senescence of ‘Sandra’ carnation. Acta Horticulturae
261, 221–225.
Xu, Y. and Hanson, M.R. (2000)
Programmed cell death during pollination-induced petal senescence in
Petunia. Plant Physiology 122,
1323–1333.

8

Developmental Control and
Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
K. DAVIES

AND

K. SCHWINN

New Zealand Institute for Crop and Food Research Ltd, Private Bag 11600,
Palmerston North, New Zealand

Introduction
For many angiosperms, pigment formation is a key part of flower development.
Flower colour, along with fragrance, floral shape and nectar reward, is important to the interaction between plants and pollinators; and preferences towards
specific colours are exhibited by pollinators, whether they are birds, bees,
butterflies or other insects (reviewed in Bohm, 1998). Commonly contributing
to floral phenotypes are colour combinations and patterning such as distinctive
spots on the flower ‘lip’ or pigment lines in the flower tube (e.g. orchids, Plate 1
– see frontispiece to this book). These may provide more specific signals within
the flower, e.g. acting as nectar guides to insects. In an extraordinary example
of pollinator signalling, the flowers of the orchid genus Ophrys use colour, scent
and shape to mimic female bees, causing the male bee to attempt copulation,
thus achieving pollination (Paxton and Tengo, 2001).
The major pigments responsible for flower colour are carotenoids, flavonoids and betalains. Although other pigment types such as chlorophylls (e.g.
Cymbidium orchid, Plate 1), phenylphenalenones and quinochalcones can
generate flower colours, their occurrence is rare (Davies, 2004). Carotenoids
are lipid soluble, plastid-located terpenoids present in photosynthetic plants,
algae and bacteria. For pigmentation of flowers (and fruits), carotenoids accumulate to high levels in specialized plastids called chromoplasts. More generally,
these pigments participate in the harvesting and dissipation of light energy in
chloroplasts, protecting the photosynthetic machinery from photo-oxidation.
Carotenoids are the basis of pigmentation in most yellow flowers, but they also
generate orange, red, brown and bronze flower colours. The flavonoids are
phenylpropanoid compounds of great variation in structure and function
(Bohm, 1998). Those involved in flower colour are water soluble and generally
located in the vacuole. The predominant flavonoid pigments are the anthocyanins, which are the basis for nearly all of the pink, red, orange, scarlet, purple,
178

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

179

blue and blue-black flower colours. The aurones and chalcones are yellow
flavonoid pigments, which provide pigmentation in a few species. The betalains
are nitrogenous compounds, also vacuolar located, which produce yellow,
orange, red and purple flower colours. Their occurrence is restricted to the
Caryophyllales (and some species of the fungal genera Amanita and Hygrocybe). Most of the families in the Caryophyllales have evolved to use betalains as
the key floral pigments rather than the anthocyanins, even though the flavonoid
pathway is active in these plants. The molecular basis for the mutual exclusion of
betalains and anthocyanins in the Caryophyllales remains to be determined.
Anthocyanins and carotenoids commonly occur together in petals, and are
generally localized to different cell layers of the petal. Anthocyanins are typically found in epidermal cells and carotenoids subepidermally. When they cooccur, the pigmentation phenotype depends on the spatial and temporal
distribution of the different pigment types, but may include orange, scarlet
and brown/black colours as well as colour patterns and colours that change
during flower development. Plate 1 shows examples of the floral colours
generated by carotenoids, flavonoids and betalains.
Although pigmentation in flowers is primarily to be found in the petals, in
some species sepals or fused floral organs (e.g. tepals) may provide the main
pigmentation. In others, non-floral organs are coloured. Within the Araceae
family, a brilliantly coloured heart-shaped bract (the spathe) is used to attract
pollinators. The bracts also provide the main coloration in Bougainvillea (Plate
1). In many species the pollen is also coloured by carotenoids and/or flavonoids.
Although colourless flavonoids in pollen have been shown to be required for
fertility in some species (e.g. Taylor and Jorgensen, 1992; Jorgensen et al.,
2002), the function of the coloured compounds is not clear. Mutants lacking
either carotenoids or anthocyanins can retain pollen fertility, although maternal
fertility may be affected (Jorgensen et al., 2002; Wakelin et al., 2003). In some
cases, pollen colour may be part of the signal to pollinators (Lunau, 2000) and it is
also possible that the pigments have protective activities against various stresses.
Pigment production is often timed to coincide with flower fertility. Thus,
pigments may appear just prior to the flower becoming fertile; or in some
cases, flower colour may fade or the flower may turn from white to coloured or
even change in colour following fertilization. These transformations may be
the result of changes in petal cell pH as the flower ages, degradation of the
pigments or de novo pigment biosynthesis. An example of the latter can be
found in Lantana. The flowers are yellow initially when fertile but change to
purple over an ageing period of 3 days (Plate 1). The yellow flowers offer nectar
and pollen rewards that older flowers do not, and are preferred by the butterfly
pollinators (Weiss, 1995). Retention of the purple older flowers maintains a
larger inflorescence, which is more attractive to pollinators at a distance while
still directing pollinators to fertile flowers. At least 200 plant genera contain
species that show colour change during flower development. Thus, variation in
flower colour associated with a change in nectar and pollen availability may be a
common occurrence (Weiss, 1995; Bohm, 1998).
The production of pigments in complex patterns that are coincident with
fertility and localized to particular cell types within the flower requires the

180

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

coordinated induction of the genes for the pigment biosynthetic enzymes.
Furthermore, in addition to the developmental signals, the pigment biosynthetic genes may respond to environmental factors such as the light quality and
quantity. This chapter reviews the knowledge on the regulation of pigment
production during flower development, with an emphasis on the transcriptional
regulation of the biosynthetic genes. It also provides a brief overview of the
major flower pigment biosynthetic pathways. A comprehensive review of
the biochemistry and molecular genetics of pigment biosynthesis would require
several chapters of this book. Thus, only outlines of the biosynthetic pathways
are given with reference to recent reviews.
Flower colour has been the target of many different genetic modification
(GM) approaches, either for advancing understanding of pigment biosynthesis
or for the development of novel ornamental varieties. In the second part of this
chapter we address the progress to date on the GM of floral pigments.

The Biosynthesis of Plant Pigments
Flavonoid and betalain pigments, like many plant secondary metabolites, are
derived from aromatic amino acids. Carotenoids, and a range of other compounds such as gibberellins and tocopherols, are produced from the 5-carbon
(C5) compound isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) within the general isoprenoid
pathway. The carotenoid and flavonoid biosynthetic pathways are now well
defined at the genetic and enzymatic level. Of course, some knowledge gaps do
exist, but these are becoming fewer and gene sequences are now available for
most of the biosynthetic steps for the coloured compounds. The molecular data
for other floral pigments are very limited, although there have been significant
recent advances in understanding betalain and apocarotenoid biosynthesis.
The biosynthetic steps for which gene sequences are available are listed
in Table 8.1, including details of the protein families to which the enzymes
belong and reference to the first publications detailing identification of the
corresponding DNA sequences. More extensive recent reviews on the molecular biology of flavonoid and carotenoid biosynthesis can be found in Marles
et al. (2003), Springob et al. (2003), Cuttriss and Pogson (2004), Fraser
and Bramley (2004), Schwinn and Davies (2004), Tanner (2004) and Dixon
et al. (2005).
For flavonoids and carotenoids, evidence is emerging on various subcellular
factors involved in their biosynthesis. Carotenoids are synthesized and stored in
plastids by nuclear-encoded enzymes; and flavonoids are synthesized in the
cytosol, likely in association with the endoplasmic reticulum. The biosynthetic
enzymes for both pathways are thought to form multi-enzyme complexes that
may enable the selective channelling of intermediates along alternative biosynthetic paths (see the section below on Regulation of Pigment Biosynthesis in
Flowers and Winkel, 2004). The requirement for appropriate enzyme complexes to be formed may have important implications for metabolic engineering experiments. For the anthocyanins, vacuolar compartmentalization and pH
of the environment are also key elements in forming the coloured compounds,

Enzyme

Abbreviation

EC number

Protein family

Referencea

Flavonoid precursors
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (cytosolic)

ACC

6.4.1.2

Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase
Cinnamate 4-hydroxylase

PAL
C4H

4.3.1.5
1.14.13.11

Biotin-containing
carboxylases
Ammonia-lyases
CytP450 (CYP73A)b

4-Coumarate:CoA ligase
Pathway to anthocyanins
Chalcone synthase

4CL

6.2.1.12

Adenylate-forming enzymes

Roesler et al. (1994);
Shorrosh et al. (1994)
Kuhn et al. (1984)
Fahrendorf and Dixon (1993);
Mizutani et al. (1993);
Teutsch et al. (1993)
Kuhn et al. (1984)

CHS

2.3.1.74

Polyketide synthase

Chalcone isomerase
Flavanone 3-hydroxylase

CHI
F3H (FHT)

5.5.1.6
1.14.11.9

Flavanone 4-reductase
Dihydroflavonol 4-reductase

FNR
DFR

1.1.1.234
1.1.1.219

No named family
2-Oxoglutarate-dependent
dioxygenase (2OGD)
NADPH reductase (RED)
RED

Anthocyanidin synthase (leucoanthocyanidin
dioxygenase)
UDP-Glc:anthocyanidin 3-O-glucosyltransferase/
UDP-Glc:flavonol 3-O-glucosyltransferase
UDP-Glc:anthocyanin 5-O-glucosyltransferased
UDP-Glc:anthocyanin 3’-O-glucosyltransferase
UDP-Glc:anthocyanin 3’,5’-O-glucosyltransferase
UDP-Rha:anthocyanidin 3-O-glucoside
rhamnosyltransferase
Hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA:anthocyanin 5-Oglucoside-6’’’-O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferasee
Hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA:anthocyanidin 3-Oglucoside-6’’-O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase
Malonyl-CoA:anthocyanin 5-O-glucoside-4’’’O-malonyltransferase
Malonyl-CoA:anthocyanin 5-O-glucoside-6’’’O-malonyltransferase

ANS (LDOX)

1.14.11.19

2OGD

F3GT
A5GT
A3’GT
A3’,5’GT
A3RT

2.4.1.115/
2.4.1.91
2.4.1.2.4.1.2.4.1.2.4.1.-

UDPG-Oglycosyltransferase (UGT)
UGT
UGT
UGT
UGT

A5AT (Gt5AT)

2.3.1.153

A3AT (Pf3AT)

2.3.1.-

Versatile
acyltransferase (VAT)
VAT

A5MT (Ss5MaT2)

2.3.1.-

VAT

Yonekura-Sakakibara
et al. (2000)
Suzuki et al. (2004b)

A5MT (Ss5MaT1)

2.3.1.-

VAT

Suzuki et al. (2001)

Kreuzaler et al. (1983);
Reimold et al. (1983)
Mehdy and Lamb (1987)
Martin et al. (1991)
O’Reilly et al. (1985)c
Martin et al. (1985);
O’Reilly et al. (1985)
Menssen et al. (1990);
Martin et al. (1991)
Fedoroff et al. (1984)
Yamazaki et al. (1999, 2002)
Fukuchi-Mizutani et al. (2003)
Noda et al. (2004)
Brugliera et al. (1994);
Kroon et al. (1994)
Fujiwara et al. (1998)

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

Table 8.1. Flavonoid, carotenoid and betalain biosynthetic enzymes involved in flower pigmentation for which DNA sequences have been
published.

181
continued

Protein family

Referencea

2.3.1.-

VAT

2.3.1.-

VAT

Suzuki et al. (2002, 2003,
2004a)
Suzuki et al. (2004a)

F3’H
F3’,5’H
A3’OMT

1.14.13.21
1.14.13.2.1.1.-

CytP450 (CYP75B)
CytP450 (CYP75A)
SAM O-Methyltransferase
(OMT)

SAM:anthocyanin 3’,5’-O-methyltransferase

A3’5’OMT

2.1.1.-

OMT

Flavones and flavonols
Flavonol synthase
Flavone synthase I
Flavone synthase II

FLS
FNSI
FNSII

1.14.11.1.14.11.1.14.13.-

2OGD
2OGD
CytP450 (CYP93B)

Holton et al. (1993b)
Martens et al. (2001)
Akashi et al. (1999); Martens
and Forkmann (1999)

C2’GT

2.4.1.-

UGT

Patent application WO03/018682

PKR (CHR, CHKR)

1.1.1.-

Aldo/ketoreductase

Welle et al. (1991)

AUS

1.21.3.6

Polyphenol oxidase

Nakayama et al. (2000)

ANR

1.1.1.-

RED

Devic et al. (1999);
Xie et al. (2003)

DXPS

4.1.3.37

Transketolase

DXR

1.1.1.267

Reductoisomerase

IPPI
GGPPS

5.3.3.2
2.5.1.29

IPP isomerase type 1
Prenyltransferase

Bouvier et al. (1998);
Lange et al. (1998)
Lange and Croteau (1999);
Schwender et al. (1999)
Blanc and Pichersky (1995)
Kuntz et al. (1992)

Enzyme

Abbreviation

Malonyl-CoA:anthocyanidin 3-O-glucoside-6’’O-malonyltransferase
Malonyl-CoA:anthocyanidin 3-O-glucoside-3’’,6’’O-dimalonyltransferase
Flavonoid 3’-hydroxylase
Flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylase
SAM:anthocyanin 3’-O-methyltransferase

A3MT (Sc3MaT,
Dm3Mat1, Dv3MaT)
A3diMT (Dm3MaT2)

Carotenoid precursors
1-Deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase
1-Deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate
reductoisomerase
IPP isomerase
GGPP synthase

Brugliera et al. (1999)
Holton et al. (1993a)
Quattrochio et al. (1993);
Patent application
WO03/062428
Quattrochio et al. (1993);
Patent application
WO04/062428

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

Chalcones
UDP-Glc:chalcone 2’-O-glucosyltransferase
6’-Deoxychalcones
Polyketide reductase
Aurones
Aureusidin synthase
Proanthocyanidins
Anthocyanidin reductase

EC number

182

Table 8.1. continued . Flavonoid, carotenoid and betalain biosynthetic enzymes involved in flower pigmentation for which DNA sequences have
been published.

PSY
PDS

2.5.1.32
1.3.99.-

z-Carotene desaturase
Carotenoid isomerase
Plastid terminal oxidase

ZDS
CRTISO
PTOX

1.14.99.30
–
–

Lycopene e-cyclase
Lycopene b-cyclase
e-Ring hydroxylase
b-Ring hydroxylase
b-Carotene 3,4-desaturase/4-hydroxylase

eLCY
bLCY
eOH
bOH
AdKeto1/
AdKeto2
CCS
ZEP
VDE
NXS

Capsanthin-capsorubin synthase
Zeaxanthin epoxidase
Violaxanthin de-epoxidase
Neoxanthin synthase
Carotenoid cleavage products
Lycopene cleavage dioxygenase
Bixin aldehyde dehydrogenase
Norbixin carboxyl methyltransferase
Zeaxanthin 7,8,7’,8’-cleavage dioxygenase
Betalain pathway
DOPA-4,5-dioxygenase
UDP-Glc:betanidin 5-O-glucosyltransferase
UDP-Glc:betanidin 5-O-glucosyltransferase

Bird et al. (1991); Bartley et al.
(1992); Ray et al. (1992)
Bartley et al. (1991)

5.5.1.5.5.1.1.14.-.1.14.13.1.14.13.-

Prenyltransferase
Flavin adenosine dinucleotide
(FAD) binding protein (BP)
FAD BP
FAD BP
Non-haem di-iron oxygenase
(membrane-bound di-iron
carboxylase)
FAD BP
FAD BP
CytP450 (CYP97C)
Non-haem di-iron oxygenase
Non-haem di-iron oxygenase

Cunningham et al. (1996)
Hugueney et al. (1995)
Tian et al. (2004)
Sun et al. (1996)
Cunningham and Gantt (2005)

–
–
–
–

FAD BP
Lipocalin
Lipocalin
FAD BP

Bouvier et al. (1994)
Marin et al. (1996); Bouvier et al. (1996)
Bugos and Yamamoto (1996)
Al-Babili et al. (2000); Bouvier et al. (2000)

LCD

–

Bouvier et al. (2003b)

BAHD
BMT
CsZCD

–
2.1.1.–

Carotenoid cleavage
dioxygenase (CCD)
Aldehyde dehydrogenase
MT
CCD

DOD
B5GT
B6GT

–
–
–

Extradiol dioxygenase
UGT
UGT

Christinet et al. (2004)
Vogt et al. (1999)
Vogt (2002)

Albrecht et al. (1995)
Isaacson et al. (2002); Park et al. (2002)
Carol et al. (1999); Josse et al. (2000)

Bouvier et al. (2003b)
Bouvier et al. (2003b)
Bouvier et al. (2003a)

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

Main carotenoid pathway
Phytoene synthase
Phytoene desaturase

a

Reference to the first publications on the isolation and characterization of the corresponding cDNA/gene.
CytP450s are classified according to molecular phylogeny into numbered families ($40% amino acid positional identity) and subfamilies designated by a letter
($55% amino acid identity).
c
Reference is given to the first example of isolation of a DFR cDNA that was shown to have FNR activity.
d
Recombinant A5GT proteins show varying degrees of anthocyanin substrate specificity.
e
The nomenclature for the AATs follows Nakayama et al. (2003). The positional numbering of the sugar hydroxyl that is modified is given followed by prime symbols
to indicate which sugar is affected. The double and triple primes indicate the 3-O-glycosyl and 5-O-glycosyl, respectively. Recombinant AATs show varying degrees
of substrate specificity.
b

183

184

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

and aspects of vacuole acidification and the localization process are now
understood (Fukada-Tanaka et al., 2000; Winefield, 2002). In flowers, carotenoid accumulation is associated with esterification of the pigments, specific
proteins (carotenoid-associated proteins) and the development of chromoplasts, all of which may assist in sequestration of the high levels of pigments
that occur compared to the levels in leaves (Vishnevetsky et al., 1999a; Fraser
and Bramley, 2004). Flavonoids also interact with specific proteins in some
species (Winefield, 2002).
Despite the notable progress on pigment biosynthesis, little is known of the
turnover and degradation of most pigments. Anthocyanin levels can change
rapidly in flowers. For example, in the yesterday, today and tomorrow plant
(Brunfelsia calcina), the flowers turn from white to purple and back to white
within 3 days. For betalains, a number of degradation activities have been
biochemically characterized (Zrÿd and Christinet, 2004). However, in general,
research on the biochemistry and chemistry of pigment breakdown (reviewed
in Simpson et al., 1976) has not been followed by extensive molecular findings. An exception is the recent cloning of cDNAs for activities that convert
carotenoids into apocarotenoids and other cleavage products (Cuttriss and
Pogson, 2004; Table 8.1).

The biosynthesis of flavonoids
Flavonoid biosynthesis is part of the larger phenylpropanoid pathway, which
produces a range of secondary metabolites from the aromatic amino acid
phenylalanine. There are many branches to the flavonoid-specific pathway,
producing coloured and colourless compounds with diverse biological functions. As mentioned previously, anthocyanins are the most significant flavonoid
pigments, with aurones, chalcones and some flavonols playing a limited role.
Also important to pigmentation are the colourless (or weakly coloured) flavones
and flavonols, for their function as co-pigments. They stabilize and maintain
anthocyanins in their coloured forms, in a process of complex molecular
interactions known as co-pigmentation (Brouillard and Dangles, 1993). Flavones and flavonols, strong absorbers of UV light, also are the basis for some
floral insect nectar guides.
At their nucleus, flavonoids are 15-carbon (C15) compounds composed of
two aromatic rings (called the A- and B-rings) joined by a 3-carbon unit (which
usually forms a third ring called the C-ring; Fig. 8.1). The various types of
flavonoids are determined by the degree of oxidation of the C-ring; and
individual compounds of the same type are determined by the degree of
hydroxylation and the type and extent of modifications such as glycosylation,
acylation and methylation. Anthocyanin B-ring hydroxylation patterns are of
prime importance in flower colour (see section below on B-ring hydroxylation).
In the following sections, we briefly describe the parts of the pathway that
are relevant to flower colour. Our focus is on the biosynthetic steps leading to
different pigment/co-pigment types and anthocyanin modifications, as knowledge on the biochemistry and molecular biology of these aspects is most

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

185

R1
3
2
HO

4⬘

5⬘

3⬘

OH

4

2⬘

B
6⬘ OH

5

HO

7

6

A

8
A

B
O
C

6

3⬘
2⬘
OH

5
O

4

2
6⬘

4⬘ OH
5⬘
R2

3
R3

OH

Fig. 8.1. Structures of naringenin chalcone (left) and the main anthocyanidins (right). The
lettering of the carbon rings is shown, as well as the numbering of the key carbons. Note that the
numbering used for chalcones is the same as for hydroxycinnamic acids (Fig. 8.2), while the
numbering for anthocyanidins is as for the other flavonoids shown in Fig. 8.3 (except aurones).
Substitutions at R1 and R2 determine the various common anthocyanidins (R3 ¼ OH) as follows:
pelargonidin (R1 and R2 ¼ H), cyanidin (R1 ¼ OH and R2 ¼ H), delphinidin (R1 and R2 ¼ OH),
peonidin (R1 ¼ OCH3 and R2 ¼ H), petunidin (R1 ¼ OCH3 and R2 ¼ OH) and malvidin (R1 and
R2 ¼ OCH3). The 3-deoxyanthocyanidins (R3 ¼ H), which are rare compounds, are apigeninidin
(R1 and R2 ¼ H), luteolinidin (R1 ¼ OH and R2 ¼ H) and tricetinidin (R1 and R2 ¼ OH).

advanced. Bohm (1998) and Forkmann and Heller (1999) provide extensive
reviews on the biochemistry (and chemistry) of flavonoids.
Formation of flavonoid pathway precursors
Precursors for the flavonoid pathway are malonyl-CoA and a hydroxycinnamic
acid (HCA)-CoA ester, usually 4-coumaroyl-CoA (Fig. 8.2). 4-Coumaroyl-CoA
is derived from phenylalanine through the sequential activities of phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase (PAL), cinnamate 4-hydroxylase (C4H) and 4-coumarate:CoA
ligase (4CL). Citrate is the source of malonyl-CoA, the conversion likely involving ATP citrate lyase (ACL) and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC). Malonyl-CoA
and CoA esters of HCAs can also feed into the flavonoid pathway at later
stages as acid group donors in the acylation of the end products.
Formation of chalcones and aurones
The first step committed to flavonoid synthesis is the formation of chalcone
pigment (pale yellow), which establishes the C15 flavonoid structure (Fig. 8.2).
Chalcone synthase (CHS) is the enzyme involved. It catalyses the condensation
of one molecule of an HCA-CoA ester with three molecules of malonyl-CoA.
Naringenin chalcone is the first flavonoid formed in most plants, through the
use of the HCA-CoA substrate 4-coumaroyl-CoA. To function as floral pigments, naringenin chalcone, or chalcones derived from it, must be stabilized to
prevent spontaneous conversion to colourless flavanone isomers. This is accomplished by enzyme-catalysed modifications involving glycosylation or
methylation. In some species, the co-action of polyketide reductase (PKR)
with CHS results in 6’-deoxychalcones, which are relatively stable due to an
intramolecular hydrogen bond between the 2’-hydroxyl and the carbonyl
group.

186

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

OH

HO

HO

OH
STS Stilbenes

CoA

4CL
C4H
O
O
O
Cinnamate
4-Coumarate
4-Coumaroyl-CoA Malonyl-CoA (3x)
ACC
ACL
Citrate
Acetyl-CoA
Malonyl-CoA (3x)

Phenylalanine

PAL

CHS 6⬘-Deoxychalcones
+PKR
CHS
Naringenin chalcone

Anthocyanins
Aurones
Flavones
Flavonols
Proanthocyanins

Fig. 8.2. Biosynthesis of the flavonoid pathway precursors 4-coumaroyl-CoA and malonylCoA. 4-Coumaroyl-CoA is synthesized within the phenylpropanoid pathway and malonyl-CoA
within primary metabolism. Enzyme abbreviations are defined in the text or Table 8.1. Also
shown are the points of action for PKR and STS, transgenes for which have been used to modify
flower colour.

Aurones, bright yellow in colour, are formed directly from chalcones
(Fig. 8.3). The reaction is reported to be catalysed by a bifunctional polyphenol
oxidase-like enzyme (Nakayama et al., 2000; Davies et al., 2001). In antirrhinum (Antirrhinum majus), the enzyme termed aureusidin synthase (AUS)
performs oxidation and B-ring hydroxylation reactions on naringenin chalcone
substrate (Nakayama et al., 2001). However, confirmation of the role of AUS
awaits analysis of gain of function or knockout plants generated through
transgenic or mutagenic approaches. A preliminary report suggests the
involvement of chalcone 4’-O-glucosyltransfease for generating the AUS
substrate (Ono et al., 2005).
Formation of flavones and dihydroflavonols
As mentioned above, chalcones can spontaneously isomerize to colourless
compounds of the flavanone type. The isomerization results in the formation
of the heterocyclic C-ring (and the loss of the chromophore) (Fig. 8.3). The
spontaneous reaction may occur in planta, but the conversion generally precedes enzymatically, through the activity of chalcone isomerase (CHI).
Flavanones serve as substrates for the formation of flavones and dihydroflavonols (DHFs) (Fig. 8.3), which are also colourless. The conversion to flavone
requires action of a flavone synthase (FNS). There are two types of FNS. In
members of the Apiaceae, the enzyme (termed FNSI) is a 2-oxoglutaratedependent (2OG)-dioxygenase (Martens et al., 2001). In all other species
studied to date, it is a cytochrome P-450-dependent monooxygenase

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

187

OH
OH
HO

OH
HO

O

OH

AUS
OH

O

OH

Aureusidin
Aurone

CHI

OH
HO

O

O

Naringenin chalcone

FNSI

HO

OH

O

FNSII
OH

OH

O

F3H

OH
HO

O

O

Naringenin

Apigenin
Flavone

FLS

HO

OH
OH

O

OH

Kaempferol
Flavonol

FNR

O

OH
OH

OH

HO

O

O

Dihydrokaempferol
DFR
HO

OH

OH

OH

Apiforol

O

ANS
OH

LAR
OH

F5GT

OH

OH

Leucopelargonidin

PAs

ANS
HO

HO

O

OH

O
O-Glc

ANR
OH

Apigeninidin 5-O-glucoside
3-Deoxyanthocyanin

OH

Pelargonidin
F3GT
HO

OH

O

O-Glc
OH

Pelargonidin 3-O-glucoside
Anthocyanin

Fig. 8.3. Simplified biosynthetic scheme for the major flavonoid pigment types. Only the routes
to compounds with 4’-hydroxylation are shown, and the anthocyanidin/anthocyanin structures
are presented in the cation form. Points of action are given for the proanthocyanidin (PA)
biosynthetic enzymes leucoanthocyanidin reductase (LAR) and anthocyanidin reductase (ANR),
transgenes for which may be used to modify flower colour. Other enzyme abbreviations are
defined in the text or Table 8.1.

188

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

(CytP450), termed FNSII (Akashi et al., 1999; Martens and Forkmann, 1999).
Flavanones are converted to DHFs by flavanone 3-hydroxylase (F3H).
Formation of flavonols and leucoanthocyanidins
DHFs are substrates for the formation of flavonols and leucoanthocyanidins
(Fig. 8.3). Flavonols are formed through the action of flavonol synthase (FLS).
A reduction catalysed by dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR) yields leucoanthocyanidins. These colourless and unstable compounds are the direct precursors
for anthocyanidin production. In terms of flower colour, the formation of
leucoanthocyanidin is one of the key reactions in anthocyanin synthesis, as
DFR substrate specificity is one of the determinants of the base pattern of
B-ring hydroxylation, and hence colour, of the anthocyanin formed (Fig. 8.4,
see also sections below on B-ring hydroxylation and altering B-ring hydroxylation). The relevant DHF substrates are dihydrokaempferol (DHK), dihydroquercetin (DHQ) and dihydromyricetin (DHM), having one, two or three B-ring
hydroxyl groups, respectively. In the formation of the rare 3-deoxyanthocyanins, which give orange and red floral colours (Winefield, et al., 2005), a
variant of DFR (initially referred to as flavanone 4-reductase or FNR) is capable
of reducing flavanone substrates to flavan-4-ols (3-deoxyleucoanthocyanidins).
Formation of anthocyanins
The first anthocyanin formed in most plants is an anthocyanidin 3-O-glycoside.
It is formed from leucoanthocyanidin through the activity of anthocyanidin
synthase (ANS, also referred to as leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase) and an
anthocyanidin 3-O-glycosyltransferase (3GT) (Fig. 8.3). The ANS product is an
anthocyanidin in a colourless pseudobase form, which serves as the substrate
for a 3GT. 3GTs mediate the transfer of a glycosyl residue from an activated
nucleotide sugar to the C-3 position of the pseudobase. A well-characterized

F3⬘H

Naringenin

Eriodictyol

F3⬘,5⬘H

Pentahydroxyflavanone

F3H F3⬘,5⬘H
F3H
F3H
F3⬘,5⬘H
F3⬘H
Dihydrokaempferol
Dihydroquercetin
Dihydromyricetin
DFR F3⬘,5⬘H
Leucopelargonidin

Leucocyanidin

OH
HO

O

OH

Pelargonidin

OH

OH
HO

OH

ANS

OH
OH

O

Leucodelphinidin

ANS

ANS

HO

DFR

DFR

O

OH

Cyanidin

OH
OH

OH
OH

Delphinidin

Fig. 8.4. Key enzymatic conversions involved in the formation of the three major anthocyanidins
(shown in the cation rather than pseudobase form). Enzyme abbreviations are defined in the text
or Table 8.1.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

189

3GT, which adds a glucose residue, is uridine diphosphate (UDP)-glucose:flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase (F3GT). The first F3GTs characterized were
found to also use flavonol substrate, hence the use of flavonoid in the name.
However, recent studies indicate there are 3GTs specific to anthocyanidin
substrate (e.g. Ford et al., 1998).
After the initial 3-O-glycosylation, anthocyanins are commonly modified by
the addition of other sugar residues, to the O-linked sugar moiety at the C-3
position and/or to other positions (e.g. frequently at C-5). They also can be
modified by aromatic or aliphatic acylation at one or more of the sugar moieties,
and/or methylation of hydroxyl groups. Commonly, enzymes with strict substrate specificities catalyse these modifications. Nakayama et al. (2003) present
a detailed review of the biochemistry and molecular biology of anthocyanin
acyltransferases, while Ibrahim and Muzac (2000) and Vogt (2000) review the
methyltransferase and glycosyltransferase gene superfamilies of plants, respectively, including those related to flavonoid biosynthesis. For simple 3-deoxyanthocyanins, the initial O-glycosylation occurs at the C-5 position.
In what can be thought of as the final step in anthocyanin biosynthesis,
anthocyanins are deposited in the vacuole, where the acidic environment
allows these pH-responsive compounds to assume coloured forms (discussed
further in section below on Vacuolar import).
B-ring hydroxylation
The degree of B-ring hydroxylation is a key determinant of flower colour, as it
determines the colour manifested by an individual anthocyanin. An increase in
hydroxylation shifts the colour away from the red end of the spectrum towards
the blue. Figure 8.4 shows the three anthocyanidin structures from which most
anthocyanins are derived. Pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins are associated
with orange, pink and red flower colours, those derived from cyanidin with
red, magenta and red-purple colours and those from delphinidin with purple
and blue colours.
The key hydroxylations occur at the C-3’ position or at both the C-3’ and
C-5’ positions (Fig. 8.1) through the activity of the CytP450s enzymes, flavonoid 3’-hydroxylase (F3’H) and flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylase (F3’,5’H), respectively. Genes/cDNAs for both enzymes (sometimes referred to as the red and
blue genes) were first cloned and characterized from petunia (Petunia hybrida)
and have been subsequently isolated from several other species (Tanner,
2004). Anthocyanins themselves are not the substrates for these enzymes but
rather flavanone and DHF intermediates in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 8.4). The hydroxylases from some species also have been found to
use flavone and flavonol substrate. In petunia, the electron donor cyt b5 is
required for full F3’,5’H (but not F3’H) activity in the flowers, replacing the
more commonly used NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase electron donor
(de Vetten et al., 1999).
Vacuolar import
Flavonoids involved in flower pigmentation are generally stored in the vacuole.
For anthocyanins in particular, importation into the vacuole is crucial. This is

190

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

vividly demonstrated by the phenotypes caused by the importation mutants,
bronze2 and anthocyanin9 (an9) of maize (Zea mays) and petunia, respectively. In the maize mutant, the kernels exhibit a brown or bronze colour
attributed to the oxidation and condensation of anthocyanin in the cytosol
(Marrs et al., 1995), while in the petunia mutant, the flower is white (Alfenito
et al., 1998). The loci encode different types of glutathione S-transferases
(GSTs), however, they are functionally homologous (Alfenito et al., 1998).
These GSTs may function through their glutathionating activity or alternatively,
may be carrier proteins, binding and escorting anthocyanins to the vacuole
(Mueller et al., 2000). ABC-type transporters have been implicated in sequestration of anthocyanins and other flavonoids that have been glutathionated
(reviewed in Winefield, 2002); and recently, an ABC protein of the multidrug
resistance-associated protein type was confirmed by mutant analysis to be
required for anthocyanin transport in maize (Goodman et al., 2004). However,
alternative mechanisms, e.g. involving multidrug and toxic compound extrusion
(MATE) transporters or vacuolar Hþ-ATPases (Baxter et al., 2005), have been
implicated for other flavonoid types. It is not yet clear whether mechanisms are
specific to the species or to the flavonoid type.

The biosynthesis of carotenoids
Carotenoids are polyene molecules, with most having a C40 backbone and
several conjugated double bonds. There are two types of carotenoids, the
hydrocarbon carotenes and their oxygenated derivatives, the xanthophylls.
While both types of carotenoids may contribute to flower colour, individual
species tend to produce predominantly one type or the other, and some
species produce distinctive rare xanthophyll structures (Goodwin, 1976). The
following sections briefly describe the formation of carotenoid precursors, the
branches of the carotenoid pathway common to all plants and the biosynthesis
of carotenoid cleavage products, with emphasis on aspects pertaining to chromoplasts and floral pigmentation. Comprehensive recent reviews on most
aspects of carotenoids can be found in Cuttriss and Pogson (2004) and Fraser
and Bramley (2004).
Formation of IPP
The plastidic 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway (Fig. 8.5) is
the main source of IPP used in carotenoid synthesis. However, the cytosolic
mevalonic acid pathway also produces IPP, and in some instances this is linked
with carotenoid production (Fraser and Bramley, 2004). In the MEP pathway,
1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate (DXP), which is derived from the condensation
of pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, is converted to MEP through the
action of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase (DXR). A series of
enzymatic conversions then form IPP and its allylic isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) from MEP. DMAPP is also formed through the isomerization
of IPP via the action of IPP isomerase (IPPI), a key biosynthetic route with
regard to carotenoid biosynthesis.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

OH

191

OH

DXR O
OP

Pyruvate
+
GlyceraldehydeTPP
3-phosphate

DXPS
OP

OH OH

OH

MEP

DXP

OPP
OH

HMBPP
IDS
CH2OPP

IDS
IPPI

CH2OPP

IPP

DMAPP

GGPPS
CH2OPP

GGPPS

GPP

CH2OPP

GGPP

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Carotenoid pathway

2xGGPP
PSY

PDS

Phytoene
cis-ζ-Carotene
ZDS + CRTISO
18

17

7

3
16

1

11

5

15

9

15⬘

13

All-trans-lycopene

13⬘

11⬘

9⬘

7⬘

5⬘
18⬘

1⬘ 16⬘

3⬘

17⬘

bLCY

γ-Carotene
eLCY

α-Carotene

17
1
3 5

bLCY

18'

16
7
18

9

11

13

15

15⬘

13⬘ 11⬘

9⬘

7⬘
16⬘

5⬘ 3⬘
1⬘
17⬘

β-Carotene

Fig. 8.5. Biosynthesis of isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and carotenoids of the carotene type.
Enzyme and compound abbreviations are defined in the text or Table 8.1, except for HMBPP
(1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl-4-phosphate), IDS (isopentenyl diphosphate/dimethylallyl
diphosphate) and TPP (thiamine pyrophosphate). The numbering of the key carbons of some
representative compounds is shown.

192

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

Formation of phytoene
The first product formed in the carotenoid-specific pathway is the C40
carotene, phytoene (Fig. 8.5), a colourless molecule having only 3 conjugated
double bonds. The chain elongation that is required to form phytoene
begins with the condensation of IPP and DMAPP to form the C10 compound
geranyl pyrophospate (GPP). Further sequential additions of IPP yield the C20
molecule geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP). The conversion of IPP/
DMAPP to GGPP is catalysed by GGPP synthase (GGPPS). The subsequent
formation of phytoene (in the 15-cis isomer form) is through a two-step
process involving the condensation of two molecules of GGPP by phytoene
synthase (PSY).
Formation of carotene pigments
A series of desaturation, isomerization and cyclization reactions form a variety of
other carotenes from phytoene (Fig. 8.5). The desaturation reactions increase
the number of conjugated double bonds in the carotene backbone, creating the
chromophores that are the basis for the coloured carotenoids. The conversion of
phytoene to the first pigment produced in the pathway, z-carotene (pale yellow),
is catalysed by phytoene desaturase (PDS) that carries out two desaturations. The
z-carotene desaturase (ZDS) carries out two additional desaturations to convert
z-carotene to the orange pigment prolycopene (tetra-cis-lycopene). Before further conversions can take place, prolycopene must be isomerized to the all-trans
form. In chloroplasts, all-trans-lycopene may be formed through photoisomerization. However, at least in chromoplasts, it appears that the production of alltrans-lycopene is dependent on the activity of carotenoid isomerase (CRTISO)
(Isaacson et al., 2002, 2004; Park et al., 2002).
Lycopene, which gives red pigmentation to organs such as tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) fruit, is less relevant to flower colour than the lycopenederived carotenes, which give yellow-orange to orange colours. These carotenes are formed by two enzymes, which introduce different cyclic end groups.
These conversions form the first branch point in the pathway (Fig. 8.5). In the
b,b branch of the pathway, lycopene b-cyclase (bLCY) converts lycopene to
the orange pigment b-carotene through the introduction of b-ionone rings at
each end of the lycopene molecule. In the b,e branch, a-carotene (yellow) is
formed from lycopene through the action of lycopene e-cyclase (eLCY), which
forms a e-ring at one end of lycopene, and bLCY, which cyclizes the other end.
eLCY generally cannot cyclize both ends of lycopene, although rare examples
are known (Cunningham and Gantt, 2001).
Formation of xanthophyll pigments
The first xanthophylls formed from the b,e and b,b branches of the pathway
are the yellow-orange monohydroxylated compounds: zeinoxanthin derived
from a-carotene; and b-cryptoxanthin, derived from b-carotene (Fig. 8.6).The
conversions involve introduction of a hydroxyl group to a single b-ring of the
molecules. The hydroxylation is catalysed by b-hydroxylase (bOH), a nonhaem di-iron oxidase. Additional hydroxylation catalysed by e-hydroxylase
(eOH), a CytP450 enzyme, or bOH leads to the formation of lutein (yellow)
from zeinoxanthin and zeaxanthin (orange) from b-cryptoxanthin, respectively.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

193

A
α-Carotene
bOH

OH

Zeinoxanthin
e OH

HO

OH

Lutein

B

HO

bOH

β-Carotene

bOH

β-Cryptoxanthin
OH

HO

ZEP

Zeaxanthin
OH

O
HO
ZEP

Antheraxanthin
OH
O

O
HO
NXS

Violaxanthin
OH
O

C
OH

Neoxanthin

HO

Fig. 8.6. Biosynthesis of xanthophylls, starting from a-carotene (A) or b-carotene (B). The
pathway shows only the xanthophylls that are common in higher plants. Enzyme abbreviations
are defined in the text or Table 8.1. It should be noted that in some species a-cryptoxanthin
accumulates, due to eOH activity on a-carotene.

194

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

Epoxides of zeaxanthin, the monoepoxidated antheraxanthin (yellow), and diepoxidated violaxanthin (yellow), frequently contribute to flower colour and are
formed through the action of zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP). The last xanthophyll
formed by the b,b branch of the pathway that is common to many plants is
neoxanthin (yellow), produced by the activity of neoxanthin synthase, an enzyme that awaits unequivocal characterization (Cuttriss and Pogson, 2004).
Lutein is the most common xanthophyll floral pigment derived from the b,e
branch of the pathway.
Some species produce rare xanthophylls in their flowers (and fruit), which
may be limited in occurrence to the specific species and its close relatives.
However, relatively little is known about the enzymes involved. The bestdescribed enzyme is capsanthin-capsorubin synthase, which produces the characteristic pigments of red pepper (Capsicum spp.) fruit from antheraxanthin
and violaxanthin. Furthermore, esterification is a common characteristic of
floral carotenoids, and may aid in the accumulation of the high levels
of pigment found in chromoplasts (see also section below on Regulation of
Pigment Synthesis in Flowers).
Pigments derived from carotenoid catabolism
The vividly coloured apocarotenoids are formed by cleavage of the normal C40
carotenoid structure. They occur in various plant tissues including roots, stems
and flowers. Saffron, an expensive spice made from the dried red styles of
saffron flowers, derives its distinctive colour from C20 apocarotenoid crocetin
glycosides. These are probably formed by cleavage of zeaxanthin by zeaxanthin
7,8(7’,8’)-cleavage dioxygenase, a plastid-localized enzyme that removes the
cyclic rings from both ends (Bouvier et al., 2003a). The crocetin dialdehyde
product is probably subsequently acted upon by an aldehyde oxidoreductase
and a UDPG-glucosyltransferase to produce water-soluble crocetin glycosides
that are transferred from the plastid to the vacuole via direct interactions
between the two organelles (Bouvier et al., 2003a).
Another example is found in the tropical bush Brunfelsia orellana, which
accumulates bixin apocarotenoids in the floral parts and seed coat. The extract of
the seed coat is the basis of the yellow-orange food colourant annatto. Cleavage
of lycopene by a dioxygenase yields bixin aldehyde, which is subsequently acted
upon by bixin aldehyde dehydrogenase to produce norbixin. Conversion of
norbixin to the major pigment bixin (and a bixin dimethyl ester) is achieved by
the action of norbixin carboxyl methyltransferase (Bouvier et al., 2003b).
The biosynthesis of betalains
Betalains are divided into two major groups: (i) the red-violet betacyanins; and
(ii) the yellow betaxanthins. The base chromophore of both types is betalamic
acid. Condensation of betalamic acid with cyclo-DOPA glucosides yields the
common simplest betacyanins (betanidin and isobetanidin glucosides). These
compounds can then be modified by additional glycosylation and acylation to
yield other betacyanins. Betaxanthins result from the conjugation of betalamic
acid with amino acids/amines.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

195

The betalain biosynthetic pathway is relatively simple with only a few
reactions that are enzyme catalysed (Fig. 8.7). In the formation of betalamic
acid, the aromatic amino acid tyrosine is hydroxylated to form L-DOPA. Cleavage of the cyclic ring of L-DOPA then forms an unstable seco-DOPA intermediate, which spontaneously converts to betalamic acid. The enzyme
catalysing the hydroxylation reaction has not been unequivocally determined,
but studies suggest that it is a bifunctional tyrosinase or a tyrosine hydroxlyase
(Zrÿd and Christinet, 2004). The cleavage reaction is catalysed by DOPA-4,
5-estradiol dioxygenase (DOD). The isolation and characterization of an encoding cDNA from Portulaca grandiflora has been reported, and it defined a
novel gene family for non-haem dioxygenases that may be involved in aromatic
compound metabolism (Christinet et al., 2004). Interestingly, the plant dioxygenase is phylogenetically unrelated to a DOPA-dioxygenase from Amanita
muscaria, which was previously shown to complement betalain production in
flowers of a P. grandiflora dod mutant (Mueller et al., 1997).
The formation of betaxanthin pigments from the condensation of betalamic
acid with amines/amino acids occurs spontaneously, as does the condensation
of betalamic acid with cyclo-DOPA glucosides in betacyanin synthesis (Schliemann et al., 1999). Cyclo-DOPA is formed from L-DOPA through an oxidation
reaction that has been attributed to the activity of the bifunctional tyrosinase
suggested to be involved in the formation of L-DOPA from tyrosine (Zrÿd and
Christinet, 2004). The conversion proceeds via an unstable DOPA-quinone
intermediate, which spontaneously cyclizes to form cyclo-DOPA. Betacyanins
are generally glycosylated and frequently acylated. O-glycosyltransferases that
can use betanidin as well as flavonoid substrate are present in cell cultures of
Dorotheanthus bellidiformis, and encoding cDNAs have been isolated (Strack
et al., 2003). However, recent biochemical studies involving several species
indicate that glycosylation (at the C-5 or C-6) predominantly occurs at the cycloDOPA step, prior to the formation of betanidin (Sasaki et al., 2004). In contrast
to the flavonoid pathway, in which acylation reactions are thioester dependent,
acylation of betacyanins involves b-acetal esters as acyl donors, and may involve
serine carboxypeptidase-like proteins (Strack et al., 2003).

Regulation of Pigment Biosynthesis in Flowers
The induction of the pigment biosynthetic genes during flowering requires both
developmental and environmental signals. Although factors such as temperature and water stress influence flower coloration, light is the principle environmental signal. Light, through direct exposure of the flowers or the leaves, has
been shown to be required for full floral coloration in many species (discussed
in Weiss, 2000; Meng and Wang, 2004). However, there is little data on the
molecular mechanisms that may be involved in mediating the light signals in
flowers. This is in contrast to the wealth of data on the light regulation of
pigment production in vegetative tissues of model species such as arabidopsis
(Arabidopsis thaliana) and maize, especially during seedling photomorphogenesis (see section below on Regulation of the Production of Flavonoid

196

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

Shikimate pathway

Chorismate
Arogenate pathway
COOH
H

COOH
H

COOH
H

NH2

NH2

NH2

TYR

TYR

(TYOH?)

O

OH

S HO

O

OH

OH

Tyrosine

L-DOPA

COOH

Dopaquinone
N
H

HO

DOD

cyclo-DOPA

COOH
H

CD5GT/
CD6GT

O

NH2

R1 O

COOH

S
H
O

OH
O

N
H

R2 O

HOOC

N
H

OH

4,5-seco-DOPA

H

COOH

H

cyclo-DOPA 5-O -glucoside (R1 = Glc; R2 = H)
cyclo-DOPA 6-O -glucoside (R1= H; R2 = Glc)

Betalamic acid

Amino acids/ amines
S

S
Betaxanthins
R1O

H
N+

5

Betacyanins

4

3
2
N+

−

COO

R2O

6

HOOC

13
14
H 15
N
H

COOH

e.g. Indicaxanthin

HOOC

H

N
H

COO−
N+

R2 O

7
12

H

R1 O

COO−

H

11
18
17
COOH

H
HOOC

Betanidin 5-O -glucoside (R1 = Glc; R2 = H)
Betanidin 6-O -glucoside (R1 = H; R2 = Glc)

N
H

COOH

Isobetanidin glucosides

Modification reactions
Betanidin/isobetanidin glucosides with acyl
groups or additional sugar moieties

Fig. 8.7. Biosynthesis of betalains. Most betacyanins have glucose as the O-linked sugar at the
C-5 or C-6 positions. The route to the less common descarboxy-betacyanins is not shown.
Abbreviations are defined in the text except for CD5GT (cyclo-DOPA 5-O-glucosyltransferase),
CD6GT (cyclo-DOPA 6-O-glucosyltransferase), S (spontaneous conversion), TYR (tyrosinase) and
TYOH (tyrosine hydroxylase).

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

197

Precursors and the reviews of Weisshaar and Jenkins, 1998; Weiss, 2000;
Davies and Schwinn, 2003).
The developmental signals for pigmentation are not well understood. The
MADS-box genes (A, B and E class) that control petal organogenesis have a
role in later events of floral development, including anthocyanin biosynthesis,
but the specifics of their action remain to be elucidated. In antirrhinum, the
B-class gene Deficiens is expressed well after petal identity is established
(Zachgo et al., 1995), and reduced expression of CHS and F3H has been
found in petal regions lacking activity of the encoded protein (Bey et al., 2004).
In petunia, inhibition of floral binding protein2 expression, a gene equivalent
to the sepallata E class genes of arabidopsis, results in plants with small,
aberrant green corollas that fail to produce anthocyanins or express CHS
(Angenent et al., 1994; Ferrario et al., 2003).
The endogenous developmental signals that synchronize pigmentation
with the appropriate period of flower fertility have been examined in a few
species. In particular, removal of the anthers will prevent normal anthocyanin
pigment formation in flowers of petunia (reviewed in Weiss, 2000) and Viola
cornuta (Farzad et al., 2002, 2003). In V. cornuta, the open flowers change
from white to purple only when they are both exposed to light and pollinated,
with pollination triggering specific changes in anthocyanin biosynthetic gene
expression. In petunia, it is thought that anther-produced gibberellic acid (GA)
is a developmental signal translocated to the corolla to modulate petal growth
and induce anthocyanin pigmentation. GA1 and GA4 have been identified in
petunia anthers and corollas, and exogenous GA1, GA3 or GA4 will compensate for anther excision and promote gene transcription for several anthocyanin biosynthetic enzymes. Other plant hormones may also influence
anthocyanin biosynthesis, with exogenous methyl jasmonate application promoting anthocyanin biosynthetic gene expression and pigmentation, and abscisic acid (ABA) inhibiting the action of GA3 (Weiss, 2000). However, it is not
known whether these results with exogenous application reflect processes
occurring normally in flower development. GA3 also upregulated carotenoid
production and gene expression for two carotenoid-associated proteins (CHRC
and CHRD) in cucumber (Cucumis sativus) petals, although transcript levels
for PSY were not affected (Vishnevetsky et al., 1997).
It is not clear what other developmental signals may be active, in conjunction with GA, or in species in which GA may not be important. Ethylene may
trigger colour change in some, but not all, species that show colour development in open flowers (Farzad et al., 2002). Adequate carbohydrate level is
required for normal development and full anthocyanin pigmentation of flowers,
and exogenously supplied sugar upregulates CHS expression in arabidopsis,
petunia and soybean (Glycine max) (Weiss, 2000). However, although sugars
are required directly as part of anthocyanin biosynthesis, it is likely that sugar
status is a general influence on flower development, rather than a specific signal
that controls the timing of pigment formation.
Although there is physiological data on the factors influencing betalain
production in plants and plant cell cultures, there are few studies on flowers
and no molecular data on regulation of gene expression. For non-floral tissues,

198

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

both light and hormones, particularly auxin and cytokinin, have been found to
influence betalain production (Strack et al., 2003; Zrÿd and Christinet, 2004).
Light can affect the quantity and type of pigment produced, but is not an
absolute requirement for their production. Cytokinins induce betalain production through new gene transcription in, e.g. seedlings of Amaranthus caudatus, while auxin has been shown to induce betalain production in
P. grandiflora.
For carotenoids, their biosynthesis must be coordinated with plastid biogenesis and development to provide both the biosynthetic apparatus and a
carotenoid sink, and there is evidence that the two processes can be tightly
linked. An increase in plastid replication and a transition from chloroplasts to
chromoplasts usually accompanies coloration in carotenoid-pigmented flowers.
In marigold (Tagetes erecta), genes related to plastid division are upregulated
during flower development (Moehs et al., 2001). Similarly, in fruit of the
tomato hp1 mutant, the increased pigmentation relative to wild-type fruit is
due to a greater concentration of chromoplasts (Cookson et al., 2003). In
cucumber flowers, the amount and/or type of the carotenoids accumulating
influences CHRC protein accumulation post-transcriptionally (Vishnevetsky
et al., 1999b). Thus, plastid–nuclear signalling is likely to occur when environmental stimuli, oxidative stress or metabolite feedback indicate required
changes in plastid structure, number or function. Similarly, there is evidence
that flavonoid biosynthesis and vacuolar development may be tightly linked
(Abrahams et al., 2003).
How are the various environmental and developmental signals mediated to
trigger the production of active pigment biosynthetic enzymes? Amongst the
various steps leading to production of pigment in flowers, it is thought that
transcription rates for the biosynthetic genes are the key regulatory targets. For
anthocyanin synthesis, it has been shown that major increases in transcript
abundance for the biosynthetic genes precede pigment production, and that
this is due to increased transcription of the genes. There are few studies for
flowers pigmented by carotenoids or betalains. However, recent studies have
shown that increases in transcript abundance occur for several carotenoid
biosynthetic genes concomitant with flower coloration in daffodil (Narcissus
pseudonarcissus), Gentiana lutea, marigold and Sandersonia aurantiaca
(Schledz et al., 1996; Moehs et al., 2001; Zhu et al., 2002, 2003; Nielsen
et al., 2003). Similarly, transcript abundance for the betalain biosynthetic
enzyme DOD correlates with pigmentation in flowers of P. grandiflora and
cell lines of beet (Christinet et al., 2004). Whether these changes in transcript
abundance are due to changes in transcription rate or transcript stability has
not been determined. However, in tomato fruit, which like flowers accumulate
high levels of carotenoids in chromoplasts, major increases in transcription of
some of the biosynthetic genes are observed prior to carotenoid pigmentation
(reviewed in Bramley, 2002; Fraser and Bramley, 2004). Furthermore, the
promoter of the tomato pds gene confers significant upregulation of b-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene activity in carotenoid-containing flowers and fruit
of transgenic tomato plants, as well as a responsiveness to changes in end
product concentrations in leaves (Corona et al., 1996).

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

199

In addition to transcriptional control, there is strong evidence that posttranscriptional and post-translational mechanisms contribute to the regulation
of both carotenoid and flavonoid production. Along with the previously mentioned example of CHRC, there is evidence for such mechanisms in carotenoid
synthesis during seedling photomorphogenesis, and changes in PSY and PDS
enzyme activity in daffodil flowers may be associated with membrane association of carotenoid biosynthetic enzyme complexes and metabolic channelling
(Schledz et al., 1996; Cunningham and Gantt, 1998; Bramley, 2002; Fraser
and Bramley, 2004). Membrane associated multi-enzyme complexes are also
thought to occur for flavonoid biosynthesis, with attachment via the CytP450
enzymes such as C4H (Achnine et al., 2004). Such complexes may be important in metabolic channelling of substrates within the phenylpropanoid pathway
(Winkel, 2004). The existence in some species of multi-gene families for some
carotenoid and flavonoid biosynthetic genes may allow for isoenzymes with
differing activities to be incorporated into distinctive biosynthetic enzyme
complexes.
Large scale studies of arabidopsis gene expression have revealed rhythmic
variation in transcript abundance for several phenylpropanoid and carotenoid
genes in vegetative tissues, including the flavonoid regulatory gene Pap1, and
the rhythms are potentially generated by changes in RNA stability (Harmer
et al., 2000; Staiger, 2002). Post-transcriptional regulation may also influence
the accumulation of BZ2 protein in maize (Pairoba and Walbot, 2003). Regarding flowers, there are few examples, but diurnal variation in transcript abundance has been found for DFR in the coloured spathe of anthurium
(Anthurium andraeanum), which is the main coloured organ associated with
the flowers of this species (Collette et al., 2004).
The relative importance of post-transcriptional/translational mechanisms
in regulating the production of the high concentrations of carotenoids and
anthocyanins in flowers is not known. Although the emphasis on transcriptional regulation may in part be due to lack of appropriate studies, transcription
remains the principal point of control identified to date for directing production
of these pigments in flowers.
The rate of transcript production from the biosynthetic genes is controlled
through the action of transcription factors (TFs). TFs are proteins that bind in a
sequence-specific manner to DNA motifs (cis-elements) within target genes,
usually in gene promoters, and, through direct or indirect interaction with the
basal transcription machinery, cause a change in the rate of transcription
initiation. TFs are categorized into classes or families on the basis of common
amino acid sequences for DNA-binding and protein–protein interaction domains (e.g. MADS box and MYB). A plant species may have many members
within a TF family that have diverse regulatory roles (e.g. the arabidopsis MYB
family, with approximately 125 members). TFs may either activate or repress
transcription, and generally have defined domains for these functions that are
functionally separable from the DNA-binding domains. Commonly, TFs form
regulatory complexes with other TFs and cofactors, and such combinatorial
control allows for greater regulatory diversity. Also, a range of post-transcriptional translational mechanisms, such as reversible phosphorylation, may

200

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

modulate TF activity. TFs often regulate the activity of multiple target genes, a
key advantage for their use in plant biotechnology.
Despite the importance of carotenoids in biology, there has been little
progress in elucidating the transcriptional control contributing to the regulation
of their synthesis. Regulatory data from studies on fruit ripening (tomato and
pepper) and seedling development (arabidopsis) include identification of candidate psy gene promoter cis-elements, identification of candidate regulatory
mutants and characterization of some of the general fruit ripening control
genes (reviewed recently in Fraser and Bramley, 2004). However, no specific
TFs relating to carotenoid biosynthesis have been identified. Furthermore,
aside from the previously mentioned indications of transcriptional control of
the biosynthetic genes, there is a lack of other data specifically for regulation
of carotenoid production in flowers, although some pale-flowered varieties of
marigold have reduced levels of transcript from several carotenoid genes,
suggesting that they may be regulatory mutants (Moehs et al., 2001). For
betalains, there is no published data on any TF. In contrast, much is understood
about transcriptional control of flavonoid production, particularly that of anthocyanins in flowers and vegetative tissues, and proanthocyanidins (PAs or condensed tannins) in seeds, through studies in the model species antirrhinum,
arabidopsis, maize and petunia. In the remainder of this section we discuss the
TFs identified to date that regulate flavonoid biosynthesis in flowers.

Regulation of flavonoid production in flowers
For flavonoids, much data have been published on the regulation of the
pathway. We cover here only those data relevant to flowers, and reviews of
the regulation of flavonoids in other parts of the plant may be found in Martin
et al. (2001), Vom Endt et al. (2002), Yamazaki (2002), Davies and Schwinn
(2003), and Springob et al. (2003). In addition, a detailed review of the
knowledge on the regulatory mutations affecting pigmentation in antirrhinum
and petunia is presented in the previous edition of this book (Martin and Gerats,
1993); and information on the structure and function of some of the types of
TF mentioned in this section can be found in the reviews of Eulgem et al.
(2000), Petroni et al. (2002) and Heim et al. (2003).
Regulation of the production of flavonoid precursors
The production of anthocyanins in flowers requires not only the activity of the
specific flavonoid genes but also those of the general phenylpropanoid pathway for production of HCAs. Furthermore, the route to malonyl-CoA formation may also need to be upregulated. Detailed studies on the regulation of the
genes required for HCA production, however, have been conducted principally
in relation to their induction in response to biotic and abiotic (e.g. UV light)
stress, and there is little information for flower development. Many of the
studies have included CHS, as it is the first specific step of the flavonoid
pathway. Only a brief mention of some of the types of TF identified is given
here, as their relevance to flower pigmentation is uncertain.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

201

Light upregulates phenylpropanoid biosynthesis in a range of plant tissues,
and for arabidopsis the photoreceptors phytochrome B and cryptochrome
have been shown to be involved in the induction process (Jenkins et al.,
2001; Hemm et al., 2004). Key to mediating gene expression in response
to light is the light-responsive unit (LRU), comprised of an MYB recognition
element (MRE) and an ACGT-containing element (ACE) (reviewed in Martin
et al., 2001; Davies and Schwinn, 2003). TFs of the basic region/leucine
zipper (bZIP) type bind to ACE boxes in a range of promoters, and some of
these are regulators of HCA and flavonoid production (reviewed in Menkens
et al., 1995; Jakoby et al., 2002). For example, HY5 is a bZIP protein that is a
direct activator of genes of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and other lightresponsive pathways in arabidopsis (Hemm et al., 2004; Ulm et al., 2004).
In parsley, bZIPs termed common plant regulatory factors (CPRFs) have been
implicated in regulation of phenylpropanoid genes via the LRU ACE (reviewed
in Jakoby et al., 2002).
Several MYB factors have been identified that can activate PAL and CHS
genes through the LRU MRE, or through related promoter elements in response to other signals. These include AmMYB305 and AmMYB340 from
antirrhinum (Sablowski et al., 1994; Moyano et al., 1996), PcMYB1 from
parsley (Feldbrügge et al., 1997), PhMYB3 from petunia (Solano et al., 1995)
and NtMYBAS1, NtMYBAS2 and NtMYB2 (Sugimoto et al., 2000; Yang
et al., 2001) from tobacco (Nicotiana). In a unique example to date, TFs
having similarities with the mammalian Ku autoantigen protein, which controls
DNA recombination and transcription, are involved in phenylpropanoid and
CHS gene regulation in response to external abiotic and biotic signals in French
bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) (Yu et al., 1993; Lindsay et al., 2002).
Not all of the TFs identified are transcriptional activators. AtMYB4 from
arabidopsis and AmMYB308 and AmMYB330 from antirrhinum are repressors of phenylpropanoid biosynthetic gene activity (Tamagnone et al., 1998;
Jin et al., 2000). AtMYB4 plays a role in the UV-B light regulation of sinapate
ester formation. These MYB proteins share amino acid sequence motifs in the
C-terminal domain that are putatively involved in the repressor activity, perhaps through protein–protein interactions with components of the basal transcription machinery.
Another component of the regulation of gene expression is the targeting of
the activating or repressing TFs for degradation. TFs involved in photomorphogenic development, including some regulating phenylpropanoid genes, are
targeted by the constitutive photomorphogenesis (COP) system. The COP
system is an assemblage of proteins that controls the ubiquitin-mediated lightdependent degradation of downstream signalling components of many photoreceptors, e.g. HY5 (reviewed in Hardtke and Deng, 2000; Schwehheimer and
Deng, 2001).
TFs regulating anthocyanin production
Transcriptional control of anthocyanin biosynthetic gene activity is one of the
best-characterized examples of this form of regulation in plants. It was first
described for vegetative and seed tissues of maize, subsequently for petals of

202

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

antirrhinum and petunia, and more recently for vegetative tissues of arabidopsis. All of these studies were aided significantly by the easy identification
of mutants, due to the visual phenotypes.
Transcriptional activation of anthocyanin biosynthetic genes is through
TFs of the R2R3-MYB and basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) (or MYC) type, a
mechanism that is conserved between widely divergent plants. Indeed, the
combinatorial activities of MYB/bHLH partnerships regulate many other
plant processes, an example being the formation of trichomes (Szymanski
et al., 2000). In antirrhinum, arabidopsis, maize and petunia, gene families
encoding both types of TFs have been found to regulate anthocyanin synthesis
(Davies and Schwinn, 2003; Springob et al., 2003). Variations in gene expression patterns of family members, and likely in the activity of the encoded
proteins, allow for fine control of the timing and amount of anthocyanin
produced, and the complex patterns of spatial distribution that can occur.
The MYB and bHLH TFs function cooperatively, directly interacting within
the transcriptional complex (Goff et al., 1992). The complex is bound to DNA
in part through the MYB member, which recognizes MYB-specific sequences
(Sainz et al., 1997). It has not been resolved whether the bHLH member also
directly binds DNA. It does function at least in part through a distinct cis
element known as ARE, either directly or through interaction with an as yet
unidentified ARE-binding protein (Hernandez et al., 2004).
WD-repeat (or WD40) proteins also play a role in the control of anthocyanin production. This role was first determined from studies on the whiteflowered an11 mutant of petunia (de Vetten et al., 1997); and they have
since been found in other species (Walker et al., 1999; Sompornpailin et al.,
2002; Carey et al., 2004). WD-repeat proteins lack DNA-binding domains,
but can bind with other proteins and promote interactions between the bound
proteins (van Nocker and Ludwig, 2003). Recently, it has been indicated in
studies of the TFs regulating PA production in arabidopsis that the WD-repeat
protein is a part of the transcriptional complex (Baudry et al., 2004).
MYB, bHLH and WD-repeat factors with a proven role in regulating
anthocyanin production in petals (and published before mid-2003) are listed
in Davies and Schwinn (2003). Notable recent additions are the MYB
factor GMYB10 of Gerbera hybrida (gerbera) (Elomaa et al., 2003) and the
bHLH factor IVORY SEED-VARIEGATED of morning glory (Ipomoea tricolor, Park et al., 2004). Of particular interest are the ROSEA1, ROSEA2,
VENOSA, DELILA and MUTABILIS TFs of antirrhinum, which determine the
complex floral patterning of pigmentation observed in this species (Martin
et al., 2001).
Despite the conserved role of MYB, bHLH and WD-repeat proteins in
controlling anthocyanin pigmentation, and the highly conserved structures of
the proteins, the anthocyanin biosynthetic genes that are the reported targets
of the TFs vary between species. In morning glory petals, and maize and perilla
(Perilla frutescens) vegetative tissues, the characterized TFs essentially activate
all the genes from CHS to those involved in transport of the anthocyanin to the
vacuole (Grotewold et al., 1998; Saito and Yamazaki, 2002; Park et al.,
2004). However, based on studies of flower colour regulatory mutants, the

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

203

TF genes in Antirrhinum, gerbera and petunia that are similar to those in
maize regulate only a subset of the genes, i.e. the ‘late biosynthetic genes’
(LBGs), starting from either F3H or DFR through to, presumably, the end of
the pathway including genes encoding transport proteins (reviewed in Martin
and Gerats, 1993; Davies and Schwinn, 2003). The corresponding ‘early
biosynthetic genes’ (EBGs) in these species are under separate regulation,
and as yet no TFs have been reported with a role in coordinating EBG
expression for pigmentation, although MYB proteins are known that can
activate these genes (see section above on the Regulation of the production
of flavonoid precursors).
Division of the pathway into modules under independent control enables
metabolic flexibility, e.g. for separate regulation of flavone or flavonol biosynthesis for the formation of floral nectar guides. Variations in the partitioning of
pathway regulation are becoming apparent as more species are characterized.
DFR is regulated separately from the other biosynthetic genes in the spathe and
spadix of Anthurium (Collette et al., 2004), and in V. cornuta ANS may be a
key regulatory target (Farzad et al., 2003).
Regarding the B-ring hydroxylases, studies show that in petunia they are
regulated separately from each other (de Vetten et al., 1999). The genes
encoding F3’,5’H (and the cyt b5 protein) are regulated with the LBGs by
the anthocyanin TFs, while the gene for F3’H is not. However, both F3’H
and F3’,5’H are upregulated in leaves of transgenic petunia expressing a
maize anthocyanin regulator, the bHLH factor LC (Bradley et al., 1998),
but, interestingly, not in tomato plants overexpressing LC and C1 (Bovy
et al., 2002).
Despite the success in elucidating aspects of the transcriptional regulation
of anthocyanin biosynthesis, much is still not known, including how activities of
the TFs are modulated or the role of repressor TFs in regulating pigmentation.
Although there are MYB and bHLH proteins that are known to have a repressive effect on anthocyanin biosynthetic gene transcription (Paz-Ares et al.,
1990; Burr et al., 1996; Aharoni et al., 2001; Chen et al., 2004), none
have been reported that are active in flower coloration. It has recently been
proposed that one of the roles of the bHLH factors in the activation of the
target genes is to relieve the MYB factors from the effect of an inhibitory factor
(Hernandez et al., 2004).
Aside from the apparent involvement of MADS-box genes in petal pigmentation (see section above on Regulation of Pigment Biosynthesis in
Flowers), there have been few developments in deciphering the regulatory
cascade leading to flavonoid pigmentation in flowers. In petunia the TFs
regulating anthocyanin synthesis in the petals are the bHLH factors: AN1
and JAF13 and AN2, which is an MYB protein (Quattrocchio et al., 1998,
1999; Spelt et al., 2000, 2002). Transgenic experiments with AN1-glucocorticoid receptor constructs have demonstrated that AN1 directly activates anthocyanin biosynthetic genes, as well as an myb gene of unknown function
(Pmyb27). However, An1 gene expression is dependent on the activity of
An2, while Jaf13 expression is not. Furthermore, Jaf13 expression does not
compensate for loss of An1 activity in the flowers. It has not been determined

204

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

whether JAF13 and AN2 are themselves direct regulators of the biosynthetic
genes. This hierarchical control has not been found for the TFs in maize (Carey
et al., 2004), nor has it been reported for the factors in the other species
studied to date.
Some progress has been made in deciphering the regulatory cascades
leading to seed pigmentation. However, the relevance of the data to floral
pigmentation is uncertain. In maize, the only characterized direct activator of
an anthocyanin TF gene is Viviparous1 (Vp1) (and its orthologues from other
species), which encodes a unique type of TF that is required for seed maturation
(McCarty et al., 1991; Hattori et al., 1992). Genes for a range of proteins
active upstream in signalling cascades for regulation of PA production in
arabidopsis have been identified. These include proteins of the homeobox
(HDGLABRA2 type), WRKY, WIP zinc finger and MADS-box type, and reviews of their roles in flavonoid biosynthesis are available in Marles et al.
(2003), Tanner (2004) and Dixon et al. (2005).
In addition to their role in controlling anthocyanin biosynthesis, some of
the regulatory factors have been found to control other aspects in epidermal
cell differentiation. Based on mutant studies, the WD-repeat proteins of arabidopsis (TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1, TTG1) and petunia (AN11) are
involved in the control of several developmental aspects, likely through interaction with different bHLH factors involved in the various regulatory pathways.
TTG1 regulates trichome, seed mucilage and PA production (Walker et al.,
1999; Baudry et al., 2004), and AN11 influences seed coat development
(Spelt et al., 2002). Furthermore, the bHLH and MYB factors themselves
can have additional regulatory roles outside of anthocyanin production. Some
of the petunia TFs regulate vacuolar pH in petal cells (AN1, AN2) and influence
seed coat development (AN1) (Spelt et al., 2002), and one of the antirrhinum
MYBs appears to regulate pH (ROSEA1; K. Schwinn, unpublished results).
Regulation of the production of other floral flavonoid pigments/co-pigments
The regulation of the production of the non-anthocyanin flavonoids in flowers
is not as well understood as for anthocyanins. Some of the TFs identified as
regulators of phenylpropanoid genes may have a role in regulating the flavonoid EBGs for production of flavones and flavonols in flowers, although there is
limited data on this. AmMYB305, and the equivalent protein from tobacco,
can bind to and activate a ‘P-box’ MRE that is linked to petal-enhanced
expression of phenylpropanoid genes (Sablowski et al., 1994). Furthermore,
AmMYB305 activates through the promoters of the CHI and F3H genes of
antirrhinum (Moyano et al., 1996). Structurally similar is AmMYB340, which
may serve a related function to AmMYB305, as it also binds to the P-box and
regulates CHI (Moyano et al., 1996). In contrast to the anthocyanin-related
TFs, these MYB factors were able to bind and activate without a bHLH partner.
In petunia, the pollen-specific flavonol 3-O-galactosyltransferase, which may
be involved in production of the fertility-important kaempferol and quercetin
3-O-(2’’-O-glucopyranosyl)-galactopyranosides, is regulated independently of a
MYB TF identified that controls pollen anthocyanin pigmentation (AN4) (Quattrocchio et al., 1993; Miller et al., 2002).

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

205

Genetic Modification of Flower Pigmentation
Novelty is a key driver of the commercial success of ornamental crops. There is
much scope to introduce novel flower colours, as some of the leading ornamental crops show only a narrow colour spectrum, whilst in others specific
colours, like blue or yellow, are lacking. GM of pigment biosynthesis offers a
route to colours outside the existing range, and in the long term is likely to have
a major influence on ornamental breeding. Indeed, the first ornamental products from GM of flavonoid biosynthesis are already in the marketplace. Carnations (Dianthus) with novel mauve and violet flower colours are being grown in
South America and Australia for sale in Australia, Japan and the USA (Tanaka
et al., 2005). Further products are ready for general release, including roses
(Rosa hybrida) that accumulate delphinidin-based anthocyanins in the flowers
and have mauve colours (Suntory Ltd, press release 8826, 6 June 2004). The
potential exists to use GM approaches to introduce novelty into other commercially important species, as genetic transformation systems are available for
most of the other major cut flower crops as well as some leading bedding
plants, bulbs, pot plants and ground-covers (Deroles et al., 2002).
Successful GM approaches to modify flower colour have primarily targeted
the flavonoid pathway. Here we present an overview of the major GM approaches that have been taken to modify flower colour for the different pigment pathways, with a few representative examples discussed in detail. A
comprehensive listing of individual experiments is given in Tables 8.2 to 8.5.
Additional discussion of GM of flavonoid-based flower colour can be found in
Schwinn and Davies (2004).
Non-plant genes that code for coloured proteins or biosynthetic activities
for novel pigments have also been used to alter plant/flower colour. Production
of green fluorescent protein from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria has been
introduced into lisianthus (Eustoma grandiflorum) flowers (Mercuri et al.,
2001). Also, algal or bacterial genes have been used to modify carotenoid
biosynthesis (Table 8.5). However, as the focus of this volume is on the
molecular biology of flowering, we do not present the non-plant gene approaches in detail.
Flavonoids
There are numerous examples of modification of flavonoid biosynthesis in
flowers of transgenic plants. There are also several examples for grains, fruit
and vegetable crops, recently reviewed in Schijlen et al. (2004). The major
methods are based on manipulation of pathway flux. The approaches to
increasing, preventing or redirecting flux into or within the pathway have
used up- or downregulation of the pathway using regulatory factors; introducing new biosynthetic activities; increasing specific endogenous biosynthetic
activities; and abolishing branches of the pathway. The latter may cause substrate to accumulate or be directed into alternative biosynthetic branches.
These approaches may target the coloured flavonoids directly, or change the

206
Table 8.2. Examples of genetic modification of flower colour using inhibition of flavonoid biosynthetic gene activity by sense or antisense RNA.
Transgene

Species modified

Effect on flower coloura

Reference

Carnation
Chrysanthemum
Gentian
Gerbera
Lisianthus
Petunia
Petunia
Rose
Torenia
Torenia

Change from pink to white
Change from pink to white
Change from blue to pale blue or white
Change from red to pink or cream
Change from purple to white or patterns
Change from red to white or patterns
Change from purple to white or patterns
Change from red to pale red
Change from blue to pale blue or patterns
Change from blue to pale blue, white or patterns

Gutterson (1995)
Courtney-Gutterson et al. (1994)
Nishihara et al. (2003)
Elomaa et al. (1993)
Deroles et al. (1998)
van der Krol et al. (1988)
Napoli et al. (1990); van der Krol et al. (1990)
Firoozabady et al. (1994)
Aida et al. (2000a,b)
Suzuki et al. (2000); Fukusaki et al. (2004)

Carnation

Change from orange to white

Zuker et al. (2002)

Petunia
Torenia
Torenia

Change from purple to white or patterns
Change from blue to pale blue or patterns
Change from blue to white or patterns

Jorgensen et al. (2002)
Aida et al. (2000a,b)
Suzuki et al. (2000)

Petunia
Torenia

Change from dark blue to pale blue or pink
Change from blue to pink

Shimada et al. (2001); Jorgensen et al. (2002)
Suzuki et al. (2000)

Lisianthus
Petunia
Petunia

Reddening effect
Change from purple to red
Change from white to pale pink

Nielsen et al. (2002)
Holton et al. (1993b)
Davies et al. (2003a)

Torenia

Paler flower colour

Ueyama et al. (2002)

Petunia

Change from purple to pink or patterns

Brugliera et al. (1994)

b

a

Only a general indication of the phenotype is given.
Many publications include use of CHS in P. hybrida as a phenotypic marker for studying the antisense or sense RNA silencing process. Only the first reports are
referenced here.

b

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

CHS
Sense
Sense and antisense
Antisense
Antisense
Antisense
Antisense
Sense
Sense
Sense and antisense
Sense or RNA interference (RNAi)
F3H
Antisense
DFR
Sense
Sense and antisense
Sense
F3 ’,5 ’H
Sense
Sense
FLS
Antisense
Antisense
Antisense
FNSII
Antisense
3RT
Antisense

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

207

abundance of the colourless flavonoid co-pigments with which anthocyanins
interact to develop their final colour.
There is potential for using approaches that do not target flux. Changes in
vacuolar pH, the subcellular site of flavonoid accumulation, or the non-flavonoid cellular components with which the flavonoid interacts can have dramatic
effects on the colour the pigment manifests. Only limited gene technology is
available as yet for targeting these aspects (e.g. for GSTs – section above on
Vacuolar import – or for pH, see Schwinn and Davies, 2004).
Preventing anthocyanin production
The simplest approach for modifying flower colour is to prevent flavonoid
pigment formation by inhibiting production of a key biosynthetic enzyme,
such as CHS. This has been done numerous times in several species (reviewed
recently in Tanaka et al., 2005 and listed in Table 8.2). Indeed, the first
examples in plants of gene inhibition by antisense RNA (van der Krol et al.,
1988) and sense RNA (Napoli et al., 1990; van der Krol et al., 1990) were for
CHS in petunia. Aside from the expected pale or white flower colours, this
approach has had unexpected phenotypes. Loss of flavonoid production has
resulted in male (e.g. Taylor and Jorgensen, 1992; Fischer et al., 1997) or
female (Jorgensen et al., 2002) sterility in some (but not all) species. Furthermore, ordered and erratic corolla pigmentation patterns have been obtained in
some species (e.g. lisianthus, see Plate 1.K). The factors governing the type of
anthocyanin patterning produced, and the stability of the phenotype, are still
not clear, but may relate to morphological and environmental signals, as well as
differences in transgene structure (Jorgensen, 1995). Interestingly, no pigmentation patterns have been observed to date in GM experiments with chrysanthemum, gerbera and rose, species that traditionally lack patterned varieties.
The introduction of transgenes for single-chain antibody fragments developed
against enzymes such as DFR has also been used to try to achieve controlled
reduction of flavonoid enzyme activity, but without clear phenotypic effects
(e.g. De Jaeger et al., 1999).
Redirecting substrate within the pathway
Altering the activities of enzymes that produce colourless flavonoids or compete with the anthocyanin-forming enzymes for substrate can be used to modify
anthocyanin levels in flowers. The first approach has been demonstrated in
antisense FLS transgenic plants. Reduction of flavonol biosynthesis in
lisianthus, petunia or tobacco resulted in an increase in anthocyanin content
in the flowers (Holton et al., 1993b; Nielsen et al., 2002; Davies et al.,
2003a). Using the second approach, genes encoding stilbene synthase, PKR
or anthocyanidin reductase (ANR) controlled by a CaMV35S promoter were
introduced into petunia or tobacco. A reduction of anthocyanin levels and paler
flower colours was achieved due to diversion of substrate (Fischer et al., 1997;
Davies et al., 1998; Joung et al., 2003; Xie et al., 2003). As would be
anticipated, the products of the respective enzymes, stilbenes, 6’-deoxychalcones and flavan-3-ols (or their expected derivatives) accumulated in the
flowers.

208

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

An alternative to reducing the activity of competing enzymes for increasing
anthocyanin production overall is to increase the abundance of anthocyanin
biosynthetic enzymes that may be flux control points. For example, anthocyanin production was enhanced in flowers of petunia and tobacco when
CaMV35S:DFR was introduced (Polashock et al., 2002; Davies et al.,
2003a), and co-introduction of both CaMV35S:DFR and CaMV35S:ANS
into forsythia resulted in increased levels of anthocyanins, including novel
production in the flowers (Rosati et al., 1997, 2003). The observed increases
in anthocyanin production may have been due to either improved competition
with other flavonoid enzymes for common substrate or improved ability to
utilize an excess of substrate.
Introducing novel flavonoid compounds
Chalcones may offer GM routes to developing yellow
flower colours in target ornamentals. Chalcones are pale yellow, usually
ephemeral, intermediates in the biosynthesis of all flavonoids. While chalcones
accumulate in flowers of some chi mutant lines in sufficient quantities to
provide yellow pigmentation (e.g. carnation), it has not yet proved possible to
generate their accumulation in transgenic plants by sense or antisense inhibition of CHI gene activity. An alternative approach to triggering chalcone
accumulation, which has proved successful, has been to introduce
CaMV35S:PKR (Davies et al., 1998). PKR catalyses the production of
6’-deoxychalcones, which are physiologically more stable than the common
6’-hydroxychalcones and cannot be used as substrates by CHI in many species.
A white-flowered line of petunia expressing a CaMV35S:PKR transgene accumulated up to 50% of the petal flavonoids as 6’-deoxychalcones, resulting in
pale yellow colours. Another approach for eliciting chalcone accumulation may
be to introduce a gene encoding an enzyme catalysing a modification to
chalcones (e.g. glycosylation) that would prevent isomerization (both spontaneous or CHI-catalysed). There are preliminary reports of the isolation of a
cDNA for one such enzyme, chalcone 2’-O-glucosyltransferase, but no details
of transgenic experiments have been published (Tanaka et al., 2005; Table
8.1). A key consideration for this approach in plants expressing CHI activity
would be whether the introduced enzyme could compete with CHI for substrate
or even access substrate.
Aurones are bright yellow compounds, and they also appear to be an
excellent prospect for GM approaches to yellow flower colours. Their precursors, chalcones, are ubiquitous, and the molecular cloning of the key aurone
biosynthetic enzyme, AUS, has been reported (Nakayama et al., 2000). Ono
et al. (2005) have published a preliminary account of the successful introduction of aurone production into torenia through introduction of AUS and
chalcone 4’-O-glucosyltransfease transgenes.

CHALCONES AND AURONES.

ALTERING B-RING HYDROXYLATION.

Some of the leading ornamental species lack
anthocyanins based on one or more of the major anthocyanidin types, most
commonly delphinidin, but also on occasion pelargonidin. An obvious approach for biotechnology is to introduce F3’,5’H activity or inhibit F3’H and/or

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

209

F3’,5’H activity to trigger production of precursors for delphinidin- or pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins, respectively. Delphinidin-derived anthocyanins are
usually needed to produce blue flower colours. As blue flower colours are highly
valued in the floriculture industry, not surprisingly, one of the major GM targets
has been the introduction of delphinidin biosynthesis into species such
as carnation, chrysanthemum and rose. Notable successes include the previously mentioned carnation and rose cultivars with violet or mauve colours.
Approaches have also been developed to maximize levels of delphinidinderived anthocyanins relative to those of other types (Okinaka et al., 2003;
Tanaka et al., 2005).
Despite the success using strategies based on the F3’,5’H, it has not been
possible to engineer blue flower colours in the target species to date. This is
because the presence of delphinidin-derived anthocyanins does not necessarily
result in a blue flower colour. Indeed, some ornamental species that lack blue
flower colours, such as cyclamen (Cyclamen persicum), impatiens, lisianthus,
pelargonium and tulip, naturally produce delphinidin-derived anthocyanins in
the flowers. Furthermore, there are a few examples in which blue flower
colours are derived from pigments other than delphinidin. For example, the
‘Heavenly Blue Anthocyanin’ in blue-flowered morning glory is peonidin
(Fig. 8.1) with six molecules of glucose and three molecules of caffeic acid
attached (Goto and Kondo, 1991). Chemical studies on several species that
have delphinidin-based blue flower colours have suggested that, in addition to
the presence of those anthocyanin types, the correct vacuolar pH and intra- or
intermolecular (co-pigmentation) interactions are required to trigger blue
anthocyanin forms. Although the transgenic carnations meet some of these
requirements, accumulating complex delphinidin-derived anthocyanins, and
having flavone co-pigments and a relatively high petal vacuolar pH of 5.5,
they are still not blue in colour (Fukui et al., 2003). This illustrates the difficulty
of engineering blue pigmentation.
Inhibition of the activities of the F3’H and/or F3’,5’H could enable production of pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins in ornamental crops that lack
them, such as chrysanthemum (Schwinn et al., 1994). Of course, with these
approaches it must first be ascertained whether the downstream enzymes can
use the differently hydroxylated substrates. In a few cases, the lack of pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins may also be related to the endogenous DFR having
weak activity with 4’-hydroxylated substrates. In the first published case of GM
of flower colour, Meyer et al. (1987) introduced a maize CaMV35S:DFR
transgene into petunia, enabling use of DHK and the subsequent production
of pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins at significant levels. This resulted in the
formation of orange flower colours, a first for this species. DFR in cranberry
(Vaccinium macrocarpon), Cymbidium orchid (Cymbidium hybrida) and
tobacco also shows absent or low selectivity for DHK, and so might be a target
in these species for this GM approach (Johnson et al., 1999, 2001; Polashock
et al., 2002).
SECONDARY MODIFICATIONS.

Secondary modifications influence the colour resulting
from anthocyanins by altering the light absorbencies of the pigments and

210

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

shaping their tertiary structures in the vacuole (Goto and Kondo, 1991; Brouillard and Dangles, 1993). In particular, methylation has a slight reddening effect
on the anthocyanin, and glycosylation of the A- and B-rings and associated
acylation, is often linked with blue flower colours. Many cDNAs are now
available for enzymes carrying out a range of secondary modifications of
anthocyanins, and some of these have been used successfully to alter anthocyanin profiles in flowers of transgenic plants (see Tables 8.2 and 8.3 and the
reviews of Schwinn and Davies, 2004; Tanaka et al., 2005). Glycosylation,
acylation and (indirectly) methylation patterns were modified. However, only
the experiments of Brugliera et al. (1994) produced a change in flower colour.
Utilization of transcription factors
As the activity of the anthocyanin biosynthetic genes appears to be determined
primarily by the expression patterns of the regulatory genes, the identification
of defined TF genes provides tools for modulating the amount as well as the
temporal and spatial occurrence of anthocyanins in plants. The validity of this
approach has been well established, not only for the use of transgenes for
endogenous TFs in a target species but also for the utility of TF transgenes to
engineer anthocyanin production in heterologous species. TF gene technology
offers the great advantage of being able to upregulate multiple genes with a
single transgene. This is illustrated by an experiment in petunia, in which a
transgene for a maize bHLH factor (LC) upregulated at least eight biosynthetic
genes in the leaves, resulting in plants with deep purple vegetation (Bradley
et al., 1998). Table 8.4 provides an extensive listing of published studies. The
remainder of this section highlights a few points of note arising from the use of
anthocyanin-related TFs in biotechnology experiments.
The overexpression of anthocyanin-related TFs has successfully enhanced
production of not only anthocyanin pigments, but also other flavonoids such as
PAs, flavonols and isoflavonoids, in a range of species. The reasons for this are
not clear. It is possible that they increase flux into or alter flux within the
flavonoid pathway, allowing the accumulation of other end products. Alternatively, they may activate genes involved in other branches of the phenylpropanoid pathway as part of their normal function, but such roles have not
previously been characterized. However, the TF transgenes are often used in
heterologous species, driven by a strong constitutive promoter (e.g. CaMV35S)
that results in transcript and (presumably) protein accumulation grossly exceeding the normal physiological levels. Thus, the introduced TF may interfere with
the endogenous regulatory environment. This may promote activity on gene
promoter sites not associated with the functioning of the native TF protein, or
result in ‘squelching’ effects on endogenous TF activity through the titration of
interacting TFs (Gill and Ptashne, 1988). ‘Dose dependent’ repression of
phenylpropanoid genes other than those regulated in wild-type plants has
been demonstrated in CaMV35S:AtMYB4 transgenic arabidopsis (Jin et al.,
2000). Furthermore, substantial upregulation of major pathways like those for
phenylpropanoids or carotenoids may have serious secondary effects, e.g.
changes in carbon supply to other pathways, alterations in the production of
ABA or GA, or changes in the transport of auxin.

Transgene

Species modified

Effect on flower coloura

Reference

PKR

Petunia
Tobacco
Tobacco
Petunia
Petunia

Change
Change
Change
Change
Change

Tobacco
Forsythia

Change from pink to dark pink
Flower (and vegetative) anthocyanin
pigmentation induced
Change from pink/white to blue/purple
Change from lilac to pink
Reddening effect
Change from pink to blue/purple
Change from pink to blue
Change from pale pink/red to
magenta/deep red or patterns
Change in pink shade
No change in phenotypeb
No change in phenotypec
No change in phenotyped
Change from pink to white;
PA-like compounds produced

Davies et al. (1998); Tanaka et al. (2005)
Joung et al. (2003)
Fischer et al. (1997)
Davies et al. (2003a)
Meyer et al. (1987); Helariutta et al. (1993);
Tanaka et al. (1995); Johnson et al. (2001)
Polashock et al. (2002); Xie et al. (2004)
Rosati et al. (2003)

STS
DFR

DFR and ANS
DFR and F3 ’,5’H
F3 ’H
F3 ’,5’H

F3GT
A3 ’GT and A5GT
AM3T
ANR

Carnation
Petunia
Torenia
Carnation
Lobelia
Petunia
Tobacco
Lisianthus
Petunia
Petunia
Tobacco

from
from
from
from
from

white to pale yellow
pink to pale pink
pink to pale pink
white to pink
pale pink to orange or red

Tanaka et al. (2005)
Brugliera et al. (1999)
Ueyama et al. (2002)
Tanaka et al. (2005)
Tanaka et al. (2005)
Holton et al. (1993a); Park and Kim (2000);
Shimada et al. (2001); Mori et al. (2004)
Shimada et al. (1999); Okinaka et al. (2003)
Schwinn et al. (1997)
Fukuchi-Mizutani et al. (2003)
Suzuki et al. (2002)
Xie et al. (2003)

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

Table 8.3. Examples of genetic modification of flower colour by the introduction of novel flavonoid biosynthetic activities or by increasing
endogenous activities, using sense transgenes. Experiments involving simple complementation of flower colour mutants are not included.

a

Only a general indication of the phenotype is given.
A change in flavonoid glycosylation and acylation occurred.
c
One new anthocyanin type, delphinidin 3,5,3’-tri-O-glucoside, was found.
d
Anthocyanins with novel malonylation were formed.
b

211

TF type: transgene (source species)

Species modified

Effect on flavonoid productiona

Reference

MYB: Rosea1 (antirrhinum)

Lisianthus
Petunia
Arabidopsis

Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins and other phenylpropanoids
increased
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
No visible change in phenotype
No visible change in phenotype
No visible change in phenotype
No increase in flavonoid content
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanin production in flowers reduced
3-Deoxyflavonoids, C-glycosylflavones, other
phenylpropanoids and fluorescent
compounds increased
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanin and flavonol production inhibited
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanin and PA production inhibited

Schwinn et al. (2001)
Schwinn et al. (2001)
Borevitz et al. (2000)

MYB: AtMYB75 (PAP1) or
AtMYB90 (PAP2) (arabidopsis)
MYB: Gmyb10 (gerbera)
MYB: C1 (maize)

MYB: c1-I (maize)
MYB: P1 or P2 (maize)

MYB: Myb.Ph2 (petunia)
MYB: FaMYB1 (strawberry)
MYB: ant1 (tomato)

bHLH: B-Peru (maize)
bHLH: Lc (maize)

White clover
Tobacco
Tobacco
Tomato
Arabidopsis
Tobacco
Tomato
Lucerne
White clover
Arabidopsis
Lucerne
Lisianthus

Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
No visible change in phenotype
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins and PAs increased and flavones
decreased
No visible change in phenotype

Borevitz et al. (2000)
Elomaa et al. (2003)
Ray et al. (2003)
Lloyd et al. (1992)
Lloyd et al. (1992)
Bovy et al. (2002)
de Majnik et al. (2000)
Chen et al. (2004)
Grotewold et al. (1998);
Zhang et al. (2003)
de Majnik et al. (2000)
Aharoni et al. (2001)
Mathews et al. (2003)
Mathews et al. (2003)
Hiratsu et al. (2003);
Matsui et al. (2004)
Mooney et al. (1995)
Mooney et al. (1995)
Ray et al. (2003)
de Majnik et al. (2000)
Lloyd et al. (1992)
Ray et al. (2003)
Bradley et al. (1999)

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

Modified MYB: PAP1 þ
EAR-motif (arabidopsis)
bHLH: Delila (antirrhinum)

Tobacco
Tobacco
Lucerne
Arabidopsis
Tobacco
Tomato
White clover
Tobacco
Maize cell lines

212

Table 8.4. Examples of genetic modification of flavonoid production in stably transformed plants or cell lines by the introduction of sense
transgenes encoding transcription factors that regulate flavonoid biosynthetic genes.

BHLH-containing Tag1
transposon: R (maize)
bHLH: Myc-rp and Myc-gp (perilla)
bHLHþMyb cointroduced: C1þDelila
bHLHþMyb cointroduced: C1þR

bHLHþMyb cointroduced: C1þR
and suppressed F3H
bHLHþMyb cointroduced: LcþC1

Bird’s foot trefoil
Tobacco
Tomato
Tobacco
Arabidopsis
Soybean
Maize cell lines
Soybean
Arabidopsis
Tomato

No visible change in phenotype
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
No increase in flavonoid content
PAs increased in roots (and decreased
in leaves of some lines)
PAs and anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased (variegated patterns)

Bradley et al. (1999)
Bradley et al. (1998)
Lloyd et al. (1992)
Goldsbrough et al. (1996)
Bovy et al. (2002)
Damiani et al. (1999)

Anthocyanins increased
Anthocyanins increased
No visible change in phenotype
Ratio of genistein to daidzein reduced
Anthocyanins, phlobaphenes and
C-glycosylflavones increased
Isoflavonoids increased

Gong et al. (1999)
Gong et al. (1999)
Mooney et al. (1995)
Yu et al. (2003)
Grotewold et al. (1998);
Bruce et al. (2000)
Yu et al. (2003)

Anthocyanins increased
Flavonols increased in fruit; anthocyanins
increased in leaves

Lloyd et al. (1992)
Bovy et al. (2002)

Robbins et al. (2003)
Liu et al. (2001)

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

bHLH: Sn (maize)

Pelargonium
Petunia
Tobacco
Tomato
Tomato
Bird’s foot trefoil

a
Only a general indication of the effect on flavonoid production is given (in some studies other phenylpropanoid types occurring were also affected), as results are
variable and may include: small increases in flavonoid levels in tissues already producing flavonoids; production of anthocyanin earlier in flower development than
normal; ectopic flavonoid production; increased flavonoid production only under stress conditions. Furthermore, a number of studies measured the effects on
anthocyanin production only.

213

214

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

Although flavonoid biosynthesis has been enhanced in a range of species
by introduction of transgenes encoding a single TF, there have been several
cases reported where no change in phenotype has occurred or where the
phenotype only becomes apparent under certain environmental conditions
(Table 8.4). Indeed, the same TF transgenes may have markedly different
effects in transgenic plants of different species. This variation in effect may be
related to the availability of adequate precursors, the characteristics of the
specific TF introduced, the presence or absence of interacting endogenous
TFs or the characteristics of the endogenous TFs. Thus, for generation of the
desired phenotypes in target species, appropriate TFs may need to be identified for each species and/or combinations of TF transgenes may be required.
TF transgenes can also be used to repress flavonoid biosynthesis. This may
be by using sequences for proteins that are thought to have a repressive impact
on anthocyanin biosynthesis as part of their normal in planta function (Aharoni
et al., 2001) or by modifying anthocyanin-related activator TFs through the
addition of repression domains from other proteins, such as the ERF-associated
amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif (Hiratsu et al., 2003; Matsui et al., 2004).

Carotenoids
For species that have carotenoid pigmentation in flowers, overexpression or
knockout transgenes for carotenoid biosynthetic enzymes might be used to
generate different carotenoid profiles and, therefore, alter flower colour. Of
greater interest would be the ability to introduce novel carotenoids based
colours into species that lack significant carotenoid production in the flowers.
However, a major hurdle may be the lack of floral plastids of sufficient number
and type. The availability of carotenoid precursors in these tissues may also
need to be addressed, although there has been some success in the metabolic
engineering of carotenoid precursor supply (e.g. Botella-Pavia et al., 2004).
Except for a preliminary report on increasing carotenoid levels in flowers of
petunia (Davies et al., 2003b), there have been no reports to date of the GM of
flower colour through the alteration of carotenoid biosynthesis – although the
colour of nectary tissue has been modified in tobacco, in an attempt to produce
commercially important ketocarotenoids in plants (Ralley et al., 2004). In
addition to in planta ketocarotenoid production, the carotenoid biotechnology
field is primarily focused on increasing levels of human health-related carotenoids in food or gaining an understanding of their in planta function as
antioxidants (reviewed in Naik et al., 2003; Fraser and Bramley, 2004). One
well-known success has been the development of ‘Golden Rice’, which has
increased b-carotene levels in the endosperm due to introduction of daffodil
PSY and Erwinia uredorva PDS transgenes (Ye et al., 2000). Table 8.5 lists
published GM experiments for carotenoid biosynthesis in plants, and some of
these approaches would be expected to generate novel phenotypes if applied
to ornamentals that have carotenoid-based floral pigmentation.
A complicating factor for GM experiments targeting carotenoid biosynthesis is the possibility of pleiotropic effects, and the potential associated need

Transgene

Species modified

Effect on carotenoid productiona

Reference

PSY

Arabidopsis

Increased carotenoid (including lutein and violaxanthin)
and abscisic acid levels in seeds, reduced
germination rate
Carotenoid production increased, flower colour changed
from white to pale yellow
Increased levels of phytoene and other carotenoids,
pleotropic effects
Increased carotenoid production in fruit and other
tissues, pleotropic effects
50-fold increase in carotenoid levels (principally
carotenes) in the seed and an orange colour imparted
No change in carotenoids, conferred herbicide resistance
Twofold to fourfold increase in fruit carotenoid levels
No change in phenotype
Reduced levels of carotenoids with e,b-rings and
increased levels of those with b, bb-rings
Increased accumulation of b-carotene and its derivatives,
overall decrease in carotenoid content
Up to sevenfold increase in b-carotene levels in fruit,
colour change from red to orange
Increased lutein levels
b-carotene and other carotenoid production in seed
endosperm and a golden colour imparted
Low levels of ketocarotenoids (including 4-ketolutein)
produced in seeds

Lindgren et al. (2003)

Petunia
Tobacco
Tomato
PSY (bacterial)

Oilseed rape

PDS
PDS (bacterial)

Tobacco
Tomato
Tobacco
Tobacco
Tomato

bLYC

Tomato

eLYC
PSY and PDS or
PSY, PDS and bLCY
b-carotene ketolase (algal)

Arabidopsis
Rice (Oryza
sativa)
Arabidopsis

Davies et al. (2003b)
Busch et al. (2002)
Fray et al. (1995)
Shewmaker et al. (1999)
Wagner et al. (2002)
Fraser et al. (2002)
Busch et al. (2002)
Misawa et al. (1994)
Römer et al. (2000);
Fraser et al. (2001)
Rosati et al. (2000)

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

Table 8.5. Genetic modification of carotenoid biosynthesis in plants using carotenoid structural genes. Sense transgenes were used unless
indicated otherwise. Experiments involving complementation of mutants are not included.

Pogson and Rissler (2000)
Ye et al. (2000)
Stålberg et al. (2003)
continued
215

Transgene

Species modified

Effect on carotenoid productiona

Reference

Tobacco

Astaxanthin produced in the flowers (the nectary),
colour change from yellow to red
Up to 13-fold increase in ketocarotenoid levels in seeds
compared to b-carotene ketolase gene alone
Ketocarotenoids produced in the leaves and nectary and
changes in total carotenoid levels
Ketocarotenoids produced in the leaves
Change in carotenoid profile with increased
xanthophyll levels
Increased zeaxanthin synthesis under high light
Increased zeaxanthin and b-cryptoxanthin levels
Zeaxanthin produced
Carotenoid levels reduced, pleiotropic effects,
lethality in some lines
Carotenoid levels reduced, gibberellin levels increased
Phytoene levels increased, pleiotropic effects,
lethality in some lines
Loss of b-carotene, small increase in lycopene
content of fruit
Increase in b-carotene levels relative to xanthophylls
Reduced zeaxanthin and antheraxanthin levels

Mann et al. (2000)

b-carotene ketolase and PSY

Arabidopsis

Carotene 4,4’-oxygenase and
3,3’-hydroxylase (bacterial)

Tobacco
Tomato
Arabidopsis

bOH (bacterial)
bLYC and bOH
ZEP antisense or co-suppression
PSY antisense

Tobacco
Tomato
Potato
Tobacco

PDS antisense

Tomato
Tobacco

bLCY antisense

Tomato

bOH antisense
VDE antisense

Arabidopsis
Tobacco

a

Only a general indication of the phenotype is given.

Stålberg et al. (2003)
Ralley et al. (2004)
Ralley et al. (2004)
Davison et al. (2002)
Götz et al. (2002)
Dharmapuri et al. (2002)
Römer et al. (2002)
Busch et al. (2002)
Bird et al. (1991)
Busch et al. (2002)
Ronen et al. (2000);
Rosati et al. (2000)
Rissler and Pogson (2001)
Chang et al. (2000);
Verhoeven et al. (2001)

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

bOH (plant)

216

Table 8.5. continued . Genetic modification of carotenoid biosynthesis in plants using carotenoid structural genes. Sense transgenes were used
unless indicated otherwise. Experiments involving complementation of mutants are not included.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation

217

for flower-specific transgene expression. Besides the obvious detrimental effects
on photosynthesis that major disruption to carotenoid production could generate, carotenoids share precursors with, or are substrates for, the biosynthesis of
important growth regulators. There may also be complications through metabolic channelling effects or concomitant regulatory changes. Expression of
CaMV35S:PSY in tobacco increased carotenoid production, but also caused
dwarfism, altered leaf morphology and reduced anthocyanin levels (Busch et al.,
2002). Expression of CaMV35S:PSY in tomato also had multiple ramifications,
including dwarfism, probably due to the diversion of GGPP substrate from
gibberellin biosynthesis (Fray et al., 1995). In oilseed rape (Brassica napus),
massive increases in a- and b-carotene levels were seen with seed-specific
expression of a bacterial PSY gene, but tocopherol and chlorophyll levels were
lowered and fatty acid composition altered (Shewmaker et al., 1999). Furthermore, a tomato line lacking activity of the fruit-related PSY-1 gene failed to make
carotenoids even though the PSY-2 gene was active in the fruit, perhaps
indicating the occurrence of metabolic channelling (Fraser et al., 1999).
Betalains
The betalain biosynthetic pathway is an attractive target for ornamental biotechnology approaches, particularly the introduction of this pathway into species
that normally lack it. The pathway from general metabolites to the first coloured
compounds involves only a few biosynthetic steps, and the introduction of
betalain biosynthesis is unlikely to cause pleiotropic effects. If DOPA substrate
is available, and DOD activity is introduced, then the steps to the yellow betaxanthins can occur spontaneously, even in species that normally do not make the
compounds. Indeed, we have shown this is the case for antirrhinum flowers (N.
Pathirana and K. Schwinn, unpublished results). However, DOPA will probably
be present in limiting quantities in most species, preventing significant betalain
formation. As yet no cDNA clones have been characterized for the putative
tyrosinase involved in DOPA production. For synthesis of the red/purple betacyanins, other transgenes will also be required. Sequences for non-specific
glucosyltransferases that can use flavonoid and betacyanin substrates are available, but sequences for other biosynthetic activities are lacking.
The only published GM study for betalains is the transient expression of a
fungal (A. muscaria) DOD cDNA in flowers of P. grandiflora genotypes
lacking activity of the plant DOD (Mueller et al., 1997). Transformed petal
cells developed pigmentation and were shown to have accumulated the plant
betalains dopaxanthin and betanin, as well as miraxanthin V, which is normally
specific to fungi.

Concluding Comments
Flower–pollinator interactions have driven the evolution of complex biosynthetic pathways and elegant regulatory mechanisms to form pigments with
specific colours and pigmentation patterns ranging from simple to highly

218

K. Davies and K. Schwinn

intricate. In some species leaves have been recruited to provide additional
(or alternative) specialized coloured organs for pollinator attraction. Floral
pigmentation is under strict developmental control and is commonly linked
to fertility status. The developmental signalling involved can be complex,
as more than one pigment pathway, and other pathways regulating other
components that affect colour like vacuolar pH, may be coordinately
controlled.
The molecular basis of the biosynthesis of the common flower colour
pigments, carotenoids and flavonoids, is now well understood. A significant
advancement regarding the flavonoid pathway has been the identification and
characterization of transcription factors that regulate flavonoid production.
However, less understood is the control of flower colour patterning, or the
linkage of pigmentation to floral development or environmental signals,
although this is likely to change over the next few years as current studies
progress.
Based on the extensive molecular knowledge on flavonoid biosynthesis,
flower and plant colour has been successfully modified in several species, with
TF transgenes proving particularly effective. With the ongoing progress in the
elucidation of the genes involved in carotenoid and betalain biosynthesis, along
with a greater understanding of these pathways, it is expected that success in
the GM of these pathways to produce desirable colours in flowers will soon be
achieved.

Acknowledgements
We thank our Crop & Food Research colleagues Murray Boase, Tony Corbett
and Simon Deroles, and Dr Martha R. Weiss (Georgetown University,
Washington, DC) for photographs included in Plate 1.

References
Abrahams, S., Lee, E., Walker, A.R., Tanner, G.J., Larkin, P.J. and Ashton,
A.R. (2003) The Arabidopsis TDS4
gene encodes leucoanthocyanidin
dioxygenase (LDOX) and is essential
for proanthocyanidin synthesis and
vacuole development. Plant Cell 35,
624–636.
Achnine, L., Blancaflor, E.B., Rasmussen,
S. and Dixon, R.A. (2004) Colocalization of L-phenylalanine ammonia-lyase
and cinnamate 4-hydroxylase for metabolic channeling in phenylpropanoid
biosynthesis. Plant Cell 16, 3098–
3109.

Aharoni, A., De Vos, C.H., Wein, M.,
Sun, Z., Greco, R., Kroon, A., Mol,
J.N. and O’Connell, A.P. (2001) The
strawberry FaMYB1 transcription factor suppresses anthocyanin and flavonol accumulation in transgenic
tobacco. Plant Journal 28, 319–332.
Aida, R., Kishimoto, S., Tanaka, Y. and
Shibata, M. (2000a) Modification of
flower colour in torenia (Torenia fournieri Lind.) by genetic transformation.
Plant Science 153, 33–42.
Aida, R., Yoshida, K., Kondo, T., Kishimoto, S. and Shibata, M. (2000b)
Copigmentation gives blue flowers on

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
transgenic torenia plants with the
antisense dihydroflavonol-4-reductase
gene. Plant Science 160, 49–56.
Akashi, T., Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Aoki,
T., Ueyama, Y., Yonekura-Sakakibara,
K., Tanaka, Y., Kusumi, T. and Ayabe,
S.-I. (1999) Molecular cloning and biochemical characterization of a novel
cytochrome P450, flavone synthase II,
that catalyzes direct conversion of flavanones to flavones. Plant and Cell
Physiology 40, 1182–1186.
Al-Babili, S., Hugueney, P., Schledz, M.,
Welsch, R., Frohnmeyer, H., Laule, O.
and Beyer, P. (2000) Identification of a
novel gene coding for neoxanthin
synthase from Solanum tuberosum.
FEBS Letters 485, 168–172.
Albrecht, M., Klein, A., Hugueney, P.,
Sandmann, G. and Kuntz, M. (1995)
Molecular cloning and functional expression in E. coli of a novel plant
enzyme mediating zeta-carotene desaturation. FEBS Letters 372, 199–
202.
Alfenito, M.R., Souer, E., Goodman,
C.D., Buell, R., Mol, J., Koes, R. and
Walbot, V. (1998) Functional complementation of anthocyanin sequestration in the vacuole by widely divergent
glutathione S-transferases. Plant Cell
10, 1135–1149.
Angenent, G.C., Franken, J., Busscher,
M., Weiss, D. and van Tunen, A.J.
(1994) Co-suppression of the petunia
homeotic gene fbp2 affects the identity
of the generative meristem. Plant
Journal 5, 33–44.
Bartley, G.E., Viitanen, P.V., Pecker, I.,
Chamovitz, D., Hirschberg, J. and
Scolnik, P.A. (1991) Molecular cloning
and expression in photosynthetic bacteria of a soybean cDNA coding for
phytoene desaturase, an enzyme of
the carotenoid biosynthesis pathway.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 88, 6532–
6536.
Bartley, G.E., Viitanen, P.V., Bacot, K.O.
and Scolnik, P.A. (1992) A tomato
gene expressed during fruit ripening

219

encodes an enzyme of the carotenoid
biosynthesis pathway. Journal of Biological Chemistry 267, 5036–5039.
Baudry, A., Heim, M.A., Dubreucq, B.,
Caboche, M., Weisshaar, B. and Lepiniec, L. (2004) TT2, TT8, and TTG1
synergistically specify the expression of
BANYULS and proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Plant Journal 39, 366–380.
Baxter, I.R., Young, J.C., Armstrong, G.,
Foster, N., Bogenschutz, N., Cordova,
T., Peer, W.A., Hazen, S.P., Murphy,
A.S. and Harper, J.F. (2005) A plasma
membrane Hþ-ATPase is required for
the formation of proanthocyanidins in
the seed coat endothelium of Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
102, 2649–2654.
Bey, M., Stüber, K., Fellenberg, K.,
Schwarz-Sommer, Z., Sommer, H.,
Saedler, H. and Zachgo, S. (2004)
Characterization of antirrhinum petal
development and identification of target genes of the class B MADS box
gene DEFICIENS. Plant Cell 16,
3197–3215.
Bird, C.R., Ray, J.A., Fletcher, J.D.,
Boniwell, J.M., Bird, S., Hughes, S.,
Morris, P.C. and Grierson, D. (1991)
Using antisense RNA to study gene
function: inhibition of carotenoid biosynthesis in transgenic tomatoes. Biotechnology 9, 635–639.
Blanc, V.M. and Pichersky, E. (1995) Nucleotide sequence of a Clarkia breweri
cDNA clone of Ipi1, a gene encoding
isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase.
Plant Physiology 108, 855–856.
Bohm, B.A. (1998) Introduction to Flavonoids. Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam.
Borevitz, J.O., Xia, Y., Blount, J., Dixon,
R.A. and Lamb, C. (2000) Activation
tagging identifies a conserved MYB
regulator of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. Plant Cell 12, 2383–2394.
Botella-Pavia, P., Besumbes, Ó., Phillips,
M.A., Carretero-Paulet, L., Boronat, A.
and Rodriiguez-Concepción, M. (2004)

220

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
Regulation of carotenoid biosynthesis in
plants: evidence for a key role of hydroxymethylbutenyl diphosphate reductase
in controlling the supply of plastidial isoprenoid precursors. Plant Journal 40,
188–199.
Bouvier, F., Hugueney, P., d’Harlingue,
A., Kuntz, M. and Camara, B. (1994)
Xanthophyll biosynthesis in chromoplasts: isolation and molecular cloning
of an enzyme catalyzing the conversion
of 5,6-epoxycarotenoid into ketocarotenoid. Plant Journal 6, 45–54.
Bouvier, F., d’Harlingue, A., Hugueney,
P., Marin, E., Marion-Poll, A. and
Camara, B. (1996) Xanthophyll biosynthesis: cloning, expression, functional reconstitution, and regulation of
b-cyclohexenyl carotenoid epoxidase
from pepper (Capsicum annuum).
Journal of Biological Chemistry
271, 28861–28867.
Bouvier, F., d’Harlingue, A., Suire, C.,
Backhaus, R.A. and Camara, B.
(1998) Dedicated roles of plastid transketolases during early onset of isoprenoid biogenesis in pepper fruits. Plant
Physiology 117, 1423–1431.
Bouvier, F., D’Harlingue, A., Backhaus,
R.A., Kumagai, M.H. and Camara, B.
(2000) Identification of neoxanthin
synthase as a carotenoid cyclase paralog. European Journal of Biochemistry 267, 6346–6352.
Bouvier, F., Suire, C., Mutterer, J. and
Camara, B. (2003a) Oxidative remodeling of chromoplast carotenoids:
identification of the carotenoid
dioxygenase CsCCD and CsZCD
genes involved in crocus secondary
metabolite biogenesis. Plant Cell 15,
47–62.
Bouvier, F., Dogbo, O. and Camara, B.
(2003b) Biosynthesis of the food and
cosmetic plant pigment bixin (Annatto). Science 300, 2089–2092.
Bovy, A., de Vos, R., Kemper, M., Schijlen, E., Pertejo, M.A., Muir, S., Collins, G., Robinson, S., Verhoeyen,
M., Hughes, S., Santos-Buelga, C. and
van Tunen, A. (2002) High-flavonol

tomatoes resulting from the heterologous expression of the maize transcription factor genes LC and C1.
Plant Cell 14, 2509–2526.
Bradley, J.M., Davies, K.M., Deroles,
S.C., Bloor, S.J. and Lewis, D.H.
(1998) The maize Lc regulatory gene
up-regulates the flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway of Petunia. Plant Journal
13, 381–392.
Bradley, J.M., Deroles, S.C., Boase,
M.R., Bloor, S., Swinny, E. and
Davies, K.M. (1999) Variation in the
ability of the maize Lc regulatory gene
to upregulate flavonoid biosynthesis in
heterologous systems. Plant Science
140, 31–39.
Bramley, P.M. (2002) Regulation of carotenoid formation during tomato fruit
ripening and development. Journal of
Experimental Botany 53, 2107–
2113.
Brouillard, R. and Dangles, O. (1993) Flavonoids and flower colour. In: Harborne, J.B. (ed.) The Flavonoids:
Advances in Research Since 1986.
Chapman & Hall, London, pp. 565–
587.
Bruce, W., Folkerts, O., Garnaat, C.,
Crasta, O., Roth, B. and Bowen, B.
(2000) Expression profiling of the
maize flavonoid pathway genes controlled by estradiol-inducible transcription factors CRC and P. Plant Cell 12,
65–80.
Brugliera, F., Holton, T.A., Stevenson,
T.W., Farcy, E., Lu, C.Y. and Cornish,
E.C (1994) Isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone corresponding to
the Rt locus of Petunia hybrida. Plant
Journal 5, 81–92.
Brugliera, F., Barri-Rewell, G., Holton,
T.A. and Mason, J.G. (1999) Isolation
and characterization of a flavonoid 3’hydroxylase cDNA clone corresponding to the Ht1 locus of Petunia
hybrida. Plant Journal 19, 441–451.
Bugos, R.C. and Yamamoto, H.Y. (1996)
Molecular cloning of violaxanthin deepoxidase from romaine lettuce and expression in Esherichia coli. Proceed-

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
ings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 93, 6320–6325.
Burr, F.A., Burr, B., Scheffler, B.E., Blewitt, M., Wienand, U. and Matz, E.C.
(1996) The maize repressor-like gene
intensifier1 shares homology with the
R1/B1 multigene family of transcription factors and exhibits missplicing.
Plant Cell 8, 1249–1259.
Busch, M., Seuter, A. and Hain, R. (2002)
Functional analysis of the early steps of
carotenoid biosynthesis in tobacco.
Plant Physiology 128, 439–453.
Carey, C.C., Strahle, J.T., Selinger, D.A.
and Chandler, V.L. (2004) Mutations
in the pale aleurone color1 regulatory
gene of the Zea mays anthocyanin
pathway have distinct phenotypes relative to the functionally similar TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 gene in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 16,
450–464.
Carol, P., Stevenson, D., Bisanz, C., Breitenbach, J., Sandmann, G., Mache,
R., Coupland, G. and Kuntz, M.
(1999) Mutations in the Arabidopsis
gene IMMUTANS cause a variegated
phenotype by inactivating a chloroplast
terminal oxidase associated with phytoene desaturation. Plant Cell 11,
57–68.
Chang, S.-H., Bugos, R.C., Sun, W.H.
and Yamamoto, H.Y. (2000) Antisense suppression of violaxanthin deepoxidase in tobacco does not affect
plant performance in controlled
growth conditions. Photosynthesis
Research 64, 95–103.
Chen, B., Wang, X., Hu, Y., Wang, Y.
and Lin, Z. (2004) Ectopic expression
of a c1-I allele from maize inhibits
pigment formation in the flower of
transgenic tobacco. Molecular Biotechnology 26, 187–192.
Christinet, L., Burdet, F., Zaiko, M., Hinz,
U. and Zrÿd, J.P. (2004) Characterization and functional identification of a
novel plant 4,5-extradiol dioxygenase
involved in betalain pigment biosynthesis in Portulaca grandiflora. Plant
Physiology 134, 265–274.

221

Collette, V.E., Jameson, P.E., Schwinn,
K.E., Umaharan, P. and Davies, K.M.
(2004) Temporal and spatial expression of flavonoid biosynthetic genes in
flowers of Anthurium andraeanum.
Physiologia Plantarum 122, 297–
304.
Cookson, P.J., Kiano, J.W., Shipton,
C.A., Fraser, P.D., Romer, S., Schuch,
W., Bramley, P.M. and Pyke, K.A.
(2003) Increases in cell elongation,
plastid compartment size and phytoene
synthase activity underlie the phenotype of the high pigment-1 mutant of
tomato. Planta 217, 896–903.
Corona, V., Aracri, B., Kosturkova, G.,
Bartley, G.E., Pitto, L., Giorgetti, L.,
Scolnik, P.A. and Giuliano, G. (1996)
Regulation of a carotenoid biosynthesis
gene promoter during plant development. Plant Journal 9, 505–512.
Courtney-Gutterson, N., Napoli, C.,
Lemieuz, C., Morgan, A., Firoozabady,
E. and Robinson, K.E.P. (1994) Modification of flower color in florist’s chrysanthemum: production of a whiteflowering variety through moleculargenetics. Biotechnology 12, 268–
271.
Cunningham, F.X. and Gantt, E. (1998)
Genes and enzymes of carotenoid biosynthesis in plants. Annual Review of
Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 49, 557–583.
Cunningham, F.X. and Gantt, E. (2001)
One ring or two? Determination of ring
number in carotenoids by lycopene ecyclases. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 98, 2905–
2910.
Cunningham, F.X. and Gantt, E. (2005) A
study in scarlet: enzymes of ketocarotenoid biosynthesis in flowers of Adonis aestivalis. Plant Journal 41, 478–
492.
Cunningham, F.X., Pogson, B., Sun,
Z.R., McDonald, K.A., DellaPenna,
D. and Gantt, E. (1996) Functional analysis of the b and e lycopene cyclase
enzymes of Arabidopsis reveals a
mechanism for control of cyclic

222

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
carotenoid formation. Plant Cell 8,
613–626.
Cuttriss, A. and Pogson, B. (2004) Carotenoids. In: Davies, K. (ed.) Plant Pigments and their Manipulation.
Blackwell, Oxford, UK, pp. 57–91.
Damiani, F., Paolocci, F., Cluster, P.D.,
Arcioni, S., Tanner G.J., Joseph R.J.,
Li, Y.G., de Majnik J. and Larkin P.J.
(1999) The maize transcription factor
Sn alters proanthocyanidin synthesis in
transgenic Lotus corniculatus plants.
Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 26, 159–169.
Davies, K.M. (2004) Important rare plant
pigments. In: Davies, K.M. (ed.) Plant
Pigments and their Manipulation.
Annual Plant Reviews, Blackwell,
Oxford, UK, pp. 214–247.
Davies, K.M. and Schwinn, K.E. (2003)
Transcriptional regulation of secondary
metabolism. Functional Plant Biology
30, 913–925.
Davies, K.M., Bloor, S.J., Spiller, G.B.
and Deroles, S.C. (1998) Production
of yellow colour in flowers: redirection
of flavonoid biosynthesis in Petunia.
Plant Journal 13, 259–266.
Davies, K.M., Spiller, G.B., Bradley, J.M.,
Winefield, C.S., Schwinn, K.E., Martin, C.R. and Bloor, S.J., (2001) Genetic engineering of yellow flower
colours. Acta Horticulturae 560, 39–
44.
Davies, K.M., Schwinn, K.E., Deroles,
S.C., Manson, D.G., Lewis, D.H.,
Bloor, S.J. and Bradley, J.M. (2003a)
Enhancing anthocyanin production by
altering competition for substrate between flavonol synthase and dihydroflavonol 4-reductase. Euphytica 131,
259–268.
Davies, K.M., Marshall, G.B., Lewis,
D.H., Winefield, C.S., Deroles, S.C.,
Boase, M.R., Zhang, H., Nielsen,
K.M., Schwinn, K.E., Bloor, S.J.,
Swinny, E. and Martin, C.R. (2003b).
Generation of new ornamental varieties through genetic modification of
pigment biosynthesis. Acta Horticulturae 624, 435–447.

Davison, P.A., Hunter, C.N. and Horton,
P. (2002) Overexpression of beta-carotene hydroxylase enhances stress tolerance in Arabidopsis. Nature 418,
203–206.
De Jaeger, G., Buys, E., Eeckhout, D., De
Wilde, C., Jacobs, A., Kapila, J., Angenon, G., Van Montagu, M., Gerats, T.
and Depicker, A. (1999) High level accumulation of single-chain variable
fragments in the cytosol of transgenic
Petunia hybrida. European Journal
of Biochemistry 259, 426–434.
de Majnik, J., Weinman, J.J., Djordjevic,
M.A., Rolfe, B.G., Tanner, G.J.,
Joseph, R.G. and Larkin, P.J. (2000)
Anthocyanin regulatory gene expression in transgenic white clover can
result in an altered pattern of pigmentation. Australian Journal of Plant
Physiology 27, 659–667.
Deroles, S.C., Bradley, J.M., Schwinn,
K.E., Markham, K.R., Bloor, S.J.,
Manson, D.G. and Davies, K.M.
(1998) An antisense chalcone synthase
gene leads to novel flower patterns in
lisianthus (Eustoma grandiflorum).
Molecular Breeding 4, 59–66.
Deroles, S.C., Boase, M.R., Lee, C.E. and
Peters, T.A. (2002) Gene transfer to
plants. In: Vainstein, A. (ed.) Breeding
for Ornamentals: Classical and Molecular Approaches. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 155–196.
de Vetten, N., Quattrocchio, F., Mol,
J. and Koes, R. (1997) The an11
locus controlling flower pigmentation
in petunia encodes a novel WD-repeat
protein conserved in yeast, plants, and
animals. Genes & Development 11,
1422–1434.
de Vetten, N., ter Horst, J., van Schaik,
H.-P., de Boer, A., Mol, J. and Koes,
R. (1999) A cytochrome b5 is required
for full activity of flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylase, a cytochrome P450 involved in
the formation of blue flower colours.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 96, 778–783.
Devic, M., Guilleminot, J., Debeaujon, I.,
Bechtold, N., Bensaude, E., Koorn-

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
neef, M., Pelletier, G. and Delseny, M.
(1999) The BANYULS gene encodes
a DFR-like protein and is a marker of
early seed coat development. Plant
Journal 19, 387–398.
Dharmapuri, S., Rosati, C., Pallara, P.,
Aquilani, R., Bouvier, F., Camara, B.
and Giuliano, G. (2002) Metabolic engineering of xanthophyll content in
tomato fruits. FEBS Letters 519,
30–34.
Dixon, R.A., Xie, D.-Y. and Sharma, S.B.
(2005) Proanthocyanidins: a final frontier in flavonoid research? New Phytologist 165, 9–28.
Elomaa, P., Honkanen, J., Puska, R.,
Seppanen, P., Helariutta, Y., Mehto,
M., Kotilainen, M., Nevalainen, L. and
Teeri, T.H. (1993) Agrobacteriummediated transfer of antisense chalcone synthase cDNA to Gerbera
hybrida inhibits flower pigmentation.
Biotechnology 11, 508–511.
Elomaa, P., Uimari, A., Mehto, M., Albert, V.A., Laitinen, R.A.E. and Teeri,
T.H. (2003) Activation of anthocyanin
biosynthesis in Gerbera hybrida
(Asteraceae) suggests conserved protein-protein and protein-promoter
interactions between the anciently diverged monocots and eudicots. Plant
Physiology 133, 1831–1842.
Eulgem, T., Rushton, P.J., Robatzek, S.
and Somssich, I.E. (2000) The WRKY
superfamily of plant transcription factors. Trends in Plant Sciences 5,
199–206.
Fahrendorf, T. and Dixon, R.A. (1993)
Stress responses in lucerne (Medicago
sativa L.) XVIII: molecular cloning and
expression of the elicitor-inducible cinnamic acid 4-hydroxylase cytochrome
P450. Archives of Biochemistry and
Biophysics 305, 509–515.
Farzad, M., Griesbach, R. and Weiss,
M.R. (2002) Floral color change in
Viola cornuta L. (Violaceae): a model
system to study regulation of anthocyanin production. Plant Science 162
225–231.

223

Farzad, M., Griesbach, R., Hammond, J.,
Weiss, M.R. and Elmendorf, H.G.
(2003) Differential expression of three
key anthocyanin biosynthetic genes in
a color-changing flower, Viola cornuta
cv. Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow.
Plant Science 165, 1333–1342.
Fedoroff, N., Furtek, D. and Nelson, O.E.
(1984) Cloning of the bronze locus in
maize by a simple and generalizable
procedure using the transposable element Activator (Ac). Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
81, 3825–3829.
Feldbrügge, M., Sprenger, M., Hahlbrock,
K. and Weisshaar, B. (1997) PcMYB1,
a novel plant protein containing a
DNA-binding domain with one MYB
repeat, interacts in vivo with a light
regulatory promoter unit. Plant Journal 11, 1079–1093.
Ferrario, S., Immink, R.G., Shchennikova, A., Busscher-Lange, J. and
Angenent, G.C. (2003) The MADS
box gene FBP2 is required for SEPALLATA function in petunia. Plant Cell
15, 914–925.
Firoozabady, E., Moy, Y., Courtney-Gutterson, N. and Robinson, K. (1994)
Regeneration of transgenic rose (Rosa
hybrida) plants from embryogenic tissue. Biotechnology 12, 609–613.
Fischer, R., Budde, I. and Hain, R. (1997)
Stilbene synthase gene expression
causes changes in flower colour and
male sterility in tobacco. Plant Journal
11, 489–498.
Ford, C.M., Boss, P.K. and Høj, P.B.
(1998) Cloning and characterization
of Vitis vinifera UDP-glucose:flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase, a homologue of the enzyme encoded by the
maize Bronze-1 locus that may primarily serve to glucosylate anthocyanidins
in vivo. Journal of Biological Chemistry 273, 9224–9233.
Forkmann, G. and Heller, W. (1999) Biosynthesis of flavonoids. In: Sankawa,
U. (ed.) Comprehensive Natural Products Chemistry, Vol. 1: Polyketides

224

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
and Other Secondary Metabolites
Including Fatty Acids and their
Derivatives. Elsevier, Oxford, UK,
pp. 713–748.
Fraser, P.D. and Bramley, P.M. (2004)
The biosynthesis and nutritional uses
of carotenoids. Progress in Lipid Research 43, 228–265.
Fraser, P.D., Kiano, J.W., Truesdale, M.R.,
Schuch, W. and Bramley, P.M. (1999)
Phytoene synthase-2 enzyme activity in
tomato does not contribute to carotenoid synthesis in ripening fruit. Plant
Molecular Biology 40, 687–698.
Fraser, P.D., Römer, S., Kiano, J.W.,
Shipton, C.A., Mills, P.B., Drake, R.,
Schuch, W. and Bramley, P.M. (2001)
Elevation of carotenoids in tomato by
genetic manipulation. Journal of the
Science of Food and Agriculture 81,
822–827.
Fraser, P.D., Römer, S., Shipton, C.A.,
Mills, P.B., Kiano, J.W., Misawa, N.,
Drake, R.G., Schuch, W. and Bramley,
P.M. (2002) Evaluation of transgenic
tomato plants expressing an additional
phytoene synthase in a fruit-specific
manner. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 99,
1092–1097.
Fray, R.G., Wallace, A., Fraser, P.D.,
Valero, D., Hedden, P., Bramley,
P.M. and Grierson, D. (1995) Constitutive expression of a fruit phytoene
synthase gene in transgenic tomatoes
causes dwarfism by redirecting metabolites from the gibberellin pathway.
Plant Journal 8, 693–701.
Fujiwara, H., Tanaka, Y., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., Fukuchi-Mizutani, M.,
Nakao, M., Fukui, Y., Yamaguchi, M.,
Ashikari, T. and Kusumi, T. (1998)
cDNA cloning, gene expression and
subcellular localization of anthocyanin
5-aromatic acyltransferase from Gentiana triflora. Plant Journal 16, 421–
431.
Fukada-Tanaka, S., Inagaki, Y., Yamaguchi, T., Saito, N. and Iida, S. (2000)
Colour-enhancing protein in blue
petals. Nature 407, 581.

Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Okuhara, H.,
Fukui, Y., Nakao, M., Katsumoto, Y.,
Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., Kusumi, T.,
Hase, T. and Tanaka, Y. (2003)
Biochemical and molecular characterization of a novel UDP-glucose:anthocyanin 3’-O-glucosyltransferase, a key
enzyme for blue anthocyanin biosynthesis, from gentian. Plant Physiology
132, 1652–1663.
Fukui, Y., Tanaka, Y., Kusumi, T., Iwashita, T. and Nomoto, K. (2003) A
rationale for the shift in colour towards
blue in transgenic carnation flowers expressing the flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylase gene. Phytochemistry 63, 15–23.
Fukusaki, E., Kawasaki, K., Kajiyama, S.,
An, C.I., Suzuki, K., Tanaka, Y. and
Kobayashi, A. (2004) Flower color
modulations of Torenia hybrida by
downregulation of chalcone synthase
genes with RNA interference. Journal
of Biotechnology 111, 229–240.
Gill, G. and Ptashne, M. (1988) Negative
effect of the transcriptional activator
GAL4. Nature 334, 721–724.
Goff, S.A., Cone, K.C. and Chandler,
V.L. (1992) Functional analysis of the
transcriptional activator encoded by
the maize B gene: evidence for a direct
functional interaction between two
classes of regulatory proteins. Genes
& Development 6, 864–875.
Goldsbrough, A., Tong, Y. and Yoder, J.I.
(1996) Lc as a non-destructive visual
reporter and transposition excision
marker gene for tomato. Plant Journal 9, 927–933.
Gong, Z.Z., Yamagishi, E., Yamazaki, M.
and Saito, K. (1999) A constitutively
expressed Myc-like gene involved in
anthocyanin biosynthesis from Perilla
frutescens: molecular characterization,
heterologous expression in transgenic
plants and transactivation in yeast cells.
Plant Molecular Biology 41, 33–44.
Goodman, C.D., Casati, P. and Walbot,
V. (2004) A multidrug resistance-associated protein involved in anthocyanin
transport in Zea mays. Plant Cell 16,
1812–1826.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
Goodwin, T.W. (1976) Distribution of
carotenoids. In: Goodwin, T.W. (ed.)
Chemistry and Biochemistry of
Plant Pigments, Vol. 1. Academic
Press, London, pp. 225–261.
Goto, T. and Kondo, T. (1991) Structure
and molecular stacking of anthocyanins – flower color variation. Angewandte Chemie – International
Edition in English 30, 17–33.
Götz, T., Sandmann, G. and Romer, S.
(2002) Expression of a bacterial carotene hydroxylase gene (crtZ) enhances
UV tolerance in tobacco. Plant Molecular Biology 50, 129–142.
Grotewold, E., Chamberlin, M., Snook,
M., Siame, B., Butler, L., Swenson,
J., Maddock, S., St Clair, G. and
Bowen, B. (1998) Engineering secondary metabolism in maize cells by ectopic expression of transcription
factors. Plant Cell 10, 721–740.
Gutterson, N. (1995) Anthocyanin biosynthetic genes and their application to
flower colour modification through
sense suppression. Horticultural Science 30, 964–966.
Hardtke, C.S. and Deng, X.-W. (2000)
The cell biology of the COP/DET/
FUS proteins. Regulating proteolysis
in photomorphogenesis and beyond?
Plant Physiology 124, 1548–1557.
Harmer, S.L., Hogenesch, J.B., Straume,
M., Chang, H.-S., Han, B., Zhu, T.,
Wang, X., Kreps, J.A. and Kay, S.A.
(2000) Orchestrated transcription of
key pathways in Arabidopsis by the
circadian clock. Science 290, 2110–
2113.
Hattori, T., Vasil, V., Rosenkrans, L.,
Hannah, L.C., McCarty, D.R. and
Vasil, I.K. (1992) The Viviparous–1
gene and abscisic acid activate the C1
regulatory gene for anthocyanin biosynthesis during seed maturation in
maize. Genes & Development 6,
609–618.
Hemm, M.R., Rider, S.D., Ogas, J.,
Murry, D.J. and Chapple, C. (2004)
Light induces phenylpropanoid metab-

225

olism in Arabidopsis roots. Plant
Journal 38, 765–778.
Heim, M.A., Jakoby, M., Werber, M.,
Martin, C., Weisshaar, B. and Bailey,
P.C. (2003) The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor family in plants: a
genome-wide study of protein structure
and functional diversity. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 20, 735–747.
Helariutta, Y., Elomaa, P., Kotilainen, M.,
Seppanen, P. and Teeri, T.H. (1993)
Cloning of a cDNA coding for dihydroflavonol-4-reductase (DFR) and characterization of dfr expression in corrollas
of Gerbera hybrida var. Regina (Compositae). Plant Molecular Biology 22,
183–193.
Hernandez, J.M., Heine, G.F., Irani,
N.G., Feller, A., Kim, M.-G., Matulnik,
T., Chandler, V.L. and Grotewold, E.
(2004) Different mechanisms participate in the R-dependent activity of the
R2R3 MYB transcription factor C1.
Journal of Biological Chemistry
279, 48205–48213.
Hiratsu, K., Matsui, K., Koyama, T. and
Ohme-Takagi, M. (2003) Dominant repression of target genes by chimeric
repressors that include the EAR motif,
a repression domain, in Arabidopsis.
Plant Journal 34, 733–739.
Holton, T.A., Brugliera, F., Lester, D.R.,
Tanaka, Y., Hyland, C.D., Menting,
J.G.T., Lu, C.-Y., Farcy, E., Stevenson, T.W. and Cornish, E.C. (1993a)
Cloning and expression of cytochrome
P450 genes controlling flower colour.
Nature 366, 276–279.
Holton, T.A., Cornish, E.C. and Tanaka,
Y. (1993b) Cloning and expression of
flavonol synthase from Petunia
hybrida. Plant Journal 4, 1003–
1010.
Hugueney, P., Badillo, A., Chen, H-.C.,
Klein, A., Hirschberg, J., Camara, B.
and Kuntz, M. (1995) Metabolism of
cyclic carotenoids: a model for the alteration of this biosynthetic pathway in
Capsicum annuum chromoplasts.
Plant Journal 8, 417–424.

226

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
Ibrahim, R.K. and Muzac, I. (2000) The
methyltransferase gene superfamily: a
tree with multiple branches. In:
Romeo, J.T., Ibrahim, R., Varin, L.
and De Luca, V. (eds) Evolution of
Metabolic Pathways. Elsevier, Oxford,
UK, pp. 349–384.
Isaacson, T., Ronen, G., Zamir, D. and
Hirschberg, J. (2002) Cloning of tangerine from tomato reveals a carotenoid isomerase essential for the
production of beta-carotene and
xanthophylls in plants. Plant Cell 14,
333–342.
Isaacson, T., Ohad, I., Beyer, P. and
Hirschberg, J. (2004) Analysis in vitro
of the enzyme CRTISO establishes a
poly-cis-carotenoid biosynthesis pathway in plants. Plant Physiology 136,
4246–4255.
Jakoby, M., Weisshaar, B., Dröge-Laser,
W., Vicente-Carbajosa, J., Tiedemann,
J., Kroj, T. and Parcy, F. (2002) bZIP
transcription factors in Arabidopsis.
Trends in Plant Science 7, 106–111.
Jenkins, G.I., Long, J.C., Wade, H.K.,
Shenton, M.R. and Bibikova, T.N.
(2001) UV and blue light signalling:
pathways regulating chalcone synthase
gene expression in Arabidopsis. New
Phytologist 151, 121–131.
Jin, H., Cominelli, E., Bailey, P., Parr, A.,
Mehrtens, F., Jones, J., Tonelli, C.,
Weisshaar, B. and Martin, C. (2000)
Transcriptional
repression
by
AtMYB4 controls production of UVprotecting sunscreens in Arabidopsis.
EMBO Journal 19, 6150–6161.
Johnson, E.T., Yi, H., Shin, B., Oh, B.-J.,
Cheong, H. and Choi, G. (1999) Cymbidium hybrida dihydroflavonol 4reductase does not efficiently reduce
dihydrokaempferol to produce orange
pelargonidin-type anthocyanins. Plant
Journal 19, 81–85.
Johnson, E.T., Ryu, S., Yi, H., Shin, B.,
Cheong, H. and Choi, G. (2001) Alteration of a single amino acid changes
the substrate specificity of dihydroflavonol 4-reductase. Plant Journal 25,
325–333.

Jorgensen, R. (1995) Cosuppression,
flower color patterns, and metastable
gene expression states. Science 268,
686–691.
Jorgensen, R.A., Que, Q.D. and Napoli,
C.A. (2002) Maternally-controlled
ovule abortion results from cosuppression of dihydroflavonol-4-reductase or
flavonoid-3’,5’-hydroxylase genes in
Petunia hybrida. Functional Plant
Biology 29, 1501–1506.
Josse, E.M., Simkin, A.J., Gaffé, J.,
Labouré, A.M., Kuntz, M. and Carol,
P. (2000) A plastid terminal oxidase
associated with carotenoid desaturation
during chromoplast differentiation.
Plant Physiology 123, 1427–1436.
Joung, J.Y., Kasthuri, G.M., Park, J.Y.,
Kang, W.J. Kim, H.S., Yoon, B.S.,
Joung, H. and Jeon, J.H. (2003) An
overexpression of chalcone reductase
of Pueraria montana var. Lobata alters biosynthesis of anthocyanin and
5’-deoxyflavonoids in transgenic tobacco. Biochemistry and Biophysics
Research Communications 303,
326–331.
Kreuzaler, F., Ragg, H., Fautz, E., Kuhn,
D.N. and Hahlbrock, K. (1983) UVinduction of chalcone synthase mRNA
in cell suspension cultures of Petroselinum hortense. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
80, 2591–2593.
Kroon, J., Souer, E., de Graaff, A., Xue,
Y., Mol, J. and Koes, R. (1994) Cloning and structural analysis of the anthocyanin pigmentation locus Rt of
Petunia hybrida: characterization of
insertion sequences in two mutant alleles. Plant Journal 5, 69–80.
Kuhn, D.N., Chappell, J., Boudet, A. and
Hahlbrock, K. (1984) Induction of
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and
4-coumarate: CoA ligase mRNAs in
cultured plant cells by UV light or
fungal elicitor. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
81, 1102–1106.
Kuntz, M., Romer, S., Suire, C., Hugueney, P., Weil, J.H., Schantz, R. and

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
Camara, B. (1992) Identification of a
cDNA for the plastid-located geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase from
Capsicum annuum: correlative increase in enzyme activity and transcript
level during fruit ripening. Plant Journal 2, 25–34.
Lange, B.M., Wildung, M.R., McCaskill,
D. and Croteau, R. (1998) A family of
transketolases that directs isoprenoid
biosynthesis via a mevalonate-independent pathway. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
95, 2100–2104.
Lange, B.M. and Croteau, R. (1999) Isoprenoid biosynthesis via a mevalonateindependent pathway in plants: cloning and heterologous expression of 1deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate reductoisomerase from peppermint. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics
365, 170–174.
Lindgren, L., Ståhlberg, K.G. and
Höglund, A.-S. (2003) Seed-specific
overexpression of an endogenous
Arabidopsis phytoene synthase gene
results in delayed germination and increased levels of carotenoids, chlorophyll, and abscisic acid. Plant
Physiology 132, 779–785.
Lindsay, W.P., McAlister, F.M., Zhu, Q.,
He, X.Z., Dröge-Laser, W., Hedrick,
S., Doerner, P., Lamb, C. and Dixon,
R.A. (2002) KAP-2, a protein that
binds to the H-box in a bean chalcone
synthase promoter, is a novel plant
transcription factor with sequence
identity to the large subunit of human
Ku autoantigen. Plant Molecular Biology 49, 503–514.
Liu, D., Galli, M. and Crawford, N.M.
(2001) Engineering variegated floral
patterns in tobacco plants using the
Arabidopsis transposable element
Tag1. Plant and Cell Physiology 42,
419–423.
Lloyd, A.M., Walbot, V. and Davis, R.W
(1992) Arabidopsis and Nicotiana
anthocyanin production activated by
maize regulators R and C1. Science
258, 1773–1775.

227

Lunau, K. (2000) The ecology and evolution of visual pollen signals. Plant Systematics and Evolution 222, 89–
111.
Mann, V., Harker, M., Pecker, I. and
Hirschberg, J. (2000) Metabolic engineering of astaxanthin production in tobacco flowers. Nature Biotechnology
18, 888–892.
Marin, E., Nussaume, L., Quesada, A.,
Gonneau, M., Sotta, B., Hugueney,
P., Frey, A. and Marion-Poll, A.
(1996) Molecular identification of zeaxanthin epoxidase of Nicotiana plumbaginifolia, a gene involved in abscisic
acid biosynthesis and corresponding
to the ABA locus of Arabidopsis thaliana. EMBO Journal 15, 2331–2342.
Marles, M.A., Ray, H. and Gruber, M.Y.
(2003) New perspectives on proanthocyanidin biochemistry and molecular
regulation. Phytochemistry 64, 367–
383.
Marrs, K.A., Alfenito, M.R., Lloyd, A.M.
and Walbot, V. (1995) A glutathione Stransferase involved in vacuolar transfer encoded by the maize gene Bronze2. Nature 375, 397–400.
Martens, S. and Forkmann, G. (1999)
Cloning and expression of flavone
synthase II from Gerbera hybrids.
Plant Journal 20, 611–618.
Martens, S., Forkmann, G., Matern, U.
and Lukacin, R. (2001) Cloning of
parsley flavone synthase I. Phytochemistry 58, 43–46.
Martin, C. and Gerats, T. (1993) The control of flower coloration. In: Jordan,
B.R. (ed.) The Molecular Biology of
Flowering. CAB International, Wallingford, UK, pp. 219–256.
Martin, C., Carpenter, R., Sommer, H.,
Saedler, H. and Coen, E.S. (1985) Molecular analysis of instability in flower
pigmentation of Antirrhinum majus,
following isolation of the pallida locus
by transposon tagging. EMBO Journal
4, 1625–1630.
Martin, C., Prescott, A., Mackay, S., Bartlett, J. and Vrijlandt, E. (1991) Control
of anthocyanin biosynthesis in flowers

228

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
of Antirrhinum majus. Plant Journal
1, 37–49.
Martin, C., Jin, H. and Schwinn, K.
(2001) Mechanisms and applications
of transcriptional control of phenylpropanoid metabolism. In: Romeo, J.T.,
Saunders, J.A. and Matthews, B.F.
(eds) Regulation of Phytochemicals
by Molecular Techniques. Elsevier,
Oxford, UK, pp. 155–170.
Mathews, H., Clendennen, S.K., Caldwell, C.G., Liu, X.L., Connors, K.,
Matheis, N., Schuster, D.K., Menasco,
D.J., Wagoner, W., Lightner, J. and
Wagner, D.R. (2003) Activation tagging in tomato identifies a transcriptional regulator of anthocyanin
biosynthesis, modification, and transport. Plant Cell 15, 1689–1703.
Matsui, K., Tanaka, H. and Ohme-Takagi,
M. (2004) Suppression of the biosynthesis of proanthocyanidin in Arabidopsis by a chimeric PAP1 repressor.
Plant Biotechnology Journal 2, 487–
493.
McCarty, D.R., Hattori, T., Carson, C.B.,
Vasil, V., Lazar, M. and Vasil, I.K.
(1991) The Viviparous-1 developmental gene of maize encodes a novel transcriptional activator. Cell 66, 895–
905.
Mehdy, M.C. and Lamb, C.J. (1987)
Chalcone isomerase cDNA cloning
and mRNA induction by elicitor,
wounding and infection. EMBO Journal 6, 1527–1533.
Meng, X. and Wang, X. (2004) Regulation
of flower development and anthocyanin accumulation in Gerbera hybrida.
Journal of Horticultural Science and
Biotechnology 79, 131–137
Menkens, A.E., Schindler, U. and Cashmore, A.R. (1995) The G-box: a ubiquitous regulatory DNA element in
plants bound by the GBF family of
bZIP proteins. Trends in Biochemical
Science 20, 506–510.
Menssen, A., Hohmann, S., Martin, W.,
Schnable, P.S., Peterson, P.A., Saedler, H. and Gierl, A. (1990) The En/
Spm transposable element of Zea

mays contains splice sites at the termini
generating a novel intron from a dSpm
element in the A2 gene. EMBO Journal 9, 3051–3057.
Meyer, P., Heidmann, I., Forkmann, G.
and Saedler, H. (1987) A new petunia
flower colour generated by transformation of a mutant with a maize gene.
Nature 330, 677–678.
Mercuri, A., Sacchetti, A., De Benedetti,
L., Schiva, T. and Alberti, S. (2001)
Green fluorescent flowers. Plant Science 161, 961–968.
Miller, K.D., Strommer, J. and Taylor,
L.P. (2002) Conservation in divergent
solanaceous species of the unique gene
structure and enzyme activity of a
gametophytically-expressed flavonol
3-O-galactosyltransferase. Plant Molecular Biology 48, 233–242.
Misawa, N., Masamoto, K., Hori, T.,
Ohtani, T., Boger, P. and Sandmann,
G. (1994) Expression of an Erwinia
phytoene desaturase gene not only
confers multiple resistance to herbicides interfering with carotenoid biosynthesis but also alters xanthophyll
metabolism in transgenic plants. Plant
Journal 6, 481–489.
Mizutani, M., Ward, E., DiMaio, J., Ohta,
D., Ryals, J. and Sato, R. (1993) Molecular cloning and sequencing of a
cDNA encoding mung bean cytochrome P450 (P450C4H) possessing
cinnamate 4-hydroxylase activity. Biochemistry and Biophysics Research
Communications 190, 875–880.
Moehs, C.P., Tian, L., Osteryoung, K.W.
and DellaPenna, D. (2001) Analysis of
carotenoid biosynthetic gene expression during marigold petal development. Plant Molecular Biology 45,
281–293.
Mooney, M., Desnos, T., Harrison, K.,
Jones, J., Carpenter, R. and Coen, E.
(1995) Altered regulation of tomato
and tobacco pigmentation genes
caused by the delila gene of Antirrhinum. Plant Journal 7, 333–339.
Mori, S., Kobayashi, H., Hoshi, Y.,
Kondo, M. and Nakano, M. (2004)

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
Heterologous expression of the flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylase gene of Vinca
major alters flower color in transgenic
Petunia hybrida. Plant Cell Reports
22, 415–421.
Moyano, E., Martinez-Garcia, J.F. and
Martin, C. (1996) Apparent redundancy in myb gene function provides
gearing for the control of flavonoid biosynthesis in Antirrhinum flowers.
Plant Cell 8, 1519–1532.
Mueller, L.A., Hinz, U., Uze, M., Sautter,
C. and Zrÿd, J.P. (1997) Biochemical
complementation of the betalain
biosynthetic pathway in Portulaca
grandiflora by a fungal 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine dioxygenase. Planta
203, 260–263.
Mueller, L.A., Goodman, C.D., Silady,
R.A. and Walbot, V. (2000) AN9, a
petunia glutathione S-transferase required for anthocyanin sequestration,
is a flavonoid-binding protein. Plant
Physiology 123, 1561–1570.
Naik, P.S., Chanemougasoundharam, A.,
Paul Khurana, S.M. and Kalloo, G.
(2003) Genetic manipulation of carotenoid pathway in higher plants. Current Science 85, 1423–1430.
Nakayama, T., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K.,
Sato, T., Kikuchi, S., Fukui, Y., Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Ueda, T., Nakao, M.,
Tanaka, Y., Kusumi, T. and Nishino,
T. (2000) Aureusidin synthase: a polyphenol oxidase homolog responsible
for flower coloration. Science 290,
1163–1166.
Nakayama, T., Sato, T., Fukui, Y., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., Hayashi, H.,
Tanaka, Y., Kusumi, T. and Nishino,
T. (2001) Specificity analysis and
mechanism of aurone synthesis catalyzed by aureusidin synthase, a polyphenol oxidase homolog responsible
for flower coloration. FEBS Letters
499, 107–111.
Nakayama, T., Suzuki, H. and Nishino, T.
(2003) Anthocyanin acyltransferases:
specificities, mechanism, phylogenetics, and applications. Journal of
Molecular Catalysis 23, 117–132.

229

Napoli, C., Lemieux, C. and Jorgensen,
R. (1990) Introduction of a chimeric
chalcone synthase gene into Petunia
results in reversible co-suppression of
homologous genes in trans. Plant
Cell 2, 279–289.
Nielsen, K.M., Deroles, S.C., Markham,
K.R., Bradley, J.M., Podivinsky, E.
and Manson, D. (2002) Antisense flavonol synthase alters copigmentation
and flower color in lisianthus. Molecular Breeding 9, 217–229.
Nielsen, K.M., Lewis, D.H. and Morgan,
E.R. (2003) Characterization of carotenoid pigments and their biosynthesis
in two yellow flowered lines of Sandersonia aurantiaca (Hook). Euphytica
130, 25–34.
Nishihara, M., Nakatsuka, T., Mishiba, K.,
Kikuchi, A. and Yamamura, S. (2003)
Flower color modification by suppression of chalcone synthase gene in gentian.
Plant
Cell
Physiology
44(Suppl.1), 59.
Noda, N., Kato, N., Kogawa, K., Kazuma,
K. and Suzuki, M. (2004) Cloning and
characterization of the gene encoding
anthocyanin 3’,5’-O-glucosyltransferase involved in ternatin biosynthesis
from blue petals of butterfly pea (Clitoria ternatea). Plant Cell Physiology
45(Suppl.1), 32.
Okinaka, Y., Shimada, Y., Nakano-Shimada, R., Ohbayashi, M., Kiyokawa,
S. and Kikuchi, Y. (2003) Selective accumulation of delphinidin derivatives in
tobacco using a putative flavonoid
3’,5’-hydroxylase cDNA from Campanula medium. BioScience, Biotechnology and Biochemistry 67,
161–165.
Ono, E., Mizutani, M., Nakamura, N.,
Fukui, Y., Sakaibara, K., Nakayama,
T., Yamaguchi, M., Kusumi, T. and
Tanaka, Y. (2005) Molecular breeding
of yellow flowers by expressing chalcone 4’-glucosyltransfease and aureusidin synthase genes. Plant Cell
Physiology 46(Suppl.), 53.
O’Reilly, C., Sheperd, N., Pereira, A.,
Schwarz-Somer, Z., Bertram, I.,

230

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
Robertson, D.S., Peterson, P.A. and
Saedler, H. (1985) Molecular cloning
of the A1 locus of Zea mays using the
transposable elements En and Mu1.
EMBO Journal 4, 877–882.
Pairoba, C.F. and Walbot, V. (2003)
Post-transcriptional regulation of expression of the Bronze2 gene of Zea
mays L. Plant Molecular Biology 53,
75–86.
Park, H., Kreunen, S.S., Cuttriss, A.J.,
DellaPenna, D. and Pogson, B.J.
(2002) Identification of the carotenoid
isomerase provides insight into carotenoid biosynthesis, prolamellar body
formation, and photomorphogenesis.
Plant Cell 14, 321–332.
Park, K.-I., Choi, J.-D., Hoshino, A., Morita, Y. and Iida, S. (2004) An intragenic
tandem duplication in a transcriptional
regulatory gene for anthocyanin biosynthesis confers pale-colored flowers
and seeds with fine spots in Ipomoea
tricolor. Plant Journal 38, 840–849.
Park, S.Y. and Kim, Y. (2000) The expression of egg plant flavonoid 3’,5’hydroxylase gene in tobacco plants (Nicotiana tabacum cv. Xanthi). Journal
of Plant Biotechnology 2, 25–28.
Paxton, R.J. and Tengo, J. (2001) Doubly
duped males: the sweet and sour of the
orchid’s bouquet. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution 16, 167–169.
Paz-Ares, J., Peterson, P.A. and Saedler,
H. (1990) Molecular analysis of the
C1-I allele from Zea mays: a dominant
mutant of the regulatory C1 locus.
EMBO Journal 9, 315–321.
Petroni, K., Tonelli, C. and Paz-Ares,
J. (2002) The MYB transcription factor
family: from maize to Arabidopsis.
Maydica 47, 213–232.
Pogson, B.J. and Rissler, H.M. (2000)
Genetic manipulation of carotenoid
biosynthesis and photoprotection.
Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London Series B
355, 1395–1403.
Polashock, J.J., Griesbach, R.J., Sullivan,
R.F. and Vorsa, N. (2002) Cloning of a
cDNA encoding the cranberry dihydro-

flavonol-4-reductase (DFR) and expression in transgenic tobacco. Plant
Science 163, 241–251.
Quattrocchio, F., Wing, J.F., Leppen,
H.T.C., Mol, J.N.M. and Koes, R.E.
(1993) Regulatory genes controlling
anthocyanin pigmentation are functionally conserved among plant species
and have distinct sets of target genes.
Plant Cell 5, 1497–1512.
Quattrocchio, F., Wing, J.F., van der
Woude, K., Mol, J.N.M. and Koes, R.
(1998) Analysis of bHLH and MYBdomain proteins: species-specific regulatory differences are caused by divergent evolution of target anthocyanin
genes. Plant Journal 13, 475–488.
Quattrocchio, F., Wing, J., van der
Woude, K., Souer, E, de Vetten, N.,
Mol, J. and Koes, R. (1999) Molecular
analysis of the anthocyanin2 gene of
petunia and its role in the evolution of
flower color. Plant Cell 11, 1433–
1444.
Ralley, L., Enfissi, E.M.A., Misawa, N.,
Schuch, W., Bramley, P.M. and Fraser,
P.D. (2004) Metabolic engineering of
ketocarotenoid formation in higher
plants. Plant Journal 39, 477–486.
Ray, H., Yu, M., Auser, P., Blahut-Beatty,
L., McKersie, B., Bowley, S., Westcott,
N., Coulman, B., Lloyd, A. and Gruber, M.Y. (2003) Expression of anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins after
transformation of lucerne with maize
Lc. Plant Physiology 132, 1448–
1463.
Ray, J., Moureau, P., Bird, C., Bird, A.,
Grierson, D., Maunders, M., Truesdale, M., Bramley, P. and Schuch, W.
(1992) Cloning and characterisation of
a gene involved in phytoene synthesis
from tomato. Plant Molecular Biology
19, 401–404.
Reimold, U., Kroger, M., Kreuzaler, F.
and Hahlbrock, K. (1983) Coding and
3’ non-coding nucleotide sequence of
chalcone synthase mRNA and assignment of amino acid sequence of the
enzyme. EMBO Journal 2, 1801–
1805.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
Rissler, H.M. and Pogson, B.J. (2001)
Antisense inhibition of the beta-carotene hydroxylase enzyme in Arabidopsis and the implications for carotenoid
accumulation, photoprotection and
antenna assembly. Photosynthesis Research 67, 127–137.
Robbins, M.P., Paolocci, F., Hughes,
J.W., Turchetti, V., Allison, G.,
Arcioni, S., Morris, P. and Damiani,
F. (2003) Sn, a maize bHLH gene,
modulates anthocyanin and condensed
tannin pathways in Lotus corniculatus. Journal of Experimental Botany
54, 239–248.
Roesler, K.R., Shorrosh, B.S. and Ohlrogge, J.B. (1994) Structure and expression of an Arabidopsis acetylcoenzyme A carboxylase gene. Plant
Physiology 105, 611–617.
Römer, S., Fraser, P.D., Kiano, J.W.,
Shipton, C.A., Misawa, N., Schuch,
W. and Bramley, P.M. (2000) Elevation of the provitamin A content of
transgenic tomato plants. Nature Biotechnology 18, 666–669.
Römer, S., Lubeck, J., Kauder, F., Steiger, S., Adomat, C. and Sandmann, G.
(2002) Genetic engineering of a
zeaxanthin-rich potato by antisense
inactivation and co-suppression of
carotenoid epoxidation. Metabolic
Engineering 4, 263–272.
Ronen, G., Carmel-Goren, L., Zamir, D.
and Hirschberg, J. (2000) An alternative pathway to b-carotene formation
in plant chromoplasts discovered by
map-based cloning of Beta and oldgold color mutations in tomato. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 97, 11102–11107.
Rosati, C., Cadic, A., Duron, M., Renou,
J.P. and Simoneau, P. (1997) Molecular cloning and expression analysis of
dihydroflavonol 4-reductase gene in
flower-organs of Forsythia  intermedia. Plant Molecular Biology 35,
303–311.
Rosati, C., Aquilani, R., Dharmapuri,
S., Pallara, P., Marusic, C., Tavazza, R.,
Bouvier, F., Camara, B. and Giuliano, G.

231

(2000) Metabolic engineering of betacarotene and lycopene content in tomato
fruit. Plant Journal 24, 413–419.
Rosati, C., Simoneau, P., Treutter, D.,
Poupard, P., Cadot, Y., Cadic, A. and
Duron, M. (2003) Engineering of
flower colour in forsythia by expression
of two independently transformed
dihydroflavonol 4-reductase and anthocyanidin synthase genes of flavonoid
pathway. Molecular Breeding 12,
197–208.
Sablowski, R.W.M., Moyano, E., Culianez-Macia, F.A., Schuch, W., Martin,
C. and Bevan, M. (1994) A flower-specific Myb protein activates transcription
of
phenylpropanoid
biosynthetic
genes. EMBO Journal 13, 128–137.
Sainz, M.B., Grotewold, E. and Chandler,
V.L. (1997) Evidence for direct activation of an anthocyanin promoter by
the maize C1 protein and comparison
of DNA binding by related Myb
domain proteins. Plant Cell 9, 611–
625.
Saito, K. and Yamazaki, M. (2002) Biochemistry and molecular biology of the
late-stage of biosynthesis of anthocyanin: lessons from Perilla frutescens as
a model plant. New Phytologist 155,
9–23.
Sasaki, N., Adachi, T., Koda, T. and
Ozeki, Y. (2004) Detection of UDPglucose:cyclo-DOPA
5-O-glucosyltransferase activity in four o’clocks
(Mirabilis jalapa L.). FEBS Letters
568, 159–162.
Schledz, M., Al-Babili, S., Von Lintig, J.,
Haubruck, H., Rabbani, S., Kleinig, H.
and Beyer, P. (1996) Phytoene
synthase from Narcissus pseudonarcissus: functional expression, galactolipid
requirement,
topological
distribution in chromoplasts and induction during flowering. Plant Journal
10, 781–792.
Schijlen, E.G.W.M., de Vos, C.H.R., van
Tunen, A.J. and Bovy, A.G. (2004)
Modification of flavonoid biosynthesis
in crop plants. Phytochemistry 65,
2631–2648.

232

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
Schliemann, W., Kobayashi, N. and
Strack, D. (1999) The decisive step in
betaxanthin biosynthesis is a spontaneous reaction. Plant Physiology 119,
1217–1232.
Schwechheimer, C. and Deng, X.W.
(2001) COP9 signalosome revisited: a
novel mediator of protein degradation.
Trends in Cell Biology 11, 420–426.
Schwender, J., Muller, C., Zeidler, J. and
Lichtenthaler, H.K. (1999) Cloning
and heterologous expression of a
cDNA encoding 1-deoxy-D-xylulose5-phosphate reductoisomerase of Arabidopsis thaliana. FEBS Letters 455,
140–144.
Schwinn, K.E. and Davies, K.M. (2004)
Flavonoids. In: Davies, K. (ed.) Plant
Pigments and their Manipulation.
Blackwell, Oxford, UK, pp. 92–149.
Schwinn, K.E., Markham, K.R. and
Given, N.K. (1994) Floral flavonoids
and the potential for pelargonidin biosynthesis in commercial chrysanthemum cultivars. Phytochemistry 35,
145–150.
Schwinn, K.E., Davies, K.M., Deroles,
S.C., Markham, K., Miller, R.M., Bradley, M., Manson, D.G. and Given, N.K.
(1997) Expression of an Antirrhinum
majus UDP-glucose:flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase transgene alters flavonoid glycosylation and acylation in
lisianthus (Eustoma grandiflorum
Grise.). Plant Science 125, 53–61.
Schwinn, K., Alm, V., Mackay, S., Davies,
K. and Martin, C. (2001) Regulation of
anthocyanin biosynthesis in Antirrhinum. Acta Horticulturae 560,
201–206.
Shewmaker, C.K., Sheehy, J.A., Daley,
M., Colburn, S. and Ke, D.Y. (1999)
Seed-specific overexpression of phytoene synthase: increase in carotenoids
and other metabolic effects. Plant
Journal 20, 401–412.
Shimada, Y., Nakano-Shimada, R.,
Ohbayashi, M., Okinaka, Y., Kiyokawa, S. and Kikuchi, Y. (1999) Expression of chimeric P450 genes
encoding flavonoid-3’,5’-hydroxylase

in transgenic tobacco and petunia
plants. FEBS Letters 461, 241–245.
Shimada, Y., Ohbayashi, M., Nakano-Shimada, R., Okinaka, Y., Kiyokawa, S.
and Kikuchi, Y. (2001) Genetic engineering of the anthocyanin biosynthetic
pathway with flavonoid-3’,5’-hydroxylase: specific switching of the pathway
in petunia. Plant Cell Reports 20,
456–462.
Shorrosh, B.S., Dixon, R.A. and Ohlrogge, J.B. (1994) Molecular cloning,
characterization, and elicitation of
acetyl-CoA carboxylase from lucerne.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 91, 4323–
4327.
Simpson, K.L., Lee, T.-C., Rodriguez,
D.B. and Chichester, C.O. (1976)
Metabolism in senescent and stored
tissues. In: Goodwin, T.W. (ed.) Chemistry and Biochemistry of Plant Pigments, Vol. 1. Academic Press,
London, pp. 780–842.
Solano, R., Nieto, C., Avila, J., Canas, L.,
Diaz, I. and Paz-Ares, J. (1995) Dual
DNA binding specificity of a petal epidermis-specific MYB transcription factor (MYB.Ph3) from Petunia hybrida.
EMBO Journal 14, 1773–1784.
Sompornpailin, K., Makita, Y., Yamazaki,
M. and Saito, K. (2002) A WD-repeatcontaining putative regulatory protein
in anthocyanin biosynthesis in Perilla
frutescens. Plant Molecular Biology
50, 485–495.
Spelt, C., Quattrocchio, F., Mol, J.N.M.
and Koes, R. (2000) Anthocyanin1 of
petunia encodes a basic helix-loophelix protein that directly activates
transcription of structural anthocyanin
genes. Plant Cell 12, 1619–1631.
Spelt, C., Quattrocchio, F., Mol, J. and
Koes, R. (2002) ANTHOCYANIN1 of
petunia controls pigment synthesis,
vacuolar pH, and seed coat development by genetically distinct mechanisms. Plant Cell 14, 2121–2135.
Springob, K., Nakajima, J., Yamazaki, M.
and Saito, K. (2003) Recent advances
in the biosynthesis and accumulation of

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
anthocyanins. Natural Products Reports 20, 288–233.
Staiger, D. (2002) Circadian rhythms in
Arabidopsis: time for nuclear proteins.
Planta 214, 334–344.
Stålberg, K., Lindgren, O., Ek, B. and
Höglund, A.S. (2003) Synthesis of
ketocarotenoids in the seed of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal 36,
771–779.
Strack, D., Vogt, T. and Schliemann, W.
(2003) Recent advances in betalain research. Phytochemistry 62, 247–
269.
Sugimoto, K., Takeda, S. and Hirochika,
H. (2000) MYB-related transcription
factor NtMYB2 induced by wounding
and elicitors is a regulator of the tobacco retrotransposon Tto1 and defense-related genes. Plant Cell 12,
2511–2528.
Sun, Z.R., Gantt, E. and Cunningham,
F.X. (1996) Cloning and functional analysis of the beta-carotene hydroxylase
of Arabidopsis thaliana. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 271, 24349–
24352.
Suzuki, H., Nakayama, T., YonekuraSakakibara, K., Fukui, Y., Nakamura,
N., Nakao, N., Tanaka, Y., Yamaguchi, M., Kusumi, T. and Nishino, T.
(2001)
Malonyl-CoA:anthocyanin
5-O-glucoside-6’’’-O-malonyltransferase from scarlet sage (Salvia splendens) flowers. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 276, 49013–49019.
Suzuki, H., Nakayama, T., YonekuraSakakibara, K., Fukui, Y., Nakamura,
N., Yamaguchi, M., Tanaka, Y.,
Kusumi, T. and Nishino, T. (2002)
cDNA cloning, heterologous expressions, and functional characterization
of malonyl-coenzyme A:anthocyanidin
3-O-glucoside-6’’-O-malonyltransferase from dahlia flowers. Plant Physiology 130, 2142–2151.
Suzuki, H., Sawada, K., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., Nakayama, T., Yamaguchi,
M.-A. and Nishino, T. (2003) Identification of a cDNA encoding malonylcoenzyme A:anthocyanidin 3-O-gluco-

233

side-6’’-O-malonyltransferase from cineraria (Senecio cruentus) flowers.
Plant Biotechnology 20, 229–234.
Suzuki, H., Nakayama, T., Yamaguchi,
M.-A. and Nishino, T. (2004a) cDNA
cloning and characterization of two
Dendranthema  morifolium anthocyanin malonyltransferases with different functional activities. Plant Science
166, 89–96.
Suzuki, H., Sawada, S., Watanabe, K.,
Nagae, S., Yamaguchi, M., Nakayama,
T. and Nishino, T. (2004b) Identification and characterization of a novel
anthocyanin malonyltransferase from
scarlet sage (Salvia splendens) flowers:
an enzyme that is phylogenetically separated from other anthocyanin acyltransferases. Plant Journal 38, 994–
1003.
Suzuki, K., Xue, H., Tanaka, Y., Fukui,
Y., Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Katsumoto,
Y., Tsuda, S. and Kusumi, T. (2000)
Flower color modifications of Torenia
hybrida by cosuppression of anthocyanin biosynthesis genes. Molecular
Breeding 6, 239–246.
Szymanski, D.B., Lloyd, A.M. and Marks,
M.D. (2000) Progress in the molecular
genetic analysis of trichome initiation
and morphogenesis in Arabidopsis.
Trends in Plant Science 5, 214–219.
Tamagnone, L., Merida, A., Parr, A.,
Mackay, S., Culianez-Macia, F.A.,
Roberts, K. and Martin, C. (1998)
The AmMYB308 and AmMYB330
transcription factors from Antirrhinum regulate phenylpropanoid and
lipid biosynthesis in transgenic tobacco. Plant Cell 10, 135–154.
Tanaka, Y., Fukui, Y., Fukuchi-Mizutani,
M., Holton, T.A., Higgins, E. and
Kusumi, T. (1995) Molecular cloning
and characterization of Rosa hybrida
dihydroflavonol 4-reductase gene.
Plant and Cell Physiology 36,
1023–1031.
Tanaka, Y., Katsumoto, Y., Brugliera, F.
and Mason, J. (2005) Genetic engineering in floriculture. Plant, Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture 80, 1–24.

234

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
Tanner, G.J. (2004) Condensed tannins.
In: Davies, K.M. (ed.) Plant Pigments
and their Manipulation. Annual Plant
Reviews, Sheffield Academic Press,
Sheffield, UK, pp. 150–184.
Taylor, L.P. and Jorgensen, R. (1992)
Conditional male fertility in chalcone
synthase-deficient petunia. Journal of
Heredity 83, 11–17.
Teutsch, H.G., Hasenfratz, M.P., Lesot,
A., Stoltz, C., Garnier, J.M., Jeltsch,
J.M., Durst, F. and Werck-Reichhart,
D. (1993) Isolation and sequence of a
cDNA encoding the Jerusalem artichoke cinnamate 4-hydroxylase, a
major plant cytochrome P450 involved
in the general phenylpropanoid pathway. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 90,
4102–4106.
Tian, L., Musetti, V., Kim, J., MagallanesLundback, M. and DellaPenna, D.
(2004) The Arabidopsis LUT1 locus
encodes a member of the cytochrome
P450 family that is required for carotenoid epsilon-ring hydroxylation activity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 101,
402–407.
Ueyama, Y., Suzuki, K., Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Fukui, Y., Miyazaki, K.,
Ohkawa, H., Kusumi, T. and Tanaka,
Y. (2002) Molecular and biochemical
characterization of torenia flavonoid
3’-hydroxylase and flavone synthase II
and modification of flower color by
modulating the expression of these
genes. Plant Science 163, 253–263.
Ulm, R., Baumann, A., Oravecz, A.,
Mate, Z., Adam, E., Oakeley, E.J.,
Schafer, E. and Nagy, F. (2004) Genome-wide analysis of gene expression
reveals function of the bZIP transcription factor HY5 in the UV-B response
of Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
101, 1397–1402.
van der Krol, A.R., Lenting, P.E., Veenstra, J.G., van der Meer, I.M., Koes,
R.E., Gerats, A.G.M., Mol, J.N.M.
and Stuitje, A.R. (1988) An antisense

chalcone synthase gene in transgenic
plants inhibits flower pigmentation.
Nature 333, 866–869.
van der Krol, A.R., Mur, L.A., Beld, M.,
Mol, J.N.M. and Stuitje, A.R. (1990)
Flavonoid genes in petunia: addition
of a limited number of additional
copies may lead to a suppression
of gene activity. Plant Cell 2, 291–
299.
van Nocker, S. and Ludwig, P. (2003) The
WD-repeat protein superfamily in Arabidopsis: conservation and divergence in
structure and function. BMC Genomics
4, 50 (http://www.biomedcentral.com/
1471–2164/4/50).
Verhoeven, A.S., Bugos, R.C. and Yamamoto, H.Y. (2001) Transgenic tobacco
with suppressed zeaxanthin formation
is susceptible to stress-induced photoinhibition. Photosynthesis Research
67, 27–39.
Vishnevetsky, M., Ovadis, M., Itzhaki, H.
and Vainstein, A. (1997) CHRC, encoding a chromoplast-specific carotenoid-associated protein, is an early
gibberellic acid-responsive gene. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 272,
24747–24750.
Vishnevetsky, M., Ovadis, M. and Vainstein, A. (1999a) Carotenoid sequestration in plants: the role of
carotenoid-associated proteins. Trends
in Plant Science 4, 232–235.
Vishnevetsky, M., Ovadis, M., Zuker, A.
and Vainstein, A. (1999b) Molecular
mechanisms underlying carotenogenesis in the chromoplast: multilevel
regulation of carotenoid-associated
genes. Plant Journal 20, 423–431.
Vogt, T. (2000) Glycosyltransferases involved in plant secondary metabolism.
In: Romeo, J.T., Ibrahim, R., Varin, L.
and De Luca, V. (eds) Evolution of
Metabolic Pathways. Elsevier, Oxford,
UK, pp. 317–347.
Vogt, T. (2002) Substrate specificity and
sequence analysis define a polyphyletic
origin of betanidin 5- and 6-O-glucosyltransferase from Dorotheanthus bellidiformis. Planta 214, 492–495.

Developmental Control and Biotechnology of Floral Pigmentation
Vogt, T., Grimm, R. and Strack, D.
(1999) Cloning and expression of a
cDNA encoding betanidin 5-O-glucosyltransferase, a betanidin- and flavonoid-specific enzyme with high
homology to inducible glucosyltransferases from the Solanaceae. Plant
Journal 19, 509–519.
Vom Endt, D., Kijne, J.W. and Memelink,
J. (2002) Transcription factors controlling plant secondary metabolism: what
regulates the regulators? Phytochemistry 61, 107–114.
Wagner, T., Windhövel, U. and Römer, S.
(2002) Transformation of tobacco with
a mutated cyanobacterial phytoene
desaturase gene confers resistance to
bleaching herbicides. Zeitschrift für
Naturforschung 57c, 671–679.
Wakelin, A.M., Lister, C.E. and Conner,
A.J. (2003) Inheritance and biochemistry of pollen pigmentation in California poppy (Eschscholzia californica
CHAM.). International Journal of
Plant Science 164, 867–875.
Walker, A.R., Davison, P.A., BolognesiWinfield, A.C., James, C.M., Srinivasan, N., Blundell, T.L., Esch, J.J.,
Marks, M.D. and Gray, J.C. (1999)
The TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 locus, which regulates trichome
differentiation and anthocyanin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis, encodes a
WD40 repeat protein. Plant Cell 11,
1337–1350.
Weiss, D. (2000) Regulation of flower pigmentation and growth: multiple signaling pathways control anthocyanin
synthesis in expanding petals. Physiologica Plantarum 110, 152–157.
Weiss, M.R. (1995) Floral colour change:
a widespread functional convergence.
American Journal of Botany 82,
167–185.
Weisshaar, B. and Jenkins, G.I. (1998)
Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and its
regulation. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 1, 251–257.
Welle, R., Schröder, G., Schiltz, E., Grisebach, H. and Schröder, J. (1991) Induced plant responses to pathogen

235

attack: analysis and heterologous expression of the key enzyme in the biosynthesis of phytoalexins in soybean
(Glycine max L. Merr. cv. Harosoy
63). European Journal of Biochemistry 196, 423–430.
Winefield, C.S., Lewis, D.H., Swinny,
E.E., Zhang, H., Arathoon, H.S.,
Fischer, T.C., Halbwirth, H., Stich,
K., Gosch, C., Forkmann, G. and
Davies, K.M. (2005) Investigation of
3-deoxyanthocyanin biosynthesis in
Sinningia cardinalis. Physiologia
Plantarum 124, 419–430.
Winefield, C. (2002) The final steps in
anthocyanin formation: a story of
modification and sequestration. Advances in Botanical Research 37,
55–74.
Winkel, B.S.J. (2004) Metabolic channeling in plants. Annual Review of Plant
Biology 55, 85–107.
Xie, D.-Y., Sharma, S.B., Pavia, N.L.,
Ferreira, D. and Dixon, R.A. (2003)
Role of anthocyanidin reductase,
encoded by BANYULS in plant
flavonoid biosynthesis. Science 299,
396–399.
Xie, D.-Y., Jackson, L.A., Cooper, J.D.,
Ferreira, D. and Dixon, R.A. (2004)
Molecular and biochemical analysis of
two cDNA clones encoding dihydroflavonol-4-reductase from Medicago
truncatula. Plant Physiology 134,
979–994.
Yamazaki, M., Gong, Z., Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Fukui, Y., Tanaka, Y.,
Kusumi, T. and Saito, K. (1999) Molecular cloning and biochemical characterization of a novel anthocyanin 5O-glucosyltransferase by mRNA differential display for plant forms regarding
anthocyanin. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 274, 7405–7511.
Yamazaki, M., Yamagishi, E., Gong, Z.,
Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Fukui, Y.,
Tanaka, Y., Kusumi, T., Yamaguchi,
T. and Saito, K. (2002) Two flavonoid
glucosyltransferases from Petunia
hybrida: molecular cloning, biochemical properties and developmentally

236

K. Davies and K. Schwinn
regulated expression. Plant Molecular
Biology 48, 401–411.
Yang, S., Sweetman, J.P., Amirsadeghi,
S., Barghchi, M., Huttly, A.K., Chung,
W.I. and Twell, D. (2001) Novel anther-specific myb genes from tobacco
as putative regulators of phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase expression. Plant
Physiology 126, 1738–1753.
Ye, X.D., Al-Babili, S., Kloti, A., Zhang,
J., Lucca, P., Beyer, P. and Potrykus, I.
(2000) Engineering the provitamin A
(beta-carotene) biosynthetic pathway
into (carotenoid-free) rice endosperm.
Science 287, 303–305.
Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., Tanaka, Y.,
Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., Fujiwara, H.,
Fukui, Y., Ashikari, T., Murakami, Y.,
Yamaguchi, M. and Kusumi, T. (2000)
Molecular and biochemical characterization of a novel hydroxycinnamoylCoA: anthocyanin 3-O-glucoside-6’’O-acyltransferase
from
Perilla
frutescens. Plant and Cell Physiology
41, 495–502.
Yu, L.M., Lamb, C.J. and Dixon, R.A.
(1993) Purification and biochemical
characterization of proteins which
bind to the H-box cis-element implicated in transcriptional activation of
plant defense genes. Plant Journal 3,
805–816.
Yu, O., Shi, J., Hession, A.O., Maxwell,
C.A., McGonigle, B. and Odell, J.T.
(2003) Metabolic engineering to increase isoflavone biosynthesis in soybean seed. Phytochemistry 63,
753–763.
Zhang, P.F., Wang, Y.B., Zhang, J.B.,
Maddock, S., Snook, M. and Peterson,

T. (2003) A maize QTL for silk maysin
levels contains duplicated Myb-homologous genes which jointly regulate
flavone biosynthesis. Plant Molecular
Biology 52, 1–15.
Zhu, C.F., Yamamura, S., Koiwa, H.,
Nishihara, M. and Sandmann, G.
(2002) cDNA cloning and expression
of carotenogenic genes during flower
development in Gentiana lutea.
Plant Molecular Biology 48, 277–
285.
Zhu, C.F., Yamamura, S., Nishihara, M.,
Koiwa, H. and Sandmann, G. (2003)
cDNAs for the synthesis of cyclic carotenoids in petals of Gentiana lutea and
their regulation during flower development. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
– Gene Structure and Expression
1625, 305–308.
Zachgo, S., de Andrade Silva, E., Motte,
P., Tröbner, W., Saedler, H. and
Schwarz-Sommer, Z. (1995) Functional analysis of the Antirrhinum
floral homeotic DEFICIENS gene
in vivo and in vitro by using a temperature-sensitive mutant. Development
121, 2861–2875.
Zrÿd, J-.P. and Christinet, L. (2004) Betalains. In: Davies, K. (ed.) Plant Pigments and their Manipulation.
Blackwell, Oxford, UK, pp. 185–213.
Zuker, A., Tzfira, T., Ben-Meir, H.,
Ovadis, M., Schklarman, E., Itzhaki,
H., Forkmann, G., Martens, S., NetaSharir, I., Weiss, D. and Vainstein, A.
(2002) Modification of flower colour
and fragrance by antisense suppression
of the flavanone 3-hydroxylase gene.
Molecular Breeding 9, 33–41.

9

Biotechnology of Floral Development
C. WINEFIELD AND B.R. JORDAN
Cell Biology Group, Agriculture and Life Sciences Division, Lincoln University,
PO Box 84, Lincoln, Canterbury, New Zealand

Introduction
The understanding of floral development at a molecular level has proceeded at an
unprecedented rate (see Jordan, 1993, for reviews of progress early last decade).
Molecular genetic studies on two model plants, Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis in
particular, have provided the foundation for this progress through the initial
identification of genes involved in flowering (see below). Recent efforts at elucidating the regulatory networks controlling the transition to flowering in the
model plant Arabidopsis have identified over 80 independent loci, which have
important roles in the control of flowering in this species (Henderson and Dean,
2004). An even larger number of genes has been discovered controlling events
downstream of floral initiation. This extensive compliment of genes also forms
very complicated regulatory networks that integrate environmental and developmental mechanisms to coordinate the reproductive process. There have been
many excellent review articles published recently, including those found in this
volume, that provide an in-depth study of those genes involved in floral timing
and floral organogenesis (Zik and Irish, 2003; Boss et al., 2004; Buzgo et al.,
2004; Henderson and Dean, 2004; Komeda, 2004). The reader is encouraged
to seek these out in order to appreciate the complexity inherent in the control of
this vitally important developmental process.
Many agriculturally important crops have had flowering and plant architectural phenotypes selected as part of ongoing domestication programmes.
Selection of appropriate flowering time, floral, fruit and plant architecture has
been a focus for many breeding programmes. Coincidently, many significant
plant traits have arisen through fortuitous mutations that have been identified
and selected for, in these programmes. Two good examples of this are the
rapid domestication of maize, of which the modern form of this plant has
been recently shown to be due to mutations of the TEOSINTE locus (Doebley
et al., 1997; Lukens and Doebley, 2001), and the generation of a high yield
ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

237

238

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

semi-dwarf rice variety in the 1960s that has now been attributed to a mutation
in the SD-1 gene (Sasaki et al., 2002; Spielmeyer et al., 2002).
Plant reproductive development clearly occupies a central role within
agriculture. The majority of plant-based foods are floral structures and propagation of many food crops is via sexual reproduction. In addition, commercially
important plant fibres such as cotton are also derived from reproductive structures (specialized terminally differentiated trichomes on the seed coat). Furthermore, the reproductive process itself can have profound impacts on the quality
and quantities of non-floral organs as is the case in forestry (Brunner and
Nilsson, 2004). The long juvenile period prior to reproductive development,
commonly observed in many tree species, not only represents a considerable
problem for breeding programmes but can also have an impact on wood
volume and quality (Brunner and Nilsson, 2004). Overall, from the brief outline
above, it is no surprise that a large and increasing effort has been deployed to
gain a better understanding of the underlying principles and control of the
flowering and reproductive processes.
While many flowering mutants have been known for hundreds of years, the
first genes to be cloned were FLORICAULA (FLO) from Antirrhinum (Coen
et al., 1990) and LEAFY (LFY) from Arabidopsis (Weigel et al., 1992).
Mutations in these genes cause a homeotic conversion of flowers to leaf-like
structures (Weigel et al., 1992). These discoveries were rapidly followed by the
identification of the genes affected by a raft of floral homeotic mutations that
generally belong to a group of transcriptional regulators known as MADS-box
genes. This, in turn, eventually led to the formation of the ABC model of floral
development (Weigel and Meyerowitz, 1994), which has recently been modified into the quartet model of flowering (Theissen and Saedler, 2001; Ferrario
et al., 2004). The homeotic transformations caused by mutations of this sort
and the results of ectopic overexpression experiments automatically suggest
the potential for biotechnology applications capable of rapidly altering reproductive development in agriculturally important crops without the difficulties
associated with traditional breeding approaches. Although many genes involved in flowering have multiple roles both within flowering and in other
developmental processes, there are a number of attractive ‘control points’
that may be useful from a biotechnological point of view.
This chapter outlines current methodology and examples of targets for manipulating flowering (further targets for biotechnological manipulation are also
identified in other chapters). To provide a different perspective, it also discusses
flowering in trees, grapes and kiwifruit, agriculturally important crops that differ
quite markedly from the rapid-cycling habit of currently employed model systems.

Methods for Gene Discovery and Manipulation
Induced and natural mutation
Modern agri-biotechnology techniques are based on commonly used experimental techniques for gene discovery and functional analysis. These normally

Biotechnology of Floral Development

239

take the form of methods aimed at removing (or reducing) a given gene activity
or promoting a given gene activity to a very high level in an ectopic manner.
Natural variations, due to acquired mutation, or introduced mutations such as
T-DNAs or transposons are preferred methods for generating nulls in a particular gene for the analysis of function. Though this type of approach is useful
in model plant systems, the applicability in a biotechnological sense is limited.
Crops with endogenously active transposons, such as maize, can be screened
for mutations in a given gene via a reverse genetics-type approach (Meely and
Briggs, 1995). However, this approach is very labour intensive and limited to
those crops with highly active characterized transposons. In other crops the
generation of useful tagged mutant populations, either through the introduction of transposons or through random insertion of T-DNAs, is dependent on
highly efficient transformation systems. Therefore for commercial biotechnology, these approaches realistically represent a blind alley.
Recently, a reverse genetic system has been developed in Arabidopsis that
makes use of chemically mutagenized populations, bioinformatics and a PCR
screening method for identification of individual plant lines containing the
lesions of interest. This system, termed Targeting Induced Local Lesions In
Genomes (TILLING), has proved to be very useful in a wide range of plant
systems and has the potential to be used in any plant system (Henikoff et al.,
2004). The system is based on ethylmethanesulphonate (EMS)-mutagenized
populations. This mutagen predominantly produces G:C to A:T transitions.
A mutagenized population (generally M2) is grown up and individual DNA
samples taken. These samples are then pooled for later PCR analysis and
mutant identification based on a procedure using the CEL I mismatch cleavage
enzyme (Oleykowski et al., 1998). Using a set of user-friendly web-based tools,
CODDLE for finding optimal regions to be TILLed and PARSESNP for mapping and interpreting the mutations delivered, primers are designed to a
particular gene of interest (Till et al., 2003). These primers are then used to
PCR screen the pooled DNA samples from the mutagenized population and
individual plants containing lesions most likely to be deleterious to gene function identified. This method offers a number of advantages over insertional or
‘tagged’ mutagenized populations in that a range of alleles can be obtained, not
all of which will be lethal and transformation systems are not required for the
production of the mutant lines. This system is likely to prove applicable to a
wide range of crop species, many of which have already been subjected to EMS
mutagenesis as part of long-standing breeding programmes.

Gene silencing
A more favoured manipulation method is the use of antisense and
co-suppression-mediated silencing of a target gene. Over the last 3–4 years
the molecular basis underlying the ability to silence genes using these methods
has begun to be resolved, with some startling implications for gene regulation
(Carthew, 2001; Waterhouse et al., 2001; Wang and Waterhouse, 2002;
Kidner and Martienssen, 2005). The consequence of these discoveries is that

240

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

antisense and co-suppression silencing are now considered to act through
similar mechanisms termed post translational gene silencing (PTGS – in plants)
and RNA interference (RNAi) in initial work on Caenorhabditis elegans. These
mechanisms are proposed to have evolved to control the proliferation of extra
chromosomal elements such as retrotransposons and RNA viruses (BurchSmith et al., 2004). However, very recent work has indicated that the role of
this system extends to the transcriptional regulation of certain genes in plants
with a strong bias towards transcriptional regulators, some of which appear to
be involved in floral development (Reinhart et al., 2002; Carrington and
Ambros, 2003). The mechanism is triggered by the presence of doublestranded RNA species that are then cut into small 19–25 nucleotide RNAs
called small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). These siRNAs then prime the system
and target homologous sequences for degradation and in some cases interfere
with translation (Waterhouse et al., 2001; Wang and Waterhouse, 2002).
Typically, antisense constructs will place entire cDNA fragments in an antisense
orientation with respect to a strong constitutive promoter like the cauliflower
mosaic virus 35S promoter (CaMV 35S). This approach, though as effective as
the newer silencing constructs, does suffer from lack of specificity. Genes that
share significant levels of sequence-identity risk being silenced along with the
target transcript. The latest techniques place target sequences of between 200
and 300 bp that are specific for a particular sequence (i.e. do not share more
than a 21-bp stretch of sequence identity) in a head-to-head orientation with an
intron between the sequences. This construct is then expressed in plants under
control of a strong constitutive promoter that gives rise to a transcript with a
hammerhead type structure. The intron is then cleaved leaving a doublestranded RNA that then triggers the silencing machinery. This 200–300 bp
double-stranded RNA species is reduced to 21–25 bp fragments (that are
diagnostic of the correct functioning of the process in transgenic plants),
which then act on the target RNA. This technique alongside the related use
of virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) (see below) has been used to successfully
reduce gene activity for a range of genes involved in flowering, resulting in
phenotype changes that have been useful in identifying potential roles of the
targeted genes (Kapoor et al., 2002; Keck et al., 2003; Sung et al., 2003;
Byzova et al., 2004; Ehsan et al., 2004; Fornara et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2004).
VIGS makes use of the same technology but rather than using
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation to deliver the silencing construct,
the constructs are maintained and propagated throughout the plant using
viral vectors (Burch-Smith et al., 2004; Constantin et al., 2004; Liu et al.,
2004). At the present time the majority of the work using this method has been
carried out using a tobacco rattle virus-based vector system. Although this virus
has proved useful for potato, tobacco and Arabidopsis, the wider utility of this
approach for other crop plants remains to be seen. It is likely that new virus
vectors will need to be constructed to further improve the utility of this method.
One great advantage, however, is that a transformation method is not necessarily required as infection, resulting in systemic spread of the silencing vector
throughout the plant, can be carried out utilizing leaf infiltration methods
(Robertson, 2004).

Biotechnology of Floral Development

241

Spreading of silencing – methylation-induced silencing
One aspect of PTGS/ VIGS that was relatively unexpected was ‘spreading’.
This process targets non-transcribed regions of DNA acting to methylate DNA
in a sequence-specific manner (Vaistij et al., 2002; Garcia-Perez et al., 2004).
This has the potential to allow promoters or other important regulatory regions
of genes to be targeted. This method offers the potential to target combinations
of transcription factor-binding sites and thereby silence a swathe of genes
without necessarily having to target individual transcription factors. It also
allows for a greater range of gene space within which gene-specific targeting
can be achieved.
The most surprising aspect to the development of our understanding of this
area is that plants themselves make use of this system to control developmentally important processes (Jones, 2002; Carrington and Ambros, 2003). Micro
RNAs (miRNAs) are single-stranded molecules that are formed by the Dicermediated cleavage of endogenously produced stem-loop structures (Hunter and
Poethig, 2003). Over 100 miRNAs have been discovered in Arabidopsis that
are conserved in rice, maize and tobacco (Jones, 2002; Reinhart et al., 2002;
Carrington and Ambros, 2003; Kidner and Martienssen, 2005). Additional
work has identified up to another 280 miRNAs in Arabidopsis (Tang and
Zamore, 2004). The targets of these miRNAs have not all been discovered
but, of those that have, a disproportionate number appear to target transcriptional regulators involved with controlling aspects of plant development (Kidner
and Martienssen, 2005). This in turn leads to the intriguing possibility that we
might be able to use this information to control aspects of flowering (Aukerman
and Sakai, 2003; Achard et al., 2004; Peragine et al., 2004).

Cell ablation
For a number of applications, especially in the forestry context, complete
prevention of flowering is a desirable trait (Martin-Trillo and Martinez-Zapater,
2002; Brunner and Nilsson, 2004). The complete prevention of flowering is
likely to be a difficult task if alterations to single genes in the flowering regulatory
pathway are targeted. This is due to the fact that most plants are obligate in their
flowering response and that vegetative growth appears to be a function of
repression of flowering rather than the promotion of vegetative growth (Sung
et al., 2003). Alteration of the expression of genes involved with floral promotion is more likely to result in an alteration of time to flowering rather than
preventing the flowering response completely. However, the use of technologies that are aimed at the destruction of floral cell types has been used to
successfully repress flowering, or particular aspects of flowering, in model species (Lemmetyinen et al., 2001; Burgess et al., 2002). The genes, encoding the
toxin of choice, are fused to a cell-specific promoter. When expressed the agents
act to kill the specified tissues. This approach has been shown to be useful in
the production of male and female sterile poplar (Campbell et al., 2003;
Brunner and Nilsson, 2004), tobacco and Arabidopsis (Lemmetyinen et al.,

242

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

2001; Burgess et al., 2002; Guerineau et al., 2003). Three main toxins have
found favour amongst both animal and plant researchers: (i) the BARNASE
gene, encoding an RNase gene from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (Lemmetyinen et al., 2001); (ii) a gene encoding the diphtheria toxin component A, which
inactivates ribosomes (Guerineau et al., 2003); and (iii) the ricin A toxin that acts
as a specific ribosome-inactivating protein (Sandvig et al., 2004). While targeting of the cytotoxic compound directly to a particular cell type has proved to be
effective in certain cases, there remains the problem of obtaining complete
control over the expression of the toxin in question. Many controlling elements
in promoters are multifunctional so a large effort must be expended to ensure
that a promoter is identified that allows expression of the toxin only in the desired
tissues. Otherwise potential harmful side effects may result that might diminish
the effectiveness of this type of approach.
More recent advances have proposed the use of a two-hybrid system in
which two parts of the toxin are expressed under the control of two promoters
with overlapping expression. This then allows the expression of harmless precursors of the toxin and the formation of the complete ‘toxic unit’ where the
promoter activities overlap. This is reported to ensure a greater degree of tissue
specificity than can be afforded by a single promoter alone (Burgess et al., 2002).
In addition to the expression of cytotoxic compounds, alternative approaches that impact on general metabolism have also been shown to be
effective in disrupting specific cell types and thereby affecting developmental
processes. One approach makes use of the fact that biotin is an essential
cofactor for many enzymatic cellular processes (Ginzberg et al., 2004).
Through overexpression of streptavidin (the gene isolated from Streptomyces
avidinii), naturally occurring cellular biotin is irreversibly bound to the expressed streptavidin leading to severe pleiotropic developmental effects. Application of biotin was shown to reverse this effect (Ginzberg et al., 2004).
Through the tissue-specific expression of the streptavidin gene, it should be
possible to cause a similar developmental disruption as has been reported for
cytotoxin expression.

Misexpression/overexpression
In particular cases it may be useful to either ectopically express a particular
gene or unlink the expression of a gene from its normal regulatory control
pathway. This is most commonly achieved through the coupling of the gene
of interest to a strongly expressed constitutive promoter such as CaMV35S.
This promoter has been the workhorse for gene studies for many years. While
it may be invaluable in describing the function of a particular gene, there
are drawbacks for its utilization when expressing transcriptional factors
with potentially multiple functions throughout the plant at all stages of its life
cycle. In terms of floral biotechnology, a good example of misexpression
of a component of the flowering regulatory network is ectopic overexpression
of the LFY gene from Arabidopsis (Weigel et al., 1992). Expression of this
gene in hybrid aspen resulted in plants with accelerated flowering (Coupland,

Biotechnology of Floral Development

243

1995; Brunner and Nilsson, 2004). While accelerated flowering was achieved,
the floral structures that were produced were not necessarily fertile or perfectly
formed, indicating that ectopically expressed LFY alone was only partly responsible for early flowering (Brunner and Nilsson, 2004). Another confounding factor has been that LFY-induced early flowering appears to be species
dependent in that overexpression of LFY in crops other than hybrid aspen has
not resulted in an early flowering phenotype (Brunner and Nilsson, 2004).
It would appear that a constitutive high level of expression of transgenes
may not necessarily be a constructive way to generate the desired phenotype.
In a number of cases no-phenotype or undesirable traits may occur through the
use of promoters such as CaMV 35S. A good example of this was attempts to
alter lignin composition in transgenic lines of Arabidopsis through the introduction of the Arabidopsis ferulate-5-hydroxylase (F5H) under control of the
CaMV 35S promoter. The aim of the experiments was to increase the amount
of syringyl-lignin monomers and show that this gene was involved in the
production of S-subunit lignin in Arabidopsis and tobacco (Meyer et al.,
1998; Franke et al., 2000). Surprisingly, it was found that the CaMV 35S–
driven constructs failed to produce increased levels of S-lignin in the expected
tissues while constructs driven with the cinnamate-4-hydroxylase (C4H) promoter strongly affected lignin production in both species in the expected
manner (Meyer et al., 1998; Franke et al., 2000). The C4H gene is involved
in lignin and general phenylpropanoid precursor production and shares an
expression pattern with genes, like F5H, that are involved with lignin production (Bell-Lelong et al., 1997; Mizutani et al., 1997).
Overexpression of flowering genes, especially of the MADS-box class of
regulators, also requires special consideration. There are large numbers of
MADS-box genes in plants and it has been shown that these genes often act
as either homodimers or heterodimers that differ in their DNA-binding affinities
and activation capabilities (Honma and Goto, 2001; Ng and Yanofsky, 2001).
This, in reality, makes the effects of heterologous expression of MADS-box
genes from different species highly unpredictable. In addition, competition
effects driven by the high level of expression of a particular gene may result
in deleterious phenotypes (Martin-Trillo and Martinez-Zapater, 2002).
It is likely that the use of heterologous promoters which have been
designed specifically to give high levels of expression in a tissue- and temporally
specific manner will be a better approach to deliver the control of flowering
phenotype required. To further improve the specificity of expression, twocomponent systems may give opportunities to tune the desired effects. Inducible expression systems may also offer a route around some of the problems
associated with the extensive use of the CaMV 35S promoter.

Gene Targets for Biotechnology in Flowering
The vast majority of research carried out to characterize flowering has taken
place in Arabidopsis. Research in other model crops (Antirrhinum, petunia,
lucerne, rice, maize and poplar) supports the idea that there is a conservation

244

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

of gene sequence, if not gene function, across a very wide range of genera
(Pineiro and Coupland, 1998; Hempel et al., 2000; Barnes, 2002; MartinTrillo and Martinez-Zapater, 2002; Zik and Irish, 2003; Brunner and Nilsson,
2004; Henderson and Dean, 2004; Pennazio, 2004). So although the majority of work done to elucidate the mechanisms controlling flowering has taken
place in a small herbaceous annual rapid-cycling plant (Arabidopsis), much of
the data generated may be directly applicable across a wide range of species,
or at least forms a good starting point from which to determine target genes
for manipulation in any given crop. In this section, therefore, we outline some
of the target genes that have formed the focus of attempts at manipulation of
flowering, mainly in Arabidopsis. Table 9.1 provides a summary of the gene
targets discussed in this section and should be considered with details provided
in other chapters of this book.
The main challenge in determining which to target of the 80 plus genes
involved in flowering is the fact that a number of key genes have a variety of
roles in controlling multiple processes in the plant. A good example of this
duality is the AGAMOUS (AG) gene from Arabidopsis that has an important
role in specifying C whorl organ identity but has also been shown recently to
play a significant role in the regional activation of sporocyte formation (Dinneny and Yanofsky, 2004). Careful analysis of the phenotypes observed in
flowering also reveals that in certain plants manipulation of single genes alone
may not be sufficient to obtain a commercially viable product. Ectopic expression of LFY in Arabidopsis leads to partial conversion of vegetative meristems
to determinate floral inflorescences; however, conversion of the vegetative
meristems to those that form complete and fertile flowers is often incomplete
(Weigel et al., 1992). Heterologous expression of LFY in other species such as
hybrid aspen, as we have already mentioned, proved to be an excellent example of the power of a biotechnological approach to manipulate flowering.
This experiment demonstrated that CaMV 35S-driven expression of Arabidopsis LFY in hybrid aspen could accelerate flowering from several years to
just over 1 year (Coupland, 1995). However, as described earlier, the overexpression of LFY in Arabidopsis and poplar results not only in the acceleration of flowering but also the malformation of floral organs suggesting that
LFY expression alone in non-competent meristems is insufficient to trigger
complete floral development and that additional unidentified factors are required (Martin-Trillo and Martinez-Zapater, 2002; Campbell et al., 2003;
Brunner and Nilsson, 2004).
One important feature of flowering that these experiments bring to the
fore is the idea of the modular nature of plant development. These modules or
phases of plant development can be divided into several distinct phases which
show distinctive morphological characteristics such as changes in leaf morphology (Lawson and Poethig, 1995; Vega et al., 2002). The phase changes
from juvenile–adult and adult–floral (Fig. 9.1A) represent two points at which
manipulation of developmental regulators may offer sensible opportunities for
the manipulation of flowering.

Proposed role

Species

Gene/mutant

Comment

Reference

Control of juvenile–adult
phase change

Arabidopsis

ZIPPY (ZIP)
SUPPRESSOR OF GENE
SILENCING3 (SGS3)
SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING2
(SGS2)/SILENCING DEFECTIVE1
(SDE1)/RNA-DEPENDENT
POLYMERASEE6 (RDR6 )
PAUSED (PSD )
HASTY (HST )
gibberellin-deficient dwarf mutants
an1, d1, d3 and d5
viviparous8 (vp8 )
teopod1, 2, 3 (tp1–3 )
corngrass (cg)
PENNYWISE (PNY )/
POUNDFOOLISH (PNF )
CONSTANS (CO)
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT )
FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC )
SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION
OF CO1 (SOC1)
HEADING DATE1 (HD1)

Argonaute-like gene
Involvement in plant transgene
silencing (PTGS)
Involvement in plant transgene
silencing (PTGS)

Hunter et al. (2003a)
Peragine et al. (2004)

Exportin-t orthologue
Putative miRNA export receptor
Not cloned to date

Hunter et al. (2003b)
Bollman et al. (2003)
Vega et al. (2002)

Not cloned to date
Not cloned to date
Not cloned to date
BEL-1 like homeobox genes
pny:pnf double mutants fail to flower
Accelerates flowering
Floral pathway integrator
Key repressor of flowering
Floral pathway integrator

Evans and Poethig (1997)

Maize

Control of vegetative–
reproductive phase change
Signal perception including
photoperiodism and
vernalization

Arabidopsis
Arabidopsis

Wheat

Homologous to CO

Peragine et al. (2004)

Biotechnology of Floral Development

Table 9.1. Targets for floral and reproductive manipulation.

Vega et al. (2002)
Smith et al. (2004)
Putterill et al. (1995)
Kardailsky et al. (1999)
Boss et al. (2004)
Robson et al. (2001)
Yano et al. (2000)

continued

245

246

Table 9.1. continued. Targets for floral and reproductive manipulation.
Proposed role

Species

Gene/mutant

Comment

Reference

Inflorescence and floral
organ architecture

Arabidopsis

TERMINAL FLOWER1 (TFL)

Homologous to CEN – converts
SAM from indeterminate to
determinant growth
A-class floral identity gene
B-class floral identity gene
C-class floral identity gene
Triple lfy:ap1:cal mutants abolish
flowering
Homologous to TFL1
Closely related to CYC
Homologous to TB1
Homologous to CYC
Not cloned to date radially symmetric
to monosymmetric floral conversion
Homologous to CYC
Homologous to LFY
Homologous to AP1
Homologous to Arabidopsis AG
and SHP
Homologous to LFY
Homologous to AP1
Homologous to TFL1

Ohshima et al. (1997)

LEAFY (LFY)
APETALA1 (AP1)
AGAMOUS (AG)
CAULIFLOWER (CAL)
Antirrhinum

Tomato
Sunflower
Maize

Grape

CENTRORADIALIS (CEN)
DICHOTOMA (DICH)
CYCLOIDEA (CYC)
SELF PRUNING (SP)
chrysanthemoides (chry)
teosinte branched1 (tb1)
Zea FLO/LFY (ZFL1 and ZFL2)
zap1
Vitis vinifera MADS1 (VvMADS1)
Vitis vinifera LFY (VvLFY)
Vitis vinifera AP1 (VvAP1)
Vitis vinifera TFL1 (VvTFL1)

Weigel et al. (1992)
Mandel et al. (1992)
Yanofsky et al. (1990)
Kempin et al. (1995)
Bradley et al. (1996)
Luo et al. (1996)
Luo et al. (1996)
Pnueli et al. (1998)
Fambrini et al. (2003)
Doebley et al. (1997)
Bomblies et al. (2003)
Mena et al. (1995)
Boss et al. (2001)
Carmona et al. (2002)
Joly et al. (2004)

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

Biotechnology of Floral Development

247

Floral stimuli
e.g. photoperiod, light quality,
temperature, gibberellin

(A)

Juvenile

Reproductive

Adult
HASTY, SGS3,
SGS2/SDE1/RDR6
Phase change

Autonomous pathway

(B)
Photoperiod
Photoreceptors

FVE
FPA

Light quality

Vernalization
FRI

Phytochrome A
FLC

VIP 3/4
ESD4

Circadian
clock genes

EFS
Gibberellin

CO

Floral pathway
integrators
FT
AGL20/SOC1

AP1
CAL
FUL
LFY

Floral organogenesis

Fig. 9.1. Interacting pathways controlling flowering. (A) Genes shown to be involved in the
control of phase changes in Arabidopsis. Environmental stimulation of flowering can only take
place after the juvenile to vegetative phase change. In Arabidopsis this may represent a period of
1–2 weeks while in tree species this phase may last as long as 25–30 years. (B) Environmental and
hormonal control of flowering in Arabidopsis, adapted from Boss et al. (2004).

Juvenile–adult vegetative phase change
Plant development is characterized by successive ‘phase’ changes from germination through to reproduction. The period of development from germination to ‘adulthood’ in plants, commonly known as the juvenile phase, differs
from plant to plant from a period of a few weeks for small herbaceous annual
plants such as Arabidopsis, through to periods that may last longer than 20
years, as is evident for many tree crops (Poethig, 2002a, 2003; Brunner and
Nilsson, 2004). Juvenility represents a phase of shoot maturation during which
the plant is incapable of flowering and the vegetative meristem can be considered ‘blind’ to promotive signals (Martin-Trillo and Martinez-Zapater, 2002;
Poethig, 2002b; Boss et al., 2004). Mutations in genes that are involved
with phase change from the juvenile–adult phases generally present as early

248

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

flowering phenotypes indicating that flowering is actively repressed in vegetative meristems (Sung et al., 2003; Boss et al., 2004). Therefore, manipulation
of genes shown to be involved in the control of the length of the juvenile phase
would be extremely useful for long-lived perennial crops such as trees. In
addition to the possibilities for reduction in the juvenile phase (and therefore
acceleration of the onset of flowering), there may be options for greatly
extending the juvenile phase. There are a number of features of juvenile
vegetative development/growth that make the indefinite extension of the
juvenile phase of development particularly attractive. Typically, the juvenile
phase is characterized by significantly different vegetative growth patterns
compared to the adult and reproductive phases of development. In Arabidopsis, as described below, juvenile vegetative development results in the production of distinct leaf phenotypes (Lawson and Poethig, 1995). In trees there are
distinct changes to wood quality between juvenile and mature phases which
would be attractive to industry (Martin-Trillo and Martinez-Zapater, 2002;
Brunner and Nilsson, 2004).
In Arabidopsis a number of genes that appear to be involved with the
control of juvenile–adult phase change have been identified. Mutations in these
genes generally result in a shortened time to flowering independent of environmental cues. Interestingly, a number of these genes appear to be involved in
the machinery responsible for post-translational gene silencing (PTGS). Mutations in the genes SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING3 (SGS3) and SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING2 (SGS2)/SILENCING DEFECTIVE1
(SDE1)/RNA-DEPENDANT POLYMERASE6 (RDR6) produce similar
phenotypes to the Argonaute gene ZIPPY (ZIP) (Hunter et al., 2003a; Peragine et al., 2004). These phenotypes are typically an acceleration of the
production of leaves with an adult character. In Arabidopsis this phase change
manifests itself as a switch from the formation of small, round leaves with
trichomes restricted to the adaxial leaf surface to adult leaves that are typified
by an elongated leaf shape with a serrate edge and trichomes on both the
abaxial and adaxial leaf surfaces (Hunter et al., 2003a). While ZIP appears to
act independently of environmental cues, both SGS3 and SGS2/RDR6 appear to be able to shorten time to flowering as well as the transition between
juvenile and adult growth phases. Epistasis analysis suggests that ZIP, SGS3,
SGS2/RDR6 and the putative miRNA export receptor HASTY (HST) operate
within the same pathway (Peragine et al., 2004). These data strongly suggest
that PTGS plays a major role in the temporal control of shoot development in
Arabidopsis.
Mutations that affect the juvenile–adult phase transition have been identified in a number of other plant species such as maize, pea and ivy (Wiltshire
et al., 1994; Lawson and Poethig, 1995; Poethig, 1997; Vega et al., 2002).
In maize these mutations are either defined as recessive, loss-of-function type
alleles and include the mutants gibberellin-deficient dwarf (an1, d1, d3 and
d5) and viviparous8 (vp8), or as genes that have been defined as primarily
dominant gain-of-function mutations and promote juvenile development and
include teopod1 (tp1), teopod2 (tp2), teopod3 (tp3) and corngrass (cg)
(Poethig, 1988; Lawson and Poethig, 1995). In pea, nine mutations have

Biotechnology of Floral Development

249

been identified that can act to perturb the juvenile–adult phase change
(Wiltshire et al., 1994). However, for maize, pea and ivy the identity of the
genetic loci has not been characterized, so comparisons to the identified
mechanisms in Arabidopsis are not possible at this time. Given the involvement of PTGS machinery in the control of this process in Arabidopsis and that
PTGS has been reported for a very wide range of plant species, it is highly likely
that similar mechanisms for the control of vegetative phase change exist. The
exact identity of the components involved may differ forcing a case-by-case
study of the target organism to better understand the exact nature of the
controlling mechanisms.

Vegetative to reproductive phase change
The recently characterized BEL-1 like homeobox class gene regulators, PENNYWISE (PNY) and POUNDFOOLISH (PNF), when combined as double
mutants result in Arabidopsis plants whose meristems remain capable of
receiving floral stimuli but are unable to complete the floral transition (Smith
et al., 2004). This situation is unusual in that the double-mutant plants do not
form flowers at all. Generally, the other mutations discussed previously will
result in some flowers being formed late in development (Komeda, 2004). In
pnf:pny plants shoot meristems only initiated leaves after the time at which
wild-type Arabidopsis plants had flowered. These leaves, though smaller than
vegetative rosette leaves, none the less retained rosette leaf characteristics.
Taken together, these data suggest that the double mutants are acting to disrupt
the normal transition from vegetative to reproductive development. It is unclear
at this stage what effect ectopic overexpression of these two homeobox genes
might have on Arabidopsis or other plants. From genetic analysis of the single
mutants in various backgrounds it is apparent that the roles of both PNY and
PNF appear to be in the regulation of the allocation of meristematic cells into
the developing primordium. Given the strongly dose-dependent effects of
either gene on inflorescence development, ectopic overexpression of these
genes using promoters such as CaMV 35S may not yield usable plants, alterations to flowering aside. The use of other promoter sequences, in combination
with these genes that offer similar spatial expression patterns but with differing
levels of expression and altered temporal regulation, may offer a better way to
utilize the dose-dependent nature of these genes to allow controlled manipulation of flowering in Arabidopsis and other crops.
From the extensive body of data describing the control of flowering in
Arabidopsis and other model species it is clear that control of meristem identity
is a key factor for any attempts at regulating flowering (see Jordan and
Anthony, 1997, for a review of molecular aspects of floral evocation). We
have already dealt with genes that appear to be important in the conversion of
vegetative meristems from a juvenile non-responding meristem to a florally
competent meristem. At this point those genes that direct the conversion of
the vegetative meristem to an inflorescence or floral meristem can then act and
offer opportunities to modify time to flowering. Mutants in these genes can act

250

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

to delay or accelerate flowering under promotive or non-promotive environmental conditions. The flowering response in Arabidopsis can be considered in
four main parts (all of which tend to be interconnected to give an integrated
response to the environmental and developmental status): (i) the autonomous
pathway; (ii) the vernalization pathway; (iii) the gibberellin (GA) pathway; and
(iv) the light-dependent pathway (see Fig. 9.1B and Chapters 1, 2 and 3, this
volume). Inputs from each of these four pathways then act coordinately to
finally promote the conversion of a competent vegetative meristem to an
inflorescence meristem (Boss et al., 2004). Central to the integration of
these pathways is the floral repressor FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC). This
regulator has been shown to repress floral pathway integrator genes and floral
meristem identity genes such as LFY and APETALA1 (AP1). The signal
cascades upstream of FLC act to lower the amount of FLC mRNA present in
the meristem thereby allowing the transition to floral development. Null mutations in FLC lead to very early flowering phenotypes (Andersen et al., 2004).
This gene is an obvious candidate for manipulation in crop species, either
through upregulation to inhibit flowering or by downregulation to accelerate
flowering. However, to date, although homologous genes have been identified
in other species, it is evident that these homologues may be functioning in a
different manner to that observed in Arabidopsis (Pineiro and Coupland,
1998). A common theme that appears to be developing is that although the
machinery of flowering regulation is conserved between species and genera,
the exact mechanism that is adopted by a particular species may differ quite
widely requiring a specific analysis of the processes in each species before a
rational approach to regulation of flowering can be applied.
While FLC represents a convergence point in the regulation of flowering in
response to developmental and temperature stimuli, light perception in terms
of daylength represents an alternative point of control. The gene CONSTANS
(CO) has been shown in Arabidopsis to be central to the regulation of flowering
in response to daylength, with mutants resulting in a late-flowering phenotype
(Putterill et al., 1995; Robson et al., 2001). Ectopic overexpression of this
gene results in early flowering phenotypes in Arabidopsis (Boss et al., 2004).
CO acts to regulate the levels of expression of FLOWERING LOCUS T
(FT ) and SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CO1 (SOC1), which
together form part of the floral integration pathway (Robson et al., 2001). In
Arabidopsis, CO belongs to a gene family consisting of 17 putative members
that is divided into three broad groupings based on the conservation of gene
structure surrounding the B-box motif and zinc-finger domains characteristic of
this group of transcription factors (Robert et al., 1998; Liu et al., 2001). COlike genes have been identified in several dicot species and in two cases,
Brassica napus and Pharbitus nil, the isolated gene sequences have been
expressed in Arabidopsis co mutant backgrounds to show functional conservation (Yano et al., 2000). In rice the Heading date1 (Hd1) gene has been
shown to be homologous to CO and possesses a role in photoperiodic responses in this plant (Yano et al., 2000; Griffiths et al., 2003). Similar genes
have been isolated from hexaploid wheat and have been shown to be able
to compliment the hd1 mutation in rice (Fambrini et al., 2003). These data

Biotechnology of Floral Development

251

suggest that manipulation of CO should be a viable method for alteration of
photoperiodic control of flowering in many plant species.
It is likely that the manipulation of the autonomous, vernalization and
photoperiod pathway gene members will result not only in the alteration of
flowering time but also as one moves backward up the regulatory pathways
there will be other associated pleiotropic effects to plant development. Picking
key genes that form distinct bottlenecks in the regulatory pathways will be
essential to successful manipulation of flowering without significant alteration
to other aspects of plant growth and development.
Manipulation of meristem identity directly through the alteration of expression of key members of the floral pathway integrators such as FT and AGAMOUS Like-20 (AGL20)/SOC1, as well as key meristem identity genes such as
LFY and AP1 in Arabidopsis, has been shown to have some utility (Mandel
et al., 1992; Weigel et al., 1992; Kardailsky et al., 1999; Moon et al., 2003;
Murai et al., 2003; Komeda, 2004). However, practically all of the experiments published to date attempt to alter the expression of these genes and have
resulted in downstream pleiotropic effects to floral and reproductive organ
development. While this may not necessarily be unsurprising, it clearly indicates
that indirect manipulation of meristematic fate may be the most productive
avenue for the manipulation of flowering in response to the environmental and
developmental cues.

Inflorescence and floral organ architecture
Other targets for agri-biotechnology approaches are control of inflorescence
and floral organ architecture. These two aspects of floral development are the
drivers behind the vast diversity in floral form observed in the angiosperms. The
genetic regulation of both of these processes is based around the control of
meristem identity and cell fate. Inflorescence architecture is essentially controlled through the determinacy of the inflorescence meristems derived from
the shoot apical meristem (SAM), while floral structure involves the fate of cell
lineages formed on the flanks of the floral meristem (Reinhardt and Kuhlemeier, 2002). Typically, plant growth can be characterized as two modes of
development: (i) monopodial where the SAM produces leaves and then flowers
on its flanks representing an indeterminate form of meristem development; and
(ii) sympodial where the meristem exhibits a determinate form of growth
terminating in floral structures and vegetative growth is continued from axillary
meristems (Reinhardt and Kuhlemeier, 2002). The genetic control of meristem
determinancy can have a major impact on plant and floral architecture. Mutants such as CENTRORADIALIS (CEN ) from Antirrhinum and TERMINAL
FLOWER (TFL) from Arabidopsis convert the normally indeterminate SAM of
these plants to a determinate meristem resulting in the premature termination
of the SAM in a flower (Bradley et al., 1996, 1997). Tomato represents the
only determinate plant in which the role of CEN/ TFL orthologues has been
extensively studied. The SELF PRUNING (SP) gene represents the tomato
homologue of CEN/ TFL (Pnueli et al., 1998; Carmel-Goren et al., 2003).

252

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

The sp mutant results in a gradual decrease in the vegetative nodes produced
within each sympodial unit in tomato from three, to two, to one, to eventually
the point where the vegetative phase is completely bypassed (Pnueli et al.,
1998). In the context of the sympodial unit, SP therefore parallels the function
of CEN/ TFL. Interestingly, unlike cen /tfl, sp does not appear to affect floral
development. It is thought that this difference does not necessarily reflect a
difference in SP function compared to CEN/ TFL but rather differences in the
shoot models between Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis compared to tomato. In
other words, vegetative and reproductive monopodial shoots with an indeterminate apical meristem compared with a sympodial vegetative and reproductive shoots and a determinate apical meristem, respectively (Pnueli et al.,
1998). Furthermore, overexpression of CEN in the determinate plant tobacco
results in a dramatic extension of the indeterminate (vegetative) phase of
growth (Amaya et al., 1999). In most transgenic lines of tobacco expressing
CEN, flowering will eventually occur. However, in transgenic lines with particularly high gene expression levels of CEN there was an indication that
sufficient levels of CEN expression might lead to the indefinite suspension of
flowering (Amaya et al., 1999). The expression patterns of the nearest tobacco
homologues of CEN, CET2 and CET4, differ quite markedly to SP in tomato
with the CET2 and CET4 being found to be expressed only in axillary meristems compared to SP which is expressed in all meristems (Pnueli et al., 1998;
Amaya et al., 1999). This point reinforces the fact that an in-depth study of the
system one wishes to manipulate is essential prior to embarking on attempts to
manipulate plant architecture. Even with this in mind given the conserved
functional role that CEN/ TFL-like genes have in regulation of meristem determinacy, orthologues of these genes may offer ways to manipulate flowering in
a wide range of crop species depending on the growth habit (monopodial or
sympodial) of the target species.
While CEN/ TFL genes act to prevent the formation of flowers, the genes
LFY and AP1 act antagonistically on CEN/ TFL-like genes to promote the
formation of flowers (Amaya et al., 1999). In Arabidopsis a further gene
CAULIFLOWER (CAL) acts in concert with LFY and AP1 to give a redundant
regulation of meristem identity in this plant (Ferrándiz et al., 2000). As we have
already mentioned, mutations in these genes leads from partial to full conversion of floral structures to leaves or leaf-like structures. The phenotypes of the
individual genes are enhanced in the double (lfy:ap1) and triple (lfy:ap1:cal)
mutants to a point where flowering can be completely abolished (Yanofsky,
1995; Ferrándiz et al., 2000). However, combinations of double mutants in
Arabidopsis have been shown to give rise to commonly recognized mutant
floral phenotypes such as seen in Brassica oleracea var. botrytis, the cauliflower (Anthony et al., 1995, 1996; Kempin et al., 1995). Interestingly, many
edible Brassica species (cauliflower, broccoli, etc.) are arrested stages of floral
development. Commercial loss takes place when the control of this state is lost
leading to ‘bolting’ of the inflorescence. Molecular regulation of floral transition
would seem a very appropriate target for manipulation. As for CEN/ TFL, it is
evident that the basic mechanisms for floral patterning involving MADS-box
transcriptional regulators are highly conserved; however, the ways in which

Biotechnology of Floral Development

253

individual plant species make use of these regulators can differ quite markedly
thereby giving rise to the plethora of floral forms evident in nature. Indeed,
quite simple mutations in this regulatory network can lead to striking changes in
floral subunit formation. For instance, a recent report of a mutation in sunflower (Helianthus annuus) termed chrysanthemoides (chry) described the
transformation of the normally radially symmetric corolla of tubular disc flowers
into a monosymmetric ligulate-like corolla. This results in a pom-pom like floral
structure. The actual molecular basis for this transformation is still being investigated, but is thought to be due to a single semi-dominant gene (Fambrini et al.,
2003).
The grasses include some of the most important food crops in the world
and the productivity of these crops is determined by their inflorescence structures (Bommert et al., 2005). Grass inflorescences possess a number of unique
floral structures in comparison to dicot species, such as the spiklet. Maize has
been the most extensively studied of the grasses due in part to the large number
of identified mutants that affect the development of the floral structures in this
plant. Additionally, maize represents one of the most stunning transformations
of a wild plant species into a high-productivity modern crop. The development
of the modern maize plant has been a story of selective breeding for the
conversion of the comparatively sparse reproductive structures of the proposed
ancestral form of maize (teosinte) to the instantly recognizable ear structure on
modern maize (Zea mays). This change in flowering habit has been attributed to
four quality trait loci (QTL) that have been selected for during the domestication
process (Burnham, 1961; Doebley et al., 1997; Doebley, 2004). Of the four
identified QTLs, one was shown by complementation testing to correspond to
the teosinte branched1 (tb1) locus. This locus has been shown to be the major
contributor to the transformation of teosinte architecture to that of maize.
Indeed, the effects of TB1 alone are sufficient that when inserted into teosinte
it is capable of a complete transformation of this plant to a maize architecture
(Doebley et al., 1997; Doebley, 2004). The TB1 gene shares significant
homology with the CYCLOIDEA (CYC) gene from Antirrhinum and appears
to affect similar aspects of development. Investigations into the genetic basis for
Antirrhinum mutants that led to a switch in floral symmetry from bilateral to
partially or fully ventralized flowers led to the identification of CYC and a closely
related gene DICHOTOMA (DICH) (Luo et al., 1996). Both of these genes are
part of the highly conserved TCP family of transcriptional activators that have
been shown to have roles in the control of growth and development such as
floral symmetry, axillary shoot outgrowth and leaf development (Doebley et al.,
1997; Cubas et al., 1999; Cubas, 2004; Doebley, 2004).
Genetic and molecular control of grass inflorescence and floral development has been most extensively studied in maize. This plant has an extensive
collection of mutants that affect the development of floral structures, some of
which produce some very startling phenotypes. Like the control of maize
architecture, many of these genes share significant levels of sequence identity
as well as functionality with homologous dicot genes (Bommert et al., 2005).
The maize homologues of FLO/LFY and SQUAMOSA (SQUA)/AP1, ZEA
FLO/LFY (ZFL1), ZFL2 and ZAP1 represent good examples of the sequence

254

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

conservation between the dicot and monocot flowering genes (Schmidt et al.,
1993; Mena et al., 1995; Schmidt and Ambrose, 1998; Bommert et al.,
2005).
Much of what we have dealt with to date are candidate genes that might be
amenable to agri-biotechnology approaches aimed at manipulation of flowering. In the following sections we look in more detail at approaches that have
been and are being adopted to manipulate flowering in woody species, specifically grapevine, kiwifruit vines and tree species. Each of these case studies
represents situations that draw heavily on what is currently known from the
annual rapid-cycling model systems such as Arabidopsis. Although, as we have
commented, this information is invaluable and there appear to be high levels
of sequence and functional conservation between species, the different and
extended life cycles of woody perennial plants offer a number of interesting
challenges.

Floral development and biotechnology in woody perennial species
In the following sections a brief overview of molecular studies in woody perennials is described. Readers, however, are recommended to refer to more
comprehensive reviews as cited below.
Grape and kiwifruit
For a comprehensive review of floral development in grapes see Shavrukov
et al. (2004), and for a recent molecular account see Boss et al. (2003) and
Joly et al. (2004).
Like many woody species, grape requires an extended period of juvenile
growth before the vine is competent to enter reproductive development. Unlike
Arabidopsis where flowering commences after the perception of a suitable
flowering stimulus, grapevines produce both vegetative and reproductive meristematic structures on the same shoot (Boss and Thomas, 2002). During shoot
development the SAM produces a regular pattern of both leaf primordia and
small meristematic protuberances termed uncommitted primordium (Boss
et al., 2003). If the uncommitted primordium forms within latent buds, they
can develop into inflorescence structures. However, if they form on rapidly
developing shoots they are more likely to form tendrils (Boss et al., 2003).
First-order buds generally burst the year they are produced. Higher-order buds
(latent buds) are formed in the axil of modified leaves formed on the lateral
shoots derived from the first-order buds. In these latent buds, the uncommitted
primordia form after 3–8 leaf primordia and subsequently opposite every two
of three leaf primordia. Dependent on the cultivar and environmental conditions, the first 1–3 uncommitted primordia formed on shoots in latent buds will
undergo repeated branching and will develop into an immature inflorescence
before the buds enter winter dormancy (Boss et al., 2003). In the following
season these buds burst and the immature inflorescences continue to develop
and form flowers in a pyramidal branched inflorescence pattern (Boss and
Thomas, 2000; Boss et al., 2003; Calonje et al., 2004). Cultivated grapevine

Biotechnology of Floral Development

255

is unusual in that it produces hermaphrodite flowers. Most members of the
Vitis genus are dioecious and the hermaphroditic flowers of cultivated species
may have been selected for at a very early stage in the domestication of
grapevine.
Grapevine tendrils are not modified leaves as are pea tendrils, but rather
are considered analogous to inflorescence structures. Several lines of evidence
including the coexpression of grapevine homologues of LFY and AP1 in these
tissues strongly suggest that grapevine tendrils are derived from uncommitted
primordia and are closely related to floral structures (Boss et al., 2001, 2002;
Carmona et al., 2002; Joly et al., 2004).
These differences in growth and developmental habit present researchers
with some very interesting questions about flowering and, as has been seen for
tree species (see below), it is likely that some of the mechanisms that control
flowering in model crops such as Arabidopsis will differ in grapevine. What is
interesting is that there appears to be a high level of conservation of gene
sequence identity between Arabidopsis and grape. Recent reports have identified grape homologues of LFY, AP1, AG, TF1 and SEPALLATA3 (SEP3)
and expression of these orthologues throughout grape inflorescence development (Boss et al., 2002). Additionally, a range of MADS box-related genes
has been isolated from grape, by homology screening a young inflorescence
library, that share identity with SEP and AG-like genes 6, 11 and 13 from
Arabidopsis (Calonje et al., 2004). The cloning and identification of two genes
sharing sequence identity with Arabidopsis FRUITFULL and AP1 and their
involvement in tendril development has also been reported (Boss et al., 2001).
In each case the genes have been sequenced and compared to reported
sequences. Analysis of the expression patterns of each of the genes supports
the view that they have a role in grape flowering. However, given the difficulties
in producing stable transgenics in grape and the long generational time that
would be required to analyse floral phenotypes arising from transgenic approaches, definitive descriptions of the function of these genes in the flowering
process are still to be demonstrated. One approach that has been utilized to
circumvent these issues has been the heterologous expression of isolated genes
in model systems such as tobacco (Boss et al., 2001). The Vitis vinifera
MADS1 (VvMADS1) gene shares significant sequence identity with AG
and SHATTERPROOF from Arabidopsis. Expression of VvMADS1 in tobacco, under control of CaMV 35S, results in alterations to the outer two floral
whorls. In some transgenic lines these alterations result in the formation of
carpelloid sepals and stamenoid petals. In the most extreme examples the
corolla, which is usually fused, was split or converted into stamen-like structures. These alterations are very reminiscent of plants ectopically expressing
AG orthologues throughout the four floral whorls (Boss and Thomas,
2002). Recently, Chardonnay grapes that overexpress VvMADS1 have been
generated (Boss et al., 2003). Although a similar floral phenotype to the
tobacco 35S::VvMADS1 was produced, some differences were found.
For instance, in some plants an extended calyx/sepal structure encased the
whole cap morphology produced by the petals (Fig. 9.2). It is clear that
VvMADS1 is likely to be a ‘C’ class gene; however, it is presently not possible

256

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

Fig. 9.2. (A) Expression analysis of VvMADS1 in different floral organs of Cabernet Sauvignon.
(B) A wild-type Chardonnay flower just prior to anthesis. (C) A flower from a transgenic
Chardonnay plant overexpressing VvMADS1. Bar ¼ 200 mm. Reproduced with permission from
Functional Plant Biology 30(6), 593–606 (Boss et al., 2003). Copyright CSIRO 2003. Published by
CSIRO Publishing, Melbourne, Australia.

to determine if it is an orthologue of AG or SHP1/2 from Arabidopsis (Boss
et al., 2003).
The relatedness between vine architecture and floral development combined with the apparent conservation of floral regulator sequence identity and
expression pattern suggests fertile ground for agri-biotechnology approaches
to assist in vine and grape improvement. The recent report of a mutation in the
grape homologue of the Arabidopsis GAI gene indicates the important involvement of phytohormones, in particular GA, in the control of floral induction in this species (Coupland, 1995; Rottmann et al., 2000; Honma and
Goto, 2001; Bomblies et al., 2003; Murai et al., 2003). This is consistent with
previous physiological studies (Srinivasan and Mullins, 1980).
Another woody perennial, like grape, is the kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa).
Recently, studies on kiwifruit have suggested that LFY and AP1 homologues
(ALF and AAP1, respectively) play a role in kiwifruit floral development
(Walton et al., 2001). In kiwifruit the flowering process takes place over two
growing seasons, with ‘evocation’ considered to take place at an early stage
within the first year. Both ALF and AAP1 show expression in both years and
the results clearly suggest a role in the first year that is indicative of a commitment to flowering (evocation). This expression pattern over 2 years is similar to
that found in grape (Joly et al., 2004). Thus by the use of these floral gene
biomarkers understanding of a very complex developmental process in grape
and kiwifruit is being elucidated.
While many interesting targets for agri-biotechnology approaches aimed at
the alteration of flowering responses are available, problems associated with
the long generational time to flowering and comparatively poor rates of transformation currently hinder the advance of these approaches. Investigating the
roles of the identified regulators such as VvLFY and VvAG is also vitally
important for understanding the actual roles of these genes in systems other
than rapid-cycling annuals.
Forestry biotechnology
There are a number of very important reasons why controlling flowering in tree
species is a high priority: (i) to increase the reproductive cycle; (ii) to reduce
vegetative losses from reproduction; and (iii) to control pollen.

Biotechnology of Floral Development

257

Conventional breeding approaches have had an enormous impact on
agricultural and horticultural crops. These techniques have been refined over
many centuries and have improved crop productivity and quality enormously.
In contrast, the domestication of forestry production has only taken place over
the last century. Two major problems relating to tree biology have prevented
substantive progress in breeding elite lines. The most obvious of these problems
is the long time before maturation (Greenwood, 1995). Trees pass through
stages of juvenility and it may be many years before they are reproductively
mature and hence assessment of breeding characteristics within the breeding
programmes is very slow. By way of example the most extensive breeding
programmes currently underway for tree species have only just reached their
fourth generation in over 100 years of effort! If the breeding cycle was reduced
from 14 to 2 years, selection efficiency would increase several hundred percent
and consequently impact on economic and environmental aspects of forestry
(Pena et al, 2001). The extensive delay in flowering, of over 20 years in some
cases, has proved to be a great hindrance, not only in terms of studying
flowering processes at a molecular level but also in terms of domestication of
tree species in general. Another difficulty is that many commercially important
tree crops outcross preferentially and are subject to inbred suppression.
This creates problems to establish desirable characteristics through conventional breeding approaches such as selfing and backcrossing (Williams and
Savolainen, 1996).
Thus, undoubtedly, the most pressing issue for forest biotechnology is the
extensive juvenile phase of development during which flowering will not occur.
To this end most of the research to date has been directed at understanding the
genetic regulators that are involved in phase change in trees. Obvious candidates such as LFY and AP1 have been targeted due to their demonstrable ability
to promote flowering in model systems and in certain tree species (Coupland,
1995; Rottmann et al., 2000). While many of the MADS-box and LFY-like
orthologues cloned from various tree species have exhibited high degrees of
functional and sequence conservation, the ability to consistently shorten the
time to flowering in tree species has proved to be elusive (Rottmann et al.,
2000). In the case of LFY homologues, ectopic overexpression of either the
Arabidopsis LFY or tree-derived sequences has only promoted flowering reliably in hybrid aspen or in lines of transgenic poplar where LFY is expressed at
very high levels (Martin-Trillo and Martinez-Zapater, 2002). This indicates that
there are most likely other factors governing the switch from vegetative
to reproductive development and LFY homologues are therefore insufficient
alone to promote the complete switch from a vegetative to a floral meristem.
Other genes from Arabidopsis that have been shown to have some involvement
with promotion of flowering such as CO and FCA have also been expressed in
hybrid aspen without effect (Pena et al., 2001). The high degree of species
specificity for control of flowering is highlighted by the expression of LFY and
AP1 in root stocks of citrus. In this species an acceleration of flowering from
6–7 years to 1 year was obtained through overexpression of these genes (Pena
et al., 2001). Interestingly, the expression of either of these genes did
not convert all meristems to floral meristems and the transgenic trees

258

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan

were still able to respond to environmental cues that induce flowering each year
(Telfer and Poethig, 1998; Hunter et al., 2003b).
From the work described above and the ever growing number of reports of
genes isolated from gymnosperms that show conservation of function when
expressed in Arabidopsis, it is apparent that genes that show involvement with
phase change in Arabidopsis and other model systems such as maize may
represent other candidates for investigation of phase change in tree species.
These include HASTY (Telfer and Poethig, 1998), PAUSED (Hunter et al.,
2003b), SERRATE (Clarke et al., 1999) and SQUINT (Berardini et al.,
2001). Mutations in these genes act to reduce the juvenile phase in Arabidopsis while not having major effects on other developmental processes. In order
to effectively modulate flowering through molecular approaches, an in-depth
understanding of the regulation of flowering in the target tree species is
required. This therefore increases the importance of experiments aimed at
acceleration of flowering time in tree species; until this is achieved it will be
difficult if not impossible to characterize the genetic pathways controlling
flowering in the diverse range of tree species that are currently grown on a
commercial basis.
Another major problem of tree reproduction is that pollen production leads
to enormous loss of vegetative growth potential. Assimilation of nitrogen, etc.
into the pollen is a net loss to vegetative growth and so inhibition of flowering
and hence pollen production would be a substantial economic advantage. The
other advantage to preventing pollen production would be to reduce public
concern over forest biotechnology. If long-distance gene flow could be prevented through inhibiting pollen production, many important genetic traits
could be introduced rapidly through modern molecular genetics without concern over their dispersal into native forest populations (Skinner et al., 2000;
Strauss et al., 1995).
Like grapevine and kiwifruit, tree species represent a different situation to
the ‘classic’ flowering models of Arabidopsis, Antirrhinum, etc. Progress is,
however, being made and the new developments in molecular technology will
undoubtedly bring greater understanding and commercial success.
As a final note, a very recent report in Nature describes a new system for
genome-wide non-Mendelian inheritance of extra-genomic information in Arabidopsis (Lolle et al., 2005). This new phenomena revolves around the inheritance of allelic-specific DNA sequence information that is not contained within
the chromosomal genome of either parent. This report describes the reversion
of the homozygous HOTHEAD (hth) mutant to wild-type using allelic-specific
information that is absent from either parent but has been present in previous
generations. The thorough characterization of this phenomenon rules out
trivial explanations such as increased mutation rates and gene conversion
with closely related gene sequences. In order to determine whether the sequence changes observed for the hth mutant occur elsewhere in the genome, a
number of hybrid hth plants were produced which were scored for changes to
molecular markers that have been shown to be polymorphic between the
Colombia and Landsberg erecta parents. In the progeny of the hth / hth F2
plants a high rate of sequence change in both directions (Col to Ler and Ler to

Biotechnology of Floral Development

259

Col) was observed. The authors postulate that the template for these reversions
is a cache of previously undescribed RNAs that are propagated through many
generations. In terms of biotechnological manipulation of flowering, this phenomenon should be viewed both in terms of caution (i.e. the plant may well be
able to revert to wild-type from transgenic/mutant status at relatively high
frequency) and in terms of potential opportunity. It might be possible that this
system may be used to introduce sequence-specific lesions into genomes in a
targeted fashion at higher frequencies than is currently possible in higher plant
species. The unravelling of the underlying mechanism for this phenomenon
may add yet another powerful tool to our repertoire for the targeted manipulation of flowering.

References
Achard, P., Herr, A., Baulcombe, D.C.
and Harberd, N.P. (2004) Modulation
of floral development by a gibberellinregulated microRNA. Development
131, 3357–3365.
Amaya, I., Ratcliffe, O.J. and Bradley,
D.J. (1999) Expression of CENTRORADIALIS (CEN) and CEN-like genes
in tobacco reveals a conserved mechanism controlling phase change in
diverse species. Plant Cell 11,
1405–1418.
Andersen, C.H., Jensen, C.S. and Petersen, K. (2004) Similar genetic switch
systems might integrate the floral
inductive pathways in dicots and
monocots. Trends in Plant Science
9, 105–107.
Anthony, R.G., James, P.E. and Jordan,
B.R. (1995) The cDNA sequence of a
cauliflower apetala-1/squamosa homologue. Plant Physiology 108, 441–
442.
Anthony, R.G., James, P.E. and Jordan,
B.R. (1996) Cauliflower (Brassica oleracea L. var. botrytis) curd development: expression of meristem identity
genes. Journal of Experimental Botany 47, 181–188.
Aukerman, M.J. and Sakai, H. (2003)
Regulation of flowering time and floral
organ identity by a microRNA and its
APETALA2-like target genes. Plant
Cell 15, 2730–2741.

Barnes, S. (2002) Comparing Arabidopsis to other flowering plants. Current
Opinion in Plant Biology 5, 128–
133.
Bell-Lelong, D.A., Cusumano, J.C.,
Meyer, K. and Chapple, C. (1997) Cinnamate-4-hydroxylase expression in
Arabidopsis. Regulation in response
to development and the environment.
Plant Physiology 113, 729–738.
Berardini, T.Z., Bollman, K., Sun, H. and
Poethig, R.S. (2001) Regulation of
vegetative phase change in Arabidopsis thaliana by cyclophilin 40. Science
291, 2405–2407.
Bollman, K.M., Aukerman, M.J., Park,
M.Y., Hunter, C., Berardini, T.Z. and
Poethig, R.S. (2003) HASTY, the Arabidopsis ortholog of exportin 5/
MSN5, regulates phase change and
morphogenesis. Development 130,
1493–1504.
Bomblies, K., Wang, R.L., Ambrose,
B.A., Schmidt, R.J., Meeley, R.B. and
Doebley, J. (2003) Duplicate FLORICAULA / LEAFY homologs zfl1 and
zfl2 control inflorescence architecture
and flower patterning in maize. Development 130, 2385–2395.
Bommert, P., Satoh-Nagasawa, N., Jackson, D. and Hirano, H-Y. (2005) Genetics and evolution of inflorescence and
flower development in grasses. Plant
Cell Physiology 46, 69–78.

260

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan
Boss, P.K. and Thomas, M.R. (2000)
Tendrils, inflorescences and fruitfulness: a molecular perspective. Australian Journal of Grape and Wine
Research 6, 168–174.
Boss, P.K. and Thomas, M.R. (2002) Association of dwarfism and floral induction with a grape ‘green revolution’
mutation. Nature 416, 847–850.
Boss, P.K., Vivier, M., Matsumoto, S.,
Dry, I.B. and Thomas, M.R. (2001) A
cDNA from grapevine (Vitis vinifera
L.), which shows homology to AGAMOUS and SHATTERPROOF, is not
only expressed in flowers but also
throughout berry development. Plant
Molecular Biology 45, 541–553.
Boss, P.K., Sensi, E., Hua, C., Davies, C.
and Thomas, M.R. (2002) Cloning and
characterisation of grapevine (Vitis
vinifera L.) MADS-box genes expressed during inflorescence and berry
development. Plant Science 162,
887–895.
Boss, P.K., Buckeridge, E.J., Poole, A.
and Thomas, M.R. (2003) New insights into grapevine flowering. Functional Plant Biology 30, 593–606.
Boss, P.K., Bastow, R.M., Mylne, J.S. and
Dean, C. (2004) Multiple pathways in
the decision to flower: enabling, promoting, and resetting. Plant Cell 16,
S18–S31.
Bradley, D., Carpenter, R., Copsey, L.,
Vincent, C., Rothstein, S. and Coen,
E. (1996) Control of inflorescence
architecture in Antirrhinum. Nature
379, 791–797.
Bradley, D., Ratcliffe, O., Vincent, C.,
Carpenter, R. and Coen, E. (1997)
Inflorescence commitment and architecture in Arabidopsis. Science 275,
80–83.
Brunner, A.M. and Nilsson, O. (2004)
Revisiting tree maturation and floral
initiation in the poplar functional
genomics era. New Phytologist 164,
43–51.
Burch-Smith, T.M., Anderson, J.C., Martin, G.B. and Dinesh-Kumar, S.P.
(2004) Applications and advantages of

virus-induced gene silencing for gene
function studies in plants. Plant Journal 39, 734–746.
Burgess, D.G., Ralston, E.J., Hanson,
W.G., Heckert, M., Ho, M., Jenq, T.,
Palys, J.M., Tang, K.L. and Gutterson,
N. (2002) A novel, two-component
system for cell lethality and its use in
engineering nuclear male-sterility in
plants. Plant Journal 31, 113–125.
Burnham, C.R. (1961) Linkage relations
of teosinte branched. Maize Genetics
Cooperation News Letter 35, 87.
Buzgo, M., Soltis, D.E., Soltis, P.S. and
Ma, H. (2004) Towards a comprehensive integration of morphological
and genetic studies of floral development. Trends in Plant Science 9,
164–173.
Byzova, M., Verduyn, C., De Brouwer, D.
and De Block, M. (2004) Transforming
petals into sepaloid organs in Arabidopsis and oilseed rape: implementation of the hairpin RNA-mediated gene
silencing technology in an organ-specific manner. Planta 218, 379–387.
Calonje, M., Cubas, P., Martinez-Zapater,
J.M. and Carmona, M.J. (2004) Floral
meristem identity genes are expressed
during tendril development in grapevine. Plant Physiology 135, 1491–
1501.
Campbell, M.M., Brunner, A.M., Jones,
H.M. and Strauss, S.H. (2003) Forestry’s fertile crescent: the application
of biotechnology to forest trees. Plant
Biotechnology Journal 1, 141–154.
Carmel-Goren, L., Liu, Y.S., Lifschitz, E.
and Zamir, D. (2003) The SELFPRUNING gene family in tomato.
Plant Molecular Biology 52, 1215–
1222.
Carmona, M.J., Cubas, P. and MartinezZapater, J.M. (2002) VFL, the grapevine FLORICAULA / LEAFY ortholog,
is expressed in meristematic regions
independently of their fate. Plant
Physiology 130, 68–77.
Carrington, J.C. and Ambros, V. (2003)
Role of microRNAs in plant and animal
development. Science 301, 336–338.

Biotechnology of Floral Development
Carthew, R.W. (2001) Gene silencing by
double-stranded RNA. Current Opinion in Cell Biology 13, 244–248.
Clarke, J.H., Tack, D., Findlay, K., Van
Montagu, M. and Van Lijsebettens, M.
(1999) The SERRATE locus controls
the formation of the early juvenile
leaves and phase length in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 20, 493–501.
Coen, E.S., Romero, J.M., Doyle, S., Elliott, R., Murphy, G. and Carpenter, R.
(1990) Floricaula: a homeotic gene required for flower development in Antirrhinum majus. Cell 63, 1311–1322.
Constantin, G.D., Krath, B.N., MacFarlane, S.A., Nicolaisen, M., Johansen,
I.E. and Lund, O.S. (2004) Virus-induced gene silencing as a tool for functional genomics in a legume species.
Plant Journal 40, 622–631.
Coupland, G. (1995) LEAFY blooms in
aspen. Nature 377, 482–483.
Cubas, P. (2004) Floral zygomorphy, the
recurring evolution of a successful trait.
Bioessays 26, 1175–1184.
Cubas, P., Lauter, N., Doebley, J. and
Coen, E. (1999) The TCP domain: a
motif found in proteins regulating plant
growth and development. Plant Journal 18, 215–222.
Dinneny, J.R. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2004)
Floral development: an ABC gene
chips in downstream. Current Biology
14, R840–R841.
Doebley, J. (2004) The genetics of maize
evolution. Annual Review of Genetics
38, 37–59.
Doebley, J., Stec, A. and Hubbard, L.
(1997) The evolution of apical dominance in maize. Nature 386, 485–488.
Ehsan, H., Reichheld, J.P., Durfee, T. and
Roe, J.L. (2004) TOUSLED kinase
activity oscillates during the cell cycle
and interacts with chromatin regulators. Plant Physiology 134, 1488–
1499.
Evans, M.M.S. and Poethig, R.S. (1997)
The viviparous8 mutation delays vegetative phase change and accelerates
the rate of seedling growth in maize.
Plant Journal 12, 769–779.

261
Fambrini, M., Bertini, D. and Pugliesi, C.
(2003) The genetic basis of a mutation
that alters the floral symmetry in sunflower. Annals of Applied Biology
143, 341–347.
Ferrándiz, C., Gu, Q., Martienssen, R.
and Yanofsky, M.F. (2000) Redundant
regulation of meristem identity and
plant architecture by FRUITFULL,
APETALA1 and CAULIFLOWER.
Development 127, 725–734.
Ferrario, S., Immink, R.G. and Angenent,
G.C. (2004) Conservation and diversity in flower land. Current Opinion
in Plant Biology 7, 84–91.
Fornara, F., Parenicova, L., Falasca, G.,
Pelucchi, N., Masiero, S., Ciannamea,
S., Lopez-Dee, Z., Altamura, M.M.,
Colombo, L. and Kater, M.M. (2004)
Functional
characterization
of
OsMADS18, a member of the AP1/
SQUA subfamily of MADS box genes.
Plant Physiology 135, 2207–2219.
Franke, R., McMichael, C.M., Meyer, K.,
Shirley, A.M., Cusumano, J.C. and
Chapple, C. (2000) Modified lignin in
tobacco and poplar plants over-expressing the Arabidopsis gene encoding ferulate 5-hydroxylase. Plant
Journal 22(3), 223–234.
Garcia-Perez, R.D., Houdt, H.V. and
Depicker, A. (2004) Spreading of
post-transcriptional gene silencing
along the target gene promotes systemic silencing. Plant Journal 38,
594–602.
Ginzberg, I., Perl, A., Genser, M., Wininger, S., Nemas, C. and Kapulnik, Y.
(2004) Expression of streptavidin in tomato resulted in abnormal plant development that could be restored by biotin
application. Journal of Plant Physiology 161, 611–620.
Greenwood, M.S. (1995) Juvenility and
maturation in conifers: current concepts. Tree Physiology 15, 433–438.
Griffiths, S., Dunford, R.P., Coupland, G.
and Laurie, D.A. (2003) The evolution
of CONSTANS-like gene families in
barley, rice, and Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiology 131, 1855–1867.

262

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan
Guerineau, F., Sorensen, A.M., Fenby, N.
and Scott, R.J. (2003) Temperature
sensitive diphtheria toxin confers conditional male-sterility in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant Biotechnology Journal 1, 33–42.
Hempel, F.D., Welch, D.R. and Feldman,
L.J. (2000) Floral induction and determination: where is flowering controlled? Trends in Plant Science 5,
17–21.
Henderson, I.R. and Dean, C. (2004)
Control of Arabidopsis flowering: the
chill before the bloom. Development
131, 3829–3838.
Henikoff, S., Till, B.J. and Comai, L.
(2004) TILLING. Traditional mutagenesis meets functional genomics. Plant
Physiology 135, 630–636.
Honma, T. and Goto, K. (2001) Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral
organs. Nature 409, 525–529.
Hunter, C. and Poethig, R.S. (2003)
miSSING LINKS: miRNAs and plant
development. Current Opinion in
Genetics & Development 13, 372–
378.
Hunter, C., Sun, H. and Poethig, R.S.
(2003a) The Arabidopsis heterochronic gene ZIPPY is an ARGONAUTE
family member. Current Biology 13,
1734–1739.
Hunter, C.A., Aukerman, M.J., Sun, H.,
Fokina, M. and Poethig, R.S. (2003b)
PAUSED encodes the Arabidopsis
exportin-t ortholog. Plant Physiology
132, 2135–2143.
Joly, D., Perrin, M., Gertz, C., Kronenberger, J., Demangeat, G. and Masson, J.E. (2004) Expression analysis
of flowering genes from seedlingstage to vineyard life of grapevine
cv. Riesling. Plant Science 166,
1427–1436.
Jones, L. (2002) Revealing micro-RNAs in
plants. Trends in Plant Science 7,
473–475.
Jordan, B.R. (ed.) (1993) The Molecular
Biology of Flowering. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.

Jordan, B.R. and Anthony, R.G. (1997)
Molecular events associated with floral
evocation. In: Geneve, R.L., Preece,
J.E. and Merkle, S.A. (eds) The Biotechnology of Ornamental Plants.
CAB International, Wallingford, UK,
pp. 215–235.
Kapoor, M., Tsuda, S., Tanaka, Y.,
Mayama, T., Okuyama, Y., Tsuchimoto, S. and Takatsuji, H. (2002)
Role of petunia pMADS3 in determination of floral organ and meristem
identity, as revealed by its loss of function. Plant Journal 32, 115–127.
Kardailsky, I., Shukla, V.K., Ahn, J.H.,
Dagenais, N., Christensen, S.K.,
Nguyen, J.T., Chory, J., Harrison,
M.J. and Weigel, D. (1999) Activation
tagging of the floral inducer FT. Science 286, 1962–1965.
Keck, E., McSteen, P., Carpenter, R. and
Coen, E. (2003) Separation of genetic
functions controlling organ identity in
flowers. EMBO Journal 22, 1058–
1066.
Kempin, S.A., Savidge, B. and Yanofsky,
M. (1995) Molecular basis of the cauliflower phenotype in Arabidopsis. Science 267, 522–525.
Kidner, C.A. and Martienssen, R.A.
(2005) The developmental role of
microRNA in plants. Current Opinion
in Plant Biology 8, 38–44.
Komeda, Y. (2004) Genetic regulation of
time to flower in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Annual Review of Plant Biology 55,
521–535.
Lawson, E.J.R. and Poethig, R.S. (1995)
Shoot development in plants: time for
a change. Trends in Genetics 11,
263–265.
Lemmetyinen, J., Pennanen, T., Lannenpaa, M. and Sopanen, T. (2001) Prevention of flower formation in
dicotyledons. Molecular Breeding 7,
341–350.
Liu, J., Yu, J., McIntosh, L., Kende, H.
and Zeevaart, J.A.D. (2001) Isolation
of a CONSTANS ortholog from Pharbitis nil and its role in flowering. Plant
Physiology 125, 1821–1830.

Biotechnology of Floral Development
Liu, Y., Nakayama, N., Schiff, M., Litt,
A., Irish, V.F. and Dinesh-Kumar, S.P.
(2004) Virus induced gene silencing of
a DEFICIENS ortholog in Nicotiana
benthamiana. Plant Molecular Biology 54, 701–711.
Lolle, S.J., Victor, J.L., Young, J.M. and
Pruitt, R.E. (2005) Genome-wide nonMendelian inheritance of extra-genomic information in Arabidopsis. Nature 434, 505–509.
Lukens, L. and Doebley, J. (2001) Molecular evolution of the teosinte
branched gene among maize and related grasses. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 18, 627–638.
Luo, D., Carpenter, R., Vincent, C., Copsey, L. and Coen, E. (1996) Origin of
floral asymmetry in Antirrhinum. Nature 383, 794–799.
Mandel, M.A., Gustafson-Brown, C.,
Savidge, B. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(1992) Molecular characterization of
the Arabidopsis floral homeotic
gene APETALA1. Nature 360,
273–277.
Martin-Trillo, M. and Martinez-Zapater,
J.M. (2002) Growing up fast: manipulating the generation time of trees.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology
13, 151–155.
Meely, B. and Briggs, S. (1995) Reverse
genetics for maize. Maize Genetics
Cooperation News Letter 69, 67–82.
Mena, M., Mandel, A., Lerner, D.,
Yanofsky, M.F. and Schmidt, R.J.
(1995) A characterization of the
MADS-box gene family in maize.
Plant Journal 8, 845–854.
Meyer, K., Shirley, A.M., Cusumano,
J.C., Bell-Lelong, D.A. and Chapple,
C. (1998) Lignin monomer composition is determined by the expression
of a cytochrome P450-dependent
monooxygenase in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 95, 6619–6623.
Mizutani, M., Ohta, D. and Sato, R.
(1997) Isolation of a cDNA and a
genomic clone encoding cinnamate
4-hydroxylase from Arabidopsis and

263
its expression manner in planta. Plant
Physiology 113, 755–763.
Moon, J., Suh, S., Lee, H., Choi, K.,
Hong, C., Paek, N., Kim, S., Lee, I.,
Moon, J., Suh, S.S., Lee, H., Choi,
K.R., Hong, C.B., Paek, N.C., Kim,
S.G. and Lee, I. (2003) The SOC1
MADS-box gene integrates vernalization and gibberellin signals for flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 35,
613–623.
Murai, K., Miyamae, M., Kato, H.,
Takumi, S. and Ogihara, Y. (2003)
WAP1, a wheat APETALA1 homolog, plays a central role in the phase
transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. Plant and Cell Physiology
44, 1255–1265.
Ng, M. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2001) Function and evolution of the plant MADSbox gene family. Nature Reviews Genetics 2, 186–195.
Ohshima, S., Murata, M., Sakamoto, W.,
Ogura, Y. and Motoyoshi, F. (1997)
Cloning and molecular analysis of the
Arabidopsis
gene
TERMINAL
FLOWER 1. Molecular and General
Genetics 254, 186–194.
Oleykowski, C., Bronson Mullins, C.,
Godwin, A. and Yeung, A. (1998) Mutation detection using a novel plant
endonuclease. Nucleic Acids Research 26, 4597–4602.
Pena, L., Martin-Trillo, M., Juarez, J.,
Pina, J.A., Navarro, L. and MartinezZapater, J.M. (2001) Constitutive expression of Arabidopsis LEAFY or
APETALA1 genes in citrus reduces
their generation time. Nature Biotechnology 19, 263–267.
Pennazio, S. (2004) ‘Florigen’: an intriguing concept of plant biology.
Rivista Di Biologia-Biology Forum
97, 33–51.
Peragine, A., Yoshikawa, M., Wu, G.,
Albrecht, H.L. and Poethig, R.S.
(2004) SGS3 and SGS2 / SDE1/
RDR6 are required for juvenile development and the production of transacting siRNAs in Arabidopsis. Genes
& Development 18, 2368–2379.

264

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan
Pineiro, M. and Coupland, G. (1998) The
control of flowering time and floral
identity in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 117, 1–8.
Pnueli, L., Carmel-Goren, L., Hareven,
D., Gutfinger, T., Alvarez, J., Ganal,
M., Zamir, D. and Lifschitz, E. (1998)
The SELF-PRUNING gene of tomato
regulates vegetative to reproductive
switching of sympodial meristems and
is the ortholog of CEN and TFL1. Development 125, 1979–1989.
Poethig, R.S. (1988) Heterochronic mutations affecting shoot development in
maize. Genetics 119, 959–973.
Poethig, S. (1997) Heterochrony in plant
development and evolution. Developmental Biology 186, Suppl. S46.
Poethig, S. (2002a) Genetic regulation of
vegetative phase change in plants. Developmental Biology 247, Suppl.
521.
Poethig, S. (2002b) Temporal and genetic
regulation of vegetative phase change.
Plant and Cell Physiology 43, Suppl.
S8.
Poethig, R.S. (2003) Phase change and
the regulation of developmental timing
in plants. Science 301, 334–336.
Putterill, J., Robson, F., Lee, K., Simon, R.
and Coupland, G. (1995) The CONSTANS gene of Arabidopsis promotes
flowering and encodes a protein showing similarities to zinc finger transcription factors. Cell 80, 847–857.
Reinhardt, D. and Kuhlemeier, C. (2002)
Plant architecture. EMBO Reports 3,
846–851.
Reinhart, B.J., Weinstein, E.G., Rhoades,
M.W., Bartel, B. and Bartel, D.P.
(2002) MicroRNAs in plants. Genes
& Development 16, 1616–1626.
Robert, L.S., Robson, F., Sharpe, A.,
Lydiate, D. and Coupland, G. (1998)
Conserved structure and function of
the Arabidopsis flowering time gene
CONSTANS in Brassica napus.
Plant Molecular Biology 37, 763–
772.
Robertson, D. (2004) VIGS vectors for
gene silencing: many targets, many

tools. Annual Review of Plant Biology 55, 495–519.
Robson, F., Costa, M.M.R., Hepworth,
S.R., Vizir, I., Pineiro, M., Reeves,
P.H., Putterill, J. and Coupland, G.
(2001) Functional importance of conserved domains in the flowering-time
gene CONSTANS demonstrated by
analysis of mutant alleles and transgenic plants. Plant Journal 28, 619–
631.
Rottmann, W.H., Meilan, R., Sheppard,
L.A., Brunner, A.M., Skinner, J.S.,
Ma, C., Cheng, S., Jouanin, L., Pilate,
G., Strauss, S.H., Ma, C.P. and
Cheng, S.P. (2000) Diverse effects of
overexpression of LEAFY and PTLF,
a poplar (Populus) homolog of
LEAFY / FLORICAULA, in transgenic
poplar and Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 22, 235–245.
Sandvig, K., Spilsberg, B., Lauvrak, S.U.,
Torgersen, M.L., Iversen, T.G. and van
Deurs, B. (2004) Pathways followed by
protein toxins into cells. Zentralblatt fur
Bakteriologie. International Journal
of Medical Microbiology 293, 483.
Sasaki, A., Ashikari, M., Ueguchi-Tanaka,
M., Itoh, H., Nishimura, A., Swapan,
D., Ishiyama, K., Saito, T., Kobayashi,
M., Khush, G.S., Kitano, H. and
Matsuoka, M. (2002) Green revolution: a mutant gibberellin-synthesis
gene in rice – new insight into the rice
variant that helped to avert famine over
thirty years ago. Nature 416, 701–
702.
Schmidt, R.J. and Ambrose, B.A. (1998)
The blooming of grass flower development. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 1, 60–67.
Schmidt, R.J., Veit, B., Mandel, M.A.,
Mena, M., Hake, S. and Yanofsky,
M.F. (1993) Identification and molecular characterization of ZAG1, the
maize homologue of the Arabidopsis
floral homeotic gene AGAMOUS.
Plant Cell, 5729–5737.
Shavrukov, Y.N., Dry, I.B. and Thomas,
M.R. (2004) Inflorescence and
bunch architecture development in

Biotechnology of Floral Development
Vitis vinifera L. Australian Journal
of Grape and Wine Research 10,
116–124.
Skinner, J.S., Meilan, R., Brunner, A.M.,
Strauss, S.H. (2000) Options for genetic engineering of floral sterility in
forest trees. In: Jain, S.M. and Minocha, S.C. (eds) Molecular Biology of
Woody Plants. Vol.1, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 135–
153.
Smith, H.M.S., Campbell, B.C. and
Hake, S. (2004) Competence to respond to floral inductive signals requires
the
homeobox
genes
PENNYWISE and POUND-FOOLISH. Current Biology 14, 812–817.
Spielmeyer, W., Ellis, M.H. and Chandler,
P.M. (2002) Semidwarf (sd-1), ‘‘green
revolution’’ rice, contains a defective
gibberellin 20-oxidase gene. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 99, 9043–9048.
Srinivasan, C. and Mullins, M.G. (1980)
Effects of temperature and growth
regulators on formation of anlagen,
tendrils and inflorescences in Vitis
vinifera L. Annals of Botany 45,
439–446.
Strauss, S.H., Rottmann, W.H., Brunner,
A.M. and Sheppard, C.A. (1995)
Genetic engineering of reproductive
sterility in forest trees. Molecular
Breeding 1, 5–26.
Sung, Z.R., Chen, L., Moon, Y.H. and
Lertpiriyapong, K. (2003) Mechanisms of floral repression in Arabidopsis. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 6, 29–35.
Tang, G. and Zamore, P.D. (2004) Biochemical dissection of RNA silencing
in plants. Methods in Molecular Biology 257, 223–244.
Telfer, A. and Poethig, R.S. (1998)
HASTY: a gene that regulates the timing of shoot maturation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 125,
1889–1898.
Theissen, G. and Saedler, H. (2001)
Plant biology: floral quartets. Nature
409, 469–471.

265
Till, B.J., Reynolds, S.H., Greene, E.A.,
Codomo, C.A., Enns, L.C., Johnson,
J.E., Burtner, C., Odden, A.R.,
Young, K., Taylor, N.E., Henikoff,
J.G., Comai, L. and Henikoff, S.
(2003) Large-scale discovery of induced point mutations with highthroughput TILLING. Genome Research 13, 524–530.
Vaistij, F.E., Jones, L. and Baulcombe,
D.C. (2002) Spreading of RNA targeting and DNA methylation in RNA silencing requires transcription of the
target gene and a putative RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Plant Cell 14,
857–867.
Vega, S.H., Sauer, M., Orkwiszewski,
J.A.J. and Poethig, R.S. (2002) The
early phase change gene in maize.
Plant Cell 14, 133–147.
Walton, E.F., Podivinsky, E. and Wu,
R-M. (2001) Biomodel patterns of
floral gene expression over the two
seasons that kiwifruit flowers develop.
Physiologia Plantarum 111, 396–
404.
Wang, M.B. and Waterhouse, P.M.
(2002) Application of gene silencing
in plants. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 5, 146–150.
Waterhouse, P.M., Wang, M.B. and Finnegan, E.J. (2001) Role of short RNAs
in gene silencing. Trends in Plant Science 6, 297–301.
Weigel, D. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1994)
The ABC’s of floral homeotic genes.
Cell 78, 203–209.
Weigel, D., Alvarez, J., Smyth, D.R.,
Yanofsky, M.F. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1992) LEAFY controls floral meristem identity in Arabidopsis. Cell 69,
843–859.
Williams, C.G. and Savolainen, O. (1996)
Inbreeding depression in conifers: implications for using selfing as a breeding strategy. Forestry Science 42,
102–117.
Wiltshire, R.J.E., Murfet, I.C. and Reid,
J.B. (1994) The genetic control of heterochrony: evidence from developmental mutants of Pisum sativum L.

266

C. Winefield and B.R. Jordan
Journal Evolutionary Biology 7,
447–465.
Yano, M., Katayose, Y., Ashikari, M.,
Yamanouchi, U., Monna, L., Fuse,
T., Baba, T., Yamamoto, K., Umehara, Y., Nagamura, Y. and Sasaki,
T. (2000) Hd1, a major photoperiod
sensitivity quantitative trait locus in
rice, is closely related to the Arabidopsis flowering time gene CONSTANS.
Plant Cell 12, 2473–2484.
Yanofsky, M.F. (1995) Floral meristems
to floral organs: genes controlling
early events in Arabidopsis flower de-

velopment. Annual Review of Plant
Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 46, 167–188.
Yanofsky, M.F., Ma, H., Bowman, J.L.,
Drews, G.N., Feldmann, K.A. and
Meyerowitz, E.M. (1990) The protein
encoded by the Arabidopsis homeotic
gene agamous resembles transcription
factors. Nature 346, 35–39.
Zik, M. and Irish, V.F. (2003) Flower development: initiation, differentiation,
and diversification. Annual Review of
Cell and Developmental Biology 19,
119–140.

III

Fertilization and Gametophyte
Development

This page intentionally left blank

10

Control of Fertilization
by Self-incompatibility
Mechanisms

T. GAUDE, I. FOBIS-LOISY AND C. MIÈGE
Reproduction et Développement des Plantes, Ecole Normale Supérieure
de Lyon, UMR 5667 CNRS-INRA-ENSL-UCB Lyon I, IFR 128 BioSciences
Lyon-Gerland, 46 allée d’Italie 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France

Introduction
In approximately 96% of flowering plant species, male and female organs are
carried on the same individual, and in most cases (approximately 75% of
species) within the hermaphroditic structure of flowers. Due to this close
proximity of reproductive organs, there is a high probability for pollen to land
on the stigma of the same flower or of a flower carried by the same individual.
This feature will favour self-pollination and, as a consequence, will reduce the
genetic variability in the species due to inbreeding. Besides, most angiosperms
are anchored in the soil by their roots and therefore cannot actively search out
their sexual partners. One might think that these traits should have promoted
or imposed self-pollination, and thus self-fertilization, and might therefore have
been deleterious for the evolution of angiosperms. However, since the end of
the tertiary era, angiosperms have diversified and conquered almost all environments. They are the most successful groups of terrestrial flora both in terms
of the number of species (approximately 300,000 described so far) and by their
diversity of forms and ecological niches. One of the reasons for this success is
thought to be the acquisition by the angiosperms of mechanisms that strongly
limit or even prevent self-fertilization. The most sophisticated and widespread
of these mechanisms is self-incompatibility (SI), which leads to the rejection
of self-pollen by the pistil. SI mechanisms were described and studied as far
back as the end of the 18th century by Charles Darwin, who observed that
some plant species were completely sterile to their own pollen but fertile with
that of any other individual of the same species (Darwin, 1876). Since this
pioneer work, SI has been found to occur in more than half of the flowering
plant species. Angiosperms have probably acquired SI early in their evolution
(Weller et al., 1995), and genetic and molecular data clearly indicate that
ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

269

270

T. Gaude et al.

SI arose independently several times during the course of evolution (de
Nettancourt, 2001; Steinbachs and Holsinger, 2002). SI constitutes a quite
original system of recognition since its operation is opposite to the immune
system of vertebrates, to reject self while accepting non-self (Gaude and
Dumas, 1987).
SI systems allow the pistil to reject self-pollen grains, which are pollen
issued from the same flower or from individuals genetically related to the female
plant. In most cases, SI is genetically controlled by a single multiallelic locus, the
S-locus (S for SI). SI systems can be classified into heteromorphic and homomorphic types (see de Nettancourt, 2001). In the heteromorphic type, flowers
of the same species can have two or three different morphological forms, and
successful pollination occurs only between flowers of different morphological
forms. In the homomorphic type, there is no distinguishable difference between flowers of the same species. Homomorphic systems can further
be classified into gametophytic self-incompatibility (GSI) or sporophytic selfincompatibility (SSI), depending on the genetic control of the pollen behaviour
during SI interactions. In GSI, the phenotype of the pollen is determined by its
own haploid genome, whereas in SSI the pollen phenotype depends on the
diploid (sporophytic) genome of the pollen parent plant. In all cases, pollen
rejection occurs when the same S-allele specificity is expressed by both the
pollen and the pistil tissue (stigma, style or ovary).
Since the beginning of the 1980s, the rapid expansion of new techniques
in molecular biology and protein chemistry, and their use to study SI systems,
has allowed significant advances in our knowledge of which molecules are
involved in male–female recognition in flowering plants. Four of the families
that display GSI, Solanaceae, Rosaceae, Scrophulariaceae and Papaveraceae, and one of the families that exhibits SSI, Brassicaceae (previously Crucifereae), have been extensively studied at the molecular level. These families
often contain plant species of substantial interest for horticulture or agriculture,
and thus, have been the object of intense classical genetic work in the past. For
all these five families, SI is controlled by a single polymorphic S-locus. Although
it is clear now that other loci are also required for a complete manifestation of
the SI response, it is the S-locus that governs the self/non-self recognition step
between the male and female partners. At least two distinct genetically linked
genes are present at the S-locus, one encoding the male determinant while the
second encodes the female determinant. Because of the presence of two genes
(S-genes) at the S-locus, the term ‘haplotypes’ is generally used to designate
variants of the S-locus (Boyes and Nasrallah, 1993). The mechanistic and
molecular aspects of SI in these model families have been reviewed recently
(see Kachroo et al., 2002; Franklin-Tong and Franklin, 2003; Hiscock and
McInnis, 2003; Kao and Tsukamoto, 2004). The evolutionary aspects of SI
have also been the concern of recent work and reviews (see Charlesworth
et al., 2003; Vieira et al., 2003; Fobis-Loisy et al., 2004; Nasrallah et al.,
2004; Shimizu et al., 2004). In this chapter, we concentrate on the most
recent data concerning the molecular bases of SI studied in three model
systems, two illustrating GSI (Solanaceae and Papaveraceae) and one illustrating SSI (Brassicaceae).

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

271

Gametophytic Self-incompatibility
GSI is the most widespread system in flowering plants and has been described
in more than 60 families including the Solanaceae, Rosaceae, Scrophulariaceae, Papaveraceae, Liliaceae and Poaceae. GSI has been particularly studied
in two Solanaceae species (Nicotiana alata and Petunia inflata) and one
Papaveraceae species (the poppy, Papaver rhoeas). Self-pollen rejection generally occurs by the arrest of pollen tube growth in the transmitting tissue of the
style. However, in poppy and grasses, pollen tube growth is stopped earlier at
the stigmatic surface. In the case of grasses, SI is genetically controlled by two
loci, namely the S- and Z-genes; and this superior level of complexity, as
compared to the single S-locus systems, has seriously slowed down the elucidation of the molecular bases of self-pollen rejection in this family (Baumann
et al., 2000). The female component of SI has been characterized in five
families. Interestingly, the same molecular mechanism based on a stylar ribonuclease (S-RNase) seems to be involved in the Solanaceae, Rosaceae,
Scrophulariaceae and Campanulaceae. By contrast, a secreted glycoprotein (S-glycoprotein) with no known catalytic activity is involved in the
Papaveraceae.

The S-RNase-based Self-incompatibility of the Solanaceae
The female determinant is the S-RNase
Since the first description of SI in the solanaceous Nicotiana sanderae by East
and Mangelsdorf (1925), and the first report on the identification of pistilspecific S-proteins isolated in N. alata (Bredemeijer and Blass, 1981), it was
only in the mid-1980s that the first S-gene of GSI systems was cloned from
N. alata (Anderson et al., 1986). At that time, nucleotide or amino acid
sequence databases were in their infancy; and it was only 3 years later that the
biochemical nature of S-proteins was actually revealed, when the sequence of
the extracellular RNase T2 of the fungus Aspergillus oryzae was found to share
sequence similarity with S-proteins (McClure et al., 1989). During the meantime, several S-proteins and clones were isolated from other S-haplotypes,
species and families exhibiting GSI. The S-gene products indeed have RNase
activity and are glycoproteins abundantly expressed in the pistil (several micrograms per pistil). They are secreted in the extracellular space, principally in the
stigma and transmitting tissue of the style. One remarkable feature of S-RNases
is their high level of allelic sequence diversity. For example, in the Solanaceae,
amino acid identity between S-RNases ranges from 38% to 98%. This level of
polymorphism is unusual for most genes, but is expected for products of genes
that are involved in self-recognition mechanisms (Clark and Kao, 1991).
A new S-allele arising in a population is favoured, because pollen bearing this
new S-allele will have high probability to encounter a stigma bearing a different
S-allele. Sequence comparisons of S-RNases revealed that there are a large
number of variable sites throughout the protein; however, two hypervariable

272

T. Gaude et al.

(HV) regions, namely HVa and HVb, were identified first in the solanaceous
S-RNases (Ioerger et al., 1990; Tsai et al., 1992) and later in the Antirrhinum
S-RNases (Xue et al., 1996). In the Rosaceae, Ishimizu et al. (1998) identified
four regions of the S-RNase sequences that appear to be under positive
selection, of which two overlap with the HVa and HVb domains. More recently, the crystal structure of two S-RNases has been determined by X-ray
diffraction in N. alata and Pyrus pyrifolia, respectively (Ida et al., 2001;
Matsuura et al., 2001). These studies reveal that both HVa and HVb regions
are exposed on the surface of the protein and support a role for the HV regions
in determining allelic specificity of the female determinant. However, a recent
phylogenetic analysis of S-RNases based on new sequence information suggests that S-specificity may involve amino acids scattered through the S-RNases
and shows evidence of recombination and/or diversifying selection in two
distinct regions of S-RNases, corresponding to HVa and C-terminus, respectively (Roalson and McCubbin, 2003).
S-RNases were good candidates as female determinants of GSI because
they segregated with S-haplotypes; were polymorphic molecules; were expressed exclusively in the female tissues; and were developmentally correlated
with the onset of SI. Direct confirmation of their involvement was first achieved
by transgenic experiments in both Petunia and Nicotiana (Lee et al., 1994;
Murfett et al., 1994). In Petunia, a loss-of-function approach (based on an
antisense strategy) and a gain-of-function approach (using a sense strategy)
were used by the group of Teh-hui Kao in the USA, to prove that S-RNases are
sufficient for the recognition and rejection of self-pollen by the pistil (Lee et al.,
1994). RNase activity is required for self-pollen rejection, because transgenic
plants expressing a mutated S3-protein lacking RNase activity are not able to
reject S3-pollen (Huang et al., 1994). Kao’s team also investigated whether the
carbohydrate moiety and HV regions of S-RNases were important for recognition specificity. Expression of a mutated non-glycosylated S3-protein in transgenic plants did not alter the SI phenotype, indicating that the glycan chains do
not confer S-specificity and are not necessary for S-RNase function in recognition and rejection of self-pollen (Karunanandaa et al., 1994). To address the
role of HV regions in S-specificity, plants were transformed with constructs
encoding chimeric S-RNases composed of the major part of the S3-RNase, but
containing HV regions from the S1-RNase. The resulting transgenic plants lost
the ability to reject S3-pollen but did not acquire the ability to reject S1-pollen,
despite the fact that chimeric S-RNases exhibited normal levels of RNase
activity (Kao and McCubbin, 1996). This result suggests that HV regions of
S-RNases are necessary but not sufficient for determining S-specificity. An
apparently contradictory result was obtained by Matton et al. (1997), who
used two very closely related S-RNases (S11 and S13) of Solanum chacoense.
These two S-RNases only differ by ten amino acid residues, of which four are
located in HV regions. Plants transformed with chimeric gene constructs
in which the S11-RNase had those four amino acids changed to those of the
S13-RNase exhibited an S13-specificity. In this particular case, it appears that
HV regions are sufficient for controlling S-haplotype specificity. However, it
cannot be ruled out that amino acids outside HV regions and conserved

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

273

between S11-RNase and S13-RNase might also be involved in the recognition
specificity of S-RNases (Verica et al., 1998). Although it is clear from these
data that HV regions are important elements in determining S-specificity of
S-RNases, further structure/function analyses are required to define more
precisely domains of S-RNases that play a role in specific pollen recognition.
A remarkable feature of all these transgenic experiments is that only the SI
phenotype of the pistil was affected, the pollen phenotype remaining unchanged. This is consistent with the idea that two different genes located at
the S-locus encode pollen and pistil S-molecules.
How the S-RNases recognize and specifically inhibit self-pollen tubes remains unknown. Initially, based on our knowledge of cell–cell recognition
systems in animals, it was thought that the SI reaction might be triggered by
a ligand–receptor-type interaction. In this hypothesis, it was presumed that the
pollen S-determinant is a receptor present at the surface of the pollen tube
(in the wall or plasma membrane). Stylar S-RNases, which share the same
S-haplotype specificity as that of the pollen S-receptor, are translocated into
the pollen tube. This would lead to hydrolysis of ribosomal and messenger
RNAs, blocking protein synthesis and therefore pollen tube growth (Kao and
McCubbin, 1996). However, Luu et al. (2000) have shown that this selective
entry of S-RNases into self-pollen tubes does not occur. By an elegant immunocytochemical study, these authors demonstrated in vivo uptake of the
S11-RNase by S12-pollen tubes, indicating that S-RNases enter the pollen
tubes independently of their S-allele specificity. This observation is compatible
with another proposed hypothesis, which however gained fewer supporters.
This hypothesis presumes that the pollen S-determinant is a cytosolic RNase
inhibitor, which inactivates all S-RNases except the one sharing the same
S-haplotype specificity as that of the pollen. In this ‘inhibitor’ model, only the
S-RNases recognized as ‘self’ inside the pollen tube will not be inhibited, and
thus will degrade RNA and stop pollen tube growth. This model supposes a dual
function for the pollen S-product: (i) an S-specific recognition function; and
(ii) an S-RNase inhibitor function. Another possibility is to have these two
functions in two distinct molecules; the pollen S-determinant is responsible
for S-specific recognition of the cognate S-RNase while a general RNase
inhibitor is present in the pollen cytosol (Luu et al., 2000). In this latter
model, specific interaction between the pollen S-product and its cognate
S-RNase in self-incompatible tubes prevents the inhibitor from blocking the
action of stylar S-RNases.
The discovery of the pollen S-determinant has recently provided new
support for this ‘inhibitor’ model.
The male determinant is the S-locus F-box/S-haplotype-specific F-box protein
During the last few years, a considerable amount of effort has been devoted to
the isolation of the pollen S-gene. Recent advances in techniques of molecular
biology, especially the development of bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
libraries and facilities for large-scale genomic DNA sequencing, have played
a major role in the identification of the pollen S-gene. As female and male

274

T. Gaude et al.

S-genes are genetically linked, both genes are predicted to be in close vicinity.
The regions flanking S-RNases were sequenced and a good pollen S-gene
candidate was searched for, i.e. an S-haplotype-specific polymorphic gene,
specifically expressed in pollen (or male tissues) and located at the S-locus.
The strongest candidate was isolated in Antirrhinum hispanicum (Scrophulariaceae) by Lai et al. (2002). This gene is located approximately 9 kb
downstream from the S-RNase gene, encoding an F-box-containing protein
and was designated AhSLF (A. hispanicum S-locus F-box gene). Most F-boxcontaining proteins are components of ubiquitin-ligase (E3) complexes that,
together with ubiquitin-activating enzymes (E1) and ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes (E2), catalyse the polyubiquitination of specific substrates leading to
their degradation by the 26S proteasome (Bai et al., 1996). Interestingly,
homologues of AhSLF have been identified in several Prunus (Rosaceae)
species (referred to as SLF in Prunus mume and SFB in Prunus dulcis) and
in P. inflata (Entani et al., 2003; Ushijima et al., 2003; Sijacic et al., 2004).
For clarity, we use only the term SLF to designate SLF/SFB pollen S-determinants. In P. inflata, PiSLF was located approximately 161 kb downstream
of the S-RNase gene (Sijacic et al., 2004). Comparison of 13 SLF sequences
of Prunus species revealed the presence of two HV regions, named HVa and
HVb, located at the C-terminus (Ikeda et al., 2004; Kao and Tsukamoto,
2004). These HV regions might be responsible for the S-haplotype specificity
of SLFs. The F-box motif is at the N-terminus and is relatively conserved among
the various SLFs analysed.
Demonstration that SLF is the pollen S-determinant was recently achieved
in P. inflata (Sijacic et al., 2004) and A. hypersicum (Qiao et al., 2004a). In
both studies, a similar approach was developed based on the ‘competitive
interaction’ observed in the Solanaceae and other GSI species. Competitive interaction causes breakdown of SI by affecting exclusively the function of
the pollen S-determinant. This phenomenon, which has been well described
at the classical genetic level, occurs when a pollen grain carries two different
S-haplotype specificities, arising for instance from duplications of the S-locus
or from tetraploidy (see de Nettancourt, 2001). The defect only concerns
heterollalelic pollen grains, e.g. diploid S1S2-pollen are compatible on S1S1-,
S2S2-, S1S2-diploid or S1S1S2S2-tetraploid pistils. Pistil SI function is unchanged in tetraploids. Sijacic et al. (2004) introduced the PiSLF2 allele in
self-incompatible S1S1 plants and obtained self-compatible plants in the progeny. Breakdown of SI was only detected on the pollen side and occurred
only on S1-pollen grains expressing PiSLF2. The results were exactly as predicted by the competitive interaction. Interestingly, they showed by RT-PCR
that both endogenous PiSLF1 and the PiSLF2 transgene were transcribed,
indicating that competitive interaction is not dependent on silencing of pollen
S-genes.
How then does the discovery of the pollen S-determinant being an F-box
protein fit with the ‘inhibitor’ model? If SLF is a component of the protein
degradation machinery, the inhibition of non-self S-RNases could occur by a
direct interaction between SLF and S-RNases, followed by the ubiquitination
and degradation of S-RNases. Interestingly, Qiao et al. (2004b) showed in

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

275

Antirrhinum that AhSLF2 physically interacts with both self and non-self
S-RNases, but seems to mediate degradation of only non-self S-RNases. We
may suppose that PiSLF might act similarly. Nevertheless, these data do not
allow us to distinguish as to whether the SLF molecule carries the two functions
of S-haplotype recognition and S-RNase inhibition or only S-haplotype recognition, inhibition of S-RNases being controlled by a general RNase inhibitor
that may not necessarily be encoded by an S-locus gene. Recent research
carried out on two self-compatible selections of Prunus avium (sweet cherry)
provides new insights on how SLF might work in SI (Sonneveld et al., 2005).
Both selections have a functional S-RNase and self-compatibility is attributed to
a loss-of-function of the pollen S-determinant. A molecular analysis demonstrated that there is no evidence of a duplication in either mutant selection, but
one mutant has a sequence rearrangement downstream of the S-RNase gene,
which includes the complete deletion of the SLF gene, while the other mutant
has a 4-bp deletion in the HVa region of SLF, which leads to a shift in the
translation reading frame and premature termination of the protein. The loss of
pollen SI function in these two selections, associated with the loss or significant
alteration of the SLF gene, provides compelling evidence that SLF is the gene
encoding the pollen S-determinant in Prunus. In the inhibitor model, if SLF has
a dual function, the loss-of-function of SLF should be coupled with the loss of
inhibition of S-RNases. As a consequence, stylar S-RNases that enter the pollen
tubes would remain active and block pollen tube growth, leading to an SI
phenotype. Interestingly, a self-compatibility phenotype is observed in both
sweet cherry mutants impaired in their pollen S function, which indicates that
SLF does not carry the S-RNase inhibition function. These results are somehow
contradictory to those obtained in Antirrhinum, which suggested that AhSLF2
interacts with non-self S-RNases to target non-self S-RNase proteasomal degradation during compatible pollination (Qiao et al., 2004b). By contrast, the
work in Prunus suggests that SLF is likely to control only the specific
S-haplotype recognition of S-RNases, preventing their inactivation by a general
RNase inhibitor present in pollen tubes. These recent data are in favour of the
two-component inhibitor model proposed by Luu et al. (2000). In this context,
the role of the F-box domain of SLF is difficult to understand if SLF is not
directly involved in S-RNase inactivation. We propose a possible mode of
action of SLF, based on its specific interaction with its cognate S-RNase, within
a protein complex made up of the heterotrimer S-RNase/general RNase
inhibitor/SLF (Fig. 10.1). The role of SLF in this complex would be to promote
polyubiquitination of the general RNase inhibitor, and hence, its degradation,
leading to the maintenance of active S-RNases in the pollen tube and arrest of
growth. In the absence of molecular recognition between SLF and S-RNase,
only S-RNase/general RNase inhibitor heterodimers would form authorizing
the growth of compatible pollen tubes. Although protein degradation via the
26S proteasome activity has been shown to be important in compatible but not
in incompatible interactions in Antirrhinum, the direct involvement of SLF in
an E3 complex remains to be demonstrated (Qiao et al., 2004b). It is worth
mentioning that classic and molecular genetic studies have revealed the existence of genes at other loci than the S-locus that are required for the full

276

T. Gaude et al.

S2-RNase

General
RNase inhibitor

S1-pollen tube

No RNase
activity

S1-RNase

Pollen SLF1

RNase
activity

Ub

AAA

Degradation

26S
proteasome

mRNA
rRNA

Tube
tube growth
growth
arrest
arrest

S1S2 style

Fig. 10.1. Model for the S-RNase-dependent mechanism of gametophytic self-incompatibility
(GSI). Stylar S-RNases (S1- and S2-RNases) present in the extracellular space of transmitting tissue
cells are taken up into the growing S1-pollen tube, independently of their S-allele specificity.
Identity of proteins involved in this translocation is still unknown. Once in the pollen tube
cytosol, S-RNases sharing no S-allele specificity with the pollen S-locus F-box (SLF) protein will
interact with a general pollen RNase inhibitor that inactivates the S-RNases. By contrast, if the
S-RNase and SLF share the same S-allele specificity (here S1), the general pollen RNase inhibitor
will not be able to inactivate the self S1-RNase. We propose that this occurs via the formation of a
heterotrimeric protein complex consisting of the S1-RNase/general RNase inhibitor/SLF1 proteins.
The role of SLF1 in this complex would be to promote specific polyubiquitination of the general
RNase inhibitor leading to its degradation by the 26S proteasome. In the absence of inhibition, the
S1-RNase remains active and can degrade the pollen tube RNA, resulting in the arrest of selfpollen tube growth. PM ¼ plasma membrane.

manifestation of the SI response (Kao and Tsukamoto, 2004). In particular,
Sims and Ordanic (2001) isolated in a yeast two-hybrid screen a pollenexpressed protein of Petunia hybrida, namely PhSBP1, which contains a
RING-finger domain and binds to S-RNases in a non-S-allele-specific
manner. RING-finger domains are often present in proteins, like F-box proteins, which participate in E3 complexes. These authors suggest that PhSBP1
is a good candidate for the general inhibitor of S-RNases, the existence of
which is presumed to be necessary in the two-component inhibitor model.

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

277

Further molecular and biochemical investigations are required to define the role
of SLF in the specific recognition of S-RNases and to elucidate the mechanism
of S-RNase inactivation. Further work is also needed to ascertain whether SI in
the Solanaceae, Scrophulariaceae and Rosaceae operates according to similar molecular mechanisms.

The S-glycoprotein-based self-incompatibility of the Papaveraceae
In the GSI system of the Papaveraceae, the model species field poppy
P. rhoeas has been particularly well studied by research groups in Birmingham,
UK, first by Mike Lawrence and co-workers and then by Chris Franklin,
Veronica Franklin-Tong and co-workers. By contrast to the S-RNase GSI
systems described above, recognition and rejection of self-pollen grains occurs
very rapidly within minutes, after deposition of pollen on to the stigmatic
papillae of poppy flowers. The stigmatic S-determinant has been identified
and several alleles of the female S-gene cloned (Foote et al., 1994). The
stigmatic S-proteins are small (approximately 15 kDa) glycoproteins secreted
in the extracellular space, which do not have RNase activity or any other known
catalytic activity. However, using an in vitro pollen germination assay,
stigmatic S-glycoproteins have been shown to inhibit pollen tube growth in
an S-haplotype-specific manner. This led to the hypothesis that the stigmatic
S-glycoproteins interact with the pollen S-gene product, which is believed to be
a plasma membrane receptor. In the search for such a receptor, a pollen
plasma membrane protein called S-protein-binding protein (SBP) was shown
to interact specifically with the stigmatic S-glycoproteins, but with no S-haplotype specificity (Hearn et al., 1996). For this reason, it is likely that SBP is not
the pollen S-determinant but it may be an accessory receptor required for a full
manifestation of the SI response. This idea gained support from the analysis of
mutant forms of the stigmatic S-glycoprotein, which were produced in Escherichia coli and assayed for pollen inhibition and SBP binding in vitro. All mutant
forms that exhibit reduced ability to inhibit incompatible pollen tube growth are
also reduced in SBP binding activity (Jordan et al., 1999). A better understanding of the initial event that takes place at the plasma membrane during selfpollen recognition necessitates cloning of SBP and the pollen S-receptor.
Although the pollen S-determinant is still unknown in the poppy, the use of
in vitro germination assay and recombinant forms of stigmatic S-glycoproteins
has allowed us to get considerable information on the signal transduction
pathway that occurs in pollen tubes after the initial recognition response (see
the review by Franklin-Tong and Franklin, 2003). Briefly, SI induction triggers
a transient increase in cytosolic [Ca2þ]i, involving influx of extracellular Ca2þ at
the shank of the pollen tube (Franklin-Tong et al., 2002). This Ca2þ influx is
rapidly followed by inhibition of pollen tube growth within 1–2 min. Ca2þ is
likely to act as a second messenger and to trigger a signalling cascade, the final
result of which is irreversible rejection of self-pollen tubes. The fact that the
Ca2þ influx occurs at the shank, and not at the tip, may indicate that the pollen
S-receptors are located in this region and might be directly involved in the

278

T. Gaude et al.

control of the Ca2þ influx. The Ca2þ influx is coupled with the loss of the apical
gradient of [Ca2þ]i, and reorganization of the pollen actin cytoskeleton together
with extensive depolymerization of F-actin. Snowman et al. (2002) showed
that within 5 min after SI induction F-actin concentrations were less than 50%
of the controls, and remained low even at 1 h after SI induction. The authors
calculated that the level of depolymerization was several orders of magnitude
greater than that required to inhibit tip growth of pollen tubes. Actin-binding
proteins that might be involved in this particular alteration of the actin cytoskeleton have been investigated. Profilin, which is an abundant pollen protein,
might participate in this process. Another actin-binding protein, a gelsolin-like
protein isolated from Papaver pollen, named PrABP80, has recently been
shown to actively depolymerize actin in vitro (Huang et al., 2004). This
protein has an actin filament severing, nucleating, capping and depolymerizing
activity, which is regulated by Ca2þ. During SI, PrABP80 is likely to enhance
profilin-mediated depolymerization of actin filaments in pollen tubes. Another
rapid change that occurs within 90 s of SI induction is the increase in phosphorylation of a cytosolic pollen protein, p26 (Rudd et al., 1996). Cloning
of the p26-encoding gene predicted that the protein is a soluble inorganic
pyrophosphatase. Biochemical assays confirmed the catalytic activity of the
recombinant p26 protein and its phosphorylation was associated with a reduction in its pyrophosphatase activity. Soluble inorganic pyrophosphatases are
key enzymes in generating ATP and are involved in the synthesis of biopolymers. It was suggested that the reduction in p26 pyrophosphatase activity
might contribute to the inhibition of SI tip growth by an arrest of or reduction
in the biosynthesis of pollen wall components (Rudd and Franklin-Tong, 2003).
The activity of another pollen protein is affected following SI response. This is a
pollen mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), designated p56, which curiously is activated several minutes after the arrest of SI pollen tube growth (Rudd
et al., 2003). Due to this peculiar timing, p56 is unlikely to play a role in the
early events that led to the rapid inhibition of SI pollen tubes. Instead, it is
proposed that p56 might play a role in initiating the signalling cascade making
the arrest of pollen tube irreversible. This idea of a two-step inhibition mechanism controlling SI in poppy has recently received strong support from the
demonstration that SI response in poppy involves programmed cell death
(PCD) (Thomas and Franklin-Tong, 2004). PCD is specifically triggered in
self-pollen tubes following SI induction and involves caspase 3-like activity,
cytochrome c leakage in the cytosol and PARP (a classic substrate of caspase3)-cleavage activity, all three of which are diagnostic features of PCD. Moreover, the data show that SI response is a biphasic process, with a first step of
rapid inhibition of pollen tube growth followed by a second step initiated by the
activation of a caspase-like enzyme. This second step is likely to make selfpollen inhibition irreversible, as it ends with cell death (Fig. 10.2). This remarkable work points out that although genetically based on the same gametophytic
control of self-pollen rejection, the molecular mechanisms selected to inhibit
self-pollen grains in the Solanaceae and other S-RNase GSI systems differ
fundamentally from those recruited in the Papaveraceae.

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

279

S1-pollen tube

Pollen S1-receptor

Ca2+

stigmatic
S2-glycoprotein

Depo

Ph
os

P

2 min
V

90 min

n

1 min

orylatio

Stigmatic
S1-glycoprotein

Caspase-like
activity

Phosph

pho
ryla
tion
lyme
rizat
ion

Ca 2+

5−30 min
PCD

P
p26

F-actin

p56

0–10 min
Reversible
Reversible
tube growth
tube
growth
arrest
arrest

Tube
Tube
death
death

S1S2 stigmatic cell

Fig. 10.2. Model for the S-glycoprotein-dependent mechanism of gametophytic selfincompatibility (GSI) system in Papaver rhoeas. S-glycoproteins secreted by the stigmatic cells
are thought to interact, in an S-dependent manner, with the still unidentified pollen S-receptor.
The specific stigmatic S-glycoprotein/pollen S-receptor interaction (here between S1-allelic
products) initiates an almost instantaneous Ca2þ influx and increase of cytosolic free Ca2þ within
the self-pollen. This triggers an intracellular Ca2þ-dependent signalling cascade, which includes
the phosphorylation of p26 (a soluble inorganic pyrophosphatase) and p56 (a MAPK) proteins,
and depolymerization of F-actin (involving the PrABP80 enzyme). The activity of p56 MAPK
increases 5 min after SI induction, reaches a peak at 10 min and remains high for a least 30 min.
It is proposed that the activation of p56 MAPK initiates a programmed cell death (PCD), which
makes the arrest of self-pollen tube growth irreversible.

Sporophytic Self-incompatibility
Genetic complexity of sporophytic self-incompatibility
In the Brassicaceae, the number of S-haplotypes is usually large, being estimated as over 90 in Brassica oleracea (Ruffio-Chable and Gaude, 2001).
Detailed molecular analyses of SI performed during the last two decades in
Brassica species, and more recently in the related species Arabidopsis lyrata
and Raphanus sativus, have demonstrated that the S-locus consists of several
distinct polyallelic genes. This multi-gene complex at the S-locus is usually

280

T. Gaude et al.

inherited as one unit, which was the basis for the introduction by Boyes
and Nasrallah (1993) of the term S-haplotype. The genomic organization of
the S-locus region has been studied by several groups (e.g. Yu et al., 1996; Cui
et al., 1999; Suzuki et al., 1999; Kusaba et al., 2001; Shiba et al., 2003).
Sequencing of a 76-kbp region of the S9-haplotype in Brassica rapa revealed
that this region contains at least 14 expressed genes (1 gene/5.4 kbp) and
three putative open reading frames (ORFs) (Suzuki et al., 1999). The presence
of transposable elements and retrotransposons has also been reported (Pastuglia et al., 1997; Shiba et al., 2003). The region around the S-determinant
genes is highly polymorphic and filled with S-haplotype-specific intergenic
sequences. It is likely that this sequence polymorphism contributes to the
suppression of recombination at the S-locus. Of the different genes characterized at the S-locus, three genes have been studied in detail as they are thought
to be involved in the recognition of self-pollen grains by the stigma. Two of
these genes, namely SLG (S-locus glycoprotein) and SRK (S-locus receptor
kinase), are specifically expressed in the stigma (Nasrallah et al., 1985; Stein
et al., 1991) whereas the third gene, SCR (S-locus cysteine rich), is only
expressed in anthers and pollen grains (Schopfer et al., 1999). The complexity
of SSI systems is also revealed by the existence of dominance interactions that
occur between S-haplotypes in a heterozygous state. Thus S-haplotypes can
be ordered in a non-linear dominance hierarchy (Thompson and Taylor,
1966). Two major groups have been distinguished in the dominance hierarchy:
(i) class I haplotypes tend to be dominant and confer a strong SI phenotype;
and (ii) class II haplotypes tend to confer a weaker phenotype (i.e. some
seeds can be produced following self-pollination) and to be recessive to the
class I haplotypes. While S-haplotypes are usually co-dominant in stigmas,
dominance interactions can be observed in anther tissues. This particular
feature of the genetics of SSI plants allows the production of homozygous
S-haplotypes after crossing of plants that share a common S-haplotype.
For example, an S2S4 heterozygous plant, with S2 co-dominant with S4
in the stigma, crossed with pollen from the pollen donor S2S3 heterozygous
plant, with S3 dominant to S2 in the anther, will set seed as the pollen
S2-determinant is not expressed in the pollen-producer plant. Hence, S2S2
homozygous plants will be present in the progeny. The molecular aspects
of these genetic interactions between S-haplotypes are just starting to be
understood (see below).

The female determinant is the S-locus receptor kinase protein
Cytological studies of pollen rejection in Brassicaceae species showed a very
early inhibition of the incompatible pollen. In all cases analysed, either the selfpollen fails to hydrate completely or, if it germinates, pollen tube elongation is
rapidly arrested at the stigma surface (see de Nettancourt, 2001). Analysis of
proteins extracted from the stigmas of plants carrying different S-haplotype
revealed the presence of abundant polymorphic glycoproteins characteristic of
each S-haplotype, the so-called SLGs. Cloning of the SLG gene (Nasrallah

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

281

et al., 1985) and later of the related S-locus-linked gene, SRK (Stein et al.,
1991), were key steps in the molecular analysis of SI. As the accumulation
of SLG and SRK transcripts and proteins coincides with the acquisition of SI by
the maturing stigma, both genes have been considered as putative female
determinants of self-pollen recognition (Stein et al., 1991, 1996). The
SLG gene encodes a glycoprotein secreted into the cell wall of stigmatic
papillae. Although the majority of the SLG protein accumulates in the stigma,
SLG can also be detected, although at very low levels, in the transmitting tissue
of the style and ovary (Kleman-Mariac et al., 1995). The only other organ in
which SLG transcripts have been detected is the anther, but SLG protein does
not accumulate to a detectable level (Delorme et al., 1995). The SRK
gene encodes a membrane-spanning protein of the plasmalemma. SRK consists of an extracellular domain that shares homology with SLG (designated
the S-domain), a single transmembrane alpha-helix, and a cytoplasmic domain
exhibiting a serine/threonine kinase activity (Goring and Rothstein, 1992;
Stein and Nasrallah, 1993; Giranton et al., 2000). SRK protein is only
detected in stigmas, although low levels of SRK transcripts can be detected in
anthers. The structure of SRK resembles the receptor kinases from animals and
it is presumed that the extracellular domain acts as a ligand-binding region
(Cock et al., 2002). Analysis of a number of alleles of SLG and SRK genes has
shown that both genes are highly polymorphic and that their respective alleles
can be grouped into two classes which correspond to the class I and II groups
defined on the basis of SI phenotype (Stein et al., 1991; Kusaba et al., 1997;
Cabrillac et al., 1999).
Recent analysis has also shown a great complexity at the level of SLG and
SRK gene expression, as certain alleles of both genes encode more than one
protein product. In the case of the SLG gene, which is usually intronless, a few
S-haplotypes have SLG alleles that contain one intron. Tantikanjana et al.
(1993) showed that the SLG allele of the class II S2-haplotype (SLG2) possesses
two exons and that alternative transcripts of this allele can encode both a
secreted form of SLG and a membrane-anchored form designated mSLG.
More recently, Cabrillac et al. (1999) analysed the SLG alleles and protein
products of the three (S2, S5 and S15) class II S-haplotypes of B. oleracea. Two
different SLG genes were isolated in the S15-haplotype, designated SLGA and
SLGB. Both of these genes possess two exons interrupted by a single intron
but only SLGA possesses a second exon that encodes a membrane-spanning
domain. SLGA is predicted to encode a secreted SLGA protein and a
membrane-anchored mSLGA protein, whereas SLGB only encodes a secreted
SLGB protein. Analysis of stigma proteins from the S15-haplotype confirmed
this prediction. Interestingly, the two other class II S2- and S5-haplotypes
carry only one or the other of the SLG genes. In fact, recent studies on
the S2-haplotype have revealed the existence of sequence heterogeneity at
the S-locus genes for this haplotype (Kusaba et al., 2000; Miège et al.,
2001). Miège et al. (2001) analysed ten S2-haplotypes of B. oleracea and
found an intrahaplotype polymorphism at the sequence level of SLG and SRK
genes. Two groups of S2-haplotype can be defined, depending on the presence
of either only SLGA or only SLGB. Surprisingly, SRK2 alleles from the two

282

T. Gaude et al.

groups can be distinguished at the sequence level, suggesting that recombination is suppressed or rarely occurs between haplotypes of the two groups.
Complexity of the SRK gene expression is also well documented. For
example, in the class I S3-haplotype, SRK3 encodes at least seven different
transcripts including transcripts from both strands of the gene (Delorme et al.,
1995; Cock et al., 1997). Several of the sense transcripts retain all or part of
the first intron and, because there is a termination codon just after the 5’ end
of the intron, are predicted to encode a soluble, truncated form of SRK that
corresponds to the predicted extracellular domain (Giranton et al., 1995). This
truncated form of SRK, which has been called eSRK for extracellular SRK,
resembles SLG and has been detected in stigma proteins of S3 plants. No eSRK
protein was detected in stigmas of plants homozygous for the class II haplotype
S15 (Cabrillac et al., 1999). Analysis of protein products coded by the various
transcripts of SRK alleles will be necessary to determine how frequent the
presence of eSRK is in the stigma of different S-haplotypes and whether
eSRK is associated exclusively with class I S-haplotypes.
The function of mSLG, eSRK and other putative variants of SLG or SRK
proteins remains unknown. Actually, the functional role played by SLG proteins in the self-pollen recognition has been seriously questioned over the
last few years. The first observation that called into question the importance
of SLG was that plants, which express very low or undetectable levels of SLG
can be self-incompatible, while plants that express high levels of SLG can be selfcompatible (Gaude et al., 1993, 1995; Okazaki et al., 1999). Moreover,
molecular analysis of B. oleracea plants homozygous for two different
S-haplotypes, S18 and S60, has shown that these plants are unable to produce
functional SLG due to mutations in the SLG coding region, although their SI
phenotype is perfectly maintained (Nishio and Kusaba, 2000). Furthermore,
certainly the most convincing evidence comes from sequencing of the S-locus
region from different S-haplotypes of A. lyrata, which revealed the absence of
the SLG gene in this SI species (Kusaba et al., 2001). Taken together, these
data suggest that SLG is not essential for SI in the Brassicaceae and that SRK,
rather than SLG, plays a key role in the recognition of self-pollen.
The importance of SRK in the accomplishment of the SI response gained
strong support from the analysis of self-compatible variants of oilseed rape and
cabbage (Goring et al., 1993; Nasrallah et al., 1994). In both studies, these
plants express normal levels of SLG proteins, but they carry mutations that
lead either to the absence of SRK transcripts or to the production of truncated
transcripts. In all cases, these self-compatible plants are unable to produce a
functional SRK protein. These data indicate that a functional SRK is required
for the SI response. Compelling evidence that SRK is actually the female
determinant of SI has only been obtained recently by transgenic experiments.
Efforts to express novel SRK alleles (gain-of-function approach) or dominant
negative forms of SRK (loss-of-function approach) in transgenic plants
have run into problems for many years due to insufficient expression and cosuppression. To avoid co-suppression due to the high similarities between the
transgene and endogenous SRK alleles, Takasaki et al. (2000) developed an
elegant strategy based on the use of a transgenic class I SRK28 allele to

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

283

transform a class II S60-haplotype receiver plant. They demonstrated that selfincompatible B. rapa plants of the S60-haplotype transformed with the SRK28
gene acquire the ability to reject S28-pollen in addition to rejecting their self
(S60)-pollen. In this study, the potential role of SLG in the SI was also addressed
by analysing the phenotype of transgenic plants expressing both SRK28 and
SLG28. While expression of SLG28 alone is not sufficient to confer a new
S-haplotype specificity in transgenic plants, the degree of S28-pollen rejection
by plants carrying the SRK28 transgene is enhanced by the presence of the
SLG28 transgene. These experiments suggest that SRK alone determines the
S-haplotype specificity of the stigma, and that SLG, when present, may act to
promote a full manifestation of the SI response.

The male determinant is the S-locus protein 11/ S-locus cysteine-rich protein
Among the different genes located at the S-locus, those whose expression is
specific to male tissues have been considered as good candidates for encoding
the male determinant of SI. However, most of them were eliminated as the
potential pollen determinant either because they were present in both selfincompatible and self-compatible lines or because they showed no sequence
variation between different S-haplotypes or, lastly, because direct evidence of
their role in SI was lacking (Pastuglia et al., 1997; Miège et al., 1999; Suzuki
et al., 1999). By combining a biochemical approach with a pollination bioassay
system, Stephenson et al. (1997) showed that pollen proteins coating
the cavities of the pollen wall could induce the SI response in the stigma in a
S-haplotype-specific manner. Fractionation of these pollen coat proteins (designated PCPs) revealed that molecules responsible for this activity, presumably
the pollen S-determinants, are basic proteins with a molecular mass of less than
10 kDa. Interestingly, a Japanese group (Suzuki et al., 1999) identified
and characterized in detail genes present in the SLG/SRK region of the S9haplotype of B. rapa and found that one of these genes, SP11 (S-locus protein
11), encodes a small cysteine-rich protein resembling the PCP isolated by
Stephenson et al. (1997). By RNA gel blot and in situ hybridization analyses,
SP11 transcripts were detected in early stages of anther development as well as
in the developing pollen at late stages (Takayama et al., 2000). The unequivocal implication of SP11 in the SI response was demonstrated by loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments performed by the group of June and
Mike Nasrallah in the USA (Schopfer et al., 1999). By a systematic sequencing
analysis of the S-locus region of different B. oleracea S-haplotypes, they
isolated a gene, designated SCR, which is specifically expressed in anthers
and corresponds to the previously characterized SP11 gene. The SP11/SCR
gene encodes a novel class of highly polymorphic peptides within a family of
proteins named the PCP family (Vanoosthuyse et al., 2001). For clarity, we use
only the term SCR to designate the SP11/SCR gene or gene product. Schopfer
et al. (1999) studied a self-compatible mutant of B. oleracea, generated by
gamma irradiation, and showed that this mutant was unable to produce detectable levels of SCR transcripts. This lack of SCR transcripts resulted in the loss

284

T. Gaude et al.

of S-specificity in the pollen but not in the stigma. By contrast, transformation
of a B. oleracea S2S2-homozygous line with the SCR6 cDNA led to the
production of S2-pollen that expressed the SCR6 transgene and that was
rejected on S6S6 stigmas. Similar results were obtained by Shiba et al.
(2001) using the gain-of-function approach in B. rapa. These data clearly
demonstrate that the SCR gene is necessary and sufficient for determining
SI specificity in pollen of Brassica species.
The analysis of the deduced amino acid sequences of several cloned
SCR sequences predicts that the mature SCR peptides are hydrophilic, small
(5.7–8.0 kDa), basic (isoelectric points over 8.0), secreted peptides containing
generally eight conserved cysteine residues and a conserved glycine (Schopfer
et al., 1999; Takayama et al., 2000, 2001). In spite of the very high level of
polymorphism observed between SCR alleles, these conserved residues are
presumably required to maintain a similar three-dimensional structure in the
mature protein. This assumption has gained strong support from the recent
determination of the solution structure of SCR8 of B. rapa (Mishima et al.,
2003). Homology modelling of allelic SCR sequences and structure-based
alignment identified a protruding loop, loop 1, as a HV region in allelic
SCRs. The authors suggest that the HV region is likely to serve as a specific
binding site for the SRK protein.

SCR/SRK interaction and self-pollen rejection
The identification of SRK and SCR as the stigma and pollen S-determinants of
SI, respectively, suggests that self-pollen rejection in the Brassicaceae depends
on a receptor/ligand-like interaction. In this model, the SCR peptide is the
pollen-borne ligand that specifically activates the stigmatic SRK receptor in the
case of a self-incompatible pollination. Indeed, studies of animal receptor
kinases have revealed that the general mode of action of these receptors is
through the activation of their cytosolic-kinase domain following ligand binding
(Heldin, 1995; Cock et al., 2002). Experiments carried out to determine the
phosphorylation status of SRK in planta, at the basal state and following selfor cross-pollination, revealed that native SRK is not phosphorylated before
pollination (Cabrillac et al., 2001). This inactive state of SRK was presumed to
be maintained by the stigmatic thioredoxins THL1 and THL2, which act as
negative regulators of the SRK kinase activity in vitro (Cabrillac et al., 2001).
Recently, this assumption has gained support from the analysis of antisense
THL1 or THL2 B. napus cv Westar transgenic plants, which shows that
suppression of THL1/2 transcripts is associated with a low level constitutive
rejection of normally compatible B. napus pollen grains (Haffani et al., 2004).
The pollen rejection observed in fluorescence microscopy was a typical Brassica SI rejection response with reduced pollen adhesion, germination and
pollen tube growth arrest at the surface of stigma papillae. Although the
authors could not detect any change in SRK activation in the partially SI
antisense THL1/2 transgenic plants, these results indicate that the THL1 and
THL2 are required for full pollen acceptance in B. napus cv Westar.

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

285

The existence of SRK receptor complexes consisting of one or two SRK
molecules associated with other stigma proteins in non-pollinated stigmas has
been shown by cross-linking experiments and by velocity sedimentation on
sucrose gradients (Giranton et al., 2000). These findings suggest that signal
transduction during the SI response might be mediated by modification of a
pre-existing inactive SRK oligomeric complex. We propose that the interaction
of SCR with the extracellular domain of SRK, within the SRK oligomeric
complex, leads to a conformational change of the SRK kinase domain that
allows the release of THL1/2 inhibition and activation, through autophosphorylation, of the SRK receptor kinase. Using an in vitro phosphorylation assay,
Cabrillac et al. (2001) showed for the first time that PCPs containing SCR can
release the negative regulation of THL1 and activate recombinant integral SRK
proteins in an S-specific manner. The direct allele-specific interaction between
SCR and the extracellular domain of SRK as well as activation of the kinase
domain of SRK following SCR binding have been confirmed in vitro (Kachroo
et al., 2001; Takayama et al., 2001). How SCR peptides accumulate in the
pollen coat during pollen development, and then reach the plasma membrane
of the stigma papilla following pollination has been examined by immunoelectron microscopy (Shiba et al., 2001; Iwano et al., 2003). SCR is secreted from
the tapetal cells into the anther locule and then translocated to the pollen
surface at the early developmental stage of the anther. In pollen grains at late
developmental stages, prior to anther dehiscence, SCR is mainly localized in
the pollen coat. During the pollination process, SCR is translocated from the
pollen surface to the surface of the papillar cell, and then penetrates the cuticle
layer of the stigma papilla to migrate across the pectin cellulose layer. Interestingly, SCR alone cannot initiate an incompatible response when applied directly on to the stigma surface, apparently because it is unable to penetrate the
stigmatic cuticle on its own. This indicates that an additional factor carried by
the pollen grain is required to ensure the proper diffusion of SCR from the
pollen surface to the plasma membrane of the stigma papilla, where it will
interact physically with its complementary S-allelic SRK.
Recently, regions that determine recognition specificity in SCR have been
investigated by producing SCR variants generated by the swapping of specific
domains between different SCR alleles and by in vitro mutagenesis (Chookajorn et al., 2004; Sato et al., 2004). These variants have been analysed for
their capacity to bind SRK by using an in vitro binding assay and a pollination
test with transgenic plants expressing the chimeric SCR peptides. This work
revealed that some SCR variants exhibit a new or dual recognition specificity.
From their results, Chookajorn et al. (2004) have proposed a model to explain
the generation of new S-haplotypes in Brassica by the occurrence of selfincompatible intermediates that derived from the ancestor alleles by mutations
affecting both SCR and SRK, but preserving allelic recognition. The work of
Sato et al. (2004) based on the analysis of pairs of very homologous SCR/SRK
sequences of B. rapa, B. oleracea and R. sativus supports this model.
Once SRK phosphorylated, following the S-allele-specific interaction between SCR and SRK, the kinase domain of SRK recruits cytosolic targets to
initiate a cascade of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events responsible

286

T. Gaude et al.

for the self-pollen rejection by the stigma papilla. Among the cytosolic proteins
of stigmatic cells, the Armadillo repeat-containing protein 1 (ARC1) was shown
to bind specifically to the phosphorylated SRK kinase domain and to be
phosphorylated in turn by SRK (Gu et al., 1998). In addition, ARC1 is
known as a positive regulator of SI, because suppression of ARC1 transcripts
in the pistil of self-incompatible B. napus plants is correlated with a partial
breakdown of SI (Stone et al., 1999). More recently, Stone et al. (2003)
demonstrated that ARC1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligose, which promotes the ubiquitination of stigma proteins during rejection of self-incompatible pollen grains.
Moreover, inhibition of the proteasomal proteolytic activity on pollinated B.
napus pistils disrupts the SI response. The authors propose that ARC1 promotes the ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of compatibility factors
(CFs) in the pistil, which are required for pollen germination and/or pollen tube
growth, and that their degradation in turn leads to pollen rejection. Identification of these CFs remains the challenging step in elucidating the precise
function of ARC1 in SI. Another protein, the kinase-associated protein phosphatase (KAPP), has also been shown to interact with the phosphorylated SRK
kinase domain (Braun et al., 1997; Vanoosthuyse et al., 2003). However, this
type 2C protein phosphatase interacts with various plant receptor kinases
(PRKs) and is likely to have a more general role in downregulating PRK activity
following ligand-binding receptor activation (Li et al., 1999; Shah et al., 2002;
Tichtinsky et al., 2003). Interestingly, two novel interactors of the kinase
domain of SRK have recently been isolated in B. oleracea, a calmodulin
(CaM) and a sorting nexin (SNX1) protein (Vanoosthuyse et al., 2003). In
animal cells, both CaM and sorting nexins are known regulators of receptor
kinase-dependent signalling pathways, acting in the downregulation of the
receptor kinase activity by promoting protein degradation via endocytosis
(Tichtinsky et al., 2003). Like KAPP, CaM and SNX1 are able to bind to
various PRKs. However, unlike KAPP, their binding is independent of the
phosphorylation status of SRK. By analogy with the known functions of these
proteins in animal systems, it is tempting to speculate that CaM and SNX1
function in downregulating PRK activity. Hence, they might control the duration and magnitude of signalling pathways initiated by PRKs during plant
growth, development and reproduction.
A new key component of the SI response in Brassica has recently been
discovered by a Japanese group (Murase et al., 2004). They studied the recessive mutation modifier (m) that confers a strict self-compatibility phenotype in
the B. rapa variety Yellow Sarson characterized about 20 years ago by Hinata
et al. (1983). The M-locus is independent of and epistatic to the S-locus, and
mm plants have a breakdown of the SI function in the stigma but not in the
pollen. By positional cloning, Murase et al. (2004) identified the M-locus
protein kinase (MLPK) as the M gene, and demonstrated that the m mutation
is a single amino acid substitution (Gly to Arg) at position 194. MLPK is a
membrane-anchored cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinase that belongs
to the receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase VII (RLCK VII) subfamily, which has no
apparent signal sequence or transmembrane domain (see Shiu and Bleecker,
2001). They showed that the single G194R mutation results in a loss of kinase

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

287

activity in vitro and a complete absence of detectable MLPK protein in stigma
extracts from mm plants. Using MLPK fused to the green fluorescent protein
(GFP) transiently expressed in tobacco BY-2 cells, they demonstrated that the
wild-type form of MLPK–GFP is located at the plasma membrane, probably
involving an N-myristoylation site. In addition, transient expression of wild-type
MLPK in stigma papillae of mm plants restores the self-pollen rejection of the
mm papillar cells. Together, these data clearly show that MLPK is a positive
mediator of SI signalling in Brassica. Although the connection with the SRK
signalling pathway remains unknown, it is likely that SRK and MLPK operate
in concert to initiate the signalling pathway that leads to self-pollen rejection in
the Brassicaceae (Fig. 10.3).

Molecular basis of dominance relationships
In the self-incompatible Brassicaceae species, including Brassica species and
A. lyrata, pollen SI specificity is determined by the diploid genotype of the
pollen-producing parent rather than the genotype of individual haploid pollen
grains. Genetic interactions between S-haplotypes are known to occur in the
expression of SI phenotype in the stigma as well as in pollen. In Brassica species,
co-dominance relationships are commonly observed in stigmas (Thompson and
Taylor, 1966). In A. lyrata, classical genetic studies revealed a complex pattern
of dominance relationships between seven haplotypes in the stigma, including at
least three dominance levels with some co-dominant relationships between
alleles at the same level (Schierup et al., 2001). Dominance relationships
between alleles in the pollen can be different from dominance relationships in
the stigma. For example, in Brassica species, S-haplotypes recessive in the
pollen exhibited co-dominance in the stigma (Thompson and Taylor, 1966).
Likewise, in A. lyrata (Kusaba et al., 2001, 2002) two S-haplotypes have been
reported, which exhibited co-dominance in the stigma and dominance/recessiveness relationships in the pollen. The existence of independent dominance
hierarchies in the stigma and pollen indicates that allelic interactions operate by
different mechanisms in the two organs. This hypothesis has recently received
some molecular support (Hatakeyama et al., 2001; Kusaba et al., 2002; Shiba
et al., 2002). Dominance relationships in pollen are regulated at the mRNA level
for SCR alleles, the expression of the pollen recessive allele being severely
downregulated in heterozygotes containing a dominant allele. Interestingly,
drastic inhibition of expression of the recessive SCR alleles has been reported
both in A. lyrata (Kusaba et al., 2002) and in Brassica (Shiba et al., 2002). This
indicates a common mechanism operating in both species to control allelic
interactions in pollen. On the female side, a different mechanism may operate
to control allelic interactions as the expression level of SRK gene cannot by itself
account for the dominance relationships in Brassica (Hatakeyama et al., 2001)
as well as in A. lyrata (Kusaba et al., 2002). The molecular basis of pollen
recognition as well as more subtle controls of S-haplotype interactions influencing SI expression in the male and female partners seem to have been maintained in quite evolutionary distant species.

288

T. Gaude et al.

SCR2
Incompatible pollen

SCR1

?

ARC1 P

PM

P

SRK1

P

THL

SNX1
CaM

KAPP

P

P

P
?

MLPK

SRK1

P

SRK1

THL

KAPP

MLPK

SRK1

SRK1

KAPP

SRK1

Cellwall
MLPK

THL

P

P

Pollen
pollen
rejection
rejection

ARC1
CF
Ub
CF

Degradation

Stigmatic cell

26S
Proteasome

Fig. 10.3. Model for the SRK-dependent mechanism of sporophytic self-incompatibility (SSI) in
the Brassicaceae. Following self-pollination, the S-locus cysteine-rich (SCR) peptides carried by
the pollen grain migrate from the pollen surface to the plasma membrane of the stigma papilla.
SCR peptides that share the same S-allele specificity (here S1) as that of the S-locus receptor kinase
(SRK) interact with the extracellular domain of SRK. SRK is part of a receptor complex located at
the stigma plasma membrane. At the basal state, SRK is inactivated by thioredoxins (THL). The
SRK1/SCR1 interaction releases the negative regulation of THL and activates the kinase domain of
SRK. The cytosolic Armadillo repeat-containing (ARC1) protein 1, which is an E3-ubiquitin ligase,
is then phosphorylated by SRK. It is proposed that the phosphorylated ARC1 recruits stigmatic
compatibility factors (CFs) to promote their polyubiquitination and degradation via the 26S
proteasome. The degradation of these still unknown factors would cause the arrest of pollen tube
growth and failure of self-fertilization. The recently discovered M-locus protein kinase (MLPK) is
supposed to be another substrate of the active SRK complex. MLPK is likely to participate in the
signalling cascade leading to CF degradation. The kinase-associated protein phosphatase (KAPP)
is probably involved in the negative regulation of the signalling pathway by dephosphorylating
SRK. The role of calmodulin (CaM) and sorting nexin 1 (SNX1) remains to be determined; they
might also be negative regulators of the SRK-dependent signalling pathway by analogy to their
known functions in downregulating animal receptor kinases.

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms

289

Arabidopsis thaliana: a new model for self-incompatibility studies?
Because the S-locus is a master recognition locus that encodes the female
(SRK) and male (SCR) SI determinants, inactivation of at least one of these
SI-determining genes is predicted to lead to a breakdown of SI and to a shift to
self-compatibility. In this context, it was particularly interesting to compare the
S-locus structure in self-incompatible (e.g. Brassica species, A. lyrata) and selfcompatible species (e.g. A. thaliana). Comparative mapping of the S-locus in
Brassica and in A. lyrata has unexpectedly revealed that the S-locus occupies
different chromosomal locations in Brassica ssp. and in Arabidopsis ssp.
(Conner et al., 1998; Kusaba et al., 2001). In Brassica, the S-locus is located
in a region that is syntenous to an ETR1-linked chromosomal region on
A. thaliana chromosome 1, whereas in A. lyrata the S-locus maps to the
ARK3-containing region of chromosome 4. Location of the S-locus in Arabidopsis ssp. has allowed the identification of the orthologues of the SRK and
SCR genes in A. thaliana. Both of them are non-functional genes in this selfcompatible species (Kusaba et al., 2001). Interestingly, transformation of
A. thaliana with the SRK / SCR gene pair was sufficient to confer SI phenotype
(Nasrallah et al., 2002, 2004). This indicates that the signalling cascade
downstream of SRK activation and responsible for self-pollen rejection was
maintained in A. thaliana, although it diverged from its SI A. lyrata relative
about 5 million years ago. These data unequivocally demonstrate that the SC
trait in A. thaliana has appeared as a consequence of the inactivation of the
SRK and SCR genes. Moreover, the SRK gene has probably become inactivated recently because its promoter is still transcriptionally active (Kusaba et al.,
2001). In contrast, previous attempts at generating a self-compatible A. thaliana by transforming with Brassica genes had failed (Bi et al., 2000). This
failure might have been due to the inability of the Brassica SRK protein to
interact properly with Arabidopsis downstream effectors. The availability of SI
transgenic A. thaliana lines constitutes a real turning point in the study of SI.
Indeed, it provides new and exciting opportunities for deciphering the biochemical machinery involved in self-pollen rejection by exploiting the numerous
tools of this model plant.

Conclusion
Tremendous progress has been made over the past few years in the molecular
characterization of signal transduction pathways controlling SI in several plant
families. Indeed, we now know the identity of the male and female determinants involved in self-pollen recognition in the Solanaceae, Rosaceae, Scrophulariaceae and Brassicaceae. It is likely that the still elusive pollen
determinant of poppy will be identified soon. It is remarkable to note how
different sophisticated molecular strategies have emerged during evolution to
limit inbreeding and promote genetic mixing. With regard to the only very
limited number of SI model systems analysed so far, we may assume that SI
mechanisms, other than those based on the S-RNase/SLF, SRK / SCR or

290

T. Gaude et al.

S-glycoprotein-like poppy genes, exist among the single S-locus SI systems. It
would be most interesting to initiate molecular studies in other families close to
or distant from those already investigated. This would allow us to determine
how many different SI systems evolved and whether they are phylogenetically
linked. These data should give us clues to understand how these molecular
mechanisms appeared during the evolution of angiosperms. From the recent
data reviewed in this chapter, it is clear that self-pollen recognition constitutes a
model of choice to study cell–cell communication in plants. New findings in the
field of SI will have important implications for our general understanding of
how plant cells communicate.

References
Anderson, M.A., Cornish, E.C., Mau,
S.L., Williams, E.G., Hoggart, R.,
Atkinson, A., Bonig, I., Grego, B.,
Simpson, R., Roche, P.J., Haley,
J.D., Penschow, J.D., Niall, H.D., Tregear, G.W., Coghlan, J.P., Crawford,
R.J. and Clarke, A.E. (1986) Cloning
of cDNA for a stylar glycoprotein associated with expression of self-incompatibility in Nicotiana alata. Nature
321, 38–44.
Bai, C., Sen, P., Hofmann, K., Ma, L.,
Goebl, M., Harper, J.W. and Elledge,
S.J. (1996) SKP1 connects cell cycle
regulators to the ubiquitin proteolysis
machinery through a novel motif, the
F-box. Cell 86, 263–274.
Baumann, U., Juttner, J., Bian, X. and
Langridge, P. (2000) Self-incompatibility in the grasses. Annals of Botany
85, 203–209.
Bi, Y.M., Brugière, N., Cui, Y., Goring,
D.R. and Rothstein, S.J. (2000) Transformation of Arabidopsis with a
Brassica SLG / SRK region and ARC1
gene is not sufficient to transfer the selfincompatibility phenotype. Molecular
and General Genetics 263, 648–654.
Boyes, D.C. and Nasrallah, J.B. (1993)
Physical linkage of the SLG and SRK
genes at the self-incompatibility locus
of Brassica oleracea. Molecular and
General Genetics 236, 369–373.
Braun, D.M., Stone, J.M. and Walker,
J.C. (1997) Interaction of the maize
and Arabidopsis kinase interaction

domains with a subset of receptor-like
protein kinases: implications for transmembrane signaling in plants. Plant
Journal 12, 83–95.
Bredemeijer, G.M. and Blass, J. (1981)
S-specific proteins in styles of self-incompatible Nicotiana alata. Theoretical
and Applied Genetics 59, 185–190.
Cabrillac, D., Delorme, V., Garin, J., Ruffio-Chable, V., Giranton, J.L., Dumas,
C., Gaude, T. and Cock, J.M. (1999)
The S15 self-incompatibility haplotype
in Brassica oleracea includes three S
gene family members expressed in stigmas. Plant Cell 11, 971–986.
Cabrillac, D., Cock, J.M., Dumas, C. and
Gaude, T. (2001) The S-locus receptor
kinase is inhibited by thioredoxins and
activated by pollen coat proteins. Nature 410, 220–223.
Charlesworth, D., Bartolome, C.,
Schierup, M.H. and Mable, B.K.
(2003) Haplotype structure of the stigmatic self-incompatibility gene in natural populations of Arabidopsis lyrata.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 20,
1741–1753.
Chookajorn, T., Kachroo, A., Ripoll,
D.R., Clark, A.G. and Nasrallah, J.B.
(2004) Specificity determinants and
diversification of the Brassica selfincompatibility pollen ligand. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 101, 911–917.
Clark, A.G. and Kao, T.H. (1991) Excess
nonsynonymous substitution of shared

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms
polymorphic sites among self-incompatibility alleles of Solanaceae. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 88, 9823–9827.
Cock, J.M., Swarup, R. and Dumas, C.
(1997) Natural antisense transcripts of
the S locus receptor kinase gene and
related sequences in Brassica oleracea. Molecular and General Genetics
255, 514–524.
Cock, J.M., Vanoosthuyse, V. and
Gaude, T. (2002) Receptor kinase signalling in plants and animals: distinct
molecular systems with mechanistic
similarities. Current Opinion in Cell
Biology 14, 230–236.
Conner, J.A., Conner, P., Nasrallah,
M.E. and Nasrallah, J.B. (1998) Comparative mapping of the Brassica S
locus region and its homeolog in
Arabidopsis: implications for the evolution of mating systems in the Brassicaceae. Plant Cell 10, 801–812.
Cui, Y., Brugiere, N., Jackman, L., Bi,
Y.M. and Rothstein, S.J. (1999)
Structural and transcriptional comparative analysis of the S locus regions in two self-incompatible Brassica
napus lines. Plant Cell 11, 2217–
2231.
Darwin, C. (1876) The Effect of Cross
and Self-fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom. John Murray,
London.
Delorme, V., Giranton, J.L., Hatzfeld,
Y., Friry, A., Heizmann, P., Ariza,
M.J., Dumas, C., Gaude, T. and
Cock, J.M. (1995) Characterization
of the S locus genes, SLG and SRK,
of the Brassica S3 haplotype: identification of a membrane-localized protein encoded by the S locus receptor
kinase gene. Plant Journal 7, 429–
440.
de Nettancourt, D. (2001) Incompatibility and Incongruity in Wild and Cultivated Plants, 2nd edn. SpringerVerlag, Berlin/Heidelberg.
East, E.M. and Mangelsdorf, A.J. (1925)
A new interpretation of the hereditary
behavior of self-sterile plants. Pro-

291

ceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 11, 166–171.
Entani, T., Iwano, M., Shiba, H., Che,
F.S., Isogai, A. and Takayama, S.
(2003) Comparative analysis of the
self-incompatibility (S-)locus region of
Prunus mume: identification of a
pollen-expressed F-box gene with
allelic diversity. Genes to Cells 8,
203–213.
Fobis-Loisy, I., Miège, C. and Gaude, T.
(2004) Molecular evolution of the S
locus controlling mating in the Brassicaceae. Plant Biology 6, 109–118.
Foote, H.C., Ride, J.P., Franklin-Tong,
V.E., Walker, E.A., Lawrence, M.J.
and Franklin, F.C. (1994) Cloning and
expression of a distinctive class of selfincompatibility (S) gene from Papaver
rhoeas L. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
91, 2265–2269.
Franklin-Tong, V.E. and Franklin, F.C.
(2003) Gametophytic self-incompatibility inhibits pollen tube growth using
different mechanisms. Trends in Plant
Science 8, 598–605.
Franklin-Tong, V.E., Holdaway-Clarke,
T.L., Straatman, K.R., Kunkel, J.G.
and Hepler, P.K. (2002) Involvement
of extracellular calcium influx in the
self-incompatibility response of Papaver rhoeas. Plant Journal 29, 333–
345.
Gaude, T. and Dumas, C. (1987) Molecular and cellular events of self-incompatibility. In: Giles, K. and Prakash, J. (eds)
Pollen: Cytology and Development.
International Review of Cytology
107, Academic Press, Orlando,
Florida, pp. 333–366.
Gaude, T., Friry, A., Heizmann, P., Mariac, C., Rougier, M., Fobis, I. and
Dumas, C. (1993) Expression of a
self-incompatibility gene in a selfcompatible line of Brassica oleracea.
Plant Cell 5, 75–86.
Gaude, T., Rougier, M., Heizmann, P.,
Ockendon, D.J. and Dumas, C.
(1995) Expression level of the SLG
gene is not correlated with the

292

T. Gaude et al.
self-incompatibility phenotype in the
class II S haplotypes of Brassica oleracea. Plant Molecular Biology 27,
1003–1014.
Giranton, J.L., Ariza, M.J., Dumas, C.,
Cock, J.M. and Gaude, T. (1995) The
S locus receptor kinase gene encodes a
soluble glycoprotein corresponding to
the SKR extracellular domain in Brassica oleracea. Plant Journal 8, 827–
834.
Giranton, J.L., Dumas, C., Cock, J.M.
and Gaude, T. (2000) The integral
membrane S-locus receptor kinase of
Brassica has serine/threonine kinase
activity in a membranous environment
and spontaneously forms oligomers in
planta. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 97, 3759–
3764.
Goring, D.R. and Rothstein, S.J. (1992)
The S-locus receptor kinase gene in a
self-incompatible Brassica napus line
encodes a functional serine/threonine
kinase. Plant Cell 4, 1273–1281.
Goring, D.R., Glavin, T.L., Schafer, U.
and Rothstein, S.J. (1993) An S
receptor kinase gene in self-compatible
Brassica napus has a 1-bp deletion.
Plant Cell 5, 531–539.
Gu, T., Mazzurco, M., Sulaman, W.,
Matias, D.D. and Goring, D.R. (1998)
Binding of an arm repeat protein to the
kinase domain of the S-locus receptor
kinase. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 95, 382–
387.
Haffani, Y.Z., Gaude, T., Cock, J.M. and
Goring, D.R. (2004) Antisense suppression of thioredoxin h mRNA in
Brassica napus cv. Westar pistils
causes a low level constitutive pollen
rejection response. Plant Molecular
Biology 55, 619–630.
Hatakeyama, K., Takasaki, T., Suzuki, G.,
Nishio, T., Watanabe, M., Isogai, A. and
Hinata, K. (2001) The S receptor kinase
gene determines dominance relationships in stigma expression of selfincompatibility in Brassica. Plant
Journal 26, 69–76.

Hearn, M.J., Franklin, F.C.H. and Ride,
J.P. (1996) Identification of a membrane glycoprotein in pollen of Papaver rhoeas which binds stigmatic selfincompatibility (S-) proteins. Plant
Journal 9, 467–475.
Heldin, C.H. (1995) Dimerization of cell
surface receptors in signal transduction. Cell 80, 213–223.
Hinata, K., Okazaki, K. and Nishio, T.
(1983) Gene analysis of self-compatibility in Brassica campestris var yellow
sarson (a case of recessive epistatic
modifier). In Proceedings of the 6th
International Rapeseed Conference,
Paris, pp. 354–359.
Hiscock, S.J. and McInnis, S.M. (2003)
Pollen recognition and rejection during
the sporophytic self-incompatibility response: Brassica and beyond. Trends
in Plant Science 8, 606–613.
Huang, S., Lee, H.S., Karunanandaa, B.
and Kao, T.H. (1994) Ribonuclease
activity of Petunia inflata S proteins
is essential for rejection of self-pollen.
Plant Cell 6, 1021–1028.
Huang, S., Blanchoin, L., Chaudhry, F.,
Franklin-Tong, V.E. and Staiger, C.J.
(2004) A gelsolin-like protein from
Papaver rhoeas pollen (PrABP80)
stimulates calcium-regulated severing
and depolymerization of actin filaments. Journal of Biological Chemistry 279, 23364–23375.
Ida, K., Norioka, S., Yamamoto, M.,
Kumasaka, T., Yamashita, E., Newbigin, E., Clarke, A.E., Sakiyama, F. and
Sato, M. (2001) The 1.55 A resolution
structure of Nicotiana alata S(F11)RNase associated with gametophytic
self-incompatibility. Journal of Molecular Biology 314, 103–112.
Ikeda, K., Igic, B., Ushijima, K., Yamane,
H., Hauck, N.R., Nakano, R., Sassa,
H., Iezzoni, A.F., Kohn, J.R. and Tao,
R. (2004) Primary structural features of
the S haplotype-specific F-box protein,
SFB, in Prunus. Sexual Plant Reproduction 16, 235–243.
Ioerger, T.R., Clark, A.G. and Kao, T.H.
(1990) Polymorphism at the self-

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms
incompatibility locus in Solanaceae
predates speciation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences
USA 87, 9732–9735.
Ishimizu, T., Shinkawa, T., Sakiyama, F.
and Norioka, S. (1998) Primary structural features of rosaceous S-RNases
associated with gametophytic self-incompatibility. Plant Molecular Biology 37, 931–941.
Iwano, M., Shiba, H., Funato, M., Shimosato, H., Takayama, S. and Isogai, A.
(2003) Immunohistochemical studies
on translocation of pollen S-haplotype
determinant in self-incompatibility of
Brassica rapa. Plant and Cell Physiology 44, 428–436.
Jordan, N.D., Kakeda, K., Conner, A.,
Ride, J.P., Franklin-Tong, V.E. and
Franklin, F.C. (1999) S-protein mutants
indicate a functional role for SBP in the
self-incompatibility reaction of Papaver
rhoeas. Plant Journal 20, 119–125.
Kachroo, A., Schopfer, C.R., Nasrallah,
M.E. and Nasrallah, J.B. (2001)
Allele-specific receptor-ligand interactions in Brassica self-incompatibility.
Science 293, 1824–1826.
Kachroo, A., Nasrallah, M.E. and Nasrallah, J.B. (2002) Self-incompatibility in
the Brassicaceae: receptor-ligand signaling and cell-to-cell communication.
Plant Cell 14, S227–238.
Kao, T.H. and McCubbin, A.G. (1996)
How flowering plants discriminate between self and non-self pollen to prevent inbreeding. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
93, 12059–12065.
Kao, T.H. and Tsukamoto, T. (2004)
The molecular and genetic bases
of S-RNase-based self-incompatibility.
Plant Cell 16, S72–83.
Karunanandaa, B., Huang, S. and Kao, T.
(1994) Carbohydrate moiety of the Petunia inflata S3 protein is not required
for self-incompatibility interactions between pollen and pistil. Plant Cell 6,
1933–1940.
Kleman-Mariac, C., Rougier, M., Cock,
J.M., Gaude, T. and Dumas, C.

293

(1995) S-locus glycoproteins are expressed along the path of pollen tubes
in Brassica pistils. Planta 196, 614–
621.
Kusaba, M., Nishio, T., Satta, Y., Hinata,
K. and Ockendon, D. (1997) Striking
sequence similarity in inter- and intraspecific comparisons of class I SLG
alleles from Brassica oleracea and
Brassica campestris: implications for
the evolution and recognition mechanism. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 94,
7673–7678.
Kusaba, M., Matsushita, M., Okazaki, K.,
Satta, Y. and Nishio, T. (2000) Sequence and structural diversity of the
S locus genes from different lines with
the same self-recognition specificities
in Brassica oleracea. Genetics 154,
413–420.
Kusaba, M., Dwyer, K., Hendershot, J.,
Vrebalov, J., Nasrallah, J.B. and Nasrallah, M.E. (2001) Self-incompatibility
in the genus Arabidopsis: characterization of the S locus in the outcrossing
Arabidopsis lyrata and its autogamous
relative Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant
Cell 13, 627–643.
Kusaba, M., Tung, C.W., Nasrallah, M.E.
and Nasrallah, J.B. (2002) Monoallelic
expression and dominance interactions
in anthers of self-incompatible Arabidopsis lyrata. Plant Physiology 128,
17–20.
Lai, Z., Ma, W., Han, B., Liang, L.,
Zhang, Y., Hong, G. and Xue, Y.
(2002) An F-box gene linked to the
self-incompatibility (S) locus of Antirrhinum is expressed specifically in pollen and tapetum. Plant Molecular
Biology 50, 29–42.
Lee, H.S., Huang, S. and Kao, T. (1994)
S proteins control rejection of incompatible pollen in Petunia inflata. Nature 367, 560–563.
Li, J., Smith, G.P. and Walker, J.C.
(1999) Kinase interaction domain of
kinase-associated protein phosphatase, a phosphoprotein-binding domain. Proceedings of the National

294

T. Gaude et al.
Academy of Sciences USA 96,
7821–7826.
Luu, D.T., Qin, X., Morse, D. and Cappadocia, M. (2000) S-RNase uptake by
compatible pollen tubes in gametophytic self-incompatibility. Nature
407, 649–651.
Matsuura, T., Sakai, H., Unno, M., Ida,
K., Sato, M., Sakiyama, F. and Norioka, S. (2001) Crystal structure at 1.5A resolution of Pyrus pyrifolia pistil
ribonuclease responsible for gametophytic self-incompatibility. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 276, 45261–
45269.
Matton, D.P., Maes, O., Laublin, G.,
Xike, Q., Bertrand, C., Morse, D. and
Cappadocia, M. (1997) Hypervariable domains of self-incompatibility
RNAses mediate allele-specific pollen
recognition. Plant Cell 9, 1757–
1766.
McClure, B.A., Haring, V., Ebert, P.R.,
Anderson, M.A., Simpson, R.J.,
Sakiyama, F. and Clarke, A.E. (1989)
Style self-incompatibility gene products of Nicotiana alata are ribonucleases. Nature 342, 955–957.
Miège, C., Dumas, C. and Cock, J.M.
(1999) Identification of a gene linked
to the Brassica S (self-incompatibility)
locus by differential display. Compte
Rendu de l’Académie des Sciences
III 322, 1051–1060.
Miège, C., Ruffio-Chable, V., Schierup,
M.H., Cabrillac, D., Dumas, C.,
Gaude, T. and Cock, J.M. (2001)
Intrahaplotype polymorphism at the
Brassica S locus. Genetics 159,
811–822.
Mishima, M., Takayama, S., Sasaki, K.,
Jee, J.G., Kojima, C., Isogai, A. and
Shirakawa, M. (2003) Structure of the
male determinant factor for Brassica
self-incompatibility. Journal of Biological Chemistry 278, 36389–
36395.
Murase, K., Shiba, H., Iwano, M., Che,
F.S., Watanabe, M., Isogai, A. and
Takayama, S. (2004) A membraneanchored protein kinase involved in

Brassica self-incompatibility signaling.
Science 303, 1516–1519.
Murfett, J., Atherton, T.L., Mou, B.,
Gasser, C.S. and McClure, B.A. (1994)
S-RNase expressed in transgenic
Nicotiana causes S-allele-specific pollen rejection. Nature 367, 563–566.
Nasrallah, J.B., Kao, T.-H., Goldberg,
M.L. and Nasrallah, M.E. (1985) A
cDNA clone encoding an S-locus specific glycoprotein from Brassica oleracea. Nature 318, 617–618.
Nasrallah, J.B., Rundle, S.J. and Nasrallah, M.E. (1994) Genetic evidence for
the requirement of Brassica S-locus receptor kinase gene in self-incompatibility response. Plant Journal 5, 373–
384.
Nasrallah, M.E., Liu, P. and Nasrallah,
J.B. (2002) Generation of self-incompatible Arabidopsis thaliana by transfer of two S locus genes from
Arabidopsis lyrata. Science 297,
247–249.
Nasrallah, M.E., Liu, P., ShermanBroyles, S., Boggs, N.A. and Nasrallah, J.B. (2004) Natural variation in
expression of self-incompatibility in
Arabidopsis thaliana: implications for
the evolution of selfing. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 101, 16070–16074.
Nishio, T. and Kusaba, M. (2000) Sequence diversity of SLG and SRK in
Brassica oleracea L. Annals of Botany 85, 141–146.
Okazaki, K., Kusaba, M., Ockendon, D.
and Nishio, T. (1999) Characterization
of S tester lines in Brassica oleracea:
polymorphism of restriction fragment
length of SLG homologues and isoelectric points of S-locus glycoproteins. Theoretical and Applied
Genetics 98, 1329–1334.
Pastuglia,
M.,
Ruffio-Chable,
V.,
Delorme, V., Gaude, T., Dumas, C.
and Cock, J.M. (1997) A functional S
locus anther gene is not required for
the self-incompatibility response in
Brassica oleracea. Plant Cell 9,
2065–2076.

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms
Qiao, H., Wang, F., Zhao, L., Zhou, J.,
Lai, Z., Zhang, Y., Robbins, T.P. and
Xue, Y. (2004a) The F-box protein
AhSLF-S2 controls the pollen function
of S-RNase-based self-incompatibility.
Plant Cell 16, 2307–2322.
Qiao, H., Wang, H., Zhao, L., Zhou, J.,
Huang, J., Zhang, Y. and Xue, Y.
(2004b) The F-box protein AhSLF-S2
physically interacts with S-RNases that
may be inhibited by the ubiquitin/26S
proteasome pathway of protein degradation during compatible pollination
in Antirrhinum. Plant Cell 16, 582–
595.
Roalson, E.H. and McCubbin, A.G.
(2003) S-RNases and sexual incompatibility: structure, functions, and evolutionary perspectives. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 29,
490–506.
Rudd, J.J. and Franklin-Tong, V.E. (2003)
Signals and targets of the self-incompatibility response in pollen of Papaver
rhoeas. Journal of Experimental Botany 54, 141–148.
Rudd, J.J., Franklin, F., Lord, J.M. and
Franklin-Tong, V.E. (1996) Increased
phosphorylation of a 26-kD pollen
protein is induced by the self-incompatibility response in Papaver rhoeas.
Plant Cell 8, 713–724.
Rudd, J.J., Osman, K., Franklin, F.C. and
Franklin-Tong, V.E. (2003) Activation
of a putative MAP kinase in pollen is
stimulated by the self-incompatibility
(SI) response. FEBS Letters 547,
223–227.
Ruffio-Chable, V. and Gaude, T. (2001) Shaplotype polymorphism in Brassica
oleracea. Acta Horticulturae 546,
257–261.
Sato, Y., Okamoto, S. and Nishio, T.
(2004) Diversification and alteration
of recognition specificity of the pollen
ligand SP11/SCR in self-incompatibility of Brassica and Raphanus. Plant
Cell 16, 3230–3241.
Schierup, M.H., Mable, B.K., Awadalla,
P. and Charlesworth, D. (2001) Identification and characterization of a poly-

295

morphic receptor kinase gene linked to
the self-incompatibility locus of Arabidopsis lyrata. Genetics 158, 387–
399.
Schopfer, C.R., Nasrallah, M.E. and Nasrallah, J.B. (1999) The male determinant of self-incompatibility in Brassica.
Science 286, 1697–1700.
Shah, K., Russinova, E., Gadella, T.W. Jr,
Willemse, J. and De Vries, S.C. (2002)
The Arabidopsis kinase-associated
protein phosphatase controls internalization of the somatic embryogenesis
receptor kinase 1. Genes & Development 16, 1707–1720.
Shiba, H., Takayama, S., Iwano, M., Shimosato, H., Funato, M., Nakagawa,
T., Che, F.S., Suzuki, G., Watanabe,
M., Hinata, K. and Isogai, A. (2001) A
pollen coat protein, SP11/SCR, determines the pollen S-specificity in the
self-incompatibility of Brassica species.
Plant Physiology 125, 2095–2103.
Shiba, H., Iwano, M., Entani, T., Ishimoto, K., Shimosato, H., Che, F.S.,
Satta, Y., Ito, A., Takada, Y., Watanabe, M., Isogai, A. and Takayama,
S. (2002) The dominance of alleles
controlling self-incompatibility in Brassica pollen is regulated at the RNA
level. Plant Cell 14, 491–504.
Shiba, H., Kenmochi, M., Sugihara, M.,
Iwano, M., Kawasaki, S., Suzuki, G.,
Watanabe, M., Isogai, A. and
Takayama, S. (2003) Genomic organization of the S-locus region of Brassica. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and
Biochemistry 67, 622–626.
Shimizu, K.K., Cork, J.M., Caicedo, A.L.,
Mays, C.A., Moore, R.C., Olsen,
K.M., Ruzsa, S., Coop, G., Bustamante, C.D., Awadalla, P. and Purugganan, M.D. (2004) Darwinian
selection on a selfing locus. Science
306, 2081–2084.
Shiu, S.H. and Bleecker, A.B. (2001) Receptor-like kinases from Arabidopsis
form a monophyletic gene family related to animal receptor kinases. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 98, 10763–10768.

296

T. Gaude et al.
Sijacic, P., Wang, X., Skirpan, A.L.,
Wang, Y., Dowd, P.E., McCubbin,
A.G., Huang, S. and Kao, T.H.
(2004) Identification of the pollen determinant of S-RNase-mediated self-incompatibility. Nature 429, 302–305.
Sims, T.L. and Ordanic, M. (2001) Identification of a S-ribonuclease-binding
protein in Petunia hybrida. Plant Molecular Biology 47, 771–783.
Snowman, B.N., Kovar, D.R., Shevchenko, G., Franklin-Tong, V.E. and
Staiger, C.J. (2002) Signal-mediated
depolymerization of actin in pollen
during the self-incompatibility response. Plant Cell 14, 2613–2626.
Sonneveld, T., Tobutt, K.R., Vaughan,
S.P. and Robbins, T.P. (2005) Loss
of pollen-S function in two self-compatible selections of Prunus avium is
associated with deletion/mutation of
an S haplotype-specific F-box gene.
Plant Cell 17, 37–51.
Stein, J.C. and Nasrallah, J.B. (1993) A
plant receptor-like gene, the S-locus
receptor kinase of Brassica oleracea
L., encodes a functional serine/threonine kinase. Plant Physiology 101,
1103–1106.
Stein, J.C., Howlett, B., Boyes, D.C.,
Nasrallah, M.E. and Nasrallah, J.B.
(1991) Molecular cloning of a putative
receptor protein kinase gene encoded
at the self-incompatibility locus of
Brassica oleracea. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences
USA 88, 8816–8820.
Stein, J.C., Dixit, R., Nasrallah, M.E. and
Nasrallah, J.B. (1996) SRK, the
stigma-specific S locus receptor kinase
of Brassica, is targeted to the plasma
membrane in transgenic tobacco.
Plant Cell 8, 429–445.
Steinbachs, J.E. and Holsinger, K.E.
(2002) S-RNase-mediated gametophytic self-incompatibility is ancestral
in eudicots. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 19, 825–829.
Stephenson, A.G., Doughty, J., Dixon,
S., Elleman, C., Hiscock, S. and
Dickinson, H.G. (1997) The male de-

terminant in self-incompatibility in
Brassica oleracea is located in the pollen coating. Plant Journal 12, 1351–
1359.
Stone, S.L., Arnoldo, M. and Goring,
D.R. (1999) A breakdown of Brassica
self-incompatibility in ARC1 antisense
transgenic plants. Science 286, 1729–
1731.
Stone, S.L., Anderson, E.M., Mullen,
R.T. and Goring, D.R. (2003) ARC1
is an E3 ubiquitin ligase and promotes
the ubiquitination of proteins during
the rejection of self-incompatible
Brassica pollen. Plant Cell 15,
885–898.
Suzuki, G., Kai, N., Hirose, T., Fukui, K.,
Nishio, T., Takayama, S., Isogai, A.,
Watanabe, M. and Hinata, K. (1999)
Genomic organization of the S locus:
identification and characterization of
genes in SLG/SRK region of S(9) haplotype of Brassica campestris (syn.
rapa). Genetics 153, 391–400.
Takasaki, T., Hatakeyama, K., Suzuki, G.,
Watanabe, M., Isogai, A. and Hinata,
K. (2000) The S receptor kinase determines self-incompatibility in Brassica
stigma. Nature 403, 913–916.
Takayama, S., Shiba, H., Iwano, M., Shimosato, H., Che, F.S., Kai, N., Watanabe, M., Suzuki, G., Hinata, K. and
Isogai, A. (2000) The pollen determinant of self-incompatibility in Brassica
campestris. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
97, 1920–1925.
Takayama, S., Shimosato, H., Shiba, H.,
Funato, M., Che, F.S., Watanabe, M.,
Iwano, M. and Isogai, A. (2001) Direct
ligand-receptor complex interaction
controls Brassica self-incompatibility.
Nature 413, 534–538.
Tantikanjana, T., Nasrallah, M.E., Stein,
J.C., Chen, C.H. and Nasrallah, J.B.
(1993) An alternative transcript of the
S locus glycoprotein gene in a class
II pollen-recessive self-incompatibility
haplotype of Brassica oleracea encodes a membrane-anchored protein.
Plant Cell 5, 657–666.

Control of Fertilization by Self-incompatibility Mechanisms
Thomas, S.G. and Franklin-Tong, V.E.
(2004) Self-incompatibility triggers
programmed cell death in Papaver pollen. Nature 429, 305–309.
Thompson, K.F. and Taylor, J.P. (1966)
Non-linear relationships between S alleles. Heredity 21, 345–362.
Tichtinsky, G., Vanoosthuyse, V., Cock,
J.M. and Gaude, T. (2003) Making inroads into plant receptor kinase signalling pathways. Trends in Plant
Science 8, 231–237.
Tsai, D.-S., Lee, H.-S., Post, L.C., Kreiling, K.M. and Kao, T.H. (1992)
Sequence of an S-protein of Lycopersicon peruvianum and comparison
with other solanaceous S-proteins.
Sexual Plant Reproduction 5, 256–
263.
Ushijima, K., Sassa, H., Dandekar, A.M.,
Gradziel, T.M., Tao, R. and Hirano, H.
(2003) Structural and transcriptional
analysis of the self-incompatibility
locus of almond: identification of a
pollen-expressed F-box gene with
haplotype-specific
polymorphism.
Plant Cell 15, 771–781.
Vanoosthuyse, V., Miège, C., Dumas, C.
and Cock, J.M. (2001) Two large Arabidopsis thaliana gene families are
homologous to the Brassica gene
superfamily that encodes pollen coat
proteins and the male component
of the self-incompatibility response.
Plant Molecular Biology 46, 17–34.

297

Vanoosthuyse, V., Tichtinsky, G., Dumas,
C., Gaude, T. and Cock, J.M. (2003)
Interaction of calmodulin, a sorting
nexin and kinase-associated protein
phosphatase with the Brassica oleracea S locus receptor kinase. Plant
Physiology 133, 919–929.
Verica, J.A., McCubbin, A.G. and Kao, T.
(1998) Are the hypervariable regions
of S RNases sufficient for allele-specific
recognition of pollen? Plant Cell 10,
314–317.
Vieira, C.P., Charlesworth, D. and
Vieira, J. (2003) Evidence for rare recombination at the gametophytic selfincompatibility locus. Heredity 91,
262–267.
Weller, S.G., Donoghue, M.J. and Charlesworth, D. (1995) The evolution of
self-incompatibility in flowering plants:
a phylogenetic approach. In: Hoch,
P.C. and Stephenson, A.G. (eds) Experimental and Molecular Approaches to Plant Biosystematics.
Missouri Botanical Garden, St Louis,
Missouri, pp. 355–382.
Xue, Y., Carpenter, R., Dickinson, H.G.
and Coen, E.S. (1996) Origin of allelic
diversity in Antirrhinum S locus
RNases. Plant Cell 8, 805–814.
Yu, K., Schafer, U., Glavin, T.L., Goring,
D.R. and Rothstein, S.J. (1996)
Molecular characterization of the S
locus in two self-incompatible Brassica
napus lines. Plant Cell 8, 2369–2380.

11

Stamen Development: Primordium to
Pollen

R.J. SCOTT1, M. SPIELMAN2 AND H.G. DICKINSON1
1

Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY,
UK, e-mail: bssrjs@bath.ac.uk
2
Department of Plant Sciences, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3RB, UK

Introduction
The stamen is the male reproductive organ of flowering plants and consists of
an anther, the site of pollen development, and in most species a stalk-like
filament that transmits water and nutrients to the anther and positions it to
aid pollen dispersal. Within the anther, male sporogenous cells differentiate and
undergo meiosis to produce microspores, which give rise to pollen grains, while
other cell types contribute to pollen maturation or release. Pollen development
involves numerous extraordinary events, some of which are either unique or
else restricted to reproductive development, including cell division and differentiation independent of a meristem; the transition from sporophytic to gametophytic generation; and modifications of cell division to produce structures
that are unusual in plant development, including coenocytic tissues (the tapetum and the microsporocyte mass), and subsequently free cells (microspores)
that give rise to self-contained units of dispersal, the pollen grains. A comprehensive review of stamen morphology across the angiosperms is provided by
Bhandari (1984), and for Arabidopsis thaliana by Scott et al. (2004). Other
reviews of stamen development, function and gene expression include Scott
et al. (1991a), Goldberg et al. (1993) and Irish (1999).
This chapter focuses mainly on recent advances in understanding stamen
development and function in A. thaliana. This model plant species has unsurpassed experimental resources such as freely available genetic tools, a fully
sequenced genome, microarrays, well-characterized mutants associated with
cloned genes and ever more comprehensive knockout collections for reverse
genetics. The advances of the last 12 years since the first edition of The
Molecular Biology of Flowering include an increased understanding of stamen
specification, stamen-specific gene expression, internal patterning of the anther,
298

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Stamen Development

299

regulation of male meiosis, the role of the callose wall in the production of free
microspores and in the patterning of the pollen wall and anther dehiscence.

The Specification of Stamens Within the Floral Meristem
Flowers of eudicots are organized into four concentric whorls of organs (sepals,
petals, stamens, carpels), which arise sequentially from the floral meristem (Fig.
11.1). The third whorl in A. thaliana flowers contains six stamens, four long
medials (long) and two shorter laterals. Stamen primordia appear during floral
stage 5 (defined by Smyth et al., 1990), with the medial stamens arising first.
At stage 7 the long stamen primordia differentiate a stalked basal region, which
will give rise to the filament, and a wider upper region that will become the
anther. Stage 8 is defined by the appearance of anther locules (in which pollen
develops) as convex protrusions on the inner (adaxial) surface of long stamens.
During this stage the sporogenous cells, which will give rise to pollen, are visible
within locules of sectioned anthers (Sanders et al., 1999). The sporogenous
cells differentiate into microsporocytes (also known as pollen mother cells or
male meiocytes), which undergo meiosis to form tetrads of haploid microspores
(Fig. 11.1). These are released into the anther locule to begin male gametophyte
A

Long stamen

B

Sepal

T
Petal

Short
stamen

Abaxial
surface

ML

Short
stamen

C

V

StR

S

Td

Microsporangium

Adaxial
surfaceAnther stage 7
Floral stage 9

Gynoecium

E En

D

E En

C
C

V

St
TPG
TPG
Anther stage 14
Floral stage 14

En
E
Anther stage 12
Floral stage 12

Fig. 11.1. Anther development. (A) Schematic representation of a transverse section through
Arabidopsis thaliana floral bud showing number, position and orientation of the floral organs
(after Hill and Lord, 1989). (B–D). Schematic representation of transverse sections through
A. thaliana anthers at different stages (after Sanders et al. 1999). Floral stages as in Smyth et al.
(1990); anther stages as in Sanders et al. (1999). C, connective; E, epidermis; En, endothecium;
ML, middle layer; S, septum; St, stomium; StR, stomium region; T, tapetum; Td, tetrads; TPG,
tricellular pollen grains; V, vascular bundle.

300

R.J. Scott et al.

development. By floral stage 12 the anthers are nearly at their final length and
contain tricellular pollen, and the filaments begin to elongate rapidly. At stage
13 the flower opens and anther dehiscence occurs to release the pollen. The
filaments continue to extend, so that the anthers brush past the receptive
stigma at stage 14.
Jenik and Irish (2000) studied the patterns of cell divisions involved in floral
organ development. They found that the floral meristem of A. thaliana, like the
shoot apical meristem (SAM), is composed of three ‘histogenic layers’ of cells
with separate lineages: L1 (epidermis), L2 (subepidermis) and L3 (core). Stamen
primordia are initiated by periclinal divisions in the floral meristem, usually within
the L2. By stage 7 the primordia are composed of an epidermis derived from the
L1, one layer of L2-derived subepidermis and an L3 core. The growth of the
anther after stage 8 is due mainly to division of L2 cells in different planes; these
give rise to most of the cell types of the anther, including the sporogenous cells
(discussed in detail below). The L3 contributes to the vasculature and sometimes
to the connectives. In other species, it has also been observed that the male germ
cells derive almost exclusively from the L2 (Goldberg et al., 1993).
There are many reviews of floral organ specification (e.g. Jack, 2001,
2004; Theißen, 2001; Lohmann and Weigel, 2002) and therefore regulation
of stamen identity will be treated very briefly here. The identity of floral organ
primordia is controlled by three classes (termed A, B and C) of homeotic selector
genes with overlapping areas of activity; stamens develop in the third whorl,
where both B and C genes are expressed. In stamens (as well as petals and
carpels) additional transcription factors, encoded by SEPALLATA (SEP) genes
in A. thaliana, are required to confer full activity on the ABC genes. The ABC
model was based on genetic studies in A. thaliana and Antirrhinum majus
(Bowman et al., 1991; Coen and Meyerowitz, 1991). The B class genes are
APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI ) in A. thaliana and DEFICIENS
(DEF) and GLOBOSA (GLO) in A. majus; the C genes are AGAMOUS (AG)
and PLENA (PLE), respectively. Mutations in any one of the B or C genes result
in homeotic conversion of the third-whorl organs to a different type. In both
A. thaliana and A. majus, loss of B function causes transformation of stamens to
carpelloid organs, loss of C function converts stamens to petals and loss of both
transforms stamens to sepals (Bowman et al., 1989; Carpenter and Coen,
1990). Single gene mutations of the SEP genes have only very subtle phenotypes, but in sep1 sep2 sep3 triple mutants all floral organs resemble sepals,
suggesting that B and C functions have been abolished (Pelaz et al., 2000).
The signals that determine the number of floral organ primordia in each
whorl are unknown (Irish, 1999). However, the number of stamens can be
perturbed by various mechanisms; extra stamens develop in clavata1 mutants,
which form enlarged meristems (Clark et al., 1993), and in superman mutants,
which have an expanded BC domain (Bowman et al., 1992). In contrast, arrest
of stamen primordia is a feature of normal development in some species. In the
radially asymmetric flowers of Antirrhinum, five stamens initiate but the dorsal
stamen arrests early in development in response to activity of the cycloidea gene
(Luo et al., 1995). In some species that produce unisexual flowers, such as maize
and white campion, stamens in female flowers initiate but later arrest or abort
(Calderon-Urrea and Dellaporta, 1999; Tanurdzik and Banks, 2004).

Stamen Development

301

Although the ABC model was developed for eudicots, it is also applicable
to monocots and basal dicots with some modifications (reviewed by Theißen,
2001; Fornara et al., 2003; Zik and Irish, 2003). Throughout the angiosperms, stamens are specified by a combination of B class proteins that are
orthologous to AP3 and PI, and C class proteins that are either orthologous or
paralogous to AG. Strikingly, orthologues of B class genes isolated from
gymnosperms (which do not form stamens) are expressed exclusively in male
reproductive structures, suggesting that the role of B genes in specifying male
reproductive development predates the divergence of gymnosperm and angiosperm lineages (Theißen, 2001).
The B class, C class and SEP proteins all belong to the MADS family of
transcription factors, which bind a target DNA sequence, CC(A / T)6CG (CArG
box), as homo- or heterodimers. In vitro, the A. majus B class proteins DEF
and GLO bind CArG box sequences only as a heterodimer (Theißen, 2001).
Similarly, A. thaliana AP3 and PI bind CArG box sequences only as a heterodimer, and the C class AG protein binds as a homodimer (Riechmann et al.,
1996). Yeast two-hybrid assays show that PI/AP3 interacts directly with SEP3
but not AG, and it has been proposed that SEP3 mediates interactions between
PI/AP3 and AG dimers so that PI/AP3, AG and SEP bind DNA in quaternary
complexes; this would explain the combinatorial action of B and C class genes
(along with SEP genes) in stamens (Honma and Goto, 2001).

Identifying Genes Involved in Stamen Development and Function
Twelve years ago one of the major unanswered questions about stamen development was the nature of the genes downstream of the B and C class transcription factors (Goldberg et al., 1993). After stamen specification, the B and
C class as well as SEP genes continue to be expressed during stamen development (Bowman et al., 1991; Pelaz et al., 2000; Jack, 2001), so could be
directly responsible for activating many of the genes involved in stamen morphogenesis and function. Among the targets of B class genes in A. thaliana are
AP3 and PI themselves, as both genes are required for the continued expression of each in the developing flower (Lohmann and Weigel, 2002). Two main
approaches have been used to identify further targets of B and C class genes.
These involve either transcriptional profiling methods including subtractive
hybridization, differential display of RNAs and differential screening of cDNA
libraries or arrays to find genes with stamen-specific or -preferred expression or
screening for mutations that affect stamens. Both approaches have yielded
interesting results, but there is not yet enough information to reconstruct the
developmental pathways that start with homeotic gene expression.

Gene expression studies
Stamen expression studies have been conducted in many crop and model
species including tomato (Ursin et al., 1989; Chmelnitsky et al., 2003),

302

R.J. Scott et al.

tobacco (Koltunow et al., 1990), A. majus (Nacken et al., 1991), oilseed rape
(Scott et al., 1991b; Shen and Hsu, 1992), maize (Wright et al., 1993), rice
(Tsuchiya et al., 1994), lily (Crossley et al., 1995), white campion (Barbacar
et al., 1997), Lotus japonicus (Endo et al., 2002) and A. thaliana (Rubinelli
et al., 1998; Sablowski and Meyerowitz, 1998; Amagai et al., 2003; Zik and
Irish, 2003). Some of these studies have manipulated B and/or C class genes
themselves to help identify their targets; these experiments will be discussed in
more detail below. Proteomics analysis has also been used to compare and
identify proteins extracted from rice anthers at different developmental stages
(Kerim et al., 2003). The expression studies have identified genes involved in
protein, starch and sucrose metabolism, osmoregulation, cell wall biosynthesis
and expansion, sugar transport, lipid transfer, flavonoid synthesis and cytoskeleton structure. These are consistent with features of stamen and/or pollen
development such as rapid growth, water movements associated with desiccation and dehiscence, stress response and accumulation of storage compounds.
Many genes with unknown function were also recovered. Few of the genes
have obvious developmental or signalling roles. Exceptions to this include
several candidate transcription factors in white campion and A. thaliana
(Barbacar et al., 1997; Zik and Irish, 2003), and a subunit of the COP9
signalosome (a repressor of photomorphogenesis in plants) found to be upregulated in rice anthers at the panicle heading stage, suggesting a role in
mediating light signals to coordinate flowering with anther dehiscence (Kerim
et al., 2003).
In situ hybridization shows that genes identified in the expression studies
are specific to a variety of stamen regions and cell types including microsporocytes, microspores, tapetum, endothecium, connectives, epidermis and filaments. A common theme is the predominance of tapetum-specific transcripts
in early anthers, reflecting the high metabolic activity of this tissue (Scott et al.,
1991a; and below).
In some of the experiments referred to above, transcriptional profiling
techniques were used in conjunction with mutants or transgenics for the B
and C class genes to aid identification of their targets. For example, differential
hybridization of an inflorescence-enriched cDNA library was used to isolate
mRNAs expressed in wild-type flowers but not def mutants of Antirrhinum,
which lack B function. This experiment yielded 12 differentially expressed
genes including tap1, expressed in the tapetum and encoding a putative
secreted protein and filamentous flower1 ( fil1), expressed mainly in stamen
filaments and petal bases and encoding a candidate cell wall protein (Nacken
et al., 1991). Rubinelli et al. (1998) compared wild-type and ag mutant
flowers of A. thaliana, which lack C function, using subtractive hybridization,
and after a further screen making use of RNA from ap3 mutants (which have
pistils but not stamens) identified 13 genes that are differentially expressed in
stamens. These included genes predicted to encode hydrolytic enzymes and a
lipid transferase. Sablowski and Meyerowitz (1998) analysed gene expression
in flowers with no C function and inducible B function, which were also treated
with a protein synthesis inhibitor, to discover direct targets of AP3/PI. Three
mRNAs were consistently upregulated by induction of B function in ap3-3; ag-3

Stamen Development

303

mutant flowers in the absence of protein synthesis, one of which, NAP, was
studied in detail. In situ hybridizations to wild-type flowers showed expression
in stamens and petals, both sites of B function, though also in some organs
outside the domain of PI/AP3 activity. Based on ectopic and antisense expression studies the authors proposed that NAP functions in the transition between
cell division and expansion, for instance in elongating stamen filaments.
Zik and Irish (2003) used microarray analysis to identify genes affected by
misexpression of AP3 and PI. Gene expression was compared in flowers from
wild-type plants and from mutants and transgenics with altered B function. This
study identified 47 genes likely to be directly or indirectly regulated by AP3/PI
in petal and/or stamen development. Since the microarray used represented
roughly 25% of the A. thaliana genome, some 200 genes may be affected by
changes in AP3/PI activity. AP3/PI-responsive genes found to be expressed in
stamens, or stamens and petals, included many implicated in the rapid cell
expansion that is a feature of petal and stamen growth. Only two candidate
transcription factors were identified, suggesting that AP3 and PI act relatively
directly in regulating gene expression. Twenty-eight of the 47 genes had one or
more candidate CArG boxes in a 1-kb upstream region, indicating that they
could be directly activated by AP3/PI, although these sequences do not provide
specific targets for particular MADS proteins.

Analysis of developmental mutants
Mutant screens conducted over many decades have revealed a large number of
sporophytic genes required for male fertility (described for example by Kaul,
1988; Chaudhury, 1993; Dawson et al., 1993; Chaudhury et al., 1994;
Taylor et al., 1998; Sanders et al., 1999; Bhatt et al., 2001; Sorensen
et al., 2002; Caryl et al., 2003). Pollen development is also affected by male
gametophytic mutations (McCormick, 2004), and indirectly by mutations in the
mitochondrial genome that result in degeneration of the tapetum (Hanson and
Bentolila, 2004). The reported sporophytic mutations disturb a variety of
processes in the stamen such as chromosome pairing or segregation in meiosis,
viability of the tapetum, pollen wall formation, filament elongation and anther
dehiscence. Genes required for pollen development that were first identified
through mutant analysis include DIF1/SYN1, encoding a cohesin required for
chromosome segregation (Bhatt et al., 1999; Bai et al., 1999); MALE STERILITY 2 (MS2), encoding a predicted fatty acyl reductase with a potential role
in pollen wall formation (Aarts et al., 1997); and MS1 and ABORTED
MICROSPORES (AMS), both candidate transcription factors expressed in
the tapetum and possibly in microspores (Wilson et al., 2001; Sorensen
et al., 2003).
General screens for male sterility yield surprisingly few mutants affecting
differentiation of anther cell types (Sanders et al., 1999). Therefore, we
conducted an extinction screen for loss of expression of a b-glucuronidase
(GUS) reporter gene fused to early tapetal-specific promoters, with the aim of
specifically detecting mutations that disrupt microsporangium development

304

R.J. Scott et al.

(Sorensen et al., 2002). This screen identified three loci involved in patterning
of the anther locule. Of these, EXTRA SPOROGENOUS CELLS (EXS)/
EXCESS MICROSPOROCYTES1 (EMS1) has been most thoroughly studied
(Canales et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2002); as this appears to be a key gene in
patterning the stamen, it will be discussed in more detail below.

Genetic Control of Anther Development
Most plant organs derive from meristems: undifferentiated populations of cells
that divide to replenish themselves and also provide founder cells for organ
primordia. Anther development is unusual in that the microsporangia arise
from single archesporial cells rather than meristems. Key stages in this process
are the establishment of adaxial–abaxial polarity, specification of cell types and
formation of the radially symmetrical microsporangia.
Asymmetry first becomes evident in the anther primordium with the formation of the microsporangia, for the two abaxial locules (facing the petals) are
larger than the adaxial pair and are further separated by the connective tissue
(Fig. 11.1). In A. thaliana leaves, asymmetry is established by cadastral interactions among genes promoting adaxial or abaxial identity, with the former
suppressing the latter (Bowman et al., 2002). Mutations in either set of genes
result in either ‘adaxialized’ or ‘abaxialized’ filamentous leaves, and the study of
flowers in these mutant lines suggests that anther polarity is similarly regulated
(Sawa et al., 1999; Siegfried et al., 1999). For example, double mutants for
fil1 and yabby1 (yab1) or kanadi1 (kan1) and kan2 produce radially symmetrical filamentous structures, the internal structure of which has yet to be
determined. As with leaves, FIL is expressed abaxially in the connective tissue
of the anther, supporting the view that stamens evolved from leaves bearing
microsporangia on their upper surfaces.
The floral meristem of A. thaliana, like the SAM, is composed of three
‘histogenic layers’ of cells with separate lineages: L1 (epidermis), L2 (subepidermis) and L3 (core). Stamen primordia are initiated by periclinal divisions in
the floral meristem, usually within the L2 (Jenik and Irish, 2000). The L2 gives
rise to most of the cell types of the anther, including the sporogenous cells
(discussed in detail below). The L3 contributes to the vasculature and sometimes
to the connectives. With the growth of the anther primordium, cells of the L2
undergo a complex series of divisions leading to the formation of the four
radially symmetrical microsporangia (Fig. 11.2), and conducting tissue that
will eventually become linked to the filament. The founder cells of the four
microsporangia are single L2 archesporial cells, each of which divides periclinally to form a primary parietal cell (PPC) subjacent to the L1, and a primary
sporogenous cell (PSC) facing inwards (Canales et al., 2002).
There has been significant progress in the last few years towards identifying
genes involved in the first steps of microsporangium differentiation. In
A. thaliana, the candidate transcription factor NOZZLE / SPOROCYTELESS
(NZZ/SPL) (Schiefthaler et al., 1999; Yang et al., 1999) is required for archesporial specification, as nzz/spl mutant anthers fail to form archesporial cells.

Stamen Development

305

Microsporangium
Adaxial surface

E
E PP
Ep

E SP

SP
PP

A
SF
Archesporial cell
(A) specified
beneath epidermal
layer (Ep)

PS

Division to form
primary parietal (PP)
and primary
sporogenous (PS)
cells. Sporogenous
'field' (SF) generated

PP PS

SP E

SP PS SP

PS
SF

M
T

SF

SP PS SP
SP SP
E

SF induces PP to divide
into secondary parietal
(SP) and endothecium
(E), and adjacent cells
into 'PP' cells

SF induces SP to divide
into tapetal (T) and
middle (M) cells, and
'PP' into secondary
parietal (SP) and
endothecium (E) cells

Fig. 11.2. Microsporangium development. Model for differentiation of the microsporangial cell
layers in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Ito et al. (2005) have also demonstrated that sporogenesis is induced by AG
through activation of the NZZ/SPL gene and that NZZ/SPL can induce
microsporogenesis in the absence of AG function. One interpretation is that
AG controls a specific process during organogenesis by activating another
regulator that performs a subset of its functions.
In maize, msca1 mutants produce archesporial cells but these do not divide
into a PSC and PPC, and no microsporangia are formed (Chaubal et al.,
2003). Intriguingly, the msca1 mutation also appears to convert the entire
anther to another structure, as stomata form ectopically on the epidermis,
although the filament maintains its identity.
The number of cells that can acquire archesporial fate in the anther
appears to be regulated by a similar mechanism to that used in the SAM to
control numbers of pluripotent cells. In the SAM, cell number is determined by
the leucine-rich repeat (LRR) receptor kinase CLAVATA 1 (CLV1), its signalling partner CLV2 and ligand CLV3 (Clark, 2001). In the anther, the number
of cells acquiring archesporial fate is restricted to one per premicrosporangial
domain by EXS/EMS1, a putative LRR receptor kinase (Canales et al., 2002;
Zhao et al., 2002). In exs / ems1 mutants, which are affected only in male
development, multiple L2 cells in the anther enter archesporial development,
with the result that an excess of PSCs is formed following the first periclinal
division. The ligand for EXS/EMS1 is unknown, but mutants in the TAPETUM
DETERMINANT 1 (TPD1) gene have phenotypes similar to exs/ems1

306

R.J. Scott et al.

lines (Yang et al., 2003a; D.Ye, personal communication), suggesting that
TPD1, a novel putative secreted protein, is involved at some point in this
signalling pathway, whether or not as a ligand for EXS / EMS1. However,
TPD1 expression differs from that of EXS/EMS1 (D. Ye, personal communication) and, while still consonant with a role in archesporial cell fate determination, this points to TPD1 playing a wider part in microsporangial
development. An EXS/EMS1 orthologue, MSP1, has been reported in rice
(Nonomura et al., 2003) and, in common with mac1 mutants in maize (which
also share phenotypic features with exs / ems1 mutants (Sheridan et al.,
1999)), msp1 lines show defects in both male and female development.
The developmental fates of the two products of the archesporial cell
division in A. thaliana are very different. The PSC undergoes a small number
of divisions to generate the meiocytes, while the PPC divides periclinally to
form an endothecial cell subjacent to the L1 and a secondary parietal cell (SPC).
The SPC again divides periclinally to generate a middle layer cell next to the
endothecium, and a tapetal cell adjacent to the sporogenous cells. Mutants
have been described with defects in anther wall layer development – e.g. ms23
and ms32 in maize, where the prospective tapetal layer undergoes an extra
periclinal division but neither layer differentiates as tapetum (Chaubal et al.,
2000) – but no clear picture is emerging as to how cell fates are specified.
Interestingly, this process is affected in exs / ems1 anthers for the tapetal and,
frequently, middle layer cells are absent (Canales et al., 2002; Zhao et al.,
2002). Whether EXS / EMS1 is itself required for tapetal specification, or
whether the mass of extra sporogenous cells formed disrupts tapetal and middle
layer differentiation, is unclear.
Periclinal divisions of the single archesporial cell thus give rise to a linear
array of different cell types (Fig. 11.2). However, this process alone – even
accompanied by anticlinal divisions – cannot generate the radially symmetrical
microsporangium, for cells of the microsporangium adjacent to the connective
have been shown to have a different origin from those on the outer face in a
number of species (Nanda and Gupta, 1978; Goldberg et al., 1993). The
model for microsporangial development most consistent with the data confers
a key organizational role on the sporogenous cells (Fig. 11.2). In this scheme,
the PSC, following its formation from the archesporial cell, sets up a radial field
of signals about itself. This field, which continues to be generated by the
subsequent division products of the PSC, induces periclinal division and development in adjacent cells. Thus, the PPC – sister to the PSC – is induced to
divide to form an endothecial cell, and adjacent to the source of signals, the
meristematic SPC. The SPC then executes the final division of the programme,
forming tapetal and middle layer cells. However, these signals are also received
and interpreted by other cells adjacent to the sporogenous cells, whatever their
origin, which are then recruited into the developmental pathway described
above. This model may seem inconsistent with some observations; for example, the cell lineage described here for A. thaliana is not universally
accepted (Yang et al., 1999), and certainly does not hold for all other species
(Davis, 1966). However, whatever the division sequence followed by these
cells, the sporogenous cells or their immediate antecedents are specified at an

Stamen Development

307

early stage in all plants, and the wall layers subsequently develop radially around
them. There are many examples in plants where tissue organization is established in the absence of a coherent pattern of cell division (Torres-Ruiz and
Jürgens, 1994). A second problem is a time disparity between the development
of the inner- and outer-facing domains of the microsporangium (Nanda and
Gupta, 1978). However, data from exs / ems1 mutant anthers point to cells of
the subepidermal L2 being ‘primed’ for development, and thus, together with
the PPCs they may be able to respond to signals generated from the PSC
earlier than other L2 cells and those of the connective tissue. The nature of the
hypothetical radial signal is unknown, but mutants would have phenotypes
resembling those of exs / ems1 lines. The fact that transcripts of TPD1, a
putative partner for the EXS/EMS1 receptor kinase, are concentrated in the
spore mass (D. Ye, personal communication) provides a first indication of a
radial disposition of signals centred on the developing microsporocytes.

Microsporangial Development
Development of the different cell types proceeds at varying speeds; while the
micosporocytes and tapetal cells rapidly enlarge and display differing patterns
of gene expression, the endothecial layer remains undifferentiated through
meiosis and much of microsporogenesis. The middle layer, of which little is
known, is apparently crushed by the expansion of the microsporocytes and
tapetum. Following the initial phase of cell expansion, cytoplasmic contact is
lost between the microsporocytes and tapetum as plasmodesmata are ruptured, seemingly by the rapid synthesis of the microsporocyte callose wall (see
below). Both the microsporocytes and tapetum eventually develop into coenocytes. As the microsporocytes enter meiosis, plasmodesmata between them
enlarge to form ‘cytomictic channels’ up to 0.5 mm in diameter, through which
cytoplasmic exchange must occur. These channels are held to promote synchrony within the micosporocyte mass (Heslop-Harrison, 1966). Later in
tapetal development, particularly in plants such as A. thaliana with secretory
tapeta (see below), walls between the tapetal protoplasts become gelatinous,
and interconnecting plasmodesmata enlarge to form irregular channels. Postmeiotic development thus involves crosstalk between two coenocytes, sealed
within the microsporangium by a lipid/sporopollenin peritapetal membrane
(Dickinson, 1970). Surprisingly, this interaction does not become essential until
after meiosis, for exs / ems1 microsporocytes progress to the tetrad stage in the
absence of any visible tapetum, and it is believed to be the lack of tapetally
derived b-1,3-glucanase, which releases the microspores from the tetrad callose walls (see below); that causes developmental arrest (Canales et al., 2002).

Meiosis in the sporogenous cells
The principal events of meiosis – chromosome pairing, recombination and
segregation – are common to all eukaryotes and the genes involved have

308

R.J. Scott et al.

been the subject of a number of reviews (Vershon and Pierce, 2000;
Rabitsch et al., 2001), as well as the focus of an interkingdom database
(www.germonline.unibas.ch). However, unlike in animals, meiosis in plants
stands not at the threshold of gametogenesis, but of the alternation of generations. The microspores formed as a product of male meiosis develop into
pollen, an independent microgametophyte. Perhaps for this reason, developmental events surrounding plant meiosis, and some details of the process itself,
differ from those in other kingdoms.
In plant microsporocytes dramatic cytoplasmic reorganization accompanies nuclear events, including dedifferentiation and division of plastids and
mitochondria, and dramatic falls in r- and mRNA (Dickinson, 1987). Little
DNA synthesis occurs during this period, except in the organelles, and prophase cDNA libraries reveal a dramatic decrease in the numbers of nuclear
genes expressed (Crossley et al., 1995). This de facto purging of sporophytic
information from the microsporocyte cytoplasm has been interpreted either as
facilitating gametophytic development post-meiosis, or freeing the germline of
detrimental RNA species including viruses and silencing elements (Dickinson,
1987). Organellar dedifferentiation and replication may also be caused by this
decrease in information from the nucleus, but microsporogenesis is also unusual in that it is highly sensitive to mitochondrial mutation. This is held to result
from a need for extreme efficiency in energy production by the tapetum.
Mutations in mitochondrial DNA; and nuclear restorer genes, which ‘correct’
the defect; have been exploited in the development of cytoplasmic male sterility
systems used in plant breeding (Kaul, 1988; Hanson and Bentolila, 2004).
As in all eukaryotes, homologous chromosomes pair during plant meiosis.
While there have been many reports of presynaptic alignment of homologues,
little unequivocal data exists, save for work with polyploid cereals where
homologous pairing clearly takes place in floral tissue prior to meiosis
(Martinez-Perez et al., 1999). The balance between homologues and homologous pairing in cereals is regulated by the polyhomeotic (ph) locus (Vega and
Feldman, 1998), and this premeiotic alignment of homologues has been cited
as evidence of an ancestral system of presynaptic alignment of homologues
(Martinez-Perez et al., 1999). Evidence is now emerging of homologous pairing during interphase in somatic cells, as also occurs in animals and microorganisms (Francz et al., 2002), but any mechanistic relationship between
these two types of pairing has yet to be established.
Following pairing, DNA processing in the male meiocytes is identical to
that of other organisms, including the formation of double strand breaks,
resection, strand invasion, ligation and resolution of the complexes formed
via Holliday junctions. As in most eukaryotes, these events are accompanied by
the formation of synaptonemal complexes and recombination nodules at zygotene/pachytene. Generally, the genes involved in meiotic processing in plants
are orthologous to animal sequences, but differences in gene number and
expression profile do occur (Bhatt et al., 2001; Caryl et al., 2003). Evidence
from a range of meiotic mutants suggests that meiotic checkpoints may also
differ between plants and other eukaryotes (Bhatt et al., 2001), with at least
one checkpoint absent from male development in A. thaliana (Bhatt et al.,

Stamen Development

309

1999). However, mutations in the homeodomain protein MALE MEIOCYTE
DEATH, which cause meiocytes to arrest at diplotene/diakinesis (Yang et al.,
2003b), suggest that some level of checkpoint control is present in anthers.

The cell wall in male meiosis
Plant cells use different methods for mitotic and meiotic cytokinesis (reviewed in
Brown and Lemmon, 2001). In mitotic cytokinesis, daughter cells are separated by a cell plate formed by fusion of golgi-derived vesicles at the phragmoplast. This structure comprises an array of cytoskeletal elements, vesicles and
endoplasmic reticulum that expands centrifugally from the interzonal region of
the mitotic spindle towards the parent cell walls (Staehelin and Hepler, 1996).
The vesicles contribute both membranes and wall components to the nascent
wall. Callose is the main component of the new wall, but it is later degraded and
replaced by cellulose and its derivatives. Male meiotic cytokinesis differs from
mitotic cytokinesis in several ways, the most striking being that on entering
meiosis a microsporocyte deposits callose between the plasma membrane and
cellulose wall (Fig. 11.3). Callose is also the major constituent of the intersporal
walls formed after meiosis, which are later degraded to release the microspores
(Echlin and Godwin, 1968; Steiglitz, 1977). The mechanism of cytokinesis is
also different, with a variety of species-specific patterns observed. Most monocots undergo successive cytokinesis during male meiosis, in which a wall is
formed between the dyad cells after meiosis I and the microspores of the
nascent tetrad after meiosis II. As in mitotically dividing cells, these walls form
centrifugally. In contrast, most dicots, including A. thaliana, undergo simultaneous microsporocyte cytokinesis, meaning that no walls are formed until the
end of meiosis II. In simultaneous cytokinesis, intersporal walls first appear as
ingrowths from the callose wall surrounding the microsporocyte, and expand
centripetally until the microspores are separated (Brown and Lemmon, 1988,
2001; Owen and Makaroff, 1995).
Control of division plane also occurs differently in sporophytic mitosis and
in male meiosis. In meiotic divisions, the future site of cell separation is not
marked by a preprophase band. Instead, after each meiotic division in species
with successive cytokinesis, or after meiosis II in those with simultaneous
cytokinesis, each microspore nucleus becomes surrounded by a radial array
of microtubules that partition the surrounding cytoplasm into ‘spore domains’
(Dickinson and Sheldon, 1984; Brown and Lemmon, 1988, 2001). Cytokinesis proceeds along the planes defined by the intersection of the arrays, as
vesicles contributing membranes and wall components coalesce at the spore
domain interfaces. In tetraspore (tes)/stud (std) mutants of A. thaliana, there is
partial or complete failure of male meiotic cytokinesis, so that all four microspore nuclei begin development in an undivided cytoplasm (Hülskamp et al.,
1997; Spielman et al., 1997). The TES gene encodes a putative kinesin that
appears to be required for establishment of the radial microtubule arrays
surrounding the microspore nuclei at the end of meiosis, as these are lacking
in tes mutants ( Yang et al., 2003c). The tes / std mutations are recessive and

310

R.J. Scott et al.

Fig. 11.3. Synthesis and dissolution of the callose wall during microgametogenesis. (A) Callose is
first synthesized beneath the cellulose wall of the pre-meiotic microsporocyte and persists
throughout meiosis. Cross walls of callose are formed during post-meiotic cytokinesis, yielding a
typical tetrad of microspores. A cocktail of wall-degrading enzymes, including an endo-b-1,3glucanase, is then secreted into the locular space by the tapetum and degrades the callose wall to
release the microspores. The microspores then complete development, yielding bi- or trinucleate
pollen grains. (B) Fluorescence microscopy of aniline blue–stained tetrads shows the
characteristic pattern of callose distribution in wild-type tobacco.

TES is expressed throughout the anther before meiosis, indicating that male
meiotic cytokinesis is under sporophytic control.

Callose wall synthesis, dissolution and function
During prophase I of meiosis, the microsporocytes of most angiosperm species
secrete a wall of callose, a b-(1,3)-glucan, between the plasmalemma and the
original cellulosic wall (Rowley and Southworth, 1967). A second round of
callose wall synthesis occurs as part of post-meiotic cytokinesis, so that individual dyads and microspores in the case of most monocots (which have successive
cytokinesis) and the tetrad of microspores in the case of most dicot species
are also surrounded by a layer of callose. In wounded plant cells callose is
synthesized by a plasma membrane localized glycosyl transferase UDP-glucose

Stamen Development

311

(1,3)-b-glucan synthase (callose synthase) (Delmer, 1987). Recently, Østergaard
et al. (2002) described an A. thaliana gene, Atgsl5, that encodes a plasma
membrane protein homologous to yeast b-(1,3)-glucan synthase and which
partially complements a yeast b-(1,3)-glucan synthase mutant. The gene is
highly expressed in flowers and may represent the enzyme responsible for
microsporocyte callose synthesis. The external microsporocyte and the internal
cross-walls of the tetrad are dissolved to release individual microsporocytes by a
cocktail of enzymes (callase) released from the tapetum (Fig. 11.3).
Numerous theories have been advanced that suggest the function of the
callose wall to be as follows: (i) a barrier or ‘molecular filter’ between the
sporogenous cells and the rest of the sporophyte that is necessary for meiosis
(Heslop-Harrison, 1964; Heslop-Harrison and Mackenzie, 1967); (ii) a
temporary wall that both isolates the products of meiosis to prevent cell
cohesion and fusion and, upon its dissolution, results in the release of free
cells (Waterkeyn, 1962); and (iii) a template or mold for the formation of
the species-specific exine sculpturing patterns seen on mature pollen grains
(Waterkeyn and Bienfait, 1970). This last potential function will be considered
in more detail later.
Natural exceptions, natural and induced mutants and plants engineered to
degrade the callose wall prematurely have provided some insight into the role
of the callose wall. Several lines of evidence suggest the callose wall is not
required for male meiosis; both the primitive species Pandanus odoratissimus,
which naturally lacks a callose wall (Periasamy and Amalathas, 1991), and
transgenic tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum)
and oilseed rape (Brassica napus) plants in which the callose wall is absent
throughout meiosis due to the ectopic expression of a b-1,3-glucanase, successfully initiate and complete meiosis to produce a tetrad of microspores
(Worrall et al., 1992; R.J. Scott, unpublished results; Fig. 11.4A and B).
Engineered absence of the callose wall in lettuce also failed to disrupt meiosis
(Curtis et al., 1996).
The callose wall does appear important for the production of individual
microspores. Species that naturally produce permanent tetrads (four microspores fused together), e.g. members of Juncaceae, Ericaceae, Oenotheraceae
develop little or no callose within the post-meiotic cross-walls within the tetrad
(Blackmore and Crane, 1988; Fig. 11.4). The microspores possess individual
exine walls but these are fused along the line of the cross-walls, which presumably prevents their separation. Blackmore and Crane (1988) proposed a model
in which the fusion of exines is related to the extent of callose wall and the
timing of its deposition. Absence of callose in the tetrad cross-walls in some
species that normally produce them also results in permanent tetrads, e.g.
tomato (Fig. 11.4). However, both P. odoratissimus (Periasamy and
Amalathas, 1991) and B. napus expressing ectopic b-1,3-glucanase (R.J.
Scott et al., unpublished results) produce individual microspores in the absence
of cross-wall callose suggesting that in some species callose is not essential for
ensuring microspores remain separate during exine wall formation within the
tetrad (Fig. 11.4).

312

R.J. Scott et al.

Meiosis + Cytokinesis
(Wild-type plants)

A

Uninucleate
microspores

Meiosis + Cytokinesis
(A9::glucanase plants)

Monocot
Brassica
napus

With
callose
wall

Dicot
Lycopersicon
esculentum

Ericaceae

General angiosperm
(including N. tabacum,
L. esculentum, B. napus,
Zea mays)

Nicotiana
tabacum

Pandanus
odoratissimus

Key

Juncaceae
Callose wall

Without
callose
wall

Pollen wall
Pergularia
daemia

L. esculentum

N. tabacum

Wild-type

B. napus

C

A9::glucanase

A9::glucanase

Wild-type

N. tabacum

B

Fig. 11.4. The role of the callose wall in the separation of microspores following cytokinesis. (A)
Most species of angiosperms produce tetrads with both outer and cross walls composed of
callose. Dissolution of the callose wall results in the release of four separate uninucleate
microspores, which develop into individual pollen grains. The microsporocytes and tetrads of
members of the Ericaceae also contain callose, but following tetrad wall dissolution the
microspores, and subsequently pollen grains, remain permanently fused as tetrads. The
microsporocytes and tetrads of a few species do not synthesize a callosic wall. Most produce
fused tetrads, such as members of the Juncaceae, and Pergularia daemia, but Pandanus
odoratissimus develops individual uninucleate micropores in the absence of the callose wall.
Artificial removal of the callose wall by ectopic tapetum-specific expression of an endo-b-1,3glucanase (A9::glucanase) in three species that normally produce individual microspores resulted
in a range of outcomes with respect to the separation of microspores. Brassica napus retained the
ability to produce individual microspores, whilst Lycopersicon esculentum developed regular
fused tetrads similar to members of the Ericaceae. Nicotiana tabacum produced a highly irregular
mixture of microspores showing evidence of both a lack of cytokinesis (multinucleate spores) and
fusion of individual microspores along abutting exine walls. (B) Fluorescence microscopy of
aniline blue-stained tetrads showing the characteristic pattern of callose distribution in wild-type
tobacco (top) but no callose in engineered N. tabacum carrying the A9::glucanase gene (bottom).
(C) Transmission electron micrographs images of wild-type microspores and microspores from
plants expressing an ectopic tapetum-specific endo-b-1,3-glucanase that removes the callose
wall during early microsporogenesis.

Stamen Development

313

The quartet (qrt) mutants in A. thaliana produce permanent tetrads
despite apparently normal patterns of callose wall synthesis and dissolution
indicating that an alternative mechanism, possibly the deposition of pectins
within the cross-walls, participate in microspore separation (Rhee and
Somerville, 1998).
At the end of meiosis, the external and intersporal walls of the tetrad are
dissolved to release individual microspores by a mixture of enzymes (callase)
containing endoglucanases and exoglucanases secreted by the tapetum. In the
anthers of petunia and lily, expression and secretion of callase activity is under
strict developmental control (Frankel et al., 1969; Steiglitz and Stern, 1973).
The callase complex of lily consists of a 32 kDa endo-b-glucanase and a 62 kDa
exotype b-1,3-glucanase (Steiglitz and Stern, 1973). The endotype enzyme
appears to play the most important role in the degradation of the callosic walls,
while the exotype is involved in the further hydrolysis of released oligosaccharides. Alterations in the timing of b-1,3-glucanase expression or failure to
express b-1,3-glucanase lead to abnormal dissolution of the tetrad callose
walls, which has been shown to be a primary cause of male sterility in cytoplasmic male-sterile lines of petunia (Izhar and Frankel, 1971), sorghum
(Warmke and Overman, 1972) and soybean (Jin et al., 1999). Callase must
also contain cellulases to degrade the original cellulosic wall of the microsporocyte since premature removal of the callose component of the wall does not
release microspores into the locule until the normal time of callase production
(Worrall et al., 1992).
Several candidates for genes encoding the endo b-1,3-glucanase component of the callase enzyme cocktail have been identified, although none have
been confirmed directly, e.g. by knockout or knock-down analysis. The A.
thaliana A6 gene encodes a polypeptide with a domain similar in sequence
to b-1,3-glucanases and a 114 amino-acid C-terminal domain, which is not
present in other known b-1,3-glucanases. Reporter gene studies established
that A6 gene expression is tapetum specific and temporally correlated with the
expression of callase activity (Hird et al., 1993). Transcripts of the tobacco
Tag1 gene that encodes a polypeptide related to established tobacco b-1,3glucanases and containing the conserved pentapeptide motif of the active site
of these enzymes are also expressed exclusively in the tapetum and show a
callase-like pattern of expression (Bucciaglia and Smith, 1994). Yamaguchi
et al. (1997) reported the cloning of cDNA (Osag1) from rice with significant
similarity to anther b-1,3-glucanases and speculated that ‘Osag1 may be involved in tetrad dissolution’. However, Yamaguchi et al. (2002) subsequently
showed that Osag1 expression occurs in anthers after callose wall dissolution
and that the transcript is present in roots and leaves, a pattern of expression
inconsistent with its identity as the b-1,3-glucanase component of callase.
Whilst one or more of the genes described above may participate in callose
wall dissolution, more effort is required to confirm this and then to understand
how this key stage in pollen production is regulated. The availability of expression array data and gene knockout lines in A. thaliana are likely to assist in
identifying bona fide components of callase.

314

R.J. Scott et al.

Tapetal development and pollen coat formation
Although presumably acting as a nurse tissue to the developing meiocytes, the
tapetum is likely to play only a nutritive role. Developmental signalling, such as
that occurring between nurse cells and the egg in Drosophila (St Johnston and
Nüsslein-Vollhard, 1992), is unlikely to take place since cytoplasmic connections
between these groups of cells are lost at an early stage. Microsporocytes and
tapetal cells do, however, share many developmental pathways (Dickinson and
Bell, 1976), particularly during pollen wall formation. Exceptions are intense
phases of protein synthesis early in development, and meiosis itself (although
homologous pairing can occur in the tapetum (Martinez-Perez et al., 1999)).
Significant nuclear changes also occur in the tapetum, with endomitosis and
endoreduplication commonly occurring in many species; in Petunia tapetal
nuclei attain DNA levels of 8C (Liu et al., 1987), while 16C has been reported
for maize (Moss and Heslop-Harrison, 1967). This intensity of nucleic acid
synthesis is probably unique to the tapetum and, combined with high levels of
protein synthesis early in development, must create an extraordinarily high
demand for energy (Liu and Dickinson, 1989), which presumably results in the
particular sensitivity of the tapetum to mitochondrial mutations.
Tapeta may be secretory, as in the Liliales and the Gramineae, and remain
at the periphery of the microsporangium throughout development, or amoeboid/invasive where tapetal cells move into the loculus and intermingle with the
developing microspores, as in the Asteraceae (Pacini, 1990). In other plants,
such as the Brassicaceae, the tapetum fragments at an early stage and components of the ruptured protoplast move into the loculus (see below).
In addition to its central role in pollen wall formation, the tapetum contributes a lipid-rich exine coating in many species – the nature of this coating
depending on the tapetal type. Thus, the secretory tapetum of Lilium deposits
a blend of carotenins, flavinols and lipids (termed pollenkitt) on to the exine
surface (Reznickova and Dickinson, 1982), while the invasive tapetal protoplasts
of the Asteraceae penetrate within the cavea of the complex-chambered pollen
wall. Most is known of the complex coatings applied to the surface of brassica
pollen, termed tryphines (Dickinson and Lewis, 1973; Murgia et al., 1991).
These are formed when tapetal fragments become applied to the pollen exine,
and contain a range of lipids, glycolipids and proteins essential for successful
development of the pollen on the stigma surface (Ruiter et al., 1997a,b).
A. thaliana pop1 mutants defective in coating components can fail to hydrate
after pollination, while in the Brassica spp. a class of small, cysteine-rich pollen
coat proteins (PCPs) are involved in interactions with the stigmas, and particularly with the female determinants of the self-incompatibility (SI) system
(Doughty et al., 1998). Indeed the male SI determinants in Brassica species
(SRC and SP11) belong to the PCP family of proteins.
How pollen coatings adhere so specifically to the exine is not understood,
but the fact that in the Brassicaceae the entire tapetum is transferred wholesale
to the pollen surface belies a high affinity for the sporopollenin surface.
Detailed study of this interface has revealed an electron lucent exinic outer

Stamen Development

315

layer, but nothing is known of its molecular structure. As the loculus is dehydrated in preparation for anther dehiscence, the tryphine changes in aspect,
with many of the cytoplasmic components becoming no longer visible. On
alighting on the stigma, the tryphine forms the interface between the pollen
and pistil, and elements penetrate fissures in the stigmatic pellicle to establish
molecular and hydraulic continuity (Roberts et al., 1984; Dickinson, 1995).

Pollen Wall Structure, Synthesis and Patterning
Structure of the pollen wall
Following male cytokinesis the individual microspores of the tetrad initiate
development of the pollen wall. As described earlier this occurs in close association with the temporary callose wall and is essentially complete before its
dissolution to release the microspores into the locule. This ephemeral wall
represents the first of several layers deposited at the microspore surface. This
is followed by the primexine, a precursor of the outer of the two layers of exine
‘the ectexine’, followed by the second exine layer ‘the endexine’, and finally ‘the
intine’ (Blackmore and Barnes, 1990) (Fig. 11.5A). This sequence is invariant,
but individual phases of deposition may be reduced or deleted to produce
species-specific wall architectures; however, a well-developed intine is always
present. The ectexine is the most complex of the pollen wall layers and provides
most of the species-specific variation in pollen wall patterning through more or
less elaboration of its column-like columellae or roof-like tectum (Fig. 11.5B).
The primexine is largely composed of polysaccharide, and apparently acts as a
template, or glycocalyx, that contains patterning information to guide the
accumulation of sporopollenin, the main structural component of the pollen
wall. In the A. thaliana mutant dex1, primexine deposition is delayed and
significantly reduced and pollen wall patterning is disrupted (Paxson-Sowders
et al., 2001). The DEX1 gene encodes a predicted membrane-associated
calcium-binding protein that may act as a nucleation site for sporopollenin.
During the initial phase of wall growth sporopollenin is apparently polymerized from precursors synthesized and secreted by the microspore; however,
the bulk of exine sporopollenin is derived from precursors secreted by the
tapetum and incorporated into the wall following the dissolution of the tetrad
(reviewed in Scott et al., 1991a).
The combination of acute vulnerability and central importance of the male
spore in the life cycle of sexually reproducing plants has driven the assembly of
various adaptive features that endow its protective capsule with remarkable
properties. Foremost is the unparalleled combination of physical strength,
chemical inertness and resistance to biological attack of the exine, which is
due principally to its main structural component, sporopollenin. These adaptive
features of sporopollenin have greatly hampered progress in understanding
both its chemical composition and details of its biosynthesis. Early literature
frequently cites carotenoids as the main constituent of sporopollenin (see
Shaw, 1971; reviewed in Scott, 1994). However, the demonstration that the

316

R.J. Scott et al.

Lacuna

A
Columellae

Sexine
Nexine

Nexine I
Nexine II
Intine

Exine

Tectum

B

C

Pollen wall development
Callose wall
3

2
1

4

5

9

10

6
7 8

11

12

Fig. 11.5. Structure of the pollen wall and a model for its development. (A) Schematic representation
of the main architectural features of a generalized mature pollen wall. The terminology is according
to Erdtman (1969). (B) Scanning electron micrograph of Lilium pollen wall showing reticulate pattern
formed by the fused heads of the columellae. The nexine I is visible through the lacunae. Scale bar:
5 mm. (C) Model of pollen wall development based on Lilium (after Scott, 1994). Events begin before
meiosis and proceed left to right until the mature wall is formed: (1) transcription of ‘pattern’ genes in
the pre-meiotic microsporocyte nucleus; (2) insertion of labile pattern information into the plasma
membrane via endoplasmic reticulum-derived vesicles, followed by tessellation to produce a
negative stencil of plates; (3) first phase of primexine synthesis over entire microspore surface except
areas destined to become apertures; (4) conversion of primexine to a sporopollenin-receptive state
through activity of factor(s) secreted from sites between the plates; (5) second phase of primexine
synthesis, more rapid than the first, resulting in limited primexine conversion and specification of
columellae; (6) nascent columellae apparent as lamellated strands that lack substantial
sporopollenin; (7) consolidation of columellae by appearance of partially polymerized
(proto)sporopollenin on the receptive surfaces; (8) final phase of primexine synthesis during which
the pattern stencil dissipates or is circumvented to produce the solid nexine I; (9) callose wall
dissolved; (10) wall elements further consolidated by tapetally derived sporopollenin; (11) nexine II
synthesized without participation of the primexine; and (12) intine synthesis initiated.

potent inhibitor of carotenoid biosynthesis, norflurazon, failed to prevent
sporopollenin biosysnthesis in Cucubita pepo (Prahl et al., 1985) began a
re-evaluation of sporopollenin composition. Subsequently, a large body of
experimental evidence (reviewed in Scott, 1994), including labelling and
degradation studies, and several types of spectroscopy, has established that

Stamen Development

317

sporopollenin has two main constituents, the major part being long-chain fatty
acids and the other more minor component, aromatic, perhaps p-coumaric
acid or related compounds. More recent analyses such as Domı́nguez et al.
(1999) and Ahlers et al. (1999) have confirmed this view. The phenolic
monomers are coupled by ester bonds characteristic of polyphenolics such
as lignin and suberin, and this places sporopollenin together with cutin, suberin
and lignin in a family of functionally (protective) and compositionally related
biopolymers (Scott, 1994). Sporopollenin, cutin and suberin also share a
common ‘polylamellate’ fine structure – multiple alternating electron-opaque
and electron-translucent lamellae (Kolattukudy and Espelie, 1985; Scott,
1994). In a model of suberin fine structure proposed by Kolattukudy and Koller
(1983), the lucent layer is interpreted as being composed of the hydrophobic
regions of long-chain fatty acids, whilst the hydrophilic ends of these molecules
comprise the opaque layer in a complex with the phenolic component.
How is sporopollenin synthesized within the growing exine walls? One
model assumes that the process resembles suberin biosynthesis; the primexine
acts as a loose scaffold on to which sporopollenin monomers (fatty acids and
phenolics) are covalently attached by the localized action of superoxide radicals
generated at the plasma membrane of the microspore (Fig. 11.5C). This
creates multilamellate probaculae, the precursors of the columellae and tectum.
Subsequently, the probaculae act as conduits for the cross-linking agent, which
facilitates extensive polymerization, and eventually the production of the highly
resistant pollen wall (Scott, 1994).
Patterning of the pollen walls
Pollen wall development involves the specification of three main architectural
features: (i) consistent numbers of precisely positioned germinal apertures (in
A. thaliana the three apertures are 1208 apart); (ii) patterned arrays of columellae, frequently arranged as hexagons (Fig. 11.5A and B); (iii) layering into
tectum, columellae, nexine and intine (Fig. 11.5A).
The pollen wall over apertures consists of intine only; consistent with the
proposed role for primexine, this matrix is not deposited in areas destined to
become apertures, thereby preventing exine development. For lily, HeslopHarrison (1963) proposed that primexine synthesis is prevented by apposition
of a colpal shield (a plate of endoplasmic reticulum) to the plasma membrane at
the position of the future aperture. Subsequently, Dover (1972) and Sheldon
and Dickinson (1986) implicated the meiotic spindle in aperture positioning,
perhaps by the spindle forcing cytoplasmic components, including endoplasmic reticulum, against the plasma membrane to form a colpal shield or similar
structure.
Despite the huge diversity in pollen wall patterning, a basic design feature
shared by many species is the reticulate arrangement (frequently as hexagons)
of the columellae, to form a series of interlocking lacunae (Fig. 11.5B). These
are particularly obvious in species such as lilies and brassicas where the
exine lacks the roof-like tectum; however, in species such as tobacco with a
well-developed tectum, and hence a smooth appearance, the tectum is

318

R.J. Scott et al.

nevertheless supported by the same patterned arrays of columellae (Scott,
1994). The positioning of these elements is complete at the tetrad stage.
Several lines of evidence suggest that the genes responsible for speciesspecific patterning of the pollen wall are transcribed within the diploid nucleus
of the pre-meiotic microsporocyte, and that the pattern information is inherited
by the microspores (Heslop-Harrison, 1963, 1968; Rogers and Harris, 1969).
There is no evidence for participation of any subcellular organelle in specifying
the columellae position. However, centrifugation experiments with developing
lily microsporocytes suggest the agent(s), potentially protein-coated vesicles,
responsible for imposing pattern on the primexine appear in the cytoplasm at
the beginning of meiosis and are progressively inserted into the plasma membrane during the course of meiosis (Sheldon and Dickinson, 1983; Dickinson
and Sheldon, 1986). These vesicles may insert protein, or another substance,
into the plasma membrane that somehow influences the position of the
columellae.
How might protein inserted in the plasma membrane specify pattern?
Heslop-Harrison (1972) made the following observation: ‘Sometimes when
we contemplate biological pattern it is difficult to imagine how great a part of it
could arise from physical causes, and correspondingly easy to slip into accepting that genetical control extends down to all detail. Yet this is obviously not so’.
Sheldon and Dickinson (1983) acknowledged the role of purely physical phenomena in the specification of exine pattern, suggesting that the vesicles fuse
randomly with the plasma membrane and the deposited protein undergoes selfassembly into pattern-specifying units. This would occur in a manner analogous
to the behaviour of bubbles within a foam, or in the cracks formed in the drying
of a uniform surface such as mud, or more dramatically in the basalt layers that
formed geological wonders such as the Devil’s Postpile (USA) and Giants
Causeway (Northern Ireland), which naturally generate hexagonal patterns
(reviewed in Scott, 1994; Fig. 11.5C). In the bubble model the vesicles insert
material into the membrane that initially generate circular plates that eventually
collide to form hexagonal plates; the columellae form along lines specified by
the interfaces between the plates. In the cracking model, the vesicular material
forms a uniform layer, which upon shrinkage forms the hexagonal arrays; the
columellae are specified along the fracture lines. A model for how this patterning information is elaborated to generate the pollen wall is shown in Fig.
11.5C. This figure also shows how the final phases of pollen wall development
are orchestrated.
The callose wall plays an important role in pollen wall formation since
its loss strongly disrupts pollen wall structure. In tobacco plants expressing b1,3-glucanase ectopically, the usually near complete tectum is deleted leaving
exposed columellae, suggesting that the callose wall may provide a solid surface
against which the tectum forms (Worrall et al., 1992; Fig. 11.6). However,
removal of the callose wall by the same technique in B. napus, a species that
lacks a tectal plate, did not disrupt the regular positioning of columellae (Fig.
11.6), indicating that the callose wall does not provide a stencil to guide the
positioning of wall elements as proposed by Waterkeyn and Bienfait (1970) for
Ipomea.

Stamen Development

319

Fig. 11.6. Role of the callose wall in exine patterning. Electron micrographs of pollen grains from
Nicotiana tabacum and Brassica napus wild-type and A9::glucanase-expressing plants showing
the effect of callose wall removal on exine wall patterning. The top and middle rows show
scanning electron micrographs at low and high power, respectively. In N. tabacum loss of the
callose wall disrupts the formation of the outer tectal layer as evidenced by the exposed
columellae. In B. napus, which naturally lacks a tectum, the absence of the callose wall results in
columellae of irregular length, suggesting that the callose wall may provide a physical barrier to
primexine growth that ensures the elaboration of columellae of regular length. The regular pattern
of lacunae on the surface of B. napus A9::glucanase pollen grains suggests that the positioning of
columellae does not involve information provided by the callose wall.

Anther Dehiscence
Mature pollen is released from the anther by dehiscence, a programme of cell
destruction culminating in rupture of the stomium, a furrow separating each
pair of anther locules (Fig. 11.1). Sanders et al. (1999) codified the major
events that occur during the dehiscence programme in A. thaliana. These
begin with degeneration of the middle layer and tapetum, expansion of the
endothecial layer and deposition of fibrous bands (wall thickenings) in endothecial and connective cells. Degeneration of the septum generates a bilocular
anther, which is followed by stomium cell breakage. In tobacco, the dehiscence
process is very similar, differing only in the greater degree of connective
breakdown. An elegant series of cell ablation experiments in tobacco showed
that a functional stomium region is essential for dehiscence (Beals and
Goldberg, 1997). Although events associated with dehiscence are normally
coordinated with pollen development, male-sterile tobacco anthers that lack
pollen and tapetum undergo a normal dehiscence process (Goldberg et al.,
1993), indicating that dehiscence does not require signals derived from these
cell types.

320

R.J. Scott et al.

Comparative anatomical studies, microscopic observations, micromanipulation experiments and measurements of water movements in stamens of a
range of species suggested a model in which the endothecium contributes to
two steps in the dehiscence process (Keijzer, 1987; Bonner and Dickinson,
1989). Just prior to dehiscence, concomitant with lysis of the cells of the
stomium, the endothecial and epidermal cells become turgid (Fig. 11.7). This
generates an inwardly directed force in the anther wall that causes rupture of
the weakened stomium. Subsequent desiccation of the endothecium causes
differential shrinkage of thickened and unthickened regions of the cell wall,
creating an outward bending force that leads to retraction of the anther wall
and full opening of the stomium to permit pollen release (Keijzer, 1987). The
ms35 mutant of A. thaliana (Dawson et al., 1999) provides supporting
evidence for the role of the endothecium in this second phase of dehiscence.
Mature anthers of ms35 mutants contain viable pollen grains, breakdown of
the septum and stomium occur normally, and the pattern of water movement is
also apparently normal. However, the endothecial cells fail to develop lignified
secondary wall thickenings and do not undergo anther wall shrinkage normally
associated with retraction of the anther wall. The MS35 gene (renamed
MYB26) encodes a putative R2R3-type MYB transcription factor (SteinerLange et al., 2003). Since other MYBs are known to regulate the phenylpropanoid pathway, e.g. AtMYBb4 (Jin et al., 2000), the role of MYB26 may be
to activate this pathway in endothecial cells in order to provide lignin residues
for wall thickening.
Perhaps the most significant recent advance in understanding the control
of dehiscence has been the discovery of the involvement of jasmonic acid (JA),

Pistil
Anther
Petal
Sepal

Stamen
filament
Water flow
Organ elongation
Jasmonate transmission

Fig. 11.7. Anther dehiscence. Model for the synchronous regulation of pollen maturation, anther
dehiscence and flower opening by jasmonic acid (JA) in Arabidopsis thaliana. The shaded areas
represent regions that actively take up water and elongate in response to JA (adapted from
Ishiguro et al., 2001).

Stamen Development

321

a lipid-derived signalling compound widely distributed in the plant kingdom. All
known mutants in JA biosynthetic or signalling pathways exhibit a similar
phenotype with: (i) reduced elongation of the filaments; (ii) delayed anther
dehiscence; and (iii) reduced pollen viability resulting in male sterility. Several
mutants in JA biosynthetic enzymes have been isolated that cause male sterility
and can be rescued by application of JA (McConn and Browse, 1996; Sanders
et al., 2000; Stintzi and Browse, 2000; Park et al., 2002; von Malek et al.,
2002). The role of JA in male fertility is supported by the JA signal transduction
mutant coronatine-insensitive 1 (coi1), which is male sterile and insensitive to
JA treatment (Feys et al., 1994; Xie et al., 1998).
The DEFECTIVE IN ANTHER DEHISCENCE 1 (DAD1) gene encodes
a phospholipase A1 catalysing the initial step of JA biosynthesis (Ishiguro
et al., 2001). Desiccation of dad1 anthers appears delayed so that at the
time of flower opening, when in wild-type anthers dehydration and shrinkage
of the endothecium and connective cells break the stomium, the endothecium
and connective cells of dad1 anthers are fully expanded and the locules are
filled with liquid. Expression studies suggest that DAD1 activity is restricted
to the anther filament immediately before flower opening; therefore the filament may represent the primary source of JA within the flower. Ishiguro
et al. (2001) proposed a model in which JA synthesized in the filaments
regulates water transport in the stamens and petals to bring about the coordinated opening of flowers, filament elongation and anther dehiscence
(Fig. 11.7). In this model, JA is required for the expression of genes involved
in water transport in anthers. Interestingly, AtSUC1, a plasma membrane
Hþ-sucrose symporter, which is theoretically capable of transporting sucrose
to increase water uptake, accumulates in some of the connective cells surrounding the vascular tissue during the final stages of anther development
(Stadler et al., 1999). Filament and petal elongation are also inhibited in
dad1 mutant flowers, suggesting that JA regulates water transport into
these organs. This accords well with the observation that dehiscence of onion
anthers correlates with extension rate of the filament (Keijzer, 1987), and the
suggestion that anther dehiscence is preceded by dehydration of the locules
and that water is exported through the filaments to the petals (Bonner and
Dickinson, 1990). An alternative model suggests that JA regulates programmed cell death in the anther as part of the dehiscence process (Zhao
and Ma, 2000).
Rieu et al. (2003) reported evidence for involvement of ethylene signalling
in dehiscence. Tobacco plants insensitive to ethylene developed structurally
normal anthers but dehiscence was late and no longer synchronized with flower
opening, correlated with delays in the degeneration of stomium cells and
dehydration of the anther. Treatment of nearly mature anthers with ethylene
accelerated dehiscence in wild-type plants. Ethylene and JA may perform the
same role in tobacco and A. thaliana, respectively, or act redundantly in both
species. The fact that A. thaliana mutants such as dde1, which cannot synthesize JA within the stamens, eventually undergo dehiscence might represent
evidence in support of redundant pathways.

322

R.J. Scott et al.

Conclusion
Twelve years ago little was known about genetic control of stamen development beyond specification of stamen primordia by floral homeotic genes. New
footholds have been established in several areas, notably patterning of the
microsporangium, regulation of meiosis and anther dehiscence. Other processes, such as genesis of the pollen wall, have proved less tractable, perhaps
because of a lack of informative mutants. Important questions remain to be
addressed, particularly those concerning the establishment of cell fates within
the microsporangium, the molecular regulation of the very different nuclear
events in the meiocytes and tapetal cells, the link between sporophytically
controlled callose degradation and male gametophyte development, the ‘molecular mechanics’ of pollen wall formation and bridging the gap between JA
levels and water movement during dehiscence. Understanding stamen development is key to the successful exploitation of plant breeding systems and, in a
world of diminishing resources and an increasing need for efficient food production, solving these questions should be accorded a high priority.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to all those in the Scott and Dickinson laboratories who have
contributed over the years to our work on anther and pollen development,
particularly Anuj Bhatt, Claudia Canales, François Guerineau, Diane Hird,
Rachel Hodge, Wyatt Paul, Liz Porter, Ursula Potter, Mike Roberts, Judith
Sheldon, Anna Sorensen and Dawn Worrall.

References
Aarts, M.G.M., Hodge, R., Kalantidis, K.,
Florack, D., Wilson, Z.A., Mulligan,
B.J., Stiekema, W.J., Scott, R. and
Pereira, A. (1997) The Arabidopsis
MALE STERILITY 2 protein shares
similarity with reductases in elongation/condensation complexes. Plant
Journal 12, 615–623.
Ahlers, F., Thom, I., Lambert, J., Kuckuk,
R. and Wiermann, R. (1999) 1H NMR
analysis of sporopollenin from Typha
angustifolia. Phytochemistry 50,
1095–1098.
Amagai, M., Ariizumi, T., Endo, M., Hatakeyama, K., Kuwata, C., Shibata, D.,
Toriyama, K. and Watanabe, M.
(2003) Identification of anther-specific
genes in a cruciferous model plant,
Arabidopsis thaliana, by using a com-

bination of Arabidopsis macroarray
and mRNA derived from Brassica oleracea. Sexual Plant Reproduction 15,
213–220.
Bai, X., Peirson, B.N., Dong, R., Xue, C.
and Makaroff, C.A. (1999) Isolation
and characterization of SYN1, a
RAD21-like gene essential for meiosis
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 11, 417–
430.
Barbacar, N., Hinnisdaels, S., Farbos, I.,
Monéger, F., Lardon, A., Delichère,
C., Mouras, A. and Negrutiu, I.
(1997) Isolation of early genes expressed in reproductive organs of the
dioecious white campion (Silene latifolia) by subtraction cloning using an
asexual mutant. Plant Journal 12,
805–817.

Stamen Development
Beals, T.P. and Goldberg, R.B. (1997) A
novel cell ablation strategy blocks tobacco anther dehiscence. Plant Cell
9, 1527–1545.
Bhandari, N.N. (1984) The microsporangium. In: Johri, B.J. (ed.) Embryology
of Angiosperms. Springer, Berlin,
pp. 53–121.
Bhatt, A.M., Lister, C., Page, T., Fransz,
P., Findlay, K., Jones, G.H., Dickinson, H.G. and Dean, C. (1999) The
DIF1 gene of Arabidopsis is required
for meiotic chromosome segregation
and belongs to the REC8 / RAD21
cohesin gene family. Plant Journal
19, 463–472.
Bhatt, A.M., Canales, C. and Dickinson,
H.G. (2001) Plant meiosis: the means
to 1N. Trends in Plant Science 16,
114–121.
Blackmore, S. and Barnes, S.H. (1990)
Pollen wall development in angiosperms. In: Blackmore, S. and Knox,
R.B. (eds) Microspores: Evolution and
Ontogeny. Academic Press, London,
pp. 173–192.
Blackmore, S. and Crane, P.R. (1988)
The systematic implications of pollen
and spore ontogeny. In: Humphries,
C.J. (ed.) Ontogeny and Systematics.
Columbia University Press, New York,
pp. 83–115.
Bonner, L.J. and Dickinson, H.G. (1989)
Anther dehiscence in Lycopersicon
esculentum Mill. New Phytology
113, 97–115.
Bonner, L.J. and Dickinson, H.G. (1990)
Anther dehiscence in Lycopersicon
esculentum. 2. Water relations. New
Phytology 115, 367–375.
Bowman, J.L., Smyth, D.R. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1989) Genes directing
flower development in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 1, 37–52.
Bowman, J.L., Drews, G.N. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991) Expression of the
Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene AGAMOUS is restricted to specific cell
types late in flower development.
Plant Cell 3, 749–758.

323
Bowman, J.L., Sakai, H., Jack, T.,
Weigel, D., Mayer, U. and Meyerowitz,
E.M. (1992) SUPERMAN, a regulator
of floral homeotic genes in Arabidopsis. Development 114, 599–615.
Bowman, J.L., Eshed, Y. and Baum, S.F.
(2002) Establishment of polarity in
angiosperm lateral organs. Trends in
Genetics 18, 134–141.
Brown, R.C. and Lemmon, B.E. (1988)
Microtubules associated with simultaneous cytokinesis of coenocytic microsporocytes. American Journal of
Botany 75, 1848–1856.
Brown, R.C. and Lemmon, B.E. (2001)
The cytoskeleton and spatial control of
cytokinesis in the plant life cycle. Protoplasma 215, 35–49.
Bucciaglia, P.A. and Smith, A.G. (1994)
Cloning and characterisation of TAG1,
a tobacco anther b-1,3-glucanase
expressed during tetrad dissolution.
Plant
Molecular
Biology
24,
903–914.
Calderon-Urrea A. and Dellaporta, S.L.
(1999) Cell death and cell protection
genes determine the fate of pistils
in maize. Development 126, 435–
441.
Canales, C., Bhatt, A.M., Scott, R.J. and
Dickinson, H.G. (2002) EXTRA
SPOROGENOUS CELLS (EXS), a
putative LRR receptor kinase, regulates male germline cell number and
tapetal identy, and promotes seed development in Arabidopsis. Current
Biology 12, 1718–1727.
Carpenter R. and Coen, E.S. (1990)
Floral homeotic mutations produced
by transposon mutagenesis in Antirrhinum majus. Genes & Development 4, 1483–1493.
Caryl, A.P., Jones, G.H. and Franklin,
F.C.H. (2003) Dissecting plant meiosis
using Arabidopsis thaliana mutants.
Journal of Experimental Botany 54,
25–38.
Chaubal, R., Zanella, C., Trimnell, M.R.,
Fox, T.W., Albertsen, M.C. and
Bedinger, P. (2000) Two male-sterile

324

R.J. Scott et al.
mutants of Zea mays (Poaceae) with
an extra cell division in the anther wall.
American Journal of Botany 87,
1193–1201.
Chaubal, R., Anderson, J.R., Trimnell,
M.R., Fox, T.W., Albertsen, M.C.
and Bedinger, P. (2003) The transformation of anthers in the msca1 mutant of maize. Planta 216, 778–788.
Chaudhury, A. (1993) Nuclear genes
controlling male fertility. Plant Cell
5, 1277–1283.
Chaudhury, A.M., Lavithis, M., Taylor,
P.E., Craig, S., Singh, M.B., Signer,
E.R., Knox, R.B. and Dennis, E.S.
(1994) Genetic control of male fertility
in Arabidopsis thaliana: structural analysis of premeiotic developmental
mutants. Sexual Plant Reproduction
7, 17–28.
Chmelnitsky, I., Sobolev, I., Barg, R.,
Shabtai, S. and Salts, Y. (2003) Isolation and preliminary characterization
of tomato petal- and stamen-specific
cDNAs from a subtracted and equilibrated cDNA library. Euphytica 129,
229–236.
Clark, J. (2001) Meristems, start your signalling. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 4, 28–32.
Clark, S.E., Running, M.P. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1993) CLAVATA1, a
regulator of meristem and flower development in Arabidopsis. Development 119, 397–418.
Coen, E.S. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991)
The war of the whorls: genetic interactions controlling flower development. Nature 353, 31–37.
Crossley, S.J., Greenland, A.J. and Dickinson, H.G. (1995) The characterisation of tapetum-specific cDNAs
isolated from a Lilium henryi L. meiocyte subtractive cDNA library. Planta
196, 523–529.
Curtis, I.S., Caiping, H., Scott, R.J.,
Power, J.B. and Davey, M.R. (1996)
Genomic male sterility in lettuce, a
baseline for the production of F1 hybrids. Plant Science 113, 113–119.

Davis, G.L. (1966) Systematic Embryology of the Angiosperms. John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Dawson, J., Wilson, Z.A., Aarts, M.G.M.,
Braithwaite, A.F., Briarty, L.G. and
Mulligan, B.J. (1993) Microspore and
pollen development in six male-sterile
mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Journal of Botany 71, 629–638.
Dawson, J., Sözen, E., Vizir, I., Van
Waeyenberge, S., Wilson, Z.A. and
Mulligan, B.J. (1999) Characterization
and genetic mapping of a mutation
(ms35) which prevents anther dehiscence in Arabidopsis thaliana by
affecting secondary wall thickening
in the endothecium. New Phytology
144, 213–222.
Delmer, D.P. (1987) Cellulose biosynthesis. Annual Review of Plant Physiology 38, 259–290.
Dickinson, H.G. (1970) The fine structure
of a peritapetal membrane investing
the microsporangium of Pinus banksiana. New Phytology 69, 1065–
1068.
Dickinson, H.G. (1987) The physiology
and biochemistry of meiosis in the
anther. International Review of Cytology 107, 79–109.
Dickinson, H.G. (1995) Dry stigmas,
water and self-incompatibility in Brassica. Sexual Plant Reproduction 8,
1–10.
Dickinson, H.G. and Bell, P.R. (1976)
The changes in the tapetum of Pinus
banksiana accompanying formation
and maturation of the pollen. Annals
of Botany 40, 1101–1109.
Dickinson, H.G. and Lewis, D. (1973)
The formation of the tryphine coating
the pollen grains of Raphanus and
its properties relating to the selfincompatibility system. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London B
184, 149–165.
Dickinson, H.G. and Sheldon, J.S. (1984)
A radial pattern of microtubules
extending between the nuclear envelope and the plasma membrane during

Stamen Development
early male haplophase in flowering
plants. Planta 161, 86–90.
Dickinson, H.G. and Sheldon, J.S. (1986)
The generation of patterning at the
plasma membrane of the young microspore of Lilium. In: Blackmore, S. and
Ferguson, I.K. (eds) Pollen and
Spores: Form and Function. Academic Press, New York, pp. 1–17.
Domı́nguez, E., Mercado, J.A., Quesada,
M.A. and Heredia, A. (1999) Pollen
sporopollenin: degradation and structural elucidation. Sexual Plant Reproduction 12, 171–178.
Doughty, J., Dixon, S., Hiscock, S.J.,
Willis, A.C., Parkin, I.A.P. and Dickinson, H.G. (1998) PCP-A1, a defensinlike Brassica pollen coat protein that
binds the S locus glycoprotein, is the
product of gametophytic gene expression. Plant Cell 10, 1333–1347.
Dover, G.A. (1972) The organisation and
polarity of pollen mother cells of Triticum aestivum. Journal of Cell Science 11, 699–711.
Echlin, P. and Godwin, H. (1968) The
ultrastructure and ontogeny of pollen
in Helleborus foetidus. L. II. Pollen
grain development through the special
callose wall stage. Journal of Cell Science 3, 175–186.
Endo, M., Matsubara, H., Kokubun, T.,
Masuko, H., Takahata, Y., Tsuchiya,
T., Fukuda, H., Demura, T. and Watanabe, M. (2002) The advantages of
cDNA microarray as an effective tool
for identification of reproductive
organ-specific genes in a model legume, Lotus japonicus. FEBS Letters
514, 229–237.
Erdtman, G. (1969) Handbook of Palynology. Hafner, Copenhagen.
Feys, B.F, Benedetti, C.E, Penford, C.N.
and Turner, J.G. (1994) Arabidopsis
mutants selected for resistance to the
phytotoxin coronatine are male sterile,
insensitive to methyl jasmonate, and
resistant to a bacterial pathogen.
Plant Cell 6, 751–759.
Fornara, F., Marziani, G., Mizzi, L., Kater,
M. and Colombo, L. (2003) MADS-

325
box genes controlling flower development in rice. Plant Biology 5, 16–22.
Francz, P., de Jong, H., Lysak, M., Castiglione, M.R. and Schubert, I. (2002)
Interphase chromosomes of Arabidopsis are organized in well-defined chromocenters from which euchromatin
loops emanate. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
99, 14584–14589.
Frankel, R., Izhar, S. and Nitsan, J. (1969)
Timing of callase activity and cytoplasmic male sterility in Petunia. Biochemical Genetics 3, 451–455.
Goldberg, R.B., Beals, T.P. and Sanders,
P.M. (1993) Anther development:
basic principles and practical applications. Plant Cell 5, 1217–1229.
Hanson, M.R. and Bentolila, S. (2004)
Interactions of mitochondrial and nuclear genes that affect male gametophyte development. Plant Cell 16
(Suppl.), 154–169.
Heslop-Harrison, J. (1963) An ultrastructural study of pollen wall ontogeny
in Silene pendula. Grana Palynol 4,
1–24.
Heslop-Harrison, J. (1964) Cell walls,
cell membranes, and protoplasmic
connections during meiosis and
pollen development. In: Linskens,
H.F. (ed.) Pollen Physiology and Fertilization. North Holland, Amsterdam,
pp. 39–47.
Heslop-Harrison, J. (1966) Cytoplasmic
connections between angiosperm
meiocytes. Annals of Botany 30,
221–230.
Heslop-Harrison, J. (1968) Pollen wall development. Science 16, 230–207.
Heslop-Harrison, J. (1972) Pattern in
plant cell walls: morphogenesis
in miniature. Proceedings of the
Royal Institute of Great Britain 45,
335–352.
Heslop-Harrison, J. and Mackenzie, A.
(1967) Autoradiography of soluble
[2-I4C] thymidine derivatives during
meiosis and microsporogenesis in
Lilium anthers. Journal of Cell Science 2, 387–400.

326

R.J. Scott et al.
Hill, J.P. and Lord, E.M. (1989) Floral
development in Arabidopsis thaliana:
a comparison of the wild type and
the homeotic pistillata mutant. Canadian Journal of Botany 67, 2922–
2936.
Hird, D.L., Worrall, D., Hodge, R.,
Smartt, S., Paul, W. and Scott, R.
(1993) The anther-specific protein encoded by the Brassica napus and Arabidopsis thaliana A6 gene displays
similarity to b-1,3-glucanase expressed
during tetrad dissolution. Plant Journal 4, 1023–1033.
Honma, T. and Goto, K. (2001) Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral
organs. Nature 409, 525–529.
Hülskamp, M., Parekh, N.S., Grini, P.,
Schneitz, K., Zimmermann, I., Lolle,
S.J. and Pruitt, R.E. (1997)
The STUD gene is required for malespecific cytokinesis after telophase II of
meiosis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Developmental Biology 187, 114–124.
Irish, V. (1999) Petal and stamen development. Current Topics in Developmental Biology 41, 133–161.
Ishiguro, S., Kawai-Oda, A., Ueda, J.,
Nishida, I. and Okada, K. (2001) The
DEFECTIVE IN ANTHER DEHISCENCE1 gene encodes a novel phospholipase A1 catalyzing the initial step
of jasmonic acid biosynthesis, which
synchronizes pollen maturation, anther
dehiscence, and flower opening in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 13, 2191–
2209.
Ito, T., Wellmer, F., Yu, H., Das, P., Ito,
N., Alves-Ferreira, M., Riechmann,
J.L. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2005)
The homeotic protein AGAMOUS
controls microsporogenesis by regulation of SPOROCYTELESS. Nature
430, 356–360.
Izhar, S. and Frankel, R. (1971) Mechanism of male sterility in Petunia: the
relationship between pH, callase activity in the anthers, and the breakdown
of the microsporogenesis. Theoretical
and Applied Genetics 41, 104–108.

Jack, T. (2001) Relearning our ABCs:
new twists on an old model. Trends
in Plant Science 6, 310–316.
Jack, T. (2004) Molecular and genetic
mechanisms of floral control. Plant
Cell 16 (Suppl.), 1–17.
Jenik, P.D. and Irish, V.F. (2000) Regulation of cell proliferation patterns by
homeotic genes during Arabidopsis
floral development. Development
127, 1267–1276.
Jin, H.L., Cominelli, E., Bailey, P., Parr,
A., Mehrtens, F., Jones, J., Tonelli, C.,
Weisshaar, B. and Martin, C. (2000)
Transcriptional repression by AtMYB4
controls production of UV-protecting
sunscreens in Arabidopsis. EMBO
Journal 19, 6150–6161.
Jin, W., Horner, H.T., Palmer, R.G. and
Shoemaker, R.C. (1999) Analysis and
mapping of gene families encoding
beta-1,3-glucanases of soybean. Genetics 153, 445–452.
Kaul, M.L.H. (1988) Male Sterility in
Higher Plants. Monographs on Theoretical and Applied Genetics 10.
Springer, Berlin.
Keijzer, C.J. (1987) The processes of anther dehiscence and pollen dispersal.
Part I: the opening mechanism of longitudinally dehiscing anthers. New
Phytologist 105, 487–498.
Kerim, T., Imin, N., Weinman, J.J. and
Rolfe, B.G. (2003) Proteome analysis
of male gametophyte development in
rice anthers. Proteomics 3, 738–751.
Kolattukudy, P.E. and Espelie, K.E.
(1985) Biosynthesis of cutin, suberin,
and associated waxes. In: Higuchi, T.
(ed.) Biosynthesis and Biodegradation of Wood Components. Academic
Press, New York, pp. 161–207.
Koltunow, A.M., Truettner, J., Cox, K.H.,
Wallroth, M. and Goldberg, R.B.
(1990) Different temporal and spatial
gene expression patterns occur during
anther development. Plant Cell 2,
1201–1224.
Liu, X.C. and Dickinson, H.G. (1989) Cellular energy levels and their effect on
male cell abortion in cytoplasmically

Stamen Development
male sterile lines of Petunia hybrida.
Sexual Plant Reproduction 2, 167–
172.
Liu, X.C., Jones, K.G. and Dickinson,
H.G. (1987) DNA synthesis and cytoplasmic differentiation in tapetal cells
of normal and CMS lines of Petunia
hybrida. Theoretical and Applied
Genetics 74, 846–851.
Lohmann, J.U. and Weigel, D. (2002)
Building beauty: the genetic control of
floral patterning. Developmental Cell
2, 135–142.
Luo, D., Carpenter, R., Vincent, C., Copsey, L. and Coen, E. (1995) Origin of
floral asymmetry in Antirrhinum. Nature 383, 794–799.
Martinez-Perez, E., Shaw, P., Reader, S.,
Aragon-Alcaide, L., Miller, T. and
Moore, G. (1999) Homologous
chromosome pairing in wheat. Journal of Cell Science 112, 1761–1769.
McConn, M. and Browse, J. (1996) The
critical requirement for linolenic acid
is pollen development, not photosynthesis, in an Arabidopsis mutant.
Plant Cell 8, 403–416.
McCormick, S. (2004) Control of male
gametophyte development. Plant Cell
16 (Suppl.), 142–153.
Moss, G. and Heslop-Harrison, J. (1967)
A cyto-chemical study of DNA, RNA
and protein in the developing maize
anther. II. Observations. Annals of
Botany 31, 555–572.
Murgia, M., Charzynska, M., Rougier, M.
and Cresti, M. (1991) Secretory tapetum of Brassica oleracea L – polarity
and ultrastructural features. Sexual
Plant Reproduction 4, 28–35.
Nacken, W.K.F., Huijser, P., Beltran, J.-P.,
Saedler, H. and Sommer, H. (1991)
Molecular characterization of two stamen-specific genes, tap1 and fil1, that
are expressed in the wild type, but not in
the deficiens mutant of Antirrhinum
majus. Molecular & General Genetics
229, 129–136.
Nanda, K. and Gupta, S.C. (1978) Studies
in the Bignoniaceae II: ontogeny of the
dimorphic anther tapetum in Tecoma.

327
American Journal of Botany 65,
400–405.
Nonomura, K.I., Miyoshi, K., Eiguchi, M.,
Suzuki, T., Miyao, A., Hirochika, H.
and Kurata, N. (2003) The MSP1
gene is necessary to restrict the number
of cells entering into male and female
sporogenesis and to initiate anther wall
formation in rice. Plant Cell 15,
1728–1739.
Østergaard, L., Petersen, M., Mattsson,
O. and Mundy, J. (2002) An Arabidopsis callose synthase. Plant Molecular Biology 49, 559–566.
Owen, H.A. and Makaroff, C.A. (1995)
Ultrastructure of microsporogenesis
and microgametogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. Ecotype Wassilewskija (Brassicaceae). Protoplasma
185, 7–21.
Pacini, E. (1990) Tapetum and microspore function. In: Blackmore, S. and
Knox, R.B. (eds) Microspores: Evolution and Ontogeny. Academic Press,
London.
Park, J.-H., Halitschke, R., Kim, H.B.,
Baldwin, I.T., Feldmann, K.A. and
Feyereisen, R. (2002) A knock-out mutation in allene oxide synthase results in
male sterility and defective wound signal transduction in Arabidopsis due to
a block in jasmonic acid biosynthesis.
Plant Journal 31, 1–12.
Paxson-Sowders, D.M., Dodrill, C.H.,
Owen, H.A. and Makaroff, C.A.
(2001) DEX1, a novel plant protein, is
required for exine pattern formation
during pollen development in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology 127, 1739–
1749.
Pelaz, S., Ditta, G.S., Baumann, E., Wisman, E. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2000) B
and C floral organ identity functions
require SEPALLATA MADS-box
genes. Nature 405, 200–203.
Periasamy, K. and Amalathas, J. (1991)
Absence of callose and tetrad in
the microsporogenesis of Pandanus
odoratissimus
with
well-formed
pollen exine. Annals of Botany 67,
29–33.

328

R.J. Scott et al.
Prahl, A.K., Springstubbe, H., Grumbach, K. and Wiermann, R. (1985)
Studies on sporopollenin biosynthesis:
the effect of inhibitors of carotenoid
biosynthesis on sporopollenin accumulation. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung
40c, 621–626.
Rabitsch, K.P., Toth, A., Galova, M.,
Schleiffer, A., Schaffner, G., Aigner,
E., Rupp, C., Penkner, A.M., MorenoBorchart, A.C., Primig, M., Esposito,
R.E., Klein, F., Knop, M. and Nasmyth,
K. (2001) A screen for genes required
for meiosis and spore formation based
on whole-genome expression. Current
Biology 11, 1001–1009.
Reznickova, S.A. and Dickinson, H.G.
(1982) Ultrastructural aspects of storage lipid metabolism in the tapetum
of Lilium hybridum var. enchantment. Planta 155, 400–408.
Rhee, S.Y. and Somerville, C.R. (1998)
Tetrad pollen formation in quartet
mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana is
associated with persistence of pectic
polysaccharides of the pollen mother
cell wall. Plant Journal 15, 79–88.
Riechmann, J.L., Wang, M.Q. and
Meyerowitz, E.M. (1996) DNA-binding
properties of Arabidopsis MADS domain homeotic proteins APETALA1,
APETALA3, PISTILLATA and AGAMOUS. Nucleic Acids Research
24, 3134–3141.
Rieu, I., Wolters-Arts, M., Derksen, J.,
Mariani, C. and Weterings, K. (2003)
Ethylene regulates the timing of anther
dehiscence in tobacco. Planta 217,
131–137.
Roberts, I.N., Harrod, G. and Dickinson,
H.G. (1984) Pollen stigma interactions
in Brassica oleracea. I. Ultrastructure
and physiology of the stigmatic papillar
cells. Journal of Cell Science 66,
241–253.
Rogers, C.M. and Harris, B.D. (1969)
Pollen exine deposition, a clue to its
control. American Journal of Botany
56, 101–106.
Rowley, J.R. and Southworth, D. (1967)
Deposition of sporopollenin on lamel-

lae of unit membrane dimensions. Nature 213, 703–704.
Rubinelli, P., Hu, Y. and Ma, H. (1998)
Identification,
sequence
analysis
and expression studies of novel anther-specific genes of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant Molecular Biology
37, 607–619.
Ruiter, R.K., Van Eldik, G.J., Van Herpen, R.M., Schrauwen, J.A. and Wullems, G.J. (1997a) Characterization of
oleosins in the pollen coat of Brassica
oleracea. Plant Cell 9, 1621–1631.
Ruiter, R.K., Mettenmeyer, T., van Laarhoven, D., Van Eldik, G.J., Doughty,
J., van Herpen, M.M.A., Schrawwen,
J.A.M., Dickinson, H.G. and Wullems,
G.J. (1997b) Proteins of the pollen
coat of Brassica oleracea. Journal of
Plant Physiology 150, 85–91.
Sablowski, R.W.M. and Meyerowitz, E.M.
(1998) A homolog of NO APICAL
MERISTEM is an immediate target of
the floral homeotic genes APETALA3/
PISTILLATA. Cell 92, 93–103.
Sanders, P.M., Bui, A.Q., Weterings, K.,
McIntire, K.N., Hsu, Y.-C., Lee, P.Y.,
Truong, M.T., Beals, T.P. and Goldberg, R.B. (1999) Anther developmental defects in Arabidopsis thaliana
male-sterile mutants. Sexual Plant Reproduction 11, 297–322.
Sanders, P.M., Lee, P.Y., Biesgen, C.,
Boone, J.D., Beals, T.P., Weiler,
E.W. and Goldberg, R.B. (2000) The
Arabidopsis DELAYED DEHISCENCE1 gene encodes an enzyme in
the jasmonic acid synthesis pathway.
Plant Cell 12, 1041–1061.
Sawa, S., Ito, T., Shimura, Y. and Okada,
K. (1999) FILAMENTOUS FLOWER
controls the formation and development of Arabidopsis inflorescences
and floral meristems. Plant Cell 11,
69–86.
Schiefthaler, U., Balasubramanian, S.,
Sieber, P., Chevalier, D., Wisman, E.
and Schneitz, K. (1999) Molecular analysis of NOZZLE, a gene involved in
pattern formation and early sporogenesis during sex organ development in

Stamen Development
Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences
USA 96, 11664–11669.
Scott, R.J. (1994) Pollen exine – the
sporopollenin enigma and the physics
of pattern. In: Scott, R.J. and Stead
A.D. (eds) Molecular and Cellular
Aspects of Plant Reproduction.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 49–81.
Scott, R., Hodge, R., Paul, W. and
Draper. J. (1991a) The molecular
biology of anther differentiation.
Plant Science 80, 167–191.
Scott, R., Dagless, E., Hodge, R., Paul,
W., Soufleri, I. and Draper, J. (1991b)
Patterns of gene expression in developing anthers of Brassica napus.
Plant Molecular Biology 17, 195–
207.
Scott, R.J., Spielman, M. and Dickinson,
H.G. (2004) Stamen structure and
function. Plant Cell 16(Suppl.), 46–
60.
Shaw, G. (1971) The chemistry of sporopollenin. In: Brooks, J., Grant, P.R.,
Muir, M., van Gijzel, P. and Shaw, G.
(eds) Sporopollenin. Academic Press,
London.
Sheldon, J.M. and Dickinson, H.G.
(1983) Determination of patterning in
the pollen wall of Lilium henryi. Journal of Cell Science 63, 191–208.
Sheldon, J.M. and Dickinson, H.G. (1986)
Pollen wall formation in Lilium: the effect of chaotropic agents, and the organisation of the microtubular
cytoskeleton during pattern development. Planta 168, 11–23.
Shen, J.B. and Hsu, F.C. (1992) Brassica
anther-specific genes: characterization
and in situ localization of expression.
Molecular & General Genetics 234,
379–389.
Sheridan, W.F., Golubeva, E.A., Abrhamova, L.I. and Golubovskaya, I.N.
(1999) The mac1 mutation alters the
developmental fate of the hypodermal
cells and their cellular progeny in
the maize anther. Genetics 153,
933–941.

329
Siegfried, K.R., Eshed, Y., Baum, S.F.,
Otsuga, D., Drews, G.N. and Bowman,
J.L. (1999) Members of the YABBY
gene family specify abaxial cell fate
in Arabidopsis. Development 126,
4117–4128.
Smyth, D.R.,Bowman,J.L.andMeyerowitz,
E.M. (1990) Early flower development in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2, 755–767.
Sorensen, A., Guerineau, F., CanalesHolzeis, C., Dickinson, H.G. and
Scott, R.J. (2002) A novel extinction
screen in Arabidopsis thaliana identifies mutant plants defective in early
microsporangial development. Plant
Journal 29, 581–594.
Sorensen, A.-M., Kröber, S., Unte, U.S.,
Huijser, P., Dekker, K. and Saedler, H.
(2003) The Arabidopsis ABORTED
MICROSPORES (AMS) gene encodes
a MYC class transcription factor. Plant
Journal 33, 413–423.
Spielman, M., Preuss, D., Li, F.-L.,
Browne, W.E., Scott, R.J. and Dickinson, H.G. (1997) TETRASPORE is
required for male meiotic cytokinesis
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 124, 2645–2657.
St Johnston, D. and Nüsslein-Volhard, C.
(1992) The origin of pattern and polarity in the Drosophila embryo. Cell 68,
201–219.
Stadler, R., Truernit, E., Gahrtz, M. and
Sauer, N. (1999) The AtSUC1 sucrose
carrier may represent the osmotic driving force for anther dehiscence and
pollen tube growth in Arabidopsis.
Plant Journal 19, 269–278.
Staehelin, L.A. and Hepler, P.K. (1996)
Cytokinesis in higher plants. Cell 84,
821–824.
Steiner-Lange, S., Unte, U.S., Eckstein,
L., Yang, C., Wilson, Z.A., Schmelzer,
E., Dekker, K. and Saedler, H. (2003)
Disruption of Arabidopsis thaliana
MYB26 results in male sterility due to
non-dehiscent anthers. Plant Journal
34, 519–528.
Stieglitz, H. (1977) Role of b-1,3-glucanase release. Developmental Biology
57, 87–97.

330

R.J. Scott et al.
Stieglitz, H. and Stern, H. (1973) Regulation of b-1,3-glucanase activity in
developing anthers of Lilium. Developmental Biology 34, 169–173.
Stintzi, A. and Browse, J. (2000) The
Arabidopsis
male-sterile
mutant,
opr3, lacks the 12-oxophytodienoic
acid reductase required for jasmonate
synthesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
97, 10625–10630.
Tanurdzik, M. and Banks, J. (2004) Sexdetermining mechanisms in land
plants. Plant Cell 16, S61–S71.
Taylor, P.E., Glover, J.A., Lavithis, M.,
Craig, S., Singh, M.B., Knox, R.B.,
Dennis, E.S. and Chaudhury, A.M.
(1998) Genetic control of male fertility
in Arabidopsis thaliana: structural
analyses of postmeiotic developmental
mutants. Planta 205, 492–505.
Theißen, G. (2001) Development of floral
organ identity: stories from the MADS
house. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 4, 75–85.
Torres-Ruiz, R and Jürgens, G. (1994)
Mutations in the FASS gene uncouple pattern formation and morphogenesis in Arabidopsis development. Development 120, 2967–
2978.
Tsuchiya, T., Toriyama, K., Ejiri, S. and
Hinata, K. (1994) Molecular characterization of rice genes specially expressed in the anther tapetum. Plant
Molecular Biology 26, 1737–1746.
Ursin, V.M., Yamaguchi, J. and McCormick, S. (1989) Gametophytic and
sporophytic expression of antherspecific genes in developing tomato
anthers. Plant Cell 1, 727–736.
Vega, J.M. and Feldman, M. (1998) Effect
of the pairing gene Ph1 and premeiotic colchicine treatment on intra- and
interchromosome pairing of isochromosomes in common wheat. Genetics
150, 1199–1208.
Vershon, A.K and Pierce, M. (2000)
Transcriptional regulation of meiosis
in yeast. Current Opinions in Cell
Biology 12, 334–339.

von Malek, B., van der Graaff, E.,
Schneitz, K. and Keller, B. (2002)
The Arabidopsis male-sterile mutant
dde2–2 is defective in the ALLENE
OXIDE SYNTHASE gene encoding
one of the key enzymes of the jasmonic
acid biosynthesis pathway. Planta
216, 187–192.
Warmke, H.E. and Overman, M.A.
(1972) Cytoplasmic male sterility in
sorghum. 1: callose behavior in fertile
and sterile anthers. Journal of Heredity 63, 103–108.
Waterkeyn, L. (1962) Les parois microsporocytaires de nature callosique
chez Helleborus et Tradescantia. Cellule 62, 225–255.
Waterkeyn, L. and Bienfait, A. (1970) On
a possible function of the callosic special wall in Ipomoea purpurea (L)
Roth. Grana 10, 13–20.
Wilson, Z.A., Morroll, S.M., Dawson, J.,
Swarup, R. and Tighe, P.J. (2001) The
Arabidopsis MALE STERILITY1
(MS1) gene is a transcriptional regulator of male gametogenesis, with homology to the PHD-finger family of
transcription factors. Plant Journal
28, 27–39.
Worrall, D., Hird, D.L., Hodge, R., Paul,
W., Draper, J. and Scott, R. (1992)
Premature dissolution of the microsporocyte callose wall causes male sterility in transgenic tobacco. Plant Cell
4, 759–771.
Wright, S.Y., Suner, M.-M., Bell, P.J.,
Vaudin, M. and Greenland, A.J.
(1993) Isolation and characterization
of male flower cDNAs from maize.
Plant Journal 3, 41–49.
Xie, D.-X., Feys, B.F., James, S., NietoRostro, M. and Turner, J.G. (1998)
COI1: an Arabidopsis gene required
for jasmonate-regulated defense and
fertility. Science 280, 1091–1094.
Yamaguchi, T., Tanaka Y., Hayashi, T.
and Koike, S. (1997) Molecular cloning
of rice anther b-1,3-glucanase gene expressed at the dissolution of tetrads.
Plant Physiology 114 (Suppl. S.),
1236–1236.

Stamen Development
Yamaguchi, T., Nakayama, K., Hayashi,
T., Tanaka, Y. and Koike, S. (2002)
Molecular cloning and characterisation
of a novel b -1,3-glucanase gene from
rice. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and
Biochemistry 66, 1403–1406.
Yang, C.-Y., Spielman, M., Coles, J.P., Li,
Y., Ghelani, S., Bourdon, V., Brown,
R.C., Lemmon, B.E., Scott, R.J., and
Dickinson, H.G. (2003c). TETRASPORE encodes a kinesin required for
male meiotic cytokinesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 34, 229–240.
Yang, S.-L., Mao, H.-Z., Xie, L.-F., Pauh,
C.S., Jiang, L., Sundaresan, V. and
Ye, D. (2003a) The Tapetum Determinant1 gene controls the identity of
the tapetal cells in the Arabidopsis
anther. Abstract, ISPMB 2003,
Barcelona, Spain.
Yang, W.C., Ye, D., Xu, J. and Sundaresan, V. (1999) The SPOROCYTELESS gene of Arabidopsis is required
for initiation of sporogenesis and en-

331
codes a novel nuclear protein. Genes
and Development 13, 2108–2117.
Yang, X., Makaroff, C.A. and Ma, H.
(2003b) The Arabidopsis MALE
MEIOCYTE DEATH1 gene encodes
a PHD-finger protein that is required
for male meiosis. Plant Cell 15,
1281–1295.
Zhao, D. and Ma, H. (2000) Male fertility:
a case of enzyme identity. Current
Biology 10, R904–R907.
Zhao, D.-Z., Wang, G.-F., Speal, B. and
Ma, H. (2002) The EXCESS MICROSPOROCYTES1 gene encodes a putative leucine-rich repeat receptor
kinase that controls somatic and reproductive cell fates in the Arabidopsis
anther. Genes & Development 16,
2021–2031.
Zik, M. and Irish, V.F. (2003) Global identification of target genes regulated by
APETALA3 and PISTILLATA floral
homeotic gene action. Plant Cell 15,
207–222.

12

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

J. BROADHVEST1 AND B.A. HAUSER2
1

Bayer Bioscience NV, Technologie Park 38, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium;
Department of Botany, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611-8526, USA
2

Introduction
Ovules are the precursors of seeds. More specifically, they are sporophytic
structures and the site of megagametogenesis or female gamete formation that
culminates in the formation of the haploid embryo sac. The prototypical
angiosperm ovule consists of three parts: (i) the nucellus, where megasporogenesis occurs; (ii) one or two integuments, which cover and nourish the
megagametophyte; and (iii) the funiculus, a supporting stalk that connects
the ovule to the placenta (Fig. 12.1). The presence and morphogenesis of
these structures are species dependent and result in the range of different ovule
shapes observed in seed plants. Once fertilized, sporophytes play important
roles during seed development: (i) the integumentary tapetum nourishes the
developing embryo and endosperm; (ii) the integuments differentiate into
the seed coat, which can regulate dormancy and seed germination; and (iii)
the funiculus may contribute to the retention of the seed until dissemination
of the progeny is required. Seeds are needed for the propagation of most
plant species, but they have also become, through crop cultivation, a food
source for humans and livestock. Because of this important role in human
and animal nutrition, plant ovule and embryo sac development has been
intensively investigated by basic and applied researchers. This review covers
the known molecular mechanisms involved in ovule organogenesis, but it does
not discuss megagametogenesis or embryogenesis. While most of the molecular work has been done using the model plant Arabidopsis, research from
other plant systems is also incorporated into this discussion.
The following generalizations can be made about ovule ontology.
Ovule primordia emerge from the placental tissue (Fig. 12.1A). The distal end
of the primordia differentiates into the nucellus, inside which meiosis and embryo
sac development takes place. The central domain, termed the chalaza, is the site
of integument initiation and growth. The proximal region of the primordia will
develop into the funiculus (Fig. 12.1B). Finally, the developmental pattern of
each of those structures, as well as the integument numbers (1 or 2), affects the
332

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

333

Fig. 12.1. Development of a bitegmic ovule. (A) Ovule primordia emerge from the placenta.
These primordia differentiate into three distinct zones: the nucellus (n), chalaza (c) and funiculus
(f). (B) The inner integument (ii) and outer integument (oi) initiate from the chalaza. A cell within
the nucellus undergoes meiosis, forming a large megaspore (m). (C) This megaspore differentiates
into the embryo sac, which contains two synergids (s), an egg cell (e) and the central cell (cc).
While this is happening, the oi undergoes asymmetric growth, causing the distal tip of the ovule to
curve until it is adjacent to the funiculus.

overall morphology of the ovule in a species-specific manner. Before addressing
ovule development per se, we briefly describe hypotheses that account for the
origin of the ovule.

Ovule Evolution
Fossil record and evolution of the integuments
The nucellus derives from a megasporangium. Based on fossil evidence,
palaeobotanists have proposed that the inner integument evolved from the
fusion of lobed or filamentous structures in the vicinity of this central megasporangium (Stewart, 1983; Herr, 1995; Kenrick and Crane, 1997). Most of
the hypotheses differ on the origin of the filaments from which the ancestral
integument arose in progymnosperm (Andrews, 1963). The axillary theory,
which, has fallen out of favour after evaluating fossils, proposed that integuments derive from foliar appendages (Worsdell, 1904). The telome theory
(Zimmerman, 1952) postulates that peripheral lateral sterile branches and
sterilized sporangia fused together to enclose a central fertile megasporangium.
The synangium theory (Benson, 1904) postulates that the primordial integument arose exclusively from fusion of modified sporangia around a central
fertile sporangium. More recently, Kenrick and Crane (1997) proposed that
clusters of sporangia found in progymnosperms were the source of the formation of an integument in a single evolutionary step. Thus, there is a general
consensus that fusion of these filaments was the process leading to the origin of
this structure. There also seems to be a consensus that this primordial, or
solitary, integument in gymnosperms corresponds to the inner integument in
bitegmic ovules.

334

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

While a single integument is found in gymnosperms, both basal and most
derived angiosperms bear bitegmic ovules, indicating that the precursor of
angiosperms had two integuments (Doyle, 1978; Doyle and Donoghue,
1986). Although some extant angiosperms have only one integument, this
unitegmy results from the fusion of the two integuments or the loss of one of
the two. In short, the outer integument arose during the evolution of angiosperms. The identity of the original structures from which the outer integument
arose in angiosperms remains nebulous. In some extinct species, cupules
surrounded unitegmic ovules and had lobed, and occasionally recurved, filaments that may have fused to form the oi (Andrews, 1963). Interestingly,
cupules have been found on a female reproductive structure where telomes
had only partially fused, indicating that the inner integument may not have
completely evolved in the angiosperm precursor.

Molecular Evolution
Research on the morphogenesis of ovules and the molecular genetic model of
ovule development offer some insights into the evolution of integuments. For
example, some Arabidopsis ovule mutant phenotypes are suggestive of potential ovule evolutionary steps found in the fossil record. The bitegmic Arabidopsis ovule can be rendered unitegmic by mutations in the INNER NO
OUTER (INO) or ABERRANT TESTA SHAPE (ATS) genes. In ino mutant
ovules, an outer integument primordium emerges, but does not develop.
Consequently, the inner integument and nucellus stand upright (Baker et al.,
1997; Schneitz et al., 1997). The ino mutant phenotype clearly illustrates that
development of the integuments is under separate genetic control, which is
consistent with their evolution. While the aberrant testa shape (ats) mutant is
also unitegmic, this integument has anatomical properties of both the inner and
outer integuments (Leon-Kloosterziel et al., 1994). While no ovule mutant
bearing only an outer integument has been identified up to now, the mimicry
of earlier steps in ovule evolution has been suggested for these two ovule
mutants.
Based on phenotype of bell1 (bel1) mutant ovules, Herr (1995) argues that
some of the filamentous structures that fused to form the integuments were
fertile. In bel1 mutants, the embryo sac arrests at a late stage of megagametogenesis and a single highly-lobed integument-like structure (ils) forms
(Robinson-Beers et al., 1992; Modrusan et al., 1994). It has been suggested
the bel1 ils, which arises as a single structure, corresponds to the oi (Modrusan
et al., 1994; Herr, 1995; Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2002). Herr (1995)
observed ‘sporangium-like’ structures in some of the ils protrusions of bel1
mutants, which led him to hypothesize that some of the ancestral filamentous
structure were, in fact, fertile (Herr, 1995).
In strubellig (sub) mutant ovules, unfused protrusions developing from the
outer integuments are often found (Schneitz et al., 1997). This phenotype is
amplified in the pretty few seeds2 ( pfs2) sub double mutant where, instead of
sheathing integuments, unfused filaments grow (Park et al., 2004). While

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

335

interpretation of any evolutionary aspect of these mutations may be subject to
controversy, orthologues of some of these genes were found in other plant
species and the studies of their regulation may help in understanding ovule
evolution. Also, the above ‘evolutionary’ mutant phenotypes were attributable
to the putative loss of activity of the genes. It will be of interest to see if
evolution can also be mimicked by way of gain-of-function experiments,
which may be expected from the evolutionary process.
Based on genetic and molecular analyses, it was noticed that many
genes regulating ovule development might also regulate other developmental
pathways, including flower organogenesis (or vice versa). Since ovules arose
before the four angiosperm floral whorls, it has been suggested that many
of the genes regulating ovule development spontaneously duplicated, that
their functions diverged during floral evolution and that ‘ovule’ organogenesis
pathways were later diverted to floral development (Gasser et al., 1998;
Broadhvest et al., 2000). Evidence for this proposed evolutionary pathway is
supplied not only by the phenotypic mutants but also by the high redundancy
and presence of many floral/ovule paralogues in plant genomes. Four-fifths
of the genes regulating ovule development (Table 12.1) fall into this category.
For example, many MADS-box genes that encode putative transcription
factors involved in regulation of floral organogenesis also regulate ovule development (Purugganan et al., 1995; Purugganan, 1997). A number of them
share partially redundant genetic activities. Recently, the MADS-box genes
were split into two phylogenetic clades: (i) a reproductive-organ patterning,
or C-class, function; and (ii) a group of genes regulating ovule development
(Kramer et al., 2004). It was shown that in many plant species MADS-box
proteins can form homo- or heteromultimeric complexes both in vivo and
in vitro, and some of these complexes are required to confer activity
on these proteins (Egea-Cortines et al., 1999; Favaro et al., 2002, 2003;
Immink et al., 2002). These studies have shown that some MADS-box genes
are functionally redundant when expressed in a tissue-dependent manner.
These data support the evolutionary sharing of ovule–floral molecular
pathways.
While neither of the hypotheses described in the above section satisfactorily accounts for all available data, they provide models that will continue to be
tested by researchers as they gather new fossil and molecular data.

Ovule Development
The genes that are known to regulate ovule development are listed in
Table 12.1, as are their functions. As noted above, many of these genes also
regulate other plant developmental pathways, especially floral morphogenesis.
Unless they shed light on ovule formation, the functions of these genes will not
be reported in this review. Other reviews have covered the subject of Arabidopsis ovule development (Angenent and Colombo, 1996; Gasser et al.,
1998; Grossniklaus and Schneitz, 1998; Schneitz et al., 1998b; Schneitz,
1999), and will serve as the starting point for the present discussion.

336

Table 12.1. Regulators of Arabidopsis ovule development.
Ovule differentiation and patterning

Growth and maturation

Growth/patterning
Class

Initiation

CUC1, CUC2

NAC domains

Initiation

BEL1

TALE
homeobox

Initiation

STK

MADS

Initiation

SHP1, SHP2
SEP1, 2 and 3

MADS
MADS

WUS
AG

Homeobox
MADS

Initiation
Carpel
initiation
Initiation
Initiation
identity

HLL

Ribosomal
protein
Novel

NZZ (SPL)

Proximal

Chalaza

Patterning
identity

Patterning
growth

Apical

Identity

Nucellus

Cell division

Inner

Identity

Outer

Identity

Patterning
growth

Primary references
Aida et al. (1997);
Ishida et al. (2000);
Takada et al. (2001)
Modrusan et al. (1994);
Ray et al. (1994);
Reiser et al. (1995);
Western and Haughn (1999);
Bellaoui et al. (2001)
Pinyopich et al. (2003)
Pinyopich et al. (2003)
Pelaz et al. (2000)

Patterning

Survival

Survival

Survival

Patterning

Patterning

Initiation

Initiation

Initiation

Initiation

Groß-Hardt et al. (2002)
Western and Haughn (1999)
Schneitz et al. (1998a);
Skinner et al. (2001)
Yang et al. (1999);
Schiefthaler et al. (1999);
Balasubramanian and
Schneitz (2000)

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

Gene

Integument

N.P.

Identity
(non-fusion)
Initiation growth

Identity (non-fusion)

Leon-Kloosterziel et al. (1994)

ANT

AP2 domain

Initiation growth

dsRNA RNAse

Cell expansion

Cell expansion

ACR

Receptor kinase

Organization

Organization

SIN2
AP2
TSO1

N.P.
AP2 domain
TSO1 domain

Cell division
Growth
Direction

Cell division
Growth
Direction of growth

SUP

Zinc finger

Asymmetric growth

INO

YABBY

Asymmetric growth

LUG

Putative
repressor
Repressor

Elliott et al. (1996);
Klucher et al. (1996);
Krizek (1999);
Mizukami et al. (2000)
Ray et al. (1996b);
Golden et al. (2002)
Tanaka et al. (2002);
Gifford et al. (2003)
Broadhvest et al. (2000)
Jofuku et al. (1994)
Hauser et al. (1998, 2000);
Song et al. (2000)
Gaiser et al. (1995);
Balasubramanian and
Schneitz (2002);
Meister et al. (2002)
Villanueva et al. (1999);
Meister et al. (2002)
Liu and Meyerowitz (1995);
Conner and Liu (2000)
Franks et al. (2002)

DCL1

SEU

Patterning
growth*

Patterning
growth

Growth

Growth
Growth

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

ATS

N.P. Not published.
*Only WUS and SUP appear to be non-cell autonomous.

337

338

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

Placentation and ovule initiation
In the angiosperms, the diversity of fruit shape, size and anatomy derives from
variations in the location and arrangement of the placenta. In Arabidopsis, the
placenta is located on the adaxial portion of the replum, where the carpel wall
fuses with the septum. Ovule primordia initiate from the placenta and generally
derive from the L1, L2 and L3 layers (Bouman, 1984). These primordia
emerge as finger-like outgrowths and exhibit radial symmetry (Fig. 12.1A).
Extensive mutagenesis suggests that ovule initiation in Arabidopsis is under
the control of redundant gene activities. All known mutations identified to affect
ovule initiation also affect pistil formation and/or placentation. It is expected
that genes involved in placenta formation may affect ovule initiation, development and numbers. For example, Arabidopsis mutations that lead to the
ectopic formation of placental tissues bear, as one might expect, ectopic ovules
(Bowman et al., 1999). Only genes expressed in or affecting both placenta and
ovule development are discussed in this section as it is more suggestive of a
direct role in ovule initiation.
In spatula (spt) mutants, the carpels do not completely fuse and form fewer
ovules than in wild-type. These defects derive from reduced growth of the
carpel margins (Heisler et al., 2001). Interestingly, SPT is expressed in ovule
primordia and in expanding integuments, but redundant activities with other
transcription factors may mask its role in ovule development (Alvarez and
Smyth, 1999; Heisler et al., 2001). While the respective single mutations
bear defective ovules (see below), the synergistic seuss leunig or ant leunig
double mutants have unfused carpels with altered internal structures, including
the placenta, and a reduced number or absence of ovules. (Liu et al., 2000;
Franks et al., 2002). In cup-shaped cotyledon1 (cuc1) cuc2 double mutants,
most commonly the septum fails to fuse, resulting in pistils with reduced
numbers of ovules that range from none to ten (Ishida et al., 2000). Given
the pistil phenotype, the reduction in ovule number may result from a reduction
in the size of the placenta in which both CUC1 and 2 genes are expressed. The
CUC3 gene is expressed between ovule primordia and hypothesized to establish a developmental boundary there (Vroemen et al., 2003).
In petunia, FLORAL BINDING PROTEIN7 (FBP7) and FBP11 genes
are exclusively expressed during placenta, ovule and seed development (Angenent et al., 1995; Colombo et al., 1995, 1997). In transgenic plants
co-suppressing these genes, spaghetti-shaped structures that resemble style
and stigma tissues were developed instead of ovules (Angenent et al., 1995).
The presence of wild-type ovules was also observed in these plants, which
might be due to variability in co-suppression or stochastic effects on the activity
of other MADS-box genes. The recent description of FBP11 loss-of-function
mutants that displayed no discernable ovule or floral phenotype (Vandenbussche et al., 2003) indicates another gene, perhaps FBP7, function during
ovule initiation. In petunia, high levels of FBP11 expression cause ovule-like
structures to develop on the petals (Colombo et al., 1995), indicating that
overexpression of FBP11 alone can lead to ovule initiation there. FBP11 is the
sole protein identified to have this activity. These data are consistent with

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

339

FBP11 and related MADS-box genes acting redundantly to stimulate ovule
initiation or promote ovule identity.
In rice, the ovuleless (ovl) mutant was recently isolated from in vitro
cultures (Yamaki and Nagato, 2002). In this mutant, 85% of the mature flowers
fail to form ovules. Unfortunately, the OVL gene has not yet been identified.

Ovule formation on sepals
Ovules are one of the last sporophytic tissues formed in plants. Many genes
active in ovule formation can also be necessary for earlier stages of plant
development, thus making it difficult to evaluate their role in ovule morphogenesis. For example, the AGAMOUS (AG) gene is expressed in ovules,
stamens and carpels. Plants with the ag mutation lack carpels, so it is difficult
to assess the effect of AG on ovule formation (Bowman et al., 1991a).
To examine the possible effects of such genes, researchers have used the
homeotic transformation of sepals into carpels to examine ovule development.
This transformation occurs in ap2 loss-of-function plants and in transgenic
plants overexpressing AG and AG-like genes. The sepals of these plants exhibit
carpel-like features, including ovules and ovule-like structures (Bowman et al.,
1991b; Mizukami and Ma, 1992; Kempin et al., 1993; Western and Haughn,
1999; Honma and Goto, 2001; Favaro et al., 2003).
While the presence of ovules on sepals permits the study of these loci,
these analyses are far from optimal. In ap2–6 mutant plants, the morphology
of the ovules on carpelloid sepals ranges from normal to highly aberrant (Kunst
et al., 1989). Depending on the ap2 mutant allele, ovules in the fourth whorl
may or may not exhibit a phenotype that differs from wild-type. For those ap2
ovules that exhibit a phenotype, integument morphology is altered near the
micropyle. These results indicate that some additional morphogenic activities
that are necessary for wild-type ovule formation are missing or at insufficient
levels in the outer floral whorl of ap2 mutants.
Despite this limitation, analyses of mutants in the ap2 background have
provided evidence of the genetic functions of AG and BEL1 during ovule
formation. Both of these genes are expressed in the chalaza of developing
ovule primordia, then AG transcripts become restricted to the endothelium
later in ovule formation (Bowman et al., 1991a; Reiser et al., 1995). Indirect
evidence suggested to Ray et al. (1994) that AG is active during ovule development. Evaluation of the bel1–3 and ag-1 mutants in the ap2–6 mutant
background led to an increase in filamentous outgrowths on sepal margins
and a concomitant decrease in the number of mature ovules (Western and
Haughn, 1999). Based on analysis of the double and triple mutant combinations, Western and Haughn propose that the BEL1 and AG proteins act in a
partially redundant manner to maintain ovule identity as this organ develops. In
addition, formation of the abnormal integuments, which are characteristic of
the bel1 mutant, requires AG activity (Western and Haughn, 1999).
Both the SHATTERPROOF1 (SHP1) and SHP2 genes, which are AG paralogues (Rounsley et al., 1995; Purugganan, 1997), regulate ovule formation.

340

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

Ectopic expression of either SHP gene causes homeotic conversion of the
sepals into carpelloid tissues (Pinyopich et al., 2003), similar to AG overexpression (Mizukami and Ma, 1992). This result indicates that while the shp1,2 double
mutant does not have an ovule phenotype, the SHP genes do affect
ovule development. In the ap2–6 ag shp1 shp2 quadruple mutant, the
ovule primordia on the sepals had fewer ovule characteristics than in the ap2–6
ag plants (Pinyopich et al., 2003). Considering that these genes are highly
expressed in developing ovules and based on this quadruple mutant phenotype,
it appears that SHP1, SHP2 and AG all specify ovule identity or regulate its
development in a redundant fashion. While these types of experiments give
insights into the role of some genes in ovule development, it is clear that additional
factors are required for ovule morphogenesis than are present in ap2–6 sepals.
With the availability of more ovule-specific promoters, the function of redundant
genes could be tested using tissue-specific RNA interference (RNAi) approaches.
These experiments would complement the observations made in ap2 carpelloid
sepal ovules.
Growth and patterning of ovule primordia
After emergence from the placental tissue, the Arabidopsis ovule primordium
forms a featureless cylindrical structure that becomes patterned along the
proximal–distal axis resulting in three separate developmental regions
(Fig. 12.1A). Each region will later give rise to different ovule structures. The
distal end of the primordia differentiates into the nucellus, inside which meiosis
and embryo sac development takes place. The central domain, the chalaza, is
the site of integument initiation and growth. The proximal region of the
primordia will further develop into the funiculus. Based on molecular expression data, patterning is thought to occur prior to the actual tripartite zonation of
the primordia. For example, the BEL1 gene is expressed in the chalaza before
this structure is anatomically established (Reiser et al., 1995).
HLL is required for the growth of ovule primordia. In hll mutants, ovule
primordia are smaller than wild-type and their development stops after the first
visible signs of the tripartite zonation (Schneitz et al., 1998a). In the distal zone,
hll primordia display anatomical signs of cell death (Schneitz et al., 1998a;
Skinner et al., 2001). The HLL gene encodes a ribosomal protein, similar to
the L14 protein found in eubacteria, which localizes to the mitochondria
(Skinner et al., 2001). The HLL gene is expressed at high levels in pistils and
ovules while a functionally redundant paralogue of HLL, called HLP, is expressed elsewhere at high levels. In the hll mutant, the levels of HLL and HLP
proteins are insufficient to sustain growth of the ovule. Consequently, the HLL
protein links the biochemical energy from the mitochondria to ovule primordia
growth (Skinner et al., 2001).
The ant and short integuments2 (sin2) loci, which as single mutants do
not exhibit obvious defects in primordium growth, have shown synergistic
effects when present in hll mutants. In the ant hll double mutants, ovule primordia growth stops earlier than in hll mutants and the chalaza-specific expression of BEL1 transcripts is detected initially at the base of emerging ovule
primordia. This led Schneitz et al. (1998a) to hypothesize that patterning of

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

341

ovule primordia occurs as the primordia emerge from the placenta. Zonation of
the nucellus occurs first, then the chalaza, and finally the funiculus.
While zonation occurs appropriately in this double mutant, most of the
proximal zone, the funiculus, fails to form. Since the ANT gene regulates
growth (Krizek, 1999; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000), loss of this activity
could slow the development of ovules, allowing cell death to terminate development even earlier in hll ant double mutants than is true in hll mutants
The sin2 hll ovule primordia are even more severely affected than ant hll
ovules. Growth of these ovule primordia ceases before they completely emerge
from the placenta (Broadhvest et al., 2000). Based on the patterning model
proposed by Schneitz et al. (1998a), these primordia contain only the apical
portion of nucellus. Analysis of the sin2 mutant phenotype indicates that this
locus regulates cell division in ovules (Broadhvest et al., 2000). If the growth of
sin2 ovules occurs even more slowly than in ant ovules, it seems reasonable to
speculate that hll-induced cell death leads to very early termination of ovule
development in hll sin2 plants.
The NOZZLE (NZZ ) (also called SPOROCYTELESS), which is a putative
transcription factor, plays an important role in patterning of the ovule primordium and in nucellus development (Schiefthaler et al., 1999; Yang et al.,
1999). In nzz mutants, the microspores and megaspores do not differentiate.
This effect on patterning was suggested because ANT and BEL1, which are
normally expressed in the chalaza, are detected in cells at the apical end of the
nzz ovule primordium, indicating that the nucellar domain does not get established properly in these mutants (Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000, 2002).
Overlapping roles for proximal/distal pattern or zonation were also suggested
for BEL1 and NZZ since nzz bel1 ovules lack the chalaza region of ovule
primordia (Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000). NZZ recently was shown
to bind INO protein (Sieber et al., 2004), which regulates development of the
outer integument. A number of double mutant phenotypes similarly indicate
that NZZ not only regulates megaspore mother cell (MMC) differentiation, but
also integument morphogenesis (Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000, 2002;
Park et al., 2004).
The current genetic model of ovule development links the patterning of
primordia with concomitant growth, suggesting that mutants lacking only the
funiculus might be found. Primordia growth and patterning are currently
regarded as two interrelated processes displaying some redundant gene activities. The availability of more cell- or tissue-specific markers that are confined to
a developmental field during ovule development could be used to test the
current patterning models. For example, WUSCHEL (WUS), which is expressed in the nucellus anlagen and could specify nucellus identity is not
expressed in nzz and sin2 hll mutant ovules.
Nucellus growth and differentiation
The MMC, located in the centre of the nucellus, undergoes meiosis forming four
megaspores, three of which will degenerate (Fig. 12.1B). Concomitant to further nucellus growth, the surviving megaspore will differentiate into the gametophyte (Fig. 12.1C). In nzz mutants, the nucellus and the embryo sac fail to

342

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

develop leading to a very short nucellus where growth terminates not long after
zonation of the primordia (Schiefthaler et al., 1999; Yang et al., 1999). Based
on the phenotype of the nzz ovules, it is not clear whether the meiotic defect
causes the characteristic nucellus phenotype or vice versa (Schiefthaler et al.,
1999; Yang et al., 1999; Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000, 2002).
Genetic analyses with the NZZ gene are complicated by interactions with
numerous other loci and multiple development pathways, some of which are
affected in a stochastic manner (Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000, 2002).
This has led to a variety of phenotypes, even among ovules of the same flower
(see below), complicating the determination of the role of this gene. Discrepancies in expression data make it hard to pinpoint functions of NZZ with regard
to the multiple phenotypes. Using a reporter b-glucuronidase (GUS) construct,
Yang et al. (1999) showed that NZZ localizes to the centre of the nucellus just
prior to differentiation of the MMC. These data conflict with reports that NZZ
transcripts are detected in ovule primordia, nucellus, chalaza and integuments
in a complex pattern (Schiefthaler et al., 1999; Balasubramanian and
Schneitz, 2000, 2002). The localization of the NZZ protein has not been
determined yet, which is hoped to help in understanding the role and mode of
action of the NZZ locus. None the less, genetic data indicate that the NZZ
gene interacts with loci specifying the proximal–distal and the abaxial–adaxial
axes (Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000, 2002).
Based on the analyses of mutants, PFS2 appears to be required for
differentiation of the MMC (Park et al., 2004). PFS2 and NZZ are the only
genes known to directly or indirectly affect nucellus development. While other
Arabidopsis ovule mutants show a reduced nucellus, each of these also has a
defect in integument growth or morphogenesis. Based on these observations, it
was suggested that the presence of at least one sheathing integument was
necessary for development of the embryo sac and/or nucellus and that a
mutation impeding integument growth would have an indirect effect on nucellar growth (Baker et al., 1997).
Integument initiation and growth
While in some species the integuments can originate from the L1 and L2
layers, in Arabidopsis integuments arise solely from the L1 (Jenik and Irish,
2001). Integuments initiate their growth sequentially in Arabidopsis. First, the
inner integument begins from two adjacent cell rows of the upper portion of the
chalaza in a synchronized manner to form a ring that encircles the primordium.
Later, the outer integument originates from two rows of cells from the lower
part of the chalaza. This occurs only on the abaxial, or bottom, side of the
primordium. Growth of both integuments occurs simultaneously, although
the outer integument undergoes asymmetric growth on the abaxial side while
the inner integument grows symmetrically, eventually sheathing the nucellus.
Asymmetric growth of the outer integument causes the ovule, including the
embryo sac, to curve so that the small opening termed ‘the micropyle’, where
the integuments terminate, is adjacent to the funiculus (Fig. 12.1C). The row of
integument cells adjacent to the nucellus differentiates into an endothelium,
which, in many species, has transfer cell characteristics. This tissue is thought

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

343

to be important for transferring sugars and nutrients into the embryo and
endosperm (Kapil and Tiwari, 1978).
Genes regulating integument initiation
While the initiation of the integuments is not synchronous, many genes regulate the development of both integuments. For example, loss-of-function analyses indicate that ANT activity is necessary for development of both
integuments (Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996; Baker et al., 1997).
Overexpression experiments indicate that ANT promotes cell growth (Krizek,
1999; Mizukami and Fischer, 2000). This gene is expressed in plant meristems
and is especially abundant in the chalaza during integument organogenesis
(Elliott et al., 1996; Klucher et al., 1996).
In an elegant set of experiments, WUS, a homeodomain protein controlling meristem cell fate, was recently found to be required for integument
initiation (Groß-Hardt et al., 2002). Since wus mutant seedlings fail to make
flowers, it was impossible to ascertain its role in ovule development. To correct
for this defect, WUS was expressed under the control of the CLAVATA1
(CLV1) promoter. In wus mutants containing the CLV1::WUS transgene,
the ovules failed to initiate integuments (Groß-Hardt et al., 2002), indicating
that WUS is required for integument formation. In this genetic line, ectopic
expression of WUS in the chalaza region induced the formation of integument
primordia from the funiculus (Groß-Hardt et al., 2002). In wild-type ovules,
WUS protein remains in the nucellus, indicating that this protein generates a
downstream signal that induces differentiation of chalaza cells. While WUS
activity promotes cell division within the floral meristem, it seems that the
same transcription factor activates a different set of genes during ovule development. The nature of this signalling remains unclear, but appears to involve
ANT and other ovule-patterning genes (Groß-Hardt et al., 2002).
Possibly because of its effect on ovule primordia patterning (see above),
NZZ regulates the temporal and spatial initiation of both integuments
(Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000). In the nzz mutants, the two integuments appear to initiate at the same time and more towards the apical portion
of the primordia (Balasubramanian and Schneitz, 2000).
Unitegmic mutants
As described earlier, loss of function of some genes cause unitegmy in Arabidopsis. In inner no outer (ino) mutants, the outer integument primordium
forms but fails to grow. In strong ino alleles, the inner integument is phenotypically normal and the ino ovule is straight or orthotropous, instead of curved.
It is clear that INO has a role in outer integument initiation and is also required
for asymmetric growth of the outer integument (see below).
In the ats mutant, a single integument initiates from the chalaza (LeonKloosterziel et al., 1994). While this integument has properties of both the
inner and outer integuments, developmental defects result in misshapen seeds
(Leon-Kloosterziel et al., 1994). The researchers were unable to determine if
this integument results from a fusion of two integuments from inception or if
one integument differentiates but takes on properties of both integuments.

344

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

None the less, the mutant line is of particular interest to scientists studying
unitegmic angiosperms, which resulted from the loss of an integument during
angiosperm evolution and diversification.
Integument growth
Once the integuments are initiated, controlled growth must occur to allow the
ovule to function and exhibit species-dependent characteristics. Regulators of
most growth components (cell elongation, division, etc.) have been identified
for integument development (Table 12.1).
In ovules, SIN2 is one of the major regulators of cell division. Loss of SIN
activity causes an arrest of integument growth after their initiation, but before
they sheathe the nucellus (Broadhvest et al., 2000). Flowers of sin2 mutants
also have defects in sepal tip development, which also derive from the L1 cell
layer. Cell elongation in the integuments requires DICER-LIKE1 (DCL1) (formerly SHORT INTEGUMENTS1) activity (Golden et al., 2002). DCL1 is an
important component of the RNAi process and its loss of function causes
reduced cell expansion of the integuments, in addition to other pleiotropic
effects (Lang et al., 1994; Ray et al., 1996a). Recently, it has been shown
that cuc1 cuc2 double mutants, which have pleiotropic effects on plant development that include integument morphogenesis, were regulated via microRNAs (Ishida et al., 2000; Mallory et al., 2004). Thus, RNAi seems to be
involved in ovule organogenesis.
A number of loss-of-function loci cause altered cellular morphogenesis in
ovules. Weak mutant alleles of the floral gene TSO1 cause the integument cells
to be disoriented and misshapen, indicating that this gene is involved in regulating the direction of cell expansion and planes of cell division of flowers and
integuments (Liu et al., 1997; Hauser et al., 1998). In blasssig (bag) mutants,
the misshapen integument cells cause a general disorganization of ovule tissues
(Schneitz et al., 1997). In addition, bag ovules commonly fuse together. Fusion
of ovules results because the wax on the cell wall of the outer integument layer is
not synthesized. To a lesser extent, in the acr4 mutant, integument cell
morphogenesis was disorganized and ovule fusion sometimes observed (Gifford
et al., 2003). ACR4 encodes a L1-specific leucine-rich receptor kinase
(Gifford et al., 2003). In the ovule, ACR4 mRNA is most abundant in the
outer layers of the oi, ii and endothelium. In addition to the integument phenotype, the sepal tips, which are also L1 tissues, are misshapen or absent.
These observations led to the premise that ACR4 is part of the cell–cell communication in the L1 layer. The sin2 mutant was also shown to affect development
of sepal tips and integuments (Broadhvest et al., 2000). It would be interesting
to see if these genes are part of a similar developmental pathway.
A leucine-rich receptor kinase, SUB, was shown to regulate outer integument morphogenesis as well as whole plant development (Chevalier and
Schneitz, 2000). In sub mutant ovules, initiation and growth of the outer
integument cells are poorly regulated, leading to the formation of outgrowths.
In tousled (tsl) mutant ovules, growth of the integuments was
variable, but compared to wild-type the oi often was shorter and the ii longer
(Roe et al., 1997b). TSL encodes nuclear serine/threonine protein kinase

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

345

(Roe et al., 1993, 1997a). The loss of two putative transcription repressors,
LEUNIG (LUG) or SEUSS (SEU), resulted in tsl-like integument phenotypes
(Roe et al., 1997b; Franks et al., 2002). TSL and LUG are elements of the
same genetic pathway during ovule development. SEU, LUG and APETALA2
(AP2) are all negative regulators of AG and these genes may interact in a
dosage-dependent manner during integument development. In seu-1/seu-1,
lug-1/þ, or ap2–1/þ plants, ovules have shortened integuments (Franks et al.,
2002).
UNICORN (UCN) is a locus that seems to have a very specific role. Loss of
UCN activity leads to the development of an outgrowth from the chalaza, which
often abnormally emerges from the abaxial side of mature ovules (Schneitz
et al., 1997).
STYLISH1 (STY1), a RING-motif protein involved in Arabidopsis apical
pistil formation is expressed in the ovule primordia, but later becomes restricted to
the outer layer of the funiculus, the oi and the tip of the nucellus (Kuusk et al.,
2002). While sty1 does not have an ovule phenotype on its own, in sty1 spt
double mutants, the outer integuments do not grow normally (Kuusk et al.,
2002).
Asymmetric growth of the outer integument
In Arabidopsis ovules, INO and SUP proteins are required for asymmetric
growth of the oi. In ino mutant ovules, the integuments do not curve. The
asymmetric growth of the oi results in curvature so extensive that the micropyle
is adjacent to the funiculus and the ovule shaped by this growth is anatropous.
INO, a member of the YABBY family of proteins, establishes an abaxial identity
during lateral organ formation (Siegfried et al., 1999; Villanueva et al., 1999).
INO is expressed specifically in the oi initial cells and later becomes spatially
restricted to the outer layer of the oi (Villanueva et al., 1999; Balasubramanian
and Schneitz, 2000). INO positively regulates the expression of itself, ANT
and BEL1 (Meister et al., 2002).
In sup mutants the outer integument exhibits reduced curvature as a result of
growth on both the abaxial and adaxial sides of the oi. As revealed by in situ
hybridization, SUP mRNA accumulates in the funiculus in an area adjacent to the
chalaza (Sakai et al., 1995). SUP affects oi growth, indicating that this locus acts
non-cell autonomously. Meister et al. (2002) proposed that SUP attenuates INO
activity on the abaxial side of the integument, although the mechanism for this
activity is not yet clear (Meister et al., 2002). Recently, Nakagawa et al. (2004)
identified the SUP in petunia (PhSUP). In the phsup mutants, the ovules also fail
to curve and are more orthotropous. Interestingly, petunia ovules are unitegmic.
Because SUP affects the outer integument only, this indicates that the petunia
integument either resulted from fusion of both integuments or derived solely
from the oi. Many classes of proteins were found to bind to the INO promoter,
but it is not yet clear what role these proteins have (Meister et al., 2004).
In splayed (syd) mutants, vegetative and floral organs grow more slowly
than normal. The ovules in these mutants fail to form an embryo sac and exhibit
more reduced curvature of the oi than wild type (Wagner and Meyerowitz,
2002). SYD encodes a chromatin-remodelling factor that is expressed almost

346

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser

ubiquitously in plants (Wagner and Meyerowitz, 2002). Loss of activity of this
chromatin-remodelling ATPase appears to reduce the growth of the outer
integument and disrupt megametogenesis.

Funiculus growth
There are no genes that specifically regulate funiculus development, although a
few mutants modulate funiculus morphology and cellular organization. In bel1
mutants, the funiculus exhibits an altered arrangement of cell files, resulting in a
funiculus that is wider and shorter than normal (Balasubramanian and Schneitz,
2000). With respect to funiculus development, SIN2 activity appears to be
redundant with BEL1 because bel1 sin2 funiculi also are shorter and thicker
than wild-type or either single mutant (Broadhvest et al., 2000). NZZ is known
to restrict funicular growth, so it is logical that genetic synergism on funicular
length is observed in nzz, as well as in bel1 and ant mutants (Balasubramanian
and Schneitz, 2000). Recently, SEEDSTICK (STK) was also described as
regulating funicular width and as having an important role in seed dispersal
(Pinyopich et al., 2003). SPT has also been suggested to have an effect on
abscission of the funiculus, a conjecture that was based on the presence of the
SPT transcript in this structure and the possible role of SPT in seed dehiscence
(Heisler et al., 2001).
Homeotic conversion or loss of ovule identity
Loss of ovule identity is used to describe the only type of homeotic transformation observed up to now in ovules: the transformation of the chalaza, integuments and nucellus into carpels or carpel-like structures. In the ABC model, a
major player in carpel identity is AG. Loss of AG activity leads to homeotic
transformation of the central region of floral meristems and the reiteration of
the ag mutant flower, which develops from the central region of an existing
flower (Bowman et al., 1991a,b). During wild-type ovule development, AG is
highly expressed in primordia and integuments
As described above, bel1 mutants cause the transformation of the integuments into an integument-like structure (ILS). However, sometimes the ILS will
develop into a complete miniature pistil, formed of two fused carpels, which will
contain bel1 ovules that can reiterate the pistil formation process. The bel1 ILS
acquires the identity of the fourth floral whorl, which would be able to respond
to the AG protein present in the ILS. In the bel1 mutant where integument
identity is lost during development, AG expression is dramatically upregulated
(Ray et al., 1994; Reiser et al., 1995).
The STK, SHP1 and SHP2 are the genes most closely related to AG
(Purugganan et al., 1995). These four genes are each expressed in ovules, and
mutational analysis indicates that they share partially redundant roles with one
another (Pinyopich et al., 2003). In the stk shp1 shp2 triple mutant, integument identity is lost and the ovule reverts to a carpel identity. This result is
consistent with these three genes’ roles of maintaining ovule identity during
development or directly regulating ovule development (Pinyopich et al., 2003).

Genes Regulating Ovule Development

347

Hormonal regulation of ovule development
We know very little about how hormones affect ovule development. While it is
obvious that hormones are involved in plant cellular and tissue growth, there is
no obvious link between the different mutant phenotypes observed up to now
and their effect on plant hormones. In tobacco, ethylene was shown to be
involved in integument growth. Downregulation of the 1-aminocyclopropane1-carboxylate oxidase (ACO) enzyme, which regulates the terminal step in
ethylene synthesis, caused female sterility. In these ovules, the integuments
were shorter than normal and the embryo sac failed to form. This phenotype
could be reversed by applying 2-chloroethylphosphonic acid (De Martinis and
Mariani, 1999).
Ethylene and auxin appear to be involved in post-pollination ovule initiation in Phalaenopsis orchids. However, because of impacts of these hormonal pathways on the overall fertilization process, it is not clear if these
hormones have direct or indirect effects on ovule initiation (Yu and Goh,
2001).
Future
Much of what we know about ovule development is based on reverse and
forward genetic screens in Arabidopsis and a few other dicot plant species.
Most loss-of-function screens are based on female sterility and thus may have
inadvertently identified only a subset of the morphogenic pathways. Except for
putative orthologues of dicot genes, we have very little molecular data on the
function of the molecular mechanism involved in monocots. Since more and
more plant genomic sequences data will be available in the future, it will be
interesting to look at the function of putative orthologues or even of ovulespecific expressed genes using targeted reverse genetic approaches. Much
remains to be learned in regard to loss- and gain-of-function of such genes in
the ovule. While functional redundancies will always be a hurdle to overcome,
the knowledge gained will serve as a base to better understand the evolution
and regulation of ovule development in many species, particularly those whose
economic value rests in their seeds.

References
Aida, M., Ishida, T., Fukaki, H., Fujisawa,
H. and Tasaka, M. (1997) Genes involved in organ separation in Arabidopsis: an analysis of the cup-shaped
cotyledon mutant. Plant Cell 9, 841–
857.
Alvarez, J. and Smyth, D.R. (1999)
CRABS CLAW and SPATULA, two
Arabidopsis genes that control carpel

development in parallel with AGAMOUS. Development 126, 2377–
2386.
Andrews, H.N.J. (1963) Early seed plants.
Science 142, 925–931.
Angenent, G.C. and Colombo, L. (1996)
Molecular control of ovule development. Trends in Plant Science 1,
228–232.

348

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser
Angenent, G.C., Franken, J., Busscher,
M., Van Dijken, A., Van Went, J.L.,
Dons, H.J.M. and Van Tunen, A.J.
(1995) A novel class of MADS-box
genes is involved in ovule development
in petunia. Plant Cell 7, 1569–1582.
Baker, S.C., Robinson-Beers, K., Villanueva, J.M., Gaiser, J.C. and Gasser,
C.S. (1997) Interactions among genes
regulating ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics 145, 1109–
1124.
Balasubramanian, S. and Schneitz, K.
(2000) NOZZLE regulates proximal–
distal pattern formation, cell proliferation and early sporogenesis during
ovule development in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Development 127, 4227–
4238.
Balasubramanian, S. and Schneitz, K.
(2002) NOZZLE links proximal–distal
and adaxial–abaxial pattern formation
during ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 129,
4291–4300.
Bellaoui, M., Pidkowich, M.S., Samach,
A., Kushalappa, K., Kohalmi, S.E.,
Modrusan, Z., Crosby, W.L. and
Haughn, G.W. (2001) The Arabidopsis
BELL1 and KNOX TALE homeodomain proteins interact through a domain
conserved between plants and animals.
Plant Cell 13, 2455–2470.
Benson, M. (1904) Telangium scotti, a
new species of Telangium (Calymmatotheca) showing structure. Annals of
Botany 18, 161–167.
Bouman, F. (1984) The ovule. In: Johri,
B.M. (ed.) Embryology of the Angiosperms. Springer-Verlag, New York,
pp. 123–157.
Bowman, J.L., Drews, G.N. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991a) Expression of the
Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene
AGAMOUS is restricted to specific
cell types late in flower development.
Plant Cell 3, 749–758.
Bowman, J.L., Smyth, D.R. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991b) Genetic interactions
among floral homeotic genes of Arabidopsis. Development 112, 1–20.

Bowman, J.L., Baum, S.F., Eshed, Y.,
Putterill, J. and Alvarez, J. (1999) Molecular genetics of gynoecium development in Arabidopsis. Current Topics
in Developmental Biology 45, 155–
205.
Broadhvest, J., Baker, S.C. and Gasser,
C.S. (2000) SHORT INTEGUMENTS
2 promotes growth during Arabidopsis reproductive development. Genetics 155, 899–907.
Chevalier, D. and Schneitz, K. (2000) The
Arabidopsis STRUBBELIG gene encodes a distinct putative leucine–rich repeat kinase involved in the control of cell
morphogernesis. In: 11th International
Conference on Arabidopsis Research.
Madison, Wisconsin, Abstract 339.
Colombo, L., Franken, J., Koetje, E., Van
Went, J., Dons, H.J.M., Angenent,
G.C. and Van Tunen, A.J. (1995)
The petunia MADS-box gene FBP11
determines ovule identity. Plant Cell
7, 1859–1868.
Colombo, L., Franken, J., Van Der Krol,
A.R., Wittich, P.E., Dons, H.J.M. and
Angenent, G.C. (1997) Downregulation of ovule-specific MADS-box
genes from petunia results in maternally controlled defects in seed development. Plant Cell 9, 703–715.
Conner, J. and Liu, Z.C. (2000) LEUNIG,
a putative transcriptional corepressor
that regulates AGAMOUS expression
during flower development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 97, 12902–12907.
De Martinis, D. and Mariani, C. (1999)
Silencing gene expression of the ethylene-forming enzyme results in a reversible inhibition of ovule development in
transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Cell
11, 1061–1072.
Doyle, J.A. (1978) Origin of the angiosperms. Annual Review of Ecological
Systems 9, 365–392.
Doyle, J.A. and Donoghue, M.J. (1986)
Seed plant phylogeny and the origin of
angiosperms: an experimental cladistic
approach. Botanical Review 52, 321–
431.

Genes Regulating Ovule Development
Egea-Cortines, M., Saedler, H. and Sommer, H. (1999) Ternary complex
formation between the MADS-box proteins SQUAMOSA, DEFICIENS and
GLOBOSA is involved in the control of
floral architecture in Antirrhinum
majus. EMBO Journal 18, 5370–
5379.
Elliott, R.C., Betzner, A.S., Huttner, E.,
Oakes, M.P., Tucker, W.Q.J., Gerentes, D., Perez, P. and Smyth, D.R.
(1996) AINTEGUMENTA, an APETALA2-like gene of Arabidopsis with
pleiotropic roles in ovule development
and floral organ growth. Plant Cell 8,
155–168.
Favaro, R., Immink, R.G., Ferioli, V., Bernasconi, B., Byzova, M., Angenent,
G.C., Kater, M. and Colombo, L.
(2002) Ovule-specific MADS-box proteins have conserved protein–protein
interactions in monocot and dicot
plants. Molecular Genetics and Genomics 268, 152–159.
Favaro, R., Pinyopich, A., Battaglia, R.,
Kooiker, M., Borghi, L., Ditta, G.,
Yanofsky, M.F., Kater, M.M. and Colombo, L. (2003) MADS-box protein
complexes control carpel and ovule development in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
15, 2603–2611.
Franks, R.G., Wang, C., Levin, J.Z. and
Liu, Z. (2002) SEUSS, a member of a
novel family of plant regulatory proteins, represses floral homeotic gene
expression with LEUNIG. Development 129, 253–263.
Gaiser, J.C., Robinson-Beers, K. and
Gasser, C.S. (1995) The Arabidopsis
SUPERMAN gene mediates asymmetric growth of the outer integument of
ovules. Plant Cell 7, 333–345.
Gasser, C.S., Broadhvest, J. and Hauser,
B.A. (1998) Genetic analysis of ovule
development. Annual Review of Plant
Physiology & Plant Molecular Biology 49, 1–24.
Gifford, M.L., Dean, S. and Ingram, G.C.
(2003) The Arabidopsis ACR4 gene
plays a role in cell layer organisation
during ovule integument and sepal

349
margin development. Development
130, 4249–4258.
Golden, T.A., Schauer, S.E., Lang, J.D.,
Pien, S., Mushegian, A.R., Grossniklaus, U., Meinke, D.W. and Ray, A.
(2002) SHORT INTEGUMENTS1/
SUSPENSOR1/CARPEL FACTORY,
a dicer homolog, is a maternal effect
gene required for embryo development
in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology
130, 808–822.
Groß-Hardt, R., Lenhard, M. and Laux, T.
(2002) WUSCHEL signaling functions
in interregional communication during
Arabidopsis ovule development. Genes
& Development 16, 1129–1138.
Grossniklaus, U. and Schneitz, K. (1998)
The molecular and genetic basis of
ovule and megagametophyte development. Seminars in Cellular and Developmental Biology 9, 227–238.
Hauser, B.A., Villanueva, J.M. and Gasser, C.S. (1998) Arabidopsis TSO1
regulates directional processes in cells
during floral organogenesis. Genetics
150, 411–423.
Hauser, B.A., He, J.Q., Park, S.O. and
Gasser, C.S. (2000) TSO1 is a novel
protein that modulates cytokinesis and
cell expansion in Arabidopsis. Development 127, 2219–2226.
Heisler, M.G., Atkinson, A., Bylstra, Y.H.,
Walsh, R. and Smyth, D.R. (2001)
SPATULA, a gene that controls development of carpel margin tissues in Arabidopsis, encodes a bHLH protein.
Development 128, 1089–1098.
Herr, J.M. (1995) The origin of the ovule.
American Journal of Botany 82,
547–564.
Honma, T. and Goto, K. (2001) Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufficient to convert leaves into floral
organs. Nature 409, 525–529.
Immink, R.G.H., Gadella, T.W.J. Jr,
Ferrario, S., Busscher, M. and
Angenent, G.C. (2002) Analysis of
MADS-box
protein-protein
interactions in living plant cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 99, 2416–2421.

350

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser
Ishida, T., Aida, M., Takada, S. and
Tasaka, M. (2000) Involvement of
CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON genes
in gynoecium and ovule development
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant and
Cell Physiology 41, 60–67.
Jenik, P.D. and Irish, V.F. (2001) The
Arabidopsis floral homeotic gene
APETALA3 differentially regulates
intercellular signaling required for
petal and stamen development. Development 128, 13–23.
Jofuku, K.D., den Boer, B.G.W., Van
Montagu, M. and Okamuro, J.K.
(1994) Control of Arabidopsis flower
and seed development by the homeotic
gene APETALA2. Plant Cell 6,
1211–1225.
Kapil, R.N. and Tiwari, S.C. (1978) The
integumentary tapetum. Botanical
Review 44, 457–490.
Kempin, S.A., Mandel, M.A. and
Yanofsky, M.F. (1993) Conversion of
perianth into reproductive organs by
ectopic expression of the tobacco floral
homeotic gene NAG1. Plant Physiology 103, 1041–1046.
Kenrick, P. and Crane, P.R. (1997) The
Origin and Early Diversification of
Land Plants: a Cladistic Study.
Smithsonian
Institution
Press,
Washington, DC.
Klucher, K.M., Chow, H., Reiser, L. and
Fischer, R.L. (1996) The AINTEGUMENTA gene of Arabidopsis required
for ovule and female gametophyte development is related to the floral
homeotic gene APETALA2. Plant
Cell 8, 137–153.
Kramer, E.M., Jaramillo, M.A. and Di
Stilio, V.S. (2004) Patterns of gene
duplication and functional evolution
during the diversification of the AGAMOUS subfamily of MADS-box
genes in angiosperms. Genetics 166,
1011–1023.
Krizek, B.A. (1999) Ectopic expression of
AINTEGUMENTA in Arabidopsis
plants results in increased growth of
floral organs. Developmental Genetics 25, 224–236.

Kunst, L., Klenz, J.E., Martinez-Zapater,
J. and Haughn, G.W. (1989) AP2
gene determines the identity of perianth organs in flowers of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant Cell 1, 1195–1208.
Kuusk, S., Sohlberg, J.J., Long, J.A.,
Fridborg, I. and Sundberg, E. (2002)
STY1 and STY2 promote the formation of apical tissues during Arabidopsis
gynoecium
development.
Development 129, 4707–4717.
Lang, J.D., Ray, S. and Ray, A. (1994)
sin1, a mutation affecting female fertility in Arabidopsis, interacts with
mod1, its recessive modifier. Genetics
137, 1101–1110.
Leon-Kloosterziel, K.M., Keijzer, C.J. and
Koornneef, M. (1994) A seed shape
mutant of Arabidopsis that is affected
in integument development. Plant Cell
6, 385–392.
Liu, Z.C. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1995)
LEUNIG regulates AGAMOUS expression in Arabidopsis flowers. Development 121, 975–991.
Liu, Z., Running, M.P. and Meyerowitz,
E.M. (1997) TSO1 functions in cell division during Arabidopsis flower development. Development 124, 665–672.
Liu, Z., Franks, R.G. and Klink, V.P.
(2000) Regulation of gynoecium marginal tissue formation by LEUNIG and
AINTEGUMENTA. Plant Cell 12,
1879–1892.
Mallory, A.C., Dugas, D.V., Bartel, D.P.
and Bartel, B. (2004) MicroRNA regulation of NAC-domain targets is required for proper formation and
separation of adjacent embryonic,
vegetative, and floral organs. Current
Biology 14, 1035–1046.
Meister, R.J., Kotow, L.M. and Gasser,
C.S. (2002) SUPERMAN attenuates
positive INNER NO OUTER autoregulation to maintain polar development of
Arabidopsis ovule outer integuments.
Development 129, 4281–4289.
Meister, R.J., Williams, L.A., Monfared,
M.M., Gallagher, T.L., Kraft, E.A.,
Nelson, C.G. and Gasser, C.S. (2004)
Definition and interactions of a positive

Genes Regulating Ovule Development
regulatory element of the Arabidopsis
INNER NO OUTER promoter. Plant
Journal 37, 426–438.
Mizukami, Y. and Fischer, R.L. (2000)
Plant organ size control: AINTEGUMENTA regulates growth and cell
numbers during organogenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 97, 942–947.
Mizukami, Y. and Ma, H. (1992) Ectopic
expression of the floral homeotic gene
AGAMOUS in transgenic Arabidopsis
plants alters floral organ identity. Cell
71, 119–131.
Modrusan, Z., Reiser, L., Feldmann, K.A.,
Fischer, R.L. and Haughn, G.W.
(1994) Homeotic transformation of
ovules into carpel-like structures in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 6, 333–349.
Nakagawa, H., Ferrario, S., Angenent,
G.C., Kobayashi, A. and Takatsuji, H.
(2004) The petunia ortholog of Arabidopsis SUPERMAN plays a distinct
role in floral organ morphogenesis.
Plant Cell 16, 920–932.
Park, S.O., Hwang, S. and Hauser, B.A.
(2004) The phenotype of Arabidopsis
ovule mutants mimics the morphology
of primitive seed plants. Proceedings
of the Royal Society London. Series
B Biological Sciences 271, 311–316.
Pelaz, S., Ditta, G.S., Baumann, E.,
Wisman, E. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2000)
B and C floral organ identity functions
require SEPALLATA MADS-box
genes. Nature 405, 200–203.
Pinyopich, A., Ditta, G.S., Savidge, B.,
Liljegren, S.J., Baumann, E., Wisman,
E. and Yanofsky, M.F. (2003) Assessing the redundancy of MADS-box
genes during carpel and ovule development. Nature 424, 85–88.
Purugganan, M.D. (1997) The MADS-box
floral homeotic gene lineages predate
the origin of seed plants: phylogenetic
and molecular clock estimates. Journal
of Molecular Evolution 45, 392–396.
Purugganan, M.D., Rounsley, S.D.,
Schmidt, R.J. and Yanofsky, M.F.
(1995) Molecular evolution of flower
development: diversification of the

351
plant MADS-box regulatory gene family. Genetics 140, 345–356.
Ray, A., Robinson-Beers, K., Ray, S.,
Baker, S.C., Lang, J.D., Preuss, D.,
Milligan, S.B. and Gasser, C.S.
(1994) Arabidopsis floral homeotic
gene BELL (BEL1) controls ovule development through negative regulation
of AGAMOUS gene (AG). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 91, 5761–5765.
Ray, A., Lang, J.D., Golden, T. and Ray,
S. (1996a) SHORT INTEGUMENT
(SIN1), a gene required for ovule development in Arabidopsis, also controls
flowering time. Development 122,
2631–2638.
Ray, S., Golden, T. and Ray, A. (1996b)
Maternal effects of the short integument mutation on embryo development in Arabidopsis. Developmental
Biology 180, 365–369.
Reiser, L., Modrusan, Z., Margossian, L.,
Samach, A., Ohad, N., Haughn, G.W.
and Fischer, R.L. (1995) The BELL1
gene encodes a homeodomain protein
involved in pattern formation in the
Arabidopsis ovule primordium. Cell
83, 735–742.
Robinson-Beers, K., Pruitt, R.E. and Gasser, C.S. (1992) Ovule development in
wild-type Arabidopsis and two femalesterile mutants. Plant Cell 4, 1237–
1249.
Roe, J.L., Rivin, C.J., Sessions, R.A.,
Feldmann, K.A. and Zambryski, P.C.
(1993) The TOUSLED gene in Arabidopsis thaliana encodes a protein
kinase homolog that is required for
leaf and flower development. Cell 75,
939–950.
Roe, J.L., Durfee, T., Zupan, J.R.,
Repetti, P.P., McLean, B.G. and Zambryski, P.C. (1997a) TOUSLED is a
nuclear serine-threonine protein kinase
that requires a coiled-coil region for
oligomerization and catalytic activity.
Journal of Biological Chemistry
272, 5838–5845.
Roe, J.L., Nemhauser, J.L. and
Zambryski, P.C. (1997b) TOUSLED

352

J. Broadhvest and B.A. Hauser
participates in apical tissue formation
during gynoecium development in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 9, 335–353.
Rounsley, S.D., Ditta, G.S. and Yanofsky,
M.F. (1995) Diverse roles for MADSbox genes in Arabidopsis development. Plant Cell 7, 1259–1269.
Sakai, H., Medrano, L.J. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1995) Role of SUPERMAN in maintaining Arabidopsis
floral whorl boundaries. Nature 378,
199–203.
Schiefthaler, U., Balasubramanian, S.,
Sieber, P., Chevalier, D., Wisman, E.
and Schneitz, K. (1999) Molecular analysis of NOZZLE, a gene involved in
pattern formation and early sporogenesis during sex organ development in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences
USA 96, 11664–11669.
Schneitz, K. (1999) The molecular and
genetic control of ovule development.
Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2,
13–17.
Schneitz, K., Hulskamp, M., Kopczak,
S.D. and Pruitt, R.E. (1997) Dissection of sexual organ ontogenesis: a
genetic analysis of ovule development
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 124, 1367–1376.
Schneitz, K., Baker, S.C., Gasser, C.S.
and Redweik, A. (1998a) Pattern formation and growth during floral organogenesis:
HUELLENLOS
and
AINTEGUMENTA are required for
the formation of the proximal region
of the ovule primordium in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 125,
2555–2563.
Schneitz, K., Balasubramanian, S. and
Schiefthaler, U. (1998b) Organogenesis in plants: the molecular and genetic control of ovule development.
Trends in Plant Science 3, 468–472.
Sieber, P., Petrascheck, M., Barberis, A.
and Schneitz, K. (2004) Organ polarity in Arabidopsis: NOZZLE physically interacts with members of the
YABBY family. Plant Physiology
135, 2172–2185.

Siegfried, K.R., Eshed, Y., Baum, S.F.,
Otsuga, D., Drews, D.N. and Bowman,
J.L. (1999) Members of the YABBY
gene family specify abaxial cell fate in
Arabidopsis. Development 126,
4117–4128.
Skinner, D.J., Baker, S.C., Meister, R.J.,
Broadhvest, J., Schneitz, K. and
Gasser, C.S. (2001) The Arabidopsis
HUELLENLOS gene, which is essential for normal ovule development, encodes a mitochondrial ribosomal
protein. Plant Cell 13, 2719–2730.
Song, J.-L., Leung, T., Ehler, L.K., Wang,
C. and Liu, Z. (2000) Regulation of
meristem organization and cell division
by TSO1, an Arabidopsis gene with
cysteine-rich repeats. Development
127, 2207–2217.
Stewart, W.N. (1983) Paleobotany and
the Evolution of Plants. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Takada, S., Hibara, K., Ishida, T.
and Tasaka, M. (2001) The CUPSHAPED COTYLEDON1 gene of
Arabidopsis regulates shoot apical
meristem formation. Development
128, 1127–1135.
Tanaka, H., Watanabe, M., Watanabe,
D., Tanaka, T., Machida, C. and
Machida, Y. (2002) ACR4, a putative
receptor kinase gene of Arabidopsis
thaliana, that is expressed in the outer
cell layers of embryos and plants, is involved in proper embryogenesis. Plant
Cell Physiology 43, 419–428.
Vandenbussche, M., Zethof, J., Souer, E.,
Koes, R., Tornielli, G.B., Pezzotti, M.,
Ferrario, S., Angenent, G.C. and Gerats,
T. (2003) Toward the analysis of the petunia MADS-box gene family by reverse
and forward transposon insertion mutagenesis approaches: B, C, and D floral
organ identity functions require SEPALLATA-like MADS-box genes in petunia.
Plant Cell 15, 2680–2693.
Villanueva, J.M., Broadhvest, J., Hauser,
B.A., Meister, R.J., Schneitz, K. and
Gasser, C.S. (1999) INNER NO
OUTER regulates abaxial–adaxial
patterning in Arabidopsis ovules.

Genes Regulating Ovule Development
Genes & Development 13, 3160–
3169.
Vroemen, C.W., Mordhorst, A.P.,
Albrecht, C., Kwaaitaal, M.A. and de
Vries, S.C. (2003) The CUP-SHAPED
COTYLEDON3 gene is required for
boundary and shoot meristem formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 15,
1563–1577.
Wagner, D. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (2002)
SPLAYED, a novel SWI/SNF ATPase
homolog, controls reproductive development in Arabidopsis. Current Biology 12, 85–94.
Western, T.L. and Haughn, G.W.
(1999) BELL1 and AGAMOUS
genes promote ovule identity in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal
18, 329–336.

353
Worsdell, W.C. (1904) The structure and
morphology of the ovule: an historical
sketch. Annals of Botany 18, 57–86.
Yamaki, S. and Nagato, Y. (2002) OVULELESS gene regulates the initial step
of ovule development in rice. Rice
Genetics Newsletter 19, 33–35.
Yang, C.-D., Ye, D., Xu, J. and Sundaresan, V. (1999) The SPOROCYTELESS gene of Arabidopsis is required
for initiation of sporogenesis and encodes a novel nuclear protein. Genes
& Development 13, 2108–2117.
Yu, H. and Goh, C.J. (2001) Molecular genetics of reproductive biology in orchids.
Plant Physiology 127, 1390–1393.
Zimmerman, W. (1952) Main results of
the ‘Telome theory’. The Palaeobotanist 1, 456–470.

13

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

R.A. BICKNELL AND A.S. CATANACH
New Zealand Institute for Crop & Food Research Ltd, Private Bag 4704,
Christchurch, New Zealand

Introduction
Apomixis is the subject of a number of recent reviews. Some authors have
focused on the potential agronomic and economic benefits of apomixis
(Hanna, 1995; Savidan, 2000a,b). Others have discussed the developmental
and genetic basis of apomixis (Koltunow et al., 1995a; Grimanelli et al.,
2001a; Koltunow and Grossniklaus, 2003; Bicknell and Koltunow, 2004) or
reviewed current theory regarding the evolutionary and ecological implications
of the trait (Van Dijk and Van Damme, 2000; Van Dijk, 2003). This chapter
provides a general overview of the field of apomixis research, with an emphasis
on our current understanding of the genetic mechanism(s) that underlie its
expression in flowering plants, and a sketch of the strategies being taken to
introduce this characteristic into crop species.

What is apomixis and where is it found?
Apomixis is the asexual formation of seeds, avoiding the processes of meiotic
reduction and recombination at fertilization, and leading to the formation of
genetically uniform progeny. The term ‘apomixis’ was first coined by Winkler
(1908) to describe ‘substitution of sexual reproduction by an asexual multiplication process without nucleus or cell fusion’. This is a broad definition that can
be interpreted to include all forms of asexual reproduction. Many of the earlier
reported references to apomixis use the term in this manner, and this has
unfortunately led to some confusion. It is now generally accepted that the
definition of apomixis be restricted to the formation of seeds by an asexual
process, a definition analogous to the term ‘agamospermous’ (Richards, 1997).
The first description of apomixis in plants is attributed to Smith (1841), who
noted that a single plant of Alchornea ilicifolia (syn Caelebogyne ilicifolia)
354

ßCAB International 2006. The Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Flowering,
2nd edn (ed. B.R. Jordan)

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

355

from Australia set abundant levels of germinable seed at Kew gardens, UK. This
species is dioecious and the individual involved had a morphology typical of the
female form, which produces no pollen. Smith surmised, therefore, that this
plant was able to form seed by a process analogous to parthenogenesis, which
had been known in animals such as aphids since the reported observations of
Bonnet (1745). Since Smith’s original observation, more than 400 flowering
plant taxa have been reported to feature apomictic forms, including species of
both monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous genera (Carman, 1997). This is
almost certainly a significant underestimate of the prevalence of the trait. To
conclusively prove the presence of apomixis it is necessary to conduct a
combination of genetic and cytological analyses (Nogler, 1984a), yet very few
plants have been adequately examined at this level. In addition, most, if not all
apomicts are also capable of some level of sexual reproduction. This ‘facultativeness’ can mask the presence of the trait, particularly when it is expressed
only at a low level. It seems, therefore, that as our understanding of apomixis
increases and our ability to discern and detect it improves many new
apomicts will be discovered and some plants that were originally described
as apomicts may need to be reclassified.
The distribution of the trait indicates a polyphyletic pattern of origin.
Apomixis occurs widely throughout the angiosperms. It is particularly prevalent
in Poaceae (a monocotyledonous family) and the Asteraceae (a dicotyledonous
family), both of which are regarded as evolutionarily advanced, yet it appears to
be either absent or very uncommon in more basal groups such as the Nymphaceae and the Winteraceae. In addition, the diversity of mechanisms of
apomixis (see below) indicates that it has arisen many times. In most cases
apomicts within a single genus utilize a similar mechanism to produce asexual
seed. However, members of closely related genera can often differ widely in the
mechanism they employ.
As mentioned above, asexual reproduction in animals has been known
since the time of Bonnet (1745), who noted its occurrence amongst aphids. It is
now known to occur in a range of animal groups, being particularly prevalent
amongst molluscs, lumbricid and planarian worms, arthropods, rotifers and
insects. It is also known to occur in some vertebrates, most notably species of
reptiles and amphibians (Suomalainen et al., 1987). Amongst the lower green
plants forms of asexual reproduction are relatively common. There is some
debate about the use of the term apomixis in these cases as the structures
present are different from those of higher plants, although they are often
regarded as analogous. Amongst ferns in particular, there are developmental
mechanisms that show clear similarities with some of the different modes of
apomixis known to occur in higher plants (Asker and Jerling, 1992). Curiously,
apomixis is presently unknown amongst the gymnosperms. However,
androgenesis or ‘paternal apomixis’ has recently been reported in the rare
Mediterranean cypress tree Cupressus dupreziana, where embryos develop
parthenogenetically from diploid pollen nourished by maternal reproductive
tissues (El Maataoui and Pichot, 2001; Pichot et al., 2001).
The widespread distribution of apomixis amongst flowering plants, its
apparent polyphyletic origins and the occurrence of analogous phenomena

356

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

in other organisms has led to the proposition that it has arisen de novo many
times from the modification of conserved functions, common to a wide variety
of multicellular organisms. Specifically, the functions of meiosis, egg cell specification and zygote specification appear to be involved in this transition.
Recently, molecular evidence has emerged to support this hypothesis. This is
discussed below.
Before proceeding further, a brief comment regarding the taxonomy of
apomicts is necessary. As indicated above, apomicts are typically classified by
genus and species in a manner similar to other flowering plants. The Linnaean
binomial classification system, however, is poorly suited to these plants, where
asexual increase frequently leads to the formation and maintenance of numerous morphologically distinct, yet interfertile varieties growing true-to-type from
seed. The taxonomy of such ‘agamic complexes’ is a difficult and contentious
task (Dickinson, 1998; Horandl, 1998). Examples of genera in which the
apomictic mode of reproduction is strongly combined with morphological
polymorphism include: Alchemilla, Hieracium, Poa, Potentilla, Ranunculus,
Rubus and Taraxacum (Czapik, 1994).

Apomixis in agriculture
Apomixis leads to the formation of large genetically uniform populations and
perpetuates hybrid vigour through successive seed generations. It could therefore be used in agriculture to perpetuate elite hybrid cultivars indefinitely
through seed. In some cases apomixis can proceed without pollination, indicating that it may be possible to use it to avoid some current complications
associated with sexual reproduction such as pollinator availability and cross
compatibility. Finally, as viruses are very seldom transmitted by seed, apomixis
may overcome viral transfer in plants that are typically propagated vegetatively
such as potatoes (Hanna, 1995; Jefferson and Bicknell, 1995; Koltunow et al.,
1995a; Savidan, 2000a,b). The value of these opportunities will vary between
crops and between production systems. For farmers in the developed world the
greatest benefit is expected to be the economic production of new, advanced,
high-yielding cultivars for use in mechanized agricultural systems. Conversely,
for farmers in the developing world the greatest benefits are expected to relate
to the breeding of robust, high-yielding cultivars for specific environments,
improvements in the security of food supply and greater autonomy over cultivar
ownership (Bicknell and Bicknell, 1999; Toenniessen, 2001).
Apomixis, however, is very uncommon among crop species. The main
exceptions appear to be tropical and subtropical fruit trees, such as mango,
mangosteen and Citrus, and tropical forage grasses such as Panicum, Brachiaria, Dichanthium and Pennisetum. There are also few apomictic species
of significant relatedness available for use in introgression programmes, which
may explain at least some of the difficulties experienced when attempts have been
made to introduce apomixis into crops though hybridization. For example, major
programmes aimed at introducing apomixis into maize (Zea mays) (Sokolov
et al., 1998; Savidan, 2000a, 2001) from the wild relative Tripsacum

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

357

dactyloides have been underway now for decades, yet unfortunately have
proven unsuccessful in terms of generating apomictic plants with agronomically
acceptable levels of seed set. Difficulties have also been encountered in efforts to
produce apomictic lines of hybrid millet (Morgan et al., 1998; Savidan, 2001).

Biogeographical and ecological considerations
Although apomixis appears to be widespread amongst angiosperms, it is not
evenly distributed. Several authors have noted a marked bias in the distribution
of apomixis (Asker and Jerling, 1992; Mogie, 1992; Carman, 1997; Richards,
1997). Of the plants known to utilize gametophytic apomixis, 75% belong to
three families, the Asteraceae, Rosaceae and Poaceae, which collectively
comprise only 10% of flowering plant species (Richards, 1997). Conversely,
while apomixis is known among the Orchidaceae, the largest flowering plant
family, it appears to be uncommon among these plants. Some authors have,
therefore, postulated that the current patterns of distribution of apomicts may
reflect the predisposition of certain plant groups to the unique developmental
and genetic changes that characterize apomixis (Grimanelli et al., 2001a;
Sharbel and Mitchell-Olds, 2001). Possible predisposing characteristics may
include cytological features like the presence of a nutritive nucellus in Citrus
(Koltunow et al., 1995b) and a nutritive integument in Hieracium (Koltunow
et al., 1998) and Taraxacum (Cooper and Brink, 1949), or they may be
genetic such as an apparent linkage grouping in Tripsacum necessary for the
interspecific transfer of the trait (Savidan, 2001).
Apomicts are often reported to predominate at higher latitudes (Stebbins,
1950, 1971; Richards, 1997). This appears to be largely due to a greater
tolerance amongst apomicts to these environments as many of the apomicts
known from Northern Europe also occur further south. Furthermore, while
apomicts were found to make up a higher percentage of the Northern
Scandinavian flora than in more southern sites, the absolute number of apomicts was greater in the warmer southern regions. This difference reflects the
greater diversity of the southern flora, which includes many more sexual
species (Asker and Jerling, 1992). There are several reports of apomicts
existing over a much greater range than their sexual counterparts, such as for
Rubrus in Europe (Gustafsson, 1943), Crepis in North America (Babcock and
Stebbins, 1938) and Dichanthium in India and Africa (De Wet, 1968), often
with the sexual form occupying a central region of the geographical range of
the apomict. Similar observations have also been made for some parthenogenetic animal species (Suomalainen et al., 1987). Some examples, however,
have also been reported of the opposite pattern, with an apomict displaying
a restricted geographical distribution while the related sexual species is more
widespread. In the genus Antennaria, the sexual species Antennaria dioica is
widespread while the apomictic forms are restricted to some Scandinavian
mountains (Porsild, 1965).
There is evidence that apomicts often either originated in glacial refugia
and/or were able to radiate from those regions more rapidly than related

358

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

sexuals once deglaciation began (Asker and Jerling, 1992). It has been proposed that apomicts may act as better colonizers than their sexual counterparts
as they are more able to successfully colonize remote sites with single individuals (Stebbins, 1950, 1971). In the case of autonomous apomicts (see below) in
particular, founding individuals are unconstrained by the need for crosspollination. In addition, they are less likely to suffer from genetic bottlenecks
following the founder event. Carman (1997, 2001) proposed that the noted
association between the radiation of apomicts and glacial refuges results from
the formation of agamic complexes within refuges during glacial periods.
Apomicts in nature often appear to have a hybrid origin (Ernst, 1918;
Gustafsson, 1947a,b; Nygren, 1948), a feature that may provide them with
fitness advantages in some habitats. Carman (1997, 2001), however,
proposed that hybridity itself is the cause of apomixis because it leads to the
formation of unique developmental gene regulatory cascades.
As implied above, apomicts are often among the early colonizers of disturbed habitats, a characteristic that may explain why many are regarded as
aggressive agricultural and amenity weeds around the world. Such weedy
species include members of the genera Taraxacum (the common dandelion),
Hieracium (hawkweed), Rubus (bramble), Cortaderia (pampas grass),
Chondrilla (skeleton weed), Opuntia (prickly pear) and Erigeron (fleabane).
Apomicts are almost invariably perennials. They are also typically polyploid (discussed below), which is strongly correlated with perenniality across all
flowering plants (Müntzing, 1936; Levin, 1983). Both woody and herbaceous
apomicts are known. However, herbaceous types appear to be more common
amongst the plants exhibiting gametophytic apomixis (see below), whilst sporophytic apomixis is common amongst trees of tropical origin. It is also common
for apomicts to be capable of other forms of asexual increase, such as through
stolon proliferation (Hieracium, Poa, Hypericum), bulb division (Allium,
Zephyranthes) or rhizomes (Rubus).
There is a clear association between the expression of apomixis and the
operation of mechanisms that limit self-fertilization (autogamy). In many cases
apomicts are closely related to sexual species that display either physiological or
morphological mechanisms limiting autogamy. In Limonium, sexual forms
exist in heteromorphic populations with a mixture of plants displaying papillateor cob-type floral stigma (Baker, 1966). Papillate plants produce pollen grains
that can germinate only on a cob-type stigma, while the pollen of cob plants will
germinate only on a papillate stigma. This mechanism drives outcrossing (allogamy), and also promotes the maintenance of similar frequencies of the two
types in a sexual population. Conversely, most apomictic species of Limonium
are known to occur only in a single form. This characteristic has been used as a
diagnostic measure of apomixis in this group (Palacios et al., 2000). Similarly,
many apomicts are closely related to sexual species that have male and female
floral forms (dioecy) such as Antennaria (O’Connell and Eckert, 1999), Cortaderia (Philipson, 1978) and Coprosma (Heenan et al., 2002). In dioecious
species the sex ratio is again driven to approximately 50% in completely sexual
populations. The related apomicts, however, demonstrate sex ratios significantly biased towards the formation of female plants (Heenan et al., 2002). In

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

359

cases such as those described above, the extent of bias towards a single mating
type is governed not only by the prevalence of apomixis in the population but
also by the level of facultative expression within individuals and by the need in
many apomicts for the fertilization of polar nuclei to form an endosperm tissue
(see below). Finally, even amongst hermaphroditic species, physiological mechanisms of self-incompatibility are often associated with apomixis. For example,
such a mechanism is reported for sexual forms of Hieracium (Gadella, 1984,
1991; Krahulcova et al., 1999), and has recently been demonstrated to be
active amongst the apomictic forms of this plant as well (Bicknell et al., 2003).

The Mechanisms of Apomixis
Apomixis is defined at a functional level as the formation of genetically identical
seeds without meiosis or fertilization. Although this outcome is the same across
the known apomictic species, many different mechanisms for achieving it have
been identified. This diversity is likely to have arisen partly from differences in
the floral biology and the life histories of the species involved and partly it may
reflect a polyphyletic origin for the trait. To provide a framework for describing
apomixis at the cellular level, known mechanisms have been divided into
groupings based on the tissue that gives rise to the asexually derived embryo
and the origin of the supporting endosperm tissue (See Fig. 13.1, also Nogler,
1984a; Koltunow, 1993; Crane, 2001).
Two main mechanisms are recognized: (i) ‘sporophytic apomixis’, in which
the asexually derived embryo arises directly from a non-gametophytic cell of the
ovule; and (ii) ‘gametophytic apomixis’, where the asexually derived embryo
arises from a gametophytic cell. In gametophytic apomicts an embryo sac
(megagametophyte) forms, which is unreduced. All of the cells within it, therefore, have the somatic chromosome complement. Gametophytic apomixis
is then typically further subdivided on the basis of the cell, giving rise to
this unreduced embryo sac. In ‘diplosporous’ types an unreduced embryo sac
forms from the differentiation of a megaspore mother cell (MMC), following
either the complete avoidance of meiosis (Antennaria type) or a dysfunctional
form of meiosis that leads to a restitution product (Taraxacum and Ixeris
types). In ‘aposporous’ types, the MMC or its derivatives degrade and a cell
nearby initiates the development of an embryo sac. The further subdivision of
the mechanisms of gametophytic apomixis is based on the steps of meiosis that
are observed, the cells that contribute to the embryo sac and the final form of
that organ (Crane, 2001).
For most flowering plants the formation of an endosperm tissue is necessary to ensure the complete development of the embryo. Apomicts are no
exception to this requirement. The formation of a functional endosperm,
however, involves different constraints to the formation of a clonal embryo.
In angiosperms, ordinarily the embryo is diploid while the endosperm tissue is
triploid. This ‘2:3’ ratio is known to be critical for the survival of the developing
seed in many species. In maize a 2:3 ratio is an absolute requirement (Lin,
1984) for the survival of the developing embryo, while in Arabidopsis it

360

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

Sexual reproduction
n

n
2n

Sporophytic apomixis
n

2n
n

2n

Diplospory
2n

2n

2n

Apospory

2n

2n
n

2n
n

Fig. 13.1. Sexual reproduction proceeds through meiosis, megaspore selection and
gametogenesis to form a reduced embryo sac. Double fertilization leads to the formation of an
n þ n zygote and a 2n þ n endosperm. In sporophytic apomixis the sexual process remains intact.
Typically, near the end of gametogenesis one or more embryos (or ‘embryoids’) form from
somatic cells of the ovule. Their further development is reliant on the formation of a 2n þ n
endosperm arising from the meiotically derived embryo sac. Sporophytic apomicts are, therefore,
always pseudogamous. In diplosporous apomicts, meiosis is either avoided entirely or is
restitutional. A single unreduced cell remains, which then undergoes gametogenesis to form an
unreduced embryo sac. The egg within that structure spontaneously divides (parthenogenesis),
initiating the pathway of embryogenesis. The endosperm may either form following fertilization
of the polar nuclei (pseudogamy) or it may arise spontaneously (autonomous apomixis). Apospory
differs from diplospory in the origin of the initial cell, giving rise to the unreduced embryo sac. In
aposporic apomicts a separate cell of the nucellus, typically adjacent to the meiotic apparatus,
undergoes gametogenesis. This can lead to the formation of both a reduced and an unreduced
embryo sac within the same ovule as pictured. Most frequently, however, one structure
predominates and the other degenerates. Aposporic apomicts may also form an endosperm by
either a pseudogamous or an autonomous process. The nuclear state of the principal structures is
marked.

strongly favours development but is not an absolute necessity for the survival of
the embryo (Scott et al., 1998). The reason for this requirement appears to
relate to the role of differential genomic imprinting on the maternal and
paternal contributions to the embryo and endosperm tissues (discussed
below). In apomicts the embryo-to-endosperm ploidy ratio can differ depending
on the mechanism of apomixis employed. In the case of sporophytic apomicts, asexually derived embryo(s) form within the somatic tissues of the

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

361

ovule, typically alongside a sexually derived structure. An endosperm then
forms as part of the sexual process and it is this structure that nourishes the
somatic embryos. As the endosperm is derived from the fertilization of two
reduced polar nuclei, this results in the typical 2:3 ploidy ratio and therefore
normal development. In gametophytic apomicts several different mechanisms
of endosperm formation are known. In all cases the asexually derived embryo
sac is unreduced so that the egg and polar nuclei it contains all have the somatic
chromosome complement. In some species differences in the development of
the embryo sac allow the 2:3 embryo/endosperm ploidy ratio to be achieved.
Panicum is a grass genus, the apomicts of which form a unique embryo sac
with only four cells, one of which acts as an egg while the central cell has only
one polar nucleus. The fertilization of that unreduced polar nucleus (and the
avoidance of egg cell fertilization) leads to the typical 2:3 embryo/endosperm
ratio. In Dichanthium annulatum the two sperm nuclei fuse with different
unfused polar nuclei, again establishing a 3n endosperm about the 2n parthenogenetic embryo (Reddy and D’Cruz, 1969). Finally, in many apomictic
plants the typical 2:3 embryo/endosperm ploidy balance requirement is relaxed (see Matzk et al., 2000). In the apomict Poa pratensis two unreduced
polar nuclei fuse with a sperm nucleus resulting in an embryo/endosperm
ploidy ratio of 5:2 (see Matzk et al., 2001), while in Taraxacum two unreduced
polar nuclei fuse but are not fertilized. The endosperm that develops in Taraxacum is therefore 4n and the embryo/endosperm ratio is 2:4. As fertilization
is neither required for the formation of an embryo nor an endosperm, Taraxacum is considered to be an example of an ‘autonomous apomict’. Plants such
as Panicum maximum and Citrus, which do require fertilization to form an
endosperm yet produce an embryo asexually, are referred to as ‘pseudogamous apomicts’.

Apomixis is a facultative process
As indicated above, apomixis almost always exists in parallel with sexual
reproduction. The first discussion of the ‘facultative’ nature of apomixis appears to have been made by Rosenberg (1906, 1907), who noted the coexistence of meiotic and ameiotic structures in the ovules of Hieracium. Together
with Ostenfeld (1904, 1906, 1910) they correctly surmised that this resulted in
the formation of both sexually and asexually derived progeny. Intriguingly, the
material studied by Rosenberg and Ostenfeld was similar to that already studied
extensively by Mendel (1869). Although Mendel did not attribute the segregation patterns he observed in these plants to asexual reproduction, he did note
that, in contrast to his observations in pea, the Hieracium F1 hybrids showed
extensive segregation while the F2 ‘hybrids’ did not segregate and uniform
progeny were consistently obtained. In correspondence with Nägeli, a Hieracium specialist (July, 1870), he noted the ‘almost opposed behaviour’ in the
two systems ‘both (of which represented) the emanation of a higher universal
law’, an indication that he was aware that this material had unique attributes
(reviewed by Correns, 1905; Nogler, 1994).

362

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

In sporophytic apomicts it is essential that the sexual pathway of seed
development remains intact as this is the sole source of endosperm tissue. In
most cases it appears that only two types of progeny form in these plants: (i)
those arising from the fertilization of a reduced egg (sexually derived progeny);
and (ii) those arising from a somatic embryo (asexually derived progeny). In
Citrus the relative levels of these two types vary from species that are regarded
as essentially obligate sexuals to plants such as grapefruit that reproduce
primarily by apomixis. There are, however, some indications that unreduced
embryo sacs occasionally form in this material and that this leads to the
production of progeny with different ploidy levels through the mediation of
unreduced gametes (Naumova et al., 1992).
In gametophytic apomicts several different types of progeny are commonly
reported. In these plants egg cells may form either from a reduced megaspore
following meiosis or they may form within an unreduced embryo sac following
either meiotic restitution (diplospory) or somatic cell gametogenesis (apospory).
Gametophytic apomicts are also capable of developing an embryo directly from
an egg cell (parthenogenesis). In most plants, however, it is also possible for
fertilization to occur if a compatible sperm cell is available at the right time to
effect syngamy. There are, therefore, two possible ploidy states for the egg cells
of these plants and two states for the role of fertilization. In combination, four
possible progeny types may result: (i) the fertilization of a reduced egg (sexual
reproduction or ‘n þ n hybridization’); (ii) the fertilization of an unreduced
egg (2n þ n hybridization); (iii) the parthenogenetic development of a reduced
egg (‘polyhaploidy’ or ‘n þ 0 progeny’); or (iv) the parthenogenetic development of an unreduced egg (apomixis or ‘2n þ 0 progeny’).
The detection and measurement of apomixis
In most cases apomixis has been detected through the formation of ‘maternal’
progeny, which appears to be morphologically identical to the mother parent.
This is a notoriously inaccurate approach for assessing genetic variation and,
therefore, for inferring the action of a particular breeding system. Several
mechanisms can give rise to apparently identical progeny, most commonly
though self-fertilization. Conversely, the form of some plants, such as the
apomicts of Taraxacum officinale (De Kovel and De Jong, 1999), are sufficiently plastic in different environments to tempt the conclusion of genetic
variation, despite the clonal nature of these populations.
The extent of facultativeness in the expression of apomixis also has an
important bearing on the interpretation of inheritance studies and on extrapolations regarding the ecological and evolutionary impact of the trait. The most
cited classical example of this is the statement by Darlington (1939) expressing
that ‘with the loss of sexual recombination the apomict, like the permanent
hybrid, is cut off from ultimate survival. Apomixis is an escape from sterility, but
it is an escape into a blind alley of evolution’. Similar comments were later
expressed by Stebbins (1950). In these cases apomixis was being treated as a
qualitative trait that was mutually exclusive of sexuality. This is now known to

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

363

seldom occur. Ironically, the near universal observation that apomixis is expressed facultatively has led to a very different prediction. Several authors have
recently suggested that even a low level of asexual reproduction can lead to the
loss of sexual reproduction in a population, as apomixis leads to a greater
investment in the replication of genotypes with predetermined fitness (Burt,
2000; Peck and Waxman, 2000).
Given these concerns there is a clear need to base any quantitative study of
apomixis on a reliable and sensitive method of detecting the trait. Several
methods have been developed, often tailored to a specific genus or mechanism
of apomixis. As mentioned above, morphological characters have been widely
used and remain useful in some systems. In dimorphic systems such as Antennaria (O’Connell and Eckert, 1999), Limonium (Baker, 1966), Coprosma
(Heenan et al., 2002) and Cortaderia (Philipson, 1978), apomixis is readily
detected by the predominance of a single form in a population when the
normal ratio of forms is expected to be closer to 1:1. In other plants cellular
characters are used as a diagnostic for apomixis. In Panicum and Pennisetum,
apomixis proceeds through the mediation of a four-celled embryo sac. Sexuals
in these plants form an eight-celled embryo sac so the prevalence of apomixis is
measured through the quantification of these different cyto-types (Leblanc and
Mazzucato, 2001). Similarly, in Hieracium and Taraxacum an asexually derived embryo will form without fertilization, often prior to the opening of the
flower. In these plants apomixis can be scored through the detection of that
structure after the avoidance of fertilization. In diplosporous grasses, such as
Elymus rectisetus and T. dactyloides, a callose cap is seen above the MMC
and the selected megaspore following meiosis, but not in association with
asexually derived structures. This observation forms the basis for a test used
to score the incidence of apomixis in many of these systems (Carman et al.,
1991; Leblanc and Mazzucato, 2001). It is important to realize that in all of
these cases apomixis is being measured through a correlative character rather
than directly. In the case of Panicum the frequency of four-celled embryo sacs
is a strong measure of apospory, but does not guarantee that the unreduced
egg will proceed to form an embryo by parthenogenesis. Similarly, the formation of embryos in Hieracium is a good indicator of parthenogenesis but does
not provide a measure of apospory.
Flow cytometry has been used to screen populations for signs of apomixis,
the most notable example of which is the work of Savidan and his colleagues
who screened tens of thousands of seedlings during a crossing programme
aimed at introgressing apomixis into maize (Savidan, 2000b, 2001). Recently
Matzk et al. (2000) reported a sensitive, yet flexible method for identifying
different classes of apomixis using flow cytometry to detect differences in the
embryo/endosperm ploidy ratio of seeds. A recent refinement to the technique
permits its use on single-seed samples (Matzk et al., 2001). Bicknell et al.
(2003) also reported a method based on the inheritance of selectable marker
loci that permits the rapid estimation of progeny-type frequencies, and the
recovery of rare classes from very large seedling populations at low cost.
Genomic mapping strategies, such as restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), AFLP and SSRs, are also being applied to the study of apomixis

364

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

(for a review see Grimanelli et al., 2001b). These techniques provide an insight
into the genetic variance of a population, a measure of inheritance from the
parent(s) and a tool for determining the chromosomal location of genetic
determinants controlling the trait. The unit cost of genetic testing is steadily
reducing, and the techniques are proving to be highly reliable in skilled hands. It
seems likely that some form of genetic testing will be a routine part of most
studies into apomixis in the near future.

The Genetic Control of Apomixis
Research into the genetic control of apomixis is progressing along two complementary lines of enquiry. In the first instance several groups are studying
factors that influence apomixis in a range of species that naturally express the
trait. A second line of enquiry is evaluating the control of sexual reproduction in
standard sexual models and using this information to ‘synthesize’ apomixis in
these plants. The two approaches are proving to be mutually supportive and
both are likely to contribute to our understanding for some time to come. For
simplicity, the two will be treated separately in this publication.

The genetic control of apomixis in native apomicts
Significant progress has recently been reported in the study of the genetic
control of apomixis in a number of species. For gametophytic apomicts most
reports indicate that apomixis is relatively simply acquired through the inheritance of either one or a small number of factors, most commonly as dominant
determinants. Amongst the aposporic grasses, a single dominant factor appears to be responsible for the inheritance of apomixis in Panicum (Savidan,
1981), Pennisetum (Sherwood et al., 1994) and Brachiaria (Valle et al.,
1994). A single dominant factor is also reported to be associated with the
inheritance of apospory in the dicotyledonous genus Ranunculus (Nogler,
1984b). In the diplosporous daisy genera Taraxacum (Van Dijk et al., 1999)
and Erigeron (Noyes, 2000; Noyes and Rieseberg, 2000), the component
processes of diplospory and parthenogenesis are separately inherited. We
have recently discovered a similar pattern of inheritance in the aposporous
daisy genus Hieracium (Bicknell, unpublished observation). Simple dominant
inheritance has also been reported for the diplosporous grasses Eragrostis
curvula (Voigt and Burson, 1983) and T. dactyloides (Leblanc et al., 1995).
There is evidence of segregation ratio distortion in some of these systems, often
because the dominant factor(s) associated with apomixis also appears to confer
gamete lethality, restricting its transfer to some gamete genotypes (Nogler,
1984b; Grimanelli et al., 1998a; Roche et al., 2001a; Jessup et al., 2002).
Much less information is available for sporophytic apomixis. Garcia et al.
(1999) reported the detection of six quantitative trait loci (QTLs) contributing
to the total variation associated with the expression of apomixis in a cross
between Poncirus trifoliata and Citrus volkameriana.

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

365

Even when the pattern of inheritance for apomixis appears to be simple,
care must be exercised when interpreting these findings. The choice of parental
material is particularly critical. Apomixis reduces the frequency of meiosis in the
ovule and also the availability of the egg cell for fertilization. Segregation during
female meiosis is, therefore, seldom measured in inheritance studies of apomicts. Fortunately, many apomicts produce adequate quantities of reduced
pollen and this has been demonstrated in many systems to transmit factors
associated with the trait. Most commonly, therefore, tests for the inheritance of
apomixis have used a sexual plant as the maternal parent and an apomict as the
pollen donor. The need to use a sexual plant of sufficient relatedness to an
apomict means great care must be taken to ensure that that plant does not have
any latent tendencies towards apomixis. Very often they do (see discussion by
Savidan, 2000b). Apomixis is a complex trait involving several developmental
processes. Progeny should, therefore, be assessed for all of the components of
the mechanism of apomixis under study. Correctly, this would involve an
embryological examination, together with tests of ploidy and a genomic profiling test (such as with AFLP) for each progeny plant (see Nogler, 1984a).
Unfortunately, very often progeny in inheritance studies have been assessed
either for apomixis as a whole or have been scored against only one component of apomixis (for a review see Bicknell, 2001; Leblanc and Mazzucato,
2001).

Why are gametophytic apomicts almost always polyploid?
Gametophytic apomicts are almost invariably polyploid and most commonly
tetraploid (Asker and Jerling, 1992). The reason for this association remains
unclear. It is, however, potentially a critical issue if apomixis is ever to be
introduced into diploid crop species. Several theories have been forwarded to
explain this association. These subdivide on the basis of cause and effect into
arguments proposing that polyploidy stimulates the development, penetrance
and maintenance of apomixis, and arguments proposing that apomixis stimulates the formation and proliferation of polyploids. Both positions may be true.
Although diploid apomicts are very rare in natural populations, they have
been reported following the experimental manipulation of several polyploid
apomicts (Bicknell, 1997; Kojima and Nagato, 1997; Naumova et al., 1999;
Koltunow, 2000). These findings indicate that polyploidy is not an absolute
requirement for the expression of apomixis. These results also proposed that
on almost every reported occasion the identified diploid apomict was weak and
most were also pollen sterile. It would appear, therefore, that while polyploidy
is probably not an absolute necessity for the expression of apomixis in most
systems, it may act to enhance the expression or promote the transmission of
the trait. Some indications of how this might operate come from yeast (Galitski
et al., 1999) and from Arabidopsis (Lee and Chen, 2001), where alterations in
ploidy status are known to affect methylation and the expression of different
alleles. There have also been reports of apomixis arising following the chromosome doubling of a sexual diploid plant. Nygren (1948) reported this finding in

366

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

Calamagrostis purpurea and Quarin et al. (2001) noted it in Paspalum
notatum. In both cases, however, the diploid sexual plant was a close relative
or a diploid form of a known apomict. It may, therefore, have been predisposed
to the expression of the trait. It also needs to be noted that a sexual plant has
been recovered following the chromosome doubling of an apomict (Asker,
1967). Finally, polyploidy has been induced in a large number of plants without
apomixis being noted in the products.
Many apomicts appear to have had a hybrid origin, and this in combination
with polyploidy is believed to have resulted in allopolyploidy in many gametophytic apomicts (Ellerstrom and Zagorcheva, 1977; Carman, 1997, 2001;
Roche et al., 2001b). There is also evidence, however, for tetrasomic inheritance in many systems, indicating the presence of autopolyploidy, or possibly
segmental allopolyploidy, in some apomicts (Pessino et al., 1999). Carman
(1997, 2001) postulated that a combination of hybridity and polyploidy can
lead to the disjunction of key regulatory events during critical stages of megasporogenesis, megagametogenesis and fertilization. This in turn may lead not
only to apomixis but also to other unusual developmental events such as
polyspory and polyembryony. Roche et al. (2001b) further suggested that
supernumerary chromatin may be the principal component in this process.
A hybrid origin, segmental allopolyploidy and the activity of reproductive
drivers are all reported characteristics of supernumerary chromatin biology
(McVean, 1995). There is growing evidence for the presence of supernumerary
chromatin in several apomictic species and it is clearly involved in the inheritance of apomixis in the grasses Pennisetum squamulatum and Cenchrus
ciliaris (Roche et al., 2001a,b and references therein). A possible hybrid origin
may also explain the apparent conundrum that apomixis seems to result from
the summation of several components, each of which on its own is expected to
confer a selective disadvantage to the plant (Mogie, 1992).
There is also evidence that apomixis promotes polyploidy. While apomixis
can function in a diploid plant, the activity of apomixis may promote the
formation of polyploids by reducing the fitness of diploid apomicts or of haploid
gametes transferring the trait. Apomicts reproduce asexually, avoiding the
activity of the meiotic sieve (Richards, 1997). As such, they can be expected
to suffer from progressive genetic degeneration through the accumulation of
random mutations, the proliferation of transposable elements and the activities
of viruses (Muller, 1964; Matzk et al., 2003). Polyploidy increases the number
of copies of each gene and effectively increases the tolerance of the genome to
the impacts of this degenerative process. As noted above, most gametophytic
apomicts form polyhaploid (n þ 0) progeny. This mechanism has been demonstrated to lead to the formation of diploid apomicts from tetraploid apomictic
parents in several species (Nogler, 1982; Bicknell, 1997; Kojima and Nagato,
1997). There is, therefore, a mechanism in most gametophytic apomicts to
form diploids, yet they do not typically survive under competition. The reason
for this, as mentioned above, is that these plants are invariably much weaker
than their polyploid, maternally derived cohorts, an apparent consequence
of a high genetic load inherited from their polyploid parent. Conversely,
most gametophytic apomicts are also capable of forming a small number of

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

367

unreduced hybrids (2n þ n) through the fertilization of an unreduced egg. In
this case the parent genome remains intact but is complemented with the
addition of new genomic material. We commonly observe significant hybrid
vigour in these plants, often making them more vigorous than their maternal
cohorts (Chapman and Bicknell, 2000). It, therefore, appears that apomixis
leads to the operation of mechanisms that generate progeny of greater or
lesser ploidy to the parent. However, selection favours the latter.
Nogler (1984b, 1986) noted that apomixis in the buttercup species Ranunculus auricomus could be inherited as a simple dominant trait; however,
the locus for apomixis could only be transferred using a polyploid gamete.
Haploid gametes were formed and proved functional, but the progeny were
always sexual. Nogler concluded that the determinant for apomixis in this
system was gamete lethal in the homozygous form. Similar results have been
reported for Tripsacum (Grimanelli et al., 1998a) and Pennisetum (Roche
et al., 2001a; Jessup et al., 2002). It is therefore argued that the restricted
transfer of apomixis to diploid or polyploid gametes will lead to the exclusive
formation of polyploid, apomictic progeny (Nogler, 1986). Furthermore, it is
not necessary for the actual alleles for apomixis to be gamete lethal to generate
this effect. Apomixis results in the asexual formation of progeny, which is
expected to lead to an accumulation in genetic load over successive asexual
cycles. Alleles conferring such a trait are, therefore, expected to become
associated with regions of high genetic load by linkage drag. This effect is
compensated for in the apomictic individual through the co-inheritance of
functional alleles, but during the formation and function of haploid gametes
linked recessive lethals associated with this region will be exposed and will
reduce gamete fitness (Bicknell et al., 2000; Matzk et al., 2003). One wellstudied example of this is a region associated with the inheritance of apomixis
in Pennisetum. The flanks of this ‘apospory-specific genomic region’ (ASGR)
are characterized by repeats of an Opie-2-like retrotransposon. Interestingly,
this transposon sequence is common throughout the genome of the related
species C. ciliaris, yet restricted to the ASGR of Pennisetum (Akiyama et al.,
2004).

The identification of ‘apomixis genes’
With the finding that gametophytic apomixis was often simply inherited, several groups are attempting to identify the sequences involved in a number of
plant species. As mentioned above, Ozias-Akins and colleagues (Ozias-Akins
et al., 1993, 1998; Roche et al., 2001a, 2002) noted in Pennisetum that the
inheritance of apospory was associated with the transfer of a genomic region
located near the telomere of a P. squamulatum chromosome (Goel et al.,
2003). This ASGR was found only in the apomict, no corresponding allele was
found in related sexual species. Furthermore, the ASGR was also found in the
related apomict C. ciliaris, again as a hemizygous region restricted to apomictic biotypes (Roche et al., 1999, 2001b). Together with the evidence of
transposon representation mentioned above, the authors note that the data

368

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

suggest that speciation of apomictic Pennisetum was preceded by a wide crossmediated introgression event of the ASGR-associated chromatin from another
species. A map-based cloning strategy is underway to identify the genes located
in the ASGR. Twelve molecular markers were found to always segregate with
the ASGR, of which eight were converted to SCARS and used to isolate
corresponding bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones (Roche et al.,
2002). Of these BAC clones, none have more than one marker and no two
of the BAC clones overlap, a result that indicates that ASGR is a region in
excess of 50 Mbp. It would appear, therefore, that the inheritance of apomixis
in this system is associated with the transfer of a large, non-recombinant
segment of a chromosome. In the diplosporous grass T. dactyloides, a similar
effort is underway. Again markers were reported in linkage with the region
associated with the inheritance of diplospory in this plant (Grimanelli et al.,
1998a; Blakey et al., 2001). Suppressed recombination is clearly also a feature
of this region, frustrating efforts to clone the critical genes involved in apomixis.
Estimates of the size of this region are less accurate than with Pennisetum but it
appears to be of a similar magnitude (D. Grimanelli, personal communication).
Paspalum, another grass genus, is also being studied. Apospory in this plant is
inherited as a simple dominant factor (Martinez et al., 2001). Grasses are
known for their high synteny. Pupilli et al. (2001) noted the co-inheritance of
five rice markers with apospory in Paspalum and are attempting to clone the
locus using these markers as probes. Again, non-recombination and hemizygosity were detected in association with the locus (Labombarda et al., 2002).
Interestingly, although all of the grasses mentioned above show considerable
synteny with the rice genome, in each case the region associated with the
inheritance of apomixis aligns with a different region of that genome
(Grimanelli et al., 2001a). Albertini et al. (2001a,b) also reported the isolation
of markers linked to apospory in Kentucky bluegrass (Poa pratensis) and
Pessino et al. (1997, 1998) noted similar findings for Brachiaria. Amongst
the eudicotyledonous systems under study, progress is being made towards the
mapping of ‘apomixis’ genes in the daisies Taraxacum (Van Dijk et al., 2003;
Vijverberg et al., 2004) and Erigeron (Noyes and Rieseberg, 2000). There is
some evidence for non-recombinant sector(s) associated with apomixis genes in
Erigeron, and gamete selection in Taraxacum, indicating that similar difficulties with cloning may also arise in these plants.
The nature of these large regions of suppressed recombination is poorly
understood. They may include several genes, collectively required for the
functioning of apomixis, as seen in the incompatibility locus of Brassica
(Fobis-Loisy et al., 2004) and/or they may contain large regions of repetitive
DNA as seen in the ASGR of Pennisetum (Akiyama et al., 2004). Retrotransposon accumulation in apomicts, with no counterbalancing of retrotransposon elimination via recombination during meiosis, is believed to be the
cause of a higher DNA content of evolutionarily older apomictic species of
Hypericum compared to their younger counterparts (Matzk et al., 2003).
While conventional linkage mapping is very difficult when the genetic determinants for apomixis are associated with a large non-recombinant region, it is
hoped that the common existence of the ASGR in several Pennisetum species

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

369

will allow genes associated with apomixis to be identified by comparing different ASGRs for conserved sequences (Roche et al., 2002).
Another related approach to identifying genes associated with apomixis is
based on mutagenesis, coupled to a method for identifying the mutated genes.
This approach has the advantage that it is not based on recombination and
therefore should not be influenced by the issues mentioned above. T. dactyloides is a close relative of maize. The two can be crossed and apomictic
hybrids selected from the progeny (Savidan, 1992, 2000a, 2001). Grimanelli
et al. (2001b) are using this feature to introduce the mutator transposon of
maize into this apomictic hybrid background. It is hoped that the transposon
will then disrupt genes associated with apomixis through insertional inactivation and provide a molecular ‘tag’ to assist the isolation of the sequences
involved. A similar ‘transposon tagging’ system was tried in the aposporous
daisy Hieracium, using an engineered heterologous transposon tagging
system based on the Ac/Ds elements of maize (Bicknell et al., 2001; Weld
et al., 2002). In this case the transposons were found to be active in the
apomict but their level of activity was too low to be of any practical value.
Deletion mutagenesis is also being tried in Hieracium (Bicknell et al., 2001).
From preliminary work it is clear that apomixis can be disrupted by genetic
deletion in these plants. Efforts are now underway to use deletion mutants
to identify region(s) associated with apomixis in these plants (R.A. Bicknell,
unpublished results).

The ‘Synthesis’ of Apomixis in Sexual Systems
As described above, apomixis can be considered as the sum of a number of
component parts, specifically the avoidance of meiosis (apomeiosis), the avoidance of fertilization (parthenogenesis), the spontaneous formation of the endosperm (in some cases) and the relaxation of the 2:3 embryo/endosperm ploidy
balance (in some cases). The discovery that these processes are under relatively
simple genetic control in many apomictic species, and the identification of
mutants in sexual species with functions similar to these components, led to
the conclusion that apomixis represents an altered form of sexuality rather than
a unique developmental programme (reviewed by Koltunow and Grossniklaus,
2003). Recent work by Tucker et al. (2003) demonstrating that similar gene
expression profiles are involved in sexual and apomictic development in Hieracium further supports this conclusion. This is not a new idea. Nogler (1984a)
expressed his belief that apomixis represented an ‘opening of the bonds’
linking megasporogenesis and embryo sac formation. Similarly, the views of
Ernst (1918) and later Carman (1997, 2001), that apomixis results from the
hybridization of sexual species due to the creation of unique combinations of
factors otherwise involved in sexual reproduction, reflect this position.
If apomixis is an altered form of sexuality, as appears to be the case, then
it seems reasonable to propose that it could be ‘synthesized’ by compiling
mutations and/or redirecting gene expression in a target sexual species. This
approach is discussed below with respect to the component processes.

370

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

The avoidance of meiosis
In the case of sporophytic apomixis, both the avoidance of meiosis and spontaneous embryogenesis are achieved through the direct formation of an embryo from the somatic tissue of the parent plant (see discussion below on
parthenogenesis). In gametophytic apomicts, a somatic cell of the ovule, normally a cell of the nucellus, enters gametogenesis without completing the
events of meiosis, resulting in the formation of an unreduced embryo sac.
Unreduced eggs are known to occur in many sexual flowering plant species
(reviewed by Harlan and De Wet, 1975; Veilleux, 1985). However, their
prevalence is much more pronounced in gametophytic apomicts. In maize
the prevalence of unreduced egg formation amongst inbred lines varied from
0% to 3.48% (Alexander and Beckett, 1963). Similarly, amongst diploid
species of Medicago the rate of unreduced egg usage was estimated at 0–9%
(Veronesi et al., 1988). In contrast, the rates of unreduced egg cell usage in the
apomicts Hieracium aurantiacum and Hieracium piloselloides were estimated at 97.4% and 97.1%, respectively (Bicknell et al., 2003). Amongst
sexual species the formation of unreduced egg cells typically occurs following
a dysfunction of meiosis, either at the first meiotic division (first division restitution, FDR) or second meiotic division (second division restitution, SDR). FDR
is similar to the events seen in some diplosporous apomicts such as Taraxacum
and Ixeris (Crane, 2001). If crossover is suppressed during the first meiotic
prophase the resulting cell is genetically equivalent to the maternal soma.
Interestingly, there is evidence that crossover does occur in some apomictic
species of Taraxacum, leading to autosegregation amongst the parthenogenetically derived progeny (Sörensen and Gudjonsson, 1946; Malecka, 1973).
Second division restitution results in genetic differences between the egg and
maternal tissues due to chromatid segregation during the first meiotic division.
It is not known amongst native apomicts and is not generally regarded as being
useful in the possible synthesis of apomixis. There is clear evidence that the
frequency of unreduced egg cell formation in sexual species is genetically
controlled with both major and minor gene effects implicated in different
species (reviewed by Veilleux, 1985). The rate of reduced gamete formation
can also be influenced through selection, indicating that it is a heritable trait
(Calderini and Mariani, 1997; Lamote et al., 2002). One of the best studied
examples is the elongate gene of maize, the mutation of which leads to a single
meiotic division that is neither completely typical of FDR nor SDR (Rhoades
and Dempsey, 1966; Nel, 1975). Other maize mutants are known to influence
the entrance of the MMC into meiosis and the completion of the first meiotic
division. In ameiotic 1 (amc1) mutants meiosis is replaced by developmental
arrest or by one-to-many mitotic divisions (Palmer, 1971; Golubovskaya et al.,
1992, 1993, 1997). In the absence of first division (afd) mutants the first
division of meiosis is replaced by a mitotic division (Golubovskaya, 1979), an
outcome similar to the mechanism of diplospory seen in Taraxacum and Ixeris
(Grossniklaus, 2001).
In the Arabidopsis dyad mutant, a dyad of unreduced megaspores forms
rather than a tetrad of reduced cells (Siddiqi et al., 2000). Unfortunately this

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

371

mutant is also female sterile. The mutation of AtDMC1 also influences meiosis
in Arabidopsis by disrupting the formation and/or stabilization of bivalents,
and reducing the possibility of crossover (Klimyuk and Jones, 1997; Doutriaux
et al., 1998; Couteau et al., 1999).

Autonomous embryo formation (parthenogenesis)
As outlined above, parthenogenesis is an essential component of all natural
apomictic systems, both sporophytic and gametophytic, and it will be equally
essential in any synthetic approach. Egg cell activation is well studied in animal
systems (reviewed by Nuccitelli, 1991; Whitacker and Swann, 1993; Jaffe,
1996), providing the basis of many recent discoveries in plants. Advances in
the isolation and use of functional flowering plant gametes have also been an
important factor in improving our understanding of this fundamental process in
plants (Faure et al., 1992; Dumas and Faure, 1995; Kranz and Dresselhaus,
1996; Rougier et al., 1996). In animals the adhesion of the sperm triggers a
transient rise in free calcium ions in the egg and this initiates a cascade of
downstream events (Whitacker and Swann, 1993). In plants a similar mechanism of calcium accumulation in the egg cytosol has recently been observed
(Digonnet et al., 1997; Antoine et al., 2000), but the components of the signal
transduction cascade have yet to be determined.
Parthenogenesis has been widely recorded in flowering plants, occurring in
most species at a low level. In the sexual plant Datura the rate of parthenogenesis was estimated at 0.018% (Kimber and Riley, 1963) while in maize rates
are reported to vary from 0.11% to 3.2%, depending on genotype (Sarkar and
Coe, 1966; Chase, 1969). By comparison, the rates of parthenogenesis in the
native apomicts H. aurantiacum and H. piloselloides were recorded at 97.6%
and 98.0%, respectively (Bicknell et al., 2003). Several mutations are known
to induce a parthenogenetic phenotype or to induce developmental phenomena with similarities to parthenogenesis in other tissues of the plant. One of the
most intriguing examples is the ‘Salmon’ system of wheat, which can produce
haploids by parthenogenesis at rates of up to 90% (Matzk et al., 1995). This
material carries a 1BL-1RS wheat/rye translocation and utilizes the cytoplasm
of Aegilops caudata or Aegilops kotschyi. Neither the translocation nor the
cytoplasm is sufficient to induce the effect alone, indicating that both nuclear
and cytoplasmic factors are involved (Matzk et al., 1995, 1997; Matzk, 1996).
The nuclear factors involved include Ptg, a promoter of parthenogenesis, and
Spg, a suppressor of parthenogenesis. Parthenogenesis is expressed when Ptg
is present with the Aegilops cytoplasm and Spg is absent (Matzk, 1996). In
barley the haploid initiator (hap) mutation leads to the formation of up to 30%
haploid embryos (Hagberg and Hagberg, 1980). Intriguingly, there appears to
be a mechanism in this mutant, which suppresses syngamy between the egg
and sperm yet permits the polar nuclei to be fertilized (Morgensen, 1988).
In Arabidopsis, several mutants have been described that influence the
formation and development of embryos and/or that result in the ectopic
formation of embryo-like structures. The LEAFY COTYLEDON (LEC) genes

372

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

LEC1, LEC2 and FUSCA3 are regulators of embryogenesis, required for the
specification of suspensor cell fate, cotyledon identity and for other critical
functions later in embryo development (Meinke et al., 1994; Lotan et al.,
1998; Stone et al., 2001; West et al., 2001). The ectopic expression of LEC1
and LEC2 in vegetative cells induces the expression of embryo-specific genes
and the development of embryo-like structures (Lotan et al., 1998; Stone
et al., 2001). PICKLE (PKL) is a chromatin-remodelling factor that acts as a
master regulator of the LEC genes LEC1, LEC2 and FUSCA3 (Ogas et al.,
1999; Rider et al., 2003). Roots in pkl mutants form embryo-like structures
indicating that this gene plays a role in repressing embryogenic development
throughout the life cycle of the plant (Henderson et al., 2004). Polycombgroup proteins form multimeric complexes that modify histone 3 and participate in the stable repression of specific genes through chromatin remodelling.
The Fertilization Independent Seed (FIS) genes of Arabidopsis are members of
this group that are known to play a role in the formation of the endosperm and
in establishing early parent-of-origin effects (see below). Recently, another
member of the group, MEDICIS, was reported. A loss-of-function mutation in
this gene led to similar defects in endosperm development as other reported
members of the FIS gene group but also led to the parthenogenetic development of a two-celled embryo from an unfertilized egg cell (Guitton et al., 2004).
Further embryo growth was arrested in the mutant.
BABY BOOM (BBM ) is an AP2-domain transcription factor identified in a
screen for differentially expressed messages during somatic embryogenesis in
microspore cultures of Brassica napus (Boutilier et al., 2002). BBM transcript
was observed to occur preferentially in developing embryos and seeds of
B. napus, and the ectopic expression of BBM induced the development of
embryo-like structures on the cotyledons and leaves of Arabidopsis (Boutilier
et al., 2002). SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR KINASE (SERK)
was similarly found as an upregulated transcript in carrot (Daucus carota)
cultures induced to form somatic embryos (Schmidt et al., 1997). The
D. carota SERK transcript (DcSERK) was found to be associated with cells
destined to undergo embryogenesis, and also to be present at the time of the
initiation of zygotic embryogenesis (Schmidt et al., 1997). The Arabidopsis
orthologue AtSERK1 was found to be expressed during gametogenesis and
early embryogenesis in Arabidopsis, and the ectopic expression of AtSERK1
was found to improve the rate of somatic embryogenesis in Arabidopsis cell
cultures (Hecht et al., 2001). AtSERK, however, did not induce a discernible
phenotype in Arabidopsis when ectopically expressed (Hecht et al., 2001).

Endosperm formation
As mentioned above, the formation of an endosperm is critical to seed development in almost every angiosperm species. Only members of the Orchidaceae and Podostemonaceae are known to either fail to form an endosperm or
form an endosperm that degenerates early in the ontogeny of the seed (Foster
and Gifford, 1974). Furthermore, all known apomicts have been recorded to

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

373

form an endosperm, with the exception of Nigritella, an orchid (Teppner and
Klein, 1993), indicating that it will be an essential tissue for the successful
installation of apomixis into target crop species. As discussed above, the
endosperm of an apomict may either be derived autonomously, following
the spontaneous fusion of polar nuclei, or may result from the fertilization
of the central cell, as in sexual plants (pseudogamy). Pseudogamous systems
are far more common than autonomous systems, possibly because they
enable the establishment of a 2:3 embryo/endosperm ploidy balance in the
developing seed.
This appears to be particularly critical in the grasses, many of which
demonstrate a profound intolerance to alterations to this 2:3 ploidy requirement (Nishiyama and Yabuno, 1978; Johnston et al., 1980; Lin, 1984; Haig
and Westoby, 1991; Birchler, 1993). Grasses are critical to agriculture as they
include all the major cereal crops for human and animal consumption as well as
forage species for managed production in rangeland agriculture. For these
reasons the installation of apomixis into grasses is a widely stated goal in
apomixis research (Khush, 1994; Savidan, 2000a,b; Grossniklaus et al.,
2001). It appears likely, therefore, that the most amenable form of ‘synthetic’
apomixis, at least in the intermediate term, will be a form that incorporates a
pseudogamous mechanism of endosperm formation (Dresselhaus et al., 2001;
Grossniklaus, 2001).
It follows that an understanding of the factors controlling endosperm
formation is needed before apomixis can be engineered into cereal crops.
Given the relative complexity of the endosperm tissue and the critical role it
plays in seed development, it is not surprising that many mutants are known
with alterations in endosperm form and/or function. Many of these also
influence embryo development (Sorensen et al., 2002), a possible indication
of the postulated common evolutionary origin of these tissues (Friedman,
1994; Carmichael and Friedman, 1995; Williams and Friedman, 2002). It
appears likely, although unproven, that many of the events of endosperm
development are similar during sexual and apomictic development, as has
recently been demonstrated for gametophyte development in the facultative
apomict Hieracium (Tucker et al., 2003). For this reason, the focus here is on
the events surrounding endosperm initiation and the role of imprinting during
embryo and endosperm development in flowering plants.
In Arabidopsis, as in many other flowering plants, fruit development
begins following fertilization in association with the initiation of seed formation.
Using this feature, mutant screens for ‘apomixis genes’ have been performed
by several groups based on the recovery of plants that are able to initiate fruit
development in the absence of fertilization (Chaudhury and Peacock, 1993;
Ohad et al., 1996; Chaudhury et al., 1997; Grossniklaus, 2001). The recovered genes, collectively known as FIS genes, all appear to be Polycomb-group
proteins as described above, and all play a role in the repression of endosperm
tissue proliferation. In fis mutants the endosperm overproliferates and is often
poorly cellularized (Kinoshita et al., 1999; Sorensen et al., 2001). In fis1/mea
and fis2 mutants a cellularized endosperm forms while in fie/fis3 development
arrests at the formation of a syncytial endosperm. As described above, a further

374

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

member of this group MEDICIS has recently been recorded (Guitton et al.,
2004), the mutation of which not only leads to a similar endosperm phenotype
but also to the formation of a rudimentary parthenogenetic embryo. Further to
their role in endosperm cell division, FIS genes appear to play a role in
determining the anterior–posterior axis of the developing endosperm
(Sorensen et al., 2001). FIS genes demonstrate parent-of-origin expression
in the developing seed. In homozygous form, FIS mutations are typically lethal,
mutant stocks are generally maintained as heterozygotes. When conveyed
through pollen, mutant fis alleles transmit with normal frequency. However,
they cannot be recovered when a plant heterozygous for the mutation is used as
the pistillate parent. This differential ability to transmit mutant alleles through
male and female gametes is an example of a ‘maternal effect’. med/fis1 was
the first maternal effect mutant described in plants and it was this characteristic,
rather than its impact on endosperm formation, that led to its initial discovery
(Grossniklaus et al., 1998). MEDEA and the other FIS genes are now known
to be imprinted with paternal copies inactive at the time of fertilization, an
effect mediated by differential DNA methylation (Vielle-Calzada et al., 1999;
Kinoshita et al., 1999; Luo et al., 2000). Imprinting may be acting at a large
number of loci during fertilization and early seed development. Vielle-Calzada
et al. (2000) noted that 20 paternally derived alleles distributed throughout the
Arabidopsis genome were not expressed during early seed development,
leading the authors to suggest that imprinting may be a general phenomenon
influencing the entire paternal gamete genome. Weijers et al. (2001), however,
noted the expression of a paternally derived chimeric gene, AtRPS5A::GUS,
as early as the two-cell embryo stage, indicating that the effect of imprinting is
not a global effect on the paternal genome but differs between genes.

Comparative Gene Expression between Apomicts and Sexuals
As apomixis appears to be essentially an altered form of sexuality, genes
involved in aspects of sexual reproduction are likely to be under altered regulation in apomicts. Tucker et al. (2003) assessed b-glucuronidase (GUS) expression in sexual and apomictic forms of Hieracium, following the
introduction of several fusion constructs combining the reporter gene with
Arabidopsis promoters of regulatory factors in embryo and endosperm development. The Arabidopsis promoters assessed included three FIS class genes,
SERK and SPOROCYTELESS (SPL) / NOZZLE (NZZ), which is required for
both male and female sporogenesis (Schiefthaler et al., 1999; Yang et al.,
1999). Patterns of expression during ovule and seed development in the
different backgrounds were compared. The expression profiles of the FIS
gene fusions during embryogenesis and endosperm development demonstrated a high degree of conservation, highlighting that apomixis shares developmental pathways with sexual reproduction. However, during earlier events
associated with megasporogenesis, reporter gene expression showed more
variation. Expression of FIS2:GUS in Arabidopsis was not found in the tetrad
of spores following meiosis. In contrast, expression of FIS2:GUS in sexual

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

375

Hieracium ovules occurred in the three micropylar spores destined for degeneration after meiosis. Apomictic Hieracium also followed this pattern; FIS2
was expressed in all four meiotic spores, all of which were destined for degeneration to be replaced by an apospore. The authors suggested that the expression of FIS2 in the meiotic tetrad indicates that FIS2 in Hieracium may play a
different role than in Arabidopsis, possibly relating to the capacity of Hieracium for apomixis. Alternatively, SPOROCYTELESS (SPL)/NOZZLE showed
conserved expression in MMCs of both Arabidopsis and Hieracium, but no
analogous expression in aposporous initial cells was found. While these data
provide a negative gene marker for apospory, positive expression associated
with apospory or diplospory of any reproductive genetic marker, to our knowledge, remains undetected.
Wide-scale gene expression analysis between ovules of apomicts and their
sexual counterparts is a potential means of isolating novel genes associated
with apomixis. The success of these approaches is dependent in part on the
availability of plant material that is genetically similar in all respects other than
mode of reproduction. This increases the likelihood that differences in gene
expression are not due to alternative polymorphisms. Genetic similarity between plant materials for analysis has been achieved with the use of bulks from
an F1 population segregating for mode of reproduction (Leblanc et al., 1997)
or the use of sexual accessions of the same species of the apomict (VielleCalzada et al., 1996; Rodrigues et al., 2003). The salmon system in wheat
offers homozygous isogenic lines, the standard line with normal sexual reproduction and two alloplasmic lines that show autonomous embryo development
(Matzk, 1996). Alternatively, mutagenesis of an apomict to a sexual may be an
effective method to generate near-isogenic lines that differ in mode of reproduction. Further considerations for wide-scale gene expression analysis include
the timing of mRNA capture for analysis and the mode of detection of differentially expressed sequences. Differential display was used to detect expression
differences between sexual and apomictic ovules of the aposporic grasses
Pennisetum ciliare (Vielle-Calzada et al., 1996), Brachiaria brizantha
(Leblanc et al., 1997; Rodrigues et al., 2003) and P. notatum (Pessino
et al., 2001). Typically, low numbers of verifiable expression differences
were detected, which is a further indication of similar developmental pathways
being shared by the apomictic and sexual modes of reproduction.
Differential gene expression of apomictic and sexual development in Panicum maximum was assessed by probing a cDNA library representing genes
expressed in flower buds of an apomictic accession (Chen et al., 1999). The
library was constructed from mRNA isolated at the point of appearance of
aposporous initial cells, and then probed with cDNA derived from apomictic
and sexual flower buds prior and during formation of aposporous initial cells.
This strategy yielded a gene that was only expressed in aposporous flower buds
at the time of aposporous initial cell development. An alternative approach is
currently underway to isolate candidate genes from a diplosporic monosomic
line of sugarbeet Beta vulgaris carrying a chromosome from Beta corolliflora
that confers diplospory. A binary BAC library has been constructed and clones
of the diplospory-conferring chromosome were isolated. These clones have

376

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

been screened further, with a pool of cDNA enriched via subtractive hybridization, for BAC clones that contain ovular genes specific to the alien chromosome which may be key factors of diplospory in B. corolliflora (Fang et al.,
2004).
On the basis of homology searches against protein and nucleotide databases, some different products from Brachiaria could be assigned functions
(Rodrigues et al., 2003). Those that were expressed more highly during
megasporogenesis in apomictic ovules included a mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinase and a protein translation factor, which may conceivably be acting
as part of an apospory-specific signal cascade. Another one that is more highly
expressed in apomictic ovules during megagametogenesis showed homology
to a myosin heavy chain of Arabidopsis. Myosins are involved in cellular
structure and transport and the authors suggest that differentially expressed
myosin may be a reflection of differences in polarity between the eight-nucleate
sexual Polygonum embryo sac and the four-nucleate unreduced aposporic
Panicum-type embryo sac, in which antipodal cells are absent. Other comparative gene expression analyses have identified expression of structural genes
associated with aposporous megagametogenesis. Pessino et al. (2001) isolated
a sequence from floral spikelets of apomictic P. notatum, which contained
homology to the KSP domain of several cytoskeletal elements, and Matzk et al.
(1997) isolated an a-tubulin from ovules with differentiated embryo sacs from
alloplasmic parthenogenetic wheat. While results of comparative gene expression analyses are starting to be meaningful, it is unclear whether differences
detected so far are critical factors for the processes of apomixis, or are a
reflection of the identities of different structures of ovules of apomicts. Differentially expressed sequences specifically linked to genomic loci of determinants
of apomixis are yet to be reported. It is possible that recent technical advances
such as laser-assisted microdissection, which enables the capture and subsequent analysis of single cells, may assist in further piecing together signal
transduction events during both apomictic and sexual reproduction.

Potential Mechanisms of Apomixis: the Complexity of
Epigenetic Regulation
Conventionally translated proteins such as transcription factors and protein
kinases clearly play an important role in gene regulation of developmental
pathways. However, recent research into both plant and animal systems reveals that gene regulation is often also mediated by alternative molecular
means. As mentioned above, parthenogenesis is a phenomenon found in
animals as well as plants. Mammals have not been found to utilize parthenogenesis, however, as in sexual plants, the induction of parthenogenesis in
mammals is receiving substantial experimental attention. Several aspects of
fertilization and early embryogenesis appear to be conserved between animals
and plants indicating that current advances being made in understanding animal systems will be very valuable for researchers studying plant models.
Successful mammalian embryogenesis in part appears to be dependent on

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis

377

paternal gene silencing during early embryogenesis. Recently, a viable parthenogenetic mouse was developed from a reconstructed oocyte with two
haploid maternal genomes. The success of this development was attributed to
increased expression of Igf2 and monoallelic expression of the non-coding
RNA, H19, which affected the expression of a wide range of genes. Igf2 and
H19 are genes that are normally imprinted in the mammalian zygote (Kono
et al., 2004).
Non-coding RNA in eukaryotes may play a critical role in some cases of
imprinting (Sleutels et al., 2002) and in other forms of epigenetic regulation
such as dosage compensation of mammalian X-chromosome inactivation
(Brockdorff et al., 1992). Other forms of epigenetic regulation include alteration of chromatin structure and chromosome pairing, whereby homologous
pairing of alleles can enable one allele to influence the state of another (GrantDownton and Dickinson, 2004). Recent data indicate that transposable elements may also influence gene expression. A comparison of Igf2 regions in a
range of mammalian genomes indicates that lack of short interspersed transposable elements (SINES) is associated with Igf2 imprinting (Weidman et al.,
2004). Despite the association of retrotransposons with the characterized
ASGR of Pennisetum (Akiyama et al., 2004), it is speculative to suggest that
transposable elements have a role in apomixis. However, recent discoveries
of the potential utility of transposable elements in gene regulation are
surprising. Different families of transposable elements were represented
differentially between cDNA libraries of oocytes and early embryos in the
mouse. Furthermore, chimeric transcripts of transposable elements spliced to
the 5’ ends of host genes were found, suggesting transposon-mediated regulation (Peaston et al., 2004). In the context of apomixis, the different components of the trait are likely to be sexual processes with altered gene regulation,
and this may be conducted via epigenetic control. The growing understanding
of epigenetic regulation of processes such as imprinting and parthenogenesis in
other systems indicates that the mechanistic possibilities of how altered gene
regulation of apomixis might be achieved are many and diverse, and may vary
between different native apomictic systems.

The ‘Synthesis’ of Apomixis
The successful installation of apomixis into sexual crops will require the integration of several component processes. Using natural processes of apomixis
as a guide, it would appear that the simplest and most flexible system to
emulate would be diplospory with pseudogamy, as seen in many grass genera.
This system ensures the formation of a single embryo within the seed as the
early meiotic apparatus is utilized as the basis for the formation of an unreduced
embryo sac. This also ensures that the developing asexual structures are
correctly positioned within the ovule and that their ontogeny is synchronously
timed with critical related events such as the formation of other floral tissues
and the dehiscence of pollen. As mentioned above, the constraints imposed by
the imprinting of the paternal genome in most sexual species will either

378

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach

necessitate the use of systems that create a triploid endosperm about a diploid
clonal embryo, such as that in the grass Panicum (Savidan, 1980), or mechanisms will be needed that relax the criteria for a precise 2:3 embryo/endosperm ploidy balance, as is seen in many apomicts, such as the grasses
Tripsacum and Paspalum (Grimanelli et al., 1997; Quarin, 1999; Matzk
et al., 2000). Furthermore, the engineering of apomixis in sexual systems in
a commercially useful form will require the use of regulatory elements with
sufficient specificity to ensure that targeted changes are succinctly directed to
specific cell types and only at specific times. Ideally, apomixis should be introduced into crops in an inducible format, permitting it to be used during seed
increase but silenced during hybridization. Promoters that provide some of
these functions (Dresselhaus et al., 2001) are available but more are clearly
required.
Finally, as the discussion above indicates, most of the processes underlying
apomixis remain incompletely understood but reassuring progress is being
made in both the study of sexual and apomictic systems. There is quiet optimism among those researching this field that these hurdles will be overcome
in the intermediate term and the great potential of apomixis will then be
realized.

References
Akiyama, Y., Conner, J.A., Goel, S.,
Morishige, D.T., Mullet, J.E., Hanna,
W.W. and Ozias-Akins, P. (2004)
High-resolution physical mapping in
Pennisetum squamulatum reveals extensive chromosomal heteromorphism
of the genomic region associated with
apomixis. Plant Physiology 134,
1733–1741.
Albertini, E., Barcaccia, G., Porceddu, A.,
Sorbolini, S. and Falcinelli, M. (2001a)
Mode of reproduction is detected by
Parth1 and Sex1 SCAR markers in a
wide range of facultative apomictic
Kentucky bluegrass varieties. Molecular Breeding 7, 293–300.
Albertini, E., Porceddu, A., Ferranti, F.,
Reale, L., Barcaccia, G., Romano, B.
and Falcinelli, M. (2001b) Apospory
and parthenogenesis may be uncoupled in Poa pratensis: a cytological
investigation. Sexual Plant Reproduction 14, 213–217.
Alexander, D.E. and Beckett, J.B. (1963)
Spontaneous triploidy and tetraploidy

in maize. Journal of Heredity 54,
103–106.
Antoine, A.F., Faure, J.-E., Cordeiro, S.,
Dumas, C., Rougier, M. and Feijó, J.A.
(2000) A calcium influx is triggered and
propagates in the zygote as a wavefront during in vitro fertilization of
flowering plants. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
97, 10643–10648.
Asker, S. (1967) Induced sexuality after
chromosome doubling in an apomictic
Potentilla argentea-biotype. Hereditas 57, 339–342.
Asker, S.E. and Jerling, L. (1992) Apomixis in Plants. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida.
Babcock, E.B. and Stebbins, G.L. (1938)
The American Species of Crepis:
their Interrelationships and Distribution as Affected by Polyploidy and
Apomixis. Carnegie Institution of
Washington, Washington, DC.
Baker, H.G. (1966) The evolution, functioning and breakdown of hetero-

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis
morphic incompatibility systems. 1.
The Plumbaginaceae. Evolution 20,
349–368.
Bicknell, R.A. (1997) Isolation of a
diploid, apomictic plant of Hieracium
aurantiacum. Sexual Plant Reproduction 10, 168–172.
Bicknell, R.A. (2001) Model systems to
study the genetics and developmental
biology of apomixis. In: Savidan, Y.,
Carman, J.G. and Dresselhaus, T.
(eds) Flowering of Apomixis: from
Mechanisms to Genetic Engineering.
CIMMYT, IRD, European Commission
DG VI, Mexico, pp. 111–120.
Bicknell, R.A. and Bicknell, K.B. (1999)
Who will benefit from apomixis? Biotechnology and Development Monitor 37, 17–21.
Bicknell, R.A. and Koltunow, A.M. (2004)
Understanding apomixis: recent advances and remaining conundrums.
Plant Cell 16(Suppl.), S228–S245.
Bicknell, R.A., Borst, N.K. and Koltunow,
A.M. (2000) Monogenic inheritance of
apomixis in two Hieracium species
with distinct developmental mechanisms. Heredity 84, 228–237.
Bicknell, R., Podivinsky, E., Catanach, A.,
Erasmuson, S. and Lambie, S. (2001)
Strategies for isolating mutants in Hieracium with dysfunctional apomixis.
Sexual Plant Reproduction 14,
227–232.
Bicknell, R.A., Lambie, S.C. And Butler,
R.C. (2003) Quantification of progeny
classes in two facultatively apomictic
accessions of Hieracium. Hereditas,
11–20.
Birchler, J.A. (1993) Dosage analysis
of maize endosperm development.
Annual Review of Genetics 27,
181–204.
Blakey, C.A., Goldman, S.L. and
Dewald, C.L. (2001) Apomixis in Tripsacum: comparative mapping of a multigene phenomenon. Genome 44,
222–230.
Bonnet, C. (1745) Traite d’insectologie
ou observations sur les pucerons.
Durand, Paris.

379
Boutilier, K., Offringa, R., Sharma, V.K.,
Kieft, H., Ouellet, T., Zhang, L., Hattori, J., Liu, C.M., Van Lammeren,
A.A., Miki, B.L., Custers, J.B. and
Van Lookeren Campagne, M.M.
(2002) Ectopic expression of BABY
BOOM triggers a conversion from
vegetative to embryonic growth. Plant
Cell 14, 1737–1749.
Brockdorff, N., Ashworth, A., Kay, G.F.,
Mccabe, V.M., Norris, D.P., Cooper,
P.J., Swift, S. and Rastan, S.
(1992) The product of the mouse Xist
gene is a 15 kb inactive X-specific transcript containing no conserved ORF
and located in the nucleus. Cell 71,
515–526.
Burt, A. (2000) Perspective: sex, recombination, and the efficacy of selection –
was Weismann right? Evolution 54,
337–351.
Calderini, O. and Mariani, A. (1997) Increasing 2n gamete production in diploid lucerne by cycles of phenotypic
recurrent selection. Euphytica 93,
113–118.
Carman, J.G. (1997) Asynchronous expression of duplicate genes in angiosperms may cause apomixis, bispory,
tetraspory, and polyembryony. Biological Journal of Linnaean Society
61, 51–94.
Carman, J.G. (2001) The gene effect:
genome collisions and apomixis. In:
Savidan, Y., Carman, J.G. and Dresselhaus, T. (eds) Flowering of Apomixis: from Mechanisms to Genetic
Engineering. CIMMYT, IRD, European Commission DG VI, Mexico,
pp. 95–110.
Carman, J.G., Crane, C.F. and RiereLizarazu, O. (1991) Comparataive histology of cell walls during meiotic and
apomeiotic megasporogenesis in two
hexaploid Australasian Elymus species. Crop Science 31, 1527–1532.
Carmichael, J.S. and Friedman, W.E.
(1995) Double fertilisation in Gnetum
gnemon. The relationships between
the cell cycle and sexual reproduction.
Plant Cell 7, 1975–1988.

380

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach
Chapman, H. and Bicknell, R. (2000) Recovery of a sexual and an apomictic
hybrid from crosses between the facultative apomicts Hieracium caespitosum and H. praealtum. New
Zealand Journal of Ecology 24, 81–
85.
Chase, S. (1969) Monoploids and monoploid-derivatives of maize (Zea mays
L). Botanical Review 35, 117–167.
Chaudhury, A.M. and Peacock, J.W.
(1993) Approaches towards isolating
apomictic mutants in Arabidopsis
thaliana: prospects and progress. In:
Khush, G.S. (ed.) Apomixis: Exploiting Hybrid Vigor in Rice. International
Rice Research Institute, Los Baños,
Philippines, pp. 67–71.
Chaudhury, A.M., Ming, L., Miller,
C., Craig, S. and Dennis, E.S. (1997)
Fertrilization-independant seed development in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 94, 4223–4228.
Chen, L., Miyazaki, C., Kojima, A., Saito,
A. and Adachi, T. (1999) Isolation and
characterisation of a gene expressed
during early embryo sac development
in an apomictic guinea grass (Panicum
maximum). Journal of Plant Physiololy 154, 55–62.
Cooper, D.C. and Brink, R.A. (1949) The
endosperm-embryo relationship in the
autonomous apomict, Taraxacum
officinale. Botanica Gazette 111,
139–152.
Correns, C. (1905) Gregor Mendels
briefe an Carl Nageli 1866–1873.
Abhandlungen der MathematischPhysikalischen Classe der Königlich
Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften 29, 189–256.
Couteau, F., Belzile, F., Horlow, C.,
Granjean, D., Vezon, D. and Doutriaux, M.P. (1999) Random chromosome segregation without meiotic arest
in both male and female meiocytes of a
dmc1 mutant of Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 11, 1623–1634.
Crane, C.F. (2001) Classification of apomictic mechanisms. In: Savidan, Y.,

Carman, J.G. and Dresselhaus, T.
(eds) Flowering of Apomixis: from
Mechanisms to Genetic Engineering.
CIMMYT, IRD, European Commission
DG VI, Mexico, pp. 24–34.
Czapik, R. (1994) How to detect apomixis
in Angiospermae. Polish Botanical
Studies 8, 13–21.
Darlington, C.D. (1939) The Evolution of
Genetic Systems. Cambridge University Press, London.
De Kovel, C.G.F. and De Jong, G. (1999)
Responses of sexual and apomictic
genotypes of Taraxacum officinale to
variation in light. Plant Biology 1,
541–546.
De Wet, J.M.J. (1968) Diploid-tetraploidhaploid cycles and the origin of variability in Dichanthium agamospecies.
Evolution 22, 394–397.
Dickinson, T.A. (1998) Taxonomy of
agamic complexes in plants: a role for
metapopulation thinking. Folia Geobotanica 33, 327–332.
Digonnet, C., Alson, D., Leduc, N.,
Dumas, C. and Rougier, M. (1997)
First evidence of a calcium transient in
flowering plants at fertilization. Development 124, 2867–2874.
Doutriaux, M.P., Couteau, F., Nergounioux, C. and White, C. (1998) Isolation and characterization of the
RAD51 and DMC1 homologues from
Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular and
General Genetics 257, 283–291.
Dresselhaus, T., Carman, J.G. and Savidan, Y. (2001) Genetic engineering of
apomixis in sexual crops: a critical assessment of the apomixis technology.
In: Savidan, Y., Carman, J.G. and
Dresselhaus, T. (eds) Flowering of
Apomixis: from Mechanisms to Genetic Engineering. CIMMYT, IRD,
European Commission DG VI, Mexico,
pp. 229–243.
Dumas, C. and Faure, J-E. (1995) Use of
in vitro fertilization and zygote culture
in crop improvement. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 6, 183–188.
El Maataoui, M. and Pichot, C. (2001)
Microsporogenesis in the endangered

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis
species Cupressus dupreziana A.
Camus: evidence for meiotic defects
yielding unreduced and abortive pollen.
Planta 213, 543–549.
Ellerstrom, S. and Zagorcheva, L. (1977)
Sterility and apomictic embryo-sac formation in Raphanobrassica. Hereditas 87, 107–120.
Ernst, A. (1918) Bastardierung als
Ursache der Apogamie im Pflanzenreich. Fischer, Jena, Germany.
Fang, X., Gu, S., Xu, Z., Chen, F., Guo, D.,
Zhang, H.B. and Wu, N. (2004) Construction of a binary BAC library for an
apomictic monosomic addition line of
Beta corolliflora in sugar beet and
identification of the clones derived
from the alien chromosome. Theoretical
and
Applied
Genetics
108, 1420–1425.
Faure, J.-E., Digonnet, C. and Dumas, C.
(1992) An in vitro system for adhesion
and fusion of maize gametes. Science
263, 1598–1600.
Fobis-Loisy, I., Miege, C. and Gaude, T.
(2004) Molecular evolution of the S
locus controlling mating in the brassicaceae. Plant Biology 6, 109–118.
Foster, A.S. and Gifford, E.M. (1974)
Comparative Morphology of Vascular Plants. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, California.
Friedman, W.E. (1994) The evolution of
embryogeny in seed plants and the developmental origin and early history of
endosperm. American Journal of Botany 8, 1468–1486.
Gadella, T.W.J. (1984) Cytology and the
mode of reproduction of some taxa of
Hieracium
subgnenus
Pilosella.
Proceedings of the Koninklijke
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen C. 87, 387–399.
Gadella, T.W.J. (1991) Variation, hybridization and reproductive biology
of Hieracium pilosella L. Proceedings
of the Koninklijke Nederlandse
Akademie van Wetenschappen C.
94, 455–488.
Galitski, T., Saldanha, A.J., Styles, C.A.,
Lander, E.S. and Fink, G.R. (1999)

381
Ploidy regulation of gene expression.
Science 285, 251–254.
Garcia, R., Asins, M.J., Forner, J. and
Carbonell, E.A. (1999) Genetic
analysis of apomixis in Citrus and Poncirus by molecular markers. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 99, 511–
518.
Goel, S., Chen, Z.B., Conner, J.A.,
Akiyama, Y., Hanna, W.W. and
Ozias-Akins, P. (2003) Delineation by
fluorescence in situ hybridization of a
single hemizygous chromosomal region associated with aposporous embryo sac formation in Pennisetum
squamulatum and Cenchrus ciliaris.
Genetics 163, 1069–1082.
Golubovskaya, I.N. (1979) Genetic control of meiosis. International Review
of Cytology 58, 247–290.
Golubovskaya, I.N., Avalkin, N.A. and
Sheridan, W.F. (1992) Effect of several
meiotic mutants on female meiosis in
maize. Developmental Genetics 13.
Golubovskaya, I.N., Grebennikova, Z.K.,
Avalkin, N.A. and Sheridan, W.F.
(1993) The role of the ameiotic 1
gene in the initiation of meiosis and in
subsequent meiotic events in maize.
Genetics 135, 1151–1166.
Golubovskaya, I.N., Avalkin, N.A. and
Sheridan, W.F. (1997) New insights
into the role of the maize ameiotic 1
locus. Genetics 147, 1339–1350.
Grant-Downton, R.T. and Dickinson,
H.G. (2004) Plants, pairing and
phenotypes – two’s company? Trends
in Genetics 20, 188–195.
Grimanelli, D., Tohme, J. and GonzalezDe-Leon, D. (2001b) Applications of
molecular genetics in apomixis research. In: Savidan, Y., Carman, J.G.
and Dresselhaus, T. (eds) Flowering
of Apomixis: from Mechanisms to
Genetic Engineering. CIMMYT, IRD,
European Commission DG VI, Mexico,
pp. 83–94.
Grimanelli, D., Hernandez, M., Perotti, E.
and Savidan, Y. (1997) Dosage effects
in the endosperm of the diplosporous
apomictic Tripsacum (Poaceae). Sex-

382

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach
ual Plant Reproduction 10, 279–
282.
Grimanelli, D., Leblanc, O., Perotti, E.
and Grossniklaus, U. (2001a) Developmental genetics of gametophytic
apomixis. Trends in Genetics 17,
597–604.
Grimanelli, D., Leblanc, O., Espinosa, E.,
Perotti, E., Gonzalez De Leon, D. and
Savidan, Y. (1998a) Non-Mendelian
transmission of apomixis in maizeTripsacum hybrids caused by a transmission ratio distortion. Heredity 80,
40–47.
Grossniklaus, U. (2001) From sexuality to
apomixis: molecular and genetic approaches. In: Savidan, Y., Carman,
J.G. and Dresselhaus, T. (eds) Flowering of Apomixis: from Mechanisms
to Genetic Engineering. CIMMYT,
IRD, European Commission DG VI,
Mexico, pp. 168–211.
Grossniklaus, U., Vielle-Calzada, J.-P.,
Hoeppner, M.A. and Gagliano, W.B.
(1998) Maternal control of embryogenesis by MEDEA, a Polycomb group
gene in Arabidopsis. Science 280,
446–450.
Grossniklaus, U., Spillane, C., Page, D.R.
and Kohler, C. (2001) Genomic
imprinting and seed development:
endosperm formation with and without
sex. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 4, 21–27.
Guitton, A.E., Page, D.R., Chambrier, P.,
Lionnet, C., Faure, J.E., Grossniklaus,
U. and Berger, F. (2004) Identification of new members of Fertilisation Independent Seed Polycomb Group
pathway involved in the control of
seed development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 131, 2971–2981.
Gustafsson, Å. (1943) The Genesis of the
European Blackberry Flora. Lund
University, Svalof, Sweden.
Gustafsson, Å. (1947a) Apomixis in
Higher Plants. II, 69–179. Lund University, Svalof, Sweden.
Gustafsson, Å. (1947b) Apomixis in
Higher Plants. III, 183–370. Lund
University, Svalof, Sweden.

Hagberg, A. and Hagberg, G. (1980)
High frequency of spontaneous haploids in the progeny of an induced mutation in barley. Hereditas 93, 341–
343.
Haig, D. and Westoby, M. (1991) Genomic imprinting in endosperm: its effect
on seed development in crosses between species, and between different
ploides of the same species, and its
implications for the evolution of apomixis. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London, Series
B 333, 1–13.
Hanna, W.W. (1995) Use of apomixis
in cultivar development. Advances in
Agronomy. 54, 333–350.
Harlan, J.R. and De Wet, J.M.J. (1975)
On Ö. Winge and a prayer: the origins
of polyploidy. Botanical Review 41,
361–390.
Hecht, V., Vielle-Calzada, J.P., Hartog,
M.V., Schmidt, E.D.L., Boutilier, K.,
Grossniklaus, U. and De Vries, S.C.
(2001) The Arabidopsis SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR KINASE
1 gene is expressed in developing ovules
and embryos and enhances embryogenic competence in culture. Plant
Physiology 127, 803–816.
Heenan, P.B., Dawson, M.I. and Bicknell,
R.A. (2002) Evidence for apomictic
seed formation in Coprosma waima
(Rubiaceae). New Zealand Journal of
Botany 40, 347–355.
Henderson, J.T., Li, H.C., Rider, S.D.,
Mordhorst, A.P., Romero-Severson,
J., Cheng, J.C., Robey, J., Sung,
Z.R., De Vries, S.C. and Ogas,
J. (2004) PICKLE acts throughout the
plant to repress expression of embryonic traits and may play a role in gibberellin-dependent responses. Plant
Physiology 134, 995–1005.
Horandl, E. (1998) Species concepts in
agamic complexes: applications in the
Ranunculus auricomus complex and
general perspectives. Folia Geobotanica 33, 335–348.
Jaffe, L.F. (1996) Egg membranes during
fertilization. In: Schultz, S.G.E.A. (ed.)

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis
Molecular Biology of Membrane
Transport Disorders. Plenum Press,
New York, pp. 367–378.
Jefferson, R.A. and Bicknell, R.A. (1995)
The potential impacts of apomixis: a
molecular genetics approach. In:
Sobral, B.W.S. (ed.) The Impact
of
Plant
Molecular
Genetics.
Birklhäuser, Boston, Massachusetts,
pp. 87–101.
Jessup, R.W., Burson, B.L., Burow, G.B.,
Wang, Y.W., Chang, C., Li, Z., Paterson, A.H. and Hussey, M.A. (2002)
Disomic inheritance, suppressed recombination, and allelic interactions
govern apospory in buffelgrass as
revealed by genome mapping. Crop
Science 42, 1688–1694.
Johnston, S.A., Den Nijs, T.P.M., Peloquin, S.J. and Hanneman Jr, R.E.
(1980) The significance of genic balance to endosperm development in
interspecific crosses. Theoretical and
Applied Genetics 57.
Khush, G.S. (1994) Apomixis: Exploiting Hybrid Vigor in Rice. IRRI, Los
Banos.
Kimber, G. and Riley, R. (1963) Haploid
angiosperms. Botanical Reviews 29,
480–531.
Kinoshita, T., Yadegari, R., Harada, J.J.,
Goldberg, R.B. and Fischer, R.L.
(1999) Imprinting of the MEDEA polycomb gene in Arabidopsis endosperm.
Plant Cell 11, 1945–1952.
Klimyuk, V.I. and Jones, J.D.G. (1997)
AtDMC1, the Arabidopsis homologue
of the yeast DMC1 gene: characterization, transposon-induced allelic
variation and meiosis associated expression. Plant Journal 11, 1–14.
Kojima, A. and Nagato, Y. (1997) Discovery
of highly apomictic and highly
amphimictic dihaploids in Allium tuberosum. Sexual Plant Reproduction 10,
8–12.
Koltunow, A.M. (1993) Apomixis: embryo sacs and embryos formed without
meiosis of fertilisation in ovules. Plant
Cell 5, 1425–1437.

383
Koltunow, A.M. (2000) The genetic and
molecular analysis of apomixis in the
model plant Hieracium. Acta Biologica Cracoviensia Series Botanica
42, 61–72.
Koltunow, A. and Grossniklaus, U. (2003)
Apomixis: a developmental perspective. Annual Review of Plant Biology
54, 547–574.
Koltunow, A.M., Bicknell, R.A. and
Chaudhury, A.M. (1995a) Apomixis:
molecular strategies for the generation
of genetically identical seeds without
fertilization. Plant Physiology 108,
1345–1352.
Koltunow, A.M., Soltys, K., Nito, N. and
Mcclure, S. (1995b) Anther, ovule,
seed and nucellar embryo development
in Citrus sinensis cv. Valencia. Canadian Journal of Botany 73, 1567–
1582.
Koltunow, A.M., Johnson, S.D. and Bicknell, R.A. (1998) Sexual and apomictic
development in Hieracium. Sexual
Plant Reproduction 11, 213–230.
Kono, T., Obata, Y., Wu, Q., Niwa, K.,
Ono, Y., Yamamoto, Y., Park, E.S.,
Seo, J.S. and Ogawa, H. (2004) Birth
of parthenogenetic mice that can develop to adulthood. Nature 428, 860–
864.
Krahulcova, A., Chrtek, J. and Krahulec,
F. (1999) Autogamy in Hieracium subgen. Pilosella. Folia Geobotanica &
Phytotaxonomica 34, 373–376.
Kranz, E. and Dresselhaus, T. (1996) In
vitro fertilization with isolated higher
plant gametes. Trends in Plant Science 1, 82–89.
Labombarda, P., Busti, A., Caceres, M.E.,
Pupilli, F. and Arcioni, S. (2002) An
AFLP marker tightly linked to apomixis
reveals hemizygosity in a portion
of the apomixis-controlling locus in
Paspalum simplex. Genome 45,
513–519.
Lamote, V., Baert, J., Roldan-Ruiz, I., De
Loose, M. and Van Bockstaele, E.
(2002) Tracing of 2n egg occurrence in
perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne L.)

384

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach
using interploidy crosses. EUPHYTICA
123, 159–164.
Leblanc, O. and Mazzucato, A. (2001)
Screening procedures to identify and
quantify apomixis. In: Savidan, Y.,
Carman, J.G. and Dresselhaus, T.
(eds) Flowering of Apomixis: from
Mechanisms to Genetic Engineering.
CIMMYT, IRD, European Commission
DG VI, Mexico, pp. 121–136.
Leblanc, O., Grimanelli, D., Gonzalez De
Leon, D. and Savidan, Y. (1995) Detection of the apomictic mode of reproduction
in
maize-Tripsacum
hybrids using maize RFLP markers.
Theoretical and Applied Genetics
90, 1198–1203.
Leblanc, O., Armstead, I., Pessino, S.,
Ortiz, J.P.A., Evans, C., Do Valle, C.
and Hayward, M.D. (1997) Non-radioactive mRNA fingerprinting to visualise
gene expression in mature ovaries of
Brachiaria hybrids derived from B. brizantha, an apomictic tropical forage.
Plant Science 126, 49–58.
Lee, H.S. and Chen, Z.L. (2001) Proteincoding genes are epigenetically regulated in Arabidopsis polyploids. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 98, 6753–6758.
Levin, D.A. (1983) Polyploidy and novelty
in flowering plants. American Naturalist 122, 1–25.
Lin, B.-Y. (1984) Ploidy barrier to endosperm development in maize. Genetics
107, 103–115.
Lotan, T., Ohto, M., Matsudaira Yee, K.,
West, M.A.L., Lo, R., Kwong, R.W.,
Yamagishi, K., Fischer, R.L., Goldberg, R.B. and Harada, J.J. (1998)
Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON1
is sufficient to induce embryo development in vegetative cells. Cell 93,
1195–1205.
Luo, M., Bilodeau, P., Dennis, E.S., Peacock, W.J. and Chaudhury, A. (2000)
Expression and parent-of-origin effects
for FIS2, MEA, and FIE in the endosperm and embryo of developing Arabidopsis seeds. Proceedings of the

National Academy of Sciences USA
97, 10637–10642.
Malecka, J. (1973) Problems of the mode
of reproduction in microspecies of
Taraxacum section Palustria Dahlstedt. Acta Biologica Cracov 14,
37–87.
Martinez, E.J., Urbani, M.H., Quarin,
C.L. and Ortiz, J.P.A. (2001) Inheritance of apospory in bahiagrass,
Paspalum notatum. Hereditas 135,
19–25.
Matzk, F. (1996) The ‘Salmon system’ of
wheat – a suitable model for apomixis
research. Hereditas 125, 299–301.
Matzk, F., Meyer, H.-M., Bäumlein, H.,
Balzer, H.-J. and Schubert, I. (1995)
A novel approach to the analysis of
the initiation of embryo development
in Gramineae. Sexual Plant Reproduction 8, 266–272.
Matzk, F., Meyer, H.M., Horstmann, C.,
Balzer, H.J., Baümlein, H. and Schubert, I. (1997) A specific alpha-tubulin
is associated with the initiation of parthenogenesis in ‘Salmon’ wheat lines.
Hereditas 126, 219–224.
Matzk, F., Meister, A. and Schubert, I.
(2000) An efficient screen for reproductive pathways using mature seeds
of monocots and dicots. Plant Journal
21, 97–108.
Matzk, F., Meister, A., Brutovska, R. and
Schubert, I. (2001) Reconstruction of
reproductive diversity in Hypericum
perforatum L. opens novel strategies
to manage apomixis. Plant Journal
26, 275–282.
Matzk, F., Hammer, K. and Schubert, I.
(2003) Coevolution of apomixis and genome size within the genus Hypericum.
Sexual Plant Reproduction 16, 51–58.
McVean, G.T. (1995) Fractious chromosomes: hybrid disruption and the origin
of selfish genetic elements. BioEssays
17, 579–582.
Meinke, D.W., Franzmann, L.H., Nickle,
T.C. and Yeung, E.C. (1994) Leafy
cotyledon mutants of Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 6, 1049–1064.

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis
Mendel, G. (1869) Über einige aus künstlicher Befruchtung gewonnene Hieracium-Bastarde. Verhandlungen des
naturforchenden Vereins in Brünn
8, 26–31.
Mogie, M. (1992) The Evolution of Asexual Reproduction in Plants. Chapman and Hall, London.
Morgan, R., Ozias-Akins, P. and Hanna,
W.W. (1998) Seed set in an apomictic
BC3 pearl millet. International Journal of Plant Sciences 159, 89–97.
Morgensen, H.L. (1988) Exclusion of
male mitochondria and plastids during
syngamy in barley as a basis for maternal inheritance. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
85, 2594–2597.
Muller, H.J. (1964) The relation of recombination to mutational advance. Mutatation Research 1, 2–9.
Müntzing, A. (1936) The evolutionary significance of autoployploidy. Hereditas
21, 263–378.
Naumova, T.N., Den Nijs, J.C.M. and
Willemse, M.T.M. (1992) Quantitative
analysis of aposporous parthenogenesis in Poa pratensis genotypes. Acta
Botanica Neerlandica 43, 1–14.
Naumova, T.N., Osadtchiy, J.V., Sharma,
V.K., Dijkhuis, P. and Ramulu, K.S.
(1999) Apomixis in plants: structural
and functional aspects of diplospory in
Poa nemoralis and P. palustris. Protoplasma 208, 186–195.
Nel, P.M. (1975) Crossing over and diploid egg formation in the elongate
mutant of maize. Genetics 79,
435–450.
Nishiyama, I. and Yabuno, T. (1978)
Causal relationships between the
polar nuclei in double fertilization and
interspecific cross-incompatibility in
Avena. Cytologia 43, 453–466.
Nogler, G.A. (1982) How to obtain diploid apomictic Ranunculus auricomus
plants not found in the wild state. Botanica Helvetica 92, 13–22.
Nogler, G.A. (1984a) Gametophytic Apomixis. In: Johri, B.M. (ed.) Embryology

385
of Angiosperms. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, pp. 475–518.
Nogler, G.A. (1984b) Genetics of
apospory in apomictic Ranunculus
auricomus. V. Conclusion. Botanica
Helvetica 94, 411–422.
Nogler, G.A. (1986) Genetics of apomictic reproduction. Giornale Botanico
Italiano 120, 49–52.
Nogler, G.A. (1994) Genetics of gametophytic apomixis – a historical sketch.
Polish Botanical Studies 8, 5–11.
Noyes, R.D. (2000) Diplospory and
parthenogenesis in sexual x agamospermous (apomictic) Erigeron (Asteraceae) hybrids. International Journal
of Plant Sciences 161, 1–12.
Noyes, R.D. and Rieseberg, L.H. (2000)
Two independent loci control agamospermy (apomixis) in the triploid
flowering plant Erigeron annuus.
Genetics 155, 379–390.
Nuccitelli, R. (1991) How do sperm activate eggs? Current topics in Developmental Biology 25, 1–16.
Nygren, A. (1948) Further studies in spontaneous and synthetic Calamagrostis
purpurea. Hereditas 34, 113–134.
O’Connell, L.M. and Eckert, C.G. (1999)
Differentiation in sexuality among
populations of Antennaria parlinii
(Asteraceae). International Journal
of Plant Sciences. 160, 567–575.
Ogas, J., Kaufmann, S., Henderson,
J. and Somerville, C. (1999) PICKLE
is a CHD3 chromatin-remodeling factor that regulates the transition from
embryonic to vegetative development
in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
96, 13839–13844.
Ohad, N., Margossian, L., Hsu, Y.-C.,
Williams, C., Repetti, P. and Fischer,
R.L. (1996) A mutation that allows
endosperm development without fertilization.
Proceedings
of
the
National Academy of Sciences USA
93, 5319–5324.
Ostenfeld, C.H. (1904) Weitere Beitrage zur
Kenntnis der Fruchtentwicklung bei der

386

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach
Gattung Hieracium. Berichte der
Deutschen Botanischen Gesellschaft
22, 537–541.
Ostenfeld,
C.H.
(1906)
Experimental and cytological studies in the
Hieracia. I. Castration and hybridization experiments with some species of
Hieracia. Botanisk Tidsskrift 27,
225–248.
Ostenfeld, C.H. (1910) Further studies on
the apogamy and hybridization of the
Hieracia. Zeitschrift fuer Indukt
Abstamm und Vererbungslehre 3,
241–285.
Ozias-Akins, P., Lubbers, E.L., Hanna,
W.W. and Mcnay, J.W. (1993) Transmission of the apomictic mode of
reproduction in Pennisetum: co-inheritance of the trait and molecular markers.
Theoretical
and
Applied
Genetics 85, 632–638.
Ozias-Akins, P., Roche, D. and Hanna,
W.W. (1998) Tight clustering and
hemizygosity of apomixis-linked molecular markers in Pennisetum squamulatum genetic control of apospory
by a divergent locus that may have no
allelic form in sexual genotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 95, 5127–5132.
Palacios, C., Rossello, J.A. and GonzalezCandelas, F. (2000) Study of the evolutionary relationships among Limonium species (Plumbaginaceae) using
nuclear and cytoplasmic molecular
markers. Molecular Phylogenetics &
Evolution 14, 232–249.
Palmer, R.G. (1971) Cytological studies of
ameiotic and normal maize with reference to premeiotic pairing. Chromosoma 35, 233–246.
Peaston, A.E., Evsikov, A.V., Graber,
J.H., De Vries, W.N., Holbrook, A.E.,
Solter, D. and Knowles, B.B. (2004)
Retrotransposons regulate host genes
in mouse oocytes and pre-implantation
embryos. Development Cell 7, 597–
606.
Peck, J.R. and Waxman, D. (2000)
What’s wrong with a little sex? Journal
of Evolutionary Biology 13, 63–69.

Pessino, S.C., Ortiz, J.P., Leblanc, O., Do
Valle, C.B., Evans, C. and Hayward,
M.D. (1997) Identification of a maize
linkage group related to apomixis in
Brachiaria. Theoretical and Applied
Genetics 94, 439–444.
Pessino, S.C., Evans, C., Ortiz, J.P.A.,
Armstead, I., Do Valle, C.B. and Hayward, M.D. (1998) A genetic map of
the apospory-region in Brachiaria
hybrids: identification of two markers
closely associated with the trait. Hereditas 128, 153–158.
Pessino, S.C., Ortiz, J.P.A., Hayward,
M.D. and Quarin, C.L. (1999) The molecular genetics of gametophytic apomixis. Hereditas 130, 1–11.
Pessino, S.C., Espinoza, F., Martinez, E.J.,
Ortiz, J.P.A., Valle, E.M. and Quarin,
C.L. (2001) Isolation of cDNA clones
differentially expressed in flowers of
apomictic and sexual Paspalum notatum. Hereditas 134, 35–42.
Philipson, M.N. (1978) Apomixis in
Cortaderia jubata (Gramineae). New
Zealand Journal of Botany 16,
45–59.
Pichot, C., El Maataoui, M., Raddi, S. and
Raddi, P. (2001) Surrogate mother for
endangered Cupressus. Nature 412,
39.
Porsild, A.E. (1965) The genus Antennaria in eastern Arctic and subarctic
America. Botanisk Tidsskrift 61,
22–55.
Pupilli, F., Labombarda, P., Caceres,
M.E., Quarin, C.L. and Arcioni, S.
(2001) The chromosome segment related to apomixis in Paspalum simplex
is homoeologous to the telomeric
region of the long arm of rice chromosome 12. Molecular Breeding 8,
53–61.
Quarin, C.L. (1999) Effect of pollen source
and pollen ploidy on endosperm formation and seed set in pseudogamous
apomictic Paspalum notatum. Sexual
Plant Reproduction 11, 331–335.
Quarin, C.L., Espinoza, F., Martinez, E.J.,
Pessino, S.C. and Bovo, O.A. (2001)
A rise of ploidy level induces the expre-

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis
ssion of apomixis in Paspalum
notatum. Sexual Plant Reproduction
13, 243–249.
Reddy, P.S. and D’Cruz, R. (1969) Mechanism of apomixis in Dichanthium
annulatum (Forssk) Staph. Botanica
Gazette 139, 71–79.
Rhoades, M.M. and Dempsey, E. (1966)
Induction of chromosome doubling at
meiosis by the elongate gene in maize.
Genetics 54, 505–522.
Richards, A.J. (1997) Plant Breeding
Systems, 2nd edn. Chapman & Hall,
London.
Rider, S.D.J., Henderson, J.T., Jerome,
R.E., Edenberg, H.J., Romero-Severson, J. and Ogas, J. (2003) Coordinate
repression of regulators of embryonic
identity by PICKLE during germination
in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal 35,
33–43.
Roche, D., Cong, P.S., Chen, Z.B.,
Hanna, W.W., Gustine, D.L., Sherwood, R.T. and Ozias-Akins, P.
(1999) An apospory-specific genomic
region is conserved between Buffelgrass (Cenchrus ciliaris L.) and Pennisetum squamulatum Fresen. Plant
Journal 19, 203–208.
Roche, D., Chen, Z.B., Hanna, W.W. and
Ozias-Akins, P. (2001a) Non-Mendelian transmission of an aposporyspecific genomic region in a reciprocal
cross between sexual pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum) and an apomictic F1
(P. glaucum  P. squamulatum). Sexual Plant Reproduction 13, 217–223.
Roche, D., Hanna, W.W. and OziasAkins, P. (2001b) Is supernumerary
chromatin involved in gametophytic
apomixis of polyploid plants? Sexual
Plant Reproduction 13, 343–349.
Roche, D., Conner, J.A., Budiman, M.A.,
Frisch, D., Wing, R., Hanna, W.W.
and Ozias-Akins, P. (2002) Construction of BAC libraries from two apomictic grasses to study the microcolinearity
of their apospory-specific genomic regions. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 104, 804–812.

387
Rodrigues, J.C.M., Cabral, G.B., Dusi,
D.M.A., De Mello, L.V., Rigden, D.J.
and Carneiro, V.T.C. (2003) Identification of differentially expressed cDNA
sequences in ovaries of sexual and
apomictic plants of Brachiaria brizantha. Plant Molecular Biology 53,
745–757.
Rosenberg, O. (1906) Über die Embryobildung in der Gattung Hieracium.
Berichte der Deutschen Botanischen
Gesellschaft 24, 157–161.
Rosenberg, O. (1907) Experimental
and cytological studies in the Hieracia.
II: cytological studies on the apogamy
in Hieracium. Botanisk Tidsskrift
143–170.
Rougier, M., Antoine, A.F., Aldon, D. and
Dumas, C. (1996) New insights in early
steps of in vitro fertilization in plants.
Sexual Plant Reproduction 9, 324–
329.
Sarkar, K.R. and Coe, E.H. (1966) A genetic analysis of the origin of maternal
haploids in maize. Genetics 54, 453–
464.
Savidan, Y. (1980) Chromosomal and
embryological analyses in sexual 
apomictic hybrids of Panicum maximum Jacq. Theoretical and Applied
Genetics 57, 153–156.
Savidan, Y. (1981) Genetics and utilization of apomixis for the improvement
of Guineagrass (Panicum maximum
Jacq.). International Grasslands Congress, Lexington, Kentucky, p. 182.
Savidan, Y.H. (1992) Progress in research
on apomixis and its transfer to major
grain crops. In: Dattee, Y., Dumas, C.
and Gallais, A. (eds) Reproductive
Biology
and
Plant
Breeding.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 269–
280.
Savidan, Y. (2000a) Apomixis: genetics
and breeding. In: Janick, J. (ed.) Plant
Breeding Reviews. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, pp. 13–86.
Savidan, Y. (2000b) Apomixis, the way
of cloning seeds. Biofutures 2000,
38–43.

388

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach
Savidan, Y. (2001) Transfer of apomixis
through wide crosses. In: Savidan, Y.,
Carman, J.G. and Dresselhaus, T. (eds)
Flowering of Apomixis: from Mechanisms to Genetic Engineering. CIMMYT, IRD, European Commission DG
VI, Mexico, pp. 153–167.
Schiefthaler, U., Balasubramanian, S., Sieber, P., Chevalier, D., Wisman, E. and
Schneitz, K. (1999) Molecular analysis
of NOZZLE, a gene involved in pattern
formation and early sporogenesis during sex organ development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA
96, 11664–11669.
Schmidt, E.D., Guzzo, F., Toonen, M.A.
and De Vries, S.C. (1997) A leucinerich repeat containing receptor-like
kinase marks somatic plant cells competent to form embryos. Development
124, 2049–2062.
Scott, R.J., Spielman, M., Bailey, J. and
Dickinson, H.G. (1998) Parent-of-origin effects on seed development in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Development
125, 3329–3341.
Sharbel, T.F. and Mitchell-Olds, T. (2001)
Recurrent polyploid origins and chloroplast phylogeography in the Arabis
holboellii complex (Brassicaceae).
Heredity 87, 59–68.
Sherwood, R.T., Berg, C.C. and Young,
B.A. (1994) Inheritance of apospory in
buffelgrass. Crop Science 34, 1490–
1494.
Siddiqi, I., Ganesh, G., Grossniklaus, U.
and Subbiah, V. (2000) The dyad gene
is required for progression through female meiosis in Arabidopsis. Development 127, 197–207.
Sleutels, F., Zwart, R. and Barlow, D.P.
(2002) The non-coding Air RNA is required for silencing autosomal imprinted
genes. Nature 415, 810–813.
Smith, J. (1841) Notice of a plant which
produces seeds without any apparent action of pollen. Transactions of the Linnaean Society, 18.
Sokolov, V.A., Kindiger, B. and Khatypova, I.V. (1998) Apomictically

reproducing 39-chromosome maizeTripsacum hybrids. Genetika 34,
499–506.
Sørensen, T. and Gudjonsson, G. (1946)
Spontaneous chromosomal aberrants
in apomictic Taraxaca. Kongelige
Danske Videnskabernes Selskab Biologiske Skrifter 4, 3–48.
Sorensen, M.B., M., C.A., Robert, H.,
Bancharel, E. and Berger, F. (2001)
Polycomb group genes control pattern
formation in plant seed. Current Biology 11, 277–281.
Sorensen, M.B., Mayer, U., Lukowitz, W.,
Robert, H., Chambrier, P., Jurgens,
G., Somerville, C., Lepiniec, L. and
Berger, F. (2002) Cellularisation in
the endosperm of Arabidopsis thaliana is coupled to mitosis and shares
multiple components with cytokinesis.
Development 129, 5567–5576.
Stebbins, G.L. (1950) Variation and Evolution in Plants. Columbia University
Press, New York.
Stebbins, G.L. (1971) Chromosomal
Evolution in Higher Plants. Edward
Arnold, London.
Stone, S.L., Kwong, L.W., Yee, K.M.,
Pelletier, J., Lepiniec, L., Fischer,
R.L., Goldberg, R.B. and Harada, J.J.
(2001) LEAFY COTYLEDON2 encodes a B3 domain transcription factor
that induces embryo development.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 98, 11806–
11811.
Suomalainen, E., Saura, A. and J., L.
(1987) Cytology and Evolution in
Parthenogenesis. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida.
Teppner, H. and Klein, E. (1993) Nigritella gabasiana spec. nova, N. nigra
subsp. iberica subsp. nova (Orchidaceae – Orchideae) und deren Embryologie. Phyton 33, 179–209.
Toenniessen, G.H. (2001) Feeding the
world in the 21st century: plant breeding, biotechnology, and the potential
role of apomixis. In: Savidan, Y., Carman, J.G. and Dresselhaus, T. (eds)
Flowering of Apomixis: from Mechan-

The Molecular Biology of Apomixis
isms to Genetic Engineering. CIMMYT, IRD, European Commission DG
VI, Mexico, pp. 1–7.
Tucker, M.R., Araujo, A.-C.G., Paech,
N.A., Hecht, V., Schmidt, E.D.L., Rossell, J.-B., De Vries, S.C. and A.M.G.,
K. (2003) Sexual and apomictic reproduction in Hieracium subgenus
Pilosella are closely interrelated developmental pathways. Plant Cell 15,
1524–1537.
Valle, C.B., Glienke, C. and Leguizamon,
G.O.C. (1994) Inheritance of apomixis
in Brachiaria, a tropical forage grass.
Apomixis Newsletter 7, 42–43.
Van Dijk, P.J. (2003) Ecological and evolutionary opportunities of apomixis:
insights from Taraxacum and Chondrilla. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society, Series B 358,
1113–1121.
Van Dijk, P. and Van Damme, J. (2000)
Apomixis technology and the paradox
of sex. Trends in Plant Science 5,
81–84.
Van Dijk, P.J., Tas, I.C.Q., Falque, M.
and Bakx-Schotman, T. (1999)
Crosses between sexual and apomictic
dandelions (Taraxacum). II. The breakdown of apomixis. Heredity 83, 715–
721.
Van Dijk, P.J., Van Baarlen, P. and De
Jong, J.H. (2003) The occurrence of
phenotypically complementary apomixis-recombinants in crosses between
sexual and apomictic dandelions (Taraxacum officinale). Sexual Plant Reproduction 16, 71–76.
Veilleux, R. (1985) Diploid and polyploid
gametes in crop plants: mechanisms
of formation and utilization in plant
breeding. Plant Breeding Reviews 3,
253–288.
Veronesi, F., Mariani, A. and Tavoletti, S.
(1988) Screening for 2n gamete producers in diploid species of genus Medicago. Genetica Agraria 42, 187–200.
Vielle-Calzada, J.P., Nuccio, M.L., Budiman, M.A., Thomas, T.L., Burson,
B.L., Hussey, M.A. and Wing, R.A.
(1996) Comparative gene expression

389
in sexual and apomictic ovaries of Pennisetum ciliare (L.) Link. Plant Molecular Biology 32, 1085–1092.
Vielle-Calzada, J.-P., Thomas, J., Spillane, C., Coluccio, A., Hoeppner,
M.A. and Grossniklaus, U. (1999)
Maintenance of genomic imprinting at
the Arabidopsis medea locus requires
zygotic DDM1 activity. Genes & Development 13, 2971–2982.
Vielle-Calzada, J.-P., Basker, R. and
Grossniklaus, U. (2000) Delayed activation of the paternal genome during
seed development. Nature 404,
91–94.
Vijverberg, K., Van Der Hulst, R., Lindhout, P. and Van Dijk, P.J. (2004) A
genetic linkage map of the diplosporous chromosomal region in Taraxacum (common dandelion; Asteraceae).
Theoretical and Applied Genetics
108, 725–732.
Voigt, P.W. and Burson, B.L. (1983)
Breeding of apomictic Eragrostis curvula. 14th International Grasslands
Congress, pp. 160–163.
Weidman, J.R., Murphy, S.K., Nolan,
C.M., Dietrich, F.S. and Jirtle, R.L.
(2004) Phylogenetic footprint analysis
of IGF2 in extant mammals. Genome
Res 14, 1726–1732.
Weijers, D., Geldner, N., Offringa, R. and
Jurgens, G. (2001) Seed development:
early paternal gene activity in Arabidopsis. Nature 414, 709–710.
Weld, R.J., Bicknell, R.A., Heinemann,
J.A. and Eady, C.C. (2002) Ds
transposition mediated by transient
transposase expression in Heiracium
aurantiacum. Plant Cell Tissue and
Organ Culture 69, 45–54.
West, M., Yee, K.M., Danao, J., Zimmerman, J.L., Fischer, R.L., Goldberg,
R.B. and Harada, J.J. (2001) LEAFY
COTYLEDON1 is an essential regulator of late embryogenesis and cotyledon identity in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 6, 1731–1745.
Whitacker, M. and Swann, K. (1993)
Lighting the fuse at fertilization. Development 117, 1–12.

390

R.A. Bicknell and A.S. Catanach
Williams, J.H. and Friedman, W.E. (2002)
Identification of diploid endosperm in
an early angiosperm lineage. Nature
415, 522–526.
Winkler, H. (1908) Über parthenogenesis
und apogamie im pflanzenreiche.
Prog. Rei. Bot. 2, 293–454.

Yang, W.C., Ye, D., Xu, J. and Sundaresan, V. (1999) The SPOROCYTELESS gene of Arabidopsis is required
for initiation of sporogenesis and
encodes a novel nuclear protein.
Genes & Development 13, 2108–
2117.

Index

ABC model of floral development 94, 100–103,
104, 106, 129–131, 238, 300, 301,
346
ectopic expression studies 104
history 117
modification 135
and reproductive organs 105
ABCDE model 130–131
ABCE model 106
abiotic stress 158–159
and pigmentation 200
abscisic acid (ABA) 55, 61, 159–160
and anthocyanin biosynthesis 197
and flower senescence 165
ACC biosynthetic genes
and floral senescence 166
synthase and oxidase 161–162, 164
Actinidia deliciosa floral development 256
AGAMOUS (AG) gene 339
age and senescence 151
agriculture and apomixis 356–357, 377–378
allelic-specific DNA sequence information
inheritance 258–259
Allium 358
ampeloprasum 5
Alstroemeria floral senescence 152, 154, 155,
165
Amborella trichopoda 127
angiosperms
and apomixis 355–356
origin and diversification 124–126
phylogeny 126–129, 128
self-incompatibility mechanism 269–270
ANITA taxa 127, 128–129

acyclic flowers 140
and floral symmetry 140
annual flowering plants 26
summer 42
winter 27–28, 42
Antennaria and apomixis 359, 363
anthers
dehiscence 319–322
development 299, 299–300
development genetic control 304–307
and tapetum-specific transcripts 302
anthesis 152–153
anthocyanidins structure 185
anthocyanin biosynthesis 197, 200
increasing 207–208
post-transcriptional mechanisms 199
prevention 207
transcription factors regulation 201–204
transcription factors utilization 210, 214
anthocyanins 178–179, 180, 184
acylation 210
cyanidin derived 188, 189
delphinidin-derived 188, 189, 205, 209
formation 188–189
glycosylation 210
methylation 210
pelargonidin-derived 188, 189, 209
vacuole storage 190
Anthurium pigmentation 199, 203
Antirrhinum hispanicum (Scrophulariaceae)
A. hispanicum S-locus F-box gene
(AhSLF) 274, 275
gametophytic self-incompatibility 270,
271

391

392
Antirrhinum majus 5, 125, 201
aureusidin synthase (AUS) 186
DEF protein DNA-binding 107
floral symmetry genes 140
genes
AGAMOUS (AG) 300
centroradialis (cen) mutant 90, 251, 253
CYC-like 140, 142
CYCLOIDEA (CYC) 253
FLORICAULA (FLO) 238
floricaula mutant 83
manipulated for flowers and reproduction
246
PLENA (PLE) 300
SQUAMOSA (SQUA) 86
Globosa (GLO) protein DNA binding 107
Squamosa (SQA) protein DNA-binding 107
stamen expression studies 302
stamen identity genes 300
stylar ribonuclease (S-RNase) and selfincompatibility 272
transcription factors 70
antisense transgene 206, 207, 284, 303
modifying caratinoid biosynthesis 216
and plant transgene silencing 239–240
apomixis
and agriculture 373, 377–378
autonomous 360
biogeographical distribution 357–359
comparative gene expression with sexual
plants 374–376
definition 354–355
detection 362–364
endosperm formation 372–374
epigenetic regulation 376–377
as a facultative process 361–362
gametophytic 358, 359, 362
gametophytic and polyploid 365–366
gene identification 367–369
genetic control of native apomicts
364–365
introduction into sexual crops 377–378
maternal 362, 374
and morphological polymorphism
356
paternal 355
and polyploidy promotion 366–367
pseudogamous 361
sporophytic 359, 360–361, 370
synthesis 377–378
‘synthesis’ in sexual systems 369–374
value to agriculture 356–357
apospory 359, 362, 363, 364, 368
Arabidopsis dyad 370–371
Arabidopsis lyrata
self-incompatibility 289

Index
self-incompatibility dominance relationship
287
sporophytic incompatibility 279, 282, 287
Arabidopsis thalia 4, 5, 125
ABC genes 130
allelic-specific DNA sequence information
inheritance 258–259
anther dehiscence 319–321
anther development 304–307
anthocyanin biosynthesis regulation 204
apomixis genes 373
asymmetry and anther development 304
autonomous flowering pathway 56
autonomous flowering pathway mutants 33
bitegmic ovule 334
callose wall synthesis 310–311, 312, 313
chemically produced mutations 239
critical flowering time 50–51
cytokinin perception 69
cytokinin signalling 61
endosperm formation 373–374
environmental stress flowering pathway 55
ethylene-receptor genes 162
ethylene signal transduction 69
evolution of vernalization response 42
external flowering signals regulation 55–56
external stimuli for flowering 51
floral and inflorescent meristems 82–84
floral-enabling pathways 9, 10–11
floral meristem and stamen specification
299–301
floral meristem identity genes 85–89
floral-promotion pathways 9–11
floral quartet mutants and tetrads 313
floral symmetry 140
flowering pathways 7–8, 15–18
flowering time independent of photoperiod
pathway 33
genes (see separate list for genes by name)
determining vernalization requirement 30
genes in floral signalling pathways 53
mutations and organ identity 101–102,
102, 105, 109–112
as genetic model of flowering 243–244
gibberellins promoting flowering 57–60
glucose and ABA signalling 157
inflorescent and floral meristems 90–92
inflorescent meristem identity 92–93
integuments initiation and growth genetic
regulation 343, 344–345
juvenile-adult phase change 247, 247–249,
257–258
light-dominant plant 12
manipulated for flowers and
reproduction 245–246
mechanisms of vernalization 28–29

Index
megaspore mother cells (MMCs) 341–343,
375
microsporangium development 305
microsporocyte cytokinesis 309–310
mutant tapetal development 314
mutants and primexine deposition 315
ovule development 335, 336–337
ovule mutant genes 334–335
ovule primordia growth and patterning
340–341
photoperiodic perception pathway 11–20, 62
photoreceptors and floral initiation 51, 52–54
phytochromes 52, 53, 54
pigment regulation 199
placental development 338
ploidy status and methylation 365
post-transitional gene silencing (PTGS)
248–249
proteins
FKF1 17
INO 345
MADS-box 63–64
MADS-box transcription factors 64, 69
MALE MEIOCYTE DEATH (MMD) 309
phytochrome-interacting (PIF3) 13
SUP 345
quantitative trait loci 15, 33, 38
repression of phenylpropanoid 210
self-compatibility studies 289
shoot apical meristems 71–72
short-day promotion pathway 69–70
signalling pathways overview 53
stamen development gene research 301–304
stamen expression studies 302
thermosensory flowering pathway 56–57
transcriptional regulator AB13 13
unitegmic mutants 343–344
vegetative to reproductive phase changes
249–251
vernalization 54–55, 55
vernalization requirement 29–34
vernalization response 37–40, 44
as winter annuals 27–28, 32
zinc-finger transcription factors 64
Archaefructus 127–128, 132–133
Armadillo repeat-containing protein 1 (ARC1)
286, 288
Asparagus officinalis 135
asymmetry 304
Asteraceae
and apomixis 355, 357
and tapetal development 314
aurones 179, 184
formation 185–186
introduced by genetic modification 208
Austrobaileyaceae 127, 128

393
autogamy (self-fertilization) 358
autonomous pathway to flowering 250, 251
auxins 198
and floral senescence 159–160, 166
Avena sativa 5
B-box genes 250
B class gene expression 131, 132, 134, 135, 136
B-ring hydroxylation 189
alteration by biotechnology 208–209
regulation 203
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 242
barley see Hordeum
basal dicots and ABC model 301
basic Helix-Loop-Helix (vHLH) transcription
factors 202
Beta vulgaris
and apomixis 375–376
and carotenoids biosynthesis 198
betalain pigments
biosynthesis 194–195, 196, 197–198
genetically modified 217
biosynthetic pathways 180, 181–183
description 179
biennial flowering plants 26
bioinformatics 239
biotin 242
bitegmic ovule 333, 334
Blitum capitatum and virgatum 7
blue pigmentation strategies 209, 210
Brachiaria 368
Brachiaria brizantha 375, 376
bract pigmentation 179
Brassica juncea carinata; pekinensis 5
Brassica napus
callose wall 311, 312
male meiosis 313
somatic embryogenesis 372
Brassica spp.
apomixis and suppressed recombination 368
mutant floral phenotypes 252
pollen coat proteins and stigma development
314
pollen wall patterning 317–318
vernalization-responsive flowering 34
Brassicaceae
S-haplotypes 279–280, 282
self-pollen rejection mechanism 280,
284–290
sporophytic self-incompatibility 270, 271
sporophytic self-incompatibility SRKdependent mechanism 287, 288,
289
C class genes 255–256
expression 131, 134

394
Calamagrostis purpurea 366
calcium
and delayed senescence 159
in the egg cytosol 371
and membrane catabolic activity 154–155
callose wall 309–311, 310–313
development 315, 318, 319
calmodulin (CaM) protein 286, 288
Cannabis sativa 5
capsanthin-capsorubin synthase 194
carbohydrates
and floral senescence 156–157
and pigmentation 197
carotenoid pigments
and catabolism 194
description 178
in Lilium tapetum 314
transcriptional control 200
carotenoid pigments biosynthesis 190, 191, 192,
192, 193–194, 198
pathways 180, 181–183
post transcriptional mechanisms 199
and transgene modification 214, 215–216,
217
carpels 101–102, 103, 104, 105
genetic identity promotion 104
structure 138–140
cauliflower mosaic virus 35S (CaMV 35S) 34, 240,
242–243, 244, 249
cell ablation 241–242
cell–cell communication 70–72
Cenchrus ciliaris 366
Centauria cyanus 7
cereals
gibberellins and floral process 59–60
vernalization requirement 34–37
vernalization response 41, 44
chalaza 332, 340, 341
homeotic conversion to carpels 346
chalcones 179, 184
formation 185
introduced by genetic modification 208
naringenin structures 185, 187
Chenopodium polyspermum and rubrum 7
Chondrilla and apomixis 358
chromatin 366
changes after vernalization 39
remodelling 55, 64–65, 377
chromoplasts 178
chrysanthemum 209
circadian clock 9, 11–17, 42, 52, 69
oscillator 12–14
and senescence 157–158
Citrus
and apomixis 361, 364
flowering control 257

Index
Coffea arabica 5
cold acclimation 41, 54–55
collumellae 315, 316, 317–318
colonization and apomixis 358
conifers 125, 126, 131, 137
constitutive photomorphogenesis (COP) system 201
Coprosoma 363
Cortaderia and apomixis 358, 363
cryptochromes 9, 11–14, 14, 15, 52
cucumber see Cucumis sativus
Cucumis sativus 5, 7
and carotenoids biosynthesis 198
CYC-like genes 140–142
Cycas circinalis male cone 125
Cyclamen persicum 209
Cymbidium orchid 209
cytokinesis 309
cytokinin 198
and flower senescence timing 159–160
signalling 60–61
cytosol 180, 190
cytosolic Ca2þ 277–278, 279
dark-dominant plants 6, 11
Datura and parthenogenesis 371
Daucus carota somatic embryogenesis 372
day-neutral plants 4, 51
daylength 3
and flowering 56–57
DELLA proteins 58, 59
Delphinium elatum 5
Dianthus carthusianorum 5
Dianthus caryophyllus 179
ethylene signalling 162–163
and senescence 152, 154, 155, 157, 163
Dianthus spp.
genetic modification for colour 205
pigmentation 209
dimers and heterodimers 94, 107, 137, 243, 301
diphtheria toxin 242
diplospory 359, 362–363, 368
DNA microarrays 117
dominance relationships, molecular basis 287, 289
dormancy 26
drought and flowering 55
drought-avoidance mechanism 42, 43
ecological niche 3
ectopic expression studies 104
embryo sac, reduced 360
embryo sac, unreduced 359, 362, 370
embryogenesis 376–377
environmental stimulation of flowering 247
Ericaceae 312
Erigeron and apomixis 358, 368
ethylene 55, 347

Index
and pigmentation 197
ethylene biosynthesis 156, 158
biocontrol for flower senescence 164
and flower senescence 161–162
in the gynoecium 158
and sucrose application 157
ethylene insensitive plants
daylily studies 152, 164–165
and flower senescence 151, 164–165
and soil-borne pathogens 164
ethylene sensitive senescence 151, 160–161
and ABA production 159–160, 162
ethylene signalling
and dehiscence 321
and flower senescence 162–163, 165
euangiosperms 128
euAP3 motif in homeotic proteins 136
eudicots 125, 129
petal formation 136
qualitative dimerization 137
eukaryotes non-coding RNA 377
Eustoma grandiflorum 5
evolutionary developmental genetics 129–131
exines 311, 314–315
and ectexine 315
patterning 318, 319
F-actin depolymerization 278
facultative plants see quantitative plants
female determinant in self-incompatibility
271–273
S-locus receptor kinase gene 280–283,
284–287
female sterility 347
flavenoid pigments
biosynthesis post transcriptional mechanisms
199
flavinol pigments in Lilium tapetum 314
flavone pigments
and dihydroflavonols formation 186, 188
regulation 203, 204
flavonoid pigments
biosynthesis 184–190
biosynthesis in transgenic plants 205–214
biosynthesis modified by transgenes
212–213, 214
biosynthetic pathways 180, 181–183
biosynthetic scheme 187
description 178–179
gene activity inhibition by sense or antisense
RNA 206
novel compound introduction 208
pathway precursors 185
production regulation 200–204
redirecting substrate within the pathway
207–208

395
flavonols
biosynthesis reduction 207
biosynthesis regulation 203
and leucoanthocyanidins formation 188
and overexpression of transcription
factors 210
floral development biotechnology 237–259
floral diversification 134–136
floral-enabling pathways 9, 10–11
floral homeotic genes
expression patterns 134–135
floral homeotic proteins 131, 136–138
floral initiation gene control 7–11
floral meristem
cell proliferation and fate 66–69
identity genes 27, 29, 81–94, 133
floral organ-identity genes 100–104, 129,
130, 131
AG expression initiation 110–111
AG post-transcriptional regulation 113–114
AG regulation targets 116
AG transcriptional repression 111–113
AP1 expression regulation 108, 109–110
AP2 translational repression 114–115
class B gene expression initiation 109–110
class B gene expression maintenance 110
class B gene regulation 115–116
expression 107–109, 110–111
floral organogenesis 100–117
genes 103
floral-pathway integrators 8, 29
floral pigmentation genetic modification 205–218
floral-promotion pathways 9–11
floral quartet model 130–131, 137, 238
floral senescence
and abiotic stress 158–159
abscised versus persistent petals 152
age related 160–165
age related versus pollination induced 151
biochemical changes 153–155
carbohydrate levels 156–157
and circadian rhythms 156–157
definition 150–151
ethylene insensitive 151–152
ethylene sensitive 151
genotypes 156
hormone influence on timing 159–160
molecular changes 155
physiological changes after anthesis 152–153
and pigmentation 179
pollination-induced 153, 158, 159, 166–167
floral signal
pathways integration 63–64
transduction mechanistic aspects 64–72
floral symmetry 140–142
floral transition 26, 27

396
florigen hormone 6, 17, 61–63
flow cytometry 363
flower origin 131–134
flowering time
control 27–28, 241
independent of photoperiod pathway 33
Fragaria x ananassa 5
Fuchsia hybrida 5
funiculus 332, 340, 341, 342
growth 346
gametophytic self-incompatibility (GSI) 270,
271–278, 279
S-glycoprotein-dependent mechanism 279,
289–290
S-RNase-dependent mechanism 273–277,
276
genes
discovery and manipulation methods
238–243
expression control 64–65
manipulated for flowers and reproduction
245–246
misexpression/overexpression 242–243
post-translational silencing 248
silencing 239–241
silencing mutations for juvenile-adult phase
change 248
targets for biotechnology in flowering
243–259
Gentiana lutea and carotenoids biosynthesis 198
genetic bottlenecks and apomixis 358
genetic modification of flower colour 206
using sense transgenes 211
genetic pathways and flowering 7–11
gerbera anthyocyanin production regulation 203,
207
gibberellic acid (GA) hormone 7, 180
and flower senescence 159–160, 165
GA 20 oxidase enzyme and LD plants 10
pathway to flowering 10, 250, 251
and pigmentation 197
as regulator of homeotic gene expression
108
signal transduction 29
signalling floral process 59–60
Glycine max 4, 5
Agate 7
Biloxi 5, 7
male sterility 313
gnetophytes 127
Gnetum gnemon 131, 137
female cone 125
Gossypium 5
davidsonii 7
hirsutum 7

Index
Gramineae tapetal secretion 314
grasses
and apomixis 361, 363, 364, 367–368,
375
diplospory with pseudogamy 377–378
gibberellins and floral process 59–60
inflorescence 253
and pseudogamy 373
green fluorescent protein (GFP) 62, 71, 205, 287
guanosine triphosphatase activity 72
gymnosperms 125, 140
flowering control 256–258
phylogeny 126–129
gynoecium removal and vase life 158
haplotypes 270
heat shock and delayed senescence 159
Helianthus spp.
genes manipulated for flowers and
reproduction 246, 253
mutant flowers 253
tuberosus 5
Hemerocallis fulva 5
hermaphroditic cones 132
hermaphroditic flowers 126, 127, 132, 133
self-incompatibility mechanism 269–270
hermaphroditic plants and apomixis 359
heterodimers 137, 243, 275, 301
Hibiscus cannabinus; esculentus 5
Hieracium
and apomixis 357, 358, 361, 363, 369,
374–375
endosperm formation 373
and unreduced egg cell usage 370
histidine phosphotransfer proteins 60–61
histone
deacetylase complex 33
modifications 38, 40
homeodomain proteins 33
homodimers 137, 243, 301
Hordeum 4, 5
GAMYB gene 58, 59
short day vernalization 43
vernalization requirement genes 35–36, 37
Humulus japonicus; lupulus 5
Hyoscyamus niger 5
Hypericum 358, 368
Illiciaceae 127
Impatiens 209
floral reversal 92
inflorescence and floral organ architecture
251–254
inflorescent meristems 81–82, 84
and floral meristem identity 90–92
identity promotion 92–93

Index
integuments 332
evolution and fossil record 333–334
growth 344–345
homeotic conversion to carpels 346
initiation and growth gene regulation 343
Ipomoea
anthyocyanin production regulation 202
pigmentation 202, 209
Iris and senescence 155, 165
irradiation and flowering 55
isoflavonoids and overexpression of transcription
factors 210
isopentynyl diphosphate (IPP) formation 190, 191
Ixeris and apomixis 359
Jasminium grandiflorum 5
jasmonic acid (JA) 320–321
juvenile-adult vegetative phase change 247–249,
257–258
Kalanchoë blossfeldiana 5
kiwifruit see Actinidia deliciosa
laser capture microdissection 117
leaf grafts and flowering 6, 7
Lemna gibba minor 5
leucine-rich receptor kinases and integument
growth 344
light
and flower development 201
and pigmentation 195, 197, 198
quality 29
and senescence 158
signals, flowering and anther dehiscence 302
light-dependent pathway to flowering 250, 251
light-dominant plants 6, 11–12
light-quality flowering pathways 7, 10
Liliaceae 135, 137
gametophytic self-incompatibility 271
Lilium
callase complex 313
pollen wall patterning 317
stamen expression studies 302
tapetal secretion 314
Limonium 358, 363
Linaria vulgaris (Scrophulariaceae) 141
Linum usitatissimum 5
lipids in Lilium tapetum 314
lipoxygenase and senescence 153, 154
lisianthus 209
Lolium temulentum 59–60
Ba 3081 5
Ceres 5
long day plants 4–6, 11–12
crop species list 5
and gibberellin activity 59–60

397
photoperiods 27
long-distance flowering signal transmission 61–63
Lotus japonicus expression studies 302
lycopene 192, 194
Lycopersicon esculentum
callose wall 311, 312
and carotenoids biosynthesis 198
genes
manipulated for flowers and
reproduction 246
SELF PRUNING (SP) 251–252
SEPALLATA (SEP) 105
male meiosis 313
stamen expression studies 301
sympodial growth habit 91–92
M-locus protein kinase (MPLK) gene 286–287
MADS-box gene family 129, 133, 238, 338–339
expression patterns of class ABC 104
in grapes 255
overexpression 243
and ovule development 335
and petal pigmentation 197, 203
transcription factor 85, 90, 92, 93–94,
301
transcriptional regulators 252–253
MADS-domain proteins
definition 105–106
dimer binding 137
factor AGL15 164
MIKC-type 137
as transcription factors 106–107
male determinant in self-incompatibility 273–277
S-locus protein 11/S-locus cysteine-rich
protein 283–287
male gametophytes
development 298–322
mutations 303–304
male organs 132
male sterility 303–304
Medicago spp. 5
and unreduced egg formation 370
megagametogenesis 376
megaspore mother cells (MMCs) 341–343, 359,
363, 375
megasporogenesis 369
meiosis
and apomixis 359, 360, 362
avoidance 370–371
male, and cell wall 309–310
regulation 322
in sporogenous cells 307–309
meiosis-mitotic cell division 5454
membrane study during senescence 154–156
meristem identity control 249, 251
meristematic receptor-like kinase (MRLK) 93

398
methylation-induced gene silencing 241
methylation of DNA 64–65
micro RNAs (miRNAs) 241
micropyle 342
microsporangium
development 305, 307–311, 313–315
patterning 322
Mohavea and CYC-like genes 142
monocots and ABC model 301
monopodial development 251
morning glory see Ipomoea
Mostly Male Theory 133–134
mutagenesis 369
mutation induction as research tool 238–239
MYB 10, 12–13, 201–204
transcription factor 320
myosins 376
N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) 58
Narcissus and senescence 155, 165
Narcissus pseudonarcissus
and carotenoids biosynthesis 198
nexine 316
Nicotiana alata gametophytic selfincompatibility 271
Nicotiana sylvestris 5, 7
Nicotiana tabacum
callose wall 5, 7, 201, 208, 311, 312
control of inflorescence 252
Maryland Mammoth sp. 4, 5
pollen wall patterning 317–318
stamen expression studies 302
transgenic male meiosis 313
night breaks 6, 11–12
Norflurazon 316
nucellus 332, 357
growth and differentiation 341–342
homeotic conversion to carpels 346
nutrient transport system 6
Nymphaea odorata 125
Nymphaeales 127, 128
obligate plants see qualitative plants
oilseed rape see Brassica napus
stamen expression studies 302
Opuntia and apomixis 358
Orchidaceae
and apomixis 357
endosperm 372–373
organellar differentation 308
orthophosphate 69
Oryza sativa 4, 5
carpel morphology 139
daylength perception 18–20
floral repression in LDs 42
floral symmetry genes 140

Index
genes
DROOPING LEAF (DL) 139
Early heading date 1 (ehd1) mutant
19–20
Early heading date 1(ehd1) mutant
69–70
Heading date (Hd1 - Hd4) mutants
18–19, 20
Heading date1 (Hd1) mutant 250
‘Golden rice’ produced by transgenes 214
semi-dwarf rice and SD-1 gene mutation
237–238
as short-day plant 18–20
short-day promotion pathway 69–70
stamen expression studies 302
vernalization requirement 34
‘out-of-female’ hypothesis 133
‘out-of-male’ hypothesis 132, 133, 134
ovule
development 332–347
development hormonal regulation 347
developmental genes 335, 336–337
formation on sepals 339–340
identity loss 346
molecular evolution 334–335
primordia growth and patterning 340–341
ovule-floral molecular pathways 335
P. grandiflora and carotenoids biosynthesis 198
paleoAP3 motif in homeotic proteins 136
Panicum and apomixis 361, 363, 364
Papaveraceae 5
gametophytic self-incompatibility 270, 271,
277–278, 279
parthenogenesis 360, 362, 364, 369, 370,
371–372, 376
Paspalum notatum 366, 368
pathogen infection and flowering 55
PCR screening as research tool 239
peas see Pisum sativum
pelargonium see Puccinia spp.
peleoric mutants 141
Pennisetum
apomictic ovules 375
and apomixis 363, 364, 366, 367–369
ASGR and retrotransposon association
377
perennials and apomixis 358
perianth 125, 127, 133
Perilla
anthyocyanin production regulation 202
phloem sap analysis 63
red 5
petals 101, 102, 104, 105
abscised versus persistent 152
organogenesis 115–116

Index
pigmentation 179
senescence 156
Petunia spp. 5, 201, 208
anther removal and pigmentation 197
anthyocyanin production regulation 203
callase complex 313
gametophytic self-incompatibility 271, 272,
274, 276
genes for placenta, ovule and seed
development 338–339
male sterility 313
orange flowers produced by transgenes 209
and senescence 153
SEPALLATA (SEP) genes 105
SUP protein and integument 345
tapetal nuclei and DNA levels of 8C 314
Pharbitis nil 5
Phaseolus vulgaris 201
phenylalanine 184
phenylpropanoid biosynthesis 201
phenylpropanoid genes 199, 204
regulation 204
repressed by transcription factors 210
phloem sap analysis 62, 63
phospholipid catabolic activity 153, 154, 155
photoperception 14–15
photoperiodism 11–20, 42, 250
definition 3
flowering pathways 7
physiology 4–7
response 3–4, 250
transmissible signals 6–7
and vernalization 29
phytochromes 9–10, 14, 15, 16, 52
phytoene formation 192
pigment biosynthesis 180–195
enzymes with published DNA sequences
181–183
regulation 195–204
pigmentation control and biotechnology
178–218
Pinus radiata genes 133
Pisum sativum 5, 7, 162
mutant genes and inflorescence 92
tendrils 254, 255
placenta 332, 333
and ovule initiation 338–339
plant development modules 244
plant fertility and pigment production 179–180
plant transgene silencing (PTGS) 240
plasmalemma 153, 310
Poaceae and apomixis 355, 357, 358, 361, 368
Podostemonaceae endosperm 372–373
pollen
coat formation 314–315
coat proteins (PCPs) 283

399
development and male gametophic
mutations 303–304
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 278
mother cells (microsporocytes) 299
phenotypes and stylar ribonuclease
(S-RNase) 273, 274–277
pigmentation 179, 204
production and tree reproduction 258
profilin protein 278
wall patterning and development 317–318
wall structure 315–317, 316
pollen tubes 277
self inhibition 273, 276
pollination 150, 154
and flower senescence 153, 158, 159
and pigmentation 197
signals and changes for senescence 166–167
pollinator
attraction 218
signalling in orchids 178
polyembryony 366
polyspory 366
Poncirus trifoliata 364
primary sporogenous cells (PSC) 304–307
primexine 315, 317
programmed cell death 151, 321, 340
and self-incompatibility 278
protein–protein interactions 137–138
proteomics 302
Prunus S-locus F-box (SLF) gene 274, 275
pseudogamous apomicts 361
pseudogamy 373
Puccinia spp. 162, 209
qualitative plants 4, 26, 362–363
crop species list 5
heterodimerization 137
quantitative plants 4, 26, 33
crop species list 5
heterodimerization 137
quantitative trait loci (QTLs) 253, 364
RAF-like kinase inhibitor (RKIP) 90
rainfall and flowering 43
Ranunculaceae
and apomixis 364
auricomus 367
petaloid organs 135–136
rapid-cycling habit 42
receptor-like kinases (RLKs) 66–69
recombination, suppressed 368–369
reproductive organs 105
Rhododendron 5
rice see Oryza sativa
Ricin A toxin 242
Ricunus communis 5

400
RING-finger domains 276
RING-motif proteins 345
RNA-binding and signalling pathways 65–66
root apical meristems 93
Rosa gallica; rugosa 5
Rosa hybrida genetic modification for colour 205
Rosaceae
and apomixis 357
gametophytic self-incompatibility 270, 271
and senescence 153
and senescence ethyline signalling 162
R2R3-MYB transcription factors 202
Rubus and apomixis 358
S-genes 271–277, 278, 279–287
S-Glycoprotein-based self-incompatibility 277–278,
279, 289–290
S-haplotypes 279–283
S-locus cystein rich gene (SCR) 280, 283, 286, 288
S-locus F-box/S-haplotype-specific F-box
protein 273–277
S-locus glycoproteins gene (SLGs) 280–283
S-locus receptor kinase gene (SRK) 280–283,
284–287
salicyclic acid (SA) 55
Schisandraceae 127
Secale cereale 5
seed pigmentation 204
self-pollen rejection 284–287
self-pollen tubes inhibition 273, 276
sense transgene 206, 207, 208
modifying caratinoid biosynthesis 215–216
regulating flavonoid biosynthetic genes
212–213
RNA 211
sepals 101, 104, 105
converted to carpelloid tissues 330
organogenesis and class C gene
expression 134
Sesamum indicum 5
sexual reproduction 150
shoot apical meristem (SAM) 251
and biochemical signalling 57–61
cell proliferation and fate 66–69
conversion to inflorescence meristem 81–82
and cytokinin signalling 60–61
short-chain fatty acids and floral senescence 166
short day plants 4–6, 11–12
crop species list 5
promotion pathway 69–70
vernalization 43
Sicyos angulatus 7
signal transduction regulating floral
development 50–72
Silene armeria; coeli-rosa 5
Sinapis alba 60–61

Index
Solanaceae
gametophytic self-incompatibility 270, 271
stylar ribonuclease (S-RNase) and selfincompatibility 271–273
Solanum tuberosum 5
Sorghum bicolor; halepense 5
Sorghum male sterility 313
sorting nexin (SNX1) protein 286, 288
soybean see Glycine max
spermatophytes
flower and cone diversity 125
phylogeny 126–129
sporocyte formation 244
sporophytic mutations 303–304
sporophytic self-incompatibility 270
genetic complexity 279–280
SRK-dependent mechanism 280–283,
284–287, 288
sporopollenin 315, 317
SR genes and ethylene regulation 161, 163–164
stamens
development and function 298
organogenesis 101–102, 104, 105, 115–116
stigma self-incompatibility mechanism 280,
284–286
streptavidin gene 242
stress
and flowering stimulus 55
and pigmentation 200
stylar ribonuclease (S-RNase) female determinant
271–273, 289–290
sugar treatment for longevity 157
sympodial development 251
synangium theory 333
Tagetes erecta and carotenoids biosynthesis 198
tapetum 299, 302, 307, 308, 312, 313, 332
development 314–315
Taraxacum and apomixis 357, 358, 359, 361,
363, 364, 368, 370
targeting induced local lesions (TILLING) 239
tectum 316
formation 318
telome theory 333
temperature
and flowering 7, 10, 27, 51, 55, 56–57
and pigmentation 195
and senescence 158–159
and vernalization 43
tendrils, grape and pea 254, 255
teosinte (maize) 253
tetrads 310, 311, 312, 313, 313
tetrasomic inheritance 366
tobacco see Nicotiana tabacum
tobacco rattle virus 240
tocopherols 180

Index
tomato see Lycopersicon esculentum
toxins and prevention of flowering 241–242
transcription factors (TFs) 70–72
and anthocyanin modulation 210
and pigment biosynthesis 199–200, 201–204
profiling techniques 302
trees
acceleration of flowering 242–243, 244
biotechnology to control flowering 256–258
juvenile period 238
juvenile to maturity vegetative phase
change 247–249, 257–258
prevention of flowering 241–242
Trifolium pratense (English Montmorency) 5
Trimeniaceae 127
Triticum 4, 5
genes manipulated for flowers and
reproduction 245
photoperiodic response manipulation
250–251
‘Salmon’ system and parthenogenesis 371,
375
short day vernalization 43
winter growth in mild temperatures 42
Triticum monococcum
MADS-box transcription factor 36
vernalization requirement genes 34–35,
36–37
Tulipa spp. 125, 137, 209
unitegmic mutants 343–344
unreduced egg cell formation 367, 370
UV light 158, 184
vacuoles 178, 179, 180, 184, 210
import of flavonoids 189–190
vegetative to reproductive phase change
249–251
vernalization 7, 9
definition 26
evolution 41–43
and histone H3 deacetylation 65
molecular process dissection 28–29
pathway to flowering 250, 251
requirement 29–37
response 37–41
Vicia faba 5
Viola cornuta 203
light and pigmentation 197
viral transfer and apomixis 356
virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) 240

401
Vitis vinifera
floral development and biotechnology
254–256
genes manipulated for flowers and
reproduction 246
water loss during senescence 153
water stress
and flowering 51
and pigmentation 195
water-use efficiency and flowering 43
WD-repeat proteins 202
wheat see Triticum
white campion stamen expression studies 302
whorl development microbiology 101–107
wilting 153
woody perennial species biotechnology 254–256
Xanthium strumarium 5, 7
xanthophyll pigments formation 192, 193, 194
yeast proteins 105, 107, 113, 137, 276, 311,
365
Zea mays 5
anthyocyanin production regulation
202, 204
genes
floral symmetry and domestication
140–141
INDETERMINATE 62
KNOTTED 1 (KN1) 70
manipulated for flowers and
reproduction 245–246, 253
manipulation of inflorescence and floral
development 253–254
msca1 mutations and anther development
305
mutation and apomixis 370
Viviparous1 (Vp1) 204
introduction of apomixis 356–357, 363
juvenile-adult phase change genes 248–249
signalling pathway for flowering 51
stamen expression studies 302
tapetal nuclei and DNA levels of 16C 314
TEOSINTE locus mutations 237
vernalization requirement 34
Zephyranthes 358
zinc-finger domain 250

Index of Flower Genes

A6, 313
ABERRANT TESTA SHAPE (ATS), 334
ABORTED MICROSPORES (ABM), 303
ACR4, 344
AERIAL ROSETTE1 (ART1), 53
AGAMOUS (AG), 84, 94
C whorl identity and sporocyte formation, 244
expression initiation, 110–111
floral meristem identity, 103
and floral meristem identity, 68
homodimers and stamen identity, 106–107
post-transcriptional regulation, 113–114
stamens and carpal development, 101, 300,
339, 346
transcriptional repression, 111–113
vernalization pathway gene, 53, 53
AGAMOUS LIKE-20 (AGL20), 29, 251
AGAMOUS LIKE-24 (AGL24), 53, 69, 87, 92–93
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT), 103, 112, 340, 343,
345
APETALA1 (AP1)
cellular autonomy study, 70–72
floral meristem identity, 29, 53, 62, 85–87,
88–89, 250, 251, 252
grape homologue, 255
MIKC type, 106–107
restricting TLL1 expression, 91
sepal and petal identity, 101, 103
APETALA2 (AP2), 53, 86, 89, 101, 103,
111–112
and integument growth, 345
translational repression, 114–115
APETALA3 (AP3), 300, 301
Class B gene expression maintenance, 110

402

Class B gene petal and stamen development,
101, 103
floral homeotic gene, 53
and floral organ identity, 84, 94
MIKC-type MADS-domain protein, 106–107
and PI activity, 303
Atgs15, 311
BELL1 (BEL1), 340, 341, 346
BELLRINGER (BLR), 103, 111–112
CARPAL FACTORY (CAF ), 113
CAULIFLOWER (CAL), 53, 88–89, 91, 252
cauliflower (cal) mutant, 85–87
CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED1(CCA1),
12–14
CLAVATA 1-3 (CLV1, CLV2, CLV3), 66–68, 305
CLAVATA1 (CLV1), 343
clavata mutants, 300
CONSTANS (CO), 9, 10, 13, 15–17, 18, 19, 52,
53, 56, 62, 63, 64, 250, 251
CONSTITUTIVELY MORPHOGENETIC1
(COP1), 14, 52
CRABS CLAW (CRC), 103, 104, 138–139
CRYPTOCHROME1 (CRY1) photoreceptor, 14,
15, 52, 54
CRYPTOCHROME2 (CRY2) photoreceptor, 9, 11,
14, 15, 16, 52, 54
CUP SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC), 115
CURLY LEAF (CLF), 103, 111–113
DEETIOLATED1 (DET1), 14
DEFECTIVE IN ANTHER DEHISCENCE1
(DAD1), 321

Index of Flower Genes

403

DELLA, 58, 59, 108
DICER-LIKE1 (DCL1), 340, 344
dif1.syn1 mutants, 303

INCURVATA1 (ICU1), 111–112
INCURVATA2 (ICU2), 103
INNER NO OUTER (INO), 139, 334

EARLY BOLTING IN SHORT DAYS (EBS)
mutation, 55
EARLY FLOWERING5 (EFL5), 34
EARLY FLOWERING IN SHORT DAYS (EFS), 8
EARLY IN SHORT DAYS4 (ESD4), 8, 34, 53
ELF3, 13
ELF4, 13
embryonic flower 1 (emf1) mutant, 89
embryonic flower 2 (emf1) mutant, 89
EXCESS MICROSPOROCYTES1 (EMS1), 304,
305–307
EXTRA SPOROGENOUS CELLS (EXS), 304,
305–307

KANADI (KAN) family, 138
kanadi1 (kan1) mutant, 304
kanadi2 (kan2) mutant, 304

FCA, 33, 53, 56
FDA, 9
Fertilization independent seed (FIS) group, 372,
373, 374–375
fil1 mutant, 304
FILAMENTOUS FLOWER (FIL), 138
FLORICAULA (FLO), 133
FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC), 9, 54
and the autonomous pathway, 56
floral inhibition, 8, 9, 93–94, 250
and vernalization, 29, 30, 31–33, 37, 38, 53
FLOWERING LOCUS D (FLD), 9, 10, 33, 53,
56
FLOWERING LOCUS K (FLK), 9, 33, 53, 56
FLOWERING LOCUS M (FLM), 93–94
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FLT), 8, 10, 16, 17, 29,
53, 63, 64
FPA, 56
FRIGIDA (FRI), 8, 31, 37, 53, 54
FRIGIDA-LIKE2 (FR2), 53
FRIGIDA-LIKE (FRL), 31
FRIGIDA-LIKE1 (FRL1), 53
FRUITFULL (FUL), 53, 87–89, 255
FUSCA3, 372
FVE, 9, 33, 53, 56
FY, 9, 33, 53, 56
GI, 13
gibberellic acid1 (ga1), 10
gibberellic acid insensitive (gai), 10
HLL, 340
HUA1, 103, 113
HUA2, 103, 113
HUA ENHANCER1 (HEN1), 103, 113–114
HUA ENHANCER2 (HEN2), 103, 113–114
HUA ENHANCER4 (HEN4), 103
HUA ENHANCERS (HEN), 113–114

LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY), 12–14
LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 AND 2 (LEC1, LEC2),
371–372
LEAFY (LFY)
acting on CEN/TFL genes, 252
B class gene expression, 109
cellular autonomy study, 70–72
floral meristem identity, 52, 53, 62, 63, 64,
103, 107–108
floral pathway integrator, 8, 29
GA pathway, 57, 58
and hybrid aspen accelerated flowering,
243, 244
mutant cloning, 238
repressing AGL24 activity, 68, 69, 110–111
leafy (lfy) mutant, 109–110
leafy (lfy) mutant, 82–84, 85–87, 88, 91
LEUNIG (LUG), 103, 111–113
LUMINIDEPENDENS (LD), 33, 53, 56
MADS AFFECTING FLOWERING2 (MAF2), 40
MADS AFFECTING FLOWERING (MAFs),
32–33
MALE STERILITY2 (MS2), 303
MEDEA, 374
MEDICIS, 372, 373–374
MYB, 64
MYB26, 320
NOZZLE (NZZ), 116, 341, 342, 374, 375
NOZZLE/SPOROCYTELESS (NZZSPL), 304–305
PENNYWISE (PNY), 89, 249
PHOTOPERIOD INDEPENDENT EARLY
FLOWERING1 (PIE1), 8, 34, 65–66
PHOTOPERIOD INSENSITIVE EARLY
FLOWERING1 (PIE1), 53
PHYTOCHROME A (PHYA) photoreceptor,
9–10, 14, 15, 16
PHYTOCROME AND FLOWERING TIME1
(PFT1), 10
PHYTOCROME B (PHYB)
photoreceptor, 10, 14, 15
photoreceptor and flavonoid precursor, 201
PHYTOCROME D (PHYD) photoreceptor, 14
PHYTOCROME E (PHYE) photoreceptor, 10,
14, 15
PI, 301–303

404
PICKLE (PKL), 372
PISTILLATA (PI ), 53, 94, 101, 103, 106–107,
110, 300, 301, 303
PLENA (PLE), 300
POUNDFOOLISH (PNF ), 89, 249
SEEDSTICK (STK), 346
SEPALLATA 1-3 (SEP1, SEP2, SEP3), 84, 94,
103, 105, 106–107, 300
SERK, 374
SEUSS (SEU), 103, 111–113, 345
SHATTERPROOF1 (SHP1), 255, 339–340
SHATTERPROOF2 (SHP2), 103, 116, 255
SHORT INTEGUMENTS2 (SIN2) see
DICER-LIKE1 (DCL1)
SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP), 93–94
SPATULA (SPT), 103, 104
SPINDLY (SPY), 57, 58
SPOROCYTELESS (SPL), 63, 103, 116, 374, 375
STERILE APETALA (SAP), 103, 111–112
STYLISH1 (STY1), 345
superman mutant, 300
SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING2
(SG2), 248
SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING3
(SG3), 248
SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF
CONSTANS1 (SOC1)
and the autonomous floral signalling pathway,
53, 58
floral-pathway integrator, 8, 10, 16, 93–94,
250, 251
transcription factor, 63, 64, 69

Index of Flower Genes
TAPETAL DETERMINANT1 (TAP1), 305–306
TERMINAL FLOWER (TFL), 68
TERMINAL FLOWER1 (TFL1), 87
terminal flower (tfl) mutant, 251
terminal flower1 (tfl1) mutant, 90, 91
terminal flower2 (tfl2) mutation, 55
TES, 309–310
tetraspore (tes)/stud (std) mutants, 309
TIMING OF CAB1 (TOC1), 9, 12–14
TSO1, 344
UNICORN (UCN), 345
UNUSUAL FLORAL ORGANS (UFO), 86, 89,
103, 109–110
VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE (VIP), 8,
65–66
VERNALIZATION INDEPENDENCE3 (VIP3),
34, 53
VERNALIZATION1 (VRN1), 9, 53, 54
VERNALIZATION2 (VRN2), 9, 53, 54
VERNALIZATION-INSENSITIVE1 (VIN1), 38,
39, 40
VERNALIZATION-INSENSITIVE2 (VIN2), 39–40
VERNALIZATION-INSENSITIVE3 (VIN3), 9, 38,
40, 53
WUSCHEL (WUS), 68, 84, 103, 341, 343
YABBY family, 104, 138–140
yabby1 (yab1) mutant, 302

