MANAGEMENT
COMMUNICATION

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to these important contributors.
The Marriott School at Brigham Young University for providing many of the resources needed to create this open
textbook.
The Friends of the Harold B. Lee Library and Jennifer Paustenbaugh, University Librarian, at Brigham Young University,
for generously supporting our efforts from start to finish.
Dr. William Baker for being a role model and inspiration for so many of us.
Our students, who light up the world as they enter to learn and go forth to serve.

Producing this open textbook was a group effort.
Lisa Thomas (Lead author and project manager)
Julie Haupt, Andy Spackman, Karmel Newell, Kurt Sandholtz, Melissa Wallentine, Liz Dixon, Crickett Willardsen, Sue
Bergin, Mariana Richardson (Writers and contributors)
Linda Christensen, Valene Middleton, Leslie Kawai, Scott Taylor, Lara Burton, Duane Miller, Kacy Faulconer, Ryan
Starks, Warren Brunson, Shayne Clarke, Rick Murdock, Ross Storey (Reviewers, editors, cheerleaders)
Clarissa Oliphant (Slide design genius), Mallory Reese (Research assistant extraordinaire)

Want to use this resource?
You can use this online textbook freely as long as you follow our Creative Commons license to attribute the original
source. You can also subscribe to our learning activities, assignment prompts, and testing materials for a small fee.
If you’re interested in adopting this curriculum or learning about our textbook creation process, please get in touch!
Email us at byumcom@gmail.com.

Kurt Sandholtz, Director
Lisa Thomas, Assistant Director
The Management Communications Group
Marriott School Of Business, Brigham Young University
This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

Last updated 08 Dec 2017

CONTENTS

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

WHY?
Be a Skilled Communicator
WRITE
Look Good in Print
PLAN
Think Before You Write
ORGANIZE
Structure Matters
BUILD
Create Clarity & Coherence
RESEARCH
Find the Answers
FORMAT
Make Your Message Inviting

8
9
10
11
12
13
14

REVISE
Zoom Out – Zoom In
MANAGE
Getting Things Done…With People
PERSUADE
Be Convincing
SHOW
Show What You Mean
PRESENT
Stand & Deliver
BRAND
Manage Your Personal Brand
WORK
Get the Job

CHAPTER

1

WHY?
BE A SKILLED COMMUNICATOR

CONTENTS
4

WRITE FOR BUSINESS

7

BE A TOP HIRE

9

BECOME A LEADER

10 STAY CONNECTED
LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike
4.0work
International
License.
This
is licensed
under a

Creative Commons
Attribute and ShareAlike
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net.
Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would4.0
likeInternational
to adopt the curriculum.
License.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 1

2

This will be one of the most useful courses you’ll take in college.
Writing and communicating well matters. In this course, you’ll learn how to communicate your best
ideas to your most important audiences.
•

WRITE FOR BUSINESS. Clear and concise writing gets noticed and leads to action.

•

BE A TOP HIRE. Demonstrated communication skills improve your job prospects.

•

BECOME A LEADER. Effective communication skills help you lead.

•

STAY CONNECTED. Appropriate communication helps you stay connected in your networks
and relationships.

Get ready to explore ways to manage projects and people, design great-looking documents, and
present your ideas clearly and confidently.

HOW DO YOU SPEND YOUR WAKING HOURS?

70

We spend approximately
@

%

of our time communicating.
3

SECTION ONE

WRITE FOR
BUSINESS

ALUMNI ADVICE

Communication is the heart of business. Short emails,
complex reports, private chats, impassioned pitches,
formal presentations, and team meetings move
information and ideas around an organization, define
strategy, and drive decisions.
Business communication is concise, direct, clear, and
compelling.

Management Communication “was
one of the toughest classes of my
undergrad, but I learned lessons I use
every day in business.”

James Clarke
Founder of Clearlink and Clarke Capital Partners

4

WRITE TO BE UNDERSTOOD
Clear and Concise Writing
All writing styles, including business writing, can be written clearly without losing meaning. Plain language is a term used
to describe writing that is clear and concise. Many businesses and governments are revising traditionally dense, hard-tounderstand text using plain-language principles. Below is an example from PlainLanguage.gov.
FEMA’s Winter Preparedness Safety Tips
BEFORE

AFTER

Timely preparation, including structural and non-structural
mitigation measures to avoid the impacts of severe winter
weather, can avert heavy personal, business and
government expenditures. Experts agree that the
following measures can be effective in dealing with the
challenges of severe winter weather.

William Strunk and E. B. White

Severe winter weather can be extremely dangerous.
Consider these safety tips to protect your property and
yourself.

“A sentence should contain no unnecessary words, a
paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason
that a drawing should have no unnecessary lines and a
machine no unnecessary parts.”
5

THE BUSINESS AUDIENCE
Your audience dictates your business writing style. Keep
the following points in mind when composing:
•

Your audience is busy. Busy (and business) readers
want concise, no-nonsense information.

•

Your audience is analytical. Readers want solid
evidence and transparency.

•

Your audience is increasingly international. Even
though English is the global language of business,
avoid language that could create misunderstandings
or confusion for non-native English speakers.

•

Your audience is decisive. Business communication
often leads to decisions. Provide well-reasoned
recommendations.

•

Decision makers are critical of time wasters.
Business moves quickly, so give only pertinent
information. Make that information reliable and
easy to access.

BUSY
ANALYTICAL
INTERNATIONAL
DECISIVE
CRITICAL

6

SECTION TWO

BE A
TOP HIRE
Employers are hungry for people with communication
and leadership skills. Job market research firm
Burning Glass reports, “Writing, communication skills,
and organizational skills are scarce everywhere.
These skills are in demand across nearly every
occupation—and in nearly every occupation they’re
being requested far more than you’d expect based on
standard job profiles.”

ALUMNI ADVICE

“The majority of business
communication today happens through
email and social platforms, so I’m ever
grateful for the critical business writing
foundation that I gained through
[Management Communication].
I would recommend it to anyone.”
Eric Farr
Principal at BrainStorm
Brigham Young University, Economics, 1996

7

HIRE THE BEST WRITER
Employers are eager to hire good writers because clear
writing demonstrates clear thinking. Read about bad
business writing in this Harvard Business Review article:

 Bad Writing is Destroying Your Company’s Productivity.
A 2016 survey reveals that written and verbal
communication skills are in the top five attributes
employers are looking for when hiring new college
graduates (see Figure 1.1).

EMPLOYERS WANT GOOD COMMUNICATORS
Top five responses employers gave when asked what attributes they
look for when hiring new college graduates.
LEADERSHIP

Leadership

80.1%
78.9%

Ability
to work
in aIN
team
ABILITY
TO
WORK
A TEAM
WRITING
SKILLS
Written
communication skills
PROBLEM-SOLVING
SKILLS

70.2%

VERBAL COMMUNICATION
Problem-solving
skills

70.2%

Verbal communication skills
FIGURE 1.1

68.9%
National Association of Colleges and Employers

“If you are trying to decide among a few people to fill a position,
hire the best writer. . . . Clear writing is a sign of clear thinking. Great writers know how
to communicate. They make things easy to understand. They can put themselves in
someone else's shoes. They know what to omit. And those are qualities you want in
any candidate. Writing is making a comeback all over our society...Writing is today's
currency for good ideas.”
Jason Fried
Founder of Basecamp, Author of ReWork

8

SECTION THREE

BECOME
A LEADER
You become a leader by using your communication skills to
learn from people, coordinate their efforts, share
knowledge, communicate high standards, and inspire.
In their book, The Extraordinary Leader, researchers
Zenger and Folkman report that communicating
“powerfully and prolifically” enhances leadership
competencies, including even seemingly unrelated ones
like technical competence or strategic development.
Powerful communication is a skill—and a habit—that
enhances all other skills.

In your other classes, you’ll spend long hours deepening
your technical knowledge in your chosen field. However, if
you leave college unable to pitch a new idea to your team,
persuade an investor, or clarify data for a client, your
influence will be blunted and much of your effort wasted.
Hone your communication skills and you will be able to
powerfully contribute solutions to your workplace and
enhance your own career.

“Power comes not from knowledge
kept but from knowledge shared.”
Bill Gates in Time Magazine

9

SECTION FOUR

STAY
CONNECTED
Human connection is valuable to health, safety, peace, and success. We spend
the majority of our waking time in communication activities, driven to
connect—and stay connected—with other people.
Part of good business communication involves understanding another’s point of
view, delivering bad news clearly but diplomatically, maintaining trust through
ethical and honest messaging, and using language to encourage and motivate a
team.
Your study of business communications will not only help you increase your
workplace skills and employable value, but will also help you to live well,
understand others, stay connected, and accomplish your goals.

You can use these skills in
every area of your life…
RELATIONSHIPS You look upset. Want
to talk about it?
NEIGHBORHOOD Empty lot cleanup
party this Saturday at 10 a.m. Bring a
rake. Donuts provided!
COLLEAGUES Does everyone
understand the new reporting
policy?
CITY The new bond is an essential
tool for improving our transit system
for the following three reasons . . .

10

IN CONCLUSION
By practicing concise and direct communication, you’ll become more effective in business, a more
sought-after hire, a more influential leader, and a more connected human being.

Let’s get started.

11

LEARN MORE
Bennett, Jeanette. “10 Coolest Entrepreneurs: James Clarke.” Utah
Valley 360, December 11, 2015.
http://utahvalley360.com/2015/12/11/coolest-entrepreneursjames-clarke/, accessed February 2017.
Bernoff, Josh. “Bad Writing Is Destroying Your Company’s
Productivity.” Harvard Business Review, September 6, 2016.
https://hbr.org/2016/09/bad-writing-is-destroying-yourcompanys-productivity , accessed February 2017.
Burning Glass Technologies. “The Human Factor” (PDF file). November
2015. http://burning-glass.com/wpcontent/uploads/Human_Factor_Baseline_Skills_FINAL.pdf ,
accessed February 2017.
Wiens, Kyle. “I Won’t Hire People Who Use Poor Grammar. Here’s
Why.” Harvard Business Review, July 20, 2012.
https://hbr.org/2012/07/i-wont-hire-people-who-use-poo ,
accessed February 2017.
Davidson, Kate. “Employers Find ‘Soft Skills’ Like Critical Thinking in
Short Supply.” The Wall Street Journal, August 30, 2016.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/employers-find-soft-skills-like-criticalthinking-in-short-supply-1472549400 , accessed February 2017.

Fox, Tom. “Dealing with conflict in the workplace.” The Washington
Post, May 21, 2015. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/onleadership/wp/2015/05/21/dealing-with-conflict-in-theworkplace/?utm_term=.b1c8cc3c6d24 , accessed February 2017.
Friedman, Esther M. et al. "Social strain and cortisol regulation in
midlife in the US." Social Science & Medicine 74, no. 4 (2012): 60715. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.11.003 , accessed
February 2017.
Gates, Bill. “Bill Gates New Rules.” Time, April 19, 1999.
http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2053895,00.ht
ml , accessed February 2017.
Harris, Lynda. “The Cost of Bad Writing.” NA Business + Management
29, no. 8 (2015): 15, accessed February 2017.
Hartung, Kyle John, and Daniel Gray Wilson. “Conversational Moves
That Matter.” Adult Education Quarterly 66, no. 3 (2016): 254-272,
accessed February 2017.
Loranger, Hoa. “Plain Language is for Everyone, Even Experts.”
Nielsen Norman Group. October 8, 2017.
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/plain-language-experts/ ,
accessed October 2017.
NACE. “Job Outlook 2016.” November 18, 2015.
http://www.naceweb.org/s11182015/employers-look-for-innew-hires.aspx , accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

ARTICLES

12

LEARN
LEARN MORE
MORE
Plain Language: Improving Communications from the Federal
Government to the Public. May 2011. Accessed June 23, 2017.
http://www.plainlanguage.gov/index.cfm.
Stewart, Bri. “10 Coolest Entrepreneurs: Eric Farr.” Utah Valley 360,
December 11, 2015.
http://utahvalley360.com/2015/12/11/coolest-entrepreneureric-farr/ , accessed February 2017.
White, Myron L. “How Badly Does Management Want Good Business
Writing?” Journal of Business Communication 3, no. 2 (1966): 1516, accessed February 2017.

Fried, Jason, and David Heinemeier Hansson. Rework. New York, NY:
Crown Business, 2010.
Garber, Peter R. 50 Communications Activities, Icebreakers, and
Exercises. (Amherst: HRD Press, Inc., 2008.) PDF e-book.
https://www2.cortland.edu/dotAsset/c1a635f6-a099-4ede-8f1579b86e315088.pdf , accessed February 2017.
Strunk, William, and E. B. White. 2000. The Elements of Style. New
York: Longman.
Zenger, John, and Joseph Folkman. The Extraordinary Leader. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education, 2009.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

BOOKS

13

CHAPTER

2

WRITE
L O O K

G O O D

I N

P R I N T

Look Good in Print
When you write for business, write correctly. Simple mistakes can embarrass you
and cost your company real money. As evidence, read this New York Times article
about the million-dollar comma: Lack of an Oxford Comma Could Cost Millions
In Chapter 2 we’ll touch briefly on 22 fundamentals of good writing. We selected
these by counting and categorizing the most common mistakes in a large sample
of student papers. In other words, our approach is neither comprehensive nor
random, but pragmatic. We want to help you avoid the most common pitfalls.



REMEMBER:

Throughout this text,
any link marked with
the blue eyeball icon
is required reading.
You may be tested on
the content.

Grammar Rules. Some of the fundamentals are grammatical, reflecting the rules
that govern how sentences are constructed in the English language. These rules
have fairly definitive right and wrong answers (although grammar rules do
evolve; witness the recent acceptance of the singular “they” by some media
outlets).
Style Guidelines. Other fundamentals relate to style: preferred constructions
that, while not based on grammar rules, represent recommended practice. Many
organizations have their own style guides listing particular do’s and don’ts.
Always follow your employer’s style guide (if available). For purposes of this
course, consider sections 2A – 2C your basic in-class style guide. You
are responsible for learning and applying the 22 fundamentals contained in
these three chapters.

TIP: Each of the 22 fundamentals will be identified as
either a grammar rule or style guideline. We don’t
expect you to memorize which are which; we simply
include this information for those who are curious.

This is Chapter 2

2

Let’s get started . . .
Click on each of these titles to read the content and watch the supporting videos.

2A Syntax and Word Choice
2B Punctuation Plus
2C Verbs

Fundamentals 1 - 9

Fundamentals 10 - 16

Fundamentals 17 - 22

Proceed to online resources if you need further clarification and practice.
Remember, applying these fundamentals is now your responsibility.

Need quick access? Remember this link:

bit.ly/mcom320fundamentals

3

Suggestions?

Click HERE

IN CONCLUSION
If you were blessed with an amazing English teacher, this content may come easily. If you
weren’t that lucky, you’ll have to work harder.
This may be your last chance to learn to produce strong, clear writing without errors.
We’ve done our best to make it relatively painless.
You’re welcome!

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

CHAPTER

3

PLAN

THINK BEFORE YOU WRITE

CONTENTS
4

PURPOSE

6

AUDIENCE

9

STRATEGY

12 STRUCTURE
LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
This work
isInternational
licensed under
a
ShareAlike
4.0
License.

Creative Commons Attribute and ShareAlike

Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
International
byumcom@gmail.com if you4.0
would
like to adoptLicense.
the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 3

2

Without a plan, writing can be frustrating.
You’ve experienced the desperate boredom of listening to a rambling presentation and
the frustration of reading a confusing email that never makes a clear point. Even if you
have a short message or are rushed, save your audience’s time by planning your message
well before delivering it.
To plan a message, follow the steps in the acronym PASS:
1. Define your PURPOSE
2. Consider your AUDIENCE
3. Develop a STRATEGY
4. Build a STRUCTURE

3

SECTION ONE

Clearly define your purpose before you start writing. Decide what you want
your audience to know, feel, and do after reading your message.

ASK PURPOSE-DEFINING QUESTIONS
 Your employees have not been accurately documenting company expenses.
As a result, your company is losing money. You want to address this issue.
Before you compose an email to them, answer the following questions:
What INFORMATION do I want to share?

I want the employees to understand the new protocol for
submitting invoices.
What FEELING do I want to convey?

I want to encourage employees to be more conscientious
about how they spend the company’s money.
What ACTION do I want to occur?

I want employees to submit invoices that include a detailed
explanation of project expenses.
.

INFORMATION?
FEELING?
ACTION?

PURPOSE

4

COMPOSE A MESSAGE STATEMENT
In Writing Well for Business Success, Sandra Lamb encourages business writers
to define their purpose by composing a message statement. “Think through
what you want to communicate until you can concisely state your complete
message in a single sentence—a message statement. The simpler and shorter,
the better.” Condensing your thoughts into one short sentence will clarify your
purpose. For example,
NO
In this memo I want to explain to
everyone what is meant by casual
dress, especially shorts, collarless
shirts, and business dress, as
opposed to business casual. I will
talk about the new company
policy regarding the dress code, to
see what people think and try to
get them to follow it.

YES
I want to explain our company’s
new “business casual” dress code
and get employees to comply with
it.

“Think through what you
want to communicate
until you can concisely
state your complete
message

in a single
sentence
.”

3.1

Write a message statement for
an important email you need
to write soon. Does it affect
the outcome?

Sandra Lamb, author
Writing Well for Business

5

INFORMATION?
FEELING?
ACTION?

SECTION TWO

AUDIENCE
Who will be reading your message? Always write with your audience in mind. Ask
yourself the following questions before you write:
KNOW. What does my audience already know about my subject? How will I make
my message interesting and relevant to them? Do they know my qualifications?
FEEL. Will my audience have positive, negative, or neutral feelings about my
message? How should I address those feelings?
DO. What action should my audience take based on my message? How will I
motivate them to take that action?

DO

KNOW
FEEL
6

INTERNATIONAL AUDIENCES
When doing business with people from another country,
research their expectations for business behavior and
communication.
JAPAN

Never use your
chopsticks to point
during a meal.

MAKE IT RELEVANT
Everyone has time and resource constraints, so your first
goal should be to help your audience see why your
message matters to them. In Business Writing, Natalie
Canavor explains, “There is one universal to count on: selfinterest. We react to things and make decisions based on
‘what’s in it for me.’”

PICTURE YOUR AUDIENCE

RUSSIA

MIDDLE EAST

Avoid raising
your voice—it’s
a sign of
weakness.

Don’t put your feet
up; showing the soles
of your feet is
disrespectful.

Choose a country and learn something about its
cultural business expectations
• Quick Guide to Going Global
• ProQuest CultureGrams
• Global Road Warrior

Try creating a mental picture of your audience before you
write. When world-famous investor Warren Buffett
composes Berkshire Hathaway’s annual report, he writes
with his sisters in mind. Doing so helps him to avoid jargon
because he writes as if he were talking to them and tries to
explain concepts in terms they can understand. He informs
by using plain English. If, however, he were sharing the
same information with one of his colleagues, his approach
would reflect their shared knowledge.



Note: To access some of
these databases you may
need to sign into your library
account first.

3.2

Read Warren Buffett’s preface to the Plain
English SEC Filings Handbook. Try to emulate
his understanding of audience in your next
email.

7

TEST YOUR MESSAGE
What might be obvious to you because of your
background, education, and training might not be obvious
to your audience. Harvard professor Steven Pinker refers
to this phenomenon as "The Curse of Knowledge." Does
your audience understand the terms you are using? Can
they make the connections you are making? Don’t
oversimplify. Supply information at your audience’s level
of knowledge and experience. Test your message by
having someone read it who has a similar background to
your audience.

CONSIDER PRIVACY AND SECURITY
ISSUES
Consider a possible secondary audience. Even if you think
your document is electronically secure, write your email as
if your conversation is not private. Hackers uncovered
secure emails of Sony executives that revealed a general
lack of professionalism from the executives. This hurt the
professional image of a respected global company.
Compose your emails with the widest possible readership
in mind, and remember that written words can easily
go viral.

@

Be aware that

ANYONE
might read your
business emails. Plan
carefully and write
consciously.
8

SECTION THREE

STRATEGY
Never underestimate the power of emotion in the decision-making process. More than 2,000 years ago, Aristotle
introduced three rhetorical strategies that are still relevant today: ethos, logos, and pathos. Research increasingly
demonstrates that our emotions are pre-cognitive. In other words, the way we feel often precedes and influences how we
process facts.

PATHOS
Emotion, values.

Rhetorical

Emotional appeal doesn’t
necessarily mean an argument
devoid of facts and logic.
Remember, the first step in
planning is to think through
what you want the audience
to know, feel, and do.

R
ETHOS

Strategies

Credibility, trust.

Part of being credible is
knowing the facts. We’ll
explore the importance of
research and evidence in
Chapter 6.

LOGOS
Logic, reason, proof.

Decision makers tend to be
analytical thinkers who prize
logical arguments supported
by data. We’ll cover
developing arguments in
Chapter 10.

9

HOW, WHAT, WHY, WHEN, AND WHERE
HOW

Choose the communication channel that best supports your content and most appeals to your
audience. Would a paper document, an electronic message, or an in-person conversation be best?
Different communication methods involve different costs; speeds of delivery; and non-verbal, nonwritten cues (such as voice inflection and body language).
For example, face-to-face dialogue enables richness of both verbal and non-verbal communication,
but such conversations do not have the permanence of written documents. While emails can be
efficient, they do not have the personal touch of a handwritten note or the urgency of a text
message. A formal report might package information better than a long email.
All such factors play into your choice of channel. The impact of one communication channel over
another can determine whether your message is received in the way you intended.

WHY

Emphasize why the audience needs to read your message. You have seconds to capture your
audience’s attention before another message or task distracts them. This is true in communication
to senior executives, in marketing to new consumer audiences, and in situations with skeptical or
unfamiliar audiences. Make your message relevant and let readers know why they should keep
reading.
Even when you have bad news to share, find a starting point that helps your audience understand
why your message matters to them. Think of questions your reader will have and answer them
quickly and clearly.

Note the preferred communication channels of your key business
contacts. Does your boss ignore emails but respond to texts?
Message people where they are paying attention.

10

HOW, WHAT, WHY, WHEN, AND WHERE
WHAT
& WHERE

When formulating a strategy, be aware of the context. What professional pressures weigh upon
your audience—both from within and without their organization? What industry-wide problems
affect them? What personal biases might influence them at the moment? What internal or external
factors may shape the way your message is received? Context for a message is like the weather for
an event; it affects everything and can’t be ignored.

WHEN

Deliberately pace the delivery of your content. What time of day should you send that email or
hand-deliver that report? Readers appreciate directness, so introduce vital information right away
instead of slowly winding up to it. Keep your tone upbeat and friendly to avoid being seen as abrupt.
Deliver delicate, disappointing, or disturbing news with more context and less directness. We’ll cover
strategies for delivering bad news in CH 10: PERSUADE.
Most of all, remember to be concise. If you take too much time to explain or deliver your message,
the audience will likely move on to another more pressing matter or communication.

Check out the Best Time of Day to Send an Email

11

SECTION FOUR

STRUCTURE
The human brain is wired to look for order, patterns, and
structure—chaotic and poorly structured messages quickly
lose a reader’s respect and interest. Make that brain
preference work for you by building clear frameworks into
your writing.
The next chapter (CH 4: ORGANIZE) will explore this process
in detail.

12

IN CONCLUSION
The
steps require work, but the process is worth it. Being aware of PURPOSE, AUDIENCE,
STRATEGY, and STRUCTURE as you plan your work will turn potentially mushy, untidy, and costly
messages into sharp and effective ones.
Plan well.

13

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES
Buffett, Warren. “Preface.” In A Plain English Handbook: How to
Create Clear SEC Disclosure Documents. Office of Investor
Education and Assistance. Washington, DC: US Securities and
Exchange Commission, 1998.
https://www.sec.gov/pdf/handbook.pdf, accessed February
2017.
Bradley, Diana. “Lessons from Sony Hack: Be Careful What You
Email.” PR Week, December 19, 2014.
lhttp://www.prweek.com/article/1327386/lesson-sony-hackcareful-emai, accessed February 2017.
Ellering, Nathan. “What 10 Studies Say About The Best Time To
Send Email.” CoSchedule Blog, CoSchedule.com, March 23,
2016. http://coschedule.com/blog/best-time-to-send-email/,
accessed February 2017.
Lerner, Jennifer S. et al. “Emotion and Decision Making.” Annual
Review of Psychology 66 (2015): 799-823.
http://www.annualreviews.org.erl.lib.byu.edu/doi/pdf/10.114
6/annurev-psych-010213-115043, accessed February 2017.

Sleek, Scott. “The Curse of Knowledge: Pinker Describes a Key
Cause of Bad Writing.” Observer 28, no. 6, (2015).
https://www.psychologicalscience.org/observer/the-curse-ofknowledge-pinker-describes-a-key-cause-of-badwriting#.WJVjwrYrLq0, accessed February 2017.

BOOKS
Canavor, Natalie. Business Writing in the Digital Age. Los Angeles,
CA: Sage Publications, 2012.
Garner, Bryan A. HBR Guide to Better Business Writing. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Publishing, 2012.
Gladwell, Malcom. David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits, and the
Art of Battling Giants. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Company,
2013.
Lamb, Sandra E. Writing Well for Business Success. New York, NY: St.
Martin’s, 2015.
Pinker, Steven. The Sense of Style: The Thinking Person’s Guide to
Writing in the 21st Century. New York, NY: Penguin Books, 2014.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

14

LEARN
LEARN MORE
MORE
Roman, Kenneth, and Joel Raphaelson. Writing That Works; How to
Communicate Effectively In Business. New York, NY:
HarperCollins, 2000.

WEBSITES
Berkshire Hathaway. “Annual and Interim Reports.”
http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/reports.html, accessed
February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

15

CHAPTER

4

ORGANIZE
S

T R

U C

T U R

E

M

A

T T E

R

S

CONTENTS
4

ORGANIZE INFORMATION

6

OUTLINE

13 USE 4A STRUCTURE
LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
This work4.0
isInternational
licensed under
a
ShareAlike
License.

Creative Commons Attribute and ShareAlike

Attribute the original source4.0
at mcom320.net.
InternationalEmail
License.
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 4

2

We don’t like chaos.
Have you ever been frustrated while searching for something important in your junk drawer, in piles of paper on your desk,
or in unlabeled boxes in the basement?
Chaos can make us uncomfortable not only in our physical surroundings, but also in our communications. Communicating
works better when we follow a few basic organizing principles so that our audience knows what to expect.

This chapter will introduce you to the following:
•

The importance of organizing your written and oral
communication.

•

A few helpful ways to impose structure by using an outline.

•

An organizing template that can be applied to nearly all
business communications: the 4A structure.

GET ORGANIZED

1.8

Cottrill Research

HOURS
The amount of time
an average office
employee spends
searching for
information per day.

FIGURE 4.1

3

SECTION ONE

ORGANIZE
INFORMATION
In business communication, a jumbled stream of
thoughts—in a voicemail, a report to your boss, or an
email to a supplier—carries a meta-message that you’re
incompetent. Beyond limiting your career prospects,
rambling messages can also cost your company clients or
tarnish its image, resulting in direct financial losses.

Thoughtless &
Unprepared

1

2

3

ACTION

Smart &
Capable

4

STRUCTURE FOR CLARITY
Powerful communication requires organization. Chapter 3
introduced the PASS acronym:

Identify the PURPOSE
Know the AUDIENCE

The work of organizing begins long before you start putting
any words on a page, screen, or slide. Like building a house,
constructing a message begins with putting up the frame—
creating the bare bones structure and then finishing the
detailing after.
Framing a message is called outlining.

Choose the STRATEGY
Create a STRUCTURE
In Chapter 3, we explored writing with a purpose, writing for
an audience, and choosing a strategy. In this chapter we focus
on creating a message structure.
An unorganized message causes your reader to waste time
trying to understand it.

Organized information
is understood more quickly and

remembered
UP TO
40% BETTER.
Matt Abrahams: Insights by Stanford Business

5

SECTION TWO

OUTLINE
Digital word processing has enabled us to spew words onto the screen and then
rearrange them as needed. However, this composition method often produces long,
unorganized messages. Investing time in an outline will improve the clarity, flow, and
brevity of your message. Outlining forces you to do your thinking first, producing
smarter, more powerful messages.
We’ll examine three approaches to outlining:

TOP-DOWN APPROACH

MIND MAPPING

BOTTOM-UP APPROACH

Discipline your message structure.

Associate visually.

Create order from chaos.

When you already know the main
subtopics to address.

When you want to visually
explore multiple aspects.

When you have information but
need structure and direction.

6

TOP-DOWN OUTLINE
OUTLINING AS DISCIPLINE
Top-down outlines work well when you have a clear idea of
what you want to say. Producing a top-down outline allows you
to logically order your ideas and provide sufficient support for
each idea.
Read through the sample alphanumeric outline for a
sales presentation to the right (Figure 4.2).
Notice that the alphanumeric outline uses Roman numerals to
indicate the major sections and letters of the alphabet to
denote subsections. Arabic numerals indicate sub-subsections,
and so on.
A top-down outline is an excellent way to organize your
message, especially if you have a well-developed set of ideas
or structure to start with.

SALES MEETING

SAMPLE ALPHANUMERIC OUTLINE

I. Introduction
A. Build rapport
B. State your purpose (this is where your agenda
goes. See the “4A Outline”.)

II. Customer needs
A. Identify the “job to be done”
B. Establish the competitor’s performance
C. Identify gaps in the competitor’s offering
III. Product
A. Describe superior head-to-head performance
B. Introduce your product’s unique features
C. Highlight other advantages: cost, quality,
convenience, “cool factor,” etc.
IV. Summary and call to action
A. Emphasize advantages of your solution
B. Gain commitment to purchase
FIGURE 4.2
Need a refresher on alphanumeric outlines?
Review Purdue OWL’s Types of Outlines: Alphanumeric
Outlines.

7

MIND MAPS
OUTLINING AS ASSOCIATION
If your ideas are not fully developed, or if you’re more of a
visual thinker, you may prefer a mind map to a formal
outline. The term “mind map” was coined by Tony Buzan,
although the technique is centuries old. Figure 4.3
summarizes creating a mind map.

4.1

Create a mind map of the sales presentation outline on the
previous page. What is gained by the mind-map approach?
What, if anything, is lost?

THE PROCESS OF MIND MAPPING
1. Write the main idea in the
center of a blank page. This
gives you room to branch out in
all directions.

4. Expand your subcategories with
more branches and keywords.
This will allow you to further
refine your ideas.

2. Identify subcategories of the
main idea and assign each a
KEYWORD. Single words are
more powerful and memorable.
Choosing a single word forces
you to think clearly and
concisely.

5. Draw CURVED branches.
Straight lines feel mechanical;
curved lines feel organic. You
want your mind map to feel like
a living, breathing organism.

3. Draw BRANCHES from your
central image with labels for
your subcategories. Draw subbranches for the conceptual
components of each category.
Make use of color.

6. Add IMAGES to the branches
and sub-branches if you’re
more visual. Pictures capture
ideas more succinctly and
creatively than do words.

FIGURE 4.3

Religion

Sanctions

Diverse
customers

Traditions

Inner
conflicts
Social
norms

CULTURE
International
conflicts

POLITICS
Exchange
Rate

Laws

CHALLENGES OF
A GLOBAL
ORGANIZATION

Fuel
Technology

ECONOMY

Exports

Trade
laws

RESOURCES

Productivity

Tariffs

COMMUNICATIONS

Demographics

Collaboration

Geography
Flexibility

Technology

8

BOTTOM-UP OUTLINE
OUTLINING AS CREATION
Bottom-up outlining is a wonderful antidote for writer’s block. It can be used when writing alone or in a group. Follow three
steps: brainstorm, cluster, and sequence. Figure 4.4 gives an example of outlining a reporting email.

1. Brainstorm

2. Cluster

3. Sequence

Think about your idea, and write down
whatever comes to mind. Don't hold
back. Capture all the facts, keywords,
concepts, stories, analogies, diagrams,
and related ideas you can think of.

Next, look for patterns in your brainstormed list. Group related items
together. Make clusters of meaning,
and stay open to new ideas. Notice
any unusual associations between
facts.

Finally, look at your clusters and
sequence them in a way that builds
meaning. Pay attention to logical
progression. Make sure your
audience has adequate information
at each step to follow your argument.

• Due dates moved to last day of
month (Opening)
• Change takes effect immediately
• People who worked on the project
and their hours. (Closing)
• Who determined the changes?
• Tasks completed (Project Status)
• Status of incomplete tasks (Project
Status)
• Who to contact with questions?
(Resources)

FIGURE 4.4

SEQUENCE

• Due dates moved to last day of
month
• Change takes effect immediately
• People who worked on the project
and their hours.
• Who determined the changes?
• Tasks completed
• Status of incomplete tasks
• Who to contact with questions?

CLUSTER

BRAINSTORM

END-OF-MONTH PROJECT REPORTING EMAIL

OPENING
• Due dates moved to last day of the
month
RESOURCES
• Who to contact with questions
PROJECT STATUS
• Tasks completed
• Status of incomplete tasks
CLOSING
• People who worked on the project and
their hours

9

TIPS FOR SEQUENCING AND ORGANIZING
FOLLOW THE RULE OF THREE

TELL A STORY

Whether writing a long report or a short email, Bryan
Garner, author of HBR Guide to Better Business Writing,
suggests that you start with three main points. By
narrowing the focus, you are forced to reason before you
write. Garner asserts that our brains prefer groups of
three. Take advantage of this innate preference and
outline in groups of three.

The oldest and most satisfying structure is a story. When
you are writing a longer piece or giving a presentation,
telling a story can be an effective structure: Set the scene,
build interest and add tension by showing a problem,
need, or pain. Finally, resolve it all with your brilliant
insights and clear thinking. Figure 4.5 shows the elements
of a story arc.

1

2

conflict

3

climax

FIGURE 4.5

conflict
conflict

STORY ARC
conflict

beginning

resolution

middle

end

10

CONVERT YOUR OUTLINE INTO HEADINGS
Headings organize your message and serve as “sign
posts”—which makes reviewing and finding information
quick and easy for readers. Use your outline to write your
headings, tighten your key phrases, and make sure your
points have parallel structure. Most word processors have
an outlining feature that automatically converts your
outline into a hierarchy of headings.

4.2

FIGURE 4.6

OUTLINE
I.

II.

III.

Create an outline by brainstorming, clustering,
and sequencing your ideas on how a small
business could take advantage of
crowdsourcing. Create headings from the
outline.

FINAL PAPER

A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.

11

CHOOSE THE RIGHT SEQUENCE
Below, author Sandra Lamb’s six common ways to sequence a message are applied to the practical example of
recommending the purchase of a new office computer. Read through to see which sequencing options best fit the purpose.

SEQUENCING OPTIONS: PURCHASE OF A NEW OFFICE COMPUTER
SEQUENCE

FIGURE 4.7

DESCRIPTION

EXAMPLE

CHRONOLOGICAL

What happened first, second,
and so on

Itemize the computer models according to which ones you researched first,
second, and so on. (Probably NOT the best way to share the information for
this scenario.)

SPATIAL

According to physical
placement—the location of
items in relation to other items

Order the analysis according to their country of design or manufacture: model X
is designed in China, model Y in South Korea, and model Z in the United States.
(Again, probably not the best way to present the information.)

COMPARATIVE

The pros and cons of different
options

Evaluate the various computer models by comparing features such as storage
space, cost, screen size, reliability, and so forth.
(This could be the best choice.)

ANALYTICAL

Based on the steps of critical
thinking; answering a series of
“whys?”

Answer a series of questions that are important to your audience: Why is
storage space an important criterion? Why does this computer cost more than
the other models? Why does this computer have low reliability scores?

IMPORTANCE

Advancing from least to most
important information or vice
versa

Sequence the information according to what matters most to your audience. If
cost were most important, begin with cost and show how that narrows the
choices, then continue with the next most important factors such as reliability
and performance.

CAUSE-AND-EFFECT

How causes interact with effects

List the “causes” (or reasons) that led to the “effect” (the search for a new
computer system), then present your recommendation. (In this case, causeeffect becomes problem-solution.)

12

SECTION 4

4A
STRUCTURE
After you create an outline to clarify and sequence your content, build a
solid structure for your message.
In previous writing classes, you may have learned a three-part approach
to writing an essay: introduction, body, and conclusion. We modify this
approach to be business- and brain-friendly. We add an agenda and rename the sections to better reflect business style. This approach is
represented by four A’s:

Attention | Agenda | Argument | Action

4A

ATTENTION
AGENDA
ARGUMENT

Take a minute to memorize this “4A” structure.

ACTION

13

4A

ATTENTION
Why should your audience spend precious time and attention on your message?
This is the first question you must answer. Hook your audience by opening with a
compelling statistic, a descriptive metaphor, a relevant story, or a penetrating
question—but keep it brief. In a short email, you might give key context details
that motivate attention.
AGENDA
An old public-speaking tip states that you should “tell ‘em what you’re gonna tell
‘em” at the beginning of a speech. This concept is crucial to business
communication. Your agenda previews the body of your message—usually in one
sentence—and prepares the reader for the main points you’re going to make.
ARGUMENT
Your argument is the meat of your message. It includes your main points
supported by solid evidence and logic. Keep in mind the Rule of Three and keep
your argument simple and memorable by not exceeding three supporting points.
ACTION
Business communication often ends with a call to action. Your closing should not
only summarize but also identify next steps (if appropriate), letting your audience
know what you’d like them to do based on the information you’ve shared.

14

IN CONCLUSION
Don't leave your audience wandering hopelessly around in your message. Create an outline to
organize and sequence your ideas. Use the 4A structure to build your outline and guide the
composition of your message:
•

Capture your audience’s ATTENTION

•

Specify your AGENDA

•

Craft a strong ARGUMENT

•

Deliver your call to ACTION

15

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES
Gallo, Carmine. “Thomas Jefferson, Steve Jobs, and the Rule of 3”
Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/carminegallo/2012/07/02/thomas
-jefferson-steve-jobs-and-the-rule-of-3/#3306fb541962, accessed
October 2017.

BOOKS
Garner, Bryan A. HBR Guide to Better Business Writing. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2012.
Lamb, Sandra E. Writing Well for Business Success. New York, NY:
St. Martin’s, 2015.

WEBSITES
Purdue Online Writing Lab. “Types of Outlines and Samples.”
https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/544/03/,
accessed February 2017.
Tony Buzan. “Home.” http://www.tonybuzan.com/, accessed
February 2017.

VIDEOS
MacGrercy Consultants. “How to Make a Mind Map.” YouTube,
published May 6, 2009.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wLWV0XN7K1g, accessed
February 2017.

Minto, Barbara. 2009. The Pyramid Principle: Logic in Writing and
Thinking (3rd edition). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Ltd.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

16

CHAPTER

5

BUILD
CREATE CLARITY & COHERENCE

CONTENTS
4

PARAGRAPHS

7

EMAIL MESSAGES

LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
This work4.0
is International
licensed under
a
ShareAlike
License.

Creative Commons Attribute and ShareAlike

Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
4.0
International
License.
byumcom@gmail.com if you
would
like to adopt
the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 5

2

Building strong paragraphs creates
a foundation for good writing.
Start building your message by combining
sentences into paragraphs.
Because emails are simply sets of paragraphs—
and the most common form of business
writing—we’ll also discuss best practices for
business email construction.

3

SECTION ONE

PARAGRAPHS
Readers don’t like solid walls of text. Long paragraphs seem to
demand too much time and effort. When you break messages into
short paragraphs—highlighted by headings, guided by transitions,
and framed by white space—you make your message more inviting.
In general, aim for paragraphs with three to five sentences.
Occasionally, you might use a single-sentence paragraph for
emphasis. Other times, you might need a longer paragraph to
complete your thought.

¶

Most paragraphs
should be about

3 to 5
sentences long.

Owl: Purdue Online Writing Lab

4

BEGIN WITH A TOPIC SENTENCE
The first sentence in each paragraph should introduce your
topic and inform the reader of the paragraph’s purpose.
These topic sentences provide a framework for your
paragraph and allow you to deliver content on a unified
theme. Write topic sentences clearly so that busy readers
can get the gist of your argument by skimming the topic
sentence of each paragraph.

NO

Develop your arguments and examples by carefully
selecting evidence-based details that lead your audience to
draw the conclusions that you want them to make. Read the
examples in Figure 5.1 to see how to show, not tell.

SHOW don’t TELL

Read Bryan Garner’s
article Writing Emails
that People Won’t
Ignore.

YES

She’s not a good
employee.

She missed the last four
employee meetings, showed up
late for two client meetings, and
lost key sales data.

Our sales team is
doing great.

Our team made 35% more sales
this quarter than during the
third quarter last year.

There are not enough
funds for pay raises.

Our analysis shows that we need
to increase productivity by 8% or
reduce expenses by 3% to afford
a pay raise of 5%.

The retail industry is
not what it used to be
[vague].

Traditional retailers struggle to
compete with the wide margins
and low overhead of online
retailers. [specific]

SUPPLY SUPPORTING DETAILS
Advance from the general to the specific―both within
paragraphs and from paragraph to paragraph. Concrete,
specific details give your claims (and you) credibility. As
author Bryan Garner asserts: “People don’t care about—or
even remember—abstractions the way they do specifics.”

SHOWING

Supporting details: Seventy-one
percent of shoppers believe they
will get a better deal online than
in stores.

FIGURE 5.1

TELLING V.

5

TRANSITION EXAMPLES
Establish a sequence

At first, consumers are hesitant to buy
online, but after just a few online shopping
experiences, they seem to prefer online
shopping.

Set up a contrast

And yet, nothing can quite replace the
experience of traditional shopping.

Provide an example

For example, online shopping carts do not
lead to online dressing rooms. Merchandise
from online stores cannot be tried on—or
even touched—before purchasing.

Add a point

Processing returns also feels inconvenient
and expensive for most shoppers.

Even though returning online merchandise
is easier than it has been in the past,
packaging items for mailing and paying for
shipping still feels burdensome.

Conclude

On the whole, consumers are shifting to
online shopping with increasing loyalty.

FIGURE 5.2

Concede a point

MAKE SMOOTH
TRANSITIONS
Transition words and phrases guide readers not
only from paragraph to paragraph in a
document, but also from point to point within
paragraphs. When used well, transitions don’t
call attention to themselves.
Awkward Transition: And thus we can deduce
that online sales play an important role in the
retail industry.
Smooth Transition: Clearly, online sales play an
important role in the retail industry.
Transitions might give emphasis, add points,
set up contrasts, establish sequences, signal
conclusions, or orient readers. See Figure 5.2 at
left for some examples.
Keep a list of transition words nearby to help
you form links in your writing.
6

SECTION TWO

EMAIL
MESSAGES

ALUMNI ADVICE

Let’s look at the principles of good paragraph writing in action
by applying them to email messages for business.
Most email messages are short and direct. Follow the 4A’s to
grab readers’ attention, structure your content, and close
your email message.

Never SEND an email before
proofreading it.

!

Be friendly, but don’t gush. Give
yourself a budget of ONE
exclamation point per email.

“In my emails, I bold my key action
items or questions and then change the
color to something that stands out. This
one addition helps me to get a better
response rate and helps people to
answer my questions. It doesn't work all
the time (people are people), but it
does help.”
Stephen Godfrey
Senior Technical Consultant,
Master of Information Systems,
Brigham Young University, Class of 2014

7

EMAIL APPLICATION ONE

USE PARAGRAPHS
The example on the left is an uninviting wall of text. The right example uses paragraphs to divide the meaning into sections
and make the email more visually appealing. Which would you rather read?

NO

YES

To:
Brad Smith <brad.smith@email.com>
From: Bryce Jones <brycej@email.com>
Subject: I had an idea

To:
Brad Smith <brad.smith@email.com>
From: Bryce Jones <brycej@email.com>
Subject: Let’s Collaborate

We’re expanding our marketing efforts into Arizona, and I think our two
companies would benefit by collaborating on a custom health-cost software
package. We’ve nearly finished our health-cost analysis algorithms. If you are
still working on your health-cost visualizations, I believe that our analysis
package and your visualization package together would give us both an edge
on the market. If you are interested, let’s have our teams meet and work out
details on the APIs this month. I’ve attached a list that Jen Clark, our market
research analyst, put together of businesses in the Phoenix area that would
benefit from our co-developed application. Jen has strong connections, and
we’d be happy to share our connections with you if we proceed on this
exciting project. Let’s discuss this by phone. Are you free on Monday or
Tuesday?

We’re expanding our marketing efforts into Arizona, and I think our two
companies would benefit by collaborating on a custom health-cost software
package.

Bryce

We’ve nearly finished our health-cost analysis algorithms. If you are still
working on your health-cost visualizations, I think that our packages together
would give us both an edge on the market.
Take a look at this list that Jen Clark, our market research analyst, put
together of businesses in the Phoenix area that would benefit from our codeveloped application. Jen has strong connections, and we’d be happy to
share them with you if we proceed on this project.
If you’re interested, our teams could meet and work out details on the APIs
this month. Let’s discuss this by phone. Are you free on Monday or Tuesday?
Bryce

8

EMAIL APPLICATION TWO

USE VISUAL SIGNPOSTS AND TOPIC SENTENCES
Visual signposts catch the reader’s eye. Bold text, bullet lists, and indents all highlight your important points.
Topic sentences help readers “get” your message even if they simply skim your email.

NO

YES

To:
Amy Wright <amy.wright@email.com>
From: Adam Kim <akim@email.com>
Subject: Get better soon!

To:
Amy Wright <amy.wright@email.com>
From: Adam Kim <akim@email.com>
Subject: Report on June 12 meeting

Amy,

Amy,

Sorry you missed the meeting last week! That cold sounds really rough. Let
me know if there’s anything I can do to help.

I hope you’re feeling better. Here’s a quick report on the June 12 meeting
that you missed:

It was a good meeting. Not as much rambling as usual. We just covered
the basics like the new client list, the ongoing audit, the yearly initiatives.
Nothing new to report that you wouldn’t have guessed. Oh, and HR came
by and gave us all an update on the new health insurance. It looks really
good. It will cost most of us less and should cover more. I’m stoked. Oh,
yeah, and we’re supposed to send any tweets about the company on to
someone in CX. Then they’ll take over. Well, get better soon.

• CLIENTS New clients are up slightly. We have lost Case and Quest
but signed FastUP and one startup with promise (Coral).

Adam

• AUDIT The audit drags on but is projected to finish by August.
Victoria needs your billing files by the end of this month.
• CX INITIATIVE Using Twitter as a customer response tool has
increased interaction with our millennial clients by 75%. Libby will
continue overseeing our Twitter account—she’s been phenomenal!
• HEALTH INSURANCE Our new health insurance (Advantage) will
cost us 7% less and cover 15% more. Here’s the link to the signup
form. It’s due by 5 p.m. next Friday, June 25.
Looking forward to having you back in the office soon. Take care.
Adam

9

EMAIL APPLICATION THREE

INCLUDE SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Support your ideas, but find the balance between giving enough and too much information. You don’t want to overburden
your reader, but you need to be credible. Use hyperlinks or attachments to provide more specific details.

NO

YES

To:
Melanie Morgan <mmorgan@email.com>
From: Raj Singh <rajie@email.com>
Subject: Update on office furniture

To:
Melanie Morgan <mmorgan@email.com>
From: Raj Singh <rajie@email.com>
Subject: Update on office furniture

I’m so stoked that we get to buy new office furniture. My back has been
killing me lately and I’m thinking it might be this dumb chair I’ve been sitting
in. It’s definitely not as comfortable as it looks. Hahaha. And there’s the desks.
No cord pull holes at all, just a slab, and the workmanship is so shoddy that
it’s always wobbling whenever I push back to go get snacks. (Forty times a
day.) So yes, we definitely need new furniture. We get to decide what to buy.
We could go to Ikea, or we could order online. Brad said we have a budget of
$2,500. What are you thinking? Should we even try to match the stuff in the
back office, or just get something comfortable? I am thinking we should just
go for comfort, but I don’t know. I’ve started looking at the manufacturers
and it looks like SitSmart, PosturePod, Wellesley, and BrainComfort are good.
We have to decide whether we want to go local or order it shipped to us. I
have so many things I want in a good chair, like posture control and height
control, also mesh so we don’t get too hot in the summer. But those are more
expensive. I don’t know. It’s all so complicated, but I’m glad we get an
upgrade!

Brad finally approved a budget of $2,500 for new office furniture!

Raj

I’ve attached a spreadsheet listing our current inventory. Hopefully, with
the budget, we will be able to replace all of our desks and chairs.
I researched replacements, focusing on stability, cord access ports,
lumbar support, and height adjustment. I’ve narrowed our options to the
following:
Local (already assembled):
• SitSmart at OfficeBarn
• BrainComfort at Furnishall
Online (assembly required):
• Wellsley from ModernOffice,
• PosturePod from Saunders
Look these over and let me know what you think—you may have other
feature priorities. Let’s make a decision by Thursday at noon.
Raj

10

EMAIL APPLICATION FOUR

USE TRANSITIONS
Transitions help your audience follow the path through your email and understand the relationship between your paragraphs.
Note: transitions are in green to help you notice them—no need to color them in actual emails.

NO

YES

To:
TEAM
From: Doug DeWitt <doug.dewitt@email.com>
Subject: I have an idea

To:
TEAM
From: Doug DeWitt <doug.dewitt@email.com>
Subject: New phone approach is working (and cupcakes!)

Team members,

Team members,

Our website looks a lot better since the update, and I really like the new
brochures. Thanks for helping to increase sales this month.
You’ll find some cupcakes in the break room. Feel free to help yourself.
Maybe some of the changes we have been trying to make have worked? It
looks like you have been smiling more and listening better, and maybe you
have not been using the same old memorized pitch? I really want to keep up
the momentum we were getting last month.
Remember the steps we talked about last month about being cheerful on
calls and customizing your responses. It really makes a difference.
Keep up the good work. Management is really happy about the new website
and brochures, but you guys and your work are the main thing.
Sincerely,
Doug

Congratulations on a 16% increase in sales this month—our highest
month-to-month improvement yet. Well done! Take a moment to
celebrate your achievement by enjoying some cupcakes in the break
room.
In an effort to keep up the momentum, I want to review some of the
positive steps that we implemented last month.
Before answering the phone, smile as you make the connection. After
greeting callers, listen carefully to their concerns—before you begin to
make a pitch. Once you think you know the purpose for their call, reflect
on what they said, and then customize the pitch to their concerns. No
more memorized responses, please.
As you demonstrated last month, YOU are the ones who make the
biggest difference when it comes to sales. Of course, we are grateful for
recent improvements to our website and brochures, but when it comes
to closing the deal, you make it happen. In short, you are irreplaceable.
Doug

11

BUSINESS COMMUNICATION
TECH TIPS
TEXTING
Texting is becoming more common in business. Generally, save texting at
work only for quick questions or reminders. Information you may need
to reference again is best conveyed via email. To get a handle on texting
for business, read GetVoip’s infographic: The 10 Commandments of
Business Texting,  which shares such essential reminders as “Thou
Shalt Not Text Bad News” and “Thou Shalt Not Text Sensitive or
Privileged Information.”

EMOJI :)
In your first professional emails, don’t use emoji. Acceptable use is still
evolving, and you can’t be sure how your recipient will react to seeing
them in your email. But if you find that your correspondent uses them
freely, go ahead and respond in kind. As with exclamation points, use
them sparingly. Emoji can improve the energy and humor of an email,
but too many make you look immature and overeager.

WHAT ABOUT GIFS?
Communicating with funny internet
GIFs is classic office fun, but be
wary of using them in more
traditional workplaces.
However, the use of GIFs and other
visuals is increasing. Organizations
like General Electric and Disney now
have official collections available
on giphy.com.
You might create a GIF to illustrate
an office process or demonstrate a
trend. In 2015, Google sent an
animated GIF to a reporter instead
of replying “No Comment”— getting
its message across very quickly.

Stoke your imagination!
Pretend the bars are moving.

Create a GIF to add
motion to a
message, illustrate a
process, or highlight
a trend.

Unclear exactly what a particular emoji means?
Check out the definitions in the Emojipedia.
GIF credit: Giphy.com

12

IN CONCLUSION
Use these examples to start building clear, concise paragraphs today.
Create paragraphs deliberately by using strong topic sentences, meaning-clarifying transitions, and just the
right amount of detail.
When you use paragraphs to write strong emails and reports, your messages are more likely to be read . . .
and acted upon.

13

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES
Garner, Bryan A. “Write E-mails That People Won’t Ignore.” Harvard
Business Review, February 21, 2013.
https://hbr.org/2013/02/write-e-mails-that-people-wont,
accessed February 2017.
Gill, Barry. “E-mail: Not dead, only Evolving.” Harvard Business
Review, June 2013. https://hbr.org/2013/06/e-mail-not-deadevolving, accessed February 2017.
Glickman, Jodi. “The Biggest Mistake People Make After Receiving a
Favor.” Harvard Business Review, January 19, 2011.
https://hbr.org/2011/01/the-biggest-mistake-ppl-make-af,
accessed February 2017.
Grech, Matt. “The 10 Commandments of Business Texting
[Infographic].” GetVoip.com Blog, October 3, 2016.
https://getvoip.com/blog/2016/10/02/business-texting/,
accessed February 2017.

BOOKS
Canavor, Natalie. Business Writing in the Digital Age. Los Angeles,
CA: Sage Publications, 2012.
Garner, Bryan A. HBR Guide to Better Business Writing. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Publishing, 2012.

WEBSITES
Effective Technical Writing in the Information Age. “Transition
Words.” https://www.eeducation.psu.edu/styleforstudents/c1_p14.html, accessed
February 2017.

Tan, Cheryl Lu-Lien. “Mind Your Email Manners.” The Wall Street
Journal, April 15, 2015.
https://www.wsj.com/article_email/mind-your-emailmanners-1429117413-lMyQjAxMTI2MDIwMTkyMDEyWj,
accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

14

CHAPTER

6

RESEARCH
F

I

N

D

T

H

E

A

N

S

W

E

R

S

CONTENTS
4

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY RESEARCH

7

SECONDARY SOURCES
WHERE SHOULD I LOOK?

10

SEARCH STRATEGIES

11

EVALUATING SOURCES

12

DOCUMENTING SOURCES

13

PLAGIARISM

HOW SHOULD I LOOK?

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 6

2

Do Your Research
In the early 1980s, Coke was losing the Cola Wars. Panicking, Coca-Cola executives assumed Coke needed
to be sweeter to compete with Pepsi. On 23 April 1985 they threw out Coca-Cola’s century-old recipe and
introduced New Coke. Outrage was immediate. Customers organized boycotts and filed lawsuits. Sales
plummeted. Less than three months later, Coca-Cola announced a return to Coca-Cola Classic.
Disastrous business decisions often begin with
seemingly reasonable assumptions. Effective
management is evidence-based. Before
making decisions, you need facts, not gut
feelings; and if you want to be convincing, you
need data. Here’s how to get it.

3

SECTION ONE

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
RESEARCH
Evidence can come from primary or secondary
research. The strongest arguments are based on both.
Primary Research. When you conduct a survey,
compile sales reports, or perform an experiment,
you’re creating new information. That’s primary
research.
Secondary Research. When you consult an analyst’s
report, search through scholarly or news articles, or
pull data from a government website, you’re
accessing information that already exists. That’s
secondary research. Seeing what’s already been
discovered can save you time and money.

Primary
Research

Secondary
Research

Creating or
gathering new
information

Using existing
information

Less expensive

X
X

May have copyright or
licensing restrictions

X

Faster

Tailored to fit your
specific need

X

May require additional
expertise

X

You own the results

X

4

RESEARCH VOCABULARY
QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH uses highly structured and standardized
methodologies to gather or analyze numerical data.
EX: Asking customers to rate their satisfaction, counting actual return
visits, determining if any correlation exists.
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH uses data that cannot be easily quantified,
often related to opinions, feelings, and experiences.
EX: Inviting a handful of customers to participate in a focus group where
they discuss their desired product features.

BALANCE
Don’t ignore research that
conflicts with your position. Your
audience is likely to come across
it anyway.
Address it upfront, and show why
your recommendation should still
be followed. A balanced
approach helps decision
making.

RELIABILITY indicates whether a tool or method produces consistent
results. A reliable test or experiment will produce the same results
when repeated.
VALIDITY A test is valid if it actually measures what it is intended to
measure. A poorly designed study may not account for all factors,
making it difficult to draw valid conclusions.
TRANSFERABILITY A research study is more useful if its results can be
generalized or transferred to other contexts.

COVFEFE
RESEARCH

LITERATURE REVIEW A rigorous review of pertinent research available
on a subject. Learn more from this handout from the University of
North Carolina-Chapel Hill and from this example: International Small
Business Journal.
5 5

SECTION TWO

SECONDARY SOURCES
Secondary research can take you many places, but
you’ll usually start with an internet search. In
addition to the open web, use specialized search
engines to dig deeper.

How can I access it?
Industry associations may publish the information
you want. Check their websites and be willing to send
emails and make phone calls.

Let’s start with this question:

Government sources are usually free but can be
difficult to navigate. News sources are often available
online. If not, try your library for access.

“How many people go skiing in
Utah each year?”

(Oh, and the answer? 4.5 million. . .good market.)
Who might be gathering information like this?
If you want to research the winter sports market,
you might start with a trade association, like
SnowSports Industries America or the Utah Ski &
Snowboard Association. The Utah state government
might also have an interest in tracking such data.
And local newspapers or industry newsletters might
publish articles on the topic.

Get the best of both worlds: Search
scholarly articles to lay a solid
foundation. Then pull in specific details
about the current case from news
sources.

6

Scholarly Journals
Use scholarly sources to establish a strong foundation. Articles
published in journals often go through a peer review process
where other experts determine whether they meet the
standards for that discipline. This process takes time but
improves reliability and establishes authority.
Examples: Academy of Management Review, Journal of
Consumer Psychology, Econometrica

THE WEB IS LIKE AN ICEBERG

SURFACE WEB

Wikipedia

Google
Bing

News Sources and Magazines

Use news sources to find the most current information on a
topic or to see how popular opinion is trending.

Examples: Wall Street Journal, The Economist, Harvard Business
Review, BusinessInsider.com

Trade and Industry Sources
Use trade and industry sources to get both current and
authoritative insight. Written by and for practicing
professionals about issues important to that industry today,
they provide you a model for the industry’s writing style.
Examples: Advertising Age, The Progressive Grocer,
SupplyChainBrain.com

Other secondary sources include reports published by industry
analysts or think tanks, data published by trade associations or
government websites, and official documents like financial
statements or court filings. When you’re trying to find
information, ask yourself, “Who would be interested in
gathering this information, and how can I find out if they make
it available?”

DEEP WEB

Multilingual Databases

Medical Records
Legal Documents
Scientific Reports
Academic Information

Conference Resources
Competitor Websites
Organization-specific
Repositories
Subscription Information

DARK WEB
Illegal information
TOR-Encrypted sites

Drug Trafficking sites
Private Communications

7

SECTION THREE

SEARCH STRATEGIES
SEARCH OPERATORS
Your library has access to databases of scholarly, news, and
industry sources like EBSCO, ProQuest, and LexisNexis that
aren’t freely available on the internet. These advanced
search engines and controlled environments allow you to
precisely manipulate your results with search operators.
The most common are the Boolean operators AND, OR,
and NOT.
Linking your search terms with AND tells the search engine
you want to see only results that include both concepts. OR
tells the engine you’ll accept results that have any one of
your terms. NOT excludes any results with that term.

Ski AND Utah

Ski OR Utah

Ski

NOT Utah

Searching with Boolean
operators returns the
content in green.

8

COMMON DATABASE OPERATORS
WHAT ABOUT GOOGLE?
When it comes to the information needs of
daily life, search engines like Google
keep getting better at reading our minds.
(Hungry? Bored? Curious?)
Google can also be a powerful tool for
serious research (Google Scholar), but you
can make your searching more effective
by using advanced search.

Operator

Effect

Example

*

Truncation: returns any word with
that beginning

ski*
(returns ski, skis,
skiing, skier, etc.)

?

Wildcard

wom?n
(returns women or
woman)

“”

Phrasing: only that full, exact phrase
will be accepted

“Park City”

()

Nesting: similar to order of
operations, nesting
compartmentalizes the effect of
operators

(”Park City” OR
Solitude OR
Sundance) AND ski*

nearX

Proximity: search terms must be
located within X number of words of
each other

ski* near5 Utah

atleastX

Frequency: the term must appear at
least X number of times

atleast3 ski* AND
Utah

Improve your search skills
by reviewing the tips in this infographic.
30 Advanced Google Search Tricks

Activity 6.1

Use Google to find sources about the use
of social media for crisis management. Try
a simple search and then some advanced
techniques. Now try it out in a library
database using the operators in the table.

9

Having trouble?
NARROW, BROADEN, AND SEPARATE
If you’re getting plenty of results, narrow your search by adding more
specific concepts. You can also filter your results by date, peer-review
status, or subject tags. If you aren’t seeing many results, broaden your
search by adding synonyms.
If your concepts haven’t been connected by previously published
research, you might be breaking new ground. Great! Try conducting
separate searches for each concept, and then you can contribute to
the global conversation by bridging those concepts in your own
writing.

As you conduct searches, skim the results for different
wording to use in your next search.
When you find a relevant source, look at its bibliography
to follow the sources it cites.

Librarian

STUCK? Librarians live to serve.
Save yourself an hour’s frustration by
taking five minutes to ask for help.

10

SECTION FOUR

EVALUATING SOURCES
Whenever you encounter a new information source,
whether it’s a scholarly journal, a website, or your
roommate’s cousin’s girlfriend’s Twitter feed, you need
to consider whether citing that source as evidence will
strengthen or undermine your position.
To judge the credibility of a source, put it through a
CRAP test. Assess these factors:

‣ Currency
‣ Reliability
‣ Authority
‣ Purpose or Point of View

Currency
Reliability

Authority

Purpose or
Point of View

11

DOES YOUR SOURCE PASS
THE CRAP TEST?
Currency
‣ How recently was it published or updated?
‣ How current are its sources and content?

Reliability
‣
‣
‣
‣

Is the information organized, written, and presented well?
Are sources cited and easily verifiable?
Do the conclusions follow from the evidence?
Does the site have a .com, .edu, .gov, or .org domain, and what does
this suggest about its reliability?

ONLINE CREDIBILITY
Fake news, social media bias, and
sponsored content: how good are
you at judging the credibility of
what you read online?
Researchers at Stanford have found
that we’re not as good as we think
we are, with 80% of middle school
students mistaking ads for a real
news story, and…

Authority
‣
‣
‣
‣

Who are the authors?
What are their credentials?
Have they been cited by other sources on the topic?
Can they be contacted?

Purpose/Point of view

…less than 1/3 of college
students recognized the
influence of political bias in
tweets.

‣ What is the author's purpose?
‣ Is the article written at a popular, professional, or professorial level?
‣ Is the author or sponsoring organization values- or mission-driven, and
might that position introduce political, cultural, or ideological bias?
‣ Is the author or organization profit-driven?
‣ How does this purpose or point of view affect the source’s usefulness?
12

CAN I USE WIKIPEDIA IN
MY RESEARCH?
A Wikipedia search can be a good starting point
for gaining a basic understanding of a topic.
Well-written entries include references that lead
to additional credible sources. But Wikipedia is
derivative by nature, and you can’t really
evaluate the authority or purpose of Wikipedia
contributors. Instead of citing Wikipedia you
should use it to look for original sources.

Don’t just cherry-pick sources that seem to support your
argument. Evaluate your sources carefully so that you can
speak intelligently about them when someone in your
audience has questions.

Activity 6.3

Evaluate these websites for currency,
reliability, authority, and purpose or point of
view. What does a CRAP test teach you about
their usefulness as sources?
‣
‣
‣
‣
‣
‣
‣

http://www.bls.gov/
http://accountingonion.com/
http://www.cato.org/
http://dhmo.org/
http://globaledge.msu.edu/
http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/
http://www.slate.com/

13

SECTION FIVE

DOCUMENTING SOURCES
Thoroughly documenting your sources not only gives
credit to the original author, but also gives your work
credibility that can’t be achieved any other way.
Cite sources at their point of impact. In formal
documents, cite at the end of the sentence in the form of
a parenthetical author-date reference or a superscript
number referring to footnotes or endnotes. Less formal
documents, especially on the internet, often provide a
clearly labeled link to a source—like this textbook does.
When citing sources follow an established style like APA,
Chicago, or MLA. This textbook follows the HBS Style
(Harvard Business School Citation Guide), but if your
organization has a preference or its own “house style,”
follow that instead.

Formal Citations
… end of sentence (Richardson, 2017).
— OR —
… end of sentence.3

3 Richardson,

Marianna. “How to Be Fabulous.”

Marriott Student Review, September 2017.

The Purdue OWL has excellent guides and
examples for all major citation styles.
Reference generators like CiteThisForMe are
easy, but results must be double checked.

14

INTEGRATE YOUR SOURCES
Weave evidence into your writing by quoting, paraphrasing, and summarizing. These examples demonstrate integrating a source text
about price elasticity in the skiing industry. Avoid accidental plagiarism by learning this skill.
QUOTE
Holmgren and McCracken warn against “making pricing
decisions independent of the other players in the market.”1

ORIGINAL ARTICLE
“The positive sign of all cross-price elasticities of demand
indicate that other resorts are considered to be
substitutes for the analyzed resort, emphasizing the
importance of not making pricing decisions independent
of the other players in the market.”1

PARAPHRASE
When setting prices, ski resorts must consider the prices of their
competitors since, as Holmgren and McCracken show, skiers are
willing to substitute one resort for another.1
SUMMARIZE
Holmgren and McCracken demonstrate how the close proximity
of Utah ski resorts increases price sensitivity for skiers.1 Because
skiers shop for the cheapest lift tickets, a resort must consider its
competitors’ prices when setting its own.
ENDNOTE FOR DIRECT QUOTE

LINK

Sources Cited:
1. Mark A. Holmgren and Vicki A. McCracken, “What Affects
Demand for ‘The Greatest Snow On Earth?’” Journal of
Hospitality Marketing & Management 23, no. 1 (2014): 18.

If you use links, provide meaningful information as well.

In his book, Secrets of the Greatest Snow on Earth, Jim Steenburgh outlines three difficulties in forecasting Utah’s powder
conditions: (1) intervening mountain ranges, (2) steep, narrow topography, and (3) the effect of the Great Salt Lake.

15

SECTION SIX

PLAGIARISM
Failure to properly document your sources, whether intentional or
accidental, is plagiarism. It’s unethical and possibly illegal. Don’t mess
with it. Your reputation and peace of mind are at stake, and the more
successful you become, the more closely your every word will be
watched, as these politicians found. CNN: From Speeches to Ph.D.'s:
Politicians Called Out for Copying
Even if you cite your sources, failing to clearly distinguish between your
own words and your source’s words is plagiarism, no matter if you
rearrange or change some of the words. For a complete overview,
consult the Purdue Owl’s site on Plagiarism.
In addition to plagiarism, be aware of copyright and licensing
restrictions. Don’t violate copyright by distributing documents or using
images without proper permission.

X
16

FAIR USE
Fair use is the legal doctrine that allows you to quote copyrighted material
in your research. Section 107 of the Copyright Act gives guidelines for
determining what qualifies as fair use. Ask yourself these questions:
1. What is the purpose of the use? Non-commercial, educational use is more
likely to qualify as fair use. “Transformative” use, which adds something
rather than just reproducing the original, is also more likely to qualify.
Examples of transformative use include criticism, parody, news reporting,
teaching, and scholarship.
2. What is the nature of the original work? The use of creative works, like art or
unpublished works, is less likely to qualify.
3. How much of the work is being used? Using significant portions of a work is
less likely to qualify.
4. What effect does the use have on the market for the original? The use is
unlikely to qualify if it hurts the market for the original.

During college, you may get into the habit of using images and other
products copied from the web, feeling that your use qualifies as fair since
it is being employed for educational purposes. Whether it does or not,
that excuse ends abruptly when you are employed, so develop good
habits now and save yourself and your company a costly mistake.

Fair use:
(NOUN)

The legal
doctrine that
allows you to
quote
copyrighted
material in
your research.

17

IN CONCLUSION
Make sure that your conclusions and recommendations are based on evidence.
Don’t expect your audience to accept your claims just because you state them as if they
were facts, saying “studies show,” “experts agree,” or “it’s widely accepted that.” Do the
work to find the facts.
Conducting effective research and thoroughly documenting your sources will help you to
construct your own authority and credibility.

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES

Donald, Brooke. “Stanford researchers find students have trouble
judging the credibility of information online.” Stanford Graduate
School of Education: News Center. November 22, 2016.
https://ed.stanford.edu/news/stanford-researchers-find-studentshave-trouble-judging-credibility-information-online, accessed
February 2017.

Gorman, Gary, Dennis Hanlon, and Wayne King. “Some Research
Perspectives on Entrepreneurship Education, Enterprise Education
and Education for Small Business Management: A Ten-year
Literature Review.” International Small Business Journal 15, no. 3
(1997): 56-77.
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0266242697153004,
accessed February 2017.
Pinola, Melanie. “Search Smarter: 30+ Google Search Tricks You
Might Not Already Know.” Zapier. July 7, 2016.
https://zapier.com/blog/advanced-google-searchtricks/#operators, accessed February 2017.

Fawzy, Farida. “From speeches to Ph.D.'s: Politicians called out for
copying.” CNN Politics. July 19, 2016.
http://www.cnn.com/2016/07/19/politics/politicians-plagiarism/,
accessed February 2017.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Robert Sutton.“Evidence-Based
Management.” Harvard Business Review. January 1, 2006.
https://hbr.org/2006/01/evidence-based-management, accessed
February 2017.

“Google Search Cheat Sheet.” Supple Supply Services.
https://supple.com.au/tools/google-advanced-searchoperators/, accessed February 2017.

“Search Smarter: 30+ Google Search Tricks You Might Not Already
Know” (Infographic). Zapier. July 7, 2016.
https://zapier.cachefly.net/storage/photos/54a7c68be04cccccdd
49ddfb322952db.png, accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Cope, Diane G. “Methods and Meanings: Credibility and
Trustworthiness of Qualitative Research.” Oncology Nursing Forum
42, no. 1 (2014): 89-91.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24368242, accessed
February 2017.

LEARN MORE
“Utah Ski Areas Set Historical Skier Visit Number For 2015-16 Season.”
Utah Business Press Release. June 2, 2016.
http://www.utahbusiness.com/utah-ski-areas-set-historical-skiervisit-number-for-2015-16-season/, accessed February 2017.
The Writing Center at UNC-Chapel Hill, “Literature Reviews” (PDF File).
Downloaded from UNC Website.
http://writingcenter.unc.edu/handouts/literature-reviews/,
accessed February 2017.
Zenger, Jack, and Folkman, Joseph. “The Data’s in: Honesty Really
Does Start at the Top.” Harvard Business Review, June 1, 2012.
https://hbr.org/2012/06/the-datas-in-honesty-really-do, accessed
February 2017.

WEBSITES
Acadamy of Management. “Acadamy of Management Review.”
http://aom.org/Publications/AMR/Academy-of-ManagementReview.aspx, accessed February 2017.
Advertising Age. “Home.” http://adage.com/, accessed February
2017.
APA Style. “Home.”
http://www.apastyle.org/learn/index.aspx?tab=2, accessed
February 2017.

BOOKS
Blum, Susan D. My Word! Plagiarism and College Culture. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 2009.
Hacker, Diana. Rules for Writers, 7th Edition. St. Martin’s, 2012.
Ferrara, Miranda H., and Michele P. LaMeau. “New Coke: New
Formula Meets Resistance,” in Corporate Disasters: What Went
Wrong and Why. Gale Research Inc, 2012.
Lipson, Charles. Cite Right: A Quick Guide to Citation Styles, 2nd
Edition. The University of Chicago Press, 2011.

The Chicago Manual of Style Online. “Chicago-Style Citation Quick
Guide.”
http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html,
accessed February 2017.
Copyright.gov. “More information on Fair Use.”
https://www.copyright.gov/fair-use/more-info.html, accessed
February 2017.
The Econometric Society. “About Econometrica.”
https://www.econometricsociety.org/publications/econometrica/
about-econometrica, accessed February 2017.
Elsevier. “Journal of Consumer Psychology.”
https://www.journals.elsevier.com/journal-of-consumerpsychology/, accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Business Insider. “Home.” http://www.businessinsider.com/,
accessed February 2017.

LEARN MORE
The Economist. “Home.” http://www.economist.com/, accessed
February 2017.

Ski Utah. “Home.” https://www.skiutah.com/, accessed February
2017.

Google. “Advanced Search.”
https://www.google.com/advanced_search, accessed February
2017.

Snowsports Industries America. “Home.” http://www.snowsports.org/,
accessed February 2017.

Harvard Business Review. “Home.” https://hbr.org/, accessed
February 2017.

Supply Chain Brain. “Home.”
http://www.supplychainbrain.com/content/index.php, accessed
February 2017.

Harvard Guide to Using Sources. “How to Avoid Plagiarism.”
https://usingsources.fas.harvard.edu/how-avoid-plagiarism,
accessed February 2018.

Utah Office of Tourism. “Home.” https://travel.utah.gov/, accessed
February 2017.

Harvard Guide to Using Sources. “What Constitues Plagiarism.”
https://usingsources.fas.harvard.edu/what-constitutes-plagiarism,
accessed February 2017.

The Wall Street Journal. “Home.” https://www.wsj.com/, accessed
February 2017.

The MLA Style Center. “Works Cited: A Quick Guide.”
https://style.mla.org/works-cited-a-quick-guide/, accessed
February 2017.
Progressive Grocer. “Home.” http://www.progressivegrocer.com/,
accessed February 2017.
Purdue Online Writing Lab. “Research and Citation Resources.”
https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/section/2/, accessed February
2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Harvard Business School, Baker Library. “Q. Citation guide: HBS.”
http://asklib.library.hbs.edu/faq/47604, accessed February 2017.

CHAPTER

7

FORMAT
MAKE YOUR MESSAGE INVITING

CONTENTS
4 CHOOSE FONTS
7 WRITE HEADINGS
10 USE WHITE SPACE
13 INSERT GRAPHICS
EXAMPLE BANK STANDARD DOCUMENT FORMATS

LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 7

2

GRAB ATTENTION
Well-formatted messages are more attractive and
accessible to your readers, inviting them to engage. The
very act of formatting also helps you clarify in your own
mind what you want to say. When you
•
•
•
•

select fonts
write headings
use white space
insert graphics

you make decisions about your message priorities, and
you guide your audience
—and yourself—
toward clearer structure.

Your audience will scan your message before deciding
whether to read it. That’s just human nature. So what
do you want them to notice first?

3

SECTION ONE

CHOOSE FONTS
Some people are typography geeks because, frankly,
fonts are fun. They’re a form of art that quickly conveys
a tremendous amount of information. Fonts are a voice
in which your writing speaks.
When formatting a document, choose your fonts
deliberately so that your message is supported by the
look and feel of the fonts you choose.
The next few pages cover some basics you should know
about fonts and typography.

I am traditional.
I am sleek and modern.
I am goofy.
I am powerful.

I AM SHOUTING.
I am artsy.
I don’t need to be noticed.

Fonts are the voice in
which your writing speaks.
4

TYPOGRAPHY BASICS
KERNING

SERIF VS. SANS SERIF

Fonts are generally classed as either “serif” or
“sans serif.” Serifs are the widened feet at the end
of font strokes. Sans serifs don’t have those
widened ends.

STROKE

serif

Kerning is the space
between letters. The best
kerning is achieved when
spacing looks even.
Kerning is most often
adjusted with large
headings or titles. Body
copy is rarely kerned.

sans serif

Typography
Light

Regular

NO

TYP O GRA P HY
YES

Bold

TYPOGRAPHY
TYPOGRAPHY ANATOMY
Ascender

Baseline

Typography
Descender

x-height
FIGURE 6.1

Median

5

HOW TO CHOOSE FONTS

SAFE-BET FONT PAIRINGS
Helvetica
Garamond

Avenir
Bell MT

Century Gothic
Century

Baskerville
Helvetica Neue

Arial
Georgia

Bebas neue
Helvetica Light

Readers scan for titles and headings first, so those elements need to stand
out.
Generally, choose two different fonts: one for title/headings, and one for
body text. A rule of thumb is to choose a serif font for one and a sans serif
font for the other. Some reliable pairings are shown in Figure 6.2.
Go to fontpair.co to experiment with a range of free Google fonts in
tandem. Remember, if you are sharing a copy of your document in editable
form, your recipient’s device may not display unusual fonts. If you save and
share your work in PDF, your fonts will be consistent.

FONTS FOR HEADINGS

Choose fonts that
‣ Convey the right impression for your document
‣ Look good on multiple screen sizes
‣ Are large and dark enough for your audience to read easily
‣ Are deliberate, distinct, and bold

Choose fonts for 3-4 levels of text:
headings, subheadings, body text &
annotations.

Headings
SUBHEADINGS

body text

HEADINGS
subheadings
body text

annotations

EXAMPLES

Garamond
HELVETICA

Helvetica

Bebas neue

Remember, the population is aging. Choose a font size that
will be easily readable by your audience.

Bebas neue
Helvetica Light

Garamond (italic)

FIGURE 6.2

LEVELS

6

SECTION TWO

WRITE HEADINGS

Because you’ve spent time planning and organizing your
document, writing headings won’t be hard.
The stylized document in Figure 7.3 shows a title and
headings that coordinate in color and size. Make sure
your headings are also parallel grammatically and that
they indicate useful content. For instance: “Why buy from
us?” is a clearer heading than simply “Why?”

The Facts of Life
Birds

Bees

Babies

FIGURE 7.3

Our brains are attuned to information hierarchy. “What
should I pay attention to first? What can I ignore until
later?” Give your reader some help by using headings in
messages longer than three or four paragraphs.

7

Be sure to write and format headings consistently
throughout your document, and make sure samelevel headings are grammatically parallel.
Save yourself some time by learning and using “styles
formatting” tools for titles, headings, and body text.
When you apply styles to your headings, you can
easily generate an outline or change the style or color
of all your headings with one click. Here’s how it’s
done in Google Docs: Working with Heading Styles.
(Word, Pages, and other text editors have similar
capabilities.)

PLACE EMPHASIS
When you need to emphasize part of your text, do it
properly. Back when everyone wrote on typewriters,
the only tools for emphasis were capitalization and
underlining, but all-caps now looks like SHOUTING,
and underlining interrupts the descending strokes of
letters. Instead, use size, italics, grayscale, bolding, or
colors to make your point.

Write Grammatically Parallel Headings
NO

YES

Hiring three new project managers
for the next fiscal year will benefit
our department in the following
three ways.

Hiring three new project managers
for the next fiscal year will benefit
our department in the following
three ways.

Project Cycle Time
Blah blah blah

Shorten Project Cycle Time
Blah blah blah

Resource Management is improved
Blah blah blah

Improve Resource Management
Blah blah blah

Budget Reduction
Blah blah blah

Reduce the Overall Budget
Blah blah blah

Place Emphasis Skillfully
NO

YES

ALL CAPS FEELS LIKE SHOUTING.

Size draws the eye.

Underlining interrupts the
descending strokes of letters, so
avoid using it.
Don’t use TWO forms of emphasis
at once. Just choose the right one.

Italicsemphasizes
emphasizekey
keywords.
words.
Italics
provides contrast.
contrast.
Grayscale provides

Bolding catches attention.
Colors please the reader.
FIGURE 6.4

BE CONSISTENT

8

FORMAT EMAIL
In an email, use bolded paragraph headings for scanability. Doing
this helps you stay organized, and readers love it.

Aa Bb

YES
To:
From:

Hannah.Jones@email.com
Arianna.Cortes@email.com

Subject: 3 Goals for Our Team Meeting

Hi, Hannah. Jackie asked us to emphasize three goals to the team at our
meeting tomorrow:
UPDATE CARDS DAILY
We all need to update our assignment cards on Trello each day by 5 p.m.
Jackie would like to be able to do a company-wide review of project status in
the evenings.
MAKE SEAMLESS HAND-OFFS
A few projects were accidentally dropped during the staff change last year, so
we need to make sure each project sheet is up to date before handing it off
to someone else.
HARVEST CUSTOMER FEEDBACK
Treat customer complaints as valuable feedback. Be sure to record the
complaint and the resolution in the appropriate log. If you see trends, bring
them to Jackie’s attention.
See you at 2:30.
Arianna

What font voice is your email
speaking in?
For daily emails, make sure you’re happy
with the default font. Some designers
claim that Verdana (san serif) or Georgia
(serif) are better choices than Gmail’s
default, Arial.
While you’re at it, try creating a
professional signature block that includes
your contact information.

Change your default font in
Gmail by going to “settings”
Choose a font that represents
Activity 7.2 your voice well.

9

SECTION THREE

USE WHITE SPACE
White space is, of course, just space. But like silence, it
is remarkably powerful. A page full of black text with
small margins feels daunting and unappealing to a
reader, as The Onion so astutely reported: Nation
Shudders at Large Block of Uninterrupted Text. Don’t
make that mistake. Build plenty of white space into your
document to enhance readability, direct attention, and
lighten the feel of the page.
The next pages demonstrate some practical formatting
tips for using space well.

Visual simplicity invites your
reader’s attention.
10

Text can be aligned four ways: on the left, the center, the right, or
spread evenly between two margins. Although “justified” text
(aligned between both edges of a column) can look sharp at a
distance, odd spacing between words can occur. These distracting,
jagged white spaces in your paragraph are called rivers. Left-justified,
ragged-right text is easiest to read, and lets you decide how to use
your extra white space, instead of sprinkling it throughout your
paragraph. Narrow columns however, can be justified well if you find
and hyphenate words that are causing rivers, or use smart text
display software like InDesign.

KEEP LINES SHORT
Keeping your lines short makes reading faster and easier. Instead of
long lines, use generous margins to keep lines shorter. Another great
solution is to use columns, which shortens the lines still further. A
good rule of thumb is to keep each line of text no longer than 52-70
characters wide so the eye captures each line quickly.

AVOID NARROW MARGINS
Margins give the eye a rest. Don’t skimp. One wider margin (up to
two inches) on mirrored sides of the page can be a good spot for
illustrations or pull quotes.

SOMETIMES

YES

Right-justified, raggedleft text can be used
to display short
text units.

Left-justified, raggedright text is easiest to
read and should be
used most often.

FULL JUSTIFIED BETWEEN MARGINS
NO

YES

Justified text can cause
odd spacing in and
between words. Avoid
it.

Justified text can look
sharp, though, if you use
design software or use hyphens when needed.

COLUMNS AND MARGINS

Columns make
lines short
Use wide
margins for
visual relief

FIGURE 6.5

LEFT-ALIGN OR JUSTIFY

RIGHT ALIGNED

LEFT ALIGNED

11

You’re probably familiar with “single spaced” and “double spaced.” (You
in high school: “Does my five-page essay have to be single spaced or
double spaced?”) But the optimal vertical distance between lines for
most documents is not 1, but about 1.15 (this spacing is called leading).
This little bit of extra space gives the document a lighter look.
Single spacing is acceptable, but do not double space your text for any
business document unless your boss is a retired high school English
teacher. It looks unfinished, undesigned, and unprofessional.
Don’t indent. Indenting the first line of each paragraph by five spaces is
another typewriter holdover. Instead, leave an extra line between
paragraphs and make all paragraphs begin flush with the left margin.

WRITE SHORT PARAGRAPHS
Paragraph breaks are the breath of reading. Don’t force your reader to
go on for too long without a refreshing break. Paragraph length can be a
formatting as well as a content decision. When writing text in columns,
use very short paragraphs.

To keep your paragraphs shorter,
use links liberally.

CHOOSE YOUR LINE SPACING
NO

0.7

Leading is the amount of vertical
space between lines of text. You
probably know it as spacing.

YES

1.15

Leading is the amount of vertical
space between lines of text. You
probably know it as spacing.

NO

2.0
Leading is the amount of vertical
space between lines of text. You
probably know it as spacing.

FIGURE 6.6

USE 1.15 LINE SPACING
AS YOUR DEFAULT

12

SECTION FOUR

INSERT GRAPHICS

If you are having trouble figuring out which kind of
graphic will best display data, try using Andrew Abela’s
handy tool Which Chart? Then download one of Juice Labs
Chart Chooser free templates. We’ll cover the
details of visualizing data and designing graphics
in Chapter 11, but these resources can get you
started.

Overall life satisfaction

Sometimes the best way to communicate information is with
graphics, not words.

NEW MCOM TEXTBOOK
INCREASES LIFE SATISFACTION

Exposure to textbook

13

CHOOSING A GRAPHIC

TRY A…

Sequence

People

Location

Data

Timeline,
Flowchart

Photo,
Org Chart

Map,
Diagram,
Floorplan

Table, Chart

Trend

Topic

Line Chart,
Infographic
Bubble Chart
(Canva)

Action or
concept
Icon
(The Noun
Project)

2014

2015
= 6 students
2016

TOPIC
2017

Kitchen

Living Room

Bedroom

Bedroom

FIGURE 6.7

TO
COMMUNICATE
ABOUT . . .

14

Don’t just sprinkle graphics throughout your document,
anchor, position, and interpret them. Figure 7.8
demonstrates how to do all three.
ANCHOR
Anchor graphics to the text by writing a clear
reference in the body of your document. Give
readers a context for what they are about to see and
a reason to care about it.

Male Hair Length Growing Slowly in Utah
25
Inches from Crown

ANCHOR YOUR GRAPHICS

MEN’S HAIR LENGTH IS GROWING
The most significant data comes from the measured length of men’s hair from
the crown to the tips. Figure 1 shows those measures and an obvious trend
toward longer hair.

20

U.C. Berkeley Men

15
10
5

BYU Men

0

INTERPRET
Finally, know that inserting a graphic is not enough.
You must interpret the meaning of your graphic for
your readers. Help them see how your graphic adds
to your argument. Move them from “What?”
through “So What?” to “Now What?”

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Years
Source: < CGT-Studies.com/hairlength/byuberk.html > May 2017

The findings show that in the year 2012, hair length at Berkeley was five times
the hair length at BYU. Years 2013 and 2014 saw an increase in that difference,
reaching a maximum for the five years of more than 10 times the length of hair
at BYU. Years 2015 and 2016 show the difference decreasing only slightly to a
little more than six times the BYU hair length, with length at both universities
remaining unchanged.
Not only do the findings support the premise that hair length of males at
Berkeley is significantly longer, the findings also show a consistent difference;
that is, for the five years of the study, hair length of men at Berkeley was
always longer than that of men at BYU. Despite these differences, the data
shows a key similarity in the growing trend of longer hair, relatively speaking.
FIGURE 7.8

POSITION
Next, position graphics strategically so that the
reader’s eye can quickly identify and locate the
information you want to convey. When you insert a
graphic, make sure you label it clearly and cite its
source (citations are usually written in a small font at
the bottom right).

15

EXAMPLE BANK

STANDARD
DOCUMENT
FORMATS
Business relies heavily on email, but printed business letters
and reports are still used. In fact, as more communication
becomes digital, the power and durability of a printed
document makes it stand out.

REPORTS

PROPOSALS

Click through the links to the right to see examples of standard
formatting and get some design ideas.

Need to type a memo?

Standard Memo Format

WHITE PAPERS

TRADITIONAL LETTERS
16

IN CONCLUSION
Formatting a great-looking document takes time and practice, but the pay off is increased
reader access . . . and increased credibility.
The next time you write a paper or create a handout, practice choosing fonts, writing
headings, using white space, and inserting graphics.

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES

Gaertner-Johnston, Lynn. “Write Better Executive Summaries.”
Business Writing Blog, May 29, 2013.
http://www.businesswritingblog.com/business_writing/2013/05/writ
e-better-executive-summaries.html, accessed February 2017.
Kapterev, Alexei. “Which typeface should I use?” LinkedIn
SlideShare, February 8, 2016.
http://www.slideshare.net/thecroaker/which-typeface-should-iuse/, accessed February 2017.
“Nation Shudders At Large Block Of Uninterrupted Text.” The Onion,
March 9, 2010. http://www.theonion.com/article/nation-shuddersat-large-block-of-uninterrupted-te-16932, accessed February
2017.
Strizver, Ilene. “Pull Quotes.” Fonts.com.
https://www.fonts.com/content/learning/fyti/typographictips/pull-quotes, accessed February 2017.

Poole, Alex. “Which Are More Legible: Serif or Sans Serif Typefaces?”
Alex Poole Blog, February 17, 2008.
http://alexpoole.info/blog/which-are-more-legible-serif-or-sansserif-typefaces/, accessed Februrary 2017.

BOOKS
Catmull, Ed.Creativity, Inc: Overcoming the Unseen Forces that
Stand in the Way of True Inspiration. New York: Random House,
2014
Hagen, Rebecca, and Kim Golombisky. White Space is Not Your
Enemy: A Beginner’s Guide to Communicating Visually through
Graphic, Web, & Multimedia Design. Burlington: Focal Press, 2013.
Kosslyn, Stephen M. Graph Design for the Eye and Mind. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2006.
Tufte, Edward R. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, 1990.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Abela, A. “Chart Suggestions—A Thought-Starter.” The Extreme
Presentation Method, September 6, 2006.
http://img.labnol.org/di/choosing_a_good_chart2.pdf, accessed
February 2017.

LEARN MORE

Butterick’s Practical Typography. “Home.”
http://practicaltypography.com/, accessed February 2017.
Canva. “Choosing the Right Font.”
https://www.canva.com/design/DAB0nI1UHN0/4EPCm3m456_SQZ
qdVx_4Dw/edit, accessed February 2017.
Canva. “Infographics.”
https://www.canva.com/create/infographics/, accessed February
2017.
CorporateIpsum. “Home.” http://www.cipsum.com/, accessed
February 2017.
Google Support. “Add a title, heading, or table of contents in a
document.”
https://support.google.com/docs/answer/116338?co=GENIE.Platf
orm%3DDesktop&hl=en, accessed October 2017.
JuiceBox. “Chart Chooser.”
http://labs.juiceanalytics.com/chartchooser/index.html,
accessed February 2017.
The Noun Project. “Home.” https://thenounproject.com/, accessed
February 2017.
Purdue Online Writing Lab. “Introduction to Grant Writing.”
https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/981/1/, February
2017.

Purdue Online Writing Lab. “White Paper: Purpose and Audience.”
https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/546/1/, February
2017.
Purdue Online Writing Lab. “Writing the Basic Business Letter.”
https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/653/01/, February
2017.
Typeconnection. “Home.” http://www.typeconnection.com/,
accessed February 2017.

VIDEOS
Brown University Computer Education. “Google Docs: Working with
Heading Styles,” YouTube, published February 9, 2012.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q58KRXwg93E&feature=youtu
.be, accessed October 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

WEBSITES

CHAPTER

8

REVISE
ZOOM

OUT

–

ZOOM

IN

CONTENTS
4 SEE IT AGAIN
5 ZOOM YOUR DOC

LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 8

2

Rewriting is the essence of
writing well—where the game
is won or lost. –William Zinsser
The word "revise" means to “see again,” and this is exactly what you need to do
when preparing your writing for public consumption.
While writing, you are zoomed in. You’ve planned your purpose, analyzed your
audience, created a structure, decided on a strategy, and drafted your message. To
revise, you just zoom out, then in again.

3

SECTION ONE

SEE IT AGAIN
When you finish a substantial first draft, get away from it. Go outside and run around
the block. Get your mind completely off the topic for a while. Cognitively, your brain will
assemble and organize the information it’s been processing for so many hours. Set an
alarm or timer for when you’ll start work again.
The amount of time you spend revising your work depends on both its length and
importance. An annual report is a major project, but even a short, critical email might
take days to get right. When you come back from your break, you’ll be examining your
writing in a new and powerful way: by mentally zooming out and then back in, just as
your reader will approach it.

Make revising your emails standard operating procedure. Don’t
fill in the TO: field until after you’ve written and revised.

4

1 Ft

SECTION TWO

ZOOM
YOUR DOC
Although you’d like to think that your audience will start with your
first word and read carefully through each word in order, you know
that’s not how it works.
As a reader you first notice the design and layout of a piece, glance
at the title, scan the headings and visuals, and skim some lines.
Only then do you decide whether you’ll commit your time to
reading it through. So try revising by using that same sequence.
Imagine yourself zooming out, then zooming in.

2 Ft
5 Ft
10 Ft

5

ZOOM OUT TO 10 FEET
LAYOUT | DESIGN

Imagine yourself about 10 feet away from a printout of your work.
What do you see? Layout, spacing, headings—not much else.
From this distance, you can’t actually read the document. Instead,
you get a sense for its overall design: headings, alignment, white
space, graphics, contrast, etc. This is important because readers’
first (and perhaps most powerful) impression of your message will
be more about its design than its content. More than ever
before, good design = credibility. This Purdue Owl video
demonstrates the basics of Visual Rhetoric.
At the 10-foot level, ask yourself these questions about LAYOUT
AND DESIGN :
‣ Does my document look good from a distance?
‣ Does it have a clear entry point?
‣ Should I use color to add interest or draw attention to key
points?
‣ Did I choose attractive and clear fonts?
‣ Did I leave enough space to make my message look inviting?
(Blank lines between paragraphs, 1.15 line spacing,
comfortable margins?)
‣ Is there any data that I should illustrate with a graphic?
‣ If this will be viewed online, is it readable on a mobile device?
6

ZOOM TO 5 FEET

AGENDA| ORGANIZATION | HEADINGS

Your reader will be looking for quick signs that you are organized and
trustworthy. Use the first two of the 4A’s to prove it:

ATTENTION Do I capture the readers’ attention immediately? Do I
provide the context of the message and tell my readers why they
should care?
In a report, the title and opening sentence are your most important
attention-grabbing tools. In a letter, your opening sentence serves
the same function. In an email, focus on the subject line: keep it
short, descriptive, and interesting enough to stand out from the
dozens (or hundreds) of other emails the reader receives daily.

AGENDA Can my reader easily locate a clear agenda that previews
the content of the message?
Your agenda is usually the last line of your opening paragraph. It will
set up the organization of your message and prime your readers’
minds to receive it. All but the shortest messages deserve agendas.

7

ZOOM TO 2 FEET

CONTENT | SUPPORTING DETAIL | PARAGRAPH STRUCTURE

The third step is to examine the substance of your message. Make sure
you support your attention grabber and your agenda. As you zoom in to
the two-foot level, check the remaining two of the 4A’s.
ARGUMENT Do I have a strong argument with all the information
necessary to fulfill the promise of my agenda? Remember, an argument
in this sense is not a conflict. It’s the combination of your main point
and how you back it up. Ask yourself:
‣ Can I streamline the reading experience for my reader by deleting
anything? Or can I link to information instead of including it?
‣ Have I remembered the readers' point of view and made clear why
they should care?
‣ Have I given the details and support my readers will want or need?
And have I checked my facts and claims to make sure they’re
absolutely accurate and cited?

ACTION Does my conclusion include a call to action for my readers,
reminding them why the whole thing matters? Have I included
information that will make next steps easy for my reader?

8

TOPIC SENTENCES
Next, make sure each paragraph passes muster. For each
paragraph, read the topic sentence. Is it clear? Does it
contain the main point of the paragraph? Does everything
else in the paragraph relate to the topic sentence?
Remember that busy readers often skim documents by
reading only the topic sentences. If someone did this to
your document, would they catch the main points of your
argument? If not, it’s time to rewrite.

4A

ATTENTION

ALUMNI ADVICE

“The need to communicate succinctly and
directly is essential to any professional work
environment, whether it’s with a small
startup or a Fortune 500 company.
People move fast and don’t have time to
parse through what you are trying to say.
Avoid using ‘throat clearing’ phrases—
phrases or words that add more to your word
count but contribute nothing to the message.
It all goes back to being clear and succinct.”

AGENDA
ARGUMENT
ACTION
Robby Boyle
Sr. HR Generalist at LinkedIn, Organizational
Behavior/HR, Brigham Young University
MBA Class of 2016

9

ZOOM TO 1 FOOT
GRAMMAR | PUNCTUATION | STYLE

class he
fit, your s
h peac

Your final step is to edit for grammar, punctuation, and style, so
zoom in really close.
Comb through your work at the sentence level to catch any errors
of grammar, spelling, or punctuation that will interfere with the
message. Alert: You may have already read your work so many
times that you mentally skip words, so try reading it aloud to
force yourself to slow down and hear the words. To catch spelling
errors, read backwards so you see each word instead of its
meaning.
Style refers to tone, word choice, sentence variety, and a host of
other elements. Everything you write has a style; you can’t
escape it. As an analogy, think about what you decide to wear
each day. Your wardrobe choices communicate something about
you; they reflect your personal style or fashion sense (deliberate
or not).
So it is with your writing. The way you use words, the rhythm of
your sentences, even whether you use a semicolon or a dash—
these subtle choices constitute your style.

10

At the one-foot level, the ZOOM process forces you to notice and
evaluate your style. Is it appropriate to the context and audience?
Too stuffy for a quick check-in with your project teammates? Too
chatty for an update to the vice-president? These are the questions to ask yourself at this stage of revision. If something in your
writing sounds clunky or off-key, it’s a style problem that needs to
be fixed.
More generally, style refers to a certain X factor that elevates
writing from useful to delightful, informative to compelling. The
best way to develop good style is to read, read, read. Get the
voice of great stylists in your head so you can imitate their
cadence, nuance, wit, and flair. The end of each chapter of this
book has recommendations for further reading that will help you
improve your own style. Great books, great thoughts, great
style…what’s not to like?

"I know my stuff looks like it was all rattled off in
28 seconds, but every word is a struggle and
every sentence is like the pangs of birth.”
Theodor Seuss Geisel (Philip Nel, Dr. Seuss: American Icon
(New York: Continuum, 2004), 35.)

WHEN SHOULD I GET SOMEONE ELSE TO
REVIEW MY WORK?
If your project is long, complicated, or mission critical, be
sure to have someone else give you feedback on your
writing. Be reasonable in your time request, and make
the job easy for your editor.
Ask if they’d like a printed copy, or offer to grab them a
drink while they look it over. To overcome the natural
anxiety about putting your work in front of critical eyes,
focus on the project rather than yourself. Mentally put
your editor on your team in getting the job done well.

FIGURE 7.1

STYLE AT THE ONE-FOOT LEVEL

11

IN CONCLUSION
Remember that doing a thorough revision allows you a fresh take. You see your work
again.
Imagine yourself zooming out to get an overall impression of the layout and design. Then
zoom in until you can just see structure—the title, agenda, headings, and logical flow.
Zoom down another level to check the main content, paragraph structure, and
supporting details. Finally, zoom all the way in and get really picky about grammar,
punctuation, and style.
Make ZOOMing a habit. Your readers will thank you.

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES

Silverman, David. “That Written-By-Committee Flavor.” Harvard
Business Review, December 21, 2009. https://hbr.org/2009/12/thatwrittenbycommittee-flavor, accessed February 2017.

BOOKS

Abell, Alicia. Business Grammar, Style, and Usage: The Desk
Reference for Articulate and Polished Business Writing, Speaking,
and Correspondence. Aspatore, 2003.
Cunningham, Helen, and Brenda Greene. The Business Style
Handbook: An A-to-Z Guide for Effective Writing on the Job.
McGraw Hill, 2013.
Einsohn, Amy. The Copyeditor’s Handbook: A Guide for Book
Publishing and Corporate Communications. University of California
Press, 2006.

Nel, Phillip. Dr. Seuss: American icon. Bloomsbury Academic, 2003.
Pinker, Steven. The Sense of Style. New York: Viking, 2014.

VIDEOS

OWLPurdue. “Purdue OWL: Visual Rhetoric,” YouTube, published
January 1, 2013. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vJvivIzkDg,
accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

“A General Guide to Understanding Written Plagarism.” EasyBib.
http://www.easybib.com/guides/students/research-guide/whatis-plagiarism/, accessed February 2017.

CHAPTER

9

MANAGE
G E T

T H I N G S

D O N E … W I T H

P E O P L E

CONTENTS
4 MEETINGS
7 EMAIL AND CHAT
10 MOTIVATION

LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 9

2

Manage and lead effectively.
As your career progresses, you’ll be asked to
manage projects, which ultimately means
managing people. In this chapter you’ll learn to
manage communications in meetings and with
email and chat. We’ll also discuss motivating at
critical moments.
Take a minute to read the advice at right about
leadership from experienced leaders.

“The key to successful
leadership is

INFLUENCE,
not authority.”

“Leadership is a series

of behaviors

rather
than a role for heroes.”

KENNETH H. BLANCHARD

MARGARET WHEATLEY

“Before you are a leader, success is all about growing
yourself. When you become a leader, SUCCESS

ABOUT GROWING OTHERS.”

IS ALL

JACK WELCH

“A leader is best when people
barely know he exists. When his
work is done, his aim fulfilled,
they will say:

“May we be men and
women of

HONESTY and
INTEGRITY

WE DID IT OURSELVES.”

in everything we do.”

LAO TZU

PRES. THOMAS S. MONSON

“My job is not to be easy on people. My job is to take
these great people we have and to push them and
MAKE THEM EVEN BETTER.”
STEVE JOBS

3

SECTION ONE

MEETINGS
Meetings can be valuable. They’re also costly in time
and human resources. Long, disorganized meetings
burn through precious resources and are excruciating.
According to a 2016 study published by the Harvard
Business Review (Collaborative Overload), “Time spent
by managers and employees in collaborative activities
has ballooned by 50% or more” over the last two
decades. Consulting with others can consume up to
80% of an individual’s time, leaving very little time for
productive, independent effort. The complexity of
global business has led to more team-based decision
making and action . . . and that means more meetings.

As a manager, you might feel that calling a meeting is
the logical next step in any project, but are you sure?
An unnecessary meeting creates inefficiency,
resentment, and lack of trust. Make sure you run
meetings that are well-planned and effective. Ask
yourself these questions:

4

SHOULD I HOLD A MEETING?

Call meetings when you need to collaborate on solutions,
create new ideas, make decisions, or assign actions.
Generally, don’t call a meeting to convey information—unless
your message is sensitive. Weekly meetings can help keep a
group cohesive and moving forward, but consider less timeconsuming ways to stay in touch (e.g., shared documents or
project-management software). Don’t let a regular meeting
become a recurring time drain. Question the necessity of
every meeting you call.

WHOM SHOULD I INVITE?
The smallest meetings are 1:1, a formal individual meeting
with a subordinate instead of just “catching up” in the break
room. Andy Grove, the legendary founder of Intel, believed
1:1 meetings pay off handsomely. “Ninety minutes of your
time can enhance the quality of your subordinate’s work for
two weeks, or for some eighty-plus hours.” High Output
Management

5

When calling a team meeting, try to keep the number of
attendees small (though you should publish the results as
widely as necessary). In large groups, social loafing occurs:
Participants reduce their effort and avoid responsibilities. An
odd number of people, close to five, is a good size for a
discussion-based meeting. Guard against inviting too many
people (trying not to offend anybody), or too few (inviting
only those you’re comfortable with).

BE SURE YOUR ATTENDANCE LIST INCLUDES . . .
1.

The decision maker (authorized to make key
decisions)

2.

People who can frame the current issues,
provide context, and propose specific solutions

3.

People required to implement the decisions

“An odd-numbered group size, close to 5, is useful for discussion and decision making.”
Sheila Margolis
What Is the Optimal Group Size for Decision Making?

55

WHEN SHOULD WE MEET?
According to an article in Fast Company (“The Best Time of Day to Do Everything at Work"), Tuesday afternoons at 3 p.m. is a good
time to hold meetings. Attendees have time to prepare for them after the weekend, and they still have a few days before the end of
the week to execute assignments. Avoid Friday afternoons and Monday mornings if at all possible. Use the company calendar invitation
system or a facilitator like Doodle, Calendly, or NeedToMeet to efficiently set a time when all invitees can attend.
Explore the interfaces of Doodle, Calendly, or
NeedToMeet and decide which you’ll use.
Activity 8.1

THE BEST TIME OF DAY TO DO EVERYTHING AT WORK
Schedule a meeting? Tuesday at 3 p.m.
W Th F

MEETINGS

MEETINGS

T

MEETINGS

M
MEETINGS

S

Sa

Scheduling a meeting on Tuesday allows time to prepare after
the weekend and act on the decisions made in the same week.

Send an email for a quick response? 6 - 7 a.m.
You’ll compete with fewer emails in the morning inbox, and
reply rates are highest, about 45%.

Make a tough decision? After lunch.

Judges make more consistent decisions when they have full
tummies. You probably will too.

Brainstorm new ideas? When you’re tired.

A tired brain won’t jump to logical solutions but will start
throwing out random and innovative ideas.

Source: Stephanie Vozza, Fast Company 23 June 2015, “The Best Time of Day to Do Everything at Work”

6

WHERE SHALL WE MEET?
Choose the right place for your meeting. You have options.
Office meetings Schedule a right-sized room—avoid one that's
so big that participants mentally check out. Make sure the room
has enough chairs and that you have what you need: projector,
strong WiFi, water, paper, etc.
Standup meetings For brief progress report meetings, try
stand-up meetings. Stand-ups are short meetings in which
participants remain standing in a common area. The idea is that
everyone will conduct business more efficiently since they don’t
want to stay standing too long!

ALUMNI ADVICE

“I love walking meetings.
They allow participants to dodge
interruptions and focus more tightly
on the discussion. The increased
heart rate and blood flow make me
feel sharper, too.”

Walking meetings Another alternative meeting location, much
favored in Silicon Valley, is outside. Walking meetings work best
for 1:1 or 1:2 meetings in mild weather. Plan a route beforehand
that will last about the length of your meeting, and warn
participants in advance so they’ll wear comfortable shoes.
Walking meetings can spur creative thought, increase
friendship, and give participants a break from the office.
David B. Andersen,

Former Intel technologist and current entrepreneur.
MS Electrical Engineering
BYU, Class of 1981

7

ENGAGING REMOTE PARTICIPANTS
Research by Rosanne Siino at Stanford suggests that
emotional engagement is the key to effective meetings,
and that remote participants have trouble staying
engaged. She recommends four ways to make remote
meetings more effective:
1. Avoid “mixed” meetings with some participants on
video and others in the room. Think all or nothing:
either everyone’s in the room or everyone’s remote.
2. Have remote participants introduce themselves at
the beginning and identify their role (e.g., notetaker, timekeeper, etc.).
3. Discourage calling in via mobile phones, which
have unpredictable connections. When you
combine a thick accent with a low-quality line,
everyone quickly becomes mentally exhausted. Use
VOIP if at all possible.

Lunch Meetings A good meal can help people relax and
feel closer. At a restaurant, consider scheduling early or
late—you’ll have more room, a quieter space, and more
attentive service. If you order lunch to be brought in, be
aware that people need downtime, so don’t frequently
overschedule their lunch hours.
Remote meetings Remote meetings are increasingly
common in decentralized teams. If you are calling a
meeting for a new team, make the effort to use a video
conferencing platform like Zoom.us, Google Hangouts,
Skype, Facetime, or Join.me. The extra hassle is worth
the increased information you will acquire by reading
body and facial language as you spend time getting to
know each other. As you become comfortable working
together, phone meetings will become more common
and efficient. Become familiar with screen-sharing
technology so you can all discuss a single document, flow
chart, or spreadsheet.

4. Keep track of who talks and who doesn’t. Draw in
non-participants by asking questions and seeking
their opinions.

Practice holding a remote meeting with a team
you work on. Create a document and share
your screen with the others in the meeting.
Activity 9.1 Have everyone contribute to a single
document using Google Docs, Sheets, or Slides.

8

HOW LONG SHALL WE MEET?
The length of time you should plan for your meeting is, of
course, determined by your purpose. Here are some
examples:
‣ 15 minutes: Status updates. Help a colleague with a
single roadblock. Readjust assignment loads.
‣ 30 minutes: Brainstorm. Create a project schedule.
Conduct a performance review. Review a report before
publication.
‣ 50 minutes: First team meeting on a new project. Work
through a recurrent multi-faceted problem. Hold a
discussion including more than five people.
Try to plan meetings that feel a little short for the task.
Meeting participants are more likely to stay focused, alert,
and grateful.
Time’s up and you’re not finished with the agenda? Table the
rest of the items and resolve to do better next time. By
ending the meeting on time, you communicate respect for
your colleagues’ time and your trustworthiness in using it.

WHAT SHOULD I DO
BEFORE THE MEETING?

Create and publish an agenda. Include the meeting purpose,
invitees, roles, location, length, and links to minutes from the
previous meeting so participants can review their
assignments. Conclude your agenda with a few questions
you’d like participants to be thinking about before the
meeting and links to any material they’ll need to review.
MEETING AGENDA
When:
Where:
Call-in Info:
Preparation:
Who:

May 21, 2017, 3 p.m. EDT
Sky Meeting Room + call + video
555.123.4567; web link here
Bring project status updates and roadblocks
Arianna (host), Libby, Clark, Anish, Jen G.

1. Project Status Update (3:00 p.m. - 30 min)
• Individual role updates
• Roadblocks to address
2. Calendared Project Items (3:30 p.m. - 15 min)
• Review existing items
• Add or delete items
• Address conflicts
3. Project Next Steps & Next Meeting (3:45 p.m. - 10 min)

If you are having trouble getting through
meetings on time, create a timed agenda.
Activity 9.2

Create an agenda for an upcoming meeting.
Send it out to prepare attendees, then follow it
during the meeting.

9

HOW DO I RUN A MEETING?
As a manager, you‘re responsible for guiding the meeting, but
don’t assume that means you should be joyless or strictly limit
discussion to the work project. To get the best from your team
during a meeting, pay attention to relationships, roles, and
results.
Relationships: A few years ago, Google spent millions of
dollars gathering and analyzing data, trying to optimize its
teams. Its data on successful teams did not easily yield
commonalities. After years of research, Google found only two
common factors in its most successful teams:
‣ Equality in the distribution of conversational turn taking.
Everyone on the team spoke about the same amount over
time.
‣ A high average social sensitivity. Members quickly and
accurately read how other teams members felt, as
indicated by tone, expression, and nonverbal cues.
Women are often naturally skilled in this, which is why
they make such valuable team members. See more of
Google’s results here: Why Some Teams are Smarter Than
Others.

RELATIONSHIPS

Source: http://brandongaille.com/how-to-have-and-run-an-effective-meeting/

ROLES

RESULTS
10

Roles: Make sure people at your meetings know what their
responsibilities are. Some managers like to assign roles like
timekeeper, facilitator, recorder, questioner, etc. For solving
problems or group writing, some like the model of assigning
figurative roles like architect, madman, carpenter, and judge.
Or randomly divide the team into Blue Hats (who are free to
find flaws and criticize) and Red Hats (who can only comment
on positives, despite personal opinions). Ensure that everyone
has input.
Results: While simultaneously paying attention to the
relationships and roles in your group, you must also move
your tasks to completion. Quickly refocus wandering
conversations and keep desired results visible so you’ll all
move toward them. “Let’s check the agenda and move on.”
“Our main goal here is to . . .” Write your meeting’s purpose
on a whiteboard or a poster. Try using project management
software like Trello, Asana, or TeamGantt.

HOW SHOULD I
FOLLOW UP?

Don’t lose all that meeting goodness. People may leave
meetings motivated to do their assignments, but they can use
your help in providing them with reminders and tools. So be
sure to delegate and publish the next steps and due dates that
team members have agreed to. Enter assignments in your
project software or send a clear follow-up email like the one
below. Peer pressure (sometimes) works wonders.

YES
To

PauloC@email.com

From

Hannah.Goss@email.com

Subject

Assignments from June 15 Meeting

Hi, Team. Great meeting this morning! Here are our next steps:
Dave: File the patent application by June 20. Here’s an example.
Corinne: Make the changes we discussed to the UI by June 25.

Visit the splash pages of some project
management software services: Trello, Asana,
Wrike, TeamGantt, Zoho. Which do you like best
Activity 9.3 and how do you see yourself using it?

Paulo: Contact ProCorps by June 27 about support for the additional
features. Call Brady James (123.555.4321) and mention me.
Me: Write up project report and share for team review by June 19.
Let me know if you run into any roadblocks. I’ll check with each of you two
days before your deadline. Our next meeting is July 1 at 3 p.m.
I’ll bring bacon donuts because…bacon.

Ask attendees to put their phones in Do Not
Disturb mode during meetings.

Hannah

11

3 Email Management Tips
SECTION TWO

EMAIL
AND CHAT
EMAIL MANAGEMENT
Good managers need to fully understand the zen of email. It
must be your servant, not your master. We’ve already
discussed how to write clear, concise emails in CH 04: BUILD.
Here are some email management tips.
Breathe. We tend to breathe very shallowly when reading
email. So that you don’t become a victim of Email Apnea,
remember to breathe deeply and stretch occasionally.
Search rather than sort. Rely on Gmail’s incredible search
capabilities to find emails you need rather than spending
time sorting and maintaining topic folders.

Email response rates start dropping with
every word over 125. Use links and
attachments to say more, if necessary.
“10 Writing Tips to Make Your Emails Less Terrible,” Josh
Bernoff.

Check your email 3 times a day
instead of 30 to save a lot of time.
Unsubscribe from unwanted
newsletters and junk email and cut
your email workload drastically.
“Block Unwanted Emails.” Google Help

121

Average number of
emails an American
worker receives per
day

42%

Percentage of
Americans that
check their email in
the bathroom (just
sayin’).

http://www.connexintl.com/blog/5-times-phone-is-better-than-email/

12

Fence your email time. Don’t let email take over your day. Resist the
impulse to check email constantly—choose the hours you’ll spend
working on your inbox.
Achieve and maintain Inbox Zero. If you routinely ignore email in your
inbox, you might ignore something important or forget it as it drifts
down your long inbox list. Read Anthony Casalena, founder and CEO of
Squarespace, who deals with about 300 emails a day, on  How to
Achieve Inbox Zero. Let your email software filter for you (Google has
great tools). Keep your inbox to under 10 items.

ACHIEVE AND MAINTAIN

INBOX ZERO

CHAT MANAGEMENT
Instant messaging is common in business settings, probably because
so many more people are working remotely. Texting is instantaneous,
but also asynchronous. It accommodates groups, records threads, and
is appealing to those who don’t speak English as a first language. But
does it decrease productivity? If you manage notification settings, IM
can be a productivity boost rather than hindrance. Read and follow
Lifewire’s  8 Etiquette Rules for Using Messaging at Work.

NIRVANA

0

SLACK is a popular messaging, archive, and search
tool for teams. Watch this Introducing Slack video.
Activity 9.4

13

SECTION THREE

MOTIVATION
Motivational communication is a topic that makes many
people cringe. They picture the slick motivational
speaker, oozing with counterfeit charisma, or a
televangelist, manipulating emotions for self-gain. (see
Chris Farley’s brilliant “Matt Foley, Motivational
Speaker” skit).
But the ability to inspire and motivate others is one of
the hallmarks of extraordinary leaders. More
importantly, research by leadership experts Jack Zenger
and Joe Folkman shows that inspiring and motivating
others requires powerful communication. Zenger and
Folkman’s book, The Inspiring Leader, suggests the
following six best practices.

14

INSPIRING LEADERSHIP
COMMUNICATE OFTEN

Inspiring leaders are prolific communicators. They are in touch with their people, listening to them, sharing ideas,
providing encouragement, and reminding them of the bigger picture.

BE POSITIVE

Pessimists and critics are rarely inspiring. Research by University of Michigan professor Kim Cameron on
leadership teams (Positive Leadership) finds that in the highest-performing teams, the ratio of positive to
negative comments is 5:1. In medium-performing teams, the ratio is 2:1. And in low-performing teams, the ratio
is 1:3 in favor of the negative. Follow the 5:1 rule and keep it positive.

ASK QUESTIONS

Stereotypes suggest that inspiring leaders give lofty speeches and articulate grand visions. Turns out they actually
ask a lot of questions. Questions inspire because they indicate openness and encourage a two-way dialogue.
Social scientists Marcial Losada and Emily Heaphy find that in high-performing organizations, leaders ask a
question for each instruction they give; in low-performing organizations, the ratio is closer to 20 instructions for
each question.

CELEBRATE!

Shine the spotlight on others rather than on yourself. Being generous with praise and giving credit to oftenanonymous co-workers are powerful ways to inspire and motivate others.

TELL STORIES

Inspiring leaders tell stories that draw the audience in. Stories are concrete and real, and therefore more
memorable than lists of facts or well-honed logical arguments. Stories often evoke emotions; they’re funny, sad,
embarrassing, shocking, admirable, etc. Stories provide a sense of completion because they have a beginning, a
middle, and an end. To be more inspiring, keep a fresh stock of anecdotes that you can deploy in your formal and
informal communications.

SHOW PASSION

Inspiration means “to exert an animating, enlivening, or exalting influence” (merriam-webster.com). Your passion
as a communicator has a direct effect on how animated and enlivened your audience feels. Remember that
communicating with passion doesn’t require high-energy histrionics. Quiet authenticity and consistent
commitment are proven ways to convey personal conviction for what you’re communicating.

15

IN CONCLUSION
Your career will include managerial roles. The ability to facilitate effective meetings will
make you stand out in a world where time-wasting meetings are the norm. Managing
your email and messaging will help you survive and thrive in our era of communication
saturation. And if you can inspire and motivate others to achieve important goals, you’ll
always be in demand for getting things done . . . with people.

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES

Casalena, Anthony. “How to Achieve Inbox Zero.” Fortune.
November 16, 2016. http://fortune.com/2016/11/16/how-toachieve-inbox-zero/, accessed February 2017.
Cherry, Kendra. “What Is Social Loafing?” verywell. May 10, 2016.
https://www.verywell.com/what-is-social-loafing-2795883,
accessed February 2017.
Cross, Rob, Reb Rebele, and Adam Grant. “Collaborative
Overload.” Harvard Business Review. January-February 2016.
https://hbr.org/2016/01/collaborative-overload, accessed
February 2017.
De Hoyos, Brandon. “Eight Etiquette Rules for Using Messaging at
Work.” Lifewire. June 29, 2016. https://www.lifewire.com/etiquetterules-for-messaging-at-work-1949632, accessed February 2017.
Duhigg, Charles. “What Google Learned From Its Quest to Build the
Perfect Team.” The New York Times. February 25, 2016.
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-googlelearned-from-its-quest-to-build-the-perfect-team.html, accessed
February 2017.

“Find the Ideal Meeting-Room Temperature.” Meetings Imagined.
http://www.meetingsimagined.com/tips-trends/find-idealmeeting-room-temperature, accessed February 2017.
Gallo, Amy. “The Condensed Guide to Running Meetings.” Harvard
Business Review. July 6, 2015. https://hbr.org/2015/07/thecondensed-guide-to-running-meetings, accessed February 2017.
Hotz, Robert Lee. “Can Handwriting Make You Smarter?” The Wall
Street Journal. April 4, 2016. https://www.wsj.com/articles/canhandwriting-make-you-smarter-1459784659, accessed February
2017.
Lawrence, Toland. “Is Instant Messaging Killing Your Company’s
Productivity? (Part 1).” Business to Community. June 29, 2016.
http://www.business2community.com/tech-gadgets/instantmessaging-killing-companys-productivity-part-101585390#6jGHgGTQLGXdmYdy.97, accessed February 2017.
Losada, M. and E. Heaphy. "The Role of Positivity and Connectivity in
the Performance of Business Teams: A Nonlinear Dynamic Model."
The American Behavioral Scientist 47, no. 6 (2004): 740-65.
http://www.scuoladipaloalto.it/wpcontent/uploads/2012/11/positive-to-negative-attractors-inbusiness-teams11.pdf, accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Antonakis, John, Marika Fenley, and Sue Liechti. “Learning
Charisma.” Harvard Business Review. June 2012.
https://hbr.org/2012/06/learning-charisma-2, accessed February
2017.

LEARN MORE

Margolis, Sheila. “What is the optimal group size for decisionmaking?” Sheila Margolis Blog. January 1, 2011.
https://sheilamargolis.com/2011/01/24/what-is-the-optimalgroup-size-for-decision-making/, accessed February 2017.

Zenger, Jack and Joe Folkman. “The Inspiring Leader: Unlocking the
Secret Behind How Extraordinary Leaders Motivate.” Zenger
Folkman Whitepaper, 2014. http://zengerfolkman.com/wpcontent/uploads/2013/03/Unlocking-The-Secret-Behind-HowExtraordinary-Leaders-Motivate.pdf, accessed February 2017.

Siino, Rosanne M., 2007. Emotional Engagement on Geographically
Distributed Teams: Exploring Interaction Challenges in Mediated
Versus Face-to-face Meetings (Doctoral dissertation, Stanford
University).

“4 Personalities of Writing: Madman, Architect, Carpenter, Judge.”
Consultants Mind. January 11, 2015.
http://www.consultantsmind.com/2015/01/11/madman-architectcarpenter-judge/, accessed February 2017.

Vozza, Stephanie. “The Best Time of the Day to do Everything at
Work.” Fast Company. June 23, 2015.
https://www.fastcompany.com/3047586/know-it-all/the-besttime-of-day-to-do-everything-at-work, accessed February 2017.
“What is a Facilitator and Other Meeting Roles.” CO2 Partners Blog.
December 5, 2013. http://www.co2partners.com/what-is-afacilitator-role-and-responsibilities/, accessed February 2017.
Woolley, Anita, Thomas W. Malone, and Christopher F. Chabris. “Why
Some Teams Are Smarter Than Others.” The New York Times.
January 16, 2015.
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/18/opinion/sunday/whysome-teams-are-smarter-than-others.html?_r=1, accessed
February 2017.

BOOKS
Amabile, Teresa and Steven Kramer. The Progress Principle: Using
Small Wins to Ignite Joy, Engagement, and Creativity at Work.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011.
Cameron, Kim. Positive Leadership: Strategies for Extraordinary
Performance. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers Inc.,
2012.
Grove, Andrew S. High Output Management. New York, NY: Vintage
Books, 1995.
Sinek, Simon. Leaders Eat Last. New York, NY: Portfolio/Penguin, 2014.
Zenger, John. The Inspiring Leader: Unlocking the Secrets of How
Extraordinary Leaders Motivate. McGraw Hill, 2009.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Thornton, Bill, Alyson Faires, Maija Robbins, and Eric Rollins. “The
Mere Presence of a Cell Phone May be Distracting.” Social
Psychology 45, no. 6 (2014). http://metacog201415.weebly.com/uploads/3/9/2/9/39293965/thornton_faires_robbin
s_y_rollins_in_press_presence_cell_phone_distracting.pdf,
accessed February 2017.

LEARN MORE
WEBSITES

Asana. “Home.” https://asana.com/, accessed February 2017.
Atlassian. “You waste a lot of time at work”
(Infographic). https://www.atlassian.com/time-wasting-at-workinfographic, accessed February 2017.
Basecamp. “Home.” https://basecamp.com/, accessed February
2017.
Calendly. “Home.” https://calendly.com/, accessed February 2017.
Connex Intl. 5 Times the Phone is Better Than Email.”
http://www.connexintl.com/blog/5-times-phone-is-better-thanemail/, accessed October 2017.

Join.Me. “Home.” https://www.join.me/, accessed February 2017.
Merriam Webster. “Inspiration.” https://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/inspiration, accessed February 2017.
NeedToMeet. “Home.” http://www.needtomeet.com/, accessed
February 2017.
Skype. “Home.” https://www.skype.com/en/, accessed February
2017.
Stanford University. “Rosanne Marie Siino (Lecturer).”
https://explorecourses.stanford.edu/instructor/rsiino, accessed
February 2017.
TeamGantt. “Home.” https://www.teamgantt.com/, accessed
February 2017.
Trello. “Home.” https://trello.com/, accessed February 2017.

Doodle. “Home.” http://doodle.com/, accessed February 2017.

Whenisgood. “Home.” http://whenisgood.net/, accessed February
2017.

Google. “Google Hangouts.”
https://hangouts.google.com/, accessed February 2017.

Wrike. “Product.” https://www.wrike.com/tourvb/?utm_expid=75732941-76.L5A1J6c1RiuF9g8_tqjsPQ.2, accessed
February 2017.

GoToMeeting. “Home.” https://www.gotomeeting.com/, accessed
February 2017.

Zoho. “Home.” https://www.zoho.com/projects/features.html,
accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Apple. “Use FaceTime with your iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch.”
https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT204380, accessed February
2017.

LEARN MORE
VIDEOS
Slack. “Getting to Know Slack.” Slack.com.
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCY3YECgeBcLCzIrFLP4gblw,
accessed May 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

SNL. “Matt Foley: Talking to Kids About Drugs.” NBC.
http://www.nbc.com/saturday-night-live/video/motivationalspeaker/n10432?snl=1, accessed February 2017.

CHAPTER

10

PERSUADE
B

E

C

O

N

V

I

N

C

I

N

G

CONTENTS
4 PERSUADE WITH PURPOSE
8 KNOW YOUR AUDIENCE
10 CHOOSE A STRATEGY
17 DETERMINE A STRUCTURE
17 DELIVER BAD NEWS EFFECTIVELY
LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 10

2

Be convincing
Persuasion is the art of convincing someone
to see something as you do, and in a way
that makes them want to take action.
In business, persuasion is a valuable skill that helps advance
ideas and get things done. The notion that “great ideas sell
themselves” is wishful thinking. Great ideas need persuasive
expression.

“Don’t raise
your voice.
Improve your
argument.”

As with any effective message, persuasive communication
requires planning. In Chapter 3 we introduced the PASS
acronym for planning your message:
‣ Define your purpose
‣ Analyze your audience
‣ Decide on a strategy
‣ Build a strong structure
In this chapter, we’ll revisit each of these steps in the context of
persuasion, focusing mostly on strategy.

Desmond Tutu

South African social rights activist and retired Anglican bishop

3

SECTION ONE

PERSUADE WITH PURPOSE
Make sure you clarify exactly what you want from your audience. In
current business slang, this means deciding “What’s your ask?” What
are you trying to convince your listener or reader to believe, feel, and
do?
Before composing a persuasive message, write a simple, one-sentence
purpose statement. The first two columns of Figure 10.1 provide some
examples of audiences and purpose statements for common situations
that require persuasion.

Complaining is not persuading.
If you have a complaint,
think of a specific

solution

before you craft your pitch.

This path will be
more efficient
In two ways.

Let’s try to think
about this in a
different way…

A raise will improve
team stability

How about
this solution…

4

YOUR ASK

PROBLEM TO BE SOLVED

Your manager

A 7.5% increase in base salary for
Sarah, the top-performing member
of your technical team, to put her at
the median for programmers with
her education and experience

Your manager needs effective and stable
teams. If Sarah is not compensated fairly, the
company may lose her and cripple the team
during this high-visibility project.

A potential client

The client needs to hire a respected analytics
A contract to complete Phase 1 of
firm. She’d like to settle the contract quickly
your proposed social media
because she has got to solve a major supplyanalytics project at a cost of $88,000
chain issue.

A potential investor

$2 million in funding to create a fully
functional prototype of your
construction management software

The investor wants to increase his bottom line
and be a good mentor. Last year, he backed a
big project that failed because of poor market
research. Now he needs an innovative product
from a reliable team—that knows their market
very well.

Craig, an underperforming
employee

Acceptance of termination of his
employment with full understanding
of the reasons and without any ill will,
if possible

The employee is unhappy in his job, but he
doesn’t want to lose it—or any self-respect. His
colleagues are long-time friends, and his wife
wants to move to Texas.

Scale Your Ask Scaling down your “ask” may make it more successful. If you try to sell your complete project at
the outset, your audience is more likely to say no. Narrow your purpose to focus on the next immediate step.

FIGURE 10.1

AUDIENCE

5

SECTION TWO

KNOW YOUR AUDIENCE
Each of the four purpose statements you just read in Figure 10.1 is
targeted to a specific audience—a specific person, actually. Knowing
your audience will help you craft your solution when penning a
persuasive message. Presenting your idea as the solution to a problem
can be highly effective. Solutions are much more persuasive than
suggestions.
The third column of Figure 10.1 identifies current problems for each
audience. Knowing the context in which your audience is making
decisions will help you craft appropriate solutions.

Solutions

are much more
persuasive than
suggestions.

If your purpose is to keep a top performer—and your boss needs to
retain top performers—great. But if your boss is under intense pressure
to cut costs, you’ll need to create a solution that addresses cost issues,
too.

6

THE UNKNOWN AUDIENCE
When you don’t know your audience, use the
approach that is easiest for a general audience to
digest: facts and figures. People like to think of
themselves as logical. Stories or analogies are also
memorable and useful with an unknown audience.

?

AUDIENCE ANALYSIS
Remember Aristotle’s ethos, logos, and pathos? We’ll explore these
rhetorical approaches at length in the strategy section of this
chapter. Here, let’s apply them to audience analysis. Look at the
first situation in Figure 10.1, getting a salary increase for a key
member of your team.
Is your boss most likely to…
A. Defer to the opinions of experts and trusted figures? If so,
invoke an authority (ethos):
“Our CEO has said that we can’t afford to pay below-market
salaries. Doing so would undermine our employment brand.”
B. Know and quote a lot of facts and statistics? Emphasize data
and logical reasoning (logos):
“Recent surveys show that employees whose salaries are below
the market average are 10 times more likely to quit.”
C. Take action when experiencing emotions such as affection,
loyalty, or guilt? Make sure to include an emotional appeal
(pathos):
“Everyone likes to feel appreciated. It’s one of the top
motivators. I know Sarah has been feeling underappreciated
lately.”

7

SECTION THREE

CHOOSE A STRATEGY
After determining your purpose and analyzing your audience, you need to craft your strategy. To start, we’ll revisit Aristotle.

ETHOS is easy to define but difficult to establish. Ethos persuades with trustworthy information. Using (and citing) credible

sources not only makes the argument more powerful, but it also makes you more believable. To establish the expertise of others, be
sure to state the expert’s credentials, like this: “Research by Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman and the Gallup organization has

consistently shown that salary is a significant factor in employees’ decisions to quit.”

If you put in the time to gather data from solid sources, your audience will tend to trust your conclusions more readily. A little bit of
research goes a long way toward establishing your ethos.

PATHOS

Rhetorical

emotion, values

ETHOS
Rhetorical

Strategies

credibility, trust

LOGOS

logic, reason, proof

8

PATHOS
Pathos influences through sentiment and emotion. Current
research in behavioral economics shows that although we like to
think we are making decisions rationally, we often make them
instinctively and emotionally, before consciously processing the
alternatives. So look for ways to make your audience feel
something about your proposal, even if you are simply making
them feel good about being logical.
As Aristotle defined it, pathos is sentiment of any sort, although
sentiments that produce sympathetic emotional reactions are
most common. Pictures of starving children get people to donate
to food relief. Such visual images play on pity for the child and
guilt about the donor’s financial security.
Children International, a prominent charity, uses the tagline, “For
the cost of one cup of coffee per day.” This is classic pathos— guilt
in this case. The tagline invites us to give up a small personal
indulgence and see the good we can do.

Pathos also includes persuasion that plays on happiness. Medical
practices often rely on pathos because medical issues can be
scary. For example, hospital ads that show contented parents
staring lovingly at their new baby are using pathos; the hospital
wants your business.
Some of the other emotions you can call up in your persuasive
messages are jealousy, admiration, pity, desire, fear, and relief.
Back to our example of seeking a raise for Sarah, your top
performer:
"Sarah is the kind of employee who goes the extra mile but never seeks
the spotlight. A salary increase would be perfect for her: measurable,
yet private." (Admiration and empathy)
Or
"Losing Sarah would jeopardize our ability to meet our deadline -- and
this is a high-visibility project." (Fear)

Look for ways to make your audience

FEEL SOMETHING
about your proposal

9

LOGOS
Logos influences through logic, reasoning, and evidence. The
first step to applying logos is to avoid misapplying it. Read
carefully this list of common logical fallacies: Information is
Beautiful | Rhetological Fallacies. Ask yourself, “Which ones
am I guilty of using?” These fallacies appear everywhere: in the
business press, in the speeches of world leaders, in
conversations in the lunchroom. Inoculate your own messages
from such faulty thinking or risk losing credibility with welleducated audiences.

Internal Logic Another aspect of logos has to do with the
sequence of your argument. This is called internal logic. Are
you able to skillfully string together a series of causes and
effects, antecedents and consequences, or pieces of
accumulating evidence to build to your conclusion? Or do your
arguments zig and zag randomly through a jumble of ideas?
Regularly read examples of strong arguments to teach yourself
to craft them.

Activity 10.1

Choose at least three fallacies from the
Rhetological Fallacies infographic and illustrate
them with examples you’ve seen in public media.

Put the following ideas in a sequence that
creates a well-constructed argument:
Activity 10.2 • Sarah has consistently outperformed
others on the team.
• We need to offer Sarah a salary increase
to bring her up to the median market
rate.
• I can’t risk losing a key member of my
team at this stage of the project.
• Sarah never asks for special recognition
or attention.
• Salaries for programmers in our area have
increased 9.7% in the past year.
• Sarah’s best friend just took a job with
Qualcomm (our biggest competitor).
• Sarah brings to the team a depth of
technical knowledge that no one else
offers.

Finally, almost every logical argument relies on facts and
figures for support. Research and documentation bolster your
credibility and make you more persuasive. Support your
proposals with facts, statistics, and data. Never assume, guess,
or invoke anonymous authority. Prove.

10

CURRENT PERSUASION RESEARCH
The ancient Greeks do not have the last word when it comes to persuasion. Research in social psychology reveals a variety of techniques that are
specific to our culture and time. Some of the best work has been done by Robert Cialdini, Regents’ Professor Emeritus of Psychology and Marketing at
Arizona State University. Cialdini’s basic point is that people are persuaded when messages connect with their motivations, and his conclusions are
supported by decades of careful psychological experiments. His best-selling book, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion, presents these six ideas:
COMMITMENT

1.

RECIPROCITY
SOCIAL PROOF
AUTHORITY

“I’m glad you see the need to do something for Sarah. Are you okay if we schedule a time to meet with
the compensation team this Friday?”

LIKING
SCARCITY

COMMITMENT
People will be more inclined to do something if they pre-commit to do it. In a 1987 experiment by social
scientist Anthony Greenwald, potential voters were contacted and pre-committed to vote the following
day at the election. Of that pool, 86.7% did vote, whereas only 61.5% of the general population (not
contacted or pre-committed) turned out. Something as simple as scheduling a meeting can gain your
audience’s pre-commitment.

2.

RECIPROCITY
Think of this as quid pro quo: you give something to get something. Seasoned consultant Ernie Nielson
calls this “the favor bank.” Human beings tend to keep a mental ledger of who owes them what. If you
deposit favors into the bank, you’re more likely to be able to withdraw the cooperation you need.
“Our team has never turned down additional projects. We do whatever it takes to get the last-minute
work done—and Sarah has been our most dependable programmer when we’re facing an all-nighter.”

3.

SOCIAL PROOF
Everyone wants to fit in. As a consequence, people will generally do what they perceive their peers to be
doing. In a famous experiment, Cialdini and his research team tried different techniques to convince
hotel guests to reuse their towels. Of all the strategies, telling a hotel guest that most guests in the same
hotel reuse their towels was the most successful. Give people social proof of your suggestion.
“I hear from a lot of my friends at other companies that they are locking in their top performers with
special compensation and benefits packages.”

11

COMMITMENT

4.

RECIPROCITY
SOCIAL PROOF

“Laszlo Bock, Google’s top HR executive, is a huge proponent of rewarding top talent.”

AUTHORITY
LIKING

AUTHORITY
This is closely aligned with Aristotle’s ethos concept. A person whose authority your audience trusts
becomes the most persuasive advocate for a course of action. Celebrity, medical, and academic
endorsements use this technique.

5.

SCARCITY

LIKING
Similar to social proof and authority, liking relies on the relationship between the audience and the
influencer. Some charities leverage this tactic at a neighborhood level: They find a sympathetic
donor, then ask that person to send personalized donation requests to her closest friends and
neighbors. The result? A 56% response rate, compared to about 30% from impersonal requests.
Note: The liking strategy does not lend itself to quick, in-the-moment application in the case of
securing a raise for Sarah. The principle would be to build a relationship with your boss: go to lunch
together, offer sincere compliments regularly, and get to know him or her. Then when you ask for
the raise, your boss will be influenced by the positive feelings he or she has toward you.

6.

SCARCITY
Marketers use this one all the time: Last chance! Only two seats left! Limited quantities available! In
fact, scarcity is one of the most heavily researched and best documented persuasive tactics in
applied psychology. The current name for the fear of scarcity is FOMO (Fear Of Missing Out). Foment
some FOMO in your audience by pointing out what they could lose by not acting.
“I’ve hired a lot of programmers over the years. I know what a gem Sarah is. Talent like hers comes
along once in every 50 hires or so. We definitely want to keep her happy.”

Whether you use Aristotle’s three classics or Cialdini’s contemporary six—or a mixture of them—take the time to
develop a persuasive strategy. You’ll dramatically increase your odds of success.

12

SECTION FOUR

DETERMINE A STRUCTURE
How should you structure a persuasive message? Should you be direct or indirect? How
do you close?
DIRECT If you have an easy persuasive task and substantial agreement with your
audience, dive right in. A direct approach delivers the bottom line first and provides the
reasoning afterward. In business, the direct approach is highly valued and should be your
default.

Direct

Indirect

INDIRECT An indirect approach presents your reasoning first, leading eventually to your
final conclusion. If your persuasive task is difficult or complex, or you need to persuade
an audience that is predisposed to disagree, use an indirect approach. Start with context
and background and build methodically to your final, persuasive conclusion. In an
indirect message, internal logic is critical; the way you structure your proof can make the
final conclusion seem the best possible idea.

13

CALL TO ACTION
Remember to close purposefully. Don’t just let your message fizzle out. You’ve worked hard to plan and deliver your message, so
remember to deliver your call to action.

AUDIENCE

YOUR ASK

CALL TO ACTION

Your manager

A 7.5% increase in base salary for Sarah

If you agree that Sarah deserves this raise, just sign this
form by Thursday and I’ll take it over to Jake in HR so it
takes effect in time for payroll on Friday.

A potential client

A contract to complete Phase 1 of your
proposed social media analytics project

I know your time is better spent on those supply-chain
fixes. Let us do this work and we’ll have actionable
recommendations to you by October 21. Here’s a copy of
the contract you’ve reviewed. If you sign it today, we can
get to work on Monday.

A potential investor

$2 million in funding to create a fully
functional prototype of your construction
management software

We’ve signed and attached your profit-sharing forms.
We'd love to work with you, and we need an answer
before March 13.

Craig, an underperforming
employee

Acceptance of the termination of his
employment with full understanding of the
reasons and without any ill will, if possible

Craig, this is a tough time. Let’s walk over to HR together
and talk about your options going forward.

FIGURE 10.2

The key to a great call to action is to make it easy for your audience to take the next step—the one that brings you closer to your goal. Be
helpful and anticipate needs: add a link to the document you’d like them to sign, create and link to a decision/approval chart, provide the
phone number for a contact, or bold an important deadline. Figure 10.2 shows a call to action for each example.

Draft both a direct and an indirect email explaining to a friend
why you won’t let him/her borrow your $3,000 mountain bike.
In what ways are the different messages effective and not?
Activity 10.3

14

SECTION FIVE

DELIVER BAD NEWS
EFFECTIVELY
Kim

Conveying bad news is a crucial and often delicate persuasive task. You
generally want to deliver the news while still keeping your audience’s good
will. A skilled communicator gives bad news in a way that persuades the
audience to accept it without becoming overly defensive—not an easy feat.
While delivering bad news is never pleasant, doing so is essential to
business. To manage effectively, you must be able to say no, cut budgets,
fire people, and deny requests. But you can learn to do these things calmly,
with integrity and compassion. By using both head and heart approaches to
support your message, you can dampen its negative impact.

Hey, Cal. Sorry to hear you
got let go! Tough break, huh!
Wait, what? What are you
talking about???

…

15

BOND, BRIDGE,
BAD NEWS, BUILD
When planning a bad news delivery (and you must plan it, not just
wing it), try using 4B’s as your basic structure or outline: Bond,
Bridge, Bad News, Build.

Casey:
Thank you for asking me to write your letter of recommendation. I’m
flattered that you value my opinion enough to ask me. (Bond) Because you
and I have worked together for a long time, I want to explain my decision to
you. (Bridge)
You’re a great colleague and a good friend. When we both worked in OEM,
you were the most ambitious member of the team. In the last couple of
years, however, you seem to have lost your drive. In fact, I’m guessing you
need this letter of recommendation because you’re searching for other jobs,
which shows how much your dedication has lagged. That’s why I can’t write
your letter of recommendation right now. (Bad News)
If you up your game for a few months and can reassure me that the company
you’re applying to isn’t a competitor, I’d be happy to write the letter you
need. At your best, you’re an asset to any company and I’d be happy to put
that in writing. Let’s set up a time to chat in person. I’d love to get the full
story of how you’re feeling about your job and the company and see if I can
help in any way. (Build)

Notice that the second paragraph in the letter is indirect. You can
rewrite it to be direct just by changing the order (internal logic):
You’re a great colleague and a good friend, but I can’t write your letter of
recommendation right now. (Bad News) When we both worked in OEM, you
were the most ambitious member of the team. In the last couple of years,
however, you seem to have lost your drive. In fact, I’m guessing you need this
letter of recommendation because you’re searching for other jobs, which
shows how much your dedication has lagged.

Delivering bad news is not easy for anybody involved, but doing
so with honesty, kindness, and clarity will make the task less
onerous.
Think of some bad news you have to deliver. Draft
an email using Bond, Bridge, Bad News, Build. Try to
avoid making your audience angry or defensive.
Activity 10.4

Need to fire someone?
Now that’s bad news.
Watch Brad Pitt do it professionally in this clip
from Moneyball.

Amina

16

IN CONCLUSION
Persuasion is not manipulation—the dark art of carefully choosing which facts to show
and hide so that your audience is misled. You don’t want to fool or force people into
doing something that they wouldn’t choose if they knew more facts.
Persuasion is showing all the facts, but in a way that helps people see things as you do . . .
and say YES.

LEARN MORE
Lerner, Jennifer S. et al. “Emotion and Decision Making.” Annual
Review of Psychology 66 (2015): 799-823.
http://www.annualreviews.org.erl.lib.byu.edu/doi/pdf/10.114
6/annurev-psych-010213-115043, accessed February 2017.
Greenwald, AG, Carnot, CG, Beach, R & Young, B 1987, 'Increasing
Voting Behavior by Asking People if They Expect to Vote' Journal of
Applied Psychology, vol 72, no. 2, pp. 315-318.

BOOKS
Robert Cialdini, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. New York,
NY. Harper Business; Revised edition, 2006.

WEBSITES
McCandless, D. Rhetological Fallacies — Information is Beautiful.
Information is Beautiful. 2017.
http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/rhetologicalfallacies/, accessed February 2017.

VIDEOS
Scott Fain, “Bullet to Head- Moneyball” Youtube, Published
September 14, 2012.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jXEtOPMW2hM, Accessed
October 5, 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

ARTICLES

CHAPTER

11

SHOW

SHOW WHAT YOU MEAN

CONTENTS
4 THREE DESIGN CONCEPTS
8 SLIDE DESIGN
9 TEN TEMPTATIONS & TECHNIQUES
16 DATA VISUALIZATION

LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 11

2

If you really want to get
your point across,
show it, don’t just tell it.

HUMAN BRAINS PREFER
VISUAL INFORMATION
100%

(Percent of information
retained after 3 days)

Visuals are a little like sugar—an appealing jolt of
concentrated meaning, and a treat for the brain after
it has been reading for a while. Learn to create
beautiful and clear charts, tables, infographics, and
presentation slides, and you’ll treat colleagues and
clients to engaging and meaningful information.

See
65%

Hear
10%

To kick things off, study this infographic:
13 Reasons Why Your Brain
Craves Infographics

0%

FIGURE 11.1

We’ll start by explaining three design concepts, then
apply them to create great presentation slides and
data visualizations.

The takeaway? ADD PICTURES.
Source: “Brain Rules,” John Medina.

3

SECTION ONE

DESIGN CONCEPTS
Make your work more attractive and effective by practicing good design.
Studying design principles and elements could be the enjoyable work of a
lifetime, but we’ll focus on just three essential categories: layout, contrast,
and repetition.

LAYOUT

CONTRAST

“

REPETITION

”

4

LAYOUT
Within the layout category, three qualities will help you design your documents and slides: space, alignment, and proximity. These
are essential to clean design, which is an indicator of credibility. It invites attention rather than punishes it.

Space creates structure,

Alignment is key to a

Proximity tells the eye which

guides the eye, and gives visual
relief. Try to emulate the
websites and fliers that use
space to attract your eye and
make key elements stand out.

professional look. Aligning
objects and text exactly along
an invisible line creates order
and connection, making your
content more brain-friendly.

things belong together. Group
related items together by
clustering them, then add white
space between clusters. Proximity
helps your audience interpret
your message quickly and
efficiently.

See areas of positive and
negative space by
squinting your eyes to
create blur.

Use the pop-up rulers on
slide software to nudge
you toward alignment.

Remove the extra line after
a paragraph heading to
keep it close and related
visually.

5

CONTRAST

NO

Contrast catches the eye. A design without contrast dissolves into
gray mush. You can focus attention and communicate hierarchy
through variation in size, shape, color, and typography.
The greater the contrast, the greater the effect. But be careful.
Your audience can become numb to constant variation, or
overwhelmed by color and font combinations that clash instead of
contrast. Determine which elements are most important and use
contrast to give them maximum impact.
Add contrast with

SIZE

, COLOR, SHADE, and SHAPE.

YES

“
Be color aware. About 1 in 20 people experience
color-blindness. Also, your work may be printed in
black and white. Do a trial print of your visual
elements in grayscale.

”

6

REPETITION
Once you’ve chosen strong, contrasting design elements, stay consistent
throughout your document. Repeated use of layouts, colors, shapes, and fonts
helps make a design look intentional, professional, and consistent.

Activity 11.1

Using a small range of consistent colors is key to good design.
Some people are great at picking color palettes, others . . .
not so much. Access the expertise of great designers by using
one of these sites to create a color palette for a project
you’re working on. Adobe Color CC
Coolors
ColourLovers

Going forward, apply these design basics to all your work. You will be amazed at
the difference.
Now let’s move on to best practices in presentation slides and data visualizations.

Da-da-da-DUN,
da-da-da-DUN.
Listen to this.

The recurring motif of Beethoven’s 5th
Symphony is a form of repetition.
Variations on the theme unify the
entire symphony, making it one of
the world’s most recognizable pieces
of music. Use repetition for power
and recall.

FIGURE 11.2

The company you work for will most likely have a style guide with an established
color palette, but someday you may be asked to create one, so read this page
about  color theory and how colors influence mood and behavior.

7

SECTION TWO

SLIDE DESIGN
Presentation slides can vary greatly depending on
purpose and audience. Slides for TED talks have very low
information density. They’re cinematic—dominated by
simple, high-impact visuals, keeping the focus on the
speaker.
Slides on the opposite end of the spectrum are
information dense. They stand alone and can be viewed
on demand, like this textbook, which was created using
PowerPoint.

Resources like Nancy Duarte’s book slide:ology and Canva’s
Design School tutorials provide excellent guidance and insight
on slide design.
Get inspiration by browsing slide decks at sites like SlideShare,
Note & Point, and Slide Guru. Not all the shared slides are
designed well, but the ones that are really stand out.

Slidedocs are a hybrid between the visual richness of
presentation slides and the information density of textbased documents. This textbook is an example. Browse
through the online book SlideDocs  which inspired it.

8

SECTION THREE

TEN TEMPTATIONS
& TECHNIQUES
In addition to layout, contrast, and repetition, remember the following 10 temptations
and techniques as you design your slides.

1. SLIDES ARE NOT YOUR NOTES

Don’t create your slides before preparing your content. If you’re outlining your
presentation on slides, you’re not really creating slides, you’re writing speaking notes.
If you project these onto the screen and read them, your audience will ignore you
and read ahead.
You might be falling into this temptation if your slides consist primarily of bulleted lists.
Bullet points are better than blocks of text, but they quickly become overwhelming.
Instead of simply listing your ideas, your slides should illustrate them. Move your
speaking notes into the speaking notes panel at the bottom of the slide as a reference.

10
TOP TEN

SLIDE TIPS

9

2. SLIDES ARE NOT YOUR PRESENTATION
Don’t let your slides take over your presentation. Unless you’re creating a slidedoc, your
slides are only a visual aid. Keep your slides simple so they focus attention on your
message, not on themselves.
Animations and transitions can be distracting. Avoid them unless you have a clear need
to illustrate movement. To communicate dense information or complex ideas, piece
together a series of slides layer by layer. These are called “builds,” and they also
translate well to PDF or print.

BUILD LAYER 1

BUILD LAYER 2

BUILD LAYER 3

10

3. SLIDES ARE NOT
YOUR HANDOUT
Slides designed to support a presentation will
rarely be effective as handouts. Providing a
physical reminder or summary of your
presentation can be very useful, and it’s worth the
effort to create a separate, standalone document.
Clearly associate your handout with your slides by
maintaining the theme of your design.

PRESENTATION
HANDOUT

In PowerPoint you can customize the
appearance of speaker’s notes, then print
them right alongside the slide. This allows
you to add more complete and
interesting information to an image of
each slide.

4. SLIDES ARE FREE
Adding slides doesn’t cost you anything, so go
ahead. Split dense content across multiple slides.
Increase your font size. Add white space. Crowded
slides are a barrier to communication.
Cool, uncrowded slides are a delight.

11

5. SLIDES SHOULD BE VISUAL
STAY CURRENT Search ”slide design trends” every year to see
what is current. For instance, Figure 11.4 shows older realistic
design making way for the currently popular flat design.

Add punch to your slides with graphics and media, but
remember their quality reflects on you as a professional.
GRAPHICS Take every opportunity to present information
visually rather than textually. CH 07: FORMAT describes a
variety of graphics, and best practices for data visualization
are explained later here in CH 11.

VIDEO Short, punchy videos can illustrate your point quickly,
wake up a crowd, or show a process. Embedding a video frees
you from reliance on internet streaming; on the other hand,
simply linking to it keeps your file size small.

ICONS Avoid old-fashioned clipart like the plague. Use icons
instead to symbolize objects and actions. Find them at
NounProject, IconFinder, or FlatIcon.

Create a link to a short portion of a funny
YouTube video in a slide. Blatti.net shows how to
link to a specific piece of a longer video.
Activity 11.3

OLD
VS.

FLAT DESIGN
Flat design is currently
popular while skeuomorphic,
drop shadows, and gradients
look old-fashioned.

FIGURE 11.4

SKEUOMORPHIC OR
REALISM DESIGN

NEW

12

USE FREE QUALITY IMAGES
freeimages.com
unsplash.com
pexels.com
lifeofpix.com
deathtothestockphoto.com

FIGURE 11.5

PHOTOS People love to look at beautiful photographs. Choose highresolution photos that are meaningful, natural looking, and not cheesy. For
maximum impact, use photos at “full bleed,” which means the photo fills
the slide, even if it “bleeds” off the edges. Use visually interesting photos
that imply several layers of meaning besides the initial obvious one, such
as the examples below (lower left and lower right) of the concept of
teamwork. Figure 11.5 at right lists excellent resources.
Look for a free high-resolution photo that illustrates the
concept of tenacity. Place it on a slide with some text.

CHEESY

COOL

INCLUDE NECESSARY
PERMISSIONS AND CREDITS
Copying an image from a Google
search is tempting, but never use
images without permission and always
credit the source. Some tools, like Flickr
and Google Images , have search
settings that can limit results to show
only images licensed for reuse or under
Creative Commons terms.
Wondering whether you can legally use
an image? Use this flowchart: Can I Use
That Photo?

FIGURE 11.6

Activity 11.4

13

6. TEMPLATES FOR FAILURE;
TEMPLATES FOR SUCCESS

Templates and built-in themes are convenient, but be cautious. Their design elements won’t
necessarily align with your message, and they might make your work seem lazy and unoriginal.
Don’t use the first template you see (everyone has already seen it), and customize templates by
changing some colors or graphic elements. Check out Slides Carnival for template ideas. You
may be better off creating your own template by setting default layouts, typography, colors,
and backgrounds in master slides. Learn how in Google Slides or PowerPoint.

7. SIGNPOSTING PROVIDES NAVIGATION

Especially in long presentations, your audience will appreciate visual cues that remind them
how you’ve structured your content and track your progress through the presentation. Create a
running agenda along the side or bottom to show where you are and where you are going.

8. WORDS ARE MEANT TO BE READ
CH 07: FORMAT outlines principles of good typography. In the context of slide design, also
remember to:
‣ Keep it simple. Use only one or two typefaces that you bold, shade, and color for
contrast.
‣ Go big. Can people in the back of the room read your text? Use a large enough font
size, such as 60 point for titles, 36 for headings, and 28 for supporting text.

A “running agenda”
indicates your progress with
visual elements at an edge
of your slides. Highlighting
the current agenda item
creates context for your
audience.
For example, this book’s
running agenda lets you
know which chapter you
are viewing.

‣ Ensure contrast. Your text must stand out against the background. If the background is
a photograph, consider putting the text in a box or ribbon that overlays the image and
provides better color contrast.

14

9. USE THE BEST TOOL FOR THE JOB
Don’t call every slide deck a “PowerPoint” or limit yourself to one
platform. In addition to PowerPoint and Keynote, online
presentation applications may play to the strengths of your
message, so click through these links to become familiar with
them.
G SLIDES:

Accessible from anywhere,
updateable, mobile-friendly.

PREZI:

Freed from a linear structure, it can
be brilliant or confusing.

CANVA:

Free web-based design. Tutorials,
templates, and tools galore.

10. TECH WILL BETRAY YOU

Sooner or later it will happen. Always be prepared by saving
copies of your slides on a flash drive and on the web. If your host
or meeting organizer will be at your presentation, send him or
her a copy to load in advance. If you have accompanying files, like
videos, images, or fonts, keep them with your slides in a single,
clearly labeled folder and compress that into a .zip file. Include a
PDF version of your slides in case the right software isn’t
available. Remember that colors and fonts may change with
different projectors, screens, and printers. Where possible, plan
some setup time to deal with any issues that might arise.

Create a set of three or four slides about sleep
deprivation in college students. Include the fact
that 60% of college students get insufficient sleep,
Activity 11.5 and most need 8 hours a night. Finally, give your
tips for getting adequate rest.

15

SECTION FOUR

DATA VISUALIZATION
Data is money. It drives decisions and seals deals. In business, you’ll present
data in slides, refer to it in written documents, post it online, and use it to
create infographics. But remember: your purpose is not to communicate
data. Your purpose is to communicate meaning.

BREAK IT DOWN THEN BUILD IT UP
Creating a chart in Google Sheets or Microsoft Excel isn’t hard, but these
tools don’t know what story you’re trying to tell with your data. Their default
designs will not help you make your point, so you need to strip them away,
layer by layer, then add back design elements that focus attention where you
want it.
You know you’re on the right track if your audience can see the story in your
chart within the first few moments of looking at it.
Cole Nussbaumer Knaflic champions this approach on her blog Storytelling
with Data. And Darkhorse Analytics animated instructions in Clear off the
Table. .

“Every bit of ink on a graphic
requires a reason.
And nearly always that
reason should be that the
ink presents new
information.”
Tufte, E. R. (1983)

The Visual Display of
Quantitative Information.
Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.

Look at the dramatic BEFORE and
AFTER of a sample sales report
design. PrintTech.

16

SELECT A CHART TYPE

Decide what story you’re trying to tell with your data, then choose
an appropriate chart. For instance, a line graph can show trends
over time, and a bar chart is good for comparisons. Pie charts are
popular, but they don’t provide visual precision. See Visage’s guide
to  chart types. Note that complex stories may require multiple
charts, and sometimes a clean, precise table is the best way to
present your data.

NO

CUT THE CLUTTER

Remove all formatting: the borders, tick marks, background, 3D
effects, shading, and all color. Reduce text by removing the labels,
title, and legend. In many cases you can even remove an axis.

Build your chart back up, but remember that every thing you add
should make your message more clear. Label data directly rather
than with a legend. Add color and weight to focus attention. Add a
title or callout that tells your story rather than just describing your
chart.
Complete this
interactive
practice simplifying
a table and graph:
Activity 11.6
Simplifying Data
Display

YES

FIGURE 11.7

FOCUS ATTENTION

17

INFOGRAPHICS
Infographics combine text and graphics creatively to tell
a larger story. See examples at visual.ly or get inspired
by David McCandless’s and Chris Jordan’s TED talks.
Infographics can be memorable, but creative
approaches may be more or less appropriate depending
on the expectations and culture within an industry or
profession (think advertising vs. accounting).
Maintain credibility by citing your sources. Remember
that, in addition to numbers, abstract concepts,
narratives, relationships, and processes can all be
communicated visually.

Activity 11.7

Make your own infographic about how
you use your time using one of these
online tools:
‣ Canva

‣ Infogr.am

‣ easel.ly

‣ Visme

‣ piktochart

‣ VennGage

How to Get Started with Infogram
in 2 Minutes
How to Create an Infographic
in Canva

INFOGRAPHIC EXAMPLE
FIGURE 11.8

18

IN CONCLUSION
Wasn’t that fun? Make understanding your visuals fun for your audience, too.
Show your message. Well-designed visual elements help you to be precise and concise.
Create effective visuals to convey confidence and competence.

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES

Cherdarchuk, Joey. “Clear Off the Table.” Dark Horse Analytics.
March 27, 2014. http://www.darkhorseanalytics.com/blog/clearoff-the-table, accessed February 2017.
Cherdarchuk, Joey. “Data Looks Better Naked.” Dark Horse
Analytics. August 20, 2013. http://www.darkhorseanalytics.com/
blog/data-looks-better-naked, accessed February 2017.
“Data Visualization 101: How to Design Charts and Graphs.” Visage.
April 27, 2015. http://www.slideshare.net/Visage/datavisualization-101-how-to-design-chartsandgraphs, accessed
February 2017.
Duarte, Nancy. “Do your Slides Pass the Glance Test?” Harvard
Business Review. October 22, 2012. https://hbr.org/2012/10/doyour-slides-pass-the-glance-test, accessed February 2017.

Duarte, Nancy. “The Quick and Dirty on Data Visualization.” Harvard
Business Review. April 16, 2014. https://hbr.org/2014/04/the-quickand-dirty-on-data-visualization, accessed February 2017.
Desjardins, Jeff. “13 Scientific Reasons Explaining Why You Crave
Infographics.” Visual Capitalist. September 6, 2016.
http://www.visualcapitalist.com/13-scientific-reasonsinfographics/, accessed February 2017.
Hortin, Anthony. “The 5 Basic Principles Of Design.” maddisondesigns
blog. March 27, 2009. http://maddisondesigns.com/2009/03/the5-basic-principles-of-design/, accessed February 2017.
Knaflic, Cole Nussbaumer. “How to do it in Excel.” Storytelling With
Data. November 10, 2011. http://www.storytellingwithdata.com/
blog/2011/11/how-to-do-it-in-excel, accessed February 2017.

“The Principles of Design.” J6 Design. http://www.j6design.com.au/6principles-of-design/, accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

“Can I Use that Picture? The Terms, Laws, and Ethics for Using
Copyrighted Images” (Infographic). The Visual Communication
Guy. 2014. http://thevisualcommunicationguy.com/wpcontent/uploads/2014/07/Infographic_CanIUseThatPicture41024x662.jpg, accessed February 2017.

LEARN MORE

“Youtube URL Modifiers.” blatti.net. December 11, 2012.
http://blatti.net/2012/12/youtube-url-modifiers/, accessed
February 2017.

BOOKS

Berinato, Scott. Good Charts: The HBR Guide to Making Smarter,
More Persuasive Data Visualizations. Harvard Business Review:
2016.

Cairo, Alberto. The Functional Art: An Introduction to Information
Graphics and Visualization. Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2013.
Duarte, Nancy. Slidedocs: Spread ideas with effective visual
documents. Duarte, Inc.: 2016. http://www.duarte.com/slidedocs/,
accessed February 2017.
Duarte, Nancy. Slide:ology: The Art and Science of Creating Great
Presentations. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media, 2008.

Knaflic, Cole Nussbaumer. Storytelling with Data. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2015.

Medina, John. Brain rules : 12 principles for surviving and thriving at
work, home, and school, Seattle, WA : Pear Press, 2008.

Wong, Dona M. The Wall Street Journal Guide to Information
Graphics: The Dos and Don’ts of Presenting Data, Facts, and
Figures. New York, NY: W.W. Norton, 2010.

WEBSITES
Adobe Color CC. “Create.” https://color.adobe.com/create/colorwheel/, accessed February 2017.
Canva. “Home.” https://www.canva.com/, accessed February 2017.
Canva. “Tutorials.” https://designschool.canva.com/tutorials/,
accessed February 2017.
Colourlovers. “Home.” http://www.colourlovers.com/, accessed
February 2017.
Color Matters. “Basic Color Theory.” http://www.colormatters.com/
color-and-design/basic-color-theory, accessed February 2017.
Coolors + Skillshare. “Home.” https://coolors.co/, accessed February
2017.
Creative Commons. “Home.” https://creativecommons.org/,
accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Smith, Laurence D., Lisa A. Best, D. Alan Stubbs, Andrea Bastiani
Archibald, and Roxann Robertson-Nay. 2002. “Constructing
knowledge: The role of graphs and tables in hard and soft
psychology.” American Psychologist 57, no. 10 (2002): 749-761.
http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/amp/57/10/749/, accessed
February 2017.

LEARN MORE
Death to Stock. “Home.” http://deathtothestockphoto.com/,
accessed February 2017.

Note & Point. “Home.” http://noteandpoint.com/, accessed February
2017.

Easelly. “Home.” https://www.easel.ly/, accessed February 2017.

The Noun Project. “Home.” https://thenounproject.com/, accessed
February 2017.

Flaticon. “Home.” http://www.flaticon.com/, accessed February
2017.

Pexels. “Home.” https://www.pexels.com/, accessed February 2017.

Piktochart. “Home.” https://piktochart.com/, accessed February
2017.

FreeImages. “Home.” http://www.freeimages.com/, accessed
February 2017.

Prezi. “Home.” https://prezi.com/, accessed February 2017.

Google Images. “Home.” https://images.google.com/?gws_rd=ssl,
accessed February 2017.

SlideGuru. “ Gallery.” http://slideguru.com/gallery, accessed
February 2017.

Google Slides. “About.” https://www.google.com/slides/about/,
accessed February 2017.

Unsplash. “Home.” https://unsplash.com/, accessed February 2017.

Iconfinder. “Home.” https://www.iconfinder.com/, accessed
February 2017.

Venngage. “Templates.” https://venngage.com/templates/,
accessed February 2017.
Visme. “Home.” https://www.visme.co/, accessed February 2017.

Infogram. “Home.” https://infogr.am/, accessed February 2017.
Life of Pix. “Home.” http://www.lifeofpix.com/, accessed February
2017.
LinkedIn. “SlideShare.” http://www.slideshare.net/, accessed
February 2017.

Visually. “Home.”
http://visual.ly/view#feature_type=undefined&type=static&,
accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Flickr. “Home.” https://www.flickr.com/, accessed February 2017.

LEARN MORE
VIDEOS
Cole Nussbaumer YouTube Channel. YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCjhGlILWNloXJdR2NTCBMlA,
accessed February 2017.
G Suite. “Using advanced Slides features | Slides | The Apps Show,”
YouTube, published June 7, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EooLYqDefd4&spfreload=10,
accessed February 2017.

Ted. “Chris Jordan: Turning powerful stats into art,” YouTube,
published June 23, 2008.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f09lQ8Q1iKE&feature=youtu.b
e, accessed February 2017.
Ted-Ed. “The beauty of data visualization - David McCandless,”
YouTube, published November 23, 2012.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ZgC8AAIGg&feature=youtu.be, accessed February 2017.

Infogram, “How to Create Charts, Reports, and Infographics with
Infogram,” YouTube, published December 8, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vVYahWlFT9U, accessed
February 2017.
Infogram, “2 Minute Getting Started Video,” Infogram.
https://infogram.com/tutorial/getting-started/video-how-to-useinfogram/, accessed October 2017.
Kimberly Ann Jimenez, “How To Create Infographics (The UltraSimple & Easy Way),” YouTube, published February 13, 2014.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nShmwzh879g, accessed
February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

GCFLearnFree.org, “PowerPoint 2016: Slide Master View,” YouTube,
published March 17, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6ARCTypPTg&t=7s,
accessed February 2017.

CHAPTER

12

PRESENT
S T A N D

&

D E L I V E R

CONTENTS
4 PLAN AHEAD
7 SET UP
10 USE FULL-BODY COMMUNICATION
16 TROUBLESHOOT

LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 12

2

Powerful presenters are
effective communicators.
Humans are fascinating and complex social animals.
We love to connect with others. We pay attention
when another human being stands up, takes a
breath, and starts speaking. Much information in
business is communicated on screens, but key
decisions—to buy, sell, invest, or hire—are often
made through presentations.
If you learn to stand out as a presenter, you’ll be a
contributor at critical moments. Powerful presenters
are effective communicators. They are the ones who
get the job, the raise, and the opportunity to return
to the table time and again. Become an excellent
presenter and you’ll certainly be less stressed when
your boss turns to you and says, “Why don’t you
take 10 minutes and explain those numbers to us.”
So plan ahead, set up strategically, use full body
communication, and troubleshoot effectively. You’ll
elevate your presentation game.

70%
The percentage of employed Americans
who say that presentation skills are
critical to their work success.

20%
The percentage of employed Americans
who say they would do almost anything
to avoid giving a presentation.

Forbes: https://www.forbes.com/sites/carminegallo/2014/09/25/new-survey70-percent-say-presentation-skills-critical-for-career-success/#32d83b708890

3

SECTION ONE

PLAN AHEAD
Remember using PASS to plan messages? Let’s review quickly how
PASS applies to giving a formal presentation.

PURPOSE

Clarify exactly what you are trying to do. What outcome do you
want as a result of your message? Write down a clear and concise
purpose statement.

AUDIENCE

Who will be listening to you? What are their primary concerns? Why
will your message matter to them? How can you get their attention
and keep it? Watch  5 Things Every Presenter Should Know About
People by Susan Weinschenk.

PURPOSE | AUDIENCE | STRATEGY | STRUCTURE

STRATEGY

What’s the best way to accomplish your aim? Will your audience
trust you easily? Should you appeal to their heads or their hearts?
Be direct or indirect?

4

STRUCTURE
Your audience can’t scan forward or backward when they get lost, so
the structure of your oral presentation needs to be rock solid and
crystal clear. Use the 4A’s to keep yourself and your audience on track.

4A
ATTENTION

Get everyone’s attention
with a skillful hook. A great
hook gives the audience
confidence in you and gets
them on your side. See the
following slide for examples.

Author Nigel Marsh
captures his audience with
a unique opening hook.
Nigel Marsh: How to make
work-life balance work

AGENDA

Tell your audience what they
can expect and preview the
structure of your talk. Often a
two- or three-part agenda is
most effective. Setting a
verbal agenda builds
anticipation and readies the
mind to receive information.

ARGUMENT

Follow through on your
promised agenda structure.
Include only relevant details
that contribute to your
argument. You only have
attention for 10-15 minutes
at a time, so if your
presentation is scheduled to
be longer, plan for some
activity or group interaction.

ACTION

Don’t just fade out, and don’t
finish weakly. Instead,
remind your audience why
your message matters, issue
a stirring call to action, and
finish strong.

5

EXAMPLE HOOKS

Q&A
The Q&A period can make or break your presentation.
Prepare as well for the Q&A as you do for your talk. Predict
audience questions and concerns, preparing articulate
answers or additional data slides for the end of your deck.
And this is important: don’t just fade out at the end of the
Q&A. When you finish answering questions, wrap up your
talk with a final reference to your call to action.

Think of hooks as the front door of your
presentation. How inviting is your
presentation’s front door?

YES

This report is about
market segmentation.

The old adage that the
customer is always right
raises the question, “Which
customer?”

Opioid abuse is a major
problem for employers.

$19,450: roughly the price of
a new Toyota Corolla. That’s
what the average opioidabusing employee costs his
or her employer in annual
medical expenses.

We have major
problems with our
inventory management
system.

Walking through the
warehouse this morning, I
heard a loud wheezing
sound. It was our inventory
management system
coughing up blood.

Activity 12.1

FIGURE 12.1

NO

Follow the PASS planning steps for an oral presentation
you might be asked to give in the next few months. Write
down a purpose statement, analyze your audience,
determine a strategy, and outline your structure.

6

SECTION TWO

SET UP
Contribute to the success of your presentation
by optimizing the environment.

1. CHOOSE A
“RIGHT SIZED” ROOM

People are sensitive to how full a room is. Choose a
room that will accommodate the expected number of
guests but not leave much room left over. A lot of
empty space can make your turnout look weak and
detract from your impact.
If you can’t change the space, remove extra chairs and
pull the remaining ones into a semi-circle. In a space
with lots of extra chairs, people will naturally sit near
the back or far apart from each other. Having people
squeeze into fewer chairs gets them talking to each
other and increases the anticipation level in the room.

7

2. CHECK YOUR TECH
Technology is both a blessing and a curse in presentations. To help reduce the
stress and increase the success, use the following technology checklist:



If you are relying on slides or a microphone, make sure you arrive early
enough to practice.







Bring extra cords and connectors.
Bring a printed copy of your notes and slides.
Check the volume on a microphone and know how to change it.
Test out the remote control—or bring your own.
Most crucial—create a backup plan in case your tech fails you.

3. PUSH THE PODIUM ASIDE
A podium is a good place to keep your water bottle, but don’t hide behind it.
People trust you more when they can see your whole body, and you’ll be able to
use the floor space to keep your audience’s attention and make your points
clear. Similarly, don’t just stand beside the screen. Your slides and visual aids are
there to support you, not the other way around.
Make sure to bring appropriate
adaptors if your tech device is not
compatible with all systems; i.e.
Mac vs. PC.

8

4. PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE
Yep. Three times. That’s the magic number for confidence and success. Don’t
write out your talk word for word and try to memorize it—that approach uses
a different part of your brain that’s not as nimble. If you try to deliver a
memorized speech and lose concentration or forget a word, you feel sunk.
But if you have good notes and practice your talk three full times in front of a
co-worker (or even your smart phone’s camera), you provide your brain with
a solid but flexible framework. Practice also gives you an innate sense of
timing, helping you know whether to stretch or cut your content to end on
time.

5. PLAN TO SHOW UP CLEAN AND TIDY

Make sure you show up fresh, clean, and dressed one step above the
audience average. Depending on the importance of the event and your own
fashion awareness, asking for dress advice can be useful. Wrinkles, baggy
knees, uneven hems, and stains are all distracting and reduce audience
confidence.

“Creating and delivering a presentation that engages
hearts and minds…take[s] work and creativity.”
Carmine Gallo, “New Survey: 70% Say Presentation Skills Are Critical For Career Success.” Forbes.com. 25 Sept. 2014
https://www.forbes.com/sites/carminegallo/2014/09/25/new-survey-70-percent-say-presentation-skills-critical-forcareer-success/#32d83b708890

9

SECTION THREE

USE FULL-BODY COMMUNICATION
Be fully human when you’re presenting in person. Use everything you’ve got. Keep in mind
that many of these principles apply to presentations delivered over the phone or internet
as well.

TAKE THE STAGE WITH CONFIDENCE
“The stage” may be in front of thousands, or only six people in a small conference room.
Regardless, walk up with vigor and energy, and make sure your face shows passion and
enthusiasm for the subject. Your audience will unconsciously imitate the mood you project.
Take a few seconds to look around the room, smile, make eye contact and build a connection
with four or five people. Gather the energy of anticipation.

10

USE YOUR EYEBROWS

MAKE EYE CONTACT

Eyebrows may seem like a funny place to start, but since you
can’t control your hair, they’re the first thing from the top
down that you can move to show expression. Raise them to
show surprise or delight, draw them up together to emphasize
a question, furrow them to show concern or concentration.
Whatever you do, remember that these frames for your eyes
draw people’s attention.

When we’re nervous, we tend to focus inward and become
self-conscious. We look down at the floor or at the wall.
Remind yourself that you are talking to people, individuals
sitting around a room, who generally want you to succeed. A
great rule of thumb is to hold short “conversations” with
audience members, spreading your attention throughout the
group. Make sure your smile reaches your eyes, because a
twinkle in the eye will make your audience inclined to smile
back and feel more positive about both your presentation,
and you.

Watch how David Epstein looks at individuals in
his audience as he builds suspense. Are athletes
really getting faster, better, stronger?

Eyebrows…
are the first thing from the
top down that you can
move to show expression.

11

PUT YOUR SHOULDERS BACK

Great posture conveys confidence, so roll your shoulders back
and allow your limbs to hang from that strong framework.
Straightening up your spine pulls your head up, too, and
makes managing your arms and legs easier. Believe it or not,
your posture actually changes the hormones in your body,
replacing stress with confidence.

Watch this animated TED Ed video about The
Benefits of Good Posture. Then call your mom
and say thanks.

MOVE DELIBERATELY
When you’ve got some floor space, move deliberately within it
to emphasize your points. For example, if you’re talking about
change over time, move from the audience’s left to its right as
you discuss each change. Avoid moving just to be moving.
Walking back and forth on a single line with no reference to
your content makes you look like a bored donkey.
Watch how Audrey Choi, CEO of Morgan
Stanley's Institute for Sustainable Investing,
uses space. Audrey Choi, How to make a
profit while making a difference

DISTRACTION ACTION

46%

Percentage of respondents who
admit to being distracted during
a co-worker’s presentation.

Tasks employees do instead of listening
to a co-worker’s presentation:
• Send text messages
• Answer email
• Surf the internet
• Check social media
• Fall asleep

Carmine Gallo, “New Survey: 70% Say Presentation Skills Are Critical For Career Success.” Forbes.com. 25 Sept. 2014
https://www.forbes.com/sites/carminegallo/2014/09/25/new-survey-70-percent-say-presentation-skills-critical-for-career-success/#32d83b708890

12

KEEP YOUR FACE MOBILE

SPEAK UP

A stiff and immobile expression is off-putting—even
disturbing—to watch. The larger your audience, the more you
need to exaggerate your expressions and move your eyes,
eyebrows, and mouth with more emphasis than you might in a
personal conversation.

Your voice is a signature part of your self-presentation. Make
yours effective by ensuring that it has good volume, pace, and
clarity. You’ll need to get feedback from peers on these
features, because what you hear inside your head isn’t what
your listeners hear. Another option is to record a video of
yourself and check how you sound. Just as you need to keep
your face and body mobile, keep your voice mobile, too. Vary
your speed, volume, and intensity to match your message.

SMILE
An authentic smile is one of your best bodily resources. It
doesn’t have to be a big toothy grin, but unless you’re
announcing a horrible tragedy, try to look happy. A wry smile
is fine if you’re a dry-humor person.

Learn from sound researcher Julian Treasure how
to better communicate your message using six
voice tools. Julian Treasure: How to Speak so
That People Want to Listen

13

USE SILENCE
Although your voice is an irreplaceable tool for communication, the absence of a voice also speaks loudly. Try
using silence to gather attention, emphasize a point, or give
people time to think about a rhetorical question. Don’t be
afraid of the illustrious pause. Silence is powerful.

Watch this short clip to see how Airbnb founder
Joe Gebbia uses deliberate, strategized pauses to
help make his conclusion more powerful. Joe
Gebbia, How Airbnb Designs for Trust

DROP YOUR TICS
AND FIND YOUR NEUTRAL
Practice a good neutral stance as a default. When nervous,
people often do repetitive and distracting things (like
clasping hands in front like a fig leaf, pacing, or pulling a ring
on and off). Avoid the distraction this causes by practicing a
comfortable neutral stance for yourself when listening to a
question or showing a visual. Hands resting loosely at your
side are always safe. In a casual presentation, one hand in
the pocket is fine too.

14

When you’re in a large space, go big or go home. Make
sure your arm motions are above your waist and away
from your body. Don’t just flap your hands around near
your body like you have tiny T-rex arms. Use large arm
gestures to emphasize a trend (“Sales are up.”) or
demonstrate a concept (“We’ll be spreading the task
load more evenly among the teams.”) Use your hands
to do things like count out three points, put an
ineffective policy on the chopping block, or raise people
to their feet for a stretch.
Business Insider’s Hand Gestures from Around
the World.

WINNING PITCHES
Take a look at some great pitches here: BYU Alum Rock Shark Tank.
Watch for the elements of a good pitch in each.
While a student at BYU, Garrett Gee designed a mobile app
called Scan. Although his pitch didn’t convince the judges on
Shark Tank, it convinced the public. Scan soon rose to the top of
the Apple store downloads, and a year later was sold to
Snapchat for $54 million.
Roomates Dan Barnes and Wesley LaPorte designed a UV light
phone charger that kills the bacteria found on your phone. Their
pitch earned them a $300,000 investment from investor Lori
Greiner.
Matt Alexander, a graduate of the Marriott School
Entrepreneurship program, designed a color-changing nightlight
for your toilet. Ilumibowl scored a $100,000 deal on Shark Tank
with investor Kevin O’Leary. View the winning pitch.

FIGURE 12.2

GESTURE LARGE

15

SECTION FOUR

TROUBLESHOOT
RECOVER ATTENTION
If you’re speaking right after lunch on a hot day, good luck. At the best
of times, humans are prone to lose focus and daydream. To recover
audience attention, try these tips:
‣ Turn on the lights. Even if you’re in the middle of a long slide
presentation, turn on the lights and review your agenda for a
minute to get everyone back on track. Remind them why they
should care.
‣ Move quickly to a new spot in the room. People will perk up and
wonder what’s going on when you abandon your traditional post
and do a few minutes from one side or the back of the room.
‣ Ask a question. Get people to discuss a question with their
neighbors, then report back to the group.
‣ Call a mid-game stretch. This is the nuclear option because it
always takes more time than you think, but if you see people
actually falling asleep, you may need to get everyone out of their
chairs and moving around. Adjust your activity suggestions to the
formality and length of the situation. A quick round of “Heads,
Shoulders, Knees, and Toes” could be great for co-workers, while a
dignified bathroom break might work better with senior managers.
16

DISTRACT THE CHATTERS
Sometimes a couple of people just check out and start their
own party. One way to get them to quiet down and refocus is
to move to stand right beside them. If that doesn’t do it, ask a
question directly to one of them, or give them a meaningful
and playful glance.

SHUT DOWN A
PRESENTATION HIJACKER

If someone in the room is TOO into your presentation and
starts to take over your role, suggest a future time when you
can hear their ideas. You may need to interrupt someone to do
this. That’s ok. If the person isn’t socially sensitive enough to

…

have caught your throat clearing or attempts to cut in, they
probably need less subtle cues. Others in the room will thank
you. Audiences don’t like chaos or hijacking. It’s
uncomfortably unpredictable.

RECOVER AFTER A MISTAKE
Did you get a report number wrong or mistakenly call your
boss Bruno? Don’t worry. Everyone makes mistakes. If you are
impeccably prepared in other ways, your audience will sense
that this is a minor blip and laugh it off. Make a quick joke or
simply correct the error and leave the awkward moment to
show authenticity and confidence. If you are uncomfortable,
your audience will be too, so just roll with it.

…

…

!

17

PLAN FOR LENGTH CHANGES

HANDLE TOUGH QUESTIONS

Suddenly you’re getting the “cut it short” sign from the back.
Can you? Some organizers are great at protecting speaker
time, others not so much. Be sure you have XS, M, XL (extrashort, medium, extra-long) versions of your presentation
planned so that you can roll with whatever time you are given.
The most common scenario is that you’ll need to cut it short,
so spend the most time on that. Think of ways you can make
your main point, then distribute supporting points evenly.

Maybe you’ve encountered a hostile audience or you are
unprepared to answer a key question in the Q&A. Now is the
time to listen. Repeat the question to clarify. Ask follow-up
questions to understand your listeners’ concerns or
requirements. If you don’t know the answers, be honest and
say so. Once you fully understand the issues, say how and
when you’ll address them. To prepare, read How to Handle
the Q&A by Leslie Belknap.

Always plan to end

5 -10 percent early
Your audience will love you.

PRESENTING IN TEAMS
If you’re going to present with a team, rehearsal is even more important. Practice
introductions and smooth transitions, decide who will handle questions for each
topic, even coordinate your level of dress. A smart, capable team that likes
each other is a joy to behold, so show your audience that you work well together
and can get the job done.

18

IN CONCLUSION
Getting humans together in a room is costly in time and money. Be sure you use each
such opportunity to make a difference—for them and for your career.
Connect with people before and after your presentation. A little self-deprecating humor
can play well, but then knock their socks off with your preparation and competence. Be
honest, humble, confident, and convincing. Be human, but be prepared.

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES

Belknap, Leslie. “How To Handle A Q&A Session During Your
Presentation.” Ethos 3. January 15, 2016.
https://www.ethos3.com/2016/01/how-to-handle-a-qa-sessionduring-your-presentation/, accessed February 2017.
Cain, Susan. “10 Public Speaking Tips From My Year of Speaking
Dangerously.” Quiet Revolution. http://www.quietrev.com/10public-speaking-tips-from-my-year-speakingdangerously/, accessed February 2017.
Duarte, Nancy. “Conquer Your Nerves Before Your Presentation.”
Harvard Business Review. April 28, 2015.
https://hbr.org/2015/04/conquer-your-nerves-before-yourpresentation, accessed February 2017.
Kraft, Tara L., Sarah D. Pressman. “Grin and Bear It: The Influence of
Manipulated Facial Expression on the Stress Response.”
Psychological Science 23, no. 11 (2012): 1372 - 1378.
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0956797612445312,
accessed February 2017.

Morgan, Nick. “How to Become an Authentic Speaker.” Harvard
Business Review, November 2008. https://hbr.org/2008/11/how-tobecome-an-authentic-speaker, accessed February 2017.
Savoy, April, Robert W. Proctor, and Gavriel Salvendy. “Information
retention from PowerPointTM and traditional lectures.” Computers
& Education 52, no. 4 (2009): 858-867.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S036013150800
2017, accessed February 2017.

BOOKS
Reynolds, Garr. Presentation Zen: Simple Ideas on Presentation
Design and Delivery. Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2008.
Gallo, Carmine. Talk Like Ted: The 9 Public-Speaking Secrets of the
World’s Top Minds. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press, 2014.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Atwood, Sarah Smith. “Making a Splash on SharkTank.” The
Exchange. March 17, 2016.
https://marriottmag.wordpress.com/2016/03/17/making-a-splashon-shark-tank/, accessed February 2017.

LEARN MORE

ABC Television Network. “Illumibowl - Shark Tank,” YouTube,
published March 11, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=12I6kP__O7k, accessed
February 2017.
Apple Keynotes. “Steve Jobs introduces the original iPhone at
Macworld SF 2007 480p,” YouTube, published January 16, 2017.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rgB2Y8Cpokg, accessed
February 2017.
Every Shark Tank Product. “Scan App Pitch (Shark Tank Season 5
Episode 4),” YouTube, published September 15, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_op9vYMnRvk, accessed
February 2017.
Phone Review. “Shark Tank | New UV Phone Sanitizer!,” dailymotion,
published June 22, 2015.
http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x2v00o1, accessed February
2017.
Ted. “Are athletes really getting faster, better, stronger? | David
Epstein,” YouTube, published April 29, 2014.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8COaMKbNrX0, accessed
February 2017.
Ted. “Before Public Speaking,” Ted.com.
https://www.ted.com/playlists/226/before_public_speaking,
accessed February 2017.
Ted. “How Airbnb designs for trust | Joe Gebbia,” YouTube,
published April 5, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=16cM-RFid9U, accessed
February 2017.

Ted. “How to make a profit while making a difference | Audrey
Choi,” YouTube, published March 16, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y7l5QHRY_AI, accessed
February 2017.
Ted. “How to speak so that people want to listen | Julian Treasure,”
YouTube, published June 27, 2014.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eIho2S0ZahI, accessed
February 2017.
Ted. “Nigel Marsh: How to make work-life balance work,” YouTube,
published February 7, 2011.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jdpIKXLLYYM&t=64s,
accessed February 2017.
Ted. “Your body language shapes who you are | Amy Cuddy,”
YouTube, published October 1, 2012.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ks-_Mh1QhMc, accessed
February 2017.
TedEx. “How to sound smart in your TEDx Talk | Will Stephen |
TEDxNewYork,” YouTube, published January 15, 2015.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8S0FDjFBj8o, accessed
February 2017.
TedEx. “And now for the eyebrow | Irrah Carver-Jones |
TEDxChelmsford,” YouTube, August 20, 2015.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vufn3w44Suk, accessed
February 2017.
Weinschenk, Susan. “5 Things Every Presenter Needs To Know About
People,” YouTube, published June 18, 2012.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WJUblvGfW6w, accessed
February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

VIDEOS

CHAPTER

13

BRAND
MANAGE YOUR PERSONAL BRAND

CONTENTS
4 ONLINE PRESENCE
7 STRATEGIC WORK
9 HIRING LANDSCAPE
11 MENTORS
14 NETWORK
LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 13

2

Like it or not, you have a personal brand.
When you roll out of bed in the morning and choose something to wear, you’re
branding yourself. Your vocabulary, facial expressions, social media posts, and
activities all contribute to that brand over time by communicating who you are and
what you value. Since opting out isn’t possible, be sure to manage your brand and
make it an asset for your future career.
Your college years are key in creating a positive professional brand. Sure, you’re busy
with classes, a social life, and work, but these five steps will help you effectively
present yourself:

1. ONLINE PRESENCE
2. STRATEGIC WORK
3. HIRING LANDSCAPE
4. MENTORS
5. NETWORK

3

SECTION ONE

ONLINE PRESENCE
The quality of your online presence has become a key
factor for many hiring managers. Make sure your digital
footprint is an asset and not a liability by following these
steps to analyze and improve it.

GOOGLE YOURSELF
Just searching your name from your own laptop on your
favorite browser isn’t enough. Your laptop knows you too
well and will return targeted results. Use a private or
incognito window to make sure your search results are
similar to what an employer will see when searching your
name. Get a friend or mentor to look over the search
results and let you know what makes a good impression
and what raises a red flag.

4

CLEAN IT UP
Get rid of embarrassing photos your friends tagged you in and scan your posts
for tone and content. No one expects you to have been perfectly professional at
15, but everything employers see will inevitably contribute to their impression
of you. Once you’ve got a clean profile, keep it that way. Privacy is largely an
illusion on the internet. Your future employer may see anything you post. Avoid
references to illegal or socially destructive behavior. According to Jobvite’s
Social Recruiting Survey, even spelling and grammar mistakes will turn off 66%
of recruiters.
Check your social media privacy settings and browser filters a
couple of times each year. Use daylight savings time as a trigger.
Do you have an evil twin? If your name is common, you might
find some embarrassing search results you can’t control. If so,
distinguish yourself. Try using a middle initial, name, or title on
all your professional correspondence and profiles.

CROWD OUT THE BAD
WITH THE GOOD
If you’ve got dodgy content floating around out there, your best strategy for
pushing it down the page in search returns is to crowd it out with good content
over time. A single obsession can also leave a bad impression. If the only thing
you ever post about is sports or anime, use the next year to round out your
online impression by making regular, interesting, and useful posts on a variety
of subjects on key social media platforms. Think of your effort as a one-credithour class, and just do the work.

SIX THINGS YOU SHOULD
KNOW ABOUT SOCIAL
RECRUITING
Referrals still
reign supreme

LinkedIn is the top
social recruiting tool

Social networks
play an important role
for recruiters
Social profiles
can offer insight about
a candidate

Some posts are
surefire turnoffs

Social recruiting
isn’t going away

Source: 6 Things You Should Know About Social Recruiting,
Hannah Morgan.

5

LINK TO YOUR INDUSTRY
A LinkedIn profile is the functional equivalent of your
internet resume and will be the first stop for a hiring
manager looking to see how you present yourself. Now is
the time to develop a great LinkedIn profile so you’ll have a
strong presence in the business landscape.

Required

MAKE YOUR

PROFILE WORK FOR YOU

1. Create an all-star profile
2. Research and reflect the best profiles from your industry
(LinkedIn examples from Marriott School Alumni)
3. Publish regularly on LinkedIn (Here’s a student example)
4. Network it up! (How to Network on LinkedIn)

FIGURE 13.1

5. Make connecting easy
Add a LinkedIn badge to your email signature

6

SECTION TWO

STRATEGIC WORK
Maybe the late-night cleaning crew at the Burger Barn is a
lot of fun. It’s comfortable, and it reliably earns you
enough to pay tuition. But it’s time to start selecting jobs,
internships, and commitments that put you on the ladder
toward your dream job. Choose your work strategically.
Scan job boards like LinkedIn, Indeed, or Monster for
entry-level opportunities associated with your industry.
Ask successful people you know how they got their start.
Create your own contract work, internship, or part-time
job. Join a professional club and demonstrate leadership.
Start a small business and attend an industry-related
conference.

7

The main point is to show movement toward
your professional goals. For years you’ve
been working hard to be a great student;
now shift your priority from achieving the
highest possible GPA to gaining practical
experience that’s attractive to future
employers and leads you toward your goals.
After you’re employed full time, if you’re
offered a new position, continue to think
strategically about how that position will fit
into your overall plan. Feel free to suggest a
hybrid role if the one you were offered
doesn’t meet your aims.
Set a goal to work on your own professional
career development each week—10 min, 30
minutes, an hour. Your research and
networking investment now will pay off later
with big dividends.

ALUMNI ADVICE

“By writing, you can become a ‘thought leader’
in your chosen field, which opens up numerous
opportunities for growth. I published an article
about my experiences with business travel on
Medium.com about six months ago. This article
received a surprising amount of traction and
was read by over 3,000 people in a week.”

Read Scott’s article about Business Travel here.

Scott Christensen

Product Designer at PwC's Emerging Tech Group,
Strategy, BYU Marriott School of Management Class of 2013

8

SECTION THREE

HIRING
LANDSCAPE
Can you name the top employers in your industry? Do you
understand the challenges and opportunities they face
right now?
By understanding the industry outlook and hiring
landscape you’ll soon face, you can position yourself to
take advantage of opportunities and avoid threats. (And
you’ll rock your interviews.) Use resources like those on
the following page to get the information you’ll need.

9

Industry Resources

Explore these industry resources.
Occupational Outlook Handbook

Government projections for job growth and salary by industry

Glassdoor.com

Reviews of employers and average salaries (take it with a grain of salt)

Vault.com

Career intelligence, rankings, ratings, and reviews

Mergent Online

In-depth information on company management, structure, and outlook

Morningstar.com

Financial analyst reports

IBIS World

Overviews of industry segments, players, and trends

Using the tools above, explore your industry and write down the
answers to these questions:
Activity 13.1

1. What are the largest and fastest growing companies in this industry?
2. What are the most influential associations in this industry and where
do they publish? (Trade journals, websites, LinkedIn groups,
association newsletters, etc.)
3. What challenges are companies in this industry currently facing?
4. Is the job market for this industry expanding, staying steady, or
decreasing?
5. What are common entry-level jobs and average salaries for the part
of the country I’d like to work in?

10

SECTION FOUR

MENTORS
People generally like to help other people. A mentor is someone
further along professionally who is willing to share information
with you and give practical advice. To a mentor, you offer a fresh
perspective, new contacts, and honest admiration. Your main jobs
in the relationship are to take responsibility for communication,
follow through to make your mentor look good, and avoid being
annoying.
The nice thing about finding mentors while you’re still in college is
that you aren’t immediately asking for something that costs that
person social capital (like a recommendation for a high-stakes job).
At first, you’re just asking for advice, and advice is pretty fun to
give. Look for mentors by:
‣ Showing up
‣ Asking questions
‣ Following up

11

SHOW UP
Attend club or industry events, openings of new businesses,
lectures, and conferences. Participate actively and with a
smile on your face. During the event, think of a few good
questions that show you’ve been paying attention, then ask
your questions of key people. If someone responds warmly
and seems to enjoy answering your questions, ask to
schedule a 20-minute visit (sometimes called an
informational interview) in person or on the phone
sometime soon.
Hand them a well-designed business card but don’t expect
them to get in touch with you. That’s your job. Meanwhile,
your card serves as a tangible reminder that you are
professional, prepared, and interesting.

ALUMNI ADVICE

“I love taking sketch notes. One night after a
business club presentation, I showed the
speaker—the CEO of a local tech company—
my illustrations of her speech. Our short
conversation quickly turned into an
internship offer.
“Talk to presenters after they speak. Keep
the conversation short, get contact
information, and follow up
soon after.”

Libby Thomas

Sr. Brand Messaging Specialist at Lucid,
Marketing, Marriott School of Management, BYU, Class of 2016

12

ASK QUESTIONS
During an informational interview, follow up with industry-specific questions and
then briefly ask for advice about career strategy. At this point, be sensitive to
whether your potential mentor is enjoying the conversation and seems willing to
help. If so, great! You’ve gained a valuable contact. No need to formally ask,
“Will you be my mentor?” That can seem pushy. A mentor is more of an
honorific than a formal title. Just remember to express gratitude, give sincere
and specific compliments, and be very sensitive about not asking for too much
time or effort. Keep your first informational interview short. Make a move to
leave after about 15 minutes unless your interviewer invites you to stay longer.

FOLLOW UP
Going forward, keep in touch every few months by sharing quick updates,
reposting something your mentor has written, asking a question, or sending
congratulations on a promotion or award. (You should be connected on LinkedIn
by now, right?) Offer to help with a small project if you can. What are you good
at that might help them? If they introduce you to someone, be sure to write an
email telling them about the outcome and saying thanks. Don’t take any effort
for granted.
When you finally get ready to search for your first professional job, you will
already have someone to help you navigate the waters, make introductions, and
recommend you. Remember that soon you’ll be in a position to be a mentor, so
pay it forward!

13

SECTION FIVE

NETWORK
You’re establishing your brand, now share it. Learning to
network is an essential business skill and decidedly NOT
just for job searching. Instead, networking is about forming
long-lasting relationships of trust and service.
To some degree, you already network. You have networked
with some of your friends for years: helping them out,
sharing ideas, making memories. Deliberate professional
networking pays big dividends. The vast majority of jobs
are secured through networks, and personal networks
channel the flow of projects, clients, resources, and
contracts worldwide.

14

Top networkers are out and about and talking to people. In
college, think of attending class as a networking event and try
sitting next to the students who make interesting comments.
When you are at a social event noshing on refreshments,
make a goal of introducing yourself to two new people. Join a
club. Get your friends to bring along some new people when
you go out for a meal. See who looks interesting and start
talking.

OPEN ENDED QUESTIONS
Ask open-ended questions, such as:

How did you get
involved in . . . ?
(or why did you decide
to major in . . . ?)

What do you
like to do on the
weekend?
What changes
are you seeing in
this industry?

What do you love
most about what you
do?

PAY ATTENTION TO PEOPLE AND
ASK THEM QUESTIONS
Everyone is an expert at something, and everyone has a story.
Find points of connection (and points of difference) to keep
the conversation lively. Widen your connections by including
people from other fields, and make quality introductions.
(“Mike, I’d like to introduce you to Sarah, who is graduating
with a degree in accounting this semester. Sarah and I go way
back, and I think she’s someone you should get to know.”)

Do you have any
travel plans this
year?

Before leaving the conversation, ask what author Judy
power connection
connector questions:
Robinette calls the power

What other ideas do
you have for me?

How can I
help you?

Who else do
you know that
I should talk
to?
FIGURE 13.2

GET OFF THE COUCH

15

CULTIVATE YOUR
CONNECTIONS
When you meet interesting people, offer a handshake and your
name. Connect soon afterward on LinkedIn. Keep notes on your
contact about where you met, some details you learned, and
how you might help each other out in the future.
Then make a habit of reaching out to your connections to keep
them growing. Think of your network as a garden. Keep the soil
rich with new ideas and experiences, plant new friendships,
discourage aggressive weeds, fertilize regularly by staying in
touch . . . then enjoy the harvest.
Schedule your networking. Set aside a regular half hour every
month to send a quick email or message to people you’ve been
impressed by. Give sincere compliments, ask questions, or find
out what they’re working on.

Assistant Power Seek out the influencers. They’re not always in
the corner office. Pay attention to people who seem to
understand power structures and procedures, those who know
decision makers and know how resources are allocated. An
executive’s assistant may be a more valuable contact than the
busy executive.

Networking for Shy People

How Not to Be Annoying. The Five Minute Favor

16

DEVELOP YOUR
ELEVATOR PITCH
An important networking tool is your personal “elevator pitch”, a
succinct and persuasive description of yourself you can deliver
flawlessly. Don’t procrastinate doing this. When you find yourself
riding in an elevator with a great contact, you’ll be glad you can
smoothly roll it out.
Prepare a personal “elevator pitch”
using these and other resources you find:

…

!

Activity 13.2 Crafting an Elevator Pitch

Examples of Elevator Pitches

Be sure to spend time writing down, structuring, and practicing
your pitch, but don’t memorize it word for word. Sounding like a
human, not a robot, is essential for the success of your pitch.
Your pitch should:
‣ Last 30 seconds or less
‣ Include your name
‣ Tell what you do well, or what differentiates you
‣ Describe what you’d like to do

17

IN CONCLUSION
These are prime years to create a positive professional brand. Pay attention to your
online presence, look around for fulfilling (and strategic) work, learn more about the
hiring landscape you’ll be landing in, cultivate mentors, and network at your classes and
events.
By doing these things now, you’ll avoid a desperate struggle to re-brand yourself after
college when you are shopping for your first real job. You may even catch the attention of
some great new friends!

LEARN MORE
ARTICLES

Jobvite. “2014 Social Recruiing Survey.” Jobvite. August 2014.
https://www.jobvite.com/wpcontent/uploads/2014/10/Jobvite_SocialRecruiting_Survey2014.pd
f, accessed November 2017.
Kemsley, Bill. “Why eLearning Works.” LinkedIn. September 13, 2016.
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-elearning-works-billkemsley, accessed February 2017.
Levinson, Meridith. “How to Network: 12 Tips for Shy People.”
CIO.com. December 11, 2007. http://www.cio.com/article/
2437488/relationship-building-networking/how-to-network--12tips-for-shy-people.html, accessed February 2017.
LinkedIn. “How to Network on LinkedIn” (PDF File). Downloaded from
LinkedIn. https://university.linkedin.com/content/dam/
university/global/en_US/site/pdf/TipSheet_NetworkingonLinkedIn.
pdf, accessed February 2017.

Morgan, Hannah. “6 Things You Should Know About Social
Recruiting.” US News & World Report. October 22, 2014.
http://money.usnews.com/money/blogs/outside-voicescareers/2014/10/22/6-things-you-should-know-about-socialrecruiting, accessed February 2017.
Robinette, Judy. “Develop Your Networking Skills Now for Future
Success.” JRobinette Enterprises. February 3, 2015.
http://www.judyrobinett.com/develop-your-networking-skills-nowfor-future-success/, accessed February 2017.
Tanner, Nathan. “10 tips that will help you score an 'All-Star' rating on
LinkedIn.” The Muse via Mashable. April 25, 2016.
http://mashable.com/2016/04/25/all-star-linkedinusers/#.8DLoTrzs8q4, accessed February 2017.
Williamson, Will. “How to Use a LinkedIn Email Buton.” May 6, 2017.
https://blog.jdrgroup.co.uk/digital-prosperity-blog/how-to-use-alinkedin-email-button, accessed November 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

Dachis, Adam. “How to Be Clever, and Not Annoying, When Asking
for a Favor.” LifeHacker. May 23, 2012.
http://lifehacker.com/5911280/how-to-be-clever-and-notannoying-when-asking-for-a-favor, accessed February 2017.

LEARN MORE

WEBSITES
Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Occupational Outlook Handbook.”
https://www.bls.gov/ooh/, accessed February 2017.
Glassdoor. “Jobs.” https://www.glassdoor.com/index.htm, accessed
February 2017.
IBIS World. “Home.” https://www.ibisworld.com/, accessed February
2017.
Mindtools. “Crafting an Elevator Pitch.”
https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/elevator-pitch.htm,
accessed February 2017.

Vault. “Home.” http://www.vault.com/, accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

MorningStar. “Home.” http://www.morningstar.com/, accessed
February 2017.

CHAPTER

14

WORK
G E T

T H E

J O B

CONTENTS
4 FIND A JOB
7 APPLY
10 RESUMES & COVER LETTERS
15 INTERVIEW
20 LAND THE JOB
LINK & LEARN
Required
Reading

This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribute and
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Attribute the original source at mcom320.net. Email
byumcom@gmail.com if you would like to adopt the curriculum.

Tips &
Optional

Examples

Activity

This is Chapter 14

2

Workers in the U.S. hold an average of

12 jobs in their lifetimes,

and more than two-thirds of those jobs come before age 30.
Source: The Bureau of Labor Statistics

3

SECTION ONE

FIND A JOB
All sorts of pathways to great jobs exist. Large organizations have
established pipelines, websites, and staff tasked with advertising and
hiring. In smaller organizations, the job description exists solely in the
mind of a business owner who is feeling a pain point and thinking about
hiring someone to help. Here are four ways to discover employment
opportunities.

1. VISIT YOUR CAMPUS
CAREER SERVICES OFFICE
Your career services office offers planning advice, career counseling,
and a dedicated group of alumni that want to see you succeed. Start
early—well before your last semester—to position yourself strategically
and take advantage of all that career services offers.
Watch this video from the BYU Career
Center: Career Center Steps to Success

4

2. SEARCH JOB
BOARDS ONLINE

LinkedIn is becoming essential to professional networking.
During your job search, make sure your own profile is top
notch and evaluate the opportunities at companies in your
industry. Read Using LinkedIn to Find a Job or Internship.

Each of these job boards acquire their
postings differently, so you’ll need to
perform a few searches to see which give
you the most useful results and services.

Indeed is a giant job posting aggregator with advanced
search functions that allow you to pinpoint job openings that
match your criteria.

Search for jobs or internships on
at least three job boards. Use
filters to narrow your search.
Activity 14.1

Monster provides a lot of useful career resources, such as
job search advice by industry, salary calculators by location,
and resume help.

Write down a list of key skills
and experience that are
valued in your industry and
plan out how you’ll acquire
those.

Glassdoor uses reviews from real people inside a company to
give you invaluable information about company culture, the
hiring process, and salaries. Use GlassDoor in your job search.

CareerBuilder scans the data in your uploaded resume and
recommends jobs to you. It also offers information about
how you stack up against others applying for the same jobs.

.com

If you have a specific company in mind, go through its
website to see if job opportunities are posted. Check back
regularly to see if new positions are posted.

5

3. NETWORK
Tell your network what you’re looking for. Your network is simply
everyone you know. Don’t be annoying, but share the fact that
you’re looking for work. Be brief and specific about what you are
looking for and what you offer. Many job opportunities are never
posted because they are offered to someone acquainted with a
current employee. The larger your network, the better your
chances of finding a non-posted job. Research has repeatedly
shown that people find jobs through “friends of friends”— distant
network contacts who are aware of opportunities that are
unknown to your closest friends.

4. PROPOSE YOUR OWN ROLE
Look for pain points in organizations around you, then propose
your own role. If you’re alert and networking, you’ll see ways you
can help. When you see a customer interaction done badly, or hear
someone complain about a constant frustration at work, think
about how you could improve the situation. Sometimes proposing
to work on a limited contract to address a problem will yield an
offer of long-term employment. Get in the door, then prove your
worth.
Treat your job search like a part-time job. Spend
time every week doing job-search activities.
Regular effort yields significant rewards.

“I’m graduating in April and
looking for a finance job
where I can put my risk
management skills to work.
Know anyone I should
connect with?”

“I’m really interested
in your field. I did quite well in
my stats major and I’ll be
looking for an internship soon.
Can you recommend someone
I should talk to?”

“Do you like working for
Adobe? I’m loving
information science and will
graduate this year.
Do you know if your division
will be hiring?"

6

SECTION TWO

APPLY
Once you’ve found a job that sounds like a good fit,
get ready to carefully tailor your employment
materials to that job.

USE KEY WORDS
Your first step is to search the job description for key
skill words. Humans and computers search for
keywords when screening applicants. You prove that
you’re serious and prepared when you reference and
demonstrate the skills being sought. Write the key
skill words down, stick the list by your computer, and
mention them honestly in your LinkedIn profile,
resume, and cover letter.

7

PREPARE PAR STORIES
PAR stands for PROBLEM, ACTION, RESULT. Interviewers like
to ask behavioral questions to figure out how you react to
challenges. Be prepared to convince them of your skills by
using keywords from the job description to prepare personal
stories that show problems you faced, the actions you took,
and what the results were.
Your stories should be brief, engaging, and job related. Seek
feedback from people you trust when coming up with your
PAR stories. You may realize you have more skills than you
thought.

Review it before each interview and add to it throughout
your career when you conquer a tough challenge. You’ll be
instantly ready to prep for your next interview. Also, you can
read it to make yourself feel better after a bad day.

Look over this sample PAR table. Read over some
of the examples stories to get ideas.

Make a table of PAR stories like the one below, with column
headings for key words, problem, action, and result.

Leadership

Analytical

PROBLEM

ACTION

My team had been working on a project
for weeks, but we weren’t having
success. No one was stepping up to take
responsibility for our deliverables. The
due date was fast approaching.

I created a schedule that would ensure
completion by the due date, then talked
to each person on the team to get their
commitment. I put in double shifts to
help a new team member get up to
speed.

The team rallied behind my schedule,
and we kept in close contact to
complete the project on time. The
professor was very pleased with our
work and asked to use our project as a
model.

Our client delivered a 40-page
document of required changes that
made my team feel overwhelmed and
discouraged.

I stayed late and created a spreadsheet
showing which person could best make
the changes requested and how we
could accomplish them quickly.

My boss was surprised and pleased the
next morning. He agreed with all my
assignment suggestions and put me in
charge of the team.

RESULT

FIGURE 14.1

KEY WORDS

8

POLISH YOUR PROFILE
Look over your LinkedIn profile and make sure that it
reflects best practices in your target industry. Different
industries—and even different functions within
industries (e.g., finance, marketing, HR, supply chain,
engineering, etc.)—have different standards and
expectations. Modify your headline and summary to
point toward the job you want. Make sure your profile is
“search optimized” by including key skills and phrases in
your descriptions of accomplishments at former
positions.
Find people who have the job you want and let their
LinkedIn profiles inspire your content, formatting, etc. If
possible, connect with these people and seek their
advice. Join groups in your industry and begin engaging
with the members.

ALUMNI ADVICE

“LinkedIn is absolutely necessary to
getting a job.
“Because of my polished LinkedIn profile,
I’ve been contacted by recruiters at
Facebook, Dropbox, Houzz, and many
other tech companies/start-ups. When
networking, I don’t use business cards at
all. I simply look people up on LinkedIn,
then I ask if we can connect.”

Scott Christensen
Product Designer at PwC's Emerging Tech Group,
Strategy, BYU Marriott School of Management Class of 2013

9

SECTION THREE

RESUMES &
COVER LETTERS
The resume is not dead yet. You’ll need to have a well-designed resume if you
are job hunting in a traditional industry or applying to work at a conventional
workplace. Even progressive companies often ask for a resume in addition to
their standard online application—a resume helps them see how you present
yourself when you have a blank slate.
If you’re creating your own job, walking a printed copy of your resume into the
office can earn you face-to-face time with key decision makers. A hand-delivered
resume and cover letter can be strong differentiators in a crowded field of
applicants.
Even so, most resumes get no more than 10 seconds of attention from someone
deciding whom to interview. Going through a stack of clone resumes can be
mind-numbing. Make sure to set yours apart in four ways.

SECONDS

Many resumes are judged
in under 10 seconds.
Make them count.
The Ladders: Make it Count

10

1. DESIGN
Resume design is important, especially in certain industries. An appropriate
resume in advertising, for example, might look out of place in accounting.
Recruiters in every industry, however, value clean, uncluttered resumes.
Spend some time looking at sample resumes online. Do a search for “[your
field] resume [current year].” Notice how formatting, font, color, graphics,
and spacing can have a huge impact on resume readability and credibility. Be
sure you design your resume to make it easy for the reader to access key
pieces of information, such as keywords, job titles, and dates.
Find a few that look good to you and emulate their design principles as you
work on your own. If you don’t feel confident in design, this may be a great
time to crack open your wallet and pay someone for help. A great-looking
resume design can keep you in the running for a great job.
Remember that your resume may first be viewed on the recruiter’s handheld
device. Check to see how your resume looks in a small format. Keep your
paragraphs and sections short. Choose great fonts. Use clear headings, color,
icons, and logos. Save as a PDF so your formatting is stable on any platform.

Activity 14.3

Do a search for “[your field] resume [current year].” Notice how
formatting, font, color, graphics, and spacing can have a huge
impact on resume readability and credibility.
Make your NAME stand out, not your email address. In
your header, use a large font for your name to show
contrast.

11

2. CONTENT
If you don’t have much pertinent work experience, highlight
your education section by listing accomplishments like
‣ Strong GPA
‣ Scholarships
‣ Club affiliations
‣ Courses completed
‣ Projects

Remember that the substance of your resume will often drive
your interview. Hiring managers may see your resume for the
first time when they sit down to interview you. As they work
their way down the page, asking you questions, be prepared
with something extra to say about each item. Prepare PAR
stories from your resume that demonstrate your skills, interest
in the industry, and cultural fit.

If your key skills can be demonstrated through an online
portfolio, create one. Include writing samples, projects you’ve
worked on, code you’ve written, or case studies from a class.
Hirers want to see what you can do.

Perhaps most important, because business loves numbers, be
sure to quantify any accomplishment you can. Numbers convey
credibility and experience on resumes.

Don’t be afraid to add a quirky accomplishment to your resume
such as “Summit County sheep-shearing champion.” If your
resume is memorable, you’ll have a better chance of landing an
interview.

Activity 14.4

QUANTIFY
Focus on results,
not responsibilities.
Quantify wherever
possible.
Remember to take
note of
quantifiable
successes at your
current internship
or job.

NO

YES

I scooped
ice cream.

Served 200+
customers daily,
suggested
method that
reduced wait time
by 50%.

Developed a
social media
campaign.

Increased sales
25% by
developing a
targeted social
media campaign.

FIGURE 14.2

The rest of your resume will be a listing of your work experience
in reverse chronological order. Of course you’ll list any paid
work that relates to your target job or demonstrates your key
skills, but include unpaid work if your responsibilities or
accomplishments were substantial. Experiences like organizing a
large event, running a donation drive, or being part of club
leadership can all be valuable in demonstrating what you bring
to a job.

Write two quantified accomplishments for your
last or current job.

12

3. STRUCTURE
Because recruiters scan resumes instead of reading them, getting
the structure right is critical. A logical flow and strong headings are
key. Your name should be the first and last thing a reader notices,
so make it stand out with size and possibly color. After your header,
you can lead with a skills summary section or go straight to your
education. Later in your career, you might list your experience first,
but if you’re just graduating from college, your education may be
your most impressive asset. Resumes should always list your most
valuable and job-pertinent assets first.
Skip the “Objective” statement. Your objective is
already clear: you want the job you’re applying for.
Also, an objective statement is YOU-focused rather
than AUDIENCE-focused.

Bad Resume
Misspelling
Typo
Disorganized
Vague
Poorly designed

4. GRAMMAR
This is where a tiny mistake could cost you a future job. One
careless error in grammar, spelling, or punctuation gives employers
an easy “no,” and your resume may quickly be tossed into the
recycling bin. Run your resume by several skilled editors until you’re
sure it’s error free.

13

COVER LETTERS

COVER LETTER TIPS

Your cover letter is your “human voice”
approach to the job. It gives you the opportunity to name drop connections you
may have within the company, briefly list
your differentiators, and promise more
proof in an interview. To make your cover
letter a great ambassador for your skills,
pay attention to these eight tips.

1. If you’re printing, use the same well-designed letterhead as your
resume. Make sure the two documents look consistent and
professional. In an email, brand yourself with a signature that includes
your LinkedIn address.
2. Follow correct letter format—or use a strong subject line in email (use
Proven Recruiter for HR Position instead of simply Application)—then
get right to the point. You only have a second to capture attention.
3. Keep your AUDIENCE focus. This message is not really about you, but
about how you can help the company. Demonstrate that you know
what the employer wants and are ready to provide it.

Read the before and after
cover letter to Google:
Cover Letters Before & After

4. Tailor it. Each cover letter and resume you send out should be tailored
to the specific job you’re applying for. Do you know anyone in the
company? Drawing attention to personal connections can have a
profoundly positive impact on your chances.

Read How to use the job
posting to create a cover letter

5. Be real. Make sure you don’t sound like a robot. Have pity on the poor
applicant screener. Use your wit to craft a human-sounding letter with
vivid language. Be honest and confident. Now is not the time for false
modesty.
6. Show, don’t tell. When you make a skill claim, support it briefly with a
concrete example. You don’t need to give too many details—save
those for the interview.
7. Make sure your grammar and spelling are impeccable. Enough said.

FIGURE 14.3

8. Be brief: no more than one page if printed, 3-4 paragraphs on email.

14

SECTION FOUR

INTERVIEW
Putting in time to prepare for your interview
is crucial to your comfort and success.
You’ve already researched your industry. Now you need to know
something about the organization you’re interviewing with, the
target position, and the person you’re meeting with.

CULTURAL FIT

One of the most intangible, and important, factors to hiring is
finding a "cultural fit." Managers want employees who are as
enthused about their organization as they are themselves, who
work similarly, and who share a sense of humor when things get
tense. To peek inside the workplace and begin to understand the
culture, check out your target organization’s profile on
Glassdoor. You’ll learn from current and former employees how
the interview process is conducted, what’s really expected of new
hires, and how much trust they have in management. This can be
extremely useful information.

Infographic Interview Intelligence

The 8 Best Questions to Ask in an Interview

15

PRACTICE
After you’ve done your research, grab a smart person and
practice, practice, practice. Hand them a copy of your
resume and something to eat. Get them to ask you
behavioral questions so that you can practice answering
smoothly and confidently with PAR stories.
You may feel uncomfortable asking someone to practice
an interview with you, but practicing your PAR stories at
least three times will give you a level of confidence that
sets you apart from your competition. Ask for candid
feedback. Be open and appreciative. Video record
yourself to see if your mannerisms, posture, and voice all
support the image you are trying to portray.

Look over these sample interview questions
arranged by skill.

MOST COMMON NON VERBAL
INTERVIEW MISTAKES
68%

Failure to make eye contact.

47%

Having little or no knowledge of the
company.

38%

Lack of a smile.

33%

Bad posture.

33%

Fidgeting too much.

90

SECONDS

How soon 30% of the interviewers
know whether they will hire the
applicant or not.

Based on a 2012 survey of 2,000 bosses. CareerGeekBlog.com.
http://www.careergeekblog.com/2012/01/06/what-happens-in-job-interview/

16

INTERVIEW FORMATS
Interviews are conducted in various formats, depending on an
organization’s resources, the job level, and location.
‣
‣
‣
‣

In-person
Video call (Facetime, Skype, Hangouts)
Recorded video (HireVue)
Phone

Here’s what you need to know about them:

IN-PERSON INTERVIEWS

Face-to-face interviews are still the gold standard. Lots of
information (most of it non-verbal) flows back and forth in this
sort of interview. When you’re offered a seat, take out a pen
and paper to make notes. Taking notes helps you look alert and
capable. It also helps you remember points you’d like to bring
up.
Your interviewer will probably start with an “ice-breaker”
question. Be prepared for the classic “Tell me about yourself.”
Give a brief personal pitch that you’ve practiced so many times
you don’t even need to think about it. Connect your background
and strengths to your target job.
Once you get talking, remember to breathe. Your interviewer
wants you to succeed. Help her discover that you’re the perfect
candidate; that will make her job much easier.

17

VIDEO CALL OR REMOTE INTERVIEWS

Video call interviews are becoming much more common. They’re an
inexpensive way for companies to quickly assess the capabilities, suitability,
and fit of candidates. In addition to the tips above, follow these steps to
improve your video interview performance.

SET UP
‣ Become familiar with the technology so you won’t be flustered if it fails. Try
out at least two services so you can switch if necessary.
‣ Compose a backdrop. Make sure your interviewer sees you in a clean,
simple environment.
‣ Orient the light toward your face or to your side, (not above or behind
you). Strong overhead light can make you look spooky. Natural light is the
most flattering, so try to sit facing a window.
‣ Make sure the camera is at eye level. Place your laptop on a stack of books
so that your interviewer isn’t looking up your nose.
‣ Double check the interview time and time zone.

ON THE DAY
‣ Choose a solid-colored shirt and make sure it’s pressed. Wrinkles show up
more on camera. If you need to wear a white shirt, wear a suit jacket over
it.

ALUMNI ADVICE

“I work from home, so all of my
business communication is through
phone, IM, and email.
“Sometimes we have video
conferences, and I’ve noticed it’s
important to make sure the
backdrop you choose looks
professional. Set yourself up in
front of a blank wall, a clean
bookshelf, or a whiteboard; avoid
your kitchen, a messy storage area,
or family pictures.”

‣ Maintain a fairly constant distance from the webcam.
‣ Don’t drum your fingers or use the keyboard to type notes during your call.
Sensitive microphones will magnify every sound.
‣ Look at the camera, not the screen. Don’t try to stare at it constantly, but
do look directly into it when you want to emphasize a point or convey
sincerity.
‣ Smile! Exude energy, confidence, and optimism.

Katie Stone
Alumni Specialist at Western Governors
University, Recreation Management
(Therapeutic Recreation), Class of 2012

18

PHONE INTERVIEWS

Phone interviews are a little nerve-wracking because of limited feedback from your
interviewer. You can’t see a reassuring nod or smile to tell you you’re on the right track. In
addition to securing a quiet spot and double-checking your interview time, these two simple
tricks will make a big difference in helping you come across as calm, confident, and upbeat.
1. Remain standing and walk around
2. Smile (even if no one’s in the room)
Even if people can’t see you, you will sound better if you’re smiling, moving, and welldressed than if you’re slouched on the couch in your pajamas. Also, moving helps you shed
stress.

INTERVIEW DAY
You’ve done your preparation and the big day is finally here. Don’t worry. You’ll rock this.
Having confidence will improve your performance, so do what you can to feel invincible.
Read through your PAR stories to remind yourself how awesome you are, press your shirt
(details make a difference), and leave an extra half hour for traffic.

Dress for success: The new grad’s
guide to dressing for a job interview

19

SECTION FIVE

FOLLOW UP
Shortly after your interview, write a thank-you
note (email or handwritten) expressing your
appreciation for the meeting. Something like
the example in Figure 14.4 will remind your
interviewer what you talked about. Briefly
connect your skills to the new understanding
of the job you obtained through the interview.
Reiterate your interest and your suitability.
Show that you’ve followed up on any
suggestions that your interviewer made.

Dear Michelle,
Thanks for seeing me yesterday. I really
enjoyed meeting you and the team.
The project for Suncast is intriguing! I keep
thinking of ways to address the distribution
problem using some of the new tools I studied
in my senior year. It’s a project I’d love
working on.
I read the article you mentioned and talked to
William Brown about it. He admires your
approach.
I look forward to hearing from you soon,
Tracy

FIGURE 14.4

LAND
THE JOB

20

ACCEPTING & NEGOTIATING
If all goes well, you’ll be extended an offer, which sometimes
has a time limit attached. Take some of the time you are given
to think about whether the job and company are a good fit for
you. Consult with your mentors and significant others.
Much has been written about salary negotiations, and they are
beyond the scope of this book. You should definitely do your
research and negotiate for an offer that reflects both your
value and your values. Successful negotiations at this point are
not all about money. You can negotiate vacation, relocation
benefits, working from home, team assignments, etc. Your
subsequent salaries will all rest on the foundation of your first
one, so getting your salary and benefits package right makes a
lot of sense.
If you don’t receive an offer, don’t get discouraged. Everyone
has more interviews than offers. Use the experience as an
opportunity to learn what you can do to succeed next time. Ask
what advice your interviewer would give you for future
interviews, and what skills or experiences the successful
candidate possessed that you should gain. Then get to work
improving your chances of landing your dream job.

21

IN CONCLUSION
Landing a job that challenges and supports you is a great accomplishment. Now go to work and use
the principles you’ve learned throughout this book to communicate your ideas with clarity, brevity,
and power. Solve problems, manage projects, and lead teams with skill and insight. As you do, you’ll
be given new opportunities and new jobs. Make them count. Do good in the world.

LEARN MORE
Bort, Julie. “14 little-known tricks to help you land your dream job
using Glassdoor.” Business Insider. July 9, 2015.
http://www.businessinsider.com/tricks-to-land-a-dream-job-viaglassdoor-2015-7, accessed February 2017.

Guerrero, Aaron. “The 8 Best Questions to Ask a Job Interviewer.” US
News & World Report. September 10, 2014.
http://money.usnews.com/money/careers/slideshows/the-8-bestquestions-to-ask-a-job-interviewer/1, accessed February 2017.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Number of Jobs Held, Labor Market
Activity, and Earnings Growth Among the Youngest Baby
Boomers.” US Department of Labor News Release. March 31, 2015.
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/nlsoy.pdf, accessed
February 2017.

Isaacs, Kim. “Cover Letter Tips for Finance Professionals.”
monster.com. https://www.monster.com/careeradvice/article/finance-cover-letter-tips, accessed February 2017.

BYU Career Services. “Cover Letters” (PDF File). Downloaded from
BYU Career Services Website. https://careers.byu.edu/wpcontent/uploads/sites/38/2017/11/Cover-Letters.pdf, accessed
February 2017.
Evans, Will. “You have 6 seconds to make an impression: How
recruiters see our resume.” The Ladders.
https://www.theladders.com/p/10541/you-only-get-6-seconds-offame-make-it-count
Granovetter, Mark S. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal
of Sociology 76, no. 6 (1973): 1360-80.
https://sociology.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/publications/the_
strength_of_weak_ties_and_exch_w-gans.pdf, accessed February
2017.

LinkedIn. “Using LinkedIn to Find a Job or Internship” (PDF File).
Downloaded from LinkedIn. https://university.linkedin.com/
content/dam/university/global/en_US/site/pdf/TipSheet_FindingaJ
oborInternship.pdf, accessed February 2017.
Monster.com. “Sample Sales Cover Letter.”
http://media.monster.com/mm/usen/content/resume/doc/salescover-letter.html, accessed February 2017.
Noel, Katherine. “8 tips for your next video job interview.” Business
Insider. March 21, 2016. http://www.businessinsider.com/how-todo-a-video-job-interview-2016-3, accessed February 2017.
Salemi, Vicki. “The new college grad’s guide to dressing for a job
interview.” monster.com. https://www.monster.com/careeradvice/article/college-grad-guide-to-dressing-for-job-interview,
accessed February 2017.

(Bold citations are referenced in the chapter text.)

ARTICLES

LEARN MORE
WEBSITES
Kick Resume. “222 Powerful Action Verbs to Use in Resume.” De
Winter Group.
https://media.licdn.com/mpr/mpr/AAEAAQAAAAAAAAh6AAAAJ
GJjZjgwZDcyLWVlMDItNDBmZi04YzkyLTg5ZmYyZDcwOThlNA.jpg,
accessed November 2017.

