00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:28 PM

Page vii

Nursing
Leadership
and

Management
Theories, Processes and Practice

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:28 PM

Page viii

This page has been left intentionally blank.

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page ix

Nursing
Leadership
and

Management
Theories, Processes and Practice
Rebecca A. Patronis Jones, DNSc, RN, CNAA, BC
Chancellor and Professor
West Suburban College of Nursing
Oak Park, IL

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page x

F.A. Davis Company
1915 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
www.fadavis.com
Copyright © 2007 by F.A. Davis Company
All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of it may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit indicates print number: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Publisher: Joanne P. DaCunha, RN, MSN
Developmental Editor: Caryn Abramowitz
Project Manager: Kristin L. Kern
Manager of Art & Design: Carolyn O’Brien
As new scientiﬁc information becomes available through basic and clinical research, recommended
treatments and drug therapies undergo changes. The author(s) and publisher have done everything
possible to make this book accurate, up to date, and in accord with accepted standards at the time of
publication. The authors, editors, and publisher are not responsible for errors or omissions or for consequences from application of the book, and make no warranty, expressed or implied, in regard to the
contents of the book. Any practice described in this book should be applied by the reader in accordance
with professional standards of care used in regard to the unique circumstances that may apply in each
situation. The reader is advised always to check product information (package inserts) for changes and
new information regarding dose and contraindications before administering any drug. Caution is especially urged when using new or infrequently ordered drugs.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Jones, Rebecca A. Patronis.
Nursing leadership and management : theories, processes, and practice / by Rebecca Patronis Jones.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8036-1362-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Nursing services—Administration. 2. Nurse administrators. 3. Leadership. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Leadership—Problems and Exercises. 2. Nursing, Supervisory—Problems and Exercises. 3.
Nursing Care—organization & administration—Problems and Exercises. WY 105 J78n 2007]
RT89.J645 2007
610.68—dc22
2006034670
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of speciﬁc clients, is granted by F.A. Davis Company for users registered with the Copyright Clearance Center
(CCC) Transactional Reporting Service, provided that the fee of $.10 per copy is paid directly to CCC,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy
license by CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged. The fee code for users of the
Transactional Reporting Service is: 8036-1362/07 0 ⫹ $.10.

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:13 PM

Page xi

dedication

To all of the chapter authors for their diligence in going the extra mile to create both
student and instructor learning materials that enhance the content of this book.
To my husband Robert, daughter Aislan, and parents Jim and Ada Lee for their words of
encouragement; and to the nurses from three generations of my family, Alice, Zelma, Jean,
Patty, and Ginger, who have provided numerous stories about nursing. And last to Abbie,
who provided nursing care to all of the members of our family in need.

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xii

This page has been left intentionally blank.

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xiii

preface
Introduction
Nurses lead and manage nursing care for patients,
families, aggregates, and communities in a variety
of settings, ranging from ambulatory to community
to inpatient. Nurses also lead and manage care
across the health-care continuum, including primary health promotion and prevention; secondary
skilled, long term, and rehabilitative; and tertiary:
emergent, urgent, and acute care. Strategies are
drawn from both leadership and management theories. Leadership involves both the leader and the
follower. In this text, we have deﬁned Leadership
as the process of envisioning a new and better
world, communicating that vision to others, motivating others and enticing them to join in efforts
to realize the vision, thinking in a different way,
challenging the status quo, taking risks, and facilitating change (Valiga and Grossman). Effective
Followers are individuals who work with and support leaders in their efforts to realize a vision by
being engaged rather than alienated, suggesting
new ideas and options, providing critical feedback
on the ideas of others (including the leader), promoting positive relationships within the group, and
acting as potential “leaders-in-waiting” (Valiga and
Grossman). Management, one of the responsibilities of leadership, is a ﬁve-step process that comprises planning, organizing, directing, coordinating,
and controlling (Garrison, Morgan, and Johnson).
The nurse’s approach to leadership and management reﬂects the dynamic state of nursing practice
and health care. Leadership has evolved from theories of the past, which pronounced that only great
and noble men could be leaders, to more current
theories that look at leadership as a learned process
or a changing role depending on the situation.
Management has evolved from competing managerial activities in a hierarchical, bureaucratic organization to complexity theory involving both the
physical and social sciences. We have included a discussion of each of these concepts and theories in
this textbook.

Purpose
The book is based on the philosophy that all nurses
are leaders who use creative decision making, entrepreneurship, and life-long learning to create a work
environment that is efficient, cost-effective, and
committed to quality care. With that in mind, the
primary goal for the textbook is to provide broad
and comprehensive coverage of leadership and
management theories and processes by synthesizing
information from nursing, health care, general
administration and management, and leadership literature and applying it to nursing. The book should
engage readers with learning activities that will
teach them how to research decision-making data
(participatory action research process) and analyze
and make reliable choices in managing their work
environment. The content is based on research
from several disciplines and provides a theory-based
scholarly, yet practical, approach that is consistent
with higher education.
Each chapter synthesizes information from nursing, health care, general administration and management, and leadership literature and incorporates
relevant examples, case studies, vignettes, and best
practices from leading experts in these ﬁelds.

Specific Objectives
The nurse is viewed as a proactive decision maker
and problem solver engaged in critical thinking.
Thus, the ﬁrst speciﬁc objective of the book is to
keep the student engaged in the learning process.
The second goal of the book is to guide students
toward applying the theory to practice and integrating evidence-based practice. Chapters require the
student to participate in current research and analysis of the literature to become an active learner.
Research briefs occur throughout various chapters
to assist the student with application to practice and
evidence-based practice to reach the second speciﬁc

xiii

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

xiv

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xiv

Preface

objective of the textbook. The third speciﬁc objective of the book is to help faculty keep students
engaged in the learning process by providing the
instructor with numerous elements on which to
build the evaluation.

Key Features
Pedagogy included in the chapters follows:
• Chapter Motivation (a quotation representative of the chapter’s content)
• Chapter Motives (measurable objectives for
the chapter)
• Hot Topic (brief discussion of something currently at the forefront of the topic of a chapter)
• Chapter Star (description of a real-life person
performing services that apply to the chapter
in an exceptional way)
• Practice to Strive For (box focusing on best
practices in the area of the chapter)
• Practice Proof (description of research study,
with questions, to encourage thinking about
evidence-based practice)
• All Good Things (summary of the chapter)
• Let’s Talk (discussion and thought questions
regarding the chapter content and related
areas)
• Names of Web sites
• References
• NCLEX-style Test Questions
An Instructor’s CD package includes:
• Chapter objectives
• Glossary of terms used throughout the book
• Case studies with discussion questions and
answers
• Learning exercises
• Names of Web sites
• PowerPoint slide presentation with key points
for each chapter
• Image bank
• A test bank with multiple-choice and shortanswer essay questions
A student CD will accompany each book and
include:
• Chapter objectives
• Study notes (PowerPoint slides of key points
for each chapter)

• Group/individual interactive learning exercises or clinical scenarios that require students
to gather data and apply theory to solve problems
• Discussion questions
• Case studies
• Interactive self-assessment exercises
• Résumé help
• Games
• Names of Web sites
• A practice test bank

Tour of the Units and Chapters
The text is divided into ﬁve major parts with corresponding chapters. Part 1 focuses on understanding
the theories of leading, following, and managing.
The ﬁrst three chapters are devoted to these topics
and theories. The third chapter focuses on motivational theory. Part 2 provides information to aid
readers in understanding organizations. Chapters
4 through 9 describe organizational structures and
cover legal, ethical, and economic issues and inﬂuences related to the regulation of nursing care.
This part also offers information on communication, both organizational and through the use of
computers, or informatics. Part 3 discusses the
skills needed to be an effective leader. Chapters 10
through 13 provide the reader with the latest decision-making and problem-solving theories and
strategies. Part 3 also covers the concepts of change,
team building, power, politics, and inﬂuence, along
with tips for the new nurse leader on how to use
these concepts. Part 4 focuses on the skills for being
an effective manager. Chapters 14 through 21 cover
the nuts and bolts of management. The theoretical
base, principles, techniques, and strategies for the
day-to-day management of nursing care are
described in detail. Readers will learn how to plan,
manage quality and risk, budget, staff and schedule,
deal with conﬂict, and delegate to manage nursing
care. The concept of culture is also discussed. Part 5
changes the focus to the skills new nurses need for
a successful career. In Chapters 22 through 25, the
reader will learn how to manage one’s self and how
to obtain the important ﬁrst job.

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xv

contributors
NANCY HOWELL AGEE, RN, MN
Chief Operating Officer/Executive Vice President
Carilion Health System
Roanoke, VA

BETSY FRANK, RN, PHD
Professor
Indiana State University College of Nursing
Terre Haute, IN

SHARON BATOR, MSN, RN
Assistant Professor
Southern University School of Nursing
Baton Rouge, LA

ELIZABETH GANEY-CODE, MSN, RN
Patient Care Nurse Manager
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX

CONNIE J. BOERST, MSN, RN, BC
Assistant Professor
Bellin College of Nursing
Green Bay, WI

SHIRLEY GARICK, PHD, RN MSN, ABQARP
DIPLOMATE, LEGAL NURSE CONSULTANT
(LNC)
Associate Professor
College of Health & Behavioral Sciences
Texas A&M University
Texarkana, TX

BARBARA B. BREWER, MALS, MBA, PHD, RN
Director of Professional Practice
John C. Lincoln North Mountain Hospital
Phoenix, AZ
CAROLINE CAMUÑAS, EDD, RN
Adjunct Associate Professor
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York, NY
Research Coordinator
J. J. Peters VA Medical Center
Bronx, NY
THERESA L. CARROLL, RN, PHD, CNAA
Professor, Department of Nursing Systems
University of Texas School of Nursing at
Houston
Houston, TX
BARBARA SHELDEN CZERWINSKI, PHD, RN,
CNAA-BC, FAAN
The Ohio State University Medical Center
Clinical Nurse Scientist
Columbus, OH
JUDY A. DAVIS, MS, MPH, APN, CNP
Clinical Faculty
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL
MARY E. HORTON, ELLIOTT, DNSC, RN
Associate Professor
West Suburban College of Nursing
Oak Park, IL

DEBORAH R. GARRISON, PHD, RN
Associate Professor
Associate Dean, Graduate Nursing Programs
University of Toledo
Toledo, OH
SHEILA C. GROSSMAN, PHD, APRN-BC
Professor and Director of Family Nurse
Practitioner Program
Fairfield University School of Nursing
Fairfield, CT
MICHELLE B. HAGADORN, MA, CPA
Masters of Accountancy
Assistant Professor of Business Administration
and Economics
Roanoke College
Salem, VA
EMILY HARMAN, MSN, RN
Assistant Professor and Associate Director of the
RN to BSN PRogram
Ohio University School of Nursing
Athens, OH
PATRICIA M. HAYNOR, DNSC, RN, NHA
Villanova University
Villanova, PA

xv

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

xvi

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xvi

Contributors

JACQUELINE J. HILL, PHD, RN, CRRN
Associate Professor
Interim Chair, Undergraduate Nursing Program
Southern University School of Nursing
Baton Rouge, LA
STACY GRANT HOHENLEITNER, MSN, RN,
CNA, NHA
Villanova University
Villanova, PA
DEBORAH A. JASOVSKY, MSN, PHD, RN,
CNAA, BC
Director of Nursing—Special Projects and
Magnet Project Director
Raritan Bay Medical Center
Perth Amboy, NJ
JEWETT J. JOHNSON, MS, RN
Assistant Professor
Wilson School of Nursing
Midwestern State University
Wichita Falls, TX
ESPERANZA VILLANUEVA JOYCE, EDD, CNS,
RN
Professor
School of Nursing
New Mexico State University
Athens, OH

DEBRA A. MORGAN, EDD, RN
Assistant Professor and Coordinator of the RN
to BSN and RN to MSN Programs
Wilson School of Nursing
Midwestern State University
Wichita Falls, TX
CAROLE A. MUTZEBAUGH, EDD, NP, CNS
Consultant, Care Management Associates
Director, Foundation for Care Management
Foundation for Care Management
Vashon, WA
MARY E. O’KEEFE, RN, PHD, JD
Legal Nurse Consultant
Mills Shirley L.L.P.
Galveston, TX
CARLA G. PHILIPS, PHD, RN
Ohio University School of Nursing
Athens, OH
DENISE TOP RHINE, MED, RN, CEN
Professor
Oakton College
Des Plaines, IL
CAROL SEAVOR, EDD, RN
President
Jefferson College of Health Sciences
Roanoke, VA

JOSEPHINE KAHLER, EDD, RN, CS
Dean/Professor
College of Health & Behavioral Sciences
Texas A&M University-Texarkana
Texarkana, TX

SUSAN SPORTSMAN, PHD, RN
Dean
College of Health Sciences and Human Services
Midwestern State University
Wichita Falls, TX

MARY KAMIENSKI, PHD, RN, APRN-C, FAEN
Assistant Dean Graduate Nursing Programs
University of Medicine and Dentistry
Newark, NJ

GEORGIANNA THOMAS, EDD, RN
Dean and Associate Professor
West Suburban College of Nursing
Oak Park, IL

PATRICIA MARTINEZ, MD
Chief Quality Officer
Asante Health System
Medford, OR

THERESA M. VALIGA, EDD, RN, FAAN
Chief Program Officer
National League for Nursing
New York, NY

SHARON MCLANE, MBA, RN, BC
Director Nursing Informatics
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX

SHARON WALKER, MA
Career Planning Specialist
Our Lady of the Lake College
Baton Rouge, LA

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xvii

reviewers
JOAN MANNING BAKER, RN, MSN, CCRN
Assistant Professor
Molloy College
Rockville Centre, NY

VIVIAN SCHRADER, PHD, RN
Associate Professor
Boise State University
Boise, ID

THOMAS BEEMAN, RN, PHD
Director, Undergraduate Nursing
University of Texas
El Paso, TX

PAMELA WHEELER, RN, PHD
Associate Professor
Linfield College
Portland, OR

MARY HILL, RN, DSN
Associate Professor
University of Mississippi
Jackson, MS

JOYCE M. WOODS, RN, PHD
Nursing Instructor
Mount Royal College
Calgary, AB, Canada

SUSAN MEYER, RN, MSN
Assistant Professor
Mount St. Mary’s College
Los Angeles, CA

POLLY GERBER ZIMMERMANN, RN, MS, MBA,
CEN
Assistant Professor, Department of Nursing
Harry S Truman College
Chicago, IL

KAY MUGGENBURG, RN, PHD
Assistant Professor
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY

xvii

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xviii

This page has been left intentionally blank.

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xix

acknowledgments
A special thanks to Caryn Abramowitz and Mary
Horton Elliott, DNSc, RN, Associate Professor,
West Suburban College of Nursing, Oak Park, IL,
for their assistance in the development of the ancillary materials.

xix

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xx

This page has been left intentionally blank.

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xxi

contents
Part 1 Understanding the Theory
of Leading, Following, and
Managing,1
Chapter 1 Leadership and Followership, 3
Chapter 2 Management Theory, 13
Chapter 3 Motivating Yourself and Others
for a Satisfying Career, 29

Part 4 Skills for Being an
Effective Manager, 221
Chapter 14 Planning and Marketing for a
Healthy Organization, 223
Chapter 15 Managing Quality and Patient
Safety, 239
Chapter 16 Budgeting, 265
Chapter 17 Staffing and Scheduling, 279

Part 2 Understanding
Organizations 39
Chapter 4 Understanding Organizational
Structures, 41
Chapter 5 Legal and Ethical Knowledge for
Nurses, 57
Chapter 6 Regulating Nursing, 69

Chapter 18 Maximizing Employee
Performance, 297
Chapter 19 Nursing Celebrates Cultural
Diversity, 315
Chapter 20 Constructive Conflict
Management, 329
Chapter 21 Delegation: An Art of
Professional Practice, 345

Chapter 7 Economic Influences, 95
Chapter 8 Organizational Communication,
113
Chapter 9 Informatics, 131

Part 3 Skills for Being an
Effective Leader, 149
Chapter 10 Enhancing Your Critical
Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem
Solving, 151

Part 5 Skills for a Successful
Career, 357
Chapter 22 Manage Yourself for a More
Fulfilling Career, 359
Chapter 23 Getting Your First Job, 375
Chapter 24 Career Development, 389
Chapter 25 Managing Your Professional and
Financial Future, 415
Index, 431

Chapter 11 Nurses Leading Change, 167
Chapter 12 Building Teams for Productivity
and Efficiency, 183
Chapter 13 Power, Politics, and Policy, 201

xxi

00Jones Leadership(F)-FM

1/16/07

9:29 PM

Page xxii

This page has been left intentionally blank.

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 1

UNDERSTANDING
THE THEORY
OF LEADING,
FOLLOWING,
AND MANAGING

1

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 2

This page has been left intentionally blank.

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 3

chapter
1
Leadership and
Followership
THERESA M. VALIGA, EDD, RN, FAAN
SHEILA GROSSMAN, PHD, APRN-BC
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Cautious, careful people always casting about to preserve their reputation and
social standing, never can bring about a reform. Those who are really in
earnest must be willing to be anything or nothing in the world’s estimation.”
Susan B. Anthony

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■

Distinguish between leadership and management.
Compare characteristics of effective followers with those
of leaders.
Discuss how all nurses can provide leadership in and for the
profession.

3

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

4

T

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 4

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

oday’s climate demands individuals who are
flexible, creative, and able to empower others to be
flexible and creative. With the nursing shortage,
managed care, higher patient acuity, fewer
resources, highly diverse demographics, and outside
influences, nurses need to be more effective leaders
than ever as they manage patients in various settings.
But what is an effective leader without effective
followers? This is also a time when nurses need to
be effective followers, knowing who to follow,
when to follow, how to follow, and how to use the
follower role most powerfully. Because most of us
are followers more often than we are leaders, the art
of followership is a concept that needs to be
explored in any contemporary discussion of leadership and management.
Burns (2003) viewed leadership as “a master discipline that illuminates some of the toughest problems of human needs and social change” (p. 3).
Others suggest that leadership is about having a
vision and getting people to follow, using the art of
persuasion. Then there are some who equate leadership with management and use the words interchangeably. Bennis and Nanus (1985) described the
phenomenon of leadership as well studied, with
each interpretation providing a sliver of insight but
none providing a holistic and adequate explanation.
Sashkin and Sashkin (2003) took a rather simplistic, but helpful, perspective on leadership, stating
that leadership that matters is the critical factor that
makes a difference in people’s lives and organizations’ success.
Many experts have described leadership as
encompassing the leader’s personality, the leader’s
behavior, the talents of the followers, and the situational context in which leadership takes place.
These experts also tend to agree that leadership can
be learned. Knowing that leaders are not necessarily born but made, therefore, is an important concept when one considers that all nurses must be
looked to as leaders in and for the profession.
Nursing’s focus today is on delivering quality
and cost-effective patient care rather than on
accomplishing a list of nursing tasks. This focus
requires that nurses fulfill both leadership and follower roles effectively. This chapter will explore
the concepts of leadership and followership and discuss how nurses can improve their abilities to lead
and follow.

Leadership Theories—
Past and Contemporary
In order to understand the phenomenon of leadership and how contemporary perspectives shape
leadership behaviors, it is helpful to know how
views about leaders and leadership have changed
over time. A brief outline of several of the more significant leadership theories provides such a context.

GREAT MAN THEORY
Just by reading the name of this theory, Great Man,
one can imagine that it is not widely accepted today.
Yet this was precisely how the world thought of
leaders for many years. This theory assumed that
all leaders were men and all were great (i.e., of
the noble class). Thus, those who assumed leadership roles were determined by their genetic and
social inheritance. It was not conceivable that those
from the “working class” could be leaders, that leadership could be learned, or that women could be
leaders.

TRAIT THEORIES
During the early part of the 20th century, several
researchers studied the behaviors and traits of individuals thought to be effective leaders. Studies
revealed that these leaders possessed multiple characteristics. Although there were commonalities
among them (e.g., they tended to be taller, be more
articulate, or exude self-confidence), there was no
standard list that fit everyone or that could be used
to predict or identify who was or could be an effective leader.

SITUATIONAL OR
CONTINGENCY THEORIES
These theories embodied the idea that the right
thing to do depended on the situation the leader
was facing. The most well-known and used situational theory involves assessing the nature of the
task and the follower’s motivation or readiness to
learn and using that to determine the particular
style the leader should use. Despite widespread discussion and use of this theory, however, little
research exists to support its validity.

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 5

Leadership and Followership

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY
A new way of thinking about leadership emerged in
the mid-1970s when James McGregor Burns
asserted that the true nature of leadership is not the
ability to motivate people to work hard for their pay
but the ability to transform followers to become
more self-directed in all they do. Transformational
leaders, therefore, “look for potential motives in followers, seek to satisfy higher needs, and engage the
full person of the follower. The result is a relationship of mutual stimulation and elevation that converts followers into leaders and may convert leaders
into moral agents” (Burns, 1978, p. 4).
Barker (1990) asserted that transformational
leaders need to have a heightened self-awareness
and a plan for self-development. This positive selfregard satisfies the leader’s self-esteem needs and

5

tends to result in “self-confidence, worth, strength,
capability, adequacy, and being useful and necessary” (Barker, 1990, p. 159).

NEW SCIENCE LEADERSHIP
Wheatley (1999) took this paradigm a step further
when she described leadership as a method of
thinking in a different way, a way that is not standard, orderly, or goal-oriented, Instead, she suggests
we think about leadership in a way that reflects
naturally occurring events: free-flowing, dynamic,
and accepting of an anything-can-happen philosophy. She recommended we think of leadership
through a new perspective. Leadership comprises
naturally occurring events in which leaders have
knowledge and serve as leaders when needed.
Thus, there is no need for others to direct and control what we do.

Practice to Strive For 1-1
Nurses who function as leaders in clinical practice are not
necessarily in positions of authority. They are not necessarily
the charge nurses, nurse managers, or chief nursing officers,
although they may very well be in such positions.
Nurse leaders, regardless of the position they hold in an
organization, are the individuals who continually question
the status quo, offer suggestions about how to improve
patient care, and entice (not demand or require) colleagues
to work toward a new level of excellence. These individuals
are familiar with what is being written by experts in the field
and draw on this literature to formulate a vision for improving their own area of practice (e.g., care of cancer patients,
the homeless, patients undergoing surgery, or poor children
in school). These individuals have a high degree of energy
and are passionate about practice. In other words, they
never give up. They challenge our thinking, propose alternative approaches to care, and are creative.
In many ways, nurse leaders make people uncomfortable
because they do not allow others to remain in their “safe little corner of the world.” Instead, they challenge others to
grow, seek out new experiences, strive for excellence in the
care they provide, and expand their horizons (e.g., working
with an interdisciplinary team, serving on institutional committees, or proposing new legislation). But leaders also help
and support colleagues as they face these new challenges
and opportunities.
These are the practices to strive for if nursing is to secure its
rightful place in health care. Every nurse has the potential to
provide leadership. We simply need to stop putting limits on
ourselves and our nurse colleagues.

Leadership Practices and Tasks
Kouzes and Posner (1995) asserted that leaders
should follow five practices of leadership to assist in
transforming followers to realize their own visions
and become more self-directed: challenging the status quo, inspiring a shared vision, enabling others
to act rather than to react, being a role model, and
encouraging the heart. These practices were identified from an analysis of the memoirs of hundreds of
managers, who were asked to reflect on what they
perceived as their own best leadership experience.
The findings from this research were similar to
Bennis and Nanus’ (1985) notions of what constituted leadership strategies: the management of risk;
the management of attention; the management of
communication; the management of trust, or credibility; and the management of respect. In addition,
the work of Kouzes and Posner and Bennis and
Nanus is consistent with that of Sashkin and
Sashkin (2003) who, after 20 years of research,
designed a four-dimensional model of transformational leadership that addresses communication
leadership, credible leadership, caring leadership,
and risk leadership (a concept they later renamed:
creating opportunities).
Gardner (1990) also researched the concept of
leadership and identified several tasks that leaders
perform. Those tasks are as follows:

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

6

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 6

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing
■

■

■
■

■

■

■

■

■

Envisioning goals—pointing the group in a
new direction or asserting a vision.
Affirming values—reminding the group members of the norms and expectations they share.
Motivating—promoting positive attitudes.
Managing—keeping the system functioning
and the group moving toward realizing the
vision.
Achieving a workable unity—managing the
conflict that inevitably accompanies change
and growth.
Explaining—teaching followers and helping
them understand why they are being asked to
do certain things.
Serving as a symbol—acting in ways that convey the values of the group and its goals.
Representing the group—speaking on behalf of
the group.
Renewing—bringing members of the group to
new levels.

These tasks provide specific guidelines for people
interested in increasing their leadership ability, and
they highlight the importance of leaders working
closely with followers.

Perspectives on Followership
Although Gardner (1990) and others have
acknowledged the importance of leaders and followers working together in order to realize a vision,
the literature typically pays little attention to the
concept of followership, and there are no “theories”
of followership.
Perhaps one of the earliest discussions of followership was presented by Kelley (1992, 1998), who
outlined four types of followers: sheep, “yes” people, alienated followers, and effective or exemplary
followers. Sheep are passive individuals who comply with whatever the leader or manager directs but
are not actively engaged in the work of the group.
“Yes” people, in comparison, are actively involved
in the group’s work and eagerly support the leader;
they do not, however, initiate ideas or think for
themselves. Alienated followers do think for themselves and often are critical of what the leader is
doing; they do not, however, share those ideas
openly, they seem disengaged, and they “rarely
invest time or energy to suggest alternative solutions or other approaches” (Grossman & Valiga,
2005, p. 47). The individuals who are engaged, sug-

gest new ideas, share criticisms with the leader, and
invest time and energy in the work of the group are
referred to as effective or exemplary followers.
Pittman, Rosenbach, and Potter (1998) also
described four types of followers: subordinates, contributors, politicians, and partners. Subordinates are
similar to Kelley’s “sheep,” doing what they are told
but not actively involved. Contributors are like
Kelley’s “yes people,” supportive, involved, and
doing a good job, but not willing to challenge the
ideas of the leader. Politicians are willing to give
honest feedback and support the leader, but they
may neglect the job and have poor performance levels. Like Kelley’s effective or exempry followers, the
partners described by Pittman, et al. (1998) are
highly involved, perform at a high level, promote
positive relationships within the group, and are seen
as “leaders-in-waiting” (p. 118).
Because leaders cannot be leaders unless they
have followers, the role of the follower is extremely
important in any discussion of leadership. In addition, the characteristics that describe effective/
exemplary followers or partners are quite similar to
those outlined for effective leaders themselves.
Although the term “follower” “conjures up images
of docility, conformity, weakness, and failure to
excel” (Chaleff, 1995, p. 3), those who are effective
in the role are independent, critical thinkers, innovative, actively engaged, able and willing to think
for themselves, willing to assume ownership, selfstarters, and able and willing to give honest feedback and constructive criticism (adapted from
Grossman & Valiga, 2005, pp. 49–50).
Effective followers are not employees who simply “follow the rules” and accept whatever management decides. In fact, the concept of effective
followers may not even be compatible with perspectives on management that assume a complacent,
nonquestioning employee. But it is clearly aligned
with the concept of leadership, because effective followers are seen as partners with the leader, working
collaboratively to realize the vision they share.
Thus, it is helpful to outline the differences
between leadership and management.

Differences Between
Leadership and Management
Leadership and management are related phenomena but they are not the same. It is important to

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 7

Leadership and Followership

realize that (a) not all individuals in management
positions are necessarily leaders, and (b) leadership
is not necessarily tied to a position of authority.
While only those in management positions are
expected to be managers, leadership can and needs
to be exercised by each of us wherever we may be.
In other words, even though an individual does not
hold a management position, she can still be a
leader on a clinical unit, in an institution, in her
community, or in the profession as a whole.
In a classic article written in 1977, Zaleznik
asserted that “leaders and managers are very different kinds of people: they differ in their motivations,
in their personal history, and in how they think and
act; they differ in their orientation toward goals,
work, human relations, and themselves; and they
differ in their worldviews” (Zaleznik, as quoted in
Grossman & Valiga, 2005, p. 5). For example, leaders are creative, innovative, and risk-takers; managers often are more concerned with maintaining
the status quo and taking few risks. In addition,
managers often have a short-range perspective and
are concerned about the “bottom line,” whereas
leaders have a long-range, visionary perspective and
are concerned about moving toward realization of
that vision.
It is important to remember that these distinctions point out the extremes of perspectives to illustrate the points that not all managers are leaders
and not all leaders are managers. Despite the differences outlined by Zaleznik and others, however,
many individuals are able to function as both leaders and managers simultaneously and effectively.
Indeed, our practice world is greatly enhanced
when leaders are able to manage and managers are
able to lead. Bennis and Nanus (1985, p. 21) have
been quoted often as saying “leaders do the right
thing, and managers do things right.” In nursing
practice, we must both do the right thing and do
that thing right. For example, we apply standards of
care to our practice that must be followed and acuity quotients that, in most cases, must be assessed in
order to make decisions about staffing, admissions,
and supports needed. Thus, we must do the thing
right. But perhaps we also need to ensure that we
are doing the right thing by evaluating if the standards fit our patient population and if the acuity
and staffing ratios are relevant to our needs. If they
are not, leaders need to step forward to create standards that do fit and that are relevant.
All nurses need to lead and manage effectively in
patient care settings in order to accomplish tasks

7

hot topic:
Leader vs. Manager
Zaleznik (1977) wrote a classic piece on the comparison
of leaders and managers, in which he described how
each relates to other people, the organizations in which
they work, and their goals. These differences are
explained in terms of how managers and leaders view
work, solitary activity, conflict, and the status quo.
He concludes that managers are generally viewed in
terms of the organization they represent and are influenced by others’ opinions. Leaders are more individualistic and really do not “belong” to organizations. He
does, however, agree that leaders can be managers,
and managers can be leaders.
Grossman and Valiga (2005, p. 7) summarized the differences between an “ideal” leader and an extremely
“organization-focused” manager in terms of the following: position, power base, goals/vision, innovative ideas,
risk level, degree of order, nature of activities, focus, perspective, degree of freedom, and actions.

and achieve maximum care quality. All need to
share their visions of how patient care can be
improved, and all need to learn from the leaders
who have gone before them.

Nursing Leaders
The nursing profession claims many true leaders.
They have expressed bold visions, invested enormous amounts of energy to realize those visions,
effectively engaged followers in the quest, been passionate about the futures they hoped to create, and
absorbed criticism, setbacks, and opposition on the
road to success.
Florence Nightingale, for example, demonstrated
how a healthful environment could promote healing and recovery, fought for the proper care of soldiers, and provided careful documentation of
interventions and outcomes that laid a foundation
for future research activities. Lillian Wald, who literally walked the rooftops of New York tenement
buildings to provide care to the poor and helpless,
created the concept of public health and demonstrated how nursing care could make a significant
difference in the lives and well-being of individuals

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

8

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 8

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

and communities. In nursing education, Isabel
Stewart was a leader in establishing standards of
quality for educational programs and instrumental
in creating a program of study to prepare individuals for the teaching or faculty role.
In more recent years, nursing leaders have
helped us establish ourselves as researchers, expert
clinicians, influencers of public policy, theorists,
and entrepreneurs. The development of nursing
theories occurred through the passionate work of
individuals such as Hildegard Peplau, Ida Jean
Orlando, Dorothea Orem, Betty Neumann, Jean
Watson, Imogene King, and Martha Rogers.
Madeleine Leininger has enhanced cultural awareness and competence of all nurses. The creation of
associate degree nursing programs was the result of
research conducted by Mildred Montag, and its
widespread implementation was realized through
her efforts and those of individuals like Verle
Waters and Elaine Tagliareni. The ability of nurses
to influence public policy evolved from the leadership provided by Shirley Chater, Jessie Scott, Doris
Block, Mary Wakefield, and Ada Sue Hinshaw.
Our profession has developed the science of
nursing practice through the efforts of such individuals as Mary Naylor, Donna Diers, Nancy
Fugate Woods, and Dorothy Brooten. The science
of nursing education has been advanced through
the sustained work of Nancy Diekelmann, Pamela
Ironside, Marilyn Oermann, and Chris Tanner.
In nursing administration, the following individuals have provided significant leadership in changing the work environment for nurses: Leah Curtin,
Barbara Donoho, and Joyce Clifford. Our nursing
organizations have been successful in charting preferred futures for our profession through the leadership of their officers, including Lucille Joel,
Nancy Langston, Sr. Rosemary Donnelly, and
Angela Barron McBride.
We know the names and accomplishments of
these talented nurses because each of them articulated a vision of a better future, was passionate
about working to realize that preferred future, was
successful in enlisting nurses in the effort, was willing to take risks, accepted criticism and suggestions,
spoke eloquently, exhibited enormous amounts of
energy, and was unwilling to accept the status quo
or settle for “second best.” In other words, each of
these individuals was a leader. None of them started
out as leaders, but their vision and passion helped

Practice Proof 1-1
May (2001) conducted a study of 508 women in the
Houston area to identify the skills and attributes those
women believed would be needed to succeed in
leadership positions in the 21st century. Data from the
263 women who responded to the questionnaire, 137 of
whom completed both the first and second rounds of the
study, yielded six skills (listed in order of importance to
the respondents) seen as the most important skills and
attributes of leaders: personal integrity, strategic
vision/action orientation, team building/communication
skills, management and technical competencies, people
skills, and personal survival skills (e.g., political sensitivity,
self-direction, courage).

QUESTIONS:

1. To what extent are the skills and attributes needed by
leaders in the 21st century that have been identified
by participants in May’s study consistent with those
needed by nurses?
2. For those who do not possess these six strengths or
need some assistance in improving their skills, how
could nurses develop and/or improve them?

them become leaders. This same opportunity awaits
each of us.
It we have a vision, if we are passionate about
realizing it, and if we invest a great deal of energy to
create our preferred future, then each one of us
might be included in a list of “nursing’s leaders” at
some point in the future. We do not need to be in
positions of authority right now. We do not need to
hold a doctorate. We do not need to be published
researchers with major grants. We do not need to be
over the age of 50 or teach in a university. What we
do need, however, is to exhibit the qualities of a
leader.

Leadership Qualities
Gardner (1990) identified several attributes of
leaders, including physical vitality and stamina,
intelligence, good judgment, willingness to accept
responsibilities, task competence (i.e., knowing
what needs to be done), understanding of followers’
needs, ability to work effectively with others, a need
to achieve, ability to motivate others, and courage.

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 9

Leadership and Followership

COMPETENCIES
In a presentation at the April 2004 American
Society of Association Executives Foundation
Forum, one of the most influential individuals in
the area of leadership, Warren Bennis, offered his
ideas about exemplary leaders. He asserted that
leaders have the following six competencies:
1. Leaders must foster a clear vision with

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

an endowed purpose that is owned by the
people involved with the leader. To illustrate this competency, Bennis gave the following example of how Howard Schultz, founder
of the Starbucks Coffee conglomeration,
views his company’s vision: “We aren’t in the
coffee business serving people; we’re in the
people business serving coffee.”
Getting people to support a vision or mission
takes work. Leaders must “keep reminding
people of what is important [because]
people really can forget what they are
there for.” Followers also need regular recognition in order to maintain their engagement
with and commitment to the vision.
Leaders must be optimistic and see possibilities. Leaders must be adaptive to the constant change in our society, which “takes a
hardiness attitude that allows [them] to face
challenges and adapt all of it in a way that
results in alignment.”
Leaders must create a culture of candor.
Bennis asserted that such a culture requires
integrity, which evolves from a balance of
ambition, competence, and having “a moral
compass.” When ambition surpasses competence or overrides one’s moral compass, for
example, integrity is lost, a culture of candor
cannot be created, and one cannot be an effective leader.
Leaders must mentor others and
acknowledge their ideas and accomplishments. Bennis said, “Drawing out the leadership qualities [of others] is the way of the true
leader.”
Good leaders must be in tune to getting
results. Bennis shared a conversation he
had with Jack Welch, previous CEO of
General Electric. This highly successful corporate manager and leader noted that “getting

9

results depends on customer satisfaction,
employee satisfaction, and cash flow. If I have
those three measurements, I can win.” Thus,
vision, good intentions, and strong desires are
not enough; leaders are leaders because they
make things happen.

GENDER DIFFERENCES
Today there are more women than ever before who
are effective leaders, and it is expected that the
number of women leaders, particularly those from
minority groups, will continue to increase (Bennis,
Spreitzer, & Cummings, 2003). There are more
women governors, senators, and representatives.
There are more women leaders in sports, science,
business, education, and many other fields than
ever before. In nursing, women have always led the
profession toward change and development.
It is reported that women have different styles
than men in many things, and because of these differences, it is assumed that women are better at some
things (e.g., child-rearing, nursing) and men are better at others (e.g., sales, construction work). But
when it comes to leadership, the styles of men and
women allow both to be successful, particularly if
stereotypical maleness is combined with stereotypical femaleness. A more androgynous perspective on
leadership—one that combines the best of “femaleness” and the best of “maleness” and draws on the
strengths of each style—therefore, is most helpful.
The androgynous leader “blends dominance,
assertiveness and competitiveness [often thought to
be “male” characteristics] . . . with concern for relationships, cooperativeness, and humanitarian values
[often associated with a “female” style]” (Grossman
& Valiga, 2005, p. 112). Such a combination is critical in a world characterized by declining resources
and increasing chaos and uncertainty.

GAINING POWER
McClelland and Burnham (1976) determined that
power is a definitive aspect of leadership because it
motivates individuals and contributes to their
charisma. The concept of power is discussed more
fully in Chapter 13 so it will not be examined in
depth here. But it is important to look at power as a
component of leadership.

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

10

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 10

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

The two primary sources of power are one’s
position in an organization and one’s personal qualities. McClelland and Burnham (1976) asserted that
hierarchical power, or the amount of authority one
has in an organization, and the ability to provide
rewards or “punishments” to others are used to
attain organizational goals. They also noted that
personal power, deriving from one’s knowledge,
competence, and trustworthiness, or from followers’ respect for and desire to be associated with the
leader, is used to influence others.
It is only when one’s personal power is well
established that one can exert transformational
leadership. Transformational leaders with highly
developed power are comfortable with themselves,
have high self-efficacy, and empower followers to
attain their own goals and, ultimately, the goals of
the group or organization. We are well aware of the
many disadvantages of people abusing their power,
but when power is used in the service of others,
positive results are realized. Greenleaf (1977) and
Block (1993) used the term stewardship to describe
the phenomenon of directing one’s power toward
the service of others, and they asserted that such
a quality is essential in leaders. Stewardship is
“the willingness to be accountable for the wellbeing of the larger organization by operating in
service, rather than in control, of those around us”
(Block, 1993).
Similar notions of building relationships through
nurturing and empowerment, gaining power
through community networking, and leading
groups based on values of cooperation were offered
by Chinn (2004). Chinn advocated for building
one’s personal power base so that it can be used
to enhance the group’s ability to achieve its goals
and realize its vision, thereby using it to fulfill
the leader role.

such individuals, and receive constructive feedback
on their performance. Having a “shadowing,” or
preceptor, experience with a leader, for example,
allows nursing students to understand the context
of an organization, develop their negotiation skills,
think more broadly, communicate more effectively,
collaborate more effectively, and be empowered
(Grossman, 2005). Personal involvement, immersion in a situation, learning by doing, and practicing
in the clinical setting with an experienced nurse
have been cited as important to learning generally.
They are also strategies to be used to help individuals learn how to be leaders.
Bennis and Thomas (2002) reinforced the
notion that in order to become an effective leader
an individual must be able to define her uniqueness
or what makes her special. She must then continually grow and increase her expertise in that unique
area so that she can be a leader who influences policy development, evidence-based practice, and dissemination of new understandings.
Many health-care organizations have leadership
programs for their managers and those aspiring to
become managers. Leadership skills can also be
learned as part of the professional development of
all nurses. Many professional organizations have
leadership institutes and seminars at their annual
conferences. When the nursing profession realizes
that nurses need leadership skills as much as
patient care and management skills and that every
nurse, from the entry-level staff nurse to the chief
executive nurse, needs to become an effective
leader, we can expect that patient care outcomes
will be enhanced and that nursing will most effectively influence health care.

All Good Things ...

BECOMING A NURSE LEADER
Nurses need to view themselves as leaders, develop
their leadership abilities, and embrace the challenges that face them in health care today
(Grossman & Valiga, 2005). In order to become
leaders, however, nurses must learn about leadership in their academic programs (Fagin, 2000),
through on-the-job experiences, through mentors,
or through other avenues. In order to develop their
leadership skills, it is imperative for nurses to
observe expert leaders, work hand-in-hand with

The mantle of leadership does not fall to only a few.
Indeed, all nurses must think of themselves as a
leader, act as a leader, and take on the challenges of
a leadership role. All leaders are not managers or
organizational office holders; many of them are
staff nurses, faculty, and individuals on the “front
lines” of patient care. By the same token, all managers are not leaders. Nurses also need to be effective followers, knowing who to follow, when to
follow, and how to follow. It is only through the
exercise of leadership and effective followership

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 11

Leadership and Followership

that nurses will be able to influence health care and
create a preferred future for the profession.
Those of us who are leaders in the field must
guide, support, and encourage those who aspire to
this role. Those who aspire to genuine leadership
must learn about this role, take the risks associated
with expressing and moving forward to achieve a
vision, and allow passions to drive actions. The
patients, families, and communities we serve
deserve nothing less.

Let’s Talk
1. How can one be a leader as a staff nurse?
2. Suppose you are often dissatisfied with the way
things are done in your institution but are afraid
to speak up or propose alternative ways of doing
things. Does this mean you can never be a leader
in nursing?
3. It seems that leaders and effective followers may
be more alike than leaders and managers. Is
that so?

NCLEX Questions
1. Great Man leadership theory assumes that:
A. All leaders are great men.
B. Leadership is determined by genetic and
social inheritance.
C. Leaders are from the working class
D. A and B.
2. Situational and Contingency theory:
A. Embodies the idea that the leader does the
right thing based on the situation.
B. Involves assessing the nature of the task and
the follower’s motivation to determine the
particular style the leader should use.
C. Involves assessing contingent courses of
action.
D. Is based on the concept that leader characteristics must fit the situation.
3. Transformational leadership theory:
A. Was developed in the mid-1970s by Warren
Bennis.
B. Is the ability to transform followers to
become more self-directed in all they do.

11

C. Involves leaders who look for potential
motive in followers, seek to satisfy higher
needs, and engage the full person of the follower.
D. B and C.
4. New Science leadership:
A. Thinks of leadership through a new perspective of naturally occurring events.
B. Is based on ethics, biology, and chemistry.
C. Involves leading based on the situation.
D. Involves a laissez-faire leadership style.
5. Kouzes and Posner (1995) asserted that leaders
use the following practice(s) of leadership:
A. Challenging the status quo.
B. Inspiring a shared vision.
C. Enabling others to act rather than to react.
D. All of the above.
6. Gardner (1990) identified the following tasks
that leaders perform:
A. Representing the group by speaking on its
behalf.
B. serving as a symbol by acting in ways that
convey the values of the group and its goals.
C. Motivating and promoting positive attitudes.
D. All of the above.
7. Kelley (1992, 1998) outlined types of followers
as:
A. Sheep, or “yes,” people.
B. Alienated followers.
C. Effective, or exemplary, followers.
D. All of the above.
8. Pittman, Rosenbach, and Potter (1998)
described types of followers as:
A. Subordinates who do what they are told but
who are not actively involved.
B. Contributors who are supportive, involved,
and doing a good job but who are not willing
to challenge the ideas of the leaders.
C. Politicians willing to give honest feedback
and support the leader.
D. All of the above.
9. Gardner identified several attributes of leaders
as:
A. Including physical vitality and stamina.
B. Intelligence and good judgment.
C. Understanding followers’ needs.
D. All of the above.

01Jones Leadership(F)-ch 01

12

1/14/07

3:30 PM

Page 12

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

10. Warren Bennis asserted that leaders have the
following competencies:
A. Foster a clear vision with an endowed purpose that is owned by the people involved
with the leader.
B. Must keep reminding people of what is
important because people really can forget
what they are there for.
C. Must mentor others and acknowledge their
ideas and accomplishments.
D. All of the above.
REFERENCES
Barker, A. (1990). Transformational nursing leadership: A
vision for the future. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Bennis, W. (2004). Highlights of “A leadership discussion with
Warren Bennis.” American Society of Association Executives
Forum, www.asaenet.org/foundation
Bennis, W., & Nanus, B. (1985). Leaders: The strategies for taking
charge. New York: Harper & Row.
Bennis, W., Spreitzer, G., & Cummings, T. (Eds.). (2003). The
future of leadership: Today’s top leadership thinkers speak to
tomorrow’s leaders. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bennis, W., & Thomas, R. (2002). Geeks and geezers: How era,
values, and defining moments shape leaders. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Block, P. (1993). Stewardship: Choosing service over self-interest.
San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Burns, J. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harpers.
Burns, J. (2003). Transforming leadership: A new pursuit of
happiness. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
Chaleff, I. (1995). The courageous follower: Standing up to and for
our leaders. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Chinn, P. (2004). Peace and poser: Creative leadership for building
community (6th ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett
Publishers.
Fagin, C. (2000). Preparing students for leadership. In C. Fagin

(Ed.), Essays on nursing leadership. New York: Springer
Publishing.
Gardner, J. (1990). On leadership. New York: Free Press.
Greenleaf, R.K. (1977). Servant leadership: A journey into the
nature of legitimate power and greatness. New York: Paulist
Press.
Grossman, S. (2005). Developing leadership through shadowing
a leader in health care. In H. Feldman & M. Greenburg (Eds.),
Educating for leadership (pp. 266–278). New York: Springer
Publishing.
Grossman, S., & Valiga, T.M. (2005). The new leadership challenge: Creating the future of nursing (2nd ed.). Philadelphia:
F.A. Davis.
Kelley, R. (1992). The power of followership: How to create leaders
people want to follow and followers who lead themselves. New
York: Doubleday Currency.
Kelley, R. (1998). In praise of followers. In W.E. Rosenbach &
R.L. Taylor (Eds.), Contemporary issues in leadership (4th ed.,
pp. 96–106). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Kouzes, J., & Posner, B. (1995). The leadership challenge: How to
keep getting extraordinary things done in organizations (2nd
ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
May, L.K. (2001). Leadership skills and attributes for Houston
women in the 21st century. Bellaire, TX: Greater Houston
Women’s Foundation.
McClelland, D., & Burnham, D. (1976). Power is the great motivator. Harvard Business Review, 54(2), 100–110.
Pittman, T.S., Rosenbach, W.E., & Potter, E.H., III. (1998).
Followers as partners: Taking the initiative for action. In
W.E. Rosenbach & R.L. Taylor (Eds.), Contemporary issues in
leadership (4th ed., pp. 107–120). Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Sashkin, M., & Sashkin, M. (2003). Leadership that matters: The
critical factors for making a difference in people’s lives and organizations’ success. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Wheatley, M. (1999). Leadership and new science: Discovering
order in a chaotic world (2nd ed.). San Francisco: BerrettKoehler Publishers.
Zaleznik, A. (1977). Managers and leaders: Are they different?
Harvard Business Review, 55(3), 67–78.

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 13

chapter
2
Management Theory
DEBORAH R. GARRISON, PHD, RN
DEBRA A. MORGAN, EDD, RN
JEWETT G. JOHNSON, MSN, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“The ﬁrst and paramount responsibility of anyone who purports to manage
is to manage self: one’s own integrity, character, ethics, knowledge,
wisdom, temperament, words, and acts. It is a complex, unending,
and incredibly difficult, oft-shunned task.”
Dee Hock, 2000, in The Art of Chaordic Leadership

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■

■

■
■

Discuss the evolution of management theories and their
relevance to nursing.
Use selected management theories to develop strategies for
managing challenges inherent in the charge nurse, clinical
manager, and other leadership roles.
Compare the strategies for managing nursing units from the
perspectives of scientific management and chaos theory,
noting the different approaches that would be used.
Describe the roles assumed by nurse leaders.
Practice decision making, communicating, negotiating, and
delegating through the learning activities suggested in the
chapter and its supplementary materials.

13

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

14

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 14

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

N

urses manage care for individual clients, families, and communities in hospitals, outpatient settings, clinics, health departments, home health
agencies, long-term care facilities, and rehabilitation centers as well as in other specialized healthcare organizations. The strategies they use to
organize care are drawn from leadership and management theories. The approaches to leadership
and management reﬂect the dynamic state of
health-care delivery as nurse managers and leaders
strive to empower nurses to provide care that produces optimal outcomes. Management and leadership have evolved and continue to evolve from a
hierarchical structure based in early management
theory to a more ﬂattened and inclusive approach
that incorporates concepts from the physical and
social sciences. In the early 1900s, these theories
drew from newtonian science that viewed the
world from a mechanistic, functional point of view.
From the late 1980s until the present, the scientiﬁc
view has shifted to include chaos theory and
complexity science. Complexity science is based
upon discoveries in physics and biology that emphasize emergent relationships and recognize the
self-organization inherent in complex, adaptive systems. Management theorists have been incorporating these concepts into new approaches to the
complex world of business and health care. This
chapter provides a chronology of this evolution and
presents a foundation for nurse leaders in the 21st
century.
Managers have traditionally been responsible for
the control of resources required to accomplish
organizational goals. These responsibilities include
budgeting, staffing, and maintaining the functions
of the organization while simultaneously balancing
ﬁduciary responsibility for the resources of the
organization. Rowland and Rowland (1997) deﬁne
management as a ﬁve-step process:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Planning
Organizing
Directing
Coordinating
Controlling

The manager is employed by an organization and
given the responsibility to accomplish speciﬁed
goals for the organization. Managers are expected to
teach workers the best way to perform the job;
match the employee to the job; provide motivational

incentives to workers; see that time, energy, and
materials are used efficiently, and ensure that the
organization fulﬁlls its objectives. At the same time,
managers seek to enhance efficiency, develop
resources required to reach the goals of the organization’s strategic plan, and manage across boundaries in the organization (Huber, 2000).
Nursing management roles in the hospital vary,
and the work to be accomplished depends on the
span of authority inherent in a particular position.
Nurses occupy such positions as chief nursing
officer, vice president for patient care, and director
of nursing, and are sought to serve on the executive
councils of hospitals, public health organizations,
and other places that deliver or impact patient care.
In many cases they are responsible not only for
the nursing units in the organization but also for
those areas that support patient care, such as pharmacy, respiratory care, physical therapy, cardiac
rehabilitation, and other such departments. The
span of control for nurses in these roles is broad,
encompassing supervision of other nurse managers
who focus on delivery of care within patient units
as well as of managers in other disciplines who
direct the delivery of care in ancillary departments
important to overall patient care. Collaboration
with other professionals on the patient care delivery team is an important part of these management roles.
Newly graduated staff nurses assume responsibility for leading a team of direct care providers
and, therefore, need to know how to manage a
patient care team effectively. This team often
includes nursing assistants, patient care technicians, licensed vocational/practical nurses, and
other registered nurses. In this role of team leader,
the nurse is responsible for identifying outcomes
that must be reached by the end of the shift and
assigning work that is appropriate to the preparation, scope of practice, and expertise of those on the
patient care team. Within a few months of graduation, new nurses are likely to ﬁnd themselves in the
role of charge nurse, in which they must employ
management skills to ensure delivery of care to an
entire patient unit. All nurses, with few exceptions,
will ﬁnd themselves in positions in which accomplishment of their functions requires coordinated
effort of a team that they must lead.
Nursing students often conceptualize management roles as those of clinical manager, head
nurse, director of nurses, or chief nursing officer

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 15

Management Theory

and do not envision themselves in such positions of
leadership. Although it is true that students do not
immediately occupy these roles, the roles newly
graduating nurses will assume do require knowledge
and application of management and leadership
strategies. Therefore, students should examine management principles very carefully, learn how to use
them effectively, and implement them upon graduation and entry into practice. This chapter presents
the evolution of management theories, their application to nursing practice, and the roles that nurse
managers assume in managing time, money, and
people to accomplish the mission and goals of the
organization.

■

■
■

■

■

■

■

■
■

Management and
Leadership Revisited
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, a debate
began regarding whether management or leadership was the better approach to accomplishing the
goals of an organization. In reality, management
and leadership are two sides of the same coin.
There is no doubt that management is an important
function of any leadership position; both are
required for the organization to function effectively.
There is a lack of consensus about whether management is a subset of leadership or whether leadership is a subset of management. Often, leadership
is conceptualized as the broader of the two concepts, with managing including such tasks as controlling resources, budgeting, and staffing. It is
apparent that nurses in leadership positions are
responsible for such activities, but their most
important role involves the development of mission
and goals for their areas of responsibility that support those of the organization. Development of mission and goals is necessarily a collaborative effort,
and the leader must engender support for their
development. Once developed, the leader must cast
the vision in such a way that it garners support
from the staff. Effective leadership calls to mind
the notion of a manager with vision, who uses
power in positive ways, challenges others to join
with the team to accomplish the vision or mission,
and creates a synergistic environment.
In his book On Becoming a Leader, Warren
Bennis contrasts the concepts of management and
leadership in this way:

■

■

15

The manager administers; the leader innovates.
The manager maintains; the leader develops.
The manager focuses on systems and structure; the leader focuses on people.
The manager relies on control; the leader
inspires trust.
The manager has a short-range view; the
leader has a long-range perspective.
The manager asks how and when; the leader
asks what and why.
The manager has his eye on the bottom line;
the leader has his eye on the horizon.
The manager imitates; the leader originates.
The manager accepts the status quo; the leader
challenges it.
The manager is the classic good soldier; the
leader is his own person.
The manager does things right; the leader does
the right thing (Bennis, 1994, p. 45).

Whereas Bennis sees leadership and management as two distinct concepts, with leadership being
the more desirable, it is our belief that both management and leadership are essential to organizational
life and growth and frequently reside within the
same individual. The juxtaposition of the manager
as being “bottom line–oriented” with the leader as
“vision oriented” can and must occur simultaneously to keep the organization healthy. For example,
one cannot ignore the budget and the available
resources in favor of developing new strategies for
meeting organizational needs. Both are necessary.
The principles required to achieve the goals
of organizations are continuing to evolve as our
society and our knowledge of the principles of our
universe expand. Table 2-1 examines Bennis’ juxtaposed ideas to see how they could be combined in
light of knowledge in the 21st century.
The current state of health-care delivery in
the United States clearly calls for innovation and
the development of original solutions that challenge the status quo. Complexity theory, which will
be discussed later in the chapter, recognizes that
small changes “nudge” organizations in the right
direction. As this transformation of the healthcare delivery system takes place, it remains
vitally important that nurse leaders manage
resources to foster the adaptation that must occur to
sustain the current systems that support patient
care.

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

16

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 16

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

TABLE 2-1

Management and Leadership: 21st-Century View

The manager administers; the
leader innovates.

All participants in the organization can be innovators who contribute to
meeting the goals of the organization.

The manager maintains; the
leader develops.

At the same time that new developments are occurring, there are existing
processes that must be maintained. Effective leaders and managers are
involved in both.

The manager focuses on systems and
structure; the leader focuses on people.

People are a part of systems, and they must be considered together.

The manager relies on control; the leader
inspires trust.

These must coexist within an organization; for example, expenses must be
controlled to allow for financial solvency, but there must be trust that the
funding will be present for required expenses.

The manager has a short-range view;
the leader has a long-range perspective.

Managing an organization is similar to driving a car: one must be cognizant
of other cars with which a collision could occur while making sure one’s car
is on the right road to reach the desired destination. To be effective leaders,
managers must possess both long- and short-term perspectives.

The manager asks how and when;
the leader asks what and why.

When the “what” and “why” have been determined, then the “how” and
“when” become imperative to accomplishing the vision.

The manager has his eye on the bottom
line; the leader has his eye on the horizon.

If one keeps one’s eye only on the horizon, then the bottom line may go
into negative numbers.

The manager accepts the status quo; the
leader challenges it.

Chaos theory suggests that equilibrium, much the same as the status quo,
is a stage preceding the demise of the organism. Living means that things
are changing continuously. To manage effectively, managers must be open
to change.

The manager is the classic good soldier;
the leader is his own person.

Members of an organization at all levels need to seek authenticity.

The manager does things right; the
leader does the right thing.

It is important not only to do the right things but to do them in the right
way once a course of action is determined.

To get a better sense of the essence of leadership
and management and their interaction with one
another, knowledge of management theory is essential. Understanding current management thought
requires an appreciation for the development of
management theory across the time span of the late
18th, 19th, 20th, and early 21st centuries. The next
section will paint a broad picture of the evolution of
management theory.
Drucker (2001) makes the following comment
about leadership in the 21st century: “One does not
‘manage’ people. The task is to lead people. The goal
is to make productive the speciﬁc strengths and
knowledge of each individual” (p. 81). He believes
that this perspective is necessary to creating a climate that supports the productivity of the “knowledge worker.” Rather than being subordinates,
knowledge workers are associates; for the organiza-

tion to work effectively, the knowledge workers
must actually know more about their own jobs
than their boss knows. The desired relationship is
more like that between an orchestra conductor and
the musicians than the traditional concept of the
“superior-subordinate” dyad. In his book The
Essential Drucker (Drucker, 2001), Drucker contrasts this current opinion of management with that
in his 1954 book The Practice of Management. The
assumption he held at that time was, “There is one
right way to manage people—or at least there
should be” (p. 77), which he now believes is at odds
with reality and productivity. How is it possible that
one of the most respected management theorists
changed his view so drastically? This question is
best answered by examining from a historical perspective the changes that have occurred in management theory.

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 17

Management Theory

TRADITIONAL MANAGEMENT METHODS
Prior to the mid-19th century, in preindustrial
times, skilled artisans or craftsmen oversaw their
trades. They accepted apprentices to work with
them and taught them the skills of the trade. The
master craftsmen made decisions about how and
when to initiate and complete work. The master
was in charge of the work, which typically was conducted in what became known as “cottage industries,” in which only a few people worked together
to create goods. Once the industrial age arrived in
the mid-1800s, this worldview of work began to
change (Nixon, 2003). Three genres of traditional
management theory have evolved: scientiﬁc management, general administrative management, and
bureaucratic management.

The Scientific Management Movement
Frederick Winslow Taylor (1856–1915) is known
as the father of scientiﬁc management. He detailed
his principles on increasing the productivity of
workers in the Midvale Steel Works plant in
Pennsylvania (Taylor, 1911). His principles included
the ideas that:
1. a worker’s job could be measured with scien-

tiﬁc accuracy;
2. workers’ characteristics could be selected
scientiﬁcally and could be developed to investigate the causes of and solutions to work
problems;
3. productivity would be improved through scientiﬁc selection of and progressive development of the worker; and
4. there should be continuing cooperation of
management and workers (Inman, 2000).
The Industrial Revolution gave rise to large factories and created the need to organize the efforts of
the supervisors and workers in the factories.
Management theory developed to organize and
teach work process in a scientiﬁc manner, fulﬁlling
the all-important desire for proﬁt (Taylor, 1911).
Taylor’s scientiﬁc management principles were
based on managing time, materials, and work specialization. For example, he developed the concept
of the time and motion study, with the idea that
wasted time and effort could and should be eliminated. He analyzed workﬂow and created an inventory of stored materials. By controlling these

17

variables, he was able to decrease production costs
and increase productivity. These strategies are
highly effective for managing task-oriented work.
In the early 1980s, hospital facilities sought to use
time and motion studies to determine patient:nurse
ratios and staffing needs. Nurses and other healthcare workers were shadowed by analysts who tried
to determine the amount of time required to provide
patient care. However, the application to a profession such as nursing failed to capture the critical
thinking, decision making, and judgment required
for patient care.
Taylor believed that organizational function was
optimal when the roles of individuals were designed
to be highly specialized, thereby taking advantage of
a particular skill set that existed within a worker.
To achieve this level of specialization, he implemented the concept of functional foremanship, in
which each worker would fall under a foreman
responsible for each area of specialization. This
emphasis on specialization was an early impetus for
the development of specialty certiﬁcation in nursing and was really an extension of the master
apprentice paradigm.

General Administrative Theory
Henri Fayol (1841–1925) was a Frenchman who
is remembered for the development of general
administrative theory. He developed his management strategies in the mining industry and was
writing at about the same time as Taylor.
Management, according to Fayol’s work, includes
ﬁve overriding concepts: (1) prevoyance, or the
anticipation of the future and the development of
a plan of action to deal with it; (2) organization
of people and materials; (3) command of the activity among personnel; (4) coordination of the parts
of the organization into a uniﬁed whole; and (5)
control through application of rules and procedures. In order for an organization to be productive, leaders must participate actively in all ﬁve
of these areas.
Fayol is remembered for his 14 principles of
management, which he felt supported the accomplishment of the overriding concepts. Although he
did not specify which of the principles he believed
to be directly related to each of the concepts, we
have developed a table to illustrate how these principles help accomplish each of the required concepts. See Table 2-2 (Inman, 2000).

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

18

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 18

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

TABLE 2-2

The Relationship Between Fayol’s Concepts and Principles of Management

CONCEPT

PRINCIPLE

RATIONALE

Prevoyance

Subordination of the
individual interest to
the corporate good
Esprit de corps

The goals of the organization are of paramount importance and
take precedence over the individual’s particular needs.

Initiative
Organization of
people and materials

Division of work
Order

Command of activity
among personnel

Coordination of parts
into a unified whole

Control through rules
and procedures

Development of high morale is important, and it is the responsibility
of the manager at the top to have a vision and to communicate it
to the employees in a way that motivates them to achieve it.
Employees should be able to develop and implement plans on their
own.
Division of work was emphasized to increase workers’ efficiency
levels.
Both employees and materials need to be at the right place at the
right time.

Unity of command

Fayol advocated having only one manager, with no conflicting line
of command.

Unity of direction

There must be one agreed-upon plan both up and down the
hierarchy.

Centralization/
decentralization
Stability of tenure
of personnel

This decision should be made based on organizational needs.

Authority

Authority gives the “right” to issue commands and includes
responsibility for the consequences.
Employees must obey and respect the rules that govern the
organization. Good discipline involves the judicious use of penalties
for breaking the rules.
The line of authority is drawn from highest management to lowest
ranks, and communication moves up and down this line.
Money is an important motivator, and a fair wage is to be paid for
work performed.
Justice and understanding are important to developing a fair and
equitable system.

Discipline
Scalar chain
Remuneration
Equity

The more stable the personnel and the managerial structures, the
more successful the business.

These principles introduced some ideas that continue to be used. For example, in the 21st century,
hospital personnel departments continue to have a
pay scale that strives to provide fair remuneration
based on educational preparation and years of experience. Every organization strives to retain its staff
because of the cost of recruiting, training, and orienting new employees. The development of “esprit
de corps,” or team spirit, continues to be important
in today’s workplace. Teamwork remains essential
to providing optimal patient care, and high morale
is conducive to the levels of collaboration and teamwork that are required in the complex health-care

environment. Patient care is delivered by a collaborative team of knowledge workers including nurses,
physicians, and therapists from a variety of disciplines, all of whom are necessary to the outcome of
optimal patient care.

Bureaucratic Management
Max Weber (1846–1920) was a German sociologist
who developed what was known as the “ideal
bureaucracy.” The ideal bureaucracy includes the
concepts of division of labor, authority hierarchy,
formal selection, formal rules and regulations,

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 19

Management Theory

impersonality, and career orientation. He recognized that it would be impossible for people to be
completely impersonal in their relationships at
work, but he believed that impersonality would be
optimal and would remove favoritism. Weber
believed that the more impersonal, rational, and
regulated the work environment, the more likely
the employees were to be treated fairly, and the
more likely the organization was to reach its objectives. Weber focused on what it was that made people respond to authority. He perceived that only
through concentrating power in the hands of a few
people in a hierarchical structure could an organization be managed effectively and efficiently. While
he did not necessarily agree that bureaucracy was
the best strategy, because it removed autonomy
from the individual, he believed it was the only way
to assure the overall success of an organization
(Inman, 2000).
During the early 20th century when Taylor,
Fayol, and Weber developed these approaches to
management, the worldview was still based upon
17th-century science science. Classical physics had
been established as Newton synthesized the work
of Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler. Newton’s laws
of motion and universal gravitation, along with the
development of calculus to compute planetary
orbits, set the stage for a framework of cause and
effect and a reliance on prediction through formulae (Whittemore, 1999). It was from this perspective that the early management theorists developed
their management strategies for the Industrial Age.
The emphasis of management was to master the
world of work through controls designed using the
principles of classical physics and science as they
were understood at that time.
Within health-care organizations today, one sees
the continuing inﬂuence of traditional management
theory in, for example, job descriptions that outline
the responsibilities of each person, thereby dividing
the labor, and in organization charts that depict the
hierarchical structure and the areas of authority for
particular positions. Job descriptions emphasize the
functions to be associated with each job, and one of
the functions of the manager is to avoid overlap
between positions and to delineate clearly the functions expected. These methods are helpful in that
job descriptions let workers know the expectations
and responsibilities associated with the positions
they occupy. However, it is also true that work
would not get done if the only functions carried out

19

each day were limited to those outlined on the job
description. The work to be accomplished is too
complex to be listed in a document of any reasonable length. In addition, the complexity of the
health-care environment is such that people need
to be treated as knowledge workers and allowed to
have both the responsibility and the authority
to make decisions about operational issues.
In general, traditional management styles have
their advantages and disadvantages. The prime
advantage is that they enhance the organization and
efficiency of industry. The disadvantages of traditional management include rigid rules, top-down
decision making, and authoritarianism. In other
words, traditional management theory created an
environment that was less optimal from a humanistic perspective. Thus, at the end of the 1920s, the
stage was set for the era of behavioral management.
The pendulum would swing from an emphasis on
the structure and organization of management to a
focus on the people who work in the organization.

THE BEHAVIORAL
MANAGEMENT MOVEMENT
The recognized beginning of the behavioral movement was a much cited study that lent its name to
the Hawthorne Effect. Elton Mayo (1887–1957),
a clinical psychologist working at the Harvard
Business School, conducted studies at the
Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric Company
from 1927 to 1932. Mayo designed a study in which
light levels in the workplace were ﬁrst increased,
during which time worker productivity increased.
Subsequently, he lowered the light levels, and yet
worker productivity continued to improve. His conclusion was that the environmental changes were
not responsible for the increasing level of productivity but rather the fact that the workers received
attention from the experimenters, which increased
levels of self-esteem and group pride, which led to
increased production. It was from this study that
Mayo concluded that management must be concerned with preserving the dignity of the workers,
demonstrating appreciation for their accomplishments and, in general, recognizing workers as social
beings with social needs (Mayo, 1953). This has
great implications for research because it is always
possible that results may be altered by the very acts
of observation and increased attention. This threat
to validity has become known as the Hawthorne

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

20

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 20

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

Effect, after the name of the company where Mayo
conducted his research.
Another well-known behavioral theorist, Douglas McGregor (1960), developed Theory X and
Theory Y. Theory X represented the traditional
viewpoints of management, which hold managers
responsible for organizing money, materials, equipment, and people as well as for directing workers’
efforts and motivating workers, controlling their
actions, and modifying their behavior to ﬁt the
needs of the organization. Theory X suggests that,
without active intervention by management, workers would be passive and nonproductive in their
roles in the organization. Theory Y assumes that
the desire to work is just as natural as the desire to
play or rest, that external control and threat or punishment are not required to achieve organizational
objectives because workers are self-motivated, and
that the capacity to work creatively to solve problems is widely distributed in the workforce.
McGregor believed that these were the two major
managerial attitudes about employees and that
these approaches directly affect how the employee
responds to managerial leadership (Marquis &
Huston, 2006).

THEORY Z: JAPANESE
MANAGEMENT STYLE
In 1981 William G. Ouchi wrote a book on Japanese
management style, entitled Theory Z. In this book
he discussed the management methodologies used
by Japanese corporations. This approach to management relied on principles that were diametrically
opposed to those used in businesses in the West,
including America, England, and Europe. Employment in the Japanese corporation is described as
being lifelong, dependent upon the development of
consensus, collaborative work, incentives for group
work, and pride in the product or service being
developed or provided.
See Table 2-3 for a comparison of the principles
of the Japanese management style with Western
management style.
Henry Mintzberg (1999) chairs an international
Masters of Practicing Management program in
which Japanese professors teach a module entitled
Managing People: The Collaborative Mind-Set. The
module emphasizes gaining contributions from all
the people in the organization and on reaching consensus. Ouchi (1981) says that there are three com-

TABLE 2-3

Comparison of Japanese and
Western Management Styles

JAPANESE
MANAGEMENT

WESTERN
MANAGEMENT

Lifetime employment

Short-term employment

Slow evaluation
and promotion

Rapid evaluation and
promotion

Nonhierarchical

Hierarchical

Nonspecialized
career paths

Specialized career paths

Implicit control
mechanisms

Explicit control mechanisms

Collective decision
making

Individual decision making

Collective responsibility

Individual responsibility

Holistic concern for
employees

Segmented concern

Ouchi, 1981, pp. 48–49.

ponents to a valid consensus: (1) I believe that you
have heard and understand me, (2) I have heard and
understand your point of view, and (3) I can support the decision we have made together.
In Japan, the word kaizen refers to the principle
of encouraging all people in the organization to contribute improvement ideas on a biweekly basis
(Bodeck, 2002). This results in 24 improvement
ideas per employee each year, compared with one
idea per employee per year in the United States and
one idea per 6 years, on average, in the United
Kingdom. Organizational growth has been shown
to be directly related to innovation. The more leadership encourages participation and ownership
among the employees, the more productive the
organization becomes. Ouchi (1981) discusses the
importance of encouraging group contributions. In
Japan, individuals rarely desire personal recognition because they believe that nothing is possible
without everyone’s contributions. Although in
the United States the predominant values focus
on individual accomplishments, it is increasingly
recognized that shared governance, which recognizes the importance of contributions from every
employee, is the desired model. The American

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 21

Management Theory

21

chapter star
Curricular Changes and Chaos Theory
Faculty members are increasingly embracing chaos theory
as the framework within which decisions are made. The
faculty at one nursing school adopted the shared
governance model as the modus operandi. That
organization has moved over the past 5 years from a quasiparticipative model to a true shared governance approach.
As this change occurred, faculty became more inclusive of
divergent viewpoints among faculty members, more
accepting of student input, and more comfortable with the
faculty role.
This faculty “owns” the curriculum. Over the past 3 years
and probably before that time, faculty began to work with
the notion that changes needed to occur within the second
senior semester of the curriculum. “Nudges” came from
faculty members who were concerned with the amount of
time devoted to and the character of the management
clinical experiences. At that time, the course was a sevensemester credit course encompassing 4 lecture and 9
clinical hours each week. Nudges also came from students
who expressed the same concerns as the faculty when
offered the opportunity to voice experiences during exit
interviews. The clinical decision-making course, which was
at that time a three-semester credit hour lecture-only
course, was intended to be the critical thinking culminating
capstone experience in the last semester. Faculty members
were concerned that there was not a clinical component
associated with the course and that there was no medical-

Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) has emphasized the importance of shared governance through
its Magnet Hospital program. This type of management is becoming more acceptable for the knowledge worker in the nursing profession in the United
States.

21ST-CENTURY MANAGEMENT THOUGHT
Management theory in the ﬁrst decade of the 21st
century is inﬂuenced by a new worldview, which
has, once again, had its roots in the physical
sciences. Managers are beginning to recognize that
the direct cause and effect relationships, to which
they held in the past, frequently do not exist in
reality. Additionally, management theories are
being promulgated in more complex systems and
in professional systems, in contrast to the earlier

surgical clinical component during the last semester of
study. Additionally, this factor was thought to influence
NCLEX-RN first-time pass rates. These nudges found voice
through faculty discussion occurring in various venues,
some of which occurred in the copy room, over lunch, and
in nursing faculty organization meetings. Faculty involved in
the courses issued a proposal to transfer 2 semester credit
hours (6 clinical clock hours) from the management course
to the clinical decision-making course. The proposal was
brought to the faculty as a whole for formal approval
through the Undergraduate Curriculum Committee, where
it found unanimous approval. The process by which this
change occurred was characteristic of chaos theory in that
all the members of the communities of interest had been
involved in discussions. The change emanated from
multiple sources and was guided by the mission and goals
of the school of nursing, which serves as the attractor to
keep the organization focused on a “student-centered,
collegial environment.” It is important to note that this
school has long relied on the principles of shared
governance that are congruent with chaos theory, particularly with the concept of self-organization. Because all
communities of interest had input and participated in the
decision-making process through both formal and informal
venues, the change was readily embraced. This change has
produced excellent outcomes both in NCLEX-RN first-time
pass rates as well as faculty and student satisfaction.

management theories that began to emerge during
the manufacturing environment of the 17th century. During that time, the worldview incorporated
the strict “cause and effect” ideas that originated
from newtonian science. Chaos theory and complexity theory, which have emerged from quantum
physics, now underscore our understanding and
interpretation of the work people do in organizations. Hock (2000) has even coined a new term for
management based in complexity science: chaordic
(kay-ordic). The word borrows the ﬁrst syllable of
the word chaos and the word order. He deﬁnes the
term chaord as “any self-organizing, self-governing,
adaptive, nonlinear, complex organism, organization, community or system, whether physical, biological or social, the behavior of which blends
characteristics of both chaos and order” (p. 22).
Organizations have elements of both chaos and

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

22

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 22

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

order, with innovation and progress occurring “at
the edge of chaos.”
Complexity science “is not a single theory. It is
the study of complex adaptive systems—the patterns of relationships within them, how they are
sustained, how they self-organize, and how outcomes emerge. Within the science there are many
theories and concepts. . . . Complexity science is
highly interdisciplinary including biologists,
anthropologists, economists, sociologists, management theorists and many others in a quest to
answer some fundamental questions about living,
adaptable, changeable systems” (Zimmerman,
Lindberg, and Plsek, 2001, p. 5.) The idea that systems in nature are self-organizing lends support for
the knowledge worker supported by Drucker in
that individuals within an organization can build a
better system, bringing order out of chaos, when
allowed to self-organize. Small changes occur that
move the system into ever-evolving patterns. Ideas
from complexity theory, such as chunking, attractors, self-organization, distributed control, and
leveraging incremental changes, can be used in
health-care organizations. See Table 2-4 for terms
used in complexity science.
Application of complexity science represents a
signiﬁcant divergence from the traditional management notion that employees are “machines” to be
controlled by management through speciﬁc job
descriptions and charts. Organizations become “living entities” encompassing all of the traits and
foibles of the individuals of which they are composed. Employees, managers, and organizations are
rapidly changing and becoming more ﬂexible in
their interactions with each other. As stated earlier,
it has been long understood that if an employee
adhered rigidly to a job description, over half of the
work to be accomplished would be left undone.
Unstated in a job description is the expectation that
the employee engage in the critical thinking, innovation, and interpersonal relationships required
to accomplish the goals and objectives of the position. This shift is evidenced through the changes in
Peter Drucker’s perception of management referenced in the beginning of the chapter. He originally
thought that there was one and only one way to
manage people. He revised his thinking to recognize
that in the 21st century employees are actually
“knowledge workers” who necessarily know more
about their area of responsibility than do their managers. The knowledge worker must be able to make

TABLE 2-4

The Language of Complexity
Science

Attractor

The attractor, or strange attractor,
brings organization to chaos. As a
mission statement is embraced by
individuals within an organization,
it can form a strange attractor that
resonates throughout the system.

Self-organization

The components of a living system
(including people in a health-care
organization) are capable of
organizing themselves to create
change that moves the organization toward growth and
accomplishment of the mission.

Edge of chaos

The state between stasis and chaos
is “the edge of chaos.” It is at this
place that the organization is at its
most open to innovation.

Distributed
control

Control leads to stasis and
maintenance of the status quo.
Distribution of information, power,
and control to the individual
members of the organization
brings innovation and adaptation.

Leveraging incremental changes

Small changes can generate big
effects.

Bifurcation

Tendency of systems to move from
one attractor to another.

Fractals

Complex, repeating, self-similar
patterns.

decisions and implement strategies that work; these
changes can be made more effectively and efficiently at the point of contact of the worker with the
environment than by management removed by several layers.
If employees are self-organizing, what does this
leave the manager to do? Hock (2000) says managers ﬁrst must manage themselves to ensure their
own integrity, character, ethics, knowledge, wisdom, words, and acts. He thinks this should take
about 50% of managers’ time. Second, Hock says
that 25% of managers’ time should be spent managing the people who have authority over them to
ensure that they will have higher-up support. The
support and consent of those managers above are

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 23

Management Theory

vital for achieving goals and desired results. Third,
25% of managers’ time must be spent managing
peers, competitors, and customers. This is done
through developing collaborative relationships that
result in outcomes that are good for all and tailored
to meet the needs of peers and customers. This
leaves no time for the people over whom the manager has authority. Hock’s idea is that managers
should hire ethical people who are in tune with the
goals of the organization and then unleash them to
do what they were hired to do. This idea matches
well with the concept of a knowledge worker who
is the specialist in the designated area of work.
Complexity theory does not disregard previous
management theories; instead, it borrows concepts
from many theories, modifying them as part of the
evolutionary process. Management using complex-

Box 2-1
In their article, The Five Minds of a Manager (2003), Gosling
and Mintzberg include the ideas that:
1. Managing yourself relies on a reflective mind-set. The
manager has to take time to think about the patterns
seen to gain a perspective on the work environment.
Reflective journaling facilitates this strategy (Morgan,
Johnson, & Garrison, 2005).
2. Managing your organization requires an analytical
mind-set. The manager needs to seek to really
understand what is going on within the organization.
The goal is to look at the needs of the organization
from new perspectives so as to identify issues and
move the organization toward action and change.
Data collection and analysis are parts of this mind-set,
but data must be interpreted in light of the mission,
goals, and relationships within the organization.
3. Managing your context depends on a worldly mindset. Seek to understand the organization and its
relationship to the community and world from diverse
perspectives. This means that the manager needs to
spend time outside the organization looking at the
environment in which it exists and at the role it needs
to fulfill.
4. Managing relationships requires a collaborative mindset. The manager’s job is not to manage people as
individuals. Rather, it is to create structures and portray
an attitude that encourages teamwork.
5. Managing change calls for an action mind-set. The
manager first identifies pertinent factors within and
outside the organization and then needs to
communicate these factors in ways that move the
organization in the right direction to accomplish its
mission and goals.

23

ity theory is neither totally mechanistic nor behaviorist. Instead, it is a new, ever-changing process.
The manager has much in common with the
artistic director of a ballet production who choreographs the dance moves, selects the music, and
plans lighting and scenery. During the production,
however, the dancers make the magic of the movements come to life. The entire performance is much
more than the sum of the individual movements
and roles. Another analogy is found in the coach of
a team who works day after day to make a game
plan that, at the time of the game, must be acted out
and adjusted by the players on the ﬁeld in response
to the opposing team (Hock, 2000).
It is clear that management has moved beyond
the mechanistic views of organizations and people
that characterized management theories in the
Industrial Age. The application of complexity theory, with its reliance on self-organization, offers
solutions for nursing and today’s health-care organizations. Strategies for applying this new science
will continue to evolve. The next section of the
chapter applies some of management concepts to
the identiﬁed roles of managers.

Management for Nurses
The nurse manager has many varied formal and
informal roles, which involve team building, decision making, communication, negotiation, delegation, and mentorship. Whether managing a group of
patients or functioning in the role of charge nurse,
clinical manager, director of nursing, vice president
of patient care, or president of the local chapter of
the American Nurses Association, nurses fulﬁll
these tasks in order to lead and manage successfully.

TEAM BUILDER
In order to lead and manage effectively, a nurse
must be able to build a strong team. The delivery
of health care is a team activity, involving professionals and unlicensed personnel from a variety of
disciplines. Based on traditional management models, the emphasis was on individuals in the workplace and was more likely to value individual
performance. New management strategies empha-

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

24

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 24

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

size the importance of self-organizing teams
and the value of group activity. In the complex
world of health-care delivery, each individual’s participation as a team member is a requirement; failure to work as a team creates fragmentation of
patient care.
Managers must ﬁrst recognize that the workers
they “supervise” are knowledge workers who can
and will make the right contributions to patient
care. Managers must communicate to all team mem-

Practice to Strive For 2-1

bers their belief in the ability of the team to work
well together. Because health-care systems have traditionally been very hierarchical, employees may
not be accustomed to being allowed to organize
their own work or solve their own problems. When
members of a team indicate their unwillingness to
participate or their lack of faith in other team members, the leader must listen carefully and avoid saying too much. The objective is to help the concerned
individuals assess their own contributions to the
team and their expectations of other team members.
Then, the manager must communicate a strong
belief in the team’s contributions to the goals of the
organization. This conversation serves the purpose
of empowering each team member to contribute
fully to the work that is to be accomplished. Chaos
theory supports the notion that small inputs can
create a ripple effect with far-reaching consequences. Each input affects the system, and the system is altered in response to each input. The team
leader, rather than being the purveyor of change,
has the responsibility of ensuring that the changes
are aligned with the organization’s mission, goals,
and objectives.
The mission and goals of the organization unify
the team and should reﬂect the goals of the members of the organization. A mission of “providing
excellent care to the patients on the ABC unit” is a
good starting point. For example, through the use of
attractors, the leader can help the team focus and
move forward in the use of the knowledge and
expertise of its members.

•

All participants in the organization are innovators who
contribute to meeting the goals of the organization.

•

Leaders/managers are involved in new developments
while existing processes are maintained.

•

People are a part of the systems, and they must be considered together.

•

Revenues and expenses must coexist within an organization; for example, expenses must be controlled to allow
for financial solvency, but there must be trust that the
funding will be present for required expenses.

•

To be effective leaders, managers must possess both
long- and short-term perspectives. They must manage
daily operations while planning for the future.

•

Leaders/managers determine the “what and why”; thus,
the “how and when” follow naturally to accomplish the
organization’s vision.

•

Leaders/managers must be open to change and manage
change effectively.

•
•

Leaders/managers must always seek authenticity.
Leaders/managers do the right things in the right way
once a course of action has been determined.

DECISION MAKER

•
•

Leaders/managers lead people.

•

Leaders/managers use reflective journaling to facilitate
reflection and think about patterns to gain a perspective
of the work environment.

•

Leaders/managers have an analytical mind-set. Data are
collected and interpreted in the light of the organization’s
mission, goals, and relationships.

•

Leaders/managers have a worldly mind-set by understanding the organization and its relationship to the
community and world from diverse perspectives.

The leader is well served to recall Drucker’s (2001)
comments about the knowledge worker of the 21st
century. The individual who does the work of the
organization is the one who knows the most about
it. Participative and transformational leaders
enter into relationships with the professionals in
their organizations. They share information, discuss
values, and collaborate on decisions. The selfesteem of team members correlates with involvement with decision making.
Sometimes decisions need to be made quickly,
but even in those circumstances the leader is illadvised to make the decision without gaining input
from those who will be affected by the decision. If
the decision will involve the need for change, the

Leaders/managers manage peers, competitors, and customers by developing collaborative relationships that
result in outcomes that are positive for all yet tailored to
meet the needs of the constituent groups.

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 25

Management Theory

greater the number of people whose views have
been considered, the greater will be the support for
the change. A paradox that exists within organizations is that frequently there is an artiﬁcial
time constraint placed on decision making, supposedly to move the organization along more rapidly.
A decision made quickly without adequate consideration and input can often result in an excessive
amount of time being required to respond to the
problems associated with rapid, uninformed
change. A wise leader negotiates for the time to
make a well-informed decision and thus avoids the
frustration and time associated with negative outcomes of hasty decision making.

COMMUNICATOR
Information is power. Current literature recognizes
the importance of keeping the members of an organization informed about issues with which they are
involved. Many health-care organizations function
around the clock, which can make the role of communicator more complex. Personal face-to-face
communication is optimal, so managers must make
every effort to stagger their hours in the organization to allow this communication on a regular
basis. Both formal and informal communication is
important. Managers who make time for informal
communication will have a more accurate understanding of the issues with which the knowledge
workers are dealing; will develop more open, trusting relationships within the organization; as well as
a greater understanding of factors affecting morale.
In the past, communication books were used as a
way to enhance “asynchronous” communication
among various shifts of workers. Today’s computer
technology supports communication through listserves, e-mail, and discussion boards. If an organization is not taking advantage of the technology
that is available, the manager should investigate the
availability and understanding of that technology.
An important aspect of communication is that it
must be mutual. In bureaucratic organizations
information often ﬂows only downward, and there
is a propensity for the information to fail to reach
the unit level. Moreover, information rarely moves
from the unit level up the hierarchy, leaving the
higher-ups out of touch. This type of communication is a sure recipe for disaster. Under these circumstances, the knowledge workers on the unit are

25

lacking important information about their environment, and their contributions cannot be fully
informed. Likewise, individuals responsible for
guiding the overall vision of the organization are
uninformed about day-to-day happenings, which
makes it difficult to create realistic strategies.

NEGOTIATOR
The nurse manager must exhibit excellent negotiation skills. These skills are important in helping a
team arrive at decisions, gaining organizational support for a new plan, gaining the cooperation of
another department or organization, and in many
other facets of the manager’s role.
The ﬁrst rule of negotiation is to understand the
positions of the stakeholders, including nurses,
patients, interdisciplinary professionals, community
members, families of patients, unlicensed assistive
personnel, and administration. Communication is
an important part of negotiation, and one of the vital
attributes of a negotiator is to encourage discussion
and trust among group members. Many times, negotiation surrounds a decision in which it is perceived
that there will be “winners” and “losers.”
Negotiation focuses on understanding who the perceived winners and losers are; the best negotiations
result in win-win solutions. Ask the question,
“Under what circumstances do you think this goal
can be accomplished?” This question frequently
moves participants from a defensive position to one
of creativity and innovation, and it uses the concept
of establishing an attractor, which causes people to
come together to discuss possibilities.

DELEGATOR
Delegation is no longer a “top-down” activity.
Instead, the leader will recognize the wisdom of
members of the health-care team, support the interconnectedness of team members in the health-care
delivery system, and embrace a more ﬂuid, innovative system. The manager will foster an environment that supports the notion of associates (1)
being partners in the delivery of health care, (2)
being accountable for evaluating the outcomes of
their interventions, (3) having the equity in the
organization to make “point of service delivery”
decisions, and (4) feeling a sense of ownership in
the organization (Wilson & Porter-O’Grady, 1999).

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

26

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 26

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

TABLE 2-5

Roles and Competencies of Nurse Managers

ROLES AND COMPETENCIES
OF THE MANAGER
Personal

Self-management
Collaborator
Networking

ACTIVITIES RELATED
TO COMPETENCIES
Values clarification; lifestyle management; goal setting; alignment with
organizational mission, goals, and objectives.
Nurtures relationships with organizational leadership and other key personnel within the organization.
Develops strong liaisons with health-care leaders in the community.

Client

Advocate
Provider of care
Coordinator of care

Recognizes needs of clients in area of responsibility.
Maintains evidence-based practice behaviors.
Assesses and recognizes the needs of the client population and applies
appropriate principles of delegation, interdisciplinary team care, education, and evaluation of outcomes.

Organizational

Member of the
profession

Represents the organization to the community, serves as a mentor to
new nurses, encourages professional behavior in others, role-models
professional nursing, holds membership in professional organizations,
and supports continuing education.
Communicates the organization’s mission, goals, and objectives to the
staff and community; facilitates communication and negotiation among
members of the organization.

Communicator

MENTOR
It is often said that effective managers are always in
the business of replacing themselves so their professional development and advancement can continue.
Mentorship is the process to accomplish this. The
identification of potential protégés can occur
through a variety of methods. Team members who
express an interest in leadership, individuals who
have recently taken on new leadership roles, and
professionals who show promise in the area of leadership through their interactions with others are all
likely candidates. Mentoring relationships can be
formal (assigned through an organization) or informal (simply a handshake agreement between a seasoned leader and an aspiring one). Sigma Theta Tau
International, the nursing honor society, is an
example of an organization that seeks to foster formal mentoring relationships, as does the American
Association of Colleges of Nursing.
Whether a mentoring relationship is formal or
informal, there are a few guidelines for success.
Mutual respect, goal setting, accountability to each
other, and open dialogue are hallmarks of an effective mentoring relationship. The mentoring relationship must be mutually rewarding; it must

involve the opportunity for real work and stimulating challenges; there must be agreement on ownership of any projects created through the partnership;
and the relationship must remain on professional
grounds at all times. The mentor has the responsibility to create opportunities for professional growth
and involvement, whereas the protégé is responsible
for responding to these opportunities. The mentor
has the responsibility to provide opportunities for
the protégé to gain recognition for the work accomplished; the protégé is accountable for being responsible and reliable with the work accepted. The
mentor empowers, encourages, and challenges
the protégé. All nurses have a professional responsibility to mentor new members of the profession.
See Table 2-5.

All Good Things…
Management has evolved from its emphasis on control and measurement as conceptualized by Taylor,
Fayol, and Weber. These strategies were helpful
during the industrial revolution, but in the 21st century they are less useful for organizations that rely

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 27

Management Theory

on the daily contributions of knowledge workers.
The evolving management theories recognize the
complexity of the work involved in professions
such as nursing. “The uncertainty of healthcare
ﬂows from the quantum and chaotic nature of the
world over time. Therefore, we should stop trying to
plan every step and predict each happening. Indeed,
we must realize that we can never come close to
knowing all there is to know about a topic or planning every step. . . . Hence we have to accept that
no matter how much we know about the world,
there are far more questions than there are answers,
and uncertainty is a natural part of our lives”
(Grossman & Valiga, 2005, p. 125).

NCLEX Questions
1. Which of the following theorists represents a traditional management viewpoint?
A. Fayol.
B. Hock.
C. Ouchi.
D. Hawthorne.
2. The individual recognized as the “father of scientiﬁc management” is:
A. Fayol.
B. Weber.
C. Taylor.
D. Ouchi.
3. Traditional management theory was designed to
provide control and structure to which types of
organizations?
A. Hospitals.
B. Scientiﬁc laboratories.
C. Manufacturing industry.
D. Institutions of higher education.
4. Complexity science has developed from the ﬁeld
of:
A. Health professions.
B. Business.
C. Industry.
D. Quantum physics.
5. In complexity science, the movement of an
organization as it changes from one attractor or
mission statement to another is known as:
A. Leverage.
B. Bifurcation.

27

C. Chaos.
D. Order.
6. Japanese organizations are known for their:
A. Short-term commitment to their employees.
B. Individual approaches to decision making.
C. Rapid promotion of employees.
D. Development of consensus.
7. Fayol’s principle of esprit de corps refers to:
A. Subordination of individual interest to the
common good.
B. Development of a high level of employee
morale.
C. Encouragement of initiative and risk taking.
D. Emphasis on goal setting.
8. Max Weber is known for the development of
which management theory?
A. Bureaucratic management.
B. Scientiﬁc management.
C. Humanistic management.
D. Transformational leadership.
9. Which of the following management theorists
conducted the famous experiment at the
Hawthorne Electric Plant in which employee
productivity increased regardless of the type of
intervention implemented at the plant?
A. Weber.
B. Mayo.
C. McGregor.
D. Hock.
10. Dee Hock recommends that managers spend
what percentage of their time managing the
employees for whom they have direct responsibility?
A. 0%.
B. 50%.
C. 75%.
D. 100%.
REFERENCES
Bennis, W. (1994). On becoming a leader. New York: AddisonWesley.
Bodek, N. (2002). Kaizen: Kazam! T⫹D, 56(1), 60–62.
Drucker, P.F. (2001). The essential Drucker. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Fayol, H. (1925). General and industrial management. London,
England: Pittman & Sons.
Flynn, J. (1998). Taylor to TQM. IIE Solutions, 30(10), 22–29.
Gosling, J., & Mintzberg, H. (2003). The ﬁve minds of a
manager. Harvard Business Review, (November), 1–10.

02Jones Leadership(F)-ch 02

28

1/14/07

3:32 PM

Page 28

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

Grossman, S.C., & Valiga, T.M. (2005) The new leadership challenge: Creating the future of nursing. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Hock, D. (2000). The art of chaordic leadership. Leader to Leader,
15(Winter):20–26. Retrieved January 15, 2005, from
http://leadertoleader.org/leaderbooks/L2L/winter2000/hock.
html
Huber, D. (2000). Leadership and nursing care management.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Inman, M.L. (2000). The relevance of traditional management theories to the 21st century. ACCA News for Students.
Retrieved from http://www.accaglobal.com/publications/
studentaccountant/32495
Marquis, B., & Huston, C. (2006). Leadership roles and management functions in nursing, theory, and application. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Mayo, E. (1953). The human problems of an industrialized civilization. New York: Macmillan.
McGregor, D. (1960). The human side of enterprise. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Mintzberg, H. (1999). Managing quietly. Leader to Leader.
12(Spring): 24–30. Retrieved January 15, 2005, from http://
leadertoleader.org/leaderbooks/L2L/spring99/mintzberg.html
Morgan, D.A., Johnson, J.G., & Garrison, D.R. (2005) Reﬂective
journaling: Bridging the theory-practice gap. In H. Feldman &
M. Greenberg (Eds.), Educating nurses for leadership (pp.
110–118). New York: Springer.

Nixon, L. (2003) Management theories: An historical perspective. Businessdate, 11(4), 5–8.
Ouchi, W.G. (1981). Theory Z: How American business can meet
the Japanese challenge. New York: Avon Books.
Rowland, H.S., & Rowland, B.L. (1997). Nursing administration
handbook (4th ed.). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publications,
Inc.
Taylor, F. (1911). The principles of scientiﬁc management. New
York: Harper & Row.
Weber, M. (1947). The theory of social and economic organization.
(A.M. Henderson & T. Parsons, Trans.). New York: Free
Press.
Wheatley, M. J. (1994). Leadership and the new science. San
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
Wheatley, M.J. (2001). Innovation means relying on everyone’s
creativity. Leader to Leader, 20(Spring):14–20.
Whittemore, R. (1999). Natural science and nursing science:
Where do the horizons fuse? Journal of Advanced Nursing,
30(5), 1027–1033.
Wilson, C.K., & Porter-O’Grady, T. (1999). Leading the revolution in health care (2nd ed.). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen
Publishers, Inc.
Zimmerman, B. (1999). Complexity science: A route through
hard times and uncertainty. Health Forum Journal, 42(2),
42–48.

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 29

chapter
3
Motivating Yourself
and Others for a
Satisfying Career
BETSY FRANK, RN, PHD
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“How does one motivate employees when so many are being asked to
do more with less? The answer is, in a large part, to make the
employee feel secure, needed and appreciated.”
Benson & Dundis, 2003

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■

Describe the various theories of employee motivation.
Discuss the relationship between motivation and job
satisfaction.
Explore the effect job satisfaction has on organizational
effectiveness.

29

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

30

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 30

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

I

s motivation as simple as Benson implies?
Perhaps not, but the heart of motivation is for
employees to believe that their work is meaningful and that it offers them a reasonable standard
of living. Mosley, Megginson, and Pietri (2005) said
it well when they deﬁned motivation “as the willingness of individuals and groups, as inﬂuenced by
various needs and perceptions, to strive toward a
goal” (p. 191).
Why is it important to understand motivation?
When health-care workers are motivated and subsequently satisﬁed with their jobs, motivation leads
to patient satisfaction and, ultimately, organizational effectiveness. Employee motivation holds a
critical key to organizational success. If leaders and
managers understand and take action to motivate
their employees, the organization will increase its
bottom line. This chapter will discuss theories of
motivation and explore the links between motivation, job satisfaction, and patient outcomes.

Theories of Employee Motivation
Many theoretical perspectives have been used to
explain worker motivation.

MASLOW
One theory, well known to nurses and other professionals, is Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. Maslow
(1970) stated that lower order needs, such as physiological and safety needs, must be met before higher
order needs, such as love and belonging, esteem, and
self-actualization, can be fulﬁlled. The physiological
needs include such things as the need for food and
sleep. Safety needs involve the need to be free from
fear and to feel secure. Love, self-esteem, and selfactualization are the higher order psychological
needs. Maslow’s theory views individuals as holistic
beings. This theory has been quite popular in managerial literature, despite the fact it was developed
from observations of psychotherapists and not for
the workplace environment. It does provide a framework to help managers understand the complexities
of human behavior. A manager might use this theory, for instance, to help understand why an
employee with ﬁnancial difficulties may not have
the motivation to undertake a complex work project
that might bring some personal acclaim. While the

theory can help explain human behavior, research
ﬁndings have not clearly supported the theoretical
model’s utility in the job environment (Porter,
Bigley, & Steers, 2003).

ALDERFER
Alderfer (1972) revised Maslow’s theory and
applied it speciﬁcally to the organizational context
(Porter, et al., 2003). His ERG theory (existence,
relatedness, growth) classiﬁes worker needs into
three categories: existence needs, which are similar
to Maslow’s physiological needs; relatedness needs,
which are similar to Maslow’s belonging needs; and
growth needs, which encompass Maslow’s esteem
and self-actualization needs. There are two important differences, however, between the theories of
Alderfer and Maslow. An employee does not have
to move through the need levels sequentially in
Alderfer’s theory. Unlike Maslow, Alderfer states
that an employee can be motivated by more than
one need category at the same time and not necessarily in a sequential fashion. For example, a nurse
can have multiple motivations for working, including salary and self-esteem. If fulﬁllment of selfesteem needs is thwarted because staffing
negatively affects the quality of care given, the
nurse may focus on a lower order need, such as
belongingness, and ignore the need to deliver highquality care. For the manager, this change in motivation may help to retain the nurse for the time
being, but quality care will continue to suffer until
the staffing issues are addressed.

HERZBERG
Another well-known theory is Frederick Herzberg’s
Two-Factor, or Motivation-Hygiene, Theory (1966).
Although his theory has been criticized for not taking into consideration an employee’s individual
needs, Herzberg’s work has fostered much research
on work motivation and is used widely by managers
to foster a motivating work environment (Porter et
al., 2003). Herzberg’s theory is built on the proposition that workers have two sets of needs: intrinsic
and extrinsic. The intrinsic needs (or motivators)
are growth, advancement, responsibility, the work
itself, recognition, and achievement. The extrinsic
needs (or hygiene factors) are security, status, relationship with subordinates, personal life, relationship with peers, salary, work conditions, and

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 31

Motivating Yourself and Others for a Satisfying Career

Practice Proof 3-1

Timmreck, T.C. Managing motivation and developing job
satisfaction in the health care work environment. (2001).
Health Care Manager, 2001, 20(1), 42-58. Copyright: Aspen
Publishers, Inc.
[Note: Article is available as a full-text article via libraries
that have subscriptions to Health Business Full Text
through the EBSCO database.]
Using Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory as a
framework for his questionnaire, the author surveyed
99 midlevel managers, including nurses and others in
managerial positions. He asked the managers to what
extent they believed certain factors served to motivate
people; he also asked to what extent they used these
factors to motivate employees. Each factor was rated
on a Likert Scale of 1 to 5. He explored to what extent
the managers used “negative motivators” such as guilt,
threats, power, rebellion, and control. These factors could
be identified as elements of hygiene deprivation
according to Herzberg. Results showed that 37% believed
that guilt should never be used as a motivator, and 42%
never used guilt as a motivator. Four percent believed
that guilt was a motivator, and one participant used guilt
to motivate employees. Fifty-three percent believed
rebellion should never be used as a motivator, and 65%
never used it. Threats were never used by 55% of the
managers, and 51% believed they should never be used.
Power was believed effective by 23%, and 8% actually
used power as a motivator. Timmreck used his findings
to point out that managers often mistakenly believe that
fear of hygiene deprivation can be used to motivate
employees effectively. He reinforced the idea that
promoting the use of motivators results in a high
level of job satisfaction.
1. What negative motivators did the managers use in
the study?
2. What were the findings related to hygiene factors and
motivation?

relationship with supervisor, supervision, company
policy, and administration. It is possible for an
employee to be satisﬁed intrinsically but dissatisﬁed
extrinsically. For example, a nurse may ﬁnd herself
enjoying her responsibilities and a recent promotion
while at the same time bemoaning her coworker’s
unwillingness to be part of a team. What this means
is that the nurse is satisﬁed with the work itself but
is dissatisﬁed with her interpersonal relationships
within the workplace environment. In order to
be motivated, employees should be satisﬁed both
extrinsically and intrinsically. Herzberg (2003)

31

points out that many human resource consultants
focus on facts that satisfy extrinsic needs, such as
compensation and human relations. Job enrichment, on the other hand, should not be overlooked.
It promotes motivation and thus job satisfaction.
For example, a nurse manager could send a staff
nurse for training in a new procedure, thereby
enhancing the staff nurse’s knowledge and enabling
her to grow in her position.

VROOM
Maslow, Alderfer, and Herzberg assume that motivational factors—whatever they may be—are global
in scope or the same for all employees. Vroom
(1964), on the other hand, recognized that motivation is more individualized and tailored to what
individual employees expect from the job itself.
According to Vroom, workers weigh their options
and engage in behaviors that will bring about
desired rewards or outcomes termed positive
valences. If the worker sees that a certain behavior
might bring about a negative outcome, Vroom called
this negative valence. Behaviors, negative or positive, are reinforced if the expected outcome is
achieved. In essence, if an expected outcome occurs,
then the workplace behavior will continue. For
example, Nurse Jones is late for work at least 2 days
each week. The nurse manager counsels Nurse
Jones and states the next time she is late a formal
disciplinary notice will be placed in her personnel
ﬁle. Nurse Jones is not late again because she knows
what the negative outcome will be.

MCCLELLAND
David McClelland (1971) also recognized that individual employees have different motivational needs
and that managers could use information about
individual employees to create a motivating work
environment. McClelland stated that the three need
categories are achievement, power, and affiliation.
Those who have high achievement needs are motivated by task accomplishment. For many, the tasks
need to be challenging, not routine (Porter, et al.,
2003). Those that have a need for power might be
more fulﬁlled in supervisory roles, and those that
have a high need for affiliation have a strong need
to be liked and to work in an environment that is
friendly towards them and that involves team work.
See Box 3-1 to learn about additional motivational
theories.

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

32

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 32

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

Box 3-1
Additional Theorists*
The Porter-Lawler Model: Porter and Lawler (Porter,
Bigley, & Steers, 2003) built upon Vroom’s (1964)
Expectancy Model. One key difference in their approach
is that they assume that the link between effort toward
anticipated job performance outcomes and employee
behavior is not direct. Rather, this link is influenced by
employee skill level and the task to be accomplished. If
the tasks provide intrinsic rewards, such as a sense of a
job well done, the employee may be more motivated
than if the task provides just extrinsic rewards such as
paid time off.
Equity Theory: The main assumption of Equity Theory
(Adams, 1963; Mowaday & Colwell, 2003) is that employees are motivated by a sense of fairness of rewards and
punishment in the workplace. For example, if the same
work brings about lower pay than when done by a fellow
worker, then the worker receiving the lower pay might
not be motivated to perform at a high level.
Self-Efficacy Theory: Self-Efficacy Theory is grounded in
social-cognitive theory (Bandura, 1997). Self-efficacy is
shown in the employee’s belief that a job can be performed at a certain level. If employees have faith they can
perform at a high level, they will be motivated, then, to
perform. Self-efficacy is influenced by the difficulty of the
task and the strength of the belief in one’s abilities to
perform the task. A task may be difficult, but if an
employee has a strong belief that the task can be
accomplished, then the employee will be motivated to
complete the task.
Control Theory: Control Theory (Carver & Scheier, 1981)
demonstrates that an employee will be motivated if what
needs to be accomplished helps to reach the goal the
employee wishes to achieve. For instance, if an employee
wants to learn more about critical care, the employee will
be motivated by an assignment to take care of critically ill
patients.
*Adapted from Porter, Bigley, and Steers, 2003.

GENERATION AFFECTS MOTIVATION
Generational differences can also account for variability in worker motivation (Atkinson, 2003;
Billings & Kowalski, 2004; Cordeniz, 2002; Hill,
2004; Izzo & Klein, 1998). Baby Boomers are interested, for the most part, in job security. If an
employee from this generation knows that performance will lead to long-term employment, the
employee will work to maintain that employment.

Unfortunately, recent layoffs at major corporations,
including health-care corporations, have challenged
the notion that good performance leads to job security. Baby Boomers, born largely between the
post–World War II era and 1964, grew up in era in
which they learned to challenge those in power and
authority (Cordeniz, 2002). Thus, Baby Boomers
often question what others tell them to do and want
to know the reasons why decisions have been made.
Rules are not motivators for behavior for Baby
Boomers.
Generation X’ers, born between 1965 and about
1977, grew up in an era when technology became
paramount. This group works primarily for personal satisfaction and growth (Cordeniz, 2002).
Balancing work and personal life is an important
goal for this group. Whereas their parents valued
organizational loyalty, members of this group
change jobs when the work environment no longer
challenges or satisﬁes them (Cordeniz, 2002; Hill,
2004). Money is more of a motivator for this group
than for earlier generations.
The Net Generation is just now coming into
the workforce. These workers were born in the
1980s. In McClelland’s terms, these workers are
motivated by affiliation. They prefer to work in
groups and teams and are hands-on learners
(Billings & Kowalski, 2004). Unlike earlier generations, they grew up in a very diverse society
(Hill, 2004). The Net Generation is more motivated
and satisﬁed when working within diverse group
settings. This group is also most comfortable
with technology; cell phones and e-mail have
always existed for them. Exposed to a wide array of
technology, the Net Generation is motivated by settings where the technology is advanced and current.
Motivation can be complex, and it differs by the
individual. In order to maximize organizational
effectiveness, the task for leaders and managers is
to discover what motivates individual workers and
to create a work environment that capitalizes on
these motivations.

Motivation Yields Job
Satisfaction Yields More
Successful Organizations
Job satisfaction occurs when a nurse’s motivational
needs are met. Nurses and other employees work in

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 33

Motivating Yourself and Others for a Satisfying Career

33

JOB SATISFACTION FOR NURSES

Chapter star

(The following is based on interviews with real people,
but names have been changed.)
“Marilyn Jones is the unit manager on a general
surgical unit. Her unit is noted for delivering highquality care. Surgeons seek to have their patients on
her unit, and the unit has been rewarded by being
designated the Unit of the Quarter. Another measure
of her success is the fact that voluntary turnover on her
unit is lower than 7%. When asked how she creates
a climate that promotes high-quality care and low
nurse turnover, she states: “As for motivation, I think
involvement is the driving force. Staff DO NOT buy into
the process unless they have input of ideas and decision
making. I have a unit team of three licensed nurses from
days and nights and one unlicensed staff member. We
meet monthly to discuss our scores and what we are
doing right and wrong. These team members are my
cheerleaders as well as my messengers. When I post new
survey scores, I expect them to draw attention to these
scores so the other staff see how we are doing. I am
always talking survey scores. The staff also knows that
when I make patient rounds—another very important
component—I ask the patients if the staff is checking
armbands, answering questions they have about their
care, and showing concern about patient privacy. I also
ask the patients and their families if they are having a
VERY GOOD stay. If they say a good stay, I ask what we
can do to make it a VERY GOOD stay. With the 1600 vital
signs, staff members ask all patients to rate their care
today on a scale of 1 to 5. When I come in the next day
and find any 4 or below, I go see that patient right away
to see how we can make it a 5. …I’m always giving
awards, pats on the back, hugs, and verbal public
recognition to my employees. I keep a ledger of who
I recognize; I wouldn’t want to go overboard on one
and not on another. … I always ask what THEIR
SOLUTION is when they come to me with a problem.
This keeps them on their toes.”

order to have certain needs met, such as ﬁnan-cial
and growth needs. When those needs are met,
employees express satisfaction with their jobs. This
crucial link between motivation and job satisfaction
has far-reaching consequences for an organization.
In short, if nurses and other health-care employees
are satisﬁed, personnel turnover decreases, the
quality of patient care increases, and the organization’s ﬁnancial outlook improves.

What leads to job satisfaction for nurses and
other health-care workers? Herzberg (2003) and
Timmreck (2001) suggest that money is not the
primary motivation for job satisfaction for nurses.
Of course, nurses and others need to make a decent
living, but other factors masy play a more important
role in job satisfaction. McNeese-Smith (1999)
found that while nurses did derive some satisfaction
from salary, beneﬁts, and the ability to balance work
and family life, the most satisfying part of the job
was patient care itself. Factors that inhibited job satisfaction were those that hindered the ability to
accomplish patient care, including lack of supplies,
feeling overloaded, and difficulties in communicating with physicians. Relationships with coworkers
could cause satisfaction or dissatisfaction as well.
Control over work environment and autonomy
in decision making also contribute to job satisfaction (Freeman & O’Brien-Pallas, 1998). Allowing
nurses to decide how patient care is to be delivered
and the opportunity to use their skills promotes a
satisfying work climate.
Hackman and Oldham’s (1980) Job Characteristics Model of Work hypothesizes that the combination of core job dimensions, such as skill variety,
task identity, task signiﬁcance, autonomy, feedback
on job performance, perceived meaningfulness
of work, and knowledge of and responsibility for
outcomes, leads to job satisfaction. Edgar (1999)
used this model to conﬁrm that autonomy, meaningful work, and opportunity to use a variety of
skills promote job satisfaction for nurses who work
in hospitals.
Autonomy and work enrichment are also important for nurses who work in community-based settings. Laamanen, Broms, Happola, and Brommels
(1999) found that work motivation and job satisfaction did increase when home health nurses had
autonomy and variability in tasks. They became dissatisﬁed when the workload became unmanageable.
Likewise, school nurses have ranked autonomy as
the most important job satisﬁer (Foley, et al., 2004).
School nurses ranked the other following factors as
important to job satisfaction: interaction with
coworkers, professional status, pay, organizational
policies, and task requirements. A study of hospice
nurses also revealed that autonomy was positively
linked to job satisfaction, as was positive supervisory support (DeLoach, 2003).

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

34

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 34

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

ORGANIZATIONAL AND
PATIENT OUTCOMES
Knowing what promotes job satisfaction for nurses
is signiﬁcant because the level of job satisfaction has
been connected to patient outcomes (Scott,
Sochalski, & Aiken, 1999). In a series of studies of
magnet hospitals, Aiken and her colleagues discovered a clear link between organizational characteristics, including nurse job satisfaction, and patient
outcomes. According to Scott et al., magnet hospitals are characterized by lower nurse turnover,
more nursing autonomy and control over practice,
and better nursing relationships with physicians.
Scott et al. noted that magnet hospitals also have
lower patient mortality and higher patient satisfaction. More recently, Aiken, et al., (2002)
reported that organizational characteristics such as
high patient to nurse ratios contributed to nurse
burnout, job dissatisfaction, and higher patient
morbidity and mortality rates. Aiken and colleagues’ work demonstrates that attending to job
satisfaction is a necessity in order to achieve positive patient outcomes.
On an international scale, Tzeng and Keteﬁan
(2002) demonstrated in an exploratory study conducted in Taiwan that nurse job satisfaction was
related in part to some measure of patient satisfaction, such as satisfaction with pain management
and arrangement for follow-up care post-discharge.
This study conﬁrms that nurse satisfaction does
inﬂuence customer satisfaction, which is critical
because if customers are not satisﬁed with care they
receive, they will go elsewhere, and that health-care
organization will suffer ﬁnancially.
Nurse satisfaction also affects the bottom line of
health-care organizations. If nurses become dissatisﬁed and subsequently leave their jobs, the organizations suffer. According to Atencio, Cohen, and
Gorenberg (2003), the cost of turnover is up to two
times the nurse’s salary. For example, if the average
nurse’s salary in an organization is $46,000 and 10
nurses leave in a year’s time, the cost to the organization is close to a million dollars.
As Herzberg’s theory suggests, nurses will leave
organizations if the dissatisﬁers outweigh the motivators (Herzberg, 1966). Davidson, Folcarelli,
Crawford, Duprat, and Clifford (1997) report that
intent to leave was predicted by poor communication within the organization and heavy workload
(Hinshaw & Atwood, 1983; Pearlin & Schooler,

1978; Price & Mueller, 1981). Additionally, Cline,
Reilly, and Moore (2003) conﬁrm that nurses
will leave when management is nonsupportive, the
pay is unsatisfactory, and staffing ratios are poor.
They point out that nurses will tolerate understaffed and perceptually unsafe settings for only
a limited amount of time. If nurses cannot get
their concerns addressed, they will leave the organization.

Leadership Makes a Difference
One of the critical determinants of job satisfaction
for nurses is relationships with supervisors. Being
able to communicate effectively with supervisors
can, in and of itself, serve as a motivating factor
for nurses. Early on, McGregor (1960) described
the relationship between leadership style and
worker motivation. According to McGregor, a
Theory X management style presupposes that
humans inherently dislike work, do not want to be
accountable and responsible for their actions, and
need to be prodded to do work. Managers who
espouse Theory X use such strategies as rewards,
threats, and punishment to get workers to do their
jobs. A Theory Y leadership style, on the other
hand, assumes that workers can achieve their personal goals by integrating their goals with those of
the organization. The Theory Y manager’s job,
then, is to foster this integration by using a variety
of human relations approaches. For example, a
nurse who wants to work for a master’s degree
in nursing may choose an organization that promotes educational mobility. The nurse’s supervisor
might work with the nurse to develop a schedule
that will facilitate this goal. A manager who
espouses the Theory Y approach is more likely to
attract employees than a Theory X manager who
rules with an iron ﬁst.
One particular human relations approach was
tested in research conducted by Mayﬁeld, Mayﬁeld,
and Kopf (1998). They demonstrated that if a leader
used motivating language in giving direction and
sharing feelings, nurses expressed a higher level of
job satisfaction and job performance. One such
example of motivating communication could be
telling a nurse in front of peers that he did a good
job with a particular patient. They caution, however, that communication is not enough to sustain

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 35

Motivating Yourself and Others for a Satisfying Career

job satisfaction. Rather, communication plus organizational behavior, such as providing meaningful
rewards, help to improve employee performance
and job satisfaction.
Leadership style can also be characterized by
whether leaders are transformational or transactional. Transformational leaders direct by role modeling, promoting employee development, providing
a stimulating work environment, and inspiring
optimism. Transactional leaders lead by being taskfocused, focusing on the daily work of the organization, setting employee goals for them, and focusing
on the reward system (Marriner-Tomey, 2004).
Morrison, Jones, and Fuller (1997) found that

Practice to Strive For 3-1
The link between motivation, job satisfaction, and positive
organizational outcomes is clear, but how to promote that
link as a leader/manager is not as clear. Quint Studer
(2003), a management consultant, provides some direction
in this regard. He says that leaders must become “Fire
Starters,” or people who have the passion to keep an organization going. Fire Starters are those who use specific strategies (some focusing on employee satisfaction) to promote
organizational success. One such strategy Studer names
“Rounding for Outcomes.” As a leader/manager, instead of
going on patient rounds, go on employee rounds. Ask your
coworkers what they need in order to do their jobs well.
Show nurses, unlicensed personnel, and physicians that you
are approachable and will work hard to provide the tools
necessary to do a good job. On employee rounds, build relationships with employees; ask about families, school, and
other items of interest to them. Ask what is going well for
them in the job and what they need to do the job better.
Focus on the positive to help structure a climate that is
focused on improvement, not negativity. Show appreciation, and thank people when they do a good job.
Studer (2003) suggests that after rounding for outcomes
with employees, leaders should round for patient outcomes.
Bring employees into the process, and ask them for patient
updates before entering patient rooms. In addition to asking patients if they have any concerns, Studer suggests asking patients, “Is there anyone you would like to recognize for
a job well done?” Effective communication is one key to job
satisfaction for nurses. Managers should discuss openly
with staff both positive and negative findings from rounds.
Studer’s recommendations are aimed at inpatient organizations, yet his template could be used in ambulatory settings as well. Managers could survey clients via telephone or
when clients present for services.

35

job satisfaction was higher when leaders were
perceived as both transformational and transactional but that the relationship between nurses and
transformational-style managers was stronger. Only
transformational leadership was positively related
to empowerment (intrinsic task motivation). An
interesting finding was that the relationship
between job satisfaction and transformational leadership style was more powerful for unlicensed personnel. These ﬁndings may suggest that different
categories of employees are motivated by different
leadership styles.
Leaders who maintain a positive work environment also have more success in keeping employees
satisﬁed. Spence-Laschinger, Finegan, and Shamian
(2001) suggest that work environments that
empower nurses to use their expert decision making promote trust within the organization and lead
to job satisfaction. Nurse leaders/managers are crucial in promoting trusting work environments.
Aside from staff nurse perceptions of the importance of leadership, nurse leaders, by their own
admission, know that being accessible and fostering
a professional practice environment that promotes
teamwork are crucial to nurse job satisfaction
(Upenieks, 2003). Like Frank, Eckrick, and Rohr
(1997), Upenieks also noted that leaders play a critical role in obtaining resources for the delivery of
optimal patient care, which in turn promotes job
satisfaction. If leaders fail to promote teamwork
and acquire the needed resources for quality patient
care, job satisfaction and quality of patient care
decrease.

All Good Things…
In this chapter, we have explored ways that nurse
leaders/managers can motivate employees to deliver
high-quality care. Motivating employees, while not
a simple task, has signiﬁcant payoffs both for the
employees and the organization as a whole. A variety of theories can be used by leaders/managers to
guide them in promoting a climate that fosters job
satisfaction and subsequent quality patient care.
Leaders/managers need to be cognizant of the fact
that what motivates one employee may not motivate another. Therefore, they may need to use a
variety of motivational strategies in order to achieve
positive patient and organizational outcomes.

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

36

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 36

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

Let’s Talk
1. Think of a time when you have been very
satisﬁed with a job you have held. What made
that job satisfying? Also think of a time when
you have been dissatisﬁed with a job you have
held. What made that job dissatisfying?
2. Think of a manager for whom you have worked.
What did the manager do to promote job
satisfaction among the employees in the
organization?
3. Identify a nursing unit where you know good
patient care is given. Discuss what factors in the
environment promote the delivery of high-quality
patient care. Pay particular attention to how the
leader motivates the employees on the unit.

4. Which employee is most likely to be a represen-

tative of Generation X?
A. Mary, who has worked at the hospital for 10
years and would not think of quitting.
B. Sue, who is motivated by money and will
change jobs when she is no longer challenged.
C. Bill, who is a hands-on learner and likes
teamwork.
D. Jeff, who always wants to know why an
action is being taken.
5. Which core job characteristic promotes job satis-

faction for nurses?
A. Rigid rules.
B. Autonomy in decision making.
C. Hierarchical decision making.
D. Lack of communication with physicians.
6. According to Herzberg, a nurse is apt to leave a

NCLEX Questions
1. According to Herzberg’s theory, which job factor

would be considered a motivator?
A. Money.
B. Vacation policies.
C. Quarterly parties.
D. Recognition of achievement through a clinical ladder.
2. Which theorist helps a manager understand why

an employee who does not feel safe on the job
cannot perform his or her job duties well?
A. Maslow.
B. Herzberg.
C. Vroom.
D. Alderfer.
3. Joe, the nurse manager for CCU, counsels

Registered Nurse Bob about his errors in charting and tells Bob that the next time an error is
made, a formal warning will be put in his personnel ﬁle. Bob does not make any more errors.
Which theorist helped Joe to frame his disciplinary action?
A. Maslow.
B. Herzberg.
C. McClelland.
D. Vroom.

job if:
A. Interpersonal relationships with coworkers
are bad.
B. Opportunities for promotion are rare.
C. Achievements are not recognized.
D. No clinical ladder is available.
7. Research by Aiken et al. on magnet hospitals

shows:
A. Job satisfaction has no impact on an organization’s effectiveness.
B. Magnet hospitals have high turnover rates.
C. Job satisfaction is positively related to positive patient outcomes.
D. Job satisfaction is not related to turnover
rates.
8. Which statement might have been made by a

manager who espouses the Theory X approach
to management?
A. “Employees on my unit are very goal-directed
and need little supervision to get the job
done.”
B. “Susie is a great worker, and I like to give her
challenging things to do.”
C. “Most of my employees only work for the
money and will do what is right only if I discipline them.”
D. “I work hard to get employees to go back to
school.”

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

1/14/07

4:07 PM

Page 37

Motivating Yourself and Others for a Satisfying Career

9. Which manager uses a transformational leader-

ship style to motivate employees?
A. Dick, who works daily to get the task done
and gives “to do” lists to employees.
B. Martin, who is known for seeing that a thorough job is done and done correctly.
C. Emily, who focuses on goal setting and
rewards goal achievement.
D. Jeanette, who is optimistic and makes a conscious effort to be a good role model.
10. Which statement best describes which theoret-

ical perspective nurse managers should use to
motivate their employees?
A. Each employee has individual needs, so no
one theory applies to all employees.
B. Each employee has individual needs, but
providing for autonomy and growth is supported by a number of theories.
C. If a manager uses Herzberg’s theory, most
employees will be satisﬁed.
D. A manager should use the theory that makes
the most sense and ﬁts his or her personal
style.
REFERENCES
Adams, J.S. (1963). Toward an understanding of inequity.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67, 422–436.
Aiken, L.H., Clarke, S.P., Sloane, D.M., Sochalski, J., &
Silber, J.H. (2002). Hospital nurse staffing and patient mortality, nurse burnout, and job dissatisfaction. JAMA 288,
1987–1993.
Alderfer, C.P. (1972). Existence, relatedness, and growth. New
York: Free Press.
Atencio, B.L., Cohen, J., & Gorenberg, B. (2003). Nurse
retention: Is it worth it? Nursing Economic, 21, 262–268, 299.
Atkinson, W. (2003). Managing the generation gap poses many
challenges. Hotel and Restaurant Management, 218(19),
72–73.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New
York: W.H. Freeman.
Benson, S.G., & Dundis, S.P. (2003). Understanding and motivating health care employees: Integrating Maslow’s hierarchy
of needs, training and technology. Journal of Nursing
Management, 11, 315–320.
Billings, D., & Kowalski, K. (2004). Teaching tips: Teaching
learners from varied generations. The Journal of Continuing
Education in Nursing, 35(3), 104–105.
Carver, C.S., & Scheier, M.F. (1981). Attention and selfregulation: A control-theory approach to human behavior. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Cline, D., Reilly, R., & Moore, J.F. (2003). What’s behind RN
turnover? Nursing Management, 34(10), 50–53.

37

Cordeniz, J. (2002). Recruitment, retention, and management of
Generation X: A focus on nursing professionals. Journal of
Healthcare Management, 47, 237–249.
Davidson, H., Folcarelli, P.H., Crawford, S., Duprat, L.J., &
Clifford, J. (1997). The effects of health care reforms on job
satisfaction and voluntary turnover among hospital-based
nurses. Medical Care, 35, 634–645.
DeLoach, R. (2003). Satisfaction among hospice interdisciplinary team members. American Journal of Hospice and
Palliative Care, 20, 434–440.
Edgar, L. (1999). Nurses’ motivation and its relationship to the
characteristics of nursing care delivery systems: A test of the
job characteristics model. Canadian Journal of Nursing
Leadership, 12(1), 14–22.
Foley, M., Lee, J., Wilson, L., Cureton, V.Y., & Canham, D.
(2004). A multi-factor analysis of job satisfaction among
school nurses. The Journal of School Nursing, 20(2), 94–100.
Frank, B., Eckrick, H., & Rohr, J. (1997). Quality nursing
care: Leadership makes the difference. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 27(5), 13–14.
Freeman, T., & O’Brien-Pallas L.L. (1998). Factors inﬂuencing
job satisfaction on specialty units. Canadian Journal of
Nursing Administration, 11(3), 25–51.
Hackman, J.R., & Oldham, G.R. (1980). Work redesign. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Herzberg, F. (2003). Best of HBR: One more time: How do you
motivate employees? Harvard Business Review, 81(1), 87–96.
Herzberg, F. (1966). Work and the nature of man. Cleveland:
World Publishing.
Hill, K.S. (2004). Defy the decades with multigenerational
teams. Nursing Management, 35(1), 32–35.
Hinshaw, A.S., & Atwood, J.R. (1983). Nursing staff turnover,
stress and satisfaction: Models, measures and management. In J. J. Fitzpatrick & H.H. Werley (Eds.), Annual
Review of Nursing Research, Vol. 1 (pp. 133–153). New York:
Springer.
Izzo, J., & Klein, E. (1998). The changing values of workers:
Organizations must respond. Healthcare Forum Journal, 41(3),
62–65.
Laamanen, R., Broms, U., Happola, A., & Brommels, M. (1999).
Changes in the work and motivation of staff delivering home
care services in Finland. Public Health Nursing, 16(1), 60–71.
Marriner-Tomey, A. (2004). Guide to nursing management and
leadership (7th ed.). St Louis: Mosby.
Maslow, A.H. (1970). Motivation and personality (2nd ed.). New
York: Harper and Row.
Mayﬁeld, J.R., Mayﬁeld, M.R., & Kopf, J. (1998). The effects of
leader motivating language on subordinate performance and
satisfaction. Human Resource Management, 37, 235–248.
McClelland, D.C. (1971). Assessing human motivation. New
York: General Learning Press.
McGregor, D. (1960). The human side of enterprise. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company.
McNeese-Smith, D.K. (1999). A content analysis of staff nurse
descriptions of job satisfaction and dissatisfaction. Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 29, 1332–1341.
Morrison, R.S., Jones, L., & Fuller, B. (1997). The relation
between leadership style and empowerment on job satisfac-

03Jones Leadership(F)-ch 03

38

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 38

Understanding the Theory of Leading, Following, and Managing

tion of nurses. Journal of Nursing Administration, 27(5),
27–34.
Mosley, D.C., Megginson, L.C., & Pietri, P.H. (2005). Supervisory
management: The art of inspiring, empowering and developing
people (6th ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western.
Mowaday, R.T, & Colwell, K.A. (2003). Employee reactions to
unfair outcomes in the workplace: The contributions of
Adams’s equity theory to understanding work motivation. In
L.W. Porter, G.A. Bigley, & R.M. Steers (Eds.), Motivation and
work behavior (7th ed.) New York: McGraw-Hill Higher
Education.
Newman, K., & Maylor, U. (2002). Empirical evidence for “the
nurse satisfaction, “quality of care and patient satisfaction
chain.” International Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance,
15(2/3), 80–88.
Pearlin, L., & Schooler, C. (1978). The structure of coping.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 19(1), 2–22.
Porter, L.W., Bigley, G.A., & Steers, R.M. (2003). Motivation and
work behavior (7th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Higher
Education.
Price, J.L., & Mueller, C.W. (1981). Academy of Management
Journal, 24, 543–565.
Scott, J.G., Sochalski, J., & Aiken, L. (1999). Review of magnet
hospital research: Findings and implications for professional
nursing practice. Journal of Nursing Administration, 29(1),
9–19.
Spence-Laschinger, H.K., Finegan, J., & Shamian, J. (2001). The
impact of workplace empowerment, organizational trust on
staff nurses’ work satisfaction and organizational commitment. Health Care Management Review, 26(3), 7–23.

Studer, Q. (2003). Hardwiring excellence: Purpose, worthwhile
work, making a difference. Gulf Breeze, FL.: Fire Starter
Publishing.
Timmreck, T.C. (2001). Managing motivation and developing
job satisfaction in the health care work environment. Health
Care Manager, 20(1), 42–58.
Tzeng, H.M. & Keteﬁan, S. (2002). The relationship between
nurses’ job satisfaction and inpatient satisfaction: An
exploratory study in a Taiwan teaching hospital. Journal of
Nursing Care Quality, 16(2), 39–49.
Upenieks, V.V. (2003). The interrelationship of organizational
characteristics of magnet hospitals, nursing leadership, and
job satisfaction. Health Care Manager, 22(2), 83–98.
Vroom, V. (1964). Work and motivation. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hiam, A. (2003). Motivational management: Inspiring your people for maximum performance. New York: American Management Association.
Hodgetts, R.M., & Hegar, K.W. (2005). Modern human relations
at work (9th ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western.
Noe, R.A., Hollenbeck, J.R., Gerhart, B., & Wright, P.M. (2004).
Fundamentals of human resource management. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Whetton, D.A., & Cameron, K.S. (2005). Developing managements skills (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Prentice Hall.

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 39

UNDERSTANDING
ORGANIZATIONS

2

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 40

This page has been left intentionally blank.

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 41

chapter
4
Understanding
Organizational
Structures
CONNIE J. BOERST, MSN, RN, BC
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“The goal of most organizations—certainly of philanthropic organizations—
is not just to deliver services, but also to foster change and improve lives.”
Peter Drucker

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■

Compare and contrast the different theories of organizations.
Describe the purpose of an organization chart.
Define the components included in an organization chart.
Differentiate between organizational culture and climate.

41

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

42

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 42

Understanding Organizations

O

rganizational mergers and health-care changes
are rampant in the 21st century. In health care
today, organizational structures are affected by the
economic, political, social, and technological pressures in society (Marriner Tomey, 2000, p. 231).
The structure identiﬁes the authority, the responsibility, and the decision-making processes. Today’s
structures are no longer simple and hierarchical;
they are complex systems with cross-functional
teams and communications and interactions occurring at many levels. The structure of the organization is representative of its mission, vision, and
values and how it functions.
Nursing is an integral and major component of
the health-care organization, with nursing being the
largest group of employees within the health-care
setting. As a result, it is essential that nurses know
their organization, the structures within which
they function, and be able to relate this to their
individual clinical unit. As health-care delivery
expands, organizations will continuously take on a
new look and approach to structure. By studying
and learning the organizational structure, nurses
will better understand their role within it. The
nurse is the key person at the bedside, coordinating
the care for the patient. Registered nurses work
within a matrix of systems within the health-care
organization, being a gatekeeper of information
that can improve outcomes for the organization.
In this chapter, the reader will learn about organizational theory and its role; review the characteristics and the different types of health-care
organizations; and understand how the corporate
vision, mission, values, and philosophy guide the
organization. The chapter also presents information on governance models, the different types of
health-care delivery settings, and the importance of
continuity of care for the health of the organization.
The chapter concludes with predictive future
trends related to organizations.

Organizational Theory
Organizations consist of groups of people coming
together for a common purpose. An organization
can be deﬁned as “a group of persons with speciﬁc
responsibilities who are acting together for the
achievement of a speciﬁc purpose determined by the

organization” (Huber, 2000, p. 454). It is “the structure that supports the organizational processes,”
according to Yoder-Wise (2003). Organizations
comprise people who are given speciﬁc tasks to complete within their deﬁned job role.
Organizational “theory,” technically, dates back
to biblical times, when thought was given to how
groups were organized. Pharaoh utilized theories to
build the pyramids of Egypt. Workers were organized into speciﬁc groups with speciﬁc tasks to be
completed for the success of the structure. Modern
organizational theory began during the Industrial
Revolution. Many theories have been reviewed to
demonstrate the how and the what of organizational
structure. Today’s view of the structure emphasizes
the relationships of the groups within the organization, the people, and how work is accomplished in a
self-organized system (Crowell, 1998).
It is important to understand the different theories of how organizations have come to be because
the theory serves as the foundational component
and the driving force for how groups are formed
and function in today’s health-care arena. As we
discuss the theories, it will reveal the transitions
and variations that shape organizational functions
today. By studying organizational theories, the
reader will understand the functionality of organizational structures.

CLASSICAL THEORY
The Classical Theory, dating to the 1890s, is one
of the oldest theories regarding organizational
structure. The focus of this theory was on the structure of the formal organization: it examined the
efficiency of the organization as a by-product of the
design of the system. The concept was that the people of an organization will be productive if they are
given a well-deﬁned task to complete. By dividing
work into tasks and requesting employees to complete the same task every day, the theory proposed
that productivity would increase because of the repetition of the task. This worked from an industrial
perspective.
Results of this theory have come to be known
as the classical principles of organizational design.
These principles examine how members are divided
into work teams, who reports to whom, the number
of people for whom the managers are responsible, and the shape of the structure. From classical
principles, Max Weber, called the Father of

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 43

Understanding Organizational Structures

Organizational Theory, created the bureaucratic
model of organizational structure. Weber’s model
consists of the following components:
■
■
■
■

Organizational structure
Division and specialization of labor
Chain of command
Span of control

The organizational structure concerns the
arrangement of the work groups within the organization and is intended to support the organization’s
survival and success. The structure determines
accountability and responsibility. It dictates who
makes the decisions and who has authority and
oversight of workers. The structure shows who
reports to whom and gives a pictorial view of the
organization. In the Classical Theory, workers were
placed into departments in relation to the work
they were assigned to complete.
Specialization of labor dictates that the work
of the organization be divided into tasks and
employees be assigned a speciﬁc task to complete.
Limiting the number of tasks assigned to each
individual increases the efficiency and improves
the organization’s product. Just as in an assembly
line, the worker who puts steering wheels on a
car every day will become very proﬁcient at the
task. The risk of error is reduced, and efficiency is
increased.
Chain of command refers to the formal line of
authority and responsibility within the organization. Authority is the power to guide and direct
workers within their speciﬁc area. This authority is
usually depicted by vertical lines on an organization
chart. This linkage is from the key position on top
to the positions directly below. Responsibility refers
to the obligation to produce or to complete the task.
Each worker is responsible to ﬁnish the task
assigned by a superior.
Span of control refers to the number of employees who report to a manager or a supervisor. A wide
span of control indicates that many employees
report to a supervisor; a narrow span means that
few employees report to one. The number of people
reporting determines the organizational structure
(Altaffer, 1998). A narrow span of control is indicative of a tall structure because each manager has
only a few people in the reporting structure. There
are many managers responsible for a limited number of people, which results in many layers to get to
the top of the organizational structure. There are

43

often many layers for the change of command, and
the span of control is narrow. A wide span of control is indicative of fewer managers and more
reporting workers, resulting in a ﬂat organizational
structure.
Many organizations still base their structure on
the Classical Theory principles, utilizing some of
the components to make up their structure. As
organizations begin to function leaner with limited
resources, other approaches and options to organize
the employees are being implemented. The Classical
Theory is based on the concept that the employee
does one job and will learn it well. In health-care
organizations today, multiple tasks are being managed and completed by fewer employees.

NEOCLASSICAL THEORY
(HUMANISTIC THEORY)
The Neoclassical Theory became popular in the
1930s. It placed emphasis on cooperation and participation in the workplace (Sullivan & Decker,
2001). The key factor in this theory is motivation.
A motivated employee will produce better output in
the job setting (see Chapter 3 on motivation in this
book). If employees are given satisfactory working
conditions and have opportunities to socialize with
other employees, job satisfaction will improve, and
the employee will be more motivated.
The Neoclassical Theory links with a democratic
style of leadership because the employees are
encouraged and allowed to participate in the functions of the organization and the decision-making
process. For example, employees may participate on
committees related to patient education and care
outcomes. Nurses and other members of the healthcare team have a voice in the decision-making
process. The Neoclassical Theory relates to a ﬂat
organizational structure. Processes are decentralized, and member involvement is encouraged.

SYSTEMS THEORY
Systems Theory is based on the work of Von
Bertalanffy (1968). This theory asserts that systems
are a whole and that organizations should be
viewed as a whole, considering the relationships
within the structure of the organization. A system
is a complex mix of intertwined elements, including
inputs, throughputs, and outputs. Inputs are the

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

44

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 44

Understanding Organizations

CHAOS THEORY

hot topic:
Nurses and the Public
Nurses today have many opportunities to expand their
services to the public domain. In the past, private duty
nursing was common; nurses provided services for a fee
or in exchange for room and board. Essentially, the
nurse was considered a free agent and could take her
services just about anywhere. Today, nurses have many
more chances to incorporate their services and provide
care for a fee. The nurse can still function as a free
agent. One example is the nurse anesthetist. This nurse
can work for a variety of hospitals and free-standing
surgical centers at the same time. The nurse can incorporate the services provided and have contracts with
many agencies at the same time.
Another example is the consultation nurse. The nurse
may have expertise in the area of technology and sign
contracts with a variety of health-care institutions to
assist them with their technology development.
Forensic nursing is still another example. The forensic
nurse possesses expertise in investigating crime, evidence gathering, and providing health-care services to
victims of crime. A nurse with this type of background
can contract with prison systems, emergency rooms,
lawyers, and the legal system.
Free agency for nursing is not a forgotten topic. In the
21st century, it is an opportunity to expand services to
the public as well as to gain independence within the
selected specialty. Nurses today have many opportunities to become autonomous within their practice and
to develop and expand their potential.

items being put into the organization to create the
product. The throughputs are the processes put into
place to assist with the creation of the outputs.
These elements work together to accomplish speciﬁc goals within the organization. Changes in one
part of the system affect the other parts of the system, creating a ripple effect. The resources are
inputs, such as the employees, patients, materials,
money, and equipment imported from the environment. The work is considered the throughput. This
is the work within the organization, transforming
energy and resources to yield a product. The product (the output) is then exported to the environment. The organization is a constant recurring
cycle of inputs, throughputs, and outputs.

The Chaos Theory stresses the importance of
change within organizations. Change is the stimulation of the organization, and it is constant in health
care today. Change can create stress or relief for
organizations, depending on how it is perceived and
interpreted (see Chapter 11 on leading change).
Leaders must constantly assess the organizational
environment and determine whether there is consistency within the structure. Organizational leaders working under the Chaos Theory will excel with
change and creativity (McGuire, 1999). Management is ﬂexible and will reward those organizational members who thrive on adaptive behaviors
and innovation. The overall goal of the organization
is to be successful in an environment of constant
change. This theory works well with healthcare organizations today. Change is inevitable, and
employees must learn to adapt and excel to remain
employable in health care.

CONTINGENCY THEORY
The concept within the Contingency Theory is
that the organization’s structure must match the
working of the environment. The most common
aspect of the Contingency Theory recognizes the
style of the leader and how this inﬂuences the situation. How the leader leads will determine how the
organizational structure is established. There is
variation in leadership style to gain expected outcomes. There is no one leadership style that ﬁts
every situation; a good leader will learn how to
adapt to each situation to support the desired outcomes. The organizational structure based on this
theory is ﬂexible and varies based on the needs of
the organization and the leader.

LEARNING ORGANIZATIONS
In a learning organization, the people and the
systems respond and expand their capabilities to
obtain the results that are desired. The basic concept is that in situations of change, the organization
that is adaptive to the change will thrive. Learning
organizations are becoming more popular in businesses today. Members of organizations have the
ability to create and manage the changes (Senge,
1999). Particular people are employed because

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 45

Understanding Organizational Structures

of their commitment to the organization, and this
commitment serves as a resource for the success of
the organization. Peter Senge (1990) identiﬁes ﬁve
disciplines for a learning organization to be successful: systems thinking, personal mastery, mental
models, building a shared vision, and team learning.
Systems thinking is the ability to examine an
organization as a whole entity, not separate units,
and to see the interrelationships between the units.
Successful organizations explore systems as a whole
and as very dynamic processes. Personal mastery
refers to a continuous learning process by each individual. It is based on self-discipline and the idea
that individuals never stop learning. Mental models
refer to an individual’s ability to see things differently and work with pictures within the mind to
inﬂuence how a given situation is seen and interpreted. This means taking a situation and being
able to view all sides of it to discover the objectivity
of it. Building a shared vision is the ability of the
organization to create a shared idea of the future
goals and dreams. This vision creates energy for the
members of the organization to work together as a
team and meet the goals of the organization. The
ﬁnal component, team learning, refers to the organizational members’ ability to unite as a whole for
the betterment of the organization. This will
improve organizational results. When members
work together, processes improve, and outcomes are
enhanced.
Organizational theory plays an important role in
the productivity and success of the organization.
The theory helps determine the type of organizational structure and how the organization will function. It is important for managers and leaders to
understand the theories, how they relate to their
organizations, and how they can inﬂuence the
members of their organization.

45

run and contribute to changes within the structure.
Organizations with a strong value set, mission,
vision, and philosophy will be more prepared to successfully meet these ever-changing events. Goals
and objectives, policies and procedures, and strategic planning are also key components of facile organizational operation.

ORGANIZATIONAL VALUES
The stated values of an organization give meaning
to its existence and help its members act in concert
with its motives. The values clarify what is important to the organization in regard to its customers,
products, and/or services. Values set the standards
for behavior within the organization and support
the mission and the strategic plan. Organizational
leaders determine a set of values that align with the
mission and the vision of the organization.
The values for the organization serve as the
foundational cornerstone for the events and activities of the facility. Organizational values are related
to the success of the organization and determine
how it will function when working with its customers. For example, if a hospital as an organization
values service, the members will work hard on
methods to improve their patient satisfaction surveys. A client who returns for future care at the
hospital is usually one who is pleased with the type
of service given. Leaders of the organization express
these values on a daily basis within their work and
responsibilities to the system. Values can be an
implicit or explicit part of the mission statement
and are incorporated implicitly into the organization’s culture. See Box 4-1 for some examples of
organizational values.

MISSION STATEMENTS

Organizational Components
and Planning
Health-care organizations have been transformed
by the many changes in social, structural, political,
and human resource allocations (Bolman & Deal,
2003). Some speciﬁc factors that have contributed
to these changes include quality care issues, increasing health-care costs, and the focus on patient satisfaction. These factors affect how the organization is

The purpose or the mission statement encapsulates
the intent and goal of the organization. It explains,
in a short statement, the core reasons behind the
organization’s existence and a primary focus on a
single strategic thrust for the organization. The purpose of each area of the organization is to pursue
the stated mission of the organization. The mission
statement sets standards for the organization’s philosophy and its goals and objectives; it is the baseline for decisions of the organization. The mission
statement drives the organization’s existence and is

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

46

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 46

Understanding Organizations

Box 4-1

Box 4-3

Organizational Values

Sample Vision Statement

Integrity
Quality
Service

Caring
Respect
Competence

a reﬂection of the culture. See Box 4-2 for an example of a mission statement.

VISION STATEMENTS
The vision statement incorporates an organization’s mission and values. It serves as the future-oriented plan for the organization, the wish list of
future development ideas, and the plan to set this
wish list into motion. The vision statement serves
as the dream of the organization and provides guidance on where an organization wants to be 10–15
years into the future. See Box 4-3 for an example of
a vision statement.

ORGANIZATIONAL PHILOSOPHY
The philosophy of an organization is derived from
its mission and incorporates the organizational values that direct the behavior of the organization. The
information provided in the philosophy—the values
and principles of the organization—provides the
framework for the decision-making process of the
organization and shapes the social and professional
development of the organization. The philosophy
serves to allow employees to achieve common goals
(Wendenhof & Strahley, 1995). The philosophy
underlies the goals and objectives of the organization, so it is imperative that nurses understand and
know their organization’s philosophy. See Box 4-4
for a sample philosophy.

Box 4-2
Sample Mission Statement
Provide a personal approach to the services offered
by demonstrating a commitment to quality health care
and offering services that promote well-being of the
community through education and advanced
technology.

To be the premier leader in quality health-care education
and service.

ORGANIZATIONAL GOALS
AND OBJECTIVES
The speciﬁc goals and objectives of the organization
provide more concrete information on what and
how the organization plans to provide/act, under
the guiding hands of its established mission and
philosophy. The organizational goals are the broad
statements of intent, and the objectives are the speciﬁc ways to accomplish the goals. Goals are a part
of the planning process, which is one of the functions of management. Generally, the goals and the
objectives explain the services offered, the resource
allocation, the future plans, and the responsibility
to the customer (Box 4-5).

ORGANIZATIONAL POLICIES
AND PROCEDURES
Each organization also has established policies and
procedures. A policy is a written plan stating how
the organization will function and work together.
Policies help the organization to accomplish the
established goals and directives and provide cohesive guidance for the members of the organization.
The procedures are the methods and direction on
how the policy will be implemented. Procedures

Box 4-4
Sample Philosophy
Hospital and Health-Care Organization, in conjunction
with the Board of Trustees and entire health-care staff,
believe that human beings are unique and holistic, having
value and worth as individuals with individualized healthcare needs. The health-care team at Hospital believes in
providing the best possible care and education (using
enhanced technology) to the community it serves. Each
client has diverse learning needs and individualized goals
to meet health-care needs. The focus of care is on wellness, caring, and the highest standards of customer
service and quality.

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 47

Understanding Organizational Structures

Box 4-5

47

The Organization Chart

Sample List of Goals
■
■
■
■

An environment will be established that is conducive
to patient teaching and learning.
Nursing staff will identify the patient’s need for
independence and foster relationships to develop this.
Quality nursing care will be provided within all levels
of the organization.
Annual development and assessment plans will be
implemented with all employees of Hospital.

The organization chart outlines the formal working
relationships and the way people interact within
the given structure. The organization chart establishes the following:
■

■
■

offer step-by-step guidance as to how to implement
and carry out the policy. Policies and procedures are
used during employee orientation, daily routines,
and decision making. Both establish interdepartmental consistency within the organization. The
policies and procedures familiarize employees with
the rules and also serve to provide guidance and
organizational direction.

ORGANIZATIONAL STRATEGIC PLANNING
Many organizations do strategic planning 3–5 years
(see Chapter 14) out for the purpose of preparing to
reach future goals. Strategic planning begins with
analysis of where the organization stands currently
and where it wants to be in the future.
The strategic plan has to have value for the members of the organization, and it needs to ﬁt with the
vision and mission of the organization. The strategic
plan may include new services for patients, building
opportunities, and other growth for the organization. It serves as the blueprint for the future. The
strategic plan maps out ideas from the vision while
focusing on the mission of the organization.
Implementation of the strategic plan requires
strong leadership and managerial skills, support
from the board of directors, administrative acceptance, and an understanding by all employees. It is
critical that members of the organization understand what the strategic plan contains and where it
will guide them for the future. Many organizations
hold informational sessions to obtain employee
input and feedback. Informed employees are happy
employees, and there will be greater acceptance
when all understand and participate in creating the
goals for the organization’s future.

Formal lines of authority—the official power
to act
Responsibility—the duty or assignment
Accountability—the moral responsibility

The chart displays the decision-making authority
within the organization, illustrating who has the
power to make and enforce decisions for the organization. Organizational leadership has the unique
ability to implement and follow the values, mission,
vision, philosophy, and strategic plan in order to
ensure the organization’s future. The leadership of
the organization is identiﬁed and described in the
organization chart.
The formal channels of communication are identiﬁed as well as how members ﬁt within the given
structure. The chart demonstrates the formal relationships within the organization but does not
demonstrate the informal communication and relationships that often develop as a result of working
within the organization. The chart shows how the
organization is supposed to run and how departments support one another in this process. Charts
change frequently and require updating at least
annually so that they represent what is really happening within the organization. Organization
charts generally reﬂect the components displayed in
Figure 4-1.

CHAIN OF COMMAND
Chain of command demonstrates who formally
reports to whom within the organization. The vertical lines in the chart represent chain of command.
It is a formal line of authority and communication
within the organization and the structure.
Authority and responsibility are delegated down
through the chain of command. This philosophy
works well, as organizations are attempting to
decrease the number of layers within their structures in order to decrease the number of management positions and save money.

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

48

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 48

Understanding Organizations

President

Vice President
Nursing

Vice President
Operations

Vice President
Business and Finance

Cardiac

Facilities

Accounting

Medical

Information
Technology

Human
Resources

Surgical

Food
Services

Development

Maternity

Environmental
Services
FIGURE 4-1 Organizational components.

Line Positions
Line positions are depicted by the solid vertical
lines within the organization chart. These lines
demonstrate who is responsible to whom within the
organization. The positions with the most decisionmaking power are near the top of the organization chart. An example of a line position would be
the Nurse Manager of the Pediatric unit, who has
power and authority over the staff nurses on the
unit. Another example would be the vice president of the organization who reports directly to the
president.

Staff Positions
Staff positions are broken horizontal lines or
dashes within the organization chart, showing
the relationship between two people who work
together to support objectives within the organization. These positions are primarily advisory in
nature, with no direct authority over the people
they are working with. The staff positions support
each other within the organization by consultation,
education, role modeling, and development. An
example would be the vice presidents of the organization with respect to one another. These members
advise and consult with each other but report to a
person in a higher position, through the vertical
line connection.

Organizations would be hard-pressed to function
without staff positions. Managers usually work
closely with people in staff positions to support a
speciﬁc cause or opportunity for the unit. For example, the manager works closely with the nursing
educator to support the educational needs of the
nursing unit. The manager would ﬁnd it difficult to
do this task without the educator’s assistance and
expertise. The educator does not necessarily report
to the manager, nor do the staff nurses directly
report to the educator. This is an example of the
advisory nature of the staff position.

Unity of Command
The concept of unity of command is central to the
hierarchy of the organization. The overall thought
is that each person on the organization chart has
one manager or one boss. This is observed on the
chart by the vertical solid lines that connect positions on the chart. As health-care organizations
continue to grow and increase in complexity, there
may be more than one person to whom an employee
must report.

Span of Control
Span of control is denoted on the chart as the number of people reporting to each manager. The span of
control determines how the organizational structure

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 49

Understanding Organizational Structures

will appear on paper (Altaffer, 1998). A wide span
of control indicates that many people are reporting
to a manager, and a narrow span of control indicates
that only a few people are reporting to the manager.
In the 1990s, many managers were let go, and their
positions were combined to cover many different
units in an effort to reduce management costs. Due
to the hierarchical nature of the chart, the higher a
leader resides within the organizational structure,
the fewer the people who report, but the greater the
overall responsibility that leader has within the
organization. As health-care organizations change
and consolidate, upper-level managers are taking on
a greater span of control (Altaffer, 1998).

DECISION MAKING
Organization charts also depict how decisions are
made within an organization. Centralized decision
making occurs when a few people at the top levels
of the organizational structure make decisions.
Such a chart will appear tall and hierarchical on

49

paper. Decentralized decision making occurs
when decisions are made throughout the organization, at the lowest level possible within the
organization. Such an organization chart takes on a
ﬂattened appearance. In decentralized decision
making, authority, responsibility, and accountability are given to the person closest to the problem to
resolve the issue. This method increases employee
morale and job satisfaction. Employees given such
authority tend to be more motivated and feel valued
as members of the organization (Huber, 2000;
Marquis & Huston, 2003).
The management and the leadership of the
organization have to be comfortable with the type
of decision making that will evolve with the organization. The method used to make decisions is inﬂuenced by the mission, the vision, the values, and the
philosophy. The size of the organization may also
inﬂuence what method is used.

Type of Organizational
Structures

Practice to Strive For 4-1
Today’s organizations face many challenges with changes
in health-care technology, reimbursement, and practice.
The organizational leader’s jobs are to formulate an organizational culture and climate that is supportive of the vision,
mission, and values of the organization. One main point to
strive for is autonomy for the nursing staff. The culture
should provide the members opportunities to grow and
develop within their profession, such as with shared governance practice models and magnet status. Both affect
nurses and how they will function within the organizational structure. The culture surrounding magnet status is
one of care centers, with leaders who work with the staff to
plan and evaluate the organization’s services to meet the
needs of the community.
Magnet status allows the nursing staff to participate and
share in the development of policies and procedures
through committees detailing research, practice, and education. Quality care and indicators are a part of all performance appraisal processes and patient satisfaction surveys.
The overall nursing structure includes autonomy, collaboration, and delegation as key processes within the nursing
philosophy. Nurses participate in all levels of decision making within the shared governance model. Organizations
strive for excellence and ensure this within all of the services
and activities offered. This philosophy is threaded throughout within the vision, mission, and values.

Health-care providers should be familiar with the
type of structure used within their organization.
The structure affects communication patterns, relationships, and authority within the health-care setting (Marquis & Huston, 2006). The structure
provides stability for the mission, the vision, the
values, and the goals of the organization. The structure aligns itself with the goals of the organization
and provides efficiency for the organization.
The structure provides stability for decision
making within the organization. The structure
determines how the decision will be made. The
organization chart depicts the lines of authority and
chain of command and identiﬁes communication
patterns and relationships for the employees of the
organization.

TALL/CENTRALIZED/BUREAUCRACY
The centralized structure, a tall structure, also
known as the bureaucracy, is a hierarchical structure (Fig. 4-2). Decision making and power are held
by a few people within the top level. Each person
who has some power and authority is responsible
for only a few people. There are many layers of

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

50

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 50

Understanding Organizations

Chief Administrator

Vice PresidentPatient Services

Vice PresidentNursing Services

Vice PresidentBusiness

Inpatient

Outpatient

Inpatient

Outpatient

Inpatient

Outpatient

One

One

One

One

One

One

Two

Three

Two

Three

Two

Three

Two

Three

Two

Three

Two

Three

FIGURE 4-2 Bureaucracy.

departments, and communication tends to be slow
as it travels through this type of a system. This type
of structure is noted for its subdivision and specialization of labor. Advantages to this type of structure
are that managers have a narrow span of control
and can maintain close supervision of their employees. A disadvantage is that there may be a delay in
decision making due to the many layers of people
that the decision must pass through to get to the top
administrative level. It predisposes leaders to an
autocratic style of leadership because many decisions must go to the top of the organization or the
higher-level supervisor for an answer.

of control. Communication patterns are simpliﬁed,
and problems tend to be addressed with ease and
efficiency at the level at which they occur.
Employees have autonomy and increased job satisfaction within this type of structure. A disadvantage
is the broad span of control, which may make it hard
for management to process information quickly and
efficiently for the employees. This is especially true
for decisions that need to span the whole structure.
Management at all levels takes on a greater sense of
responsibility within this structure, so education
across teams is important. Managers may be supervising areas with which they are not familiar or
have limited working experience.

FLAT/DECENTRALIZED STRUCTURE
AD HOC/ADHOCRACY STRUCTURE
The decentralized structure is ﬂat in nature, and
organizational power is spread out throughout the
structure (Fig. 4-3). There are few layers in the
reporting structure, and managers have a broad span

The organic or adhocracy structure of organization is an open, free-form system. This system
has resulted from behavioral research based on job

Nursing Administrator

Maternity
Supervisor

Nurse

Nurse

Pediatric
Supervisor

Nurse

Nurse

Nurse

Surgery
Supervisor

Nurse

FIGURE 4-3 Decentralized structure.

Nurse

Nurse

Nurse

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 51

Understanding Organizational Structures

satisfaction and efficiency. This type of structure is
used with specialized teams to complete a speciﬁc
task. From an organizational perspective, the entire
organization consists of specialized teams, each
assigned to complete a speciﬁc task. The major disadvantage of this type of structure is the lack of a
formal chain of command. The teams work
together, but when problems are encountered there
is no assigned person within the structure on whom
they can rely for resolution.

MATRIX STRUCTURE
The matrix structure is a combination of two structures, consisting of the product (output) and the
function, linked into one structure. The function
consists of all of the activities and duties needed to
produce an end product, and the product is the
result of the function. The structure works to balance the function and service of the organization
into one operational outcome. The functions are the
tasks required to complete the product. The manager of the product division works with the manager
of the function division, creating two lines of
authority, accountability, and communication. The
team approach is incorporated, and there is a
decrease in the number of formal rules for this type
of structure. Issues with the matrix structure
include the vague chain of command and goal variation between the two structures. This type of structure implements the use of resources efficiently.

STRUCTURES SPECIFIC TO HEALTH CARE
As health-care organizations continue to change
and reorganize services to meet the needs of the customer, so will the look of the structure. Many services are changing and becoming more accessible for
the patient entering the complex health-care arena.

Integrated Health-Care System
Integrated health-care systems can be deﬁned as
innovative, patient-centered hospital delivery systems that continuously improve quality and use
resources cost-effectively (Effken & Stetler, 1997).
This type of system evolved as a result of changes in
reimbursement and managed care. An integrated
health-care system is a network of structures combined into one to provide better continuity of care

51

for patients in the most applicable setting. The networks share the risks associated with the cost to
provide care to the patients (McCarthy, 1997). By
providing services in the most appropriate setting,
the costs can be contained, which allows for a better patient outcome.
The push for an integrated system stems from
the need to improve the quality of care within
organizations, to reduce costs associated with
health care, and to ensure patient/customer satisfaction (Wolf, Hayden, & Bradle, 2004). The single
hospital of yesterday is now a component of a much
larger system, offering a wide range of services for
the consumer. Integrated health-care systems
attempt to keep costs down and keep dollars for
care within their own systems. This type of consolidation also assists and prepares for managed competition. One example of a cost control measure
includes redesigning practice to serve the organizational and patient needs better. Management systems look collaboratively at patient care and
outcomes of care. It is important for nurses to know
and understand how these systems work and what
can be done to enhance them.
The services offered can include a combination
of any of the following: hospital, clinics, home
health, community health, school nursing, longterm care, and rehabilitation services. When services vary like this, it is known as vertical
integration, which provides a range of health-care
services across the life span (Newhouse & Mills,
1999). When the integrated system consists of a
chain of similar services, such as all hospitals or
clinics, this is known as horizontal integration.

TYPES OF HEALTH-CARE SERVICES
There are three types of health-care services on the
health-care continuum. Integrated systems often
provide all three types. The shift to managed care
has also changed the focus from secondary and tertiary care to primary health care. Primary health
care prioritizes the importance of health promotion
and illness prevention. This is the ﬁrst line of
defense for health care. Examples of health-care
services provided in primary care include physician
visits, immunization clinics, mammography, and
teaching and education for clients. Primary health
care covers services that prevent illness. Secondary
health-care services focus on treating disease

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

52

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 52

Understanding Organizations

through intervention. The patient has a health
alteration and seeks treatment to improve the current state of health. Secondary health-care settings
include the acute care setting, such as inpatient hospitals, surgical centers, and birthing centers.
Tertiary health-care services focus on the restoration and rehabilitation services for patients with
chronic health-care needs. The goal is to maintain
the current state at the best possible level of health.
Health-care settings include long-term care facilities, hospice, and rehabilitation centers.
Managed care is the umbrella term that is used to
address the ﬁnancing and risk management for
services provided in integrated health-care systems.
Managed care unites the ﬁnancing groups with the
providers of care. The goal of managed care is to
establish programs that beneﬁt all key participants,
including the insurance companies and the physicians. The push for managed care was evident as
the health-care industry continued to become more
complex and difficult for patients to maneuver and
understand. Intensifying these concerns was the
increase in cultural diversity served by the private
sector (Valanis, 2000). The managed care model is
the only health-care delivery model formulated
from market and customer response, as compared
with government and legislative initiatives (KellyHeidenthal, 2003; Liberman & Rotarius, 2001).
Managed care involves a prepaid mechanism,
which means that a predetermined dollar amount is
established to cover the cost of the health-care service. Care that is rendered is selective and requires
prior authorization. There are many types of managed care products in use currently. The most common is the health maintenance organization
(HMO). The HMO plan offers health care for its
members for a ﬁxed prepaid amount. An enrolled
group of patients participates in the plan, and the
provider is considered an employee. The provider
receives a ﬁxed payment for the services from the
subscriber and assumes the ﬁnancial risk. The
advantage of a managed care program is cost reduction. There is a gatekeeper for the patient, usually
the primary care physician. The gatekeeper’s role is
to oversee and coordinate services for the patient in
the mix of the system. A disadvantage to managed
care includes limitations to specialized care needs;
some organizations are proﬁt-driven and limit their
services. Patients in health care today are discharged quicker and sicker, with only limited services available outside of the acute care setting.

Professional Practice Models
In organizations where nurses are employed and
valued, management has developed and implemented opportunities for professional, autonomous
nursing practice. Shared governance is deﬁned as
“structures… based on a set of principles about the
relationship between the worker and the workplace” (Porter-O’Grady, 2003, p. 251). The push
was for decentralized nursing leadership and decision making for professional nurses. Such a structure is based on the values of interdependence and
accountability for nursing practice. The objective is
to empower the nursing staff through involvement
in decisions that affect their speciﬁc work areas
(Erickson, Hamilton, Jones, & Ditomassi, 2003).
The outcome from implementation of a professional practice model is that nurses have control
of their nursing practice. Nursing staff participates
in nursing committees that cover topics such as
education, community involvement, research, quality control, and staffing, scheduling, and hiring
practices.
The uniqueness of this structure is that nurses
gain control and autonomy over their professional
nursing practice. Governance models are designed
to link values and nursing practice beliefs to achieve
quality care (Anthony, 2004). There are more
opportunities to be involved in decision making and
have a voice within the organizational structure. As
the nursing staff members serve on the various
committees, they plan and organize the care of the
patients and establish standards for nursing care
based on research and evidenced-based practice.

MAGNET STATUS
The American Academy of Nursing (AAN) began
to review and identify as magnet hospitals those
hospitals that had solid organizational structures
and a decentralized, open management style. This
concept became popular in the 1980s in relation to professional practice model concepts. The
goal of the magnet organization was to demonstrate autonomous nursing practice through selfgovernance, appropriate staffing, clinical expertise,
and clinical ladder career opportunities (Upenieks,
2003).
To obtain magnet status, hospitals demonstrate
that the structure in place is exempliﬁed through a
professional practice model that promotes excel-

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 53

Understanding Organizational Structures

lence in nursing. Compliance with the identiﬁed
standards must be demonstrated at all levels of
nursing care within the organization (McClure,
Poulin, Sovie, & Wandelt, 1983). Multiple days of
onsite evaluations to assess organizational magnetism are conducted by the accrediting organization,
American Nurses Credentialing Center, to determine if magnet status can be awarded. Status is
awarded for 4 years. To achieve magnet status,
there must organizational and nursing leadership
linkages. There are 14 criteria necessary to obtain
magnet status:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Quality of nursing leadership
Organizational structure
Management style
Personnel policies and programs
Professional models of care
Quality of care
Quality improvement
Consultation and resources
Autonomy
Community and the hospital
Nurses as teachers
Image of nursing
Interdisciplinary relationships
Professional development

Organizational Culture
and Climate
All organizations have an informal structure that is
not identiﬁed on the organization chart. It comprises the social networks and relationships that
develop in the work setting. It provides a sense of
belonging within the organization, also known as
the culture and climate of the organization. These
concepts provide insight into the organization and
help inﬂuence change.

ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
Culture can be deﬁned as the assumptions and
beliefs that organizational members have in common. It is the “shared values and beliefs within the
organization” (Huber, 2000, p. 437). The culture of
the organization contains the norms that characterize the environment (Sleutel, 2000). The culture
gives a sense of identity to its members and their

53

commitment to the organization, and it helps to
determine the behavior of the organization. It
drives the work and the quality of the care within
the organization (Gershon, Stone, Bakken, &
Larson, 2004).
Culture also means that there are things in the
environment that are constant, unspoken, and
rarely subject to change. The culture consists of
things that are not written down but are known by
all members. The organizational culture affects
the outcomes of quality for the organization. The
culture is learned through the relationship between
behaviors and the consequences (Jones & Redman,
2000).

ORGANIZATIONAL CLIMATE
The climate of the organization is the “perception
of how it feels to work in a particular environment”
(Snow, 2002, p. 393). Components of the climate
are speciﬁc and easy to measure. Some characteristics of climate include amount of involvement members can have, supervisor support given, amount of
responsibility given, commitment of the members,
ﬂexibility of the work setting, and standards set for
improving practice. The key assessment question to
ask regarding the climate of an organization is
“Would I want to work here? Why or why not?”
The climate comprises the social aspects of the
organization that make the members feel like they
are a part of the team.

All Good Things…
Health-care organizations face many changes in
today’s world. Nurses are a major component of a
health-care organization, and it is imperative they
understand the structure in which they provide
nursing care. The structure of the organization is
deﬁned by the organization chart. This chart indicates who reports to whom and who is responsible
and accountable for the functions of the organization. The organizational structure defines the
arrangement of the work groups. Organizations
today that have a strong value set, mission, vision,
and philosophy are better prepared to meet everchanging events and the needs of their customers.
This chapter deﬁnes organizational theories, different types of structures, lines of authority and

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

54

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 54

Understanding Organizations

accountability, and the components of the organization chart. These are all elements that help members understand their work environment. Nurses
need to be knowledgeable and comfortable within
the culture and the climate of the organization.
Many organizations are improving their work environment through shared governance and magnet
status for the nurses. This provides autonomy and
demonstrates the importance of a professional practice environment for the registered nurse.

Let’s Talk
1. Determine what your personal values are, and
compare them with those of a local health-care
setting. Do you see a ﬁt with your values and
those of the organization?
2. Think of the last position you had or the current
job you are in. What type of organizational
structure was in place? Was it working for the
organization? Did you feel comfortable within
the structure?
3. Describe the type of culture and climate you
believe will best serve your needs as a practicing
registered nurse.

NCLEX Questions
1. Which theory emphasizes the importance of
cooperation and participation in the workplace?
A. Chaos Theory.
B. Systems Theory.
C. Classical Theory.
D. Neoclassical Theory.
2. When reviewing an organizational chart, what
represents the formal line of authority and
responsibility within the organization?
A. Specialization of labor.
B. Chain of command.
C. Span of control.
D. Organizational structure.
3. The basic concept behind a learning organization is:
A. The popularity to change.

B. The people change.
C. The adaptation to change.
D. The resources of change.
4. Which one of the following sets the standards
for behavior within the organization?
A. The mission.
B. The values.
C. The philosophy.
D. The vision.
5. Line and staff positions are identiﬁed on the
organization chart. What does the line position
denote?
A. Who is responsible to whom within the
organization.
B. Advisory relationships between employees.
C. The number of people reporting to each
manager.
D. How the decisions are made by the employer.
6. Which type of structure has decision making
and power being led by a few people?
A. Flat.
B. Integrated.
C. Matrix.
D. Tall.
7. What is characteristic of a ﬂat structure?
A. Narrow span of control.
B. Fewer layers in the reporting structure.
C. Combines two structures into one.
D. Is cost-effective with use of resources.
8. A patient was admitted to the hospital for an
outpatient surgical procedure. Discharge was on
the same day, and recovery continued at home.
This is an example of what type of health care?
A. Primary.
B. Secondary.
C. Tertiary.
D. Quarterly.
9. Professional practice models allow for autonomous nursing practice. This concept is based
on the relationship between the worker and the
workplace. An example of a professional practice model is:
A. Matrix.
B. Integrated health care.
C. Shared governance.
D. Nursing care delivery.

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 55

Understanding Organizational Structures

10. Organizational culture and climate are important aspects of the organization. Which of the
following are characteristic of the culture of the
organization?
A. Supervisor support given.
B. Flexibility of the work setting.
C. Responsibility given.
D. Determines the behavior of the organization.
REFERENCES
Altaffer, A. (1998, July). First line managers: Measuring their
span of control. Nursing Management, 36–40.
Anthony, M. (2004). Shared governance models: The theory,
practice, and evidence. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing,
9(1)1–10.
Bolman, L., & Deal, T. (2003). Reframing organizations: Artistry,
choice, and leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Crowell, D. (1998, May). Organizations are relationships, a new
view of management. Nursing Management, 28–29.
Effken, J., & Stetler, C. (1997). Impact of organizational
redesign. Journal of Nursing Administration. 27(7/8), 23–32.
Erickson, J., Hamilton, G., Jones, D., & Ditomassi, M. (2003).
The value of governance/staff empowerment. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 33(2), 96–104.
Gershon, R., Stone, P., Bakken. S., & Larson, E. (2004).
Measurement of organizational culture and climate in healthcare. Journal of Nursing Administration, 34(1), 33–39.
Huber, D. (2000). Leadership and nursing care management (2nd
ed.). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Jones, K., & Redman, R. (2000). Organizational culture and
work redesign. Journal of Nursing Administration, 30(12),
604–610.
Liberman, A., & Rotarius, T. (2001). Managed care evolution—
where did it come from and where is it going? In KellyHeidenthal, P. Nursing leadership and management. Australia:
Thomson-Delmar Learning.
Marquis, B., & Huston, C. (2003). Leadership roles and management functions in nursing. Theory & application (4th ed.).
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Marriner-Tomey, A. (2000). Guide to nursing management and
leadership (6th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
McCarthy, R. (1997, September). Do integrated delivery systems
do it better? Business & Health, 39–43.
McGuire, E. (1999). Chaos theory: Learning a new science.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 29(2), 8–9.
McClure, M., Poulin, M., Sovie, M., & Wandelt, M. (1983).
Magnet hospitals: Attraction and retention of professional nurses.
Washington, D.C.: American Nurses Association.
Newhouse, R., & Mills, M. (1999). Vertical systems integration.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 29(10), 22–29.
Porter-O’Grady, T. (2003). Researching shared governance.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 33(4), 251–252.
Senge, P. (1990). The ﬁfth discipline: The art & practice of the
learning organization. New York: Currency Doubleday.
Senge, P. (1999). The practice of innovation. In Hesslebein, F., &
Cohen, P. (Eds.), Leader to leader (pp. 57–68). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

55

Sleutel, M. (2000). Climate culture, context or work environment? Organization factors that inﬂuence nursing practice.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 30(2), 53–58.
Snow, J. (2002). Enhancing work climate to improve performance and retain valued employees. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 32(7/8), 393–397.
Sullivan, E, & Decker, P. (2001). Effective leadership and management in nursing. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Upenieks, V. (2003). What’s the attraction to magnet hospitals?
Nursing Management, 34(2), 43–44.
Valanis, B. (2000). Professional nursing practice in an HMO:
The future is now. Journal of Nursing Education, 39(1), 13–20.
Wendenhof, J., & Strahley, J. (1995). Realizing a corporate philosophy. Organizational Dynamics, 23, 4–19.
Wolf, G., Hayden, M., & Bradle, J. (2004). The transformational
model for professional practice. A system integration focus.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 34(4), 180–187.
Yoder-Wise, P. (2003). Leading and managing in nursing (3rd
ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aikman, P., Andress, I., Goodfellow, C., LaBelle, N., & PorterO’Grady, T. (1998). System integration: A necessity. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 28(2), 28–34.
Belcher, J., & Alexy, B. (1999). High-resource hospital users in
an integrated delivery system. Journal of Nursing Administration, 29(10), 30–36.
Drucker, P. (1980). Management in turbulent times. New York:
Harper & Row Publishers.
Hudson, K. (2005). From research to practice on the magnet
pathway. Nursing Management, 36(3), 33–37.
Ingersoll, G., Kirsch, J., Ehrlich-Merk, S., & Lightfoot, J.
Relationship of organizational culture and readiness for
change to employee commitment to the organization. Journal
of Nursing Administration, 30(1), 11–20.
Osland, J., Kolb, D., & Rubin, I. (2001). The organizational
behavior reader (7th ed.). Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice
Hall.
Tappen, R., Weiss, S., & Whitehead, D. (1998). Essentials of
nursing leadership and management. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis
Company.
Taylor, N. (2003). The magnetic pull. Nursing Management,
34(7), 48–56.
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). General systems theory. New York:
George Braziller.
Walton, M. (1986). The Deming management method. New York:
Perigee Books.

Additional Bibliography
Jones, L.B. (1998). The path: Creating your mission statement for
work and life. New York: Hyperion.
Mitzberg, H. (1983). Structures in ﬁves: Designing effective organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Norton, D., & Kaplan, R. (2000). The strategy-focused organization. Boston: Harvard Business School.
Porter-O’Grady, T. (1992). Implementing shared governance:
Creating a professional organization. St. Louis: Mosby–Year
Book.

04Jones Leadership(F)-ch 04

1/14/07

3:34 PM

Page 56

This page has been left intentionally blank.

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 57

chapter
5
Legal and Ethical
Knowledge for Nurses
SHIRLEY GARICK, PHD, RN, MSN, ABQARP Diplomate, Legal Nurse Consultant (LNC)
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Mercy and Justice balance the scales of Justice;
if mercy fails then justice must prevail.”
Anonymous

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■

Discuss foundations of the law.
Describe general areas of the law.
Explain the difference between civil and criminal law.
Define ethics.
Describe ethical principles and theories.
Discuss the interrelationship between law and ethics.

57

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

58

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 58

Understanding Organizations

U

nderstanding the legal and ethical issues
involved in nursing practice is critical for all nurses,
especially managers and leaders. Legal and ethical
issues are intertwined in many ways, but the two
entities are distinct bodies of thought and practice.
Ethics and laws both derive from societal values.
Ethics is a branch of philosophy that involves clariﬁcation of the “shoulds” and “oughts” of individuals
and society. Ethical decision making entails a distinctive choice between undesirable options. Ethical
algorithms help to guide decisions by looking at multiple dimensions of the situation under review.
Laws, on the other hand, are set down by the state
or federal governments, administrative agencies, or
courts, to establish boundaries of behaviors for society. The legal process constantly questions and
debates the law on both legal and ethical planes.
To clear some of the confusion that often surrounds ethics and law, it is important to point out
that ethics deals with the “should and should nots”
that are related to behavior or actions taken by an
individual. Ethics also deals with the questions of
why an action is reprehensible or not reprehensible
(Fry & Veatch, 1992). The legality of these choices
is always a strong consideration when attempting to
resolve ethical dilemmas. Ethical dilemmas in
health care come up frequently, and they often
address life and death issues. Nurse leaders must be
prepared to address these issues in order to guide
the members of their nursing staff. This chapter
considers the aspects of the legal system with which
the nurse leader must become familiar and then
explores the foundations of ethics and ethical decision making.

The Legal System
The American legal system is based on the early
English system of common law. Common law
refers to case law that is directed and made by a
judge rather than by a governmental legislative
body. This type of law is set by precedent or the
principles of stare decisis, along with the factual scenario of a given case. These laws build from one
case to the next, as each judge’s decision sets the
precedent for future cases. In addition to federal
law, Pohlman points out that each state court system has it own “case law [emphasis added] based

on the interpretation of its respective statutes”
(Pohlman, 1990, p. 296). State and federal legislative bodies create statutes according to societal
need. Administrative agencies detail the implementation of these statutes, and the courts interpret
confusion over the meaning of the statutes.

FEDERAL LEGISLATION
Federal laws affect nursing practice by setting minimum standards of care for all agencies receiving
federal funding. Nurses must become familiar with
federal legislation, such as the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act, which guarantees the privacy of a patient’s personal health information; the Emergency Medical Treatment and
Active Labor Law (EMTALA), and the Americans
With Disabilities Act (ADA). According to Moy
(2003), EMTALA prohibits refusal of care for indigent and uninsured patients seeking emergency
care in the emergency department. It prevents hospitals from “dumping” indigent individuals on
other hospitals. The ADA also affects nursing intimately. This law proscribes any discrimination
against individuals with disabilities by offering
them the same opportunities as individuals without
disabilities. For instance, if an individual with disabilities is the most qualiﬁed individual for a job but
requires reasonable accommodations by the
employer in order to take the job, the employer
must make these accommodations. See Box 5-1 for
others federal laws affecting nurses.

STATE LEGISLATION
State laws also regulate nurses. Nurse practice
acts (NPAs) are created by state legislatures to
deﬁne, limit, and oversee nursing practice. Nurses
must be familiar with the NPA in the state in which
they are practicing. NPAs set the requirements for
becoming licensed as a nurse in a given state, for
renewing one’s license, and for continuing education. They deﬁne the duties and responsibilities of
nurses in the state and limit the scope of practice.
Many NPAs include safe harbor laws, which limit
nurses to practicing only in their area of expertise.
For example, they prevent a rehabilitation nurse
from being pulled into intensive care because of a
staff shortage. Other NPAs include good samaritan
provisions, which protect nurses from liability for

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 59

Legal and Ethical Knowledge for Nurses

Box 5-1
Other Selected Federal Laws Affecting Nurses
The Wagner Act (National Labor Act of 1935) allowed
the establishment of unions and the National Labor
Relations Board.
Taft Hartley Act, 1947, balanced power between
management and unions.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 1967, prohibits
hiring and promotion discrimination against workers age
40 years or older.
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), 1970,
ensures a safe physical work environment for employees.
Civil Rights Act, 1964, prohibits sexual harassment as well
as employment discrimination based on race, color,
religion, gender, or national origin.
Equal Pay Act, 1963, establishes that paying a lower
wage to workers based on gender is illegal.
The Patient Self-Determination Act, 1990, dictates that
hospitals and all health-care organizations, if they accept
Medicare/Medicaid funding, must comply with
requirements relating to client advance directives.

volunteering to help in an emergency situation.
These provisions apply, for example, if a nurse stops
at the scene of a car accident to assist victims. If
something goes wrong, the victims of the car accident could not sue the nurse for malpractice. NPAs
also address charting and physician orders. They
specify that nurses must be skillful, correct, timely,
and thorough in their charting. With respect to
physician orders, most NPAs make nurses responsible for ensuring that orders are clear and accurate.
If the nurse needs clariﬁcation, she must seek it
from the physician giving the orders. The nurse is
obligated to follow the physician order, but if she
believes that doing so would be dangerous to the
health of the patient, she is responsible for contacting her supervisor and following through with the
institution’s policy regarding physician orders.

COMMON LAW
Along with federal and state statutes, common
law guides nursing practice. In order to understand
how common law works in practice, consider the
precedent-setting case of Utter v. United Hospital
Center, Inc. (Giordano, 2003). This case involved a
patient developing compartment syndrome after his

59

arm was put in a cast. The nurse caring for this
patient failed to acknowledge and recognize the
signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome and
did not request medical intervention. This case set a
legal precedent that is still followed by other courts:
nurses are required to exercise independent judgment to ensure patient safety and to prevent harm.
Case law touches on a range of issues that involve
nursing practice, including nursing malpractice,
practicing medicine without a license, wrongful termination, legal challenges to a nurse’s license, and
questions regarding collective bargaining and labor
laws. Nurse managers must work in collaboration
with risk managers to make staff nurses aware of
and educated about relevant case law.
There are two major categories of common law
that nurses must understand: civil and criminal
law. Civil law involves violations between people
regarding everyday matters. Criminal law regulates
offenses against individuals and society, violations
made with criminal intent. Tort law is one of the
major branches of civil law. Contracts is the other
major branch. According to Hall (1990), a tort is a
wrongdoing or injury that is committed against a
person’s property or person. The basis of this type
of action is the liability by one individual against
another. Contracts law revolves around an offer and
acceptance of terms between two or more individuals or organizations. The law speciﬁes when these
agreements should be upheld and when they should
not be upheld.

Torts
There are two types of torts: unintentional and
intentional.
Unintentional Torts

Unintentional torts include the two types of tort
that most frequently affect nurses, negligence and
malpractice. Negligence is the failure to act as a reasonable or prudent person would act in the same or
similar circumstances. Malpractice is a form of negligence committed by a professional, such as a
nurse, by which professional misconduct, unreasonable lack of professional skills, and/or noncompliance with accepted standards of care causes
injury to the client (Creighton, 1986).
There are a number of elements involved in both
negligence and malpractice (Box 5-2). In order to
establish liability for negligence, the existence of a
duty must ﬁrst be established. This duty and/or

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

60

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 60

Understanding Organizations

Box 5-2
Elements of Malpractice
Duty to client
Breach of duty
Causation
Damages
Forseeability

Owed to the client by nature of
employment and standards of care
by which the nurse must practice.
A failure to meet the standard of care
owed to the client.
A direct relationship between the
failure to meet the standard of care
and the client’s harm.
It must be proved that the client/
patient has incurred harm through
the unsafe nursing practice.
The nurse must recognize or have prior
knowledge that failing to meet a
standard of care may cause this type
of harm to the client/patient.

obligation from the nurse to the patient is created by
law, standards of practice, or contract (Creighton,
1986). For instance, if a nurse is late to shift change,
the nurse waiting for the nurse running late may
not leave or abandon the clients in their care until
the other nurse arrives because that nurse has
a legal duty to the clients. If there is an urgent reason that the nurse on duty must leave, then the
manager or supervisor must be notiﬁed so that
another nurse may ﬁll the position until the late
nurse arrives. This leads to the second element
needed to establish negligence, a breach of duty by
the nurse. If the nurse breaches a duty (i.e., left the
clients without waiting for the late nurse to arrive
and without ﬁnding a replacement), there is evidence of the second element of negligence (Fry &
Johnstone, 2002).
The third element needed to establish liability for
malpractice is causation, or proximate cause.
Causation means that the nurse’s breach of duty is
reasonably close to or causally connected to the
injury or damage to the client. Damage or actual
harm is the fourth element needed to prove malpractice. Without harm or injury, no cause of action
exists. This harm may be physical, emotional,
and/or ﬁnancial (Furrow, et al., 1991). There must
be proof of a direct relationship between not meeting a standard and the injury sustained by the client.
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal element of malpractice is the
forseeability of an event. Foreseeability in this
context means that the damages must be a reasonably expected result from the breach of duty.

Nurse executives/managers need to be aware of
the current trend toward the criminalization of professional nurses’ negligence. A nurse-attorney
shares a personal communication of May 14, 1997,
reported by Burkhardt and Nathaniel (1998). The
communication is as follows:
“Until recently, the risk of criminal prosecution
for nursing practice was non-existent unless nursing action arose to the level of criminal intent, such
as the case of euthanasia leading to murder charges.
However, in April, 1997, three nurses were indicted
by a Colorado grand jury for criminally negligent
homicide in the death of a newborn. Public records
show that one nurse was assigned to care for the
baby. A second nurse offered to assist her colleague
in caring for the baby. A third nurse was a nurse
practitioner working in the hospital nursery.
Because the baby was at risk for congenital syphilis,
the physician ordered that the nurse give 150,000
units of intramuscular penicillin, which would have
required ﬁve separate injections. In relation to other
problems the same day, the baby was subjected to a
lumbar puncture, which required six painful
attempts. To avoid inﬂicting further pain, Nurse
Two asked the nurse practitioner if there was
another route available for administration of the
penicillin. Nurse Two and the nurse practitioner
searched recognized pharmacology references and
determined that IV administration would be acceptable. The nurse practitioner had the authority to
change the route and directed Nurse Two to administer the medication intravenously rather than
intramuscularly. Unrecognized by the nurses, the
pharmacy erroneously delivered the medication
prepared and ready to administer in a dose ten
times greater than was ordered—1.5 million units.
As Nurse Two was administering the medication
IV, the baby died. The Colorado Board of Nursing
initiated disciplinary proceedings against Nurse
Two and the Nurse Practitioner, but not against
Nurse One. The grand jury indicted all three nurses
on charges of criminally negligent homicide, but
did not indict the pharmacist” (Burkhardt &
Nathaniel, 1998, p. 124). This is a very disturbing
example of the criminalization of negligence. The
case should be made that the nurses should have
double-checked the medication, but there really
does not seem to be criminal intent involved.
However, recklessness can rise to the level of criminal negligence, and in this case recklessness, not
intent, became the issue. Extreme cases of negli-

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 61

Legal and Ethical Knowledge for Nurses

gence that rise to the level of recklessness, however,
can sometimes replace the need for criminal intent.
Vicarious liability arises when other parties
are held responsible for causes of negligence. In
these cases, employers become responsible for
employees’ actions. Most employees are supervised,
so employers, by virtue of their oversight responsibilities, are held accountable for negligent acts
employees commit in the course of employment.
Employers also tend to have “deeper pockets” than
individual employees, so the doctrine of vicarious
liability affords injured clients a greater pool of
resources from which to draw. There is often the
temptation by nurses to believe they are protected
by their employer, but they need to keep in mind the
principle of indemniﬁcation when practicing.
Under this doctrine, the institution may in turn sue
the nurses for damages paid out for substandard
care. Nurse managers play an important role in
avoiding corporate liability problems by ensuring
that employees are delivering high-quality care to
their consumers. They must recognize the signiﬁcance of information gathered, reports, implementation of plans, and evaluation of care on an
ongoing basis. This includes client satisfaction surveys and/or other tools, which give information on
the consumers’ perception of the care they have
received in the institution.
Intentional Torts

Intentional torts are “willful or intentional acts
that violate another person’s rights or property”
(Berzweig, 1996). There are basically three components to intentional torts:
■

■
■

The acts are intended to interfere with the
plaintiff and/or the plaintiff’s property.
The acts are intentional by the defendant.
The acts cause the consequences.

There is no legal requirement for the act causing
injury or damage, only proof of intention is sufficient for the courts (Fiesta, 1988). Intentional torts
include fraud, assault, battery, informed consent,
false imprisonment, invasion of privacy, and
defamation, which includes slander and libel. This
section brieﬂy describes each in turn.
Fraud is deliberate deception to gain unfair or
unlawful advantage of a situation. Fraud may occur
if a nurse falsiﬁes her employment record or any
records at her disposal. According to Guido (2001),
civil assault is a threat to touch an individual without consent and causing an immediate fear of harm.

61

The touch does not have to take place; the individual just has to be fearful that it will take place.
Battery, on the other hand, is the actual and unlawful touching of the individual’s body or clothes or
anything attached to the individual without the
individual’s consent. The nurse manager must
make sure that their employees understand these
two intentional torts and the differences. Fiesta
(1988) presents an interesting case in which a
Christian Scientist client refused medication and
treatment. This client was nonetheless forced to
take medication, which the courts ultimately ruled
was a battery and awarded remuneration.
Interestingly, one of the most common examples
of battery in a hospital setting is surgery being performed without informed consent. Informed consent is the process whereby a client is informed of
all possible outcomes, risks of treatments, and alternatives in order to be able to consent freely to the
recommended procedure. This means the client has
the opportunity and the freedom to make choices in
health-care treatment. Confusion arises when the
patient is not mentally competent to make decisions
about treatment, when there is a language or cultural barrier to understanding the explanation of
the treatment and risks, when the patient has not
reached legal age to consent but is an emancipated
minor, in emergency situations, and when patients
refuse to consent despite expected dire consequences for refusal. State laws vary on these subjects. Informed consent is an active and complex
area of litigation. Nurses should ensure that valid
informed consent exists before performing or assisting with any procedure or treatment. Otherwise,
nurses risk possible cause of action for battery.
According to Creighton (1986, p. 197), false
imprisonment is the unjustiﬁable and unlawful
detention of a client within ﬁxed boundaries or an
act with the intention to keep the individual in such
a conﬁnement. There are many cases involving
false imprisonment. In Big Town Nursing Home, Inc.
v. Newman (1970), a 67-year-old man was brought
to the nursing home by a nephew, and when he
tried to leave, the staff restrained him and denied
him use of the telephone or his clothes. The court
found the reckless actions of the nursing home willful and malicious in detaining him.
Invasion of privacy is the right to be left alone or
free from unwanted publicity. Fiesta (1988)
describes four types of privacy invasion: the intrusion of the client’s physical and mental solitude,

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

62

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 62

Understanding Organizations

public disclosure of private facts, any type of publicity that puts the client in the public eye under
false pretenses, and any type of appropriation that
is a beneﬁt due to the client’s name or likeness (p.
160). The case of Bethiaume v. Pratt involved a
dying client who had cancer of the larynx and was
repeatedly photographed for use by the physician.
The client asked not to be photographed, but these
wishes were ignored, and the court found the physician liable for invasion of privacy (Fiesta, 1988, p.
160). Nurse leaders and managers must make sure
that a client’s privacy is not invaded during their
care. This includes ethical as well as legal overtones
in client care delivery. Conﬁdentiality is one of the
ethical principles that nursing practice upholds via
the American Nurses Association Code of Ethics
with Interpretative Statements (2001). Nurse managers must make certain that the privileged information regarding clients in their care is kept
conﬁdential. Nurses are privy to highly conﬁdential
information regarding client care. Information
should be disseminated exclusively on a need-toknow basis. Nurse managers should also caution
their staff not to discuss interesting client cases in
open areas. Nurse managers are charged with the
maintenance of nursing standards within the ranks
of their nursing staff.

Practice to Strive For 5-1
Catalano (1991); Guido (1997); and Mitchell & Grippando
(1993) all point out Best Practices for Reducing the Risk of
Malpractice Litigation:
I. Maintain good communication with the clients in your
care. This means being courteous and respectful; listening carefully; not making value judgments; assessing the
ability of your client to follow and understand and then
explaining treatments, orders, and medications at the
level of understanding and in the language the client
understands. Always verify and clarify telephone orders;
optimally, do not take any telephone orders or give
instructions or advice over the phone.
II. Always keep your knowledge and skills up to date. Do
not administer any medication with which you are not
familiar, and always practice within the professional
standards and statutory span of your practice.
III. Follow and know your institution’s policies and procedures, and always pay close attention to your clients’
changing health status. Keep close attention to all
details surrounding your clients, and document thoroughly, accurately, objectively, and in a timely manner.
IV. Always seek attention for a client’s changing health status, and question physician orders if they are unclear or
not in keeping with the client’s condition. Remember to
challenge policies or bureaucratic structures that may
threaten your client’s welfare.

Contract Law
The area of contract law most relevant to nurse
managers is employment. Most employment relationships between nurses and employers are “at
will,” which allows the employees to quit “at will”
and the employer to terminate “at will,” for no reason. An actual employment contract between
employee and employer is more binding, however.
The nurse promises to provide speciﬁc nursing
services in exchange for ﬁnancial reimbursement. If
either side violates its promises under the contract,
the contract has been breached, and the other part
may seek damages.
Contracts also come into play in the labor law
arena. Many nurses work under the auspices of a
union. The Massachusetts Nurses Association
(2003) points out that 35% of nurses with union
affiliation make a higher wage and work less
mandatory overtime than nonunion nurses. This
brings into play collective bargaining agreements,
which protect the nurse and will not allow the discharge of a nurse without “good cause.” Nurse

supervisors are not allowed to participate in collective bargaining.

Ethical Foundations
Ethics is a philosophy based on moral values and
reasoning. It contains distinct conduct rules that

Administrative Law
Administrative law includes the regulatory and
adjudicatory power that is placed in the hands of
agencies like the state boards of nursing. For example,
state boards of nursing are given authority to further
define state-legislated nursing practice acts by setting out
the needed preparation for nursing practice and
disciplinary actions for nurses who fail to follow the rules
governing the practice of nursing.

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 63

Legal and Ethical Knowledge for Nurses

hot topic:
Advance Directives
Advance directives include living wills, do not resuscitate (DNR) orders, and durable power of attorney for
health care. Patients and their families as well as nurse
managers and leaders must be conversant in these topics. Advance directives allow the individual who is of
sound mind to make decisions regarding end-of-life or
emergency treatment before situations arise. Advance
directives may be executed through a living will, which
designates the type of care the individual would like to
receive in circumstances in which the individual is no
longer able to decide.
Because living wills sometimes do not hold legal validity, many individuals execute a durable power of attorney for health care, which names a person who will be
responsible for end-of-life decision making and care.
Nurses are obligated to ask patients about advance
directives, living wills, and durable power of attorney.
The Patient Self-Determination Act directs all healthcare institutions receiving Medicare/Medicaid funds to
inform adult patients of their right to determine their
care. This includes informing them of advance directives and their right to have an advance directive.
Health practitioners have a duty to follow medical
directives, out of respect for patients’ wishes. The physician must adhere to state statutes when writing these
orders, and the nurse must follow these orders. In fact,
nurses have been sued for not observing these orders
(Tammelleo, 1997). Claims that may be lodged against
the nurse for violating DNR orders include battery and
negligence.

regulate particular choices of actions or decisions
(Mappes & DeGrazia, 2001). These rules are based
on philosophical theories. Ethics and ethical decision making stem from works of major philosophers, such as Immanuel Kant, Rawls, and Mill
(Brannigan & DeGrazia, 2001). Deontology, or formalism, is a theory that focuses on an individual’s
motives rather than on the consequences of actions.
Deontology encompasses natural law and incorporates dutiful actions of the individual (Hill & Zweig,
2003). Kant further recognized that reasoning is
sufficient in leading an individual to moral actions
and that these actions should be commenced as
ends in themselves rather than as means to an end
(Raphael, 1994). For example, a physician asks a

63

nurse to monitor a depressed 40-year-old patient
who has been placed on a new, experimental antidepressant medication. The nurse monitors the
patient and tells the physician that the patient said,
“The medication makes me feel nauseated all of the
time,” but the depression has lifted. The physician
makes the decision to maintain the patient on the
medication because of the need to continue testing
on this new medication. The physician is using the
patient as a means to an end rather than demonstrating concerns for the patient’s needs and feelings. Kant insisted that moral actions be placed
within the boundaries of reason. He further pointed
out that an action is not right unless it has the capability of becoming a binding law for everyone. For
instance, in truth telling, if the caveat of telling a lie
to please a patient exists, then to tell the truth is not
a categorical imperative for everyone.
The other major ethical theory is teleology, or
consequentialism. Utilitarianism, which is part of
teleology and supports the “the greatest good for the
greatest number of people,” considers consequences
of actions (Beauchamp & Childress, 2001). For
instance, if there were to be a ﬂu epidemic and ﬂu
vaccine was limited, the decision would be to allow
the greatest number of individuals who would be
affected to receive the vaccine ﬁrst. If after their
vaccinations, more vaccine became available, then
the remainder of the population could be vaccinated. Utilitarianism truly considers real-life and
commonsense approaches. John Stuart Mill
expressed the view that pleasure and happiness
have different qualities. This followed with the
distinction that applying the golden rule in one’s
conduct takes precedence over immediate gratiﬁcations. Mill thought that the greatest happiness
must involve everyone concerned, not just an individual. Therefore, the emphasis of this principle is
based on groups aimed at producing the most happiness, focusing on utility, consequences, and
means to an end (Raphael, 1994).
Another ethical theory is the more contemporary
ethics of care. Mappes and DeGrazia (2001) point to
the history of this ethical theory as being based on
the moral experiences of women, with a focus on
personal relationships and responsibilities of the
relationship. Munson (2004) determines that individuals who prescribe to the care ethic think in
terms of speciﬁc circumstances by using individual
context rather than universal rules and principles.
Furthermore, in resolving ethical dilemmas and

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

64

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 64

Understanding Organizations

accepting complex circumstances, the people
involved must utilize critical thinking within the
context of solving or coming to a resolution of the
ethical situation.
Mappes and DeGrazia (2001) also considered
virtue ethics as part of the ethical picture. Virtue
ethics, according to these authors, originated with
Aristotle and is based on the character of the individual. Virtue ethics deals with the good or virtuous
character traits that may be engendered within the
individual. Aristotle named courage as a virtue,
striking a balance between excess courage (rashness) and appropriate courage within a situation. The Greek philosophers always strove for balance between two ends of excesses. Balance was
always considered the best approach in dealing with
virtues. Aristotle also believed that virtues were
attained and developed through training and routine
practice. In understanding virtue ethics, it would be
reasonable to believe that virtuous individuals facing complex ethical dilemmas would make the right
decisions due to their virtuous character.
Beauchamp and Childress (2001) laid the foundation for ethical dilemma resolution in their ﬁrst
edition of Principles of Biomedical Ethics. This book
is now into its ﬁfth edition and continues to act as
a guide for ethical decision making. Nurse leaders/managers need to consider the following ethical
principles in their decision-making process or if
they are participating on an ethical committee.

ETHICAL PRINCIPLES
The principles listed in Box 5-3 act as a basic foundation for ethical decision making. The ﬁrst principle is autonomy, which involves the right to
self-determination and to make independent personal decisions regarding care. Beauchamp and
Childress (2001) imply that the principle of autonomy is sometimes described as respect for autonomy. An example in health care is the patient’s right
to refuse treatment. The only restriction on autonomy that may preclude this right would be a com-

Box 5-3
Ethical Principles
Autonomy
Beneficence
Nonmaleficence
Justice

Fidelity
Veracity
Sanctity of human life

municable disease, in which case the patient’s
autonomy would be restricted. Devettere (2000)
points to the Patient Self-Determination Act of
1990 as the ﬁrst federal initiative that was introduced and designed to educate patients on the use
of advance directives. Currently, hospitals and other
institutions provide education and paperwork for
patients being admitted who have not implemented
an advance directive.
Beneﬁcence is a principle that speaks to deeds
of charity, mercy, and kindness toward the individual. It also means promoting the welfare of others
(Beauchamp & Childress, 2001) or doing good.
Nurses, by the nature of nursing practice, perform
beneﬁcent acts.
Nonmaleﬁcence literally means to not harm the
patient. Munson (2004) believes this is the overriding principle in the care of patients. Aiken and
Catalano (1994) declares that nonmaleﬁcence is the
other side of beneﬁcence but that the two cannot be
considered independent of each other. Nurses may
sometimes violate this principle in the short term in
order to give a positive long-term result. An example is chest compressions in the event of heart stoppage in an elderly patient; ribs may be broken,
and/or sternal fractures may occur that are harmful, but recovering the patient’s life takes precedence over the harm.
The principle of justice is actually the deontological ethical theory. According to Beauchamp and
Childress (2001), it encompasses the entire ﬁeld of
ethics and refers to the right to be treated justly,
fairly, and equally. Munson (2004) points out that
justice in health care often refers to distributive justice and/or the distribution of scarce health-care
resources. Social justice becomes a part of this;
Munson continues that it implies fairness in the
treatment of individuals. Nurses should be aware
that when indigent patients arrive in the emergency
department, they must be treated in an equitable
way and that if persons require emergency service
due to trauma, nurses must proceed to deliver the
service as deemed appropriate. This goes along with
Rawls’ concept of a Theory of Justice (1971).
Brannigan and DeGrazia (2001) cited Rawls’ two
principles of equality and justice: (1) that everyone
should be given equal liberty no matter what adversities exist; and (2) that differences among people
ought to be recognized by being inclusive of the
least advantaged and given their share of improvements. Others have explored this concept in health
care, according to Brannigan and Boss, by proposing

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 65

Legal and Ethical Knowledge for Nurses

equitable health-care systems, benchmarks, and
accessible points of entry.
Fidelity focuses more on the delivery of health
care and literally means keeping one’s promises or
obligations to an individual. Munson (2004) suggests that keeping these commitments becomes of
paramount importance when considering patient
care standards that are to be met by the nurse.
Likewise, nurse managers are bound by their commitments to their employees. In particular, a verbal
commitment involving a shift change is a contract
with the employee and should be considered as such
by the manager.
Veracity involves truth telling by all concerned in
patient care. The nurse certainly has an obligation
to tell the truth, for instance, when a patient asks
about his or her condition. This, however, can take
on tones of nonmaleﬁcence when, for example, a
cancer patient asks the nurse how long he might
live. In this instance, it may be the duty of the nurse
not to take hope away from the patient and to provide a positive answer to this question. The answer
might include the idea that no one is able to predict
death and that there is always hope in life. Here
again the balancing of beneﬁcence and nonmalfeasance within the boundaries of veracity is important in the nurse’s actions (Munson, 2004).
The sanctity of life principle is a part of ethical
decisions when it comes to withholding or withdrawing life-sustaining treatments or assisting suicide. Sanctity of human life is deﬁned as the
obligation not to take human life (Fry & Veatch,
2000). The American Nurses Association (ANA)
implies that nurses caring for patients should direct
their care toward the relief and prevention of the
suffering that is often associated with the process of
dying (ANA, 1985, p. 4). This brings into focus the
ANA’s position statement (1994) on active
euthanasia and its position statement on withholding nutrition and hydration for the patient (ANA,
2001). The latter position should be made by the
client or surrogate with the health-care team. The
ANA carefully considered the beneﬁt-and-harm
relationship of withholding nutrition, recognizing
that, sometimes, living causes more harm to the
individual than dying. The ANA differentiates
between artiﬁcial nutrition and the individual being
able to consume food and water by mouth. The
ANA states that only artiﬁcial nutrition may or
may not be justiﬁed. If the individual is unable to
make decisions, then the surrogate must be relied
upon. Nurses must continue to give good care and

65

educate client family members about the dying
process and provision of comfort measures (ANA
Ethics and Human Rights Position Statements,
April 2, 1992).

ETHICAL DECISION MAKING
Nurses must learn how to make ethical decisions,
and nurse managers/leaders must direct and guide
nurses in making such decisions. Nurses, in
increasing numbers, are being invited to participate
on ethical committees. These committees are
structured with members of the health-care team,
administrators, risk managers, attorneys for the
institution, and others. A popular ethical decision
model called MORAL was put forward by Thiroux
(1977) and Halloran (1982). This model offers
a very concise and systematic way of making ethical decisions (Box 5-4). It is most important that

Box 5-4
MORAL Model of Ethical Decision Making
M—Massage the dilemma. Identify and define the issues
in the dilemma. Consider the options of all the major
players in the dilemma and their value systems. This
includes patients, family members, nurses, physicians,
clergy, and any other interdisciplinary health-care
members.
O—Outline the options. Examine all of the options,
including those that are less realistic and conflicting.
This stage is designed only for considering options and
not for making a final decision.
R—Resolve the dilemma. Review the issues and options,
applying basic principles of ethics to each option.
Decide the best option, based on the views of all those
concerned in the dilemma.
A—Act by applying the chosen option. This step is usually
the most difficult because it requires actual
implementation, whereas the previous steps require
only dialogue and discussion.
L—Look back and evaluate the entire process, including
the implementation. No process is complete without a
thorough evaluation. Ensure that those involved are
able to follow through on the final option. If not, a
second decision may be required, and the process
must start again at the initial step.
Modified from Thiroux, J. (1977). Ethics: Theory and practice.
Philadelphia: Macmillan; and Halloran, M.C. (1982). Rational
ethical judgments utilizing a decision making tool. Heart and
Lung 11, 566–570.

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

66

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 66

Understanding Organizations

Box 5-5
Essential Values and Behaviors
Altruism is a concern for the welfare and well-being of
others. In professional practice, altruism is reflected by the
nurse’s concern for the welfare of patients, other nurses,
and other health-care providers. The professional behaviors
involved with this essential value include: understanding of
cultures, beliefs, and perspectives of others; advocacy for
patients, particularly the most vulnerable; risk taking on
behalf of patients and colleagues; and mentoring other
professionals.
Autonomy is the right to self-determination. Professional
practice reflects autonomy when it respects patients’ rights
to make decisions about their health. The professional
behaviors involved with this essential value include:
planning care in partnership with patients; honoring the
right of patients and families to make decisions about
health care; and providing information so patients can make
informed choices.
Human dignity is respect for the inherent worth and
uniqueness of individuals and populations. In professional
practice, human dignity is reflected when the nurse
values and respects all patients and colleagues. The
professional behaviors involved with this essential value
include: providing culturally competent and sensitive care;

protecting patients’ privacy; preserving the confidentiality of
patients and health-care providers; and designing care with
sensitivity to individual patient needs.
Integrity is acting in accordance with an appropriate code
of ethics and accepted standards of practice. Integrity is
reflected in professional practice when the nurse is honest
and provides care based on an ethical framework that is
accepted within the profession. The professional behaviors
involved with this essential value include: providing honest
information to patients and the public; documenting care
accurately and honestly; seeking to remedy errors made by
self or other; and demonstrating accountability for own
actions.
Social justice is upholding moral, legal, and humanistic principles. This value is reflected in professional practice when the nurse works to ensure equal treatment
under the law and equal access to quality health care.
The professional behaviors involved with this essential
value include: supporting fairness and nondiscrimination
in the delivery of care; promoting universal access to
health care; and encouraging legislation and policy
consistent with the advancement of nursing care and
health care.

American Association of Colleges of Nursing, 1998.

ethical decisions be reached in a timely manner.
and the use of this model certainly facilitates the
process.
Ethics and ethical decision making have become
a thread that is followed throughout the nursing
curriculum. The American Association of Colleges
of Nursing (AACN) has presented a set of nursing
values for nursing students to internalize into their
nursing education (Box 5-5). These essential values
follow closely the aforementioned ethical principles
as a guide for the profession and provide a foundation for future nursing leaders and managers to
build upon.

All Good Things…
Legal and ethical issues are moving to the forefront
of professional nursing practice. The current socie-

tal values are changing, and there is an increasing
abundance of litigation in the health-care arena.
Along with this, the rapid changes in technological
advancement keep health professionals in a constant state of training. Nurse executives and managers must know the law and ethics as well as
understand the ramiﬁcations of making sure their
employees are also knowledgeable of the law and
ethical dilemmas. The laws that affect nurses are
critical for nurse executives to understand and follow by making their employees knowledgeable
about the pitfalls that may arise due to not meeting
standards of care in their units and what may happen to them legally due to this failure to meet standards of care. Along with the legalities of practice
and care go the ethical issues involved in practice.
Understanding ethical foundations, ethical decision
making, and ethical committees is an important
part of the nurse executive/managerial role.

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 67

Legal and Ethical Knowledge for Nurses

Let’s Talk
1. Discuss the interrelationship of law and ethics.
2. Discuss federal laws affecting nursing and
their impact on the profession.
3. Describe the difference between the two types of
common law.
4. Discuss the elements of malpractice, and give
an example of each.
5. Give an example of the criminalization of
negligence.
6. What are the three components of intentional
torts?
7. Give an example of an intentional tort of
battery.
8. Give one example of a best practice for reducing
the risk of malpractice litigation.
9. Discuss advance directives and claims that
may be lodged for not following them.
10. Give an example of each of the seven ethical
principles.
11. Discuss the ﬁve steps of ethical decision making
in the MORAL model.

NCLEX Questions
1. Legal and ethical issues are intertwined but:
A. They are not distinct bodies of thought or
practice.
B. They are individual and distinct bodies of
thought and practice.
C. Have no effect on each other.
D. Are not of great inﬂuence on each other.
2. Ethics is a body of knowledge that deals with:
A. Primarily legal aspects of health care.
B. Trying to get individuals to behave correctly.
C. The “shoulds” and “should nots” of individual behavior or actions.
D. Religion only.

67

3. Common law refers to:
A. Laws that societies have in common.
B. Ethical ideas only.
C. Statutes.
D. Case law.
4. Some of the federal laws affecting nurses are:
A. Not important because only state laws
impact nursing.
B. Age discrimination act and equal pay act.
C. Very important but not relevant to practice.
D. The nurse practice acts.
5. It is important for nurses to know the Nurse
Practice Act in their state because:
A. It affects their practice.
B. It authorizes their licensure.
C. Neither a nor b.
D. Both a and b.
6. Nonmaleﬁcence actually means:
A. For the nurse to take care of the client.
B. There is negligence.
C. To not harm the patient.
D. Malpractice.
7. Deontology encompasses:
A. Duty.
B. Natural law.
C. Utilitarianism.
D. All of the above.
8. Ethic of care is:
A. Part of all health-care philosophy.
B. Consequentialism.
C. Formulated by John Mill.
D. Based on the moral experiences of
women.
9. Ethics is:
A. Based on moral values and reasoning.
B. Only part of the legal system.
C. Not as important as the legal system.
D. Important to philosophical studies.
10. Ethical principles are:
A. Autonomy, ﬁdelity, veracity.
B. Only abstract ideas.
C. Not used in practice.
D. Not applicable to legal situations.

05Jones Leadership(F)-ch 05

68

1/14/07

3:35 PM

Page 68

Understanding Organizations

REFERENCES
Aiken, T.D., & Catalano, J.I. (1994). Legal, ethical and political
issues in nursing. Philadelphia: FA Davis.
American Nurses Association. (1998). Standards for nurse
administrators. Kansas City, MO: Author.
American Nurses Association (1988). Standards for nurse
administrators. Kansas City, MO: Author.
American Nurses Association Committee on Ethics (2001). Code
for nurse with interpretative statements, Washington, DC:
American Nurses Association.
Beauchamp, T.L., & Childress, J.F. (2001). Principles in biomedical ethics (5th ed.). New York: Oxford University.
Berzweig, P. (1996). The nurse’s liability for malpractice (6th ed.).
New York: Mosby.
Black’s law dictionary (6th ed.) (1996). St. Paul: West.
Brannigan, M.C., & DeGrazia, D. (2001). Health care ethics in a
diverse society. Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
Burkhardt, M., & Nathaniel, A. (1998). Ethics & issues in contemporary nursing. Albany, NY: Delmar Publishers.
Chambliss, D.R. (1996). Beyond caring: Hospitals, nurses, and the
social organization of ethics. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Cofer, M.J. (1998). How to avoid age bias. Nursing Management,
29(11), 34–36.
Creighton, H. (1986). Law every nurse should know (5th ed.).
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Curtin, L. (2001). The ﬁrst 10 principles for the ethical administration of nursing services. Nursing Administration Quarterly,
25(1), 7–13.
DeMello, A. (1985). One-minute wisdom. New York: Doubleday.
Devettede, R.J. Pretrial decision making for health care ethics:
Cases of concepts (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Edwards, P.A., & Roemer, L. (1996) Are nurse managers ready
for the current challenges of health care? Journal of Nursing
Administration, 26(9), 11–17.
Fiesta, J. (1999a). Do no harm: When caregivers violate our
golden rule, part I. Nursing Management, 30(8), 10–11.
Fiesta, J. (1999b). Informed consent: What health care professionals need to know, part 2. Nursing Management, 30(7), 6–7.
Fiesta, J. (1999c). Know your boundaries in sexual assault litigation. Nursing Management, 31(1), 10.
Fiesta, J. (1988). The law and liability: A guide for nurses (2nd
ed.) New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Fowler, M.D., & Benner, P. (2001). Implementing the new code
of ethics for nurses: An interview with Marsha Fowler.
American Journal of Critical Care, 10(6), 434–437.
Fry, S., & Johnstone, M.J. (2002). Ethics in nursing practice:
A guide to ethical decision making (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK:
Blackwell Science.
Fry, S.T., & Veatch, R.M. (1992). Case studies in nursing ethics
(2nd ed.). Boston: Jones and Barlett Publishers.
Furrow, B.R., Johnson, S.H., Jost, T.S., & Schwartz, R.L. (1991).
Liability and quality issues in health care. St. Paul: West.

Giordano, K. (2003). Examining nursing malpractice:
A defense attorney’s perspective. Critical Care Nurse, Apr(23).
Guido, G.W. (2001). Legal and ethical issues in nursing (3rd ed.).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hall, J.K. (1990). Understanding the ﬁne line between law and
ethics. Nursing 90(10), 37.
Hellinghausen, M.A. (1996). Providers face more liability as
duties grow. Nursing & Allied Health Week, 1(15), 1.
Hill, T.C., & Zweig, R.M. (2003). Immanuel Kant: Groundwork
for the metaphysics of morals, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Iowa Hospital Association (1991). The patient self-determination
act of 1990: Implementation in Iowa hospitals. Author.
Kelly, C. (2000). Nurses’ moral practice: Investing and discounting
self. Indianapolis: Sigma Theta Tau, International Center
Nursing Press.
LaDuke, S. (2000). What to expect from your attorney. Nursing
Management, 31(1), 10.
Mappes, T.A., & DeGrazia, D. (2002). Biomedical ethics (5th ed).
Boston: McGraw Hill.
Massachusetts Nursing Association (2003). MNA Publication,
May, 11.
Moy, M.M. (2005). A year later: EMTALA ﬁnal rule clariﬁes
obligations. ED Legal Letter, 16(4), 37–48.
Moy, M.S. (2003). EMTALA revisions provide clearer explanation of critical terms. ED Legal Letter, 15(2), 13–24.
Munson, R. (2004). Intervention and prediction: Basic issues in
medical ethics (7th ed.). Victoria, Australia: Thomas
Wadsworth.
Nguyen, B.Q. (2000a). ADA coverage: Deﬁning who is “qualiﬁed
individual with a disability.” American Journal of Nursing,
100(3), 87.
Nguyen, B.Q. (2000b). If you’re replaced by a younger nurse.
American Journal of Nursing, 100(3), 82.
Olson-Chavarriaga, D. (2000). Informed consent: Do you know
your role? Nursing 2000, 30(5), 60–61.
Patient Self-Determination Act/Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1990, Pub L No. 101–508, Sec. 4206; 42 U.S.C. Sec.
1395cc(a)(1).
Pohlman, K.J. (1989a). Legal issues in nursing: DNR? CPR?
Focus on Critical Care, 16(3), 224–225.
Pohlman, K.J. (1989b). Legal issues in nursing: Nursing negligence. Focus on Critical Care, 16(4), 296–298.
Pohlman, K.J. (1990). Against nursing advice? Focus on Critical
Care, 17(1), 57–58.
Pozgar, G.D. (1999). Legal aspects of health care administration
(7th ed.). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Press.
Raphael, D.D. (1994). Moral philosophy (2nd ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Steckler, S.L. (2000). Nursing case law update. Journal of Nursing
Law, 7(1), 55–64.
Yoder-Wise, P. (2003). Leading and managing in nursing (3rd
ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 69

chapter
6
Regulating Nursing
MARY O’KEEFE, RN, PHD, JD
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“The nurse promotes, advocates for, and strives
to protect the health, safety, and rights of the patient.”1
Disclaimer2

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Explore nursing regulation through nursing practice acts.
Define nursing standards and competencies.
Identify nursing standards specific to advanced practice,
management, and informatics.
Analyze evidence-based nursing practice as the standard of care.
Analyze nursing research as the mechanism to provide
evidence-based nursing and best practice.
Explore accreditation as nursing regulation.
Explore policies and procedures as nursing regulation.
Explore regulations of staffing to provide standardized patient
care.
Discuss state and federal legislative and administrative
regulation of nursing.

1American

Nurses Association. (2001 June). Code of Ethics for Nurses. Retrieved
December 14, 2004, from http://www.nursingworld.org/ethics/chcode.htm
2The information contained in this chapter is not intended to be legal advice. Further, this information related to regulating nursing
is dynamic, and may have changed or be changing at any point. Therefore, when seeking legal advice regarding any of the
information contained in this chapter, retain the legal counsel of an attorney.

69

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

70

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 70

Understanding Organizations

N

ursing practice is regulated on the state and
federal level. Nursing regulation “began as a simple
registry process to protect the nursing title and the
public” (Flook, 2003, p. 160). The primary purpose
of nursing regulation today is not only protecting
the public through a deﬁned nursing practice but
also regulating nursing education and “overseeing
the competence of nurses through licensing and
disciplinary rules and regulations” (Flook, 2003,
p. 160). The authority to license and discipline the
nursing profession is granted to each state’s board
of nursing, often called the board of nurse examiners (BNE) through state legislation creating a
nursing practice act and mechanisms for licensure.

The Nursing Practice Act
At the state level, nursing is regulated by the nursing practice act, which provides for licensure as a
registered nurse. A state’s act deﬁnes nursing and
the standards of care. The nurse is licensed to practice under the state’s act. The act deﬁnes speciﬁcally
what the reasonable nurse is licensed to do to meet
the standards of patient care.

STANDARD OF CARE FOR
THE REGISTERED NURSE
The standard of care (Box 6-1) is “that degree of
care, expertise and judgment exercised by a reasonable and prudent nurse under the same or similar
circumstances [through] use of nursing process”
(O’Keefe, 2001, pp. 552–553).
Licensure is the “mechanism by which a state
establishes and veriﬁes compliance with [nursing]
standards” (O’Keefe, 2001, p. 542). The act regulates nursing through the BNE, which oversees the
nurse’s compliance with the nursing standards and
grants licensure.
Certification acknowledges nursing competence at an advanced level of practice. Gunn (1999,
p. 135) believed that society and patients in general
have grown skeptical of the willingness of the nursing profession to police itself. In the 1970s, skepticism coupled with a malpractice crisis forced
regulators of nursing practice to move beyond
“one-time testing for a lifelong credential, to other
alternatives for assuring competency in nursing

Box 6-1
BNE Rule 217.11: Standards of Nursing
Practice for the Registered Nurse (22 Tex.
Admin. Code 217, Part 11, 2004)
The Texas Board of Nurse Examiners is responsible for
regulating the practice of nursing within the State of
Texas for Vocational Nurses, Registered Nurses, and
Registered Nurses with advanced practice authorization.
The standards of practice establish a minimum acceptable
level of nursing practice in any setting for each level of
nursing licensure or advanced practice authorization.
Failure to meet these standards may result in action
against the nurse’s license even if no actual patient injury
resulted.
(3) Standards Specific to Registered Nurses. The registered
nurse shall assist in the determination of healthcare
needs of clients and shall:
(c) Utilize a systematic approach to provide
individualized, goal-directed, nursing care by:
(d) performing comprehensive nursing assessments
regarding the health status of the client;
(ii) making nursing diagnoses that serve as the basis
for the strategy of care;
(iii) developing a plan of care based on the
assessment and nursing diagnosis;
(iv) implementing nursing care; and
(v) evaluating the client’s responses to nursing
interventions;
(B) Delegate tasks to unlicensed personnel in
compliance with 22 Tex. Admin. Code
chapter 224, relating to clients with acute
conditions or in acute care environments,
and chapter 225, relating to independent
living environments for clients with stable
and predictable conditions.

practice.” Currently, the focus varies on a state-bystate basis, from voluntary to mandatory requirements for continuing education as a mechanism for
either continuing certiﬁcation or recredentialing.
Certiﬁcation involves “examinations developed by
professional organizations which provide certiﬁcation of a claim to competence at a certain level of
practice” (O’Keefe, 2001, p. 532). The graduate
nurse must possess the competence to practice
independently, a declaration that must be demonstrated and supported by documentation (Texas
Board of Nurse Examiners, 2004). A nursing
competency is the skill and behavior required to
perform the role of a nurse.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 71

Regulating Nursing

STANDARDS OF CARE FOR
ADVANCED NURSING PRACTICE
By deﬁnition, an advanced practice nurse (APN)
is “a registered professional nurse who is prepared
for advanced nursing practice by virtue of knowledge and skills obtained through a post-basic or
advanced educational program of study, [and] acts
independently and/or in collaboration with other
health care professionals in the delivery of health
care services” (O’Keefe, 2001, p. 529).

Regulating Advanced Practice
Advanced nursing practice is regulated by and built
upon standards of care for the registered nurse,
identiﬁed within each state’s nursing practice act.
See Box 6-2 for the deﬁnition of an APN in Texas.
Prior to1971, most states made it illegal for any
nurse to perform diagnosis or prescribe treatment.
Regulation of APNs and programs for their preparation by boards of nursing vary from state to state.
Fenton and Thomas (1998) reported that boards
have authority only to regulate advanced practice
through: (1) the recognition of the APN and (2) the
setting of standards and scope of practice. Fenton
(1998, p. 78) noted the “lack of consistent APN
educational program standards and experiences and
criteria for recognition of APNs was problematic at
the levels of accreditation, certiﬁcation, and regulation.” As a consequence, the Texas Board of Nurse

Box 6-2
BNE Rule 221.1(3): Definition of an Advanced
Practice Nurse (22 Tex. Admin. Code
221.1(3), 2001)
(3) Advanced practice nurse—A registered nurse
approved by the board to practice as an advanced
practice nurse based on completing an advanced
educational program acceptable to the board. The term
includes a nurse practitioner, nurse-midwife, nurse
anesthetist, and clinical nurse specialist. The advanced
practice nurse is prepared to practice in an expanded role
to provide health care to individuals, families, and/or
groups in a variety of settings including but not limited
to homes, hospitals, institutions, offices, industry, schools,
community agencies, public and private clinics, and
private practice. The advanced practice nurse acts
independently and/or in collaboration with other health
care professionals in the delivery of health care services.

71

Examiners developed a model designed to ensure
the education and recognition of the APN, emphasizing both professionalism and public safety
(Fenton & Thomas, 1998).
For example, APNs practice via protocols or
other written authorizations. See Box 6-3 for a definition of these protocols and other written authorizations under the Texas Nursing Practice Act.
Roemer (1977) reported that states have been
increasingly liberalizing the scope of nursing functions, making it possible for the APN to assume
functions formerly not within the nurse’s scope of
clinical practice. In some states, some of these
advanced practice functions are allowed under doctor’s supervision. In other states, especially in rural
areas, the APN may function independently. The
independent action, however, such as dispensing
medications, may be limited to a single course of
treatment.
Midwives tend to function independently.
According to Roemer (1977), nurse-midwives have
been accepted as extensions of scarce medical facilities, generally authorized to provide prenatal and
postpartum care, handle normal deliveries, and do
family planning work, including ﬁtting diaphragms
and inserting and removing IUDs. Moreover,
courses for family planning nurse practitioners have
been set up across the United States. Graduates may,
with medical direction: (1) perform bimanual pelvic
examinations and breast examinations; (2) prescribe
contraception; (3) ﬁt diaphragms, insert IUDs, and
examine vaginal secretions microscopically; and (4)
refer patients with problems to physicians.
Roemer (1977) also reported a California program of both registered and nonregistered nurses
trained as women’s health specialists, who make
routine examinations in both pregnant and nonpregnant women, to give family planning advice.
Non-RN family planning specialists being trained
included (1) licensed vocational nurses, (2) baccalaureate degree holders in non-nursing ﬁelds, and
(3) qualiﬁed persons with less formal education.
This 24-week course was authorized under the
California State Department of Health. According
to Roemer, the use of the APN would (1) help make
family planning and well-baby services more generally available and (2) conserve valuable physician
time for those cases that need greater skill and
training.
As standards of nursing care vary from state to
state, so does the regulation of the APN. Ponto,

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

72

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 72

Understanding Organizations

Box 6-3
BNE Rule 221.13: Core Standards for Advanced Practice (22 Tex. Admin. Code 221.1(3), 2001)
(a) The advanced practice nurse shall know and conform
to the Texas Nursing Practice Act; current board rules,
regulations, and standards of professional nursing; and
all federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations
affecting the advanced role and specialty area. When
collaborating with other health care providers, the
advanced practice nurse shall be accountable for
knowledge of the statutes and rules relating to advanced
practice nursing and function within the boundaries of
the appropriate advanced practice category.
(b) The advanced practice nurse shall practice within the
advanced specialty and role appropriate to his/her
advanced educational preparation.
(c) The advanced practice nurse acts independently and/or
in collaboration with the health team in the observation,
assessment, diagnosis, intervention, evaluation,
rehabilitation, care and counsel, and health teachings
of persons who are ill, injured or infirm or experiencing
changes in normal health processes; and in the promotion and maintenance of health or prevention of illness.
(d) When providing medical aspects of care, advanced
practice nurses shall utilize mechanisms which provide
authority for that care. These mechanisms may include,
but are not limited to, Protocols or other written

Sabo, Fitzgerald, and Wilson (2002) report that
many other state boards of nursing are examining
advanced nursing practice to determine a process to
recognize and regulate such practice for the purpose
of eventual uniformity of the nursing law. For example, in 1999, Minnesota state law was redesigned to
deﬁne and provide protection for advanced practice registered nurses. The Minnesota Board of
Nursing convened to develop (1) recommendations
regarding issues of certiﬁcation, (2) criteria for
determining acceptable certifying organizations, (3)
procedures in the event of examination failure, and
(4) a process for communicating this information to
the nursing community (Ponto et al., 2002).

Scope of Practice for Clinical
Nurse Specialists
A clinical nurse specialist (CNS) is an APN who
has specialized education and training in one clinical area. For example, the psychiatric CNS focuses

authorization. This shall not be construed as requiring
authority for nursing aspects of care.
(1) Protocols or other written authorization shall promote
the exercise of professional judgment by the advanced
practice nurse commensurate with his/her education
and experience. The degree of detail within
protocols/policies/practice guidelines/clinical practice
privileges may vary in relation to the complexity of the
situations covered by such Protocols, the advanced
specialty area of practice, the advanced educational
preparation of the individual, and the experience level of
the individual advanced practice nurse.
(2) Protocols or other written authorization:
(A) should be jointly developed by the advanced
practice nurse and the appropriate physician(s),
(B) shall be signed by both the advanced practice nurse
and the physician(s),
(C) shall be reviewed and re-signed at least annually,
(D) shall be maintained in the practice setting of the
advanced practice nurse, and
(E) shall be made available as necessary to verify
authority to provide medical aspects of care.
(e) The advanced practice nurse shall retain professional accountability for advanced practice
nursing care.

on treating the patient in the clinical area through
patient or staff education, consultation with psychiatric nursing or other staff, and structuring patient
therapies. See Box 6-4 for the scope of practice for
the APN.
Heitkemper and Bond (2004) believed that the
CNS is critical to providing leadership to improve
patient care, advancing nursing practice, and
strengthening health-care delivery systems.
The scope of nursing practice has been expanded
to encompass nursing via various technologies. For
example, with the advent of telenursing, states must
now extend the scope of practice across state
boundaries.
The Effects of Telenursing Upon
Expansion of Nursing Practice Acts

Nursing practice acts—developed by the individual
states—traditionally have regulated the nurses that
practice within the state. Telenursing challenges
this boundary-driven regulation. Telenursing is

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 73

Regulating Nursing

73

Box 6-4
BNE Rule 221.12: Scope of Practice
for the Advanced Practice Nurse
(22 Tex. Admin. Code 221.12, 2001)
The advanced practice nurse provides a broad range of
health services, the scope of which shall be based upon
educational preparation, continued advanced practice
experience and the accepted scope of professional
practice of the particular specialty area. Advanced practice
nurses practice in a variety of settings, and according to
their practice specialty and role they provide a broad
range of health care services to a variety of patient
populations.
(1) The scope of practice of particular specialty areas
shall be defined by national professional specialty
organizations or advanced practice nursing organizations recognized by the Board. The advanced practice
nurse may perform only those functions which are
within that scope of practice and which are consistent
with the Nursing Practice Act, Board rules, and other
laws and regulations of the State of Texas.
(2) The advanced practice nurse’s scope of practice shall
be in addition to the scope of practice permitted a
registered nurse and does not prohibit the advanced
practice nurse from practicing in those areas deemed
to be within the scope of practice of a registered nurse.

the “electronic transfer of nursing data, nursing
information, and nursing expertise between two
points” (O’Keefe, 2001, p. 552). Because nurses are
now able to practice outside of their state without
actually traveling, telenursing has had a considerable impact on the expansion of nursing practice
acts. Hutcherson (2001, p. 4) opined: “During the
last century the world has become increasingly
reliant on a variety of technologies to manage information needs. Escalation in deployment of remote
technology to enhance health care, accompanied by
expanded public and private reimbursement for distant care, indicates increasing acceptance of these
technologies. Yet many legal and regulatory questions regarding the provision of health care using
these technologies remain.”
The age of informatics has opened a new era for
nursing practice, taking advantage of advances in
telecommunications technology that has allowed
nurses to provide patient care in different geographic locations throughout the country (Hardin
& Langford, 2001). The state-based system of nurs-

hot topic:
National Health Care: Is Nursing Ready?
Health care and nursing have been transformed, by
technology and other external forces, into a national
and international system that has (1) reshaped professional nursing practice to cross state boundaries, (2)
facilitated nursing regulation on a multistate level, (3)
enabled the implementation of the national interstate
practice model, and (4) placed nursing within the global
health-care marketplace (Fernandez & Herbert, 2004).
The National Health Care Program (NHCP) is often
referred to as “socialized medicine,” as the government
will administer, regulate, and control health care by providing for health and hospital care for the public. Other
terms for NHCP are “universal health care” and “single
payer health care.”
Currently, only those older than 65 years are the beneficiaries of government-paid medical benefits through
Medicare. Through NHCP, payment for all public health
care will be subsidized by public funds. Health-care
providers will be subject to salaries, as all providers will
work for and receive their salaries from the government.
National and international health care exists in the geographic sense for nursing, through federal and state
government regulations, such as the Nursing Licensure
Compact (NLC). Has the NLC created the structure for
nurses to participate in a national health care program?
Are levels of nursing practice and competencies clearly
identified in preparation for an NHCP? Can levels of
competencies be standardized across state boundaries
to nationalize basic nursing competencies in preparation for an NHCP?

ing practice acts is being challenged by this new
practice environment.
The Nurse Licensure Compact

To accommodate new technology, states have
created the interstate compact (Hardin &
Langford, 2001). An interstate compact “is an
agreement between two or more states established
for the purpose of remedying a particular problem
of multi-state concern” (National Council of State
Boards of Nursing, 2005, citing Black’s Law
Dictionary). In this instance, the compact, developed by the National Council of State Boards of

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

74

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 74

Understanding Organizations

Nursing, “allows nurses to practice outside their
state of licensure, as long as the nurse adheres to the
nurse practice act in the state in which he/she practices” (O’Keefe, 2001, p. 541).
The compact utilizes the mutual recognition
model, which is a model of nursing licensure that
“allows a nurse to have one license (in the nurse’s
state of residency) and to practice in other states, as
long as that individual acknowledges that he or she
is subject to each state’s practice laws and discipline.
Under mutual recognition, practice across state lines
is allowed, whether physical or electronic, unless the
nurse is under discipline or a monitoring agreement
that restricts practice across state lines. In order to
achieve mutual recognition, each state must enter
into an interstate compact, called the Nurse
Licensure Compact (NLC or Compact)” (National
Council of State Boards of Nursing, 2005).
The NLC grants the nurse a multistate licensure privilege, meaning “the authority to practice
nursing in any compact state that is not the state of
residency,” without the need of an additional
license. See Box 6-5 for a listing of states currently
participating and/or pending participation in the
NLC.
But the NLC also provides that the nurse is
accountable for complying with the nursing practice laws, regulations, standards of care, and competencies in the state where the patient is located at
the time care is provided (National Council of State
Boards of Nursing, 2005). This is a daunting task
because the terminology within the nursing practice acts varies from state to state.

Box 6-5
Nurse Licensure Compact Implementation
(National Council of State Boards of
Nursing, 2005)
The following list shows which states have enacted the
RN and LPN/VN Nurse Licensure Compact. Please note
that although New Jersey, New Hampshire, and South
Carolina have enacted the Nurse Licensure Compact,
these states have not yet implemented (passed into law)
the compact. On April 25, 2005, the states of Iowa and
Utah agreed to mutually recognize APRN licenses. No
date has been set for the implementation of the APRN
Compact.

COMPACT STATES

IMPLEMENTATION DATE

Arizona
7/1/2002
Arkansas
7/1/2000
Delaware
7/1/2000
Idaho
7/1/2001
Iowa
7/1/2000
Maine
7/1/2001
Maryland
7/1/1999
Mississippi
7/1/2001
Nebraska
1/1/2001
New Mexico
1/1/2004
North Carolina
7/1/2000
North Dakota
1/1/2004
South Dakota
1/1/2001
Tennessee
7/1/2003
Texas
1/1/2000
Utah
1/1/2000
Virginia
1/1/2005
Wisconsin
1/1/2000
If you are seeking Compact licensure, please contact your
state board of nursing for primary state of residence
requirements.
Compact States Pending Implementation

NURSING PRACTICE ACTS LACK
UNIFORMITY FROM STATE TO STATE
The terminology used within the acts differs and
varies from state to state. For example, Lavin,
Meyer, and Carlson (1999) reviewed the use of the
term “nursing diagnosis” in the nursing practice
acts in the United States. They divided the nursing
practice acts of the 50 states and the District of
Columbia into those that did or did not include
within a nursing context: (1) the term “nursing
diagnosis” or (2) the word “diagnosis.” The ﬁndings revealed that 33 of the 51 nursing practice acts
used the term “diagnosis” within the nursing context. They concluded (p. 57): “The majority of practice acts now deﬁne the practice of professional

PENDING COMPACT STATES
New Jersey
New Hampshire
South Carolina

STATUS
Signed by Governor
Signed by Governor
Signed by Governor

nursing as including the diagnostic act, although
the manner in which they use the term varies.”
Marrs and Alley (2004) conducted a descriptive
study to explore related regulatory terminology
used in nurse practice acts from the 50 states and
Washington, DC. They discovered, for example, that
although terms such as moral turpitude, moral character, and morality were used by approximately half

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 75

Regulating Nursing

of the states, the terms typically were not deﬁned.
They suggested (p. 54): “Agreement among states
on uniform deﬁnitions and standards of nursing
practice can be a step toward aligning practice acts,
bringing consistency to disciplinary actions, and
informing the public about the profession’s standards for practice.”

DISCIPLINE AND REHABILITATION
UNDER THE TERMS OF THE NURSING
PRACTICE ACT
Nursing regulatory boards have the power to take
disciplinary action against licensees who have violated the state’s act. Typically, license suspension is
a common penalty. For examples of violations of an
act and grounds for disciplinary action, see Box 6-6.
Disciplinary action in most states is a function of
the state board of nursing. But boards also promote
rehabilitation for nurses while they regain competence. Lewallen and McMullan (2001) reported that
as part of the disciplinary process, the state board of
nursing may require licensees to take courses in
legal-ethical decision making and/or pharmacology.
They indicate that this form of rehabilitative discipline redevelops nursing competence in the following manner: (1) during the courses, the licensees
must acknowledge their speciﬁc violation and
explore the reasons for occurrence and strategies
for prevention and (2) on completion of the
courses, instructors submit required course materials that are used for consideration of relicensure
decisions. These rehabilitation courses, designed to
return the nurse to competence, are developed
based on nursing standards and required competencies identiﬁed in the state’s nursing practice act.

Nursing Competencies
The graduate nurse must possess the competence to
practice independently, a declaration that must be
demonstrated and supported by documentation
(Texas Board of Nurse Examiners, 2004). A nursing competency is the skill and behavior required
to perform the role of a nurse.
Carlson, Kotze, and van Rooyen (2003, p. 30)
have noted “the clinical learning environment creates many opportunities for student learning and
the development of critical competencies in the

75

Box 6-6
Texas Nursing Practice Act: Grounds for
Disciplinary Action (301 Tex. Occ. Code
452, 2005) Sec. 301.452. Grounds for
Disciplinary Action
(a) In this section, “intemperate use” includes practicing
nursing or being on duty or on call while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
(b) A person is subject to denial of a license or to
disciplinary action under this subchapter for:
(1) a violation of this chapter, a rule or regulation not
inconsistent with this chapter, or an order issued
under this chapter;
(2) fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice professional nursing
or vocational nursing;
(3) a conviction for, or placement on deferred
adjudication community supervision or deferred
disposition for, a felony or for a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude;
(4) conduct that results in the revocation of probation
imposed because of conviction for a felony or for
a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
(5) use of a nursing license, diploma, or permit, or the
transcript of such a document, that has been
fraudulently purchased, issued, counterfeited, or
materially altered;
(6) impersonating or acting as a proxy for another
person in the licensing examination required under
Section 301.253 or 301.255;
(7) directly or indirectly aiding or abetting an
unlicensed person in connection with the
unauthorized practice of nursing.

nursing profession.” They conducted a study that
“revealed that the students experience uncertainty
due to the lack of opportunities to develop competence in providing nursing care.” Four factors these
researchers identiﬁed as contributing to the students’ ability to develop essential nursing competencies included (1) availability and accessibility of
competent staff; (2) sufficient equipment to fulﬁll
nursing duties and meet the needs of patients; (3)
consensus in the expectations of nursing school and
clinical nursing personnel in hospitals on the
patient standard of care; and (4) awareness among
faculty of the needs and problems of ﬁrst-year nursing students in the clinical health-care environment
in meeting standards of care. Unfortunately, students often ﬁnd that the very nature of the clinical
learning experience may interfere with their ability

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

76

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 76

Understanding Organizations

to develop nursing competencies, as the guidance
and support by nursing personnel in the clinical
learning environment are often inadequate due to
the current critical nursing shortage.
The development, measurement, and documentation of essential nursing competencies will be discussed through exploration of (1) essential nursing
competencies, (2) measurement of competencies in
clinical practice, (3) competencies critical to nursing management, (4) competencies critical to
advanced nursing practice, and (5) competencies in
nursing informatics.

ESSENTIAL NURSING COMPETENCIES
Nursing competencies to be developed, documented, and validated in the student’s clinical setting include (1) the core competency of caring, (2)
competencies essential to patient care, and (3) competencies in specialty practice.

(2003). Sadler found that “ﬁnal semester seniors
identiﬁed their families as making the greatest contribution to their development of caring; only a few
reported the inﬂuence of the nursing curriculum”
(Sadler, 2003, p. 295). Regardless of its origin, the
competency of caring appears to be the basis and
framework for the development of other essential
nursing competencies.

Competencies Essential to Patient Care
Part of the challenge of preparing new graduates for
practice is ensuring skill in providing a broad continuum of patient care. Utley-Smith (2004, pp.
166–170) identiﬁed six categories of competencies
for new baccalaureate graduates in today’s healthcare environment:
1. Health Promotion Competency: involves

The Core Competency of Caring
Care is a competency often elusive of measurement
and/or validation. But caring in professional nursing has been described as the essence of nursing
(Sadler 2003). Woodward (2003, p. 215) postulated:
“Human caring, while instinctive, can also be
taught, learned, and measured through the nursing
education system … suggest[ing] people enter nursing because they value interpersonal relationships,
altruism, and a desire to help others.”
This “caring ethic” can be built upon. Woodward
(2003) believes that nursing students can be professionally trained to develop the competency of caring
through the concepts of modeling and role modeling. Modeling is “the process used by the nurse to
develop an image and understanding of the client’s
world—an image and understanding developed
within the client’s framework and from the client’s
perspective.” This simply means to “walk a mile” in
the patient’s shoes. “Role modeling” was deﬁned as
utilizing “the facilitation and nurturance of the
individual in attaining, maintaining and/or promoting health through purposeful interventions”
(Woodward, 2003, p. 215; citing Erickson, Tomlin,
& Swain, 1983, p. 95).
But Sadler (2003) measured the self-reported
competency of caring in baccalaureate nursing students, using the Coates Caring Efficacy Scale (CES)

2.

3.

4.

5.

interventions initiated by the nurse to promote and improve health in individuals, families, and communities. The focus of the
intervention “is on assisting clients to maximize their health potential and enhance their
well-being.” Therefore, client assessment and
intervention are equally important parts of
this competency.
Supervision Competency: involves the graduate nurse’s ability to coordinate the implementation of a nursing care plan, by ancillary
or subordinate members of the health-care
team who are responsible for carrying out
speciﬁc aspects of the health plan.
Interpersonal Communication Competency:
“encompasses relationship skills that enable
the nurse to work effectively on a team …
such as communication, negotiating, problem-solving, and collaboration.”
Direct Care Competency: encompasses the
psychomotor skills necessary to deliver patient
care including, for example, medication
administration, wound care, and injections.
Essentially, these competencies are those skills
that “require the nurse to use hands or body to
manipulate equipment and the client.”
Computer Competency: “refers to the ability
of the nurse to use electronic and technological equipment to access, retrieve, and store
information that assists in the delivery of
effective nursing care.”

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 77

Regulating Nursing

6. Caseload Management Competency: concerns

the nurse’s ability to coordinate care for a speciﬁc number of clients. This may involve
direct care as well as time and resource management over a particular period.
These ﬁndings identify and encompass critical
outcome competencies that deﬁne the standards of
care for the graduate nurse in both the classroom
and clinical settings (Utley-Smith, 2004). Graduate
nurse will also have the opportunity to develop specialty competencies within their traditional coursework.

Competencies in Specialty Practice
RN-to-BSN specialty courses often move from a traditional model to a competency-based model,
according to Foss, Janken, Langford, and Patton
(2004). For example, within a psychiatric nursing
program, a student may be assigned to work with a
probate court as the court’s visitor, assessing the
ward’s psychiatric status and need for continuing
guardianship. Specialty competencies as a court visitor are then used to measure the student’s course
learning outcomes, such as the student’s ability to
determine if the psychiatric ward meets the standard of care for the psychiatric patient. Faculty can
then document not only student learning outcomes
but also mastery of competencies within this specialty area of practice.

MEASUREMENT OF COMPETENCIES
IN CLINICAL PRACTICE
Staff development professionals and continuing
education instructors have always been concerned
with maintaining continued competency of the clinical practitioner in nursing practice. Waddell (2001)
reported that the issue of competence reached new
levels of signiﬁcance because of proposals made by
the Pew Commission Taskforce on Health Care
Workforce Regulation and the National Council of
State Boards of Nursing.
Waddell (2001, p. 2) believed that these two powerful organizations have forced the nursing profession to re-examine the question, “How do we
promote and assure continued competence?”
Waddell believed competence should be assessed via
(1) mandatory continuing education, (2) peer

77

Box 6-7
Pew Commission Taskforce on
Health Care Workforce Regulation:
Ten Recommendations for Reform
(Gragnola & Stone, 1997)
1. “States should use standardized and understandable
language for health professions regulation and its
functions to clearly describe them for consumers,
provider organizations, businesses, and the
professions.”
2. “States should standardize entry-to-practice
requirements and limit them to competence
assessments for health professions to facilitate the
physical and professional mobility of the health
professions.”
3. “States should base practice acts on demonstrated
initial and continuing competence. This process must
allow and expect different professions to share
overlapping scopes of practice. States should explore
pathways to allow all professionals to provide services
to the full extent of their current knowledge, training,
experience and skills.”
4. “States should redesign health professional boards
and their functions to reflect the interdisciplinary and
public accountability demands of the changing
health care delivery system.”
5. “Boards should educate consumers to assist them in
obtaining the information necessary to make decisions
about practitioners and to improve the board’s public
accountability.”
6. “Boards should cooperate with other public and private organizations in collecting data on regulated
health professions to support effective workforce
planning.”
7. “States should require each board to develop,
implement and evaluate continuing competency
requirements to assure the continuing competence of
regulated health care professionals.”
8. “States should maintain a fair, cost-effective and
uniform disciplinary process to exclude incompetent
practitioners to protect and promote the public’s
health.”
9. “States should develop evaluation tools that assess the
objectives, successes and shortcomings of their
regulatory systems ad bodies to best protect and
promote the public’s health.”
10. “States should understand the links, overlaps and
conficts between their health care workforce
regulatory systems and other systems which affect
the education, regulation and practice of health care
practitioners and work to develop partnerships to
streamline regulatory structures and processes.”

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

78

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 78

Understanding Organizations

review, and (3) practice or process audits used to
assess continued competence. But Waddell suggested that the actual measurement involved in
the assessment and veriﬁcation of nursing competence should be established by (1) utilization of
appropriate measurement scales; (2) selection of
accurate measurement instruments, i.e., a reliable,
validated competency scale; and (3) interpretation
of the measurement data by nurses qualiﬁed in
informatics.
Nursing competence may be measured and validated by utilizing a variety of mechanisms to document compliance, including the (1) videotaping, (2)
preceptors’ record of competency-based orientation,
(3) development of a portfolio of competence in
clinical practice, (4) nurse’s self-assessment of competence, and (5) utilization of the hospital intranet.

Videotaping to Assess and Document
Competencies and Course Outcomes
The challenge in nursing education, according to
Winters et al. (2003, p. 472), is how to develop a
mechanism for “effectively teaching competencies
and allowing students to safely practice essential
nursing skills.” They suggested videotaping, as this
medium “offers a safe way … to practice skills and
develop conﬁdence prior to actual performance …
[it] is a teaching-learning strategy used to
help…develop effective communication, physical
assessment, and selected psychomotor skills …
[and] also provides … a mechanism for detailed
instructor feedback to improve performance.” For
example, the graduate nurse or registered nurse,
both required to attend annual cardiopulmonary
resuscitation training exercises, may provide videotaped documentation of either attainment or updating of this competence.

The Preceptors’ Record of
Competency-Based Orientation
According to Harper (2002, p. 198, quoting
Alspach, 1995): “Competency-based orientation is
[a program that is] learner focused … based on the
attainment of core [nursing] competencies … that
are necessary for new employees to function in
their [health care] role at the completion of the orientation period.”
Harper (2002) conducted a research study
designed to describe preceptors’ perceptions of a

competency-based orientation. The results of a 26item questionnaire indicated that the majority of
preceptors agreed on the following components as
necessary to meet standards for a basic nursing orientation: (1) attainment of core competencies that
are role- and unit-speciﬁc, (2) sufficient time for
attainment and completion of core competencies,
and (3) a preceptor to ensure that competencies are
in fact attained and validated, e.g., via an orientation checklist.

Development of Portfolios of
Competence in Clinical Practice
A portfolio is a set of documents that “captures
learning from experience, enables an assessor to
measure student learning, acts as a tool for reﬂective thinking, illustrates critical analytical skills and
evidence of self-directed learning and provides a
collection of detailed evidence of a person’s competence” (Scholes, et al., 2004, p. 595).
The purpose of a portfolio is to document and
verify achievement of the clinical competencies
required to meet the standard of patient care in the
area of practice to which the nurse is assigned.
They concluded (p. 595): “To achieve maximum
beneﬁt from the portfolio as a learning tool to link
theory and practice, there needs to be a clear ﬁt
between the model of portfolio and the professional
practice that is to be assessed.”
When designing a portfolio, nurses, faculty,
and/or nursing students must match learning outcomes and/or competencies to their practice, reconstructing those clinical experiences into the format
required for portfolio documentation, such as a
skills checklist. Through this process, nursing faculty and students undergo a process of deconstructing learning outcomes/competencies, then ﬁtting
this information into their unique practice.
Competencies are then reconstructed to ﬁt the
structure of the portfolio.
According to the University of Michigan School
of Nursing (2005), when comparing a résumé
with a portfolio: “A career portfolio … is a much
more in-depth document, and supplements—not
replaces—your résumé … a key feature is the inclusion of artifacts … [or] tangible objects that demonstrate your work … [such as] care plans, brochures,
outlines of training sessions, manuals, spreadsheets, memos, etc., that you created by yourself or
as part of a group effort.”

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 79

Regulating Nursing

These portfolios can be in many formats, including paper or electronic, Web pages, PDF documents,
and even PowerPoint. Included within the portfolio
may also be documents addressing the nurse’s good
faith self-assessment of competency.

A Nurse’s Self-Assessment of Competence
Self-assessment tools can also be utilized to document and measure competence in clinical practice.
Meretoja, Isoaho, and Leino-Kilpi (2004, p. 124)
reported that “self-assessment assists nurses to
maintain and improve their practice by identifying
their strengths and areas that may need to be further developed … encourag[ing] them to take an
active part in the learning process of continuing
education.”
Meretoja, Eriksson, and Leino-Kilpi (2002, p.
95) collected descriptive data addressing competent
nursing practice in a variety of settings. The data
came from staff nurses, head nurses, and nursing
directors in an acute 1000-bed university hospital.
The descriptive data obtained were then analyzed
to identify a set of clinical indicators for generic
competencies that could be applied to all clinical
practice environments.
The Nurse Competence Scale, an instrument utilized to measure the level of nurse competence, was
then designed and developed by Meretoja et al.
(2004). The 73 competencies were categorized into
the following seven roles and functions: (1) helping
role, (2) teaching-coaching role, (3) diagnostic functions, (4) managing situations, (5) therapeutic interventions, (6) ensuring quality, and (7) work role.
Categories of the scale were derived from
Benner’s From Novice to Expert competency framework. The results revealed that the higher the frequency of using competencies, the higher the
nurse’s self-assessed level of competence. Age and
length of work experience had a weak positive correlation with level of competence (Meretoja et al.,
2004). See Box 6-8.
The nurses’ self-evaluation of competence in
their own job performance may be conceptualized
as an indicator of the standards for the quality of
nursing care. Tzeng (2004) clustered nursing competencies into the following three general groups:
(1) basic-level patient care skills, (2) intermediatelevel patient care and fundamental management
skills, and (3) advanced-level patient care and
supervision skills. The results of the study revealed
“that nurses’ self-assessment of intermediate

79

Box 6-8
Nurse Competence Scale: Helping Role
Planning patient care according to individual needs.
Supporting patient’s coping strategies.
Critically evaluating own philosophy in nursing.
Modifying the care plan according to individual needs.
Utilizing nursing research findings in relationships with
patients.
6. Developing the treatment culture of own unit.
7. Decision making by ethical values.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Adapted from Meretoja et al., 2002.

patient care skills, the difference between nurses’
self-assessment and job demands for basic patient
care skills, and nurses’ overall satisfaction with
their own nursing competencies were three signiﬁcant predictors of overall satisfaction with nurses’
own job performance. Nurses’ self-assessment on
basic patient care skills and advanced patient care
skills contributed to nurses’ levels of overall satisfaction with their own nursing competencies.
These results suggest a relationship between competency and performance” (Tzeng, 2004, p. 487).
Based on these findings, academic nursing
courses and on-the-job training programs may be
amended to place emphasis on these competencies
required to provide high-quality patient care
(Tzeng, 2004). Further, self-assessments demonstrate to nursing regulatory bodies good faith in the
nurse’s efforts to either achieve or maintain competencies essential to meet the standard of practice.

Utilization of the Hospital Intranet to
Validate and Document Compliance
With State Competency Standards
Currently, regulatory agencies require hospitals to
provide evidence that employees are in compliance
with state-mandated competencies. Wolford and
Hughes (2001, pp. 188–189) identiﬁed “Intranetdelivered computer-based training as an effective
and efficient method of providing and documenting
training to meet regulatory requirements.”
For example, regulatory agencies require competency in adapting nursing care standards to the
developmental needs of patients. Although Welton,
Nieves-Khouw, Schreiber, and McElreath (2000)
suggested that training programs on age-speciﬁc

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

80

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 80

Understanding Organizations

care competencies vary widely in format, content,
and method, these authors developed computerbased training (CBT) programs on age-speciﬁc care
competencies, using traditional self-paced learning
modules. The authors converted printed modules to
CBT and pilot-tested experiences of using CBT with
clinical staff, ultimately implementing an organization-wide CBT deployment for age-speciﬁc care
competency and other mandatory training.

COMPETENCIES CRITICAL
TO NURSING MANAGEMENT
Nursing management has its own set of unique
competence functions. Connelly, Yoder, and MinerWilliams (2003) categorized a total of 54 charge
nurse competencies within the following four categories: (1) clinical/technical competencies, (2) critical thinking competencies, (3) organizational
competencies, and (4) human relations skills.
These researchers believe that these competencies
deﬁne the standard for leadership and management
skills required to function as effective, front-line
charge nurses. See Box 6-9.
Kleinman (2003) noted, “nurse managers are
often less well prepared to manage the business
activities than the clinical activities.” The nurse
managers and nurse executives who were subjects
of this research identiﬁed staffing and scheduling,
management, and human resources as the three
most important competencies for nurse managers.

Box 6-9
Categories of Generalist Versus Specialist
Nursing Competencies
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Decision-making competencies
Developing practice competencies
Health education competencies
Interpersonal competencies
Knowledge “how to” competencies
Knowledge “about” competencies
Organizing competencies
Practice/intervention competencies
Professional responsibilities competencies
Personal qualities competencies
Teaching competencies
Values competencies

Adapted from Gibson et al., 2003

Based on the results of Kleinman’s research (p.
451), and in an effort to develop and validate
knowledge of the regulations and standards of practice for a nurse manager that encompass not only
the organizational but also the clinical/technical
competencies, the subjects of this research suggested: “Strategies nurse executives may employ to
develop nurse manager business knowledge include
traditional undergraduate and graduate degree programs, online programs, certiﬁcate programs, continuing education, in-service education offerings,
seminars, and mentoring activities.”

COMPETENCIES CRITICAL TO
ADVANCED NURSING PRACTICE
The level and type of competence and education
required in advanced nursing practice depend on
the area of specialty practice and vary from state to
state. The following section discusses (1) generalist
versus specialist nursing competencies and (2) competencies required in critical care.

Generalist Versus Specialist
Nursing Competencies
A generalist nurse is one who has a duty to comply
with the standards of nursing practice as identiﬁed
in the nursing practice act of the state of licensure.
A specialist nurse has a duty to comply with the
state’s standards of nursing practice and a duty to
comply with the standards of practice as identiﬁed
in the specialty area, e.g., psychiatric nursing.
This distinction between the standards of practice for generalist versus specialist nursing requires
analysis of the “characteristics of knowledge, skills,
abilities, values and qualities displayed in the context of professional work for both groups of nurses”
(Gibson, Fletcher, & Casey, 2003, p. 591). These
authors conducted a research study to determine if
there was a difference between the basic competencies of a generalist versus those of a specialist nurse.
They ordered 198 competencies into 26 subcategories that were then classiﬁed into 12 categories.
See Box 6-10.
In conclusion, the researchers noted: “There is a
signiﬁcant common element in these two areas of
nursing practice, and generalist preparation in …
nursing is the foundation of specialist … nursing
practice. Generalist knowledge and skills are

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 81

Regulating Nursing

Box 6-10
Charge Nurse Competencies:
Clinical/Technical Competencies
Responsibilities directly related to patient care or some
technical aspect of working on a clinical unit:
1. Calculate patient acuities and enter them in the
computer (or ensure these are done).
2. Complete administrative duties (examples: complete
24-hour report, pre-op charts, up-date
census/assignment board).
3. Assist staff in completing their work.
4. Act as a clinical resource, sharing knowledge.
5. Use computer skills to chart and complete reports.
6. Delegate workload appropriately and fairly.
7. Check emergency equipment, handle unit
emergencies.
8. Conduct initial unit-wide patient assessments.
9. Use knowledge of medical equipment to provide
care.
10. Use knowledge of available clinical resources when
needed.
11. Use knowledge of unit, type of patients, procedures,
etc., to plan work.
12. Maintain a safe, clean physical unit environment.
13. Provide direct patient care as needed, balancing
patient care with charge nurse duties.
14. Provide for patient safety.
Adapted from Connelly, et al., 2003.

expanded in specialist practice and there is also evidence of specialist practice that is beyond the scope
of general nursing practice” (Gibson et al., 2003,
p. 591).

Competencies Required in Critical Care
Nationally accepted critical care competencies have
not been formulated. Therefore, critical care
programs in each educational institution tend to
redeﬁne the essential competencies necessary to
meet the standards of practice in the area of critical
care, resulting in variations in accepted practice
from state by state basis and within practice.
But core critical care competencies can be identiﬁed on a national basis. Jones (2002) conducted a
research study designed to elicit core critical care
competency statements from a sample of nurses
working in London, England, in critical care.
According to Jones, a core critical care competency
framework can be developed by expert nurses draw-

81

ing on their own experience and knowledge of critical care nursing. The author suggested that this
process would be useful to (1) educationalists
designing competency-based curricula, (2) critical
care managers as a tool for recruitment and retention and for education and training of staff, and (3)
individual critical care nurses to facilitate continuous professional development.

Competencies Required
in Nursing Informatics
Informatics is the “application of computer and
statistical techniques to the management of information” (University of New Castle upon Tyne,
2004). The standards on which nursing informatics
competencies are based are still evolving. Some of
the essential nursing informatics competencies will
be categorized according to their relevancy to (1)
national nursing education strategies designed to
develop nursing informatics competencies, (2)
nurses at four levels of practice, (3) risk assessment,
and (4) computerization of records
National Education Strategies Designed to Develop
Nursing Informatics Competencies

Herbert (2000) proposed that advances in the
sophistication of information and communication
technologies offer the nurse practitioner opportunities for (1) better information management, (2)
more complete documentation of work, and (3)
knowledge development to support evidence-based
nursing practice. Herbert suggested a shift in
emphasis from specialists in nursing informatics
(NI) to NI being integrated into all domains of nursing clinical practice, pointing to the need for nursing
informatics education strategies on a national level.
According to Herbert (2000), steps in developing
a plan to implement an education program on informatics competencies and standards must include (1)
recognizing the role and history of the NI
specialists, (2) deﬁning NI and the required NI competencies, and (3) adapting the educational infrastructure required to support this initiative. A
national committee, the National Nursing Informatics Project, was working on a plan to address
these competencies in nursing informatics (Herbert,
2000). This project ultimately demonstrated, however, that informatics does not seem to be as successful in providing evidence-based research for
establishing standards and competencies for practice as individual nursing researchers, such as
Staggers, Gassert, and Curran (2002).

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

82

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 82

Understanding Organizations

Informatics Competencies for Nurses
at Four Levels of Practice

Bickford (2002) noted that, although nurses
have always dealt with data, information, and
knowledge, the standard for nursing now requires
core competencies not only in computer skills but
also in data and information management.
Informatics competencies differ according to the
nurse’s level of skill.
Staggers, Gassert, and Curran (2002, p. 383) conducted a research study designed “to produce a
research-based master list of informatics competencies for nurses and differentiate these competencies
by level of nursing practice.” The four levels of practice were identiﬁed as the beginning nurse, the
experienced nurse, the informatics specialist, and
the informatics innovator. Based on a comprehensive literature review and item consolidation, an
expert panel of informatics nurse specialists deﬁned
initial competencies for the beginning informatics
nurse. See Box 6-11 for a master list of valid computer competencies for the Level 1 Beginning
Nurse.
The results of the research of Staggers, et al.
(2002) indicated that: (1) computer skills are only
one set of competencies within the larger category
of informatics standards, and (2) programming
skills or competencies of the third-level informatics
specialist nurse are generally not a necessary standard for the ﬁrst-level beginning and/or secondlevel experienced nurse.
Thus, Staggers, et al. (2002) agreed with
Herbert’s (2000) conclusion that general, not specialized, informatics should be the standard
for integration into all areas of clinical nursing
practice.

Informatics Utilized in
Regulating Safety Standards
Nursing informatics may be utilized to design or
redesign computerized risk assessment programs
that monitor whether patient safety standards have
been met. Browne, Covington, and Davila (2004)
reported that such computerized tools provide (1)
an accurate assessment of the safety risk to each
patient; (2) indicators that are embedded into routine assessment documentation, eliminating added
charting time and ensuring safety; (3) tailored
interventions for speciﬁc patient safety risks; (4)
an integration of fall-risk information into the care

Box 6-11
Level 1 Beginning Nurse: Master List
of Valid Computer Competencies
Computer Skills—Administration: applications for
structured patient data entry
Computer Skills—Communication (e-mail, Internet,
telecommunications)
Informatics Knowledge—Data access: for patient care
Informatics Knowledge—Documentation of patient care
Computer Skills—Education of patient, instruction of staff
Computer Skills—Monitoring patient systems
Computer Skills—Basic desktop software: uses word
processing
Computer Skills—Systems: use of peripheral devices, e.g.,
CD-ROM; knows basic components of the current
computer system
Computer Skills—Data to improve nursing practice
Computer Skills—Impact: requires time, persistent effort,
and skill for computers to become an effective tool
Computer Skills—Privacy/security: describes patients’
rights as they pertain to computerized information
management
Adapted from Staggers, et al., 2002

plan, report sheets, and care conferences; and (5)
an interdisciplinary communication network
regarding the standards of care for safety.

Informatics Utilized in Establishing
the Standard of Care
A descriptive study, designed by Scott and Elstein
(2004) using the Nursing Home Quality Initiative,
found that the standard of nursing care may be
achieved, regulated, and maintained through nursing informatics by (1) utilizing quality measurement methods and tools in monitoring patient care,
(2) utilizing quality data to ensure desired patient
care outcomes, (3) monitoring organizational and
cultural factors affecting utilization of quality data
in the clinical setting, (4) utilizing informatics systems to gather and implement quality data, and (5)
documenting and measuring impact evaluation and
research outcomes. The ﬁndings of this study may
be generalized to establish the standard of care,
ensuring quality nursing care. Thus, the nursing
standard becomes regulated through evidence-based
research.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 83

Regulating Nursing

83

Box 6-12
Level 3 Nursing Informatics Specialist: Master List of Valid Computer Competencies
Computer Skills-Basic Desktop Software: develops/writes
spreadsheets used for complex problems
Computer Skills-Project Management
Computer Skills-Quality Improvement: determines data
indicators, quality and effectiveness of nursing
informatics practice
Computer Skills-Systems: integrate different applications or
programs
Informatics Knowledge-Data: demonstrates fluency in
informatics and nursing terminologies
Informatics Knowledge-Education: plans and develops
application/system training programs for users, clients
Informatics Knowledge-Impact: interprets current
legislation, research, and economics affecting
computerized information management in health scope
of user passwords, devises strategies to protect the
confidentiality of computerized information
Informatics Knowledge-Regulations: incorporates relevant
law and regulations into informatics practice
Informatics Knowledge-Systems: applies theories that
influence computerization in health care; evaluates
applications/systems available in health care
Informatics Knowledge-Usability: applies human factors and
ergonomics to the design of the computer screen,
location and design of devices, and design of software
Informatics Skills-Analysis: applies principles and techniques
of systems analysis; interprets information flow within the
organization
Informatics Skills-Data/Data Structures: constructs data
structures and maintains data sets; integrates nursing
taxonomies, unified nomenclatures and other data
needed by nurses within database design
Informatics Skills-Design, Development: develops screen
layouts, report formats, and custom views of clinical data
by working directly with clinical departments and

individual users; coordinates the development of
integrated computer-based patient record technologies;
maintains database (e.g., adding, deleting fields,
structuring input for others, relational database)
Informatics Skills-Evaluation: existing technologies for costeffectiveness; evaluates hardware, software, and vendor
support
Informatics Skills-Fiscal Management: uses strategies to
optimize application use after implementation (benefits
realization)
Informatics Skills-Implementation: devises strategies for
installing applications/systems
Informatics Skills-Management: determines project scope,
objectives, and resources for each proposed application,
system or enhancement; functions as a project manager
Informatics Skills-Privacy/Security: develops policies related
to privacy, confidentiality, and security of patient and
client data
Informatics Skills-Programming: applies principles of
computer programming to communicate with software
developers
Informatics Skills-Requirements: modifies information
technologies to meet changing data requirements/needs
Informatics Skills-Role: consults about informatics with
clinical, managerial, educational, and/or research entities
Informatics Skills-Systems Maintenance: assists in the
resolution of basic software problems
Informatics Skills-System Selection: designs evaluation
criteria and strategies for selecting applications and
systems
Informatics Skills-Testing: conducts tests of information
management applications, systems.
Informatics Skills-Training: produces short-term and longterm training plans, materials, and operating manuals
tailored to the organization.

Adapted from Staggers, et al., 2002

Evidence-Based Practice:
The Standard of Care
Evidence-based nursing practice is an expected part
of the nursing standard of care. Evidence-based
nursing practice utilizes the best current clinical
evidence or research when implementing the nursing process. Evidence-based practice is the basis
upon which nursing standards are developed. Thus,
evidence-based nursing practice is a clinical

decision-making process that is integrated into the
nursing process. This scientiﬁc, step-by-step process
combines (1) the best available research evidence,
(2) the nurses’ clinical expertise, and (3) the
patient’s preferences for patient care.
Nurses integrate evidence-based nursing into the
nursing process by doing the following:
1. Identifying the patient’s care need by assess-

ment, based on analysis using current nursing
knowledge, expertise, and clinical practice.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

84

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 84

Understanding Organizations

2. Researching the literature for best evidence

relevant to meeting the patient care need.
3. Evaluating the research, or best evidence, for
interventions speciﬁc to the patient care need.
4. Choosing the best intervention designed to
meet the patient care need, justifying the
selection based on valid, reliable research
(University of Minnesota, 2004).
Evidence-based practice challenges nurses to
develop patient care interventions and expand the
relevant knowledge, based on the best research. But
van Meijel, Gamel, van Swieten-Duijfjes, and
Grypdonck (2004) reported limited literature on
the development of evidence-based nursing interventions. They presented a model for developing
evidence-based nursing interventions, designed to
guide the process of developing and testing complex
nursing interventions while incorporating the experience of the client.
The model consisted of four stages: (1) problem
deﬁnition, (2) accumulation of building blocks for
intervention design, (3) intervention design, and
(4) intervention validation.
The model allowed for the accumulation of
empirical evidence and theory development during
the formulation of the evidence-based intervention.
The authors suggested (p. 84) that the “use of the
model could facilitate effective communication
among nurses, researchers and educators when discussing the development and testing of nursing
interventions.”
Plouffe and Seniuk (2004) promoted evidencebased clinical practice as the goal of professional
nursing. Unfortunately, they reported (p. 14) that
“linking research to the clinical realm appears logical and sounds simplistic, yet frequently our preconceived thoughts and ideas of ease of change do
not equate with the reality of the situation.”
Although relevant research may exist, and the
patient care need may be there, the question
remains of “how shall the two meet?”
For example, a study was designed by Olade
(2004), whose purpose was: (1) to identify the
extent to which rural nurses utilize evidence-based
practice guidelines from scientiﬁc research in their
practice, (2) to describe previous and current
research utilization activities, and (3) to identify
the speciﬁc barriers they face in their practice settings. The results of the study revealed that only
20.8% of the participants, nurses with bachelor’s
degrees, were involved in research utilization. The

two most common areas of research were pain management and pressure ulcer prevention and management. Barriers to research identiﬁed by Olade
included rural isolation and lack of nursing
research consultants.
But Winch, Creedy, and Chaboyer (2002, p. 56)
commented that evidence-based nursing practice
either will or does direct nursing practice, arguing:
“It is possible to identify the governance of nursing
practice and hence nurses across two distinct axes;
that of the political (governance through political
and economic means) and the personal (governance
of the self through the cultivation of the practices
required by nurses to put evidence into practice.) …
Evidence-based nursing is an emerging technology
of government that judges nursing research and
knowledge and has the capacity to direct nursing
practice at both the political and personal level.”

EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE
THROUGH NURSING RESEARCH:
THE ROAD TO BEST PRACTICE
Best practice is the process through which competence and evidence-based practice lead to the
desired health-care outcome. Nursing research is
the mechanism to provide evidence-based practice.
Thus, for desired patient outcomes and to ensure
cost-efficient and effective best practice, application
of nursing research ﬁndings is essential to the establishment and regulation of the standard of nursing
practice.
Many variables affect regulations and standards
that are the subject and/or outcome of nursing
research. Olsen (2003) identiﬁed Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) privacy regulations, which became effective April 14,
2003, as having had the most signiﬁcant current
impact on nursing research. The privacy requirements of the regulations have affected nursing
research in (1) the research process, (2) accessing
data (including recruitment and using medical
records), (3) creating data (including intervention
studies, survey, and interview research), and (4)
disclosing data to others, such as nursing colleagues
at other health-care institutions.
Hodge, Kochie, Larsen, and Santiago (2003)
identiﬁed a “research-practice gap,” a situation in
which research ﬁndings that should become best
nursing practice are not implemented. In an

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 85

Regulating Nursing

attempt to diminish the research-practice gap via
evidence-based nursing practice, the authors studied ways to implement best practice. A patient care
research utilization committee was formed to
review and revise each patient care policy and procedure, based on best research evidence. The impetus for the project was a belief that current patient
care policies and procedures were (1) based on tradition rather than on science and (2) did not provide best practice in patient care, missing skills
required for new equipment, treatments, and
research ﬁndings. The beneﬁcial outcomes of this
research project included (1) a revision of patient
care policies and procedures, based on scientiﬁc evidence; (2) generation of new research questions,
based on gaps in the nursing literature; and (3) an
increase in the number of clinical nurses involved
in using research to provide best practice.
Staff education is another important component
of best practice. A research utilization project was
designed by Cruz, Abdul-Hamid, and Heater (1997)
for the purpose of (1) selecting and implementing a
research-based restraint education program, (2)
reducing the use of restraints in an acute care setting, and (3) changing the perception about
restraints in the direction of decreased importance.
The existing restraint policy and procedure and
new restraint products and alternative restraint
methods were reviewed by a multidisciplinary
team. Based on the evidence provided by a review of
the literature on restraint education programs, the
multidisciplinary team concluded that education
was the key component in promoting best practice.
Education programs could be monitored by risk
management and quality assurance to ensure best
practice in accordance with nursing regulations.

Accreditation as Nursing
Regulation
Accreditation is a voluntary process of compliance
with a set of standards established by a nongovernmental organization (University of New Castle
upon Tyne, 2004). Accreditation is the process utilized by an organization, such as a school of nursing
or health-care facility, to verify a competent educational or health-care program, respectively. For
example, the state’s governing board for nursing
typically provides accreditation for schools of nurs-

85

ing, providing validation that the educational program is in compliance with the state’s standards of
instruction for teaching qualiﬁed students how to
provide standardized nursing care. Private accrediting agencies like the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO)
monitor compliance with state and federal standards, but utilization of these private accrediting
agencies is voluntary, not mandatory.

JOINT COMMISSION ON ACCREDITATION
OF HEALTHCARE ORGANIZATIONS (JCAHO)
Established over 50 years ago, JCAHO is an independent, not-for-proﬁt accreditation organization.
Governed by a board that includes physicians,
nurses, and consumers, JCAHO sets the standards
by which quality of health care provided in hospitals is measured in the United States and around the
world (JCAHO, 2004).
Hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers may
voluntarily choose to apply for accreditation
through JCAHO or other such organizations.
According to Sauﬂ and Fieldus (2003), before
accrediting a hospital, JCAHO requires compliance
with its standards regarding the environment of
care, provision of care, and quality of care. Quality
of care is ensured by JCAHO conducting regular
surveys of each agency’s performance. The value of
the accreditation, according to the authors (p. 152),
is that this process “… certiﬁes to the health care
community and the community-at-large that the
facilities meet nationally accepted standards
through a recognized accreditation program.”
JCAHO is committed to improving and regulating safety in patient care by providing (1) standards
of patient care, (2) survey evaluations on the healthcare provider’s status in meeting standards of care,
and (3) professional consultative and educational
services on mechanisms for meeting the standard of
patient care (Sauﬂ & Fieldus, 2003). To meet
JCAHO standards, nursing standards and operating
strategies of health-care organizations must be in a
continual state of readiness, including performance improvement practices. Gantz, Sorenson,
and Howard (2003) believe that nurses have a
unique role in identifying and guiding the nursing
process, central to quality care, and the commitment to establishing and maintaining quality care,
as identiﬁed by JCAHO. They believe that the para-

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

86

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 86

Understanding Organizations

digm of health care must be shifted from just meeting the standards to continual readiness and performance
improvement
throughout
the
organization.

COMPLIANCE WITH POLICIES
AND PROCEDURES
A policy is a stated system by which health care is
administered. A procedure is a step-by-step process
by which a health-care outcome is achieved.
The American Nurses Association (ANA) plays
a signiﬁcant role in the development of model policies and procedures on both the state and national
levels. Standards of care also affect the development
of policies and procedures regulating nursing practice. Policies and procedures must meet or exceed
minimum standards of care as set by nurse practice
acts and other sources.
For example, the ANA provides a foundation for
policies and procedures related to patient safety by
(1) developing and disseminating policies and procedures to meet the standard for patient safety, (2)
lobbying for legislation and regulations that protect
and serve users of nursing services, and (3) advocating for patients and issues that affect a nurse’s
ability to meet the standards for safe care.
Policies and procedures are designed to regulate,
standardize, and drive nursing practice (Zeitz &
McCutcheon 2002). Evidence-based nursing practice is essential in developing policies and procedures. Zeitz and McCutcheon (2003) reported that
although evidence-based nursing is the mechanism
for achieving best practice in the clinical setting, in
reality it has had very little impact on the clinical
practice that nurses deliver on a daily basis. For
example, the authors noted that although the collection of vital signs is a ubiquitous component of practice in the postoperative general surgical setting,
there is little evidence, in the form of evidence-based
policies and procedures, to support this practice.
Further, they indicated that nursing policies and
textbooks, in general, present traditional, routineregulated clinical practice without an evidence base.
Traditional policies and procedures are being used
to (1) control rather than support evidence-based
practice and (2) limit opportunities for clinicians to
make patient-speciﬁc decisions. They suggested
that evidence-based practice, and ultimately best
practice, may be achieved through creation of policies and procedures based on (1) rigorous relevant

evidence that supports standardized nursing interventions, (2) the nurse’s clinical expertise, and (3)
the changing and expanding environment in which
nurses develop and practice. One of the most important environmental factors affecting nursing practice is the level of staffing.

Compliance With Staffing Requirements
Regulation of staffing affects productivity, the delivery of patient care, and thus the standard of nursing
care. Bednar, Haight and Street (2003, p. 47)
reported that: “… state-mandated staffing ratios,
coupled with restrictive nurse practice acts, may be
impacting the delivery of care to … patients.” They
found that patient-to-staff ratios vary state by state.
Mark, Harless, McCue, and Xu (2004) conducted
a study designed to evaluate previous research ﬁndings exploring the relationship between nurse
staffing and quality of care. In evaluating this relationship, they examined the effects of change in registered nurse staffing on change in quality of patient
care from 1990 to 1995 They found (p. 279) that
“improving registered nurse (RN) staffing unconditionally improves quality of care.” Levels of registered nurse staffing must also comply with state and
federal legislative and administrative regulations.

Legislative and Administrative
Regulation of Nursing
Nursing practice is regulated through state and federal legislative and administrative laws and agencies.
The state and federal legislatures develop and pass
laws. Federal administrative agencies, such as the
Veterans Administration, oversee compliance with
regulations by their agencies. Some examples of federal administrative regulatory agencies include the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS),
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). State administrative agencies,
such as state boards of nursing, create regulations to
accompany, detail, and implement state laws.

CENTERS FOR MEDICARE
AND MEDICAID SERVICES (CMS)
The CMS administers the Medicare program and
collaborate with states to administer Medicaid, the

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 87

Regulating Nursing

State Children’s Insurance Health Care Program,
and HIPAA. CMS is speciﬁcally responsible for simpliﬁcation of standards for implementation of and
HIPAA and maintenance of quality standards for
health care through its surveys and certiﬁcation
functions (CMS, 2004).

HEALTH INFORMATION PORTABILITY
AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT (HIPAA)
CMS oversees implementation of HIPAA standards
and regulations. Title I of HIPAA is designed to protect health insurance coverage for workers and
their families when they change or lose their jobs.
Title II of HIPAA, The Administrative Simpliﬁcation provisions, “requires strict security measures
to protect the electronic health data of patients”
(Follansbee, 2002, p. 42). Consequently, nursing
policies and procedures associated with the management of health-care information have changed
dramatically (Follansbee, 2002).
Requirements under HIPAA require nursing
service to comply with privacy standards by (1)
developing appropriate policies and procedures, (2)
providing notice of privacy practices and other
forms, (3) implementing measures to secure privacy, (4) contracting with business associates to
secure privacy, and (5) training all nursing staff
involved in patient care (Lucas, Adams, & Wachs,
2004). According to these authors (pp. 178–179):
“HIPAA’s privacy regulations are considered ‘the
ﬂoor’ or minimum standard for the protection of
PHI [protected health information]. As such, it is
likely that these privacy regulations will become the
‘industry standard’ to which all health care professionals will be held.”

Research in Long-Term Care:
Issues, Dilemmas, and Challenges
Scott and Elstein (2004) reported that as the
American population ages, already sizable longterm care expenditures are likely to increase. The
CMS, as the largest purchaser of health care for the
aging population, is continuously working to
improve the standard of long-term patient care
through (1) quality monitoring and enforcing of
patient care standards, (2) providing information to
beneﬁciaries about the standard of patient care, and
(3) enhancing resources to improve standardized
patient care.

87

Medicare and Medicaid also establish program
requirements in long-term care facilities. For example, according to regulations created by CMS (CMS,
2003, September), long-term care facilities may, in
speciﬁc circumstances, utilize paid feeding assistants to supplement the services of certiﬁed nurse
aides. The training and certiﬁcation of the feeding
assistants must have occurred under standardized
guidelines, established by CMS.

OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY
AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA, 2004) is a federal agency whose mission
is designed to: “assure the safety and health of
America’s workers by setting and enforcing standards; providing training, outreach, and education;
establishing partnerships; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace safety and health.”
OSHA provides a foundation for understanding
workplace health and safety by producing publications, pamphlets, audiovisual programs, computer
access programs, and other documents designed to
promote compliance with safety standards (Nester,
1996). OSHA works to build partnerships between
occupational safety and health-care administration,
according to Nester (1996). For example, the Office
of Occupational Health Nursing within OSHA is an
active advocate for health-care workers, such as
nurses, assisting with the establishment of standards that protect and provide for the safety of
patients and all health-care providers.

The OSHA Pathogens Standard
In 1991 the OSHA standard designed to protect
health-care providers from exposure to blood and
other potentially infectious materials became
mandatory. According to Goldstein and Johnson
(1991), health-care employers were required to
institute an infection control plan based upon this
OSHA standard, which included universal precautions, engineering and work practice controls, personal protective equipment, and housekeeping.
Occupational health nurses (1) coordinated the
development, maintenance, and revision of this
infection control program, in compliance with the
OSHA regulations, (2) educated management about
the hazards of blood-borne pathogens, and (3) provided assistance to ensure compliance with the

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

88

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 88

Understanding Organizations

OSHA standard, resulting in a safe and healthy
work environment for the health-care provider.
Nursing plays an active role in OSHA’s functions. Nurses are not only regulated/protected by
OSHA standards but also play an important role in
their implementation to meet standards for patient
safety.

CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL (CDC)
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC, 2004) is the leading federal agency for protecting the patient’s health and safety both at home
and abroad. The CDC is responsible for (1) developing and applying disease prevention and control,
(2) maintaining environmental health, and (3) promoting health and education activities designed to
improve the well-being of the people of the United
States. But research has demonstrated that more
nursing expertise is needed in the area of disease
control, as this environmental concern is a “front
line” patient care safety issue in nursing practice.

Disease Control: A Safety
Issue in Nursing Practice
According to Larson and Butterﬁeld (2002), clients
often use nurses as their primary contact for
expressing concerns about health problems related
to environmental disease control. In response to this
need, core competencies for nursing expertise in the
ﬁeld of environmental disease control were developed by the Institute of Medicine, Agency for Toxic
Substances and Disease Registry, and National
Institute of Nursing Research. These core disease
control competencies comprise a baseline of knowledge and awareness as well as a standard by which
nurses intervene to prevent and minimize environmental disease. Nursing standards for disease control focused on the following four competencies:
1. Basic knowledge and disease control concepts: “Understanding scientiﬁc principles
[of] … basic mechanisms of exposure…prevention and control strategies … applied
research, and the interdisciplinary nature of
environmental health.”
2. Assessment and referral: “Completing a comprehensive environmental exposure history
and making appropriate referrals … locating

and providing appropriate scientiﬁc information for individual patients and communities.”
3. Advocacy, ethics, and risk communication:
“Understanding the role of advocacy, principles of environmental justice, and risk communication in addressing environmental
health issues.”
4. Legislation and regulation: “Understanding
… environmental health policy as well as
state and national regulations” (Larson &
Butterﬁeld, 2002, pp. 301–308; quoting Pope,
Snyder, & Mood, 1995).

Establishing Safety Protocols Based
Upon CDC and OSHA Recommendations
In 1987 OSHA was petitioned by the ANA and
labor unions to issue an emergency infection control standard, subsequent to the ﬁrst documented
reports of occupationally acquired human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) in health-care providers
(Miramontes, 1990). OSHA responded by enforcing voluntary guidelines developed by the CDC
4 years earlier. Subsequently, OSHA drafted regulations containing the ﬁnal set of HIV safety protocols
in1991.
According to Miramontes (1990), OSHA established HIV safety standards and protocols to be utilized by all health-care providers, addressing (1)
types of protective clothing and equipment, (2)
housekeeping and laundry areas, (3) infectious
waste disposal, and (4) tracking employees, preand postexposure. In enforcing these standards,
hospitals stress continued education and training in
order to increase compliance. Miramontes (pp.
561–562) cited a research study that found “after a
two-year training/evaluation period, physician
compliance with infection control procedures
increased from 20% to 80%, and nurse compliance
rose from 50% to 86%.”

All Good Things…
Nursing practice is regulated on the state and federal levels. On the state level, nursing is regulated
via the state’s nursing practice act, which provides
for licensure as a registered nurse. Subsequently,

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 89

Regulating Nursing

Practice to Strive For 6-1
Best practice is the process through which competence and
evidence-based practice lead to the desired health-care outcome. Brief, concrete tips to promote best practice in consideration of the previously identified nursing regulations,
which focus on combined competence and evidence-based
practice, include:
1. Knowing the standards of practice in your state’s nursing practice act for the registered nurse and/or for
advanced practice.
2. Knowing the definition of unprofessional conduct in
your state’s nursing practice act.
3. Knowing the grounds for disciplinary action by the governing board for nursing practice.
4. Knowing whether your state participates in the nurse
licensure compact and your multistate licensure privileges under the compact.
5. Knowing the competencies required to perform your
role as a nurse, whether a generalist or a specialist.
6. Documenting attainment of, compliance with, and/or
updating of competencies.
7. Developing nursing informatics competencies.
8. Practicing evidence-based nursing by utilizing the best
current clinical evidence or research when implementing the nursing process.
9. Knowing the standard of care as defined in the
employer’s policy and procedures.
10. Working with accrediting agencies to provide certification that the health-care provider meets nationally
accepted standards for patient care.
11. Ensuring the staffing necessary to deliver and meet the
standard of patient care.
12. Complying with federal regulations regarding the standard of care related to privacy of health-care data.
13. Complying with federal regulations regarding the standard of care related to workplace health and safety

certiﬁcation acknowledges nursing competence at
an advanced level of practice.
The nursing practice act establishes the standard
of care and scope of practice, which are monitored
by the state’s governing board, usually the board of
nursing examiners. The nursing practice act also
regulates advanced practice; for example, the clinical nurse specialist. The scope of nursing practice

89

has been expanded by telenursing, requiring the
development of the Nurse Licensure Compact
(NLC). The NLC creates standardization within
nurse practice acts that vary and lack uniformity
from state to state, providing more standard methods of compliance, discipline, and rehabilitation.
Nursing has been developed upon the core competence of caring, a concept difficult to measure,
document, or legislate. Other essential competencies, which appear to be measurable behaviors,
include health promotion, supervision, interpersonal communication, direct care, computer, and
case load competencies. Competencies may be documented with videotaping, orientation records,
portfolios, self-assessment tools, records of mandatory intranet training courses, and continuing
education records. Advanced areas of nursing practice have more specialized sets of competencies.
Speciﬁc competencies are required in nursing
informatics at four levels, consisting of the beginning, experienced, informatics specialist, and
informatics innovator nurse. Informatics may be
integrated into the nursing standards.
Evidence-based nursing practice is the expected
standard of care. Nursing research is the mechanism to provide evidence-based practice. The nurse
may integrate evidence-based practice into the nursing process, for example, by following a four-step
clinical decision-making process. Policies and procedures also establish the standard of care and thus
regulate nursing practice.
Independent organizations, such as JCAHO,
monitor a health-care provider’s compliance with
state and federal laws and regulations. Accreditation is the process utilized by an organization, such
as a school of nursing or health-care facility, to verify competency of its educational or health-care program, respectively. Staffing and productivity must
also be regulated under these accreditation guidelines to meet the standard of care.
Legislative and administrative regulation of
nursing occurs on the federal level; for example,
through CMS. CMS oversees the administration of
HIPAA, a federal law that regulates conﬁdentiality
issues related to patient care. OSHA is a federal
agency that promotes standards for patient safety in
the health-care environment. The CDC is the federal agency that develops and promotes disease prevention and control.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

90

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 90

Understanding Organizations

Let’s Talk
1. What is the nursing standard for advanced
practice, management, and informatics?
2. Do you believe that nurses should seek
certiﬁcation? If so, why?
3. In what areas can a nurse specialize that are
considered advanced practice?
4. How has telenursing expanded nurse practice
acts?
5. Does an interstate compact have to exist for a
nurse to practice telenursing in those states?
6. How does lack of uniformity in state nurse
practice acts affect interstate compacts and
telenursing?
7. What can inﬂuence student nurse learning of
competencies in the clinical area?

NCLEX Questions
1. A nursing competency:
A. Is a skill that the nurse has to perform.
B. Is a speciﬁc behavior that a nurse must
demonstrate.
C. A and B.
D. Is the proﬁciency level that the nurse must
obtain.
2. A standard of care:
A. Requires use of the nursing process.
B. Is the degree of care, expertise, and judgment
exercised by nurses under similar circumstances.
C. A and B.
D. Is the number of patients that a competent
nurse can care for on any given shift.
3. What affects nursing regulation?
A. A state nurse practice act.
B. Accreditation by an official body.
C. Policies and procedures.
D. All of the above.
4. The goal of state and federal legislation is to:
A. Protect the public.
B. Regulate nursing education.

C. Oversee nurse competency via licensure and
discipline.
D. All of the above.
5. A nurse practice act:
A. Governs the role of the nurse.
B. Governs nursing education.
C. A and B.
D. Prescribes the competencies for the nursing
role.
6. Certiﬁcation is:
A. An examination.
B. Developed by a professional organization.
C. Aids a nurse in demonstrating competency.
D. All of the above.
7. What types of disciplinary action can a board of
nursing take?
A. License suspension.
B. Licensure denial.
C. Mandate that the offender take courses in
legal ethical decision making or pharmacology.
D. All of the above.
8. An advanced practice nurse:
A. Is a registered nurse.
B. Has studied in a post-basic or advanced educational program of study.
C. Acts independently of other health-care professionals in the delivery of health-care services.
D. All of the above.
9. Portfolios:
A. Can be used to demonstrate to state boards
of nursing that one is qualiﬁed to be a registered nurse.
B. Can be designed to demonstrate one’s competence.
C. Consist of documentation that captures
learning from experience.
D. B and C.
10. Modeling:
A. Is the facilitation and nurturance of an individual.
B. Assists one in attaining, maintaining, and
promoting health.
C. Is a purposeful nursing intervention.
D. Is a process used by nurses to develop an
understanding of the client’s world.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 91

Regulating Nursing

REFERENCES
Alspach, J. (1995). The educational process in nursing staff development. St.Louis: Mosby.
American Nurses Association. (2001 June). Code of ethics for
nurses. Retrieved December 14, 2004, from http://www.
nursingworld.org/ethics/chcode.htm
Bednar, B., Haight, D., & Street, J. (2003). State-mandated
staffing ratios within ESRD: Beneﬁts and costs. Nephrology
News Issues, 17(5):47, 51–55, 56.
Bickford, C.J. (2002). Informatics competencies for nurse managers and their staffs. Seminar in Nurse Management, 10(2):
110–113.
Browne, J.A., Covington, B.G., & Davila, Y. (2004). Using information technology to assist in redesign of a fall prevention program. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 19(3): 218–225.
Carlson, S., Kotze, W.J., & van Rooyen, D. (2003). Accompaniment needs of ﬁrst year nursing students in the clinical
learning environment. Curationis, 26(2):30–39.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2004). About the
CDC. Retrieved November 22, 2004, from http:// www.governmentguide.com/govsite.adp?bread⫽*Main& url⫽http%
3A//www.governmentguide.com/ams/clickThruRedirect.
adp%3F55076483%2C16920155%2Chttp%3A//www.cdc.
gov/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2004).Facts
about the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Retrieved
November 22, 2004, from http://www.cms.hhs.gov/
researchers/projects/APR/2003/facts.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, HHS. (2003
August). Medicare and Medicaid programs: Changes to
the hospital inpatient prospective payment systems and ﬁscal
year 2004 rates. Final rule. Federal Register, 68(148):
45345–4672.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, HHS. (2003 September). Medicare and Medicaid programs: Requirements for paid
feeding assistants in long term care facilities. Final rule.
Federal Register, 68(187): 55528–55539.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2004). The
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.
Retrieved November 22, 2004, from http://www.cms.
hhs.gov/hipaa/
Connelly, L.M., Yoder, L.H., & Miner-Williams, D. (2003). A
qualitative study of charge nurse competencies. Medical
Surgical Nursing, 12(5):298–306.
Cruz, V., Abdul-Hamid, M., & Heater, B. (1997). Research-based
practice: Reducing restraints in an acute care setting Phase I.
Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 23(2): 31–40.
Erickson, H., Tomlin, E., & Swain, M.A. (1983). Modeling and
role modeling: A theory and paradigm for nursing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Fenton, M.V., & Thomas, K.A. (1998). Advanced practice nursing in Texas: The interface of accreditation, regulation, and
certification. Advanced Practice Nursing Quarterly, 4(3):
78–85.
Fernandez, R.D., & Herbert, G.J. (2004). New modalities of
treatment and care require the development of new structures
and systems to access care. Nursing Administration Quarterly,
28(2):129–132.
Flook, D.M. (2003). The professional nurse and regulation.
Journal of Perianesthetic Nursing, 18(3):160–167.

91

Follansbee, N.M. (2002). Implications of the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 32(1):42–47.
Foss, G.F., Janken, J.K., Langford, D.R., & Patton, M.M. (2004).
Using professional specialty competencies to guide course
development. Journal of Nursing Education, 43(8):368–375.
Gantz , N.R., Sorenson, L., & Howard, R.L. (2003). A collaborative perspective on nursing leadership in quality improvement: The foundation for outcomes management and
patient/staff safety in health care environments. Nursing
Administration Quarterly, 27(4):324–329.
Gibson, F., Fletcher, M., & Casey, A. (2003). Classifying general
and specialist children’s nursing competencies. Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 44(6):591–602.
Goldstein, L., & Johnson, S. (1991). OSHA blood-borne
pathogens standard: Implications for the occupational health
nurse. American Association of Hospital Nursing Journal,
39(4):182–188.
Gragnola, C.M., & Stone, E.S. (1997). Responses from the ﬁeld
to the Pew Health Professions Commission’s December 1995
report: Reforming health care workforce regulation: Policy considerations for the 21st Century. UCSF Center for the Health
Professions. Retrieved January 1, 2006, from http://www.
futurehealth.ucsf.edu/pdf_ﬁles/futwkreg.pdf
Gunn, I.P. (1999). Regulation of health care professionals, Part 2:
Validation of continued competence. Certiﬁed Registered Nurse
Anesthetist, 10(3):135–141.
Hardin, S., & Langford, D. (2001). Telehealth’s impact on nursing and the development of the interstate compact. Journal of
Professional Nursing, 17(5):243–247.
Harper, J.P. (2002). Preceptors’ perceptions of a competencybased orientation. Journal of Nurses Staff Development,
18(4):198–202.
Heitkemper, M.M., & Bond, E.F. (2004). Clinical nurse specialists: State of the profession and challenges ahead. Clinical
Nurse Specialist, 18(3):135–140.
Herbert, M. (2000). A national education strategy to develop
nursing informatics competencies. Canadian Journal of
Nursing Leadership, 13(2):11–14.
Hodge. M., Kochie. L.D., Larsen. L., & Santiago. M. (2003).
Clinician-implemented research utilization in critical care.
American Journal of Critical Care, 12(4):361–366.
Hutcherson, C.M. (2001). Legal considerations for nurses practicing in a telehealth setting. Online Journal of Issues in
Nursing, 6(3):4.
Joint Commission on Hospital Accreditation. (2004). What is the
Joint Commission on Hospital Accreditation. Retrieved on
November 22, 2004, from http://www.jcaho.org/general⫹
public/who⫹jc/index.htm
Jones, M. (2002). Critical care competencies. Nursing Critical
Care, 7(3):111–120.
Kleinman, C.S. (2003). Leadership roles, competencies, and education: How prepared are our nurse managers? Journal of
Nursing Administration, 33(9):451–455.
Larson L.S., & Butterﬁeld P. (2002). Mapping the future of environmental health and nursing: Strategies for integrating
national competencies into nursing practice. Public Health
Nursing, 19(4):301–308.
Lavin, M.A., Meyer, G., & Carlson J.H. (1999). A review of the
use of nursing diagnosis in U.S. nurse practice acts. Nursing
Diagnosis, 10(2):57–64.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

92

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 92

Understanding Organizations

Lewallen, L.P., & McMullan, K.G. (2001). Returning to competence after discipline. JONAS Health Law Ethics Regulations,
3(3):88–91.
Lucas, B., Adams, S., & Wachs, J.E. (2004). Roadmap to HIPAA:
Keeping occupational health nurses on track. American
Association of Hospital Nursing Journal, 52(4):169–179.
Mark, B.A., Harless, D.W., McCue, M., & Xu, Y. (2004). A longitudinal examination of hospital registered nurse staffing and
quality of care. Health Service Research, 39(2):279–300.
Marrs J.A., & Alley, N.M. (2004). Moral turpitude: A benchmark toward eligibility for registered nurse licensure? JONAS
Health Law Ethics Regulations, 6(2):54–59.
Meretoja, R., Eriksson, E., & Leino-Kilpi, H. (2002). Indicators
for competent nursing practice. Journal of Nursing Management, 10(2):95–102.
Meretoja, R., Isoaho, H., & Leino-Kilpi, H. (2004). Nurse competence scale: Development and psychometric testing. Journal
of Advanced Nursing, 47(2):124–133.
Miramontes, H. (1990). Progress in establishing safety protocols
based on CDC and OSHA recommendations. Infection Control
in Hospital Epidemiology, 11(10 Supp):561–562.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. Nurse
Licensure Compact: Nurse licensure compact implementation.
Retrieved December 26, 2005, from http://www.ncsbn.org/
nlc/rnlpvncompact_mutual_recognition_state.asp
Nester, R.M. (1996). Occupational Safety & Health Administration: Building partnerships. American Association of Hospital
Nursing Journal, 44(10):493–499.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (2004). OSHA’s
mission. Retrieved November 22, 2004, from http://
www.osha.gov/oshinfo/mission.html
Olade, R,A. (2004). Evidence-based practice and research utilization activities among rural nurses. Journal of Nursing
Scholarship, 36(3):220–225.
Olsen, D.P. (2003). HIPAA privacy regulations and nursing
research. Nursing Research, 52(5):344–348.
Plouffe, J., & Seniuk, C. (2004). Walking the walk: Living
evidence-based practice. Dynamics, 15(1):14–17.
Ponto, J., Sabo, J., Fitzgerald, M.A., & Wilson, D.E. (2002).
Operationalizing advanced practice registered nurse legislation: Perspectives from a clinical nurse specialist task force.
Clinical Nurse Specialist, 16(5):263–269.
Pope, A.M., Snyder, M.A., & Mood, L.H. (Eds.). (1995). Nursing,
health and the environment: Strengthening the relationship to
improve the public’s health. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Roemer, R. (1977). The nurse practitioner in family
planning services: Law and practice. JOICFP Review,
6(3):28–34.
Sadler, J. (2003). A pilot study to measure the caring efficacy of
baccalaureate nursing students. Nursing Education Perspective,
24(6):295–299.
Sauﬂ, N.M., & Fieldus, M.H. (2003). Accreditation: A “voluntary” regulatory requirement. Journal of Perianesthia Nursing,
18(3):152–159.
Scholes, J., et al. (2004). Making portfolios work in practice.
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 46(6):595–603.
Scott, J.C., & Elstein, P. (2004). Research in long-term care:
Issues, dilemmas, and challenges from the public purchaser’s
perspective. Medical Care, 42(4 Supp):11–18.

Staggers, N., Gassert, C.A., & Curran, C. (2002). A Delphi study
to determine informatics competencies for nurses at four levels of practice. Nursing Research, 51(6):383–390.
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2001). Advanced practice
nurse. 22 Texas Administrative Code 221.1(3). Retrived
December 31, 2005, from http://info.sos.state.tx.us/pls/
p u b / re a d t a c ex t . Ta c Pa g e ? s l ⫽R & a p p ⫽9 & p _ d i r ⫽& p _
rloc⫽&p_tloc⫽&p_ploc⫽&pg⫽1&p_tac⫽&ti⫽22&pt⫽11&c
h⫽221&rl⫽1
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2001). Approval for prescriptive authority. 22 Texas Administrative Code 222.2.
Retrieved January 2, 2006, from http://info.sos.state.tx.us/
pls/pub/readtacext.TacPage?sl⫽R&app⫽9&p_dir⫽&p_rloc⫽
&p_tloc⫽&p_ploc⫽&pg⫽1&p_tac⫽&ti⫽22&pt⫽11&ch⫽22
2&rl⫽2
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2001). Core standards for
advanced practice. 22 Texas Administrative Code 221.13.
Retrieved December 31, 2005, from http://info.sos.state.tx.
us/pls/pub/readtacext.TacPage?sl⫽R&app⫽9&p_dir⫽&p_
rloc⫽&p_tloc⫽&p_ploc⫽&pg⫽1&p_tac⫽&ti⫽22&pt⫽
11&ch⫽221&rl⫽13
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2001). Minimum requirements for carrying out or signing prescriptions. 22 Texas
Administrative Code 222.4. Retrieved January 2, 2006, from
http://info.sos.state.tx.us/pls/pub/readtacext.TacPage?sl⫽R&
app⫽9&p_dir⫽&p_rloc⫽&p_tloc⫽&p_ploc⫽&pg⫽1&p_tac
⫽&ti⫽22&pt⫽11&ch⫽222&rl⫽4
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2001). Protocols or other written authorizations. 22 Texas Administrative Code 221.1(12).
Retrieved December 31, 2005, from http://info.sos.state.
tx.us/pls/pub/readtacext.TacPage?sl⫽R&app⫽9&p_dir⫽&p_
rloc⫽&p_tloc⫽&p_ploc⫽&pg⫽1&p_tac⫽&ti⫽22&pt⫽11&c
h⫽221&rl⫽1
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2001). Scope of Practice. 22
Texas Administrative Code 221.12. Retrieved December 31,
2005, from http://info.sos.state.tx.us/pls/pub/ readtacext.
TacPage?sl⫽R&app⫽9&p_dir⫽&p_rloc⫽&p_tloc⫽&p_ploc
⫽& p g ⫽1 & p _ t a c ⫽& t i ⫽2 2 & p t ⫽11 & c h ⫽2 2 1 &
rl⫽12
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2004). Standards of
Nursing Practice. 22 Texas Administrative Code 217, Part 11.
Retrieved December 26, 2005, from http://info.sos.state.
tx. us/pls/pub/readtac ext.TacPage?sl⫽R&app⫽9&p_dir⫽&
p_rloc⫽&p_tloc⫽&p_ploc⫽&pg⫽1&p_tac⫽&ti⫽22&pt⫽11
&ch⫽217&rl⫽11
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners. (2004). Temporary Authorization to Practice. 22 Texas Administrative Code 217,
Part 3(a)(1). Retrieved December 27, 2005, from http://
www.bne.state.tx.us/grads.htm
Texas Nursing Practice Act. (2005). Grounds for disciplinary
action. 301 Texas Occupational Code 452. Retrieved
December 26, 2005, from http://www.bne.state.tx.us/
npa1.htm#452
Thalman, J.J., & Ford, R.M. (2004). Labor and productivity
measures. Respiratory Care Clinics of North America,
10(2):211–221.
Tzeng, H.M. (2004). Nurses’ self-assessment of their nursing
competencies, job demands and job performance in the
Taiwan hospital system. International Journal of Nursing
Studies, 41(5):487–496.

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 93

Regulating Nursing
University of Michigan.(2005). Resume vs. portfolio. Retrieved
December 29, 2005, from http://www.nursing. umich.edu/
studentresources/resumes/resumeVsPfolio.html
University of New Castle upon Tyne. (2004). Online medical
dictionary. Online at http://cancerweb.ncl.ac.uk/cgibin/
omd?action⫽Home&query⫽
Utley-Smith, Q. (2004). Competencies needed by new baccalaureate graduates. Nursing Education Perspectives, 25(4):
166–170.
van Meijel, B., Gamel, C., van Swieten-Duijfjes, B., & Grypdonck, M.H. (2004). The development of evidence-based nursing interventions: Methodological considerations. Journal of
Advanced Nursing, 48(1):84–92.
Waddell, D.L. (2001). Measurement issues in promoting continued competence. Journal of Continuing Education Nursing,
32(3):102–106; 138–139.
Welton, R., Nieves-Khouw, F., Schreiber, D.A., & McElreath,
M.P. (2000). Developing computer-based training for agerelated competencies. Journal Nurses Staff Development,
16(5):195–201.
Winch, S., Creedy, D., & Chaboyer, W. (2002). Governing nursing conduct: The rise of evidence-based practice. Nursing
Inquiry, 9:156–161.
Winters, J., et al. (2003). Use of videotaping to assess competencies and course outcomes. Journal of Nursing Education,
42(10):472–476.
Wolford, R.A., & Hughes, L.K. (2001). Using the hospital
Intranet to meet competency standards for nurses. Journal of
Nurses Staff Development, 17(4):182–189.
Woodward, W. (2003). Preparing a new workforce. Nursing
Administration Quarterly, 27(3):215–222.
Zeitz, K., & McCutcheon H. (2003). Evidence-based practice: To
be or not to be, this is the question! International Journal of
Nursing Practice, 9(5):272–279.
Zeitz, K., & McCutcheon, H. (2002). Policies that drive the nursing practice of postoperative observations. International
Journal of Nursing Studies, 39(8):831–839.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aroskar, M.A., Moldow, D.G., & Good, C.M. (2004). Nurses’
voices: Policy, practice and ethics. Nursing Ethics, 11(3):
266–76.
Bell, D., Bowen, T., & Dilling, D. (1991). Computerizing records
for continuing education. Journal of Nursing Staff Development, 7(1):36–39.
Bergren, M.D. (2004). HIPAA-FERPA revisited. Journal of
Scholastic Nursing, 20(2):107–112.
Drenkard, K.N. (2004). The clinical nurse leader: A response
from practice. Journal of Professional Nursing, 20(2):89–96.

93

Editorial. (2000). Recognizing nursing’s independent license:
Prescriptive authority for APNs. Michigan Nurse, 73(3):
11–12.
Laine, G.A, et al. (1994). Hospital-wide medication policies and
standards. American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy, 51(23):
2949–2951.
Lewis, M.A., & Tamparo, C.D. (2002). Medical law, ethics
and bioethics for ambulatory care (5th ed.). Philadelphia:
FA Davis.
Lorimer, K. (2004). Continuity through best practice: Design and
implementation of a nurse-led community leg-ulcer service.
Canadian Journal of Nursing Research, 36(2):105–112.
Lyon, B.L., & Minarik, P.A. (2001). Statutory and regulatory
issues for clinical nurse specialist (CNS) practice: Ensuring
the public’s access to CNS services. Clinical Nurse Specialist,
5(3):108–114.
MacEachern, L. (2003). Providers issue brief: Scope of practice
and prescriptive authority: Year-end report 2003. Issue Brief
Health Policy Track Service, 1–29.
Menenberg, S.R. (1995). Standards of care in documentation of
psychiatric nursing care. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 9(3):
140–142, 148.
Meretoja, R., & Leino-Kilpi, H. (2003). Comparison of competence assessments made by nurse managers and practicing
nurses. Journal of Nursing Management, 11(6):404–409.
Merriam Webster. (2004). Medical dictionary. Online at
http://www2.merriam-webster.com.
Mikos, C.A. (2004). Inside the nurse practice act. Nursing
Management, 35(9):20–22, 91.
Oermann, M.H. (2002). Developing a professional portfolio in
nursing. Orthopedic Nursing, 21(2):73–78.
O’Keefe, M. (Ed.) (2001). Nursing practice and the law: Avoiding
malpractice and other legal risks. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Rowell, P.A. (2003). The Professional Nursing Association’s role
in patient safety. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 8(3):3.
Sattler, B. (1996). Occupational and environmental health: From
the back roads to the highways. American Association of
Hospital Nursing Journal, 44(5):233–237.
Schwab, N.C., & Pohlman, K.J. (2004). Records—the Achilles’
heel of school nursing: Answers to bothersome questions.
Journal of School Nursing, 4:236–241
Slimmer, L., & Andersen, B. (2004). Designing a data and safety
monitoring plan. Western Journal of Nursing Research,
26(7):797–803.
Tanner, A., Pierce, S., & Pravikoff, D. (2004). Readiness for evidence-based practice: Information literacy needs of nurses in
the United States. Medinformatics 2004, 936–940.
University of Minnesota.(2004). Evidence-based health care
project: Evidence-based nursing. Retrieved October 23, 2004,
from http://evidence.ahc.umn.edu/ebn.htm

06Jones Leadership(F)-ch 06

1/15/07

6:42 PM

Page 94

This page has been left intentionally blank.

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 95

chapter
7
Economic Influences
MICHELLE B. HAGADORN, MA, CPA
NANCY HOWELL AGEE, RN, MN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Leaders owe their institutions vital ﬁnancial health, and the relationships
and reputation that enable continuity of that ﬁnancial health.”
Max De Pree

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■

■
■

Describe economic changes in the health-care industry and the
resulting challenges to managers.
Discuss who pays for health-care services and the unique
complexities of payment methods to health-care organizations.
Explore the challenges of balancing supply and demand for
health-care services and understand what factors managers can
influence.
Review the two primary forms of business organizations and
focus on their different goals and objectives.
Discuss the current forms of health-care rationing.

95

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

96

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 96

Understanding Organizations

L

eadership is a challenging job as described by De
Pree above. Leaders are asked to be stewards for
their organizations’ assets, which range from ﬁnancial resources and human resources to the overall
reputation of the organization. Leaders keep the
organization continually moving forward by looking for ways to improve while managing the delicate
balance between the goals of the customer and
those of the organization. This chapter describes
why health economics is important to managers
within the health-care industry and some of the
unique challenges facing those managers. Health
economics has received increased focus in recent
years due to the increase in technological innovations, the greater availability of data, and the surge
in health-care spending. The need for managers to
be effective stewards has never been greater.

Current Status of Health
Care in the United States
In order to understand the current turmoil in the
U.S. health-care system, a brief review of several
dramatic changes that have occurred over the last
40 years is warranted. The emphasis of medical
care shifted from diagnosis of the illness to intervention and, now, has shifted to prevention of the
illness. New technologies have revolutionized the
ways in which health care is practiced. A few examples of these innovations include organ transplants,
radiation and chemotherapy treatment plans for
cancer, in vitro fertilization, and vast enhancements in drug treatments. The role of health insurance coverage has risen dramatically from less than
10% of the U.S. population in 1940 to more than
84% today (Weisbrod, 1991). In addition, in 1935
when Social Security was enacted as a beneﬁt for
older citizens, only 5% of the population lived past
the age of 65 years. Social Security did not anticipate life expectancy increases and the resulting
need for longer-term use (Cypher, 2003). Finally,
health-care expenditures continue to grow in proportion to the gross domestic product, making up
15.3% of total spending in the U.S. economy in
2003, or $1.7 trillion annually, up from 5.3% in the
1960s. Health-care spending is outpacing growth in
the overall economy by 3 percentage points
(Highlights—National Health Expenditures, 2003).
See Figure 7-1.

Why is there so much focus on the increase
in health-care spending? One reason is that the
United States spends more on health care per
person than any other major industrialized country
but fares worse on key health indicators such as life
expectancy and infant mortality rates. (Anderson,
1997). In addition, the continuing growth in healthcare spending leaves a smaller proportion of
national income for other purposes, such as education or defense. This has prompted the federal
government and employers to question whether
the beneﬁts of this increased spending are warranted, which has spurred the current discussions
of how to reform the health-care system. Central
to the reform debate is how much to pay for health
care. In order to understand the issues fully,
an overview of the current payment systems is
necessary.

OVERVIEW OF HEALTHCARE PAYMENT SYSTEMS
Who pays for medical care? In most industries, the
process of obtaining payment for services or products is fairly straightforward. A customer will purchase a product or service and be presented with a
bill that represents the quantity of goods or services
received, multiplied by an appropriate price.
Discounts may encourage sales of slow-moving
inventory; however, the basic method is a ﬁxed
price per unit set by the business. But health care
does not follow this simple process. In the United
States, there is a complex structure in place for
obtaining payment for health-care services, due to
various contractual relationships with third parties
(Cleverley & Cameron, 2003). As seen in Figure
7-2, 83% of all payments come from third parties.
Nevertheless, it is important that managers remember that the consumer is the ultimate payer for
health-care services. Although most consumer payments are indirect in the form of insurance premiums or taxes, increases in health-care costs will
force consumers to spend less on other goods and
services and more on items like insurance beneﬁts.
Reactions to increases in health-care costs can vary,
such as consumers dropping their health insurance
coverage, employers reducing the health insurance
beneﬁts offered to employees, or insurance companies reducing payments for services. Even insured
consumers are required to make some direct payments for health-care services, often referred to as

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 97

97

Economic Influences

National Health Expenditures
Total
Calendar
Year

GDP
in
billions

1965
1966
1967
1970
1975
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

Private Funds

Public Funds

Amount
in
billions

Per
Capita

Percent
of GDP

Amount
in
billions

Per
Capita

Percent
of
Total

Amount
in
billions

Per
Capita

Percent
of
Total

$720
759
834
1,040
1,635

$41.0
45.1
50.7
73.1
129.6

$205
324
249
348
590

5.7
5.7
6.1
7.0
7.9

$30.6
31.6
31.8
45.4
74.8

$154
156
156
216
340

75.1
69.9
62.8
62.2
57.6

$10.2
13.5
18.9
27.5
55.0

$51
67
93
131
250

24.9
30.1
37.2
37.8
42.4

2,795
3,131
3,259
3,535
3,933
4,213
4,453
4,742
5,106
5,449
5,803
5,956
6,319
6,642
7,054
7,400
7,813
8,318
8,781
9,274
9,825
10,082

245.8
255.1
321.0
353.5
390.1
425.8
457.2
496.0
558.1
622.7
696.0
761.8
827.0
888.1
937.2
990.1
1,039.4
1092.7
1,150.0
1,219.7
1,310.0
1,425.5

1,067
1,225
1,366
1,489
1,628
1,765
1,672
2,020
2,243
2,477
2,738
2,966
3,184
3,381
3,534
3,967
3,647
4,007
4,178
4,392
4,672
5,035

8.8
9.1
9.8
10.0
9.9
10.1
10.3
10.5
10.9
11.3
12.0
12.7
13.1
13.4
13.3
13.4
13.3
13.1
13.1
13.2
13.3
14.1

140.9
153.9
186.7
206.1
229.3
252.2
256.9
259.3
331.7
370.9
413.5
441.3
458.5
497.7
509.8
532.5
557.5
589.2
626.4
659.7
718.7
777.9

512
704
794
868
957
1,043
1,093
1,174
1,333
1,476
1,627
1,718
1,503
1,895
1,922
1,968
2,063
2,160
2,283
2,411
2,563
2,749

57.3
57.5
55.2
55.3
55.6
59.1
55.4
55.1
59.4
59.6
59.4
57.9
56.6
55.0
54.4
53.8
53.6
53.9
54.6
54.9
54.9
54.6

104.8
121.2
134.3
147.5
160.6
174.6
190.4
208.8
225.4
251.8
262.5
320.6
358.5
390.4
427.3
457.7
481.9
503.5
521.6
550.0
591.3
646.7

455
521
571
621
671
722
760
847
910
1,002
1,111
1,248
1,380
1,486
1,611
1,709
1,784
1,845
1,895
1,960
2,109
2,265

42.7
42.5
41.8
41.7
41.2
40.9
41.6
41.9
40.5
40.4
40.6
42.1
43.4
44.0
45.6
46.2
46.4
46.1
45.4
45.1
45.1
45.4

NOTES: These data reflect Bureau of Economic Analysis Gross Domestic Product as of October 2001. Per capita is calculated
using Census resident based population estimates.
November 2003
FIGURE 7-1 National health-care trends in public versus private funding in selected years. (Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, U.S.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis)

out-of-pocket payments, co-pays, or deductibles.
Some out-of-pocket payments are for services that
are not covered by the policy or for services in
excess of the policy’s coverage limits.
Most health-care organizations have a master
price list referred to as the charge description
master (CDM). The CDM has the speciﬁc charges
for a deﬁned unit of service, such as an x-ray, speciﬁc laboratory test, or 1 hour of surgery time. The
unique aspect of pricing in the health-care industry
is that often the payment for a speciﬁc unit of service in no way relates to the charge that actually
appears on the patient’s bill from the CDM. This

dilemma is discussed in more detail in the review of
reimbursement methods.

Uninsured Consumers
Currently, about 16% of the population (45 million
people) does not have health insurance (Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2005). These
consumers must pay for their health-care needs
from their own resources. Customers without
insurance are expected to pay the total billed
charges, based on the health-care organization’s
price list, while insured customers receive dis-

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

98

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 98

Understanding Organizations

Personal Health Care Expenditures by Source of Funds:
Selected Years 1960–2000
Over the last several decades, the public sector share of health spending
has increased, while the share from out-of-pocket spending has declined.

$23.3

$63.1

Dollars in Billions
$214.5
$609.3

$1,130.4

100
27.1%

80

5.0%

39.7%

Percent

34.6%

2.8%

11.9%

10.0%

16.9%

17.6%

11.5%

11.4%

15.7%

19.2%

20
11.5%

21.4%

8.0%

1960

33.4%
7.3%

21.4%

0

28.3%

22.3%

2.0%

40

5.0%

4.3%

55.2%

60

17.2%

22.5%

1970

1980
Calendar Year

Total Public

1990

16.8%

2000

Total Private

Other Public

Out-of-Pocket

Medicare

Other Private

Total Medicaid, SCHIP expansion
and SCHIP

Private Health Insurance

counts for services based on contracts their insurance companies have negotiated with the providers.
When personal resources are not adequate, often
the uninsured consumer must rely on charity care
or do without the service. The rising share of the
population without medical insurance is seen as a
major problem in the United States and one of the
key issues driving the need for health-care reform.
See Figure 7-3.

Reimbursement Models
Health-care managers need to understand the basic
payment methods for customers with insurance.
There are two main categories of payment methods:
fee-for-service and capitation.
Fee for Service

In fee-for-service payment methods, reimbursement increases based on the number of services
provided. There are three primary methods of
reimbursement: cost-based reimbursement, chargebased reimbursement, and the prospective payment
system
Cost-based reimbursement is not frequently
encountered in practice today; Medicare reimbursed

FIGURE 7-2 Personal health-care expenditures by source of funds. (Source: CMS
Office of Actuary, National Health Statistics
Group)

health-care providers in this manner from 1966 to
1983. Under cost-based reimbursement, the payer
agrees to reimburse the provider for the costs
incurred in providing services to the insured populations. The payment is limited to allowable costs,
which is deﬁned as costs directly related to the provision of health-care services (Gapenski, 2003). For
example, if the hospital’s cost to care for a patient
delivering a baby included 2 days in the hospital at
a nursing cost of $480 per day, medical supplies of
$200, drugs of $125, and equipment use of $250, the
hospital would be reimbursed the sum of all these
costs, $1,535.
Charge-based reimbursement was common in
the early days of health insurance, when payers
reimbursed providers on the basis of billed charges.
The current trend is away from paying on billed
charges; however, some payers now reimburse
based on a discount of billed charges ranging 20%to
40% (Gapenski, 2003). For example, if the patient
bill for the same 2-day maternity stay included
charges that totaled $3,500, the hospital would be
paid some percentage of this amount under chargebased reimbursement.
In the prospective payment system (PPS) a
predetermined rate is paid for services. Reimburse-

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 99

99

Economic Influences
Private Insurance
Any private
plan

68.6%*
69.6%

Employmentbased
Directpurchase

Any government
plan

60.4%*
61.3%
9.2%
9.3%
Government Insurance
26.6%*
25.7%
13.7%*
13.4%

Medicare

12.4%*
11.6%

Medicaid
Military
health care†

Not covered

2003
2002

3.5%
3.5%
No Insurance
15.6%*
15.2%

* Statistically different at the 90-percent confidence level.
†

FIGURE 7-3 Coverage by type of health insurance:
2002 and 2003. (Source: U.S. Census Bureau,
Current Population Survey 2003 and 2004, annual
social and economic supplements)

Military health care includes: CHAMPUS (Comprehensive Health and Medical Plan for
Uniformed Services)/Tricare and CHAMPVA (Civilian Health and Medical Program of the
Department of Veterans Affairs), as well as care provided by the Department of Veterans
Affairs and the military.
Note: The estimates by type of coverage are not mutally exclusive; people can be
covered by more than one type of health insurance during the year.

ment of services is based on a per-unit payment,
such as diagnosis, procedure, day, or episode. Several common PPS examples follow:
1. Per-procedure reimbursement, which is com-

monly used in outpatient settings.
2. Per-diagnosis reimbursement, in which diagnoses that require a higher resource utilization have higher reimbursement rates.
“Medicare pioneered this basis of payment in
its diagnosis related group system, which was
first used for hospital reimbursement in
1983” (Gapenski, 2003). For further discussion, see the Medicare section below.
3. Per-day reimbursement, in which the healthcare provider is paid a ﬁxed amount for each
day that service is provided, regardless of the
nature of the services.
4. Global pricing, which is a single payment that
covers all services delivered in a single
episode of care. For example, one payment is
made for maternity services, covering physi-

cian visits prior to and following delivery and
hospital care for the delivery.
Capitation

The second major category of reimbursement is
capitation, in which the provider is paid a ﬁxed
number per covered life per period (usually a
month), regardless of the number and type of services provided. Although similar to the prospective
payment system, a capitated payment system pays a
ﬁxed number per month for all services provided to
an individual versus per procedure or episode
under the PPS. Initially, everyone believed that capitation would become the dominant method of payment; however, the popularity of capitation plans
has declined and became popular only in certain
geographic locations. The administrative skills and
data demands required to manage risks appropriately are quite substantial. In addition, the ﬁnancial
risks to the insurer are greater under capitation due
to the importance of accurately projecting the
appropriate payment per member. Currently, fee-

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

100

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 100

Understanding Organizations

for-service plans continue to be the most common
form of reimbursement (Gapenski, 2003).

Financial Incentives and Risk
Each of the reimbursement methods provides different ﬁnancial incentives to providers of healthcare services. In cost-based reimbursement, for
example, providers are paid more if their costs are
higher; therefore, no incentive exists to contain
costs. In charge-based reimbursement, on the other
hand, providers have an incentive to increase their
prices because that results in higher payments.
Generally, in a competitive marketplace, consumers
will only be willing to pay so much for a service, but
because most payments for health-care services
come from third parties, providers have limited ability to pass on higher charges. As third-party payers
transition to a discount charge-based methodology,
providers have an incentive to manage costs to
maintain the same level of proﬁt. Additional costs
are no longer able to be recouped through increasing charges for services, as only a portion of the
charges will be reimbursed.
In all of the prospective payment methods,
regardless of the unit of payment (procedure, diagnosis), an incentive exists to reduce costs because
the payment is ﬁxed. The overall incentive under
the PPS is to work more effectively by managing
costs and increasing the utilization of the most profitable services. Under global pricing, for example,
one payment is made for an entire episode of
services, so a strong incentive exists for the physicians and hospitals to work together to offer the
most effective treatment. Finally, under capitation,
the key to proﬁtability is to increase efficiency and
decrease utilization. In a capitation setting, providers have the incentive to practice preventive
medicine rather than just treating the illness so they
can limit unnecessary utilization of services.
Health-care providers also face several ﬁnancial
risks created by the reimbursement methods in
place. The risks create some uncertainty regarding
the proﬁtability of the organization. First, providers
now bear the risk that costs will exceed revenues.
Due to reimbursement for services being somewhat
ﬁxed under current payment methods, providers
can no longer increase revenues to offset additional
costs. Revenues can be increased, but the reimbursement will be the same, regardless of the
charge. A key difference among the reimbursement

methods is the ability of the provider to inﬂuence
the proﬁt of each service by setting the prices above
the costs. In the PPS, risk is increased due to the
payment being ﬁxed regardless of the charge to the
patient. The PPS payment is based on the resource
utilization necessary for the average patient, and
because some patients need more intensive treatments than others, the health-care provider is at
greater risk to manage costs to maintain proﬁtability. It is important to realize that the recent trends
in reimbursement represent a shift in risk from the
insurers to the providers. By implementing a ﬁxed
payment for services regardless of patient charges,
the providers are now responsible for managing
costs to ensure a proﬁt is made on services.

Major Third-Party Payers
There are two broad categories of third-party payers, which provide insurance coverage to the populations: private insurers and public programs.
Currently, approximately 54% of all hospital payments come from private sources, with the remaining 46% coming from governmental programs such
as Medicare and Medicaid. Over the last several
decades, the trend has been toward an increase in
public sector funding of health-care spending, with
public funding projected to be 49% of total funding
by 2014 (USA Today, 2005).

PRIVATE INSURERS
The major private insurers include Blue Cross/Blue
Shield, commercial insurers, and self-insurers.
During the Depression, the Blue Cross/Blue
Shield concept emerged as a way for patients to
afford care at hospitals and from local physicians.
Blue Cross was created by Justin Ford Kimball;
1300 school teachers were allowed to ﬁnance 21
days of hospital care by making small monthly payments to the Baylor University Hospital (Flanagan
& Kjesbo, 2004). Blue Shield was emerging in the
Paciﬁc Northwest as a result of serious injuries and
chronic illness in the lumber and mining camps.
“Employers who wanted to provide medical care for
their workers made arrangements with physicians
who were paid a monthly fee for their services”
(History of Blue Cross/Blue Shield, 2006). These

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 101

Economic Influences

organizations developed across the country as independent not-for-proﬁt corporations. Today, the various Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans continue to
operate as independent organizations and are
members of a single national association that sets
standards. In 1986 Congress eliminated their taxexemption status because the organizations were
offering commercial insurance. As a result, several
plans have converted to for-proﬁt status; due to the
complexities involved in converting from not-forproﬁt to for-proﬁt status, others maintain their notfor-proﬁt status (Gapenski, 2003). Because all Blue
Cross/Blue Shield corporations operate independently, reimbursement methods vary by state. Just
as with Medicare, the trend has been toward a
prospective payment methodology. Many private
insurers have adopted Medicare’s diagnosisrelated group (DRG) system and developed their
own payment rates based on speciﬁc diagnoses.
Several types of organizations, most often forproﬁt insurance companies, offer commercial health
insurance. Traditionally, commercial insurers
have reimbursed providers for health-care services
on the basis of billed charges. As health-care costs
continue to grow, and as these organizations have
begun charging higher insurance premiums, a trend
has started toward more cost-effective reimburse-

Common Types of Managed Care Plans
Many private insurers have moved to offering managed
care plans. “Managed care plans are designed to control
healthcare costs through monitoring, prescribing or
proscribing the provision of healthcare to a patient”
(Cleverley, 2003). The two most common plans are health
maintenance organizations and preferred provider
organizations. There is much variability in how these plans
work; however, they both seek to change incentives in
several ways:
Limiting subscribers’ choices to a provider within the
network of providers.

ment methods. As for-proﬁts, these organizations
have an incentive to maximize their owners’ proﬁts.
Another form of private insurance is where companies set aside funds to pay for future health costs
of their own employees rather than using an outside
organization to provide their health insurance. This
form of insurance is referred to as self-insurance
and is very popular among organizations with a
large number of employees. The next section of the
chapter focuses on the two major government
insurance programs, Medicare and Medicaid.

Medicare
The Medicare and Medicaid programs were established through the Social Security Act in the mid1960s. These programs were administered by the
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
(HEW). “In 1977, the Health Care Financing
Administration (HCFA) was created under HEW to
effectively coordinate Medicare and Medicaid. In
1980, HEW was divided into the Department of
Education and the Department of Health and
Human Services. In 2001, HCFA was renamed the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)”
(Medicare Information Resource, 2005).
CMS is the federal agency that administers the
Medicare program. Currently, Medicare provides
coverage to approximately 40 million Americans.
Medicare is the national health insurance program
for:
■
■

■

■

Encouraging preventive care services by offering lower
co-pays.

■

Changing financial incentives for health-care providers to
limit the number of services ordered for patients
Implementing utilization review processes prior to
services being rendered.

People age 65 years or older
Some people younger than age 65, with qualifying disabilities that have been recognized by
the Social Security Administration
People with end-stage renal disease, which is
permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or
a kidney transplant

Medicare coverage is separated into two plans:

Relying on the primary care physician to serve as the
gatekeeper for referral and approval of services.

Discouraging use of brand name drugs by higher co-pays.

101

Part A coverage provides hospital and some
skilled nursing home coverage.
Part B coverage provides outpatient, physician,
ambulatory surgical, and several miscellaneous services.

Most people do not pay a monthly Part A premium because they or their spouses are eligible for
Social Security, and it comes as a beneﬁt of Social
Security. The Part A premium in 2005 for individuals not eligible for Social Security beneﬁts was $375

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

102

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 102

Understanding Organizations

per month. Part B coverage is optional to all individuals who have Part A coverage. In 2005, the
monthly premium for Part B was $78.20 (HHS
Announces, 2005).
Until 1983 Medicare reimbursed providers for
health-care services based on provider costs. In 1983
the federal government implemented a new reimbursement system for Part A providers called the
PPS, discussed earlier. The objective of the PPS was
to curb Medicare spending and provide incentives
for providers to manage costs. The ultimate goal was
to curb growth in health-care spending and to free
up funds in the national budget for other services.
Unfortunately, over the years PPS payments have
not kept pace with hospital costs. To make matters
worse, the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997
placed signiﬁcant restrictions on the growth in
Medicare spending. The Balanced Budget Relief Act
of 1999 restored some of the spending cuts from the
BBA, but payment growth is still below the growth
in operating costs (Gapenski, 2003).
In the PPS system, providers have an incentive to
look for ways to contain costs and maintain profitability. From the early 1980s until 2000, outpatient services continued to be reimbursed at cost
while inpatient services were reimbursed under the
PPS, so providers shifted services from inpatient to
outpatient. As a result, Medicare spending for outpatient services grew quickly and offset some of the
expected savings from the PPS. As a result, in
August 2000, Medicare implemented a ﬁxed payment system for outpatient services as well.

Medigap Plans
A Medigap policy is a health insurance policy sold by
private insurance companies that must follow state and
federal laws. Many people choose to buy these policies
because Medicare does not pay for all their health-care
costs. For example, consumers must pay for coinsurance,
co-pays, and deductibles, which are called gaps in
coverage, and they often choose to buy a Medigap plan
to cover these gaps. In addition, Medigap plans often
cover benefits that the original plan does not offer, such
as emergency health care while traveling. Monthly
premiums are paid to the private insurance company for
the Medigap coverage. There are 12 standardized plans
from which to choose that vary in cost, based on the
specific details of each plan, such as deductible and copay limits and restrictions on which facilities can be used
(Medicare and You, 2006).

Inpatient Prospective Payment System

The foundation of Medicare’s inpatient PPS is the
DRG assigned to the patient at discharge from the
hospital. The DRG provides a way to classify
patients based on their primary diagnosis. The diagnosis is inﬂuenced by which medical diagnostic category a patient is in. There are approximately 543
DRGs. Each DRG is assigned a relative weight,
which represents the average number of resources
used in treating the average patient with a certain
diagnosis. The average weight of all DRGs is
assumed to be 1, so DRGs with a relative weight
greater than 1 are more resource-intensive than
DRGs with a relative weight of lower than 1. The
Medicare case mix index of an institution is a
weighted average of all the different diagnoses being
treated at a particular organization. For example, a
case mix index of 1.5 indicates that a facility’s diagnoses are more complex and resource-intensive than
a facility with a case mix index of 0.80. CMS reviews
the relative weights of speciﬁc DRGs annually and
makes adjustments based on changes in resource
consumption, treatment patterns, and technology.
The DRG payment assigned by Medicare is
based on standardized payment rates for labor and
nonlabor costs and the relative weight of the DRG.
The labor portion of the payment must be adjusted
for the local area wage index, which attempts to
reﬂect relative labor costs across the United States.
Local wage indices and standardized payment rates
are published annually by CMS. Table 7-1 contains
an illustration of this calculation for DRG 106
Cardiac Bypass with a PTCA for a hospital in
Atlanta, Georgia.
The inpatient PPS works fairly well when
patient costs are distributed symmetrically for each
DRG, and the payment should be sufficient to cover
the costs of an average patient. For example, if
within the DRG for pneumonia more patients have
a severe rather than a mild case, the charges would
be higher for the sicker patients yet the reimbursement will be the same regardless. In the event that
certain hospitals treat sicker patients who require
more resources for certain DRGs, the PPS payment
will fall short in covering the costs of care. To provide some cushion for high-cost patients, the PPS
provides an additional outlier payment for patients
whose costs exceed certain thresholds.
The regular PPS payment covers only operating
costs. Because hospitals have to bear the costs of
ﬁnancing assets necessary to provide services,

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 103

Economic Influences

TABLE 7-1

Example of Inpatient PPS
Reimbursement*

DRG 106 CORONARY
BYPASS WITH PTCA

HOSPITAL:
ATLANTA, GA

National unadjusted labor payment
Wage index: Atlanta, GA
Wage-adjusted labor payment
National nonlabor payment
Total adjusted payment for a relative
weight of 1
DRG 106 relative weight
Total PPS payment for DRG 106

$2,823.63
⫻ .9960
⫽ $2,812.34
⫹ 1,730.62
⫽ $4,542.96
⫻ 7.3062
$33,191.74

*The current labor payment rate is $2,823.63, which is multiplied
by the local wage index for Atlanta, Georgia, of .9960 to calculate
the adjusted labor payment rate. This amount is added to the
nonlabor payment amount to derive the adjusted hospital rate.
The adjusted hospital rate is an attempt by CMS to account for
differences in costs due to geographic location. Finally, the
adjusted hospital rate is multiplied by the DRG relative weight to
determine the hospital payment for DRG 106. Once the adjusted
hospital rate has been determined, it is relatively simple to
analyze the payment for any number of DRGs by multiplying the
appropriate DRG weight by the adjusted hospital rate to
determine the total payment.

Medicare provides additional dollars to assist in
covering capital costs. Currently, the capital payment rate is $416.53, which is multiplied by the
DRG relative weight, for each Medicare discharge
during the year. So hospitals receive additional
reimbursement equal to $416.53 ⫻ DRG weight ⫻
the number of Medicare patients.
Outpatient PPS

On August 1, 2000, CMS implemented an outpatient PPS based on ambulatory payment classiﬁcations (APCs). Services grouped under each APC are
similar clinically and in terms of the resources
required. A payment rate is established for each
APC, and hospitals may be paid for more than one
APC for an encounter. Currently, there are approximately 350 APCs that specify surgical and nonsurgical procedures, visits to clinics and emergency
departments, and ancillary services.
The APC payment calculation is based on a standard national payment rate, the national Medicare
payment percentage, and the patient’s co-payment
amount. The national payment rate is divided into
labor and nonlabor components. Labor represents

103

60% of the payment rate and nonlabor the remaining 40%. As in the DRG calculations, the labor
component of the payment rate is adjusted for the
hospital’s local wage index. The calculation of the
payment for an individual APC is fairly straightforward. Complications arise, however, when multiple
procedures are performed within the same visit for
a patient. The procedure with the highest value is
paid at 100% of the APC payment, and additional
procedures are paid at 50%. Certain outpatient
services are paid based on a fee schedule, such as
physical, occupational and speech therapy, ambulance services, and diagnostic laboratory services.
In addition to inpatient and outpatient hospital
services moving to a PPS of reimbursement, nursing homes and home health agency payment methods have also been revised to shift more risk to
the health-care provider by capping payments for
services.

Medicaid
Medicaid was created under Title XIX of the Social
Security Act in 1965 as an entitlement program

Practice Proof 7-1

Popularity of new drug-coated stents exceed supply.
Cardiovascular Watch, July 21, 2003, p. 15.

Stents have been used since 1987 in conjunction with
angioplasties to help prevent arteries from reclosing from
plaque buildup. In the spring of 2003, Cordis Corporation
released a new stent that was coated with the drug
sirolimus. Research indicates that the drug-coated stents
prevent scar tissue from reclogging the artery, which
often results in another angioplasty within a year of the
first procedure. Demand for the new stents is outpacing
supply. At the time of this article, Cordis Corporation had
the only drug-coated stent on the market. It is anticipated
that Boston Scientific will receive approval from the
Federal Drug Administration (FDA) within the next year to
offer its own drug-coated stent. In addition, the Cordis
stents sell for approximately $2,100 more than the bare
metal stents, which is creating financial losses for some
hospitals on these procedures.
1. What are the factors driving the demand for the drugcoated stents?
2. What are the possible rationing issues as a result of the
shortage? What are possible solutions to this dilemma?
3. Explain the potential reimbursement ramifications from
the new stents.

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

104

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 104

Understanding Organizations

jointly funded by the federal and state governments
to provide medical assistance for qualiﬁed individuals and families with low income and resources.
“Medicaid is the largest source of funding for medical and health-related services for America’s poorest people” (Medicaid: A Brief Summary, 2005).
States have tremendous autonomy in how they
structure their Medicaid programs. States decide on:
■
■
■
■

Eligibility criteria
Type, amount, duration, and scope of services
Payment rates for services
Administration

Due to the ﬂexibility each state possesses in
structuring its Medicaid programs, considerable
variations occur. For example, an individual may be
eligible for Medicaid in one state and not be eligible
in another state.
The federal government pays a portion of expenditures under each state’s Medicaid program. The
percentage the federal government pays is updated
annually by comparing the state’s average per capita
income level with the national income average.
States with higher income levels are reimbursed a
smaller percentage. By law, federal payment cannot
be lower than 50% or higher than 83% of a state’s
Medicaid costs. In 2004, the overall average payment percentage was 60.2%, ranging from 50% in
12 states to a high of 77% in Mississippi (Medicaid:
A Brief Summary, 2005). See Box 7-1 for an
example.

Basic Economic Theories
of Supply and Demand
Based on the current state of health-care spending,
there is little argument that resources are limited
and consumers (and professionals) are forced to
make decisions on how to allocate these resources
best. The study of economics helps managers analyze the allocation of scarce resources. Resources
are anything useful in the consumption or production of a product or service, such as nursing care,
new equipment, surgical supplies and, of course,
money. For example, individuals must choose daily
how to allocate their resources for food, gas, entertainment, and health care. Basic supply and demand
theories help illustrate how this allocation of

resources takes place. Managers can use these concepts to make both broad strategic decisions and
detailed pricing decisions.
In a market system, price is used to ration goods
and services. A price system is easy to operate
because the price of a product or service selfcorrects when the quantity supplied exceeds the
quantity demanded. A price system allows individuals with different preferences to make their own
choice. In the health-care industry, the market system may appear to work unfairly, as when low
income consumers or individuals with preexisting
medical conditions are unable to afford needed
services (Lee, 2000).

DEMAND THEORY
Most organizations begin their annual strategic
planning process by projecting demand for their
products. In the health-care setting, the focus is on
predicting demand for the appropriate level of services to provide, which also results in planning the
required staffing levels to meet this demand.
Managers routinely project revenues based on a certain volume of services at a given price. This type of
demand forecasting is an essential part of management. It is very important to understand the relationship between price and quantity. The demand
curve describes the quantity of goods or services
that will be purchased at different prices when all
other factors are held constant. Generally, the
demand curve slopes downward, which means that
a price decrease will reﬂect more sales of a product.
See Figure 7-4. For example, in looking at Figure 74, a consumer is willing to buy 80 units at a price of
$50 each; however, at a price of $100, consumers
are only willing to buy 60 units. Other factors that
may inﬂuence demand for health services include
consumer income, insurance coverage, perceptions
of health status, and changes in the prices of other
products (Lee, 2000).
The demand for medical care is more complex
than the demand for many products due to the:
1. Inﬂuence of insurance coverage on the price

of care.
2. Complexity in understanding the relationship

between the cost and value of a medical service compared with the likely outcome or beneﬁt of the service. This is in part due to the

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 105

Economic Influences

105

Box 7-1
The Medicaid Program in the State of New York
Let’s take a look at the state of New York’s Medicaid plan to
learn more about eligibility requirements and services
covered. Citizens of New York may be eligible for Medicaid
if they have high medical bills, receive Supplemental
Security Income (SSI), or meet certain income, age, or
disability requirements. The following table illustrates the
2006 income and resource limits to qualify for Medicaid in
New York. Resources include property of all kinds, including
real and intangible property: e.g., retirement accounts, life
insurance policies, stocks, bonds, automobiles, and personal
property. Individuals may still qualify for Medicaid even if
they own a home, car, or personal property.

NUMBER IN
FAMILY

MONTHLY NET
INCOME

RESOURCES

1

$692

$4,150

2

$900

$5,400

3

$1,017

$6,100

4

$1,025

$6,150

5

$1,034

$6,200

6

$1,134

$6,800

7

$1,275

$7,650

8

$1,417

$8,500

The above income levels are expanded for pregnant
women and children.
The following services are paid by Medicaid, but some
services may not be covered because of age, financial

lack of information related to these costs and
beneﬁts.
3. Difficulty in making informed choices, which
leads consumers to turn to health-care professionals for advice. These professionals
have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on demand and
often make choices that reﬂect their own best
interests.

SUPPLY CURVE AND EQUILIBRIUM PRICE
The supply of services offered is based on how
much the producer is willing to sell at each price.
This relationship is graphically illustrated in Figure
7-4 by an upward-sloping supply curve, demonstrating that producers are willing to sell more as the
price increases. For example, at a price of $150 a

circumstances, family situation, transfer of resource
requirements, or living arrangements. Some services have
small co-payments.
■ Smoking cessation agents
■ Treatment and preventive health and dental care
(physicians and dentists)
■ Hospital inpatient and outpatient services
■ Laboratory and x-ray services
■ Care in a nursing home
■ Care through home health agencies and personal
care
■ Treatment in psychiatric hospitals (for persons under 21
or those 65 years and older), mental health facilities, and
facilities for the developmentally disabled
■ Family planning services
■ Early periodic screening, diagnosis, and treatment for
children under 21 years under the child/teen health
program
■ Medicine, supplies, medical equipment, and appliances
(wheelchairs, etc.)
■ Clinical services
■ Transportation to medical appointments, including
public transportation and car mileage
■ Emergency ambulance transportation to a hospital
■ Prenatal care
■ Some insurance and Medicare premiums
Citizens of New York may apply for Medicaid by writing,
phoning, or going by their local social services department
(New York State Department of Health: Medicaid, 2006).

provider would be willing to supply 80 units; the
consumer is only willing to buy 80 units at a price
of $50. Markets generally move toward an equilibrium price at which producers want to sell
the amount that consumers are willing to buy.
Movements along the demand curve describe the
different quantities that consumers are willing to
buy at various prices; however, certain circumstances can cause the entire demand curve to shift
to the right or left. An example of a situation that
would result in the entire demand curve shifting to
the right would be the expansion of insurance coverage ( i.e., insurance will pay a larger portion of the
bill, more people are covered by insurance, or possibly a reduction in deductibles). The increased coverage of mammograms or colonoscopies for patients
of a certain age has created a shift in demand for
these services. See Figure 7-5.

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

106

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 106

Understanding Organizations

$300

D

S2

$200

S

Price

Price

$250

$150
$100

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Quantity
FIGURE 7-4 Supply and demand at equilibrium.

A shift in the supply curve to the right indicates
that at every price a producer wants to supply a
smaller quantity. A change in regulations might
cause such a shift in the supply curve by making
care more expensive. For example, recent changes
in the approval process for freestanding ambulatory surgery centers in certain states have led to a
major shift to provision of services outside the
hospital (Lee, 2000). Hospitals saw a decrease in
the demand for their services, which caused a
reduction in the quantity of services offered. See
Figure 7-6.
Health-care managers face many challenges in
balancing the supply and demand for services. To
illustrate some of the unique challenges, compare
an automobile manufacturer with a health-care
organization. Prices are set in the competitive marketplace for automotive manufacturers. Consumers have a choice among many suppliers of
automobiles, and there is easy access to information
to help distinguish between the qualities of competing models, such as Internet Web sites). The
assumption is that consumers make a rational decision based on the price and quality of the product.
In addition, consumers directly pay for the full
price of the purchase. In contrast, health-care organizations often do not provide a wide array of serv-

D1
Price

P1

D

$50
$0

S1

P2

D2
S

P2

Q1

Q2
Quantity

FIGURE 7-6 Shift in supply due to change in regulations allowing
freestanding ambulatory surgery centers.

ices; for example, limited organizations offer open
heart surgery or organ transplant services.
Historically, it has been difficult to obtain necessary
information to compare services from one facility
with those of another. In addition, the information
is very complex, and consumers often seek the
advice of health-care professionals, which allows
the professionals to inﬂuence the choice of which
service to purchase. Finally, the payment for the
service, in the majority of cases, is made by a third
party, such as the federal government or private
insurance companies. Predicting supply and
demand for services is difficult for health-care
organizations because of the involvement of multiple third parties in the decision process of where to
seek health-care services.
Health-care organizations are currently facing
additional pressures because of resource shortages
that do not meet demand. Services are constrained
by, for example, the current shortage of nurses and
the projected shortage of physicians. Consequently,
the prices (hourly rates, salaries) to attract nurses
and physicians are increasing, reducing proﬁts even
further. In addition, the cost of drugs and medical
supplies has skyrocketed. Finally, a dramatic
increase in demand for health-care services is
expected over the next 20 years because of a
projected 72% increase in the population over age
65, coupled with technological advances offering
more treatment options and extending the life
expectancy (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 2003).

P1

Q1 Q2

Maximizing Profits

Quantity
FIGURE 7-5 Shift in demand due to expanded insurance coverage
of colonoscopies.

As evident in the previous discussion of supply and
demand, producers of health-care services strive to

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 107

Economic Influences

increase the demand for their services in hopes of
maximizing proﬁts. Even if one is employed in a
not-for-proﬁt organization, which does not explicitly seek proﬁt maximization as a goal, it is important to realize that proﬁts are necessary to carry out
the mission of the organization.
Proﬁts are dollars that are left over after total
costs are subtracted from total revenue. Managers
are able to inﬂuence proﬁts by reducing costs and/or
expanding the quantity of services offered and
thereby increasing revenue. Reducing costs generally requires improvements in clinical management,
which focuses on how clinical plans are designed
and the associated resource usage. Reengineering
and quality management are two strategies that
some organizations have used to improve the performance of their organization and thereby reduce
costs. Reengineering is generally a more radical
approach, in which all business processes are
reviewed and revised to improve the efficiency of
key organizational processes while reducing costs.
Quality management often focuses on improving
clinical processes and how the delivery of care to
the patient can be improved while saving costs. The
impact of the changes on the organizational culture
is a key factor that must be managed in order for the
improvements to be successful.
The second option for maximizing proﬁts is
increasing the services offered in order to increase
revenue. As a general rule, it is proﬁtable to expand
output as long as the additional revenue generated
is greater than the additional costs incurred.

107

Practice to Strive For 7-1
Cost reduction is a hot topic in the health-care industry,
and many articles have been written about how to redesign
clinical processes to increase profits. A recent article in
Healthcare Financial Management describes a success
story at Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital (LPCH) in
Stanford. This hospital improved patient flow, which
thereby increased bed capacity, profits, and patient
satisfaction. There are several strategies that managers
can take from this example and apply to their own
organizations.
A critical first step in clinical reengineering projects entails
an accurate assessment of the current environment.
At LPCH, a comprehensive assessment included detailed
observations, a review of historical data, and interviews
with all stakeholders, including physicians, housekeeping, case managers, and many others. Actions that
resulted from this assessment included a comprehensive
implementation of strategies rather than a piecemeal
approach.
Because many of the improvements to patient flow
depended on changes to multiple processes in various
departments, a comprehensive rollout allowed larger benefits to be achieved. The hospital created workflow and
reporting tools to provide daily and weekly key performance
measures for key stakeholders. In addition, communication
with staff to explain the process and create consent was
critical to the success of the project. LPCH saw significant
improvements within 11 months, such as a 7% increase in
capacity, increased operating income of $3.3 million, and
improvements in several bed placement and turnover
measures (Flanagan & Kjesbo, 2004).

FOR-PROFIT VERSUS NOT-FORPROFIT HEALTH ORGANIZATIONS
Although all ﬁrms do not have maximizing proﬁts
as a primary goal, proﬁts are necessary to maintain
long-term ﬁnancial viability in the increasingly
competitive health-care environment. Traditionally,
not-for-proﬁt organizations have dominated the
health-care industry. A closer examination of the
differences between for-proﬁt and not-for-proﬁt
health-care organizations will provide a better
understanding of the overall goals and objectives of
these organizations.
For-proﬁt organizations are often referred to
as investor-owned, which means that investors buy
shares of stock in the ﬁrm, representing ownership
interests. A primary goal of for-proﬁt entities is to
maximize proﬁts for their owners, keeping in mind

Pricing Services
The manager of an outpatient cancer center was
approached by the local Veterans Administration (VA)
hospital to provide certain treatment unavailable at the
VA for $250 per treatment. The manager agreed to this
proposal because there was extra time in the schedule
that was already being covered by staff. This allowed the
manager to increase the department’s revenue without
adding any additional costs. Had the demand from the VA
grown beyond what could be fit into the existing
schedule, the manager would have had to reevaluate the
situation based on the projected revenue compared with
the additional staffing costs that would have been
required.

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

108

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 108

Understanding Organizations

that investors have many choices regarding how to
invest their money in today’s competitive marketplace. The investors in the ﬁrm are referred to as
stockholders and have several basic rights:

2.

1. The right to vote for the ﬁrm’s board of direc-

tors and on other relevant issues.
2. A claim to the earnings of the ﬁrm, primarily

through cash or stock dividends.
3. In the case of bankruptcy or liquidation, the

3.

stockholders are entitled to any proceeds that
remain after all other obligations have been
satisﬁed.
There are two basic types of for-proﬁt organizations: publicly held ﬁrms and privately held ﬁrms.
Publicly held ﬁrms are owned by a large number
of investors, and the shares of stock in the ﬁrm are
traded through various mechanisms, such as the
New York Stock Exchange, American Stock
Exchange, or over-the-counter market. Examples of
publicly held health-care organizations include
Healthcare Corporation of America and Beverly
Enterprises. In contrast, privately held ﬁrms are
owned by just a few investors and are not publicly
traded. In general, for-proﬁts are thought to be more
efficient because of the scrutiny by shareholders on
ﬁnancial performance. In addition, for-proﬁts can
readily access large amounts of capital by issuing
additional shares of stock to modernize their facilities and compete for customers (Marsteller,
Bovbjerg, & Nichols, 1998).
An alternative form of ownership is the not-forproﬁt organization, which is also referred to as a
tax-exempt or nonproﬁt corporation. Unlike the
for-proﬁt entities, not-for-proﬁt organizations traditionally had serving the community as their primary goal. The IRS Tax Code Section 501C (3) sets
forth the criteria that a ﬁrm must meet to qualify
for tax exemption as a charitable organization: if it
is formed for some deﬁned public good and if none
of the net earnings will be disbursed to any shareholder or individual as a “dividend” or share of the
net. There are several key characteristics of not-forproﬁt organizations:
1. Historically,

not-for-profit organizations
received signiﬁcant revenues from charitable sources and other donations. Nonproﬁts today receive a small portion of total
income from donations; they are being challenged to increase efficiency to gain access to

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

capital and remain competitive (Harrison &
Sexton, 2004).
Not-for-proﬁt organizations have no shareholders; therefore, a board of trustees, often
residents from the local community who are
not owners of the ﬁrm, exercise control over
the organization’s operations (Josephson,
1997).
Not-for-profit organizations have limited
access to capital because they cannot issue
shares of stock. Tax-exempt bond issues are
their primary source of funding for capital
needs.
In the event of liquidation or sale, proceeds
must be used for a charitable purpose.
Tax subsidies are often provided to not-forproﬁt organizations through exemptions on
local, state, and federal taxes.
Not-for-proﬁt organizations are expected to
provide free care for poor people, regardless of
their ability to pay.
Not-for-proﬁt organizations are expected to
provide beneﬁts to the community, such
as access to services that are not proﬁtable,
medical education and research, community
education, and health screening (Josephson,
1997; Marsteller, Bovbjerg, & Nichols, 1998).
Patients expect that not-for-proﬁt organizations will not reduce quality to increase profits and that earnings above costs will be used
for beneﬁcial services or other worthy investments (Marsteller, Bovbjerg, & Nichols,
1998).
In many small communities, the very existence of a hospital may be owed to its not-forprofit status as substantial donations of
money and time from the community often
support the hospital. Local hospitals are a
valuable part of the community infrastructure
and have fostered community development
and civic pride (Marstellar, Bovbjerg, &
Nichols, 1998).

Not-for-proﬁt hospitals represent 58% of total
hospitals in the United States, according to a recent
American Hospital Association Survey (Fast Facts,
2005). Although not-for-profits clearly play a
dominant role in the health-care industry, many
federal and state policy makers are starting to question the validity of the true differences between forproﬁts and not-for-proﬁts. With health-care costs

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 109

Economic Influences

growing at the state and federal levels, policy makers, looking for additional sources of revenue as
a way to balance their budgets, are scrutinizing the
current tax subsidies that not-for-proﬁts receive.
Several states, such as Texas and Utah, are now
requiring health-care organizations to meet minimum levels of indigent care to maintain their taxexempt status.

All Good Things…
This chapter has provided a broad overview of the
unique challenges facing managers in the healthcare industry today. It is of vital importance for

109

managers to understand the economic pressures
facing health-care organizations and why their role
is so important in effectively managing their organizations’ scarce resources. Even with the additional
complexities of health care, however, there are several factors that managers can inﬂuence. Accurately
forecasting demand for services is a very important
management task, as is managing the costs of meeting the demand for services. Cost management can
be as focused as staffing and supply utilization
within a particular unit or as broad as a clinical
reengineering project for a certain patient diagnosis. An understanding of the patients who utilize
the services is crucial to understanding how the
organization will ultimately be paid for the services
provided.

hot topic:
Health-Care Rationing
Rationing is one method that society uses to balance
demands with limited resources. Even though the United
States is viewed as a world leader in both scientific and
technological aspects of medical care, not all citizens have
access to basic health-care services. Current issues providing the context for rationing of health care are as follows:
1. Health-care services are restricted to individuals with
sufficient financial resources (Cypher, 2003).
2. Health-care providers can choose not to accept
certain forms of insurance, such as Medicaid or
HMO plans, due to low payment (Cypher, 2003).
3. High deductibles and increasing insurance premiums
are forcing many middle-income families to forego
health-care coverage. In addition, small businesses are
unable to supplement the cost of premiums for
employees or even offer health-care coverage (Cypher,
2003).
4. Individuals with preexisting medical conditions
are restricted in their access to health-care
coverage.
5. Public policy covers only Medicare recipients.
The reality is that millions of Americans’ access to care is
limited either because they are unable to afford or qualify
for insurance coverage or the coverage they have does
not cover the services needed. Private insurance compa-

nies using a managed care system ration services through
such methods as primary care gatekeeping, financial
incentives to physicians, utilization review of services, and
capitation. Primary care physicians serve as the point of
access, or gatekeeper, to specialists, hospitalization, and
other services. Limiting services or having consumers
choose less costly treatments or simply no treatment at all
is a primary objective of the managed care system.
Physicians receive incentives that encourage them to
ration health-care services. In addition, most managed
care systems have a utilization review process in place,
which requires prior authorization before a nonroutine
service can be provided to a patient. Traditional insurance
programs also attempt to ration services by not covering
certain services in their policies. Often customers will avoid
these procedures because they have to pay for them from
their personal finances. Patients likewise self-ration their
use of services when they do not have insurance coverage. This is often referred to as price-based rationing,
because the patient has to evaluate the cost of receiving
the services versus the perceived benefits of care (Baur,
Wang, & Fitzgerald, 1996).
The potential legal and ethical issues surrounding the ability of citizens to receive needed health-care services is a
controversial topic without an easy solution. It is clear that
the current system is in need of a dramatic reform to correct these inequalities.

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

110

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 110

Understanding Organizations

Let’s Talk
1. What impact have recent trends in legislation
had on the health-care industry?
2. What is the key difference in prospective
reimbursement methods? How would hospital
management policies differ for PPS
methodologies of reimbursement?
3. Think of a time in your work experience when
services for a certain patient were limited.
What were the circumstances surrounding
this situation and details of how the decision was made? How did you feel about
it?
4. Give an example of a time when your organization or department experienced a shift
in supply or a shift in demand for certain
services.
5. Using Table 7-1 as a guide, calculate the hospital payment rate for DRG 371 Cesarean without CC with a relative weight of .6221 for a
hospital in New York City with a local wage
index of 1.3595.

NCLEX Questions
1. In the United States, the majority of health-care
services are paid by:
A. Consumers.
B. Employers.
C. Insurance companies.
D. Financial institutions.
2. Increases in health-care costs often lead to:
A. Consumers dropping insurance coverage.
B. Employers reducing health insurance beneﬁts.
C. Insurance companies reducing payments for
services.
D. All of the above.
3. The primary reimbursement methods under the
fee-for-service category are:
A. Cost-based reimbursement.
B. Charge-based reimbursement.
C. Capitation.
D. A and B only.

4. The advantages of a price-based market system
are:
A. Easy to operate because the price is selfcorrecting.
B. Individual choice is limited.
C. Goods and services are allocated in a fair
manner.
D. All of the above.
5. Predicting demand for medical care is more
complex due to:
A. Third parties paying for the majority of services.
B. Difficulty in comparing cost and quality of
services.
C. Need for professional advice to make an
informed decision.
D. All of the above.
6. Which of the following is NOT a characteristic
of a not-for-proﬁt organization?
A. Unlimited access to capital.
B. Proceeds from liquidation must be used for a
charitable purpose.
C. Exemption from local, state, and federal
taxes.
D. Free care for poor citizens.
7. Current health-care rationing issues include:
A. Restriction of services to individuals with
sufficient resources.
B. Providers choosing to accept only certain
forms of insurance.
C. Difficulty for individuals with preexisting
conditions to obtain insurance coverage.
D. All of the above.
8. Which reimbursement method demonstrates a
shift in the ﬁnancial risk from the insurer to the
provider?
A. Cost-based reimbursement.
B. Percentage of charges.
C. Prospective payment.
D. All of the above.
9. Under the Medicare inpatient system a DRG
with a relative weight of 2.0 compared with a
DRG with a relative weight of .80 is:
A. More complex and resource-intensive.
B. Less complex and resource-intensive.
C. The same in complexity and resource usage.
D. None of the above.

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 111

Economic Influences

10. Characteristics of the Medicaid program are as
follows:
A. Federally and state-funded program for lowincome individuals and families.
B. Federal government has speciﬁc guidelines
how the program is structured.
C. Eligibility for Medicaid is the same regardless of the state of residence.
D. The federal government’s share of the
Medicaid program’s cost has not changed
over the last several years.
REFERENCES
Anderson, G.F. (1997). In search of value: An international comparison of cost, access and outcomes. Health Affairs, 16(6):
163–171.
Baur, M., Wang, J., and Fitzgerald, J. (1996). Insurance rationing
versus public political rationing: The care of the Oregon health
plan. Public Budgeting and Finance, 16(1): 60–74.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid services. Retrieved March
17, 2005, from http://www.cms.hhs.gov/charts/healthcare
system/chapter1.pdf
Cleverley, W., and Cameron, A. (2003). Essentials of health care
ﬁnance. Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett.
Cypher, D. (2003) Healthcare rationing: Issues and implications.
Nursing Forum, 32(4): 25–34.
Fast facts on U.S. hospitals from AHA hospital statistics.
Retrieved February 11, 2005, from www.aha,org//aha/
resource_center/fastfacts/fast_facts_US_hospitals.html
Flanagan, S., and Kjesbo, A. (2004). Conquering capacity: By
improving its patient ﬂow, one hospital has been able to admit
an additional 400 patients since January 2003 and expects to
maintain that potential. Healthcare Financial Management,
58(7): 92–97.
Gapenski, L. (2003) Understanding healthcare ﬁnancial management. Chicago: Health Administration Press.
Harrison, J., and Sexton C. (2004). The paradox of the notfor-proﬁt hospital. The Health Care Manager, 23(3):192–205.
Healthcare Tab Ready to Explode. (2005, February 24). USA
Today p. 1A.
HHS Announces Medicare Premium, Deductibles for 2005. United
States Department of Health and Human Services. Retrieved
March 23, 2005, from http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/
2004pres/20040903a.html

111

History of Blue Cross Blue Shield. Retrieved February 6, 2006,
from http://www.bcbs.com/history/index.html/
Lee, R. (2000). Economics for healthcare managers. Chicago:
Health Administration Press.
Marsteller, J., Bovbjerg, R., and Nichols, L. (1998). Non-proﬁt
conversion: Theory, evidence, and state policy options. Health
Services Research, 33(5): 1495–1500.
Medicaid: A Brief Summary. Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. Retrieved March 23, 2005, from http://
www.cms.hhs.gov/publications/overview-medicaremedicaid/default4.asp
Medicare and You. Retrieved February 4, 2006, from http://
www.medicare.gov/publications/pubs/pdf/10050.pdf
Medicare Information Resource. Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. Retrieved March 23, 2005, from
http://www.cmc.hhs.gov/medicare/
New York State Department of Health: Medicaid. Retrieved
February 5, 2006, from http://www.health.state.ny.us/
health_care/medicaid/#income
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Office of Research,
Development and Information. CMS Publication No. 03445.
June 2003
Weisbrod, B.A. (1991). The health care quadrilemma: An essay
on technological change, insurance, quality of care, and cost.
The Journal of Economic Literature 29: 523–552.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barr, D. (2002) Where do we go from here? An introduction to U.S.
health policy: The organization, ﬁnancing and delivery of healthcare in America (pp. 223-237). San Francisco: Benjamin
Cummings.
Health care costs. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Retrieved February 9, 2005, from www.ahrg.gov
Highlights—National Health Expenditures, 2003. Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services. Retrieved February 9, 2005,
from http://www.cms.hhs.gov/statistics/nhe/historical/highlights.asp
Josephson, G. (1997). Private hospital care for proﬁt? A reappraisal. Health Care Management Review, 22(3): 64–74.
Random House Webster’s college dictionary. (1996). New York:
Random House.
Scott, J.S. (2004). Dare we use the word (gasp)—rationing?
Healthcare Financial Management 58(5): 32–34.

07Jones Leadership(F)-ch 07

1/14/07

4:09 PM

Page 112

This page has been left intentionally blank.

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 113

chapter
8
Organizational
Communication
CARLA G. PHILLIPS, PHD, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“The greatest problem in communication is the illusion
that it has taken place.”
George Bernard Shaw

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■

Identify the communication process.
Describe perspectives of communication as they relate to
organizational communication.
Explore the relationship of organizational structure to
organizational communication.
Discuss the importance of organizational communication to
patient safety and quality care.
Distinguish between formal and informal channels of
communication.

113

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

114

E

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 114

Understanding Organizations

ffective communication is essential to the wellbeing of an organization. Communication is critical
to the strategic planning process of any organization, and it is crucial for attainment of short- and
long-term organizational goals. Likewise, good communication is pivotal to the day-to-day operation of
any organization, affecting patient safety and quality care, employee satisfaction, and customer relations and satisfaction. Adamson, Emswiller, and
Ollier (1991) recognize the importance of organizational communication and point out that if
something cannot be communicated in a consistent
and inspiring way, it cannot be done, no matter how
well it is planned and ﬁnanced.
Communication can be considered as occurring along a continuum, from interpersonal
communication to small-group communication to
organizational communication. Interpersonal communication occurs when the participants are face to
face. Although there is disagreement in the literature as to how many people can be involved in
interpersonal communication, it is generally agreed
that it involves only two or three people. According
to Trenhom (1991), because the interaction is face
to face, there is spontaneity to the communication,
and although the communication is focused, there
is no need for messages to be “prepackaged.” Smallgroup communication becomes more complex than
interpersonal communication primarily because the
number of participants increases. Again, although
the exact number of participants in small-group
communication is not deﬁnite, the literature suggests that it may range from two to seven or so participants. Whereas small-group communication can
provide the same sensory impact and immediacy of
feedback as interpersonal communication, with
participants knowing and reacting to one another,
the possible combinations of relationships increase
dramatically, and messages may be sent via a variety of networks (Trenholm, 1991). Organizational
communication is different from the other two in
that the number of participants is greater, and the
communication occurs within the context of an
organizational hierarchy. Trenholm notes that organizational communication is usually highly structured and goal-oriented and that roles in the
communication process may correspond to roles
within the organizational hierarchy. Therefore,
because messages may be sent by a variety of people
in a variety of formats, the immediate feedback of

interpersonal and small-group communication is
not possible. In organizational communication,
messages are, by necessity, carefully planned and
structured. Trenholm states that “communication
within the organization involves a higher degree of
strategic planning than it does with a dyad or small
group” (p. 24).
This chapter focuses on organizational communication, although interpersonal and small-group
communication may also be used as part of the
overall communication strategy. This chapter presents an overview of the communication process, a
discussion of three theoretical perspectives relevant
to organizational communication, and other information relevant to the understanding of effective
communication in organizations.

Communication Theories
Communication between humans is of critical
importance whether occurring between two individuals or between multiple people in an organization, but communication is often difficult.
Communication is usually taken for granted; that is,
someone sends a message to another person, either
verbally or in writing, and assumes that the person
receiving the message understood the message
exactly as it was intended. When communicating
with a few people, it is fairly easy to validate
whether the message was understood as intended.
When communicating with many people in organizations, it becomes more difficult to ascertain
whether a message was understood correctly.
Because communication is basic and constant in
the lives of humans, it has been studied for centuries. If communication within organizations is to
be effective, it is important to have an understanding of the underlying precepts of communication.
For example, in order for nurse managers to be
effective communicators, they should practice communication founded on sound theoretical perspectives. The following theories are summarized here:
the mechanistic perspective, the psychological perspective, and the interactionist perspective.

MECHANISTIC PERSPECTIVE
According to Trenholm (1991), the mechanistic
perspective of communication is a linear, one-

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 115

Organizational Communication

directional, sequential model of communication.
Trenholm explains the model by applying it to a
face-to-face spoken communication between two
people: “The two people become sender and
receiver. The sender encodes the message into units
of spoken language that are conveyed by sound
waves to the receiver, who decodes the message.
Any feature not intended by the sender but inadvertently included in the message is called noise”
(p. 33). Noise may interfere with the message so
that it is not received as intended. Whether communicating between two people or between groups
of people, it is important to consider the factors that
may hinder the clear transmission of a message:
environmental noise, the emotional content of the
message, and tone of voice as well as the nonverbal
behavior of the sender.

PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
The psychological perspective builds on the mechanistic perspective, acknowledging the sender,
receiver, and the message, but goes beyond the linear approach. The psychological perspective is
based, in large part, on learned behavior. It suggests
that when a message is received, it serves as a stimulus to the receiver to respond to the message. This
process of give and take, in which (1) a message is
sent, (2) it stimulates the receiver to respond, (3) a
response is sent, which then (4) stimulates the
receiver to respond, is a learned behavior. Children
learn from an early age, as they develop their ability
to communicate, that when they are spoken to, they
are expected to respond either behaviorally or verbally. This perspective recognizes that people constantly receive and respond to stimuli. “All
responses are elicited by stimuli, and all stimuli lead
to responses. Human beings are both senders and
receivers because we simultaneously react to and
produce stimuli” (Trenholm, p. 34). Trenholm further theorizes that humans both seek out and
process stimuli according to learned responses. As
children are socialized, for example, they learn
which behaviors and actions are met with approval,
including their communication. Trenholm asserts,
“As communicators, we actively choose to attend to
certain stimuli, interpret them by means of our own
unique mental structures, and respond by emitting
certain behaviors capable of stimulating others” (p.
37). According to this perspective, a message is sent
by some means, and the potential for noise exists,

115

but the sender and receiver become joint senders
and receivers. For example, a person sends a message to a receiver either verbally or by some other
means. When the message is received, it stimulates
the receiver to respond, and the receiver then
becomes the sender of a message, and so on.

INTERACTIONIST PERSPECTIVE
The interactionist perspective is based on the body
of work known as symbolic interactionism. This
perspective developed as a way to understand the
development of self as learned through a process of
interaction within the larger society/environment.
According to symbolic interaction, the self emerges
during interaction between an individual and the
environment beginning in infancy. The self
emerges as that which makes each person unique
and comprises a set of ideas, values, and experiences, all arrived at through social interaction.
Trenholm (1991) notes that the concept of symbols
is foundational to this perspective and that symbols
are generally agreed upon by members of a group
and become socially signiﬁcant because of this
agreement. She summarizes by stating, “Humans
exist in and through communication; human action
can be understood through the shared symbol systems that make action possible” (p. 39). Given that
people have different experiences, ideas, and values,
they are likely to interpret messages differently
based on their own unique socialization. This theoretical perspective has provided the basis for continuing research in the ﬁeld of communication and
other disciplines. It provides the basis for managers
and others involved in organizational communication to understand that people will engage in the
communication process based, in part at least, on
their own experiences.

Symbols in Communication
Trenholm (1991) believes that “words are symbols,
and human language is a symbolic code, just as the
Morse Code, sign language, semaphore codes and
traffic lights are symbolic systems. The meanings of
these codes are established through convention;
their use is generally intentional” (p. 12). Dahnke
and Clatterbuck (1990) state that “one common
view of communication holds that it is a process in
which a message producer puts thoughts or feelings
into words and transmits those words to a hearer

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

116

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 116

Understanding Organizations

who then gets the information from them” (p. 24).
They further state that the notion of a code is essential to this viewpoint, with language being representative of a code. Barnum and Kerfoot (1995)
state, “The act of putting meaning into symbolic
form is called encoding, and the act of extracting
meaning from symbols is termed decoding. The
degree of agreement between the message sent and
the message received will depend on the degree to
which the symbols have the same meaning for the
two parties” (pp. 296–297).
It is clear that in organizations messages are sent
through a variety of means to many categories of
workers, using words as symbols. Words and other
symbols often bear many different meanings. In
order for people to derive a common meaning from
a message, they must have a common understanding of the symbols, in this case the words. For example, assume a top governing body of a health-care
system is composed of both health-care professionals and a mix of lay people. When the administration of the health-care system brings proposals to
the group seeking approval for programs or equipment, the proposals must not be ﬁlled with technical jargon that the lay members of the group cannot
understand. The administrative team presenting
the reports or proposals should present them in easily understandable terms or at least interpret the
technical language for the audience. This holds true
for messages sent throughout the organization.
Many people who work in health-care settings do
not have a clinical background and therefore cannot
interpret messages about clinical issues accurately.
By the same token, clinical people often lack a background in business or ﬁnance, so issues of budget
may pose difficulty if not presented in easily understandable terms. But executives and clinicians who
live with technical terms on a daily basis often forget that the audience does not share that same language. Therefore, messages must be worded
appropriately for varied audiences and categories of
workers throughout an organization.

Organizational Structure
as It Influences Communication
In order to understand how communication can
occur in organizations, it is necessary to understand

what constitutes an organization and the impact of
the chain of command on communication in organizations. (See Chapter 4 for a complete discussion of
organizations and their characteristics.) “An organization is a systematic arrangement of two or more
people or entities who fulﬁll formal roles and share
a common purpose” (Wolper, 2004 p. 653). All
health-care systems fulﬁll this deﬁnition of an
organization, regardless of their size or purpose.
Even though a public health agency has a different
purpose than a long-term care facility, each has its
own purpose and people who fulﬁll the roles necessary to achieve the goals of the organization. Wolper
observes that hospitals usually have pyramidal, or
hierarchical, forms of structure in which people at
the top levels have a span of control and authority
that is passed down to other employees in the chain
of command. In such a structure, a manager may
delegate to two or three supervisors, who delegate
to several charge nurses, and so on. This hierarchical structure is common in most health-care organizations and becomes more pronounced in larger
organizations. This structure usually dictates how
communication ﬂows within an organization. For
example, the nurse administrator may communicate with nurse managers, who then pass the message along to staff nurses.
The notion of the chain of command has to do
with the lines of authority throughout the organization. Employees are expected to respect the chain of
command; a break in the chain suggests a violation
of authority, according to Wolper (2004). For example, if an employee has an issue or concern, the
employee is expected to communicate the concern
to his or her immediate supervisor, who then takes
the message through the organizational hierarchy.
The manager should return to the employee with an
answer to the employee’s concern. Employees often
get frustrated as it takes time for an issue to be
taken up through the hierarchy and then back down
through the channels to the employee. The larger
the organization, the more time required for communication to travel through the levels.
Because of the complexities of health-care organizations, it is necessary that all functions are well
coordinated. Much of the coordination in hospitals
occurs at the level of middle managers. Effective
communication between people, units, and departments facilitates coordination of decision making
and the quality of the day-to-day operations.

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 117

Organizational Communication

Ruthman (Kelly-Heidenthal, 2003) states,
“Avenues of communication are often deﬁned by an
organization’s formal structure. The formal structure of the organization establishes who is in charge
and identiﬁes how different levels of personnel and
various departments relate within the organization” (p. 126). For example, nurses on a unit may
have concerns about the transportation of clients to
surgery. They tell their concerns to the nurse manager, who in turn discusses the issue with the nurse
manager of the surgery department or others within
the organization who could solve the problem. The
formal structure of the organization dictates who
has the authority to deal with certain issues and
to speak to others within the organization to resolve
problems. Marquis and Huston (2003) note the
impact the formal organizational structure has
on communication and observe that people in
lower levels are more likely to have inadequate
communication from higher levels. They state,
“This occurs because of the number of levels communication must ﬁlter through in large organizations. As the number of employees increases
(particularly more than 1000 employees), the
quantity of communication generally increases;
however, employees may perceive it as increasingly
closed” (p. 337).
Often, employees see a great deal of communication coming down through the levels of the hierarchy and perceive that there is very little opportunity
for them to respond or to initiate communication
from their level. They are bound by the formal lines
of the organizational structure and must rely on
their immediate supervisor to relay their concerns
or input upward. Much communication in organizations is designed to inform employees, but little
communication invites employee input. This may
be especially true in larger organizations where
there are many layers in the hierarchy.
Communication within organizations has
become more challenging as health systems have
grown in size and complexity. Advances in technology, greater acuity of patients, managed care,
diagnosis-related groups, and regulatory requirements have changed the way health-care organizations function. The pace of most health-care
organizations is faster than in the past, with many
regulatory requirements dictating organizational
performance. Effective communication is required
for the coordination, cooperation, and collabora-

117

Interpersonal and Group Communication
in Organizations
Although interpersonal and group-level communications are at lower levels of organizational communication, they are major forms of communication. People
exchange vital information as they meet one on one
or in group meetings. For instance, a group of nurse
managers may meet with the nurse executive to work
through solutions to staffing problems, or the nurse
executive may meet with the chief of the medical
staff to address a clinical issue. Staff nurses may meet
to solve a problem on a nursing unit. Organizational
communication requires nurse executives, managers,
and employees to have the necessary skills to communicate at all levels within the organization to accomplish
goals.

tion necessary to achieve unit and organizational
goals. The complexities of the health-care environment require effective communication for keeping
employees informed of the status and challenges of
the unit and organization, the organizational goals,
and the unit expectations and responsibilities in
meeting those goals. Communication serves to give
employees the knowledge and guidance necessary
to do their jobs, build commitment to unit and
organizational goals, and make them feel that they
are an integral part of the organization
Nurse executives and managers must be able to
ascertain what and how many details need to
be provided to employees and make considered
judgments about the best means by which to provide that information. Nurse executives in particular may need to deliver the messages on the same
topic to several audiences and will need to tailor
the message to the audience. If seeking approval
for funding for a program from the governing board
of the agency, the nurse executive would provide
enough information for the board to make an
informed decision, usually in a formal presentation.
When presenting the program to employees who
will be responsible for implementing the program,
the level of speciﬁcity would increase and might
be communicated personally, through nurse managers, in educational session, or by memo.
Employees must also understand their responsibility to be proactive in bringing nursing issues—
including problems and solution suggestions—to

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

118

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 118

Understanding Organizations

the attention of management, using the proper
chain of command.

Types of Organizational
Communication
Organizational communication includes verbal
and nonverbal means of communication throughout the organization. Large, complex organizations
use a variety of channels of communication, including vertical, horizontal, diagonal, and the
grapevine (Marquis and Huston, 2003).
Managers have to determine the best mode of
communication to be used to convey a particular
message. For example, layoffs or some other change
in the organization with strong, potentially negative
consequences for employees warrant a face-to-face
meeting so that management can provide immediate clariﬁcation and can receive feedback. The
immediate feedback and clariﬁcation may prevent
misunderstandings and rumors that misconstrue
the intent of the message. Other more routine information may be communicated successfully by
memo or e-mail. Marquis and Huston (2003) note
that “a message’s clarity is greatly affected by the
mode of communication used” (p. 341).

VERBAL COMMUNICATION
Both face-to-face and written messages constitute
verbal communication. Written messages, including
e-mail, provide documentation of the message but
may be misinterpreted by the recipients and are
time-consuming for managers. People will likely
interpret written messages from their own perspectives, experiences, and position in the organization,
making unlikely a common understanding of written messages by all who receive them. Efficient and
effective writing skills are important for nurse managers. Spears (1997) interviewed nurse managers
concerning their feelings about writing business
communications. Nurse managers reported that on
average they spent between 12.4 and 16 hours of a
40-hour work week writing. They noted the need
for good writing skills, and many expressed the
need for more education in developing writing
skills. They reported that often written requests

and recommendations garnered more attention
from top managers than oral messages. Written
requests, recommendations, and proposals also provide a record of the communication.
Marquis and Huston (2003) observe that face-toface communication is rapid but that fewer people
may receive the information. Common strategies
used by managers and nurse executives are to have
open meetings with staff on all shifts. However, it
would be rare if 100% of the staff members were
able to attend these meetings at the times scheduled. Therefore, other means of conveying information might be necessary, such as memos or written
summaries of the content of the meetings. Nonetheless, nurse managers communicate face-to-face
in a variety of formats, including formal meetings,
presentations, and work groups. Top-level managers typically spend many hours in meetings.
Barnum and Kerfoot (1995) state, “Person-toperson communication has advantages such as forcing the receiver’s attention to the issue, providing
immediate feedback and clariﬁcation, and allowing
the message to be adapted to a speciﬁc audience” (p.
300). Crow (2002) suggests that personal interaction may build more trust than written communication, such as memos, and that it provides people
the opportunity to question each other.
Whatever mode of verbal communication is
used, several points are important. Messages should
be checked carefully for accuracy, completeness of
detail, and clarity. Some managers ask others to
read a message to evaluate these points before the
message is sent to the target audience. This review
becomes more important in light of a survey of 1000
“average” workers in the United States (Schumann,
2004). The study found that employees want truthful information from their employer and that only
about half were satisﬁed with the information they
received. The researcher found that employees
want plain talk that is easy to evaluate on items that
are important to them. The tone of a message is also
of utmost importance. The message should convey
respect for the intended audience. Barnum and
Kerfoot (1995) state that it is a mistake for a manager to write a message in anger. A communication
written or spoken in an angry, confrontational tone
almost always engenders a negative response from
employees. A message that conveys respect and
invites cooperation and collaboration is likely to be
well received. The tone must be appropriate for the

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 119

Organizational Communication

topic and the targeted audience, and both the shortand long-term effects of the message must be considered.

Nonverbal Cues
■
■
■

NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
In face-to-face communication, the spoken word is
accompanied by nonverbal behaviors. Sometimes
the nonverbal behavior is planned and calculated,
and other times it is unconscious on the part of all
parties involved in the communication process.
Communication is commonly considered a process,
with words as symbols and language representing a
code. When a person assumes a rigid posture and
shakes a ﬁst at someone else, words are not necessary to understand the meaning of the message. In
a work setting, an angry, frowning face may convey
a louder message than the words spoken or the tone
of voice used. Gillies (1994) states, “To compensate
for the inadequacy of verbal message information,
people unconsciously use facial expression, gesture,
touch, and vocal tone to amplify the meaning of
spoken communication” (p. 184). Nonverbal communication includes appearance, tone of voice, gestures, body movements, glances, facial expressions,
dress, smell, proximity, and gait (Dahnke and
Clatterbuck, 1990; Ruthman in Kelly-Heidenthal,
2003). Tone may be more important than the words
in a message, and facial expression may be more
important than either. Even if the content of a message is fairly neutral and informative, if it is delivered by someone with an angry facial expression
using a sharp tone of voice, the content of the message will most likely be overshadowed by the nonverbal behavior of the sender. Because nonverbal
communication is usually unconscious, it is hard to
control. It is important for the nonverbal message to
be consistent with the verbal message. For example,
it would be inappropriate to deliver a serious message of a planned layoff while smiling. Managers
and employees should be aware of their nonverbal
behavior and recognize its impact on all communication. Both managers and employees should monitor their nonverbal behaviors. They may also ﬁnd it
useful to seek feedback from others to determine if
their nonverbal behaviors are consistent with their
verbal messages and to determine the impact of
their nonverbal behavior on the overall impression
generated by their communication.

119

■
■
■

Posture
Gait
Facial expression
Gestures
Body language
Tone, pitch, and volume of voice

Note: There may be gender and cultural differences in
communication that may impact/influence nonverbal
behavior

VERTICAL, HORIZONTAL,
AND DIAGONAL COMMUNICATION
In complex organizations, it is necessary for communication to ﬂow in a variety of directions in
order to attain organizational goals. Vertical, horizontal, and diagonal communications are used to
communicate effectively.

Vertical Communication
Vertical communication is communication that
occurs between superiors and subordinates.
Vertical communication includes downward communication, in which information and other types
of communication are sent by superiors to subordinates. Downward communication reﬂects the hierarchical structure of the organization. Downward
communication can occur in a variety of ways
depending, in part, on the content of the message.
For example, news that will please subordinates,
such as a bonus, would be delivered differently than
news that might be distressing to them, such as
upcoming layoffs (Barnum and Kerfoot, 1995).
Some messages may need to be delivered by a variety of modes, such as face-to-face, mediated forms
like video or audio, and written. For example, if a
procedure is being changed, it may be announced in
a unit meeting, reinforced by a memo to all employees affected by the change, and shown in a video
detailing the proposed change. The revised procedure would then be written and placed on the nursing unit. The mediated and written messages also
serve to provide a record of the communication. If
employees do not adhere to the new procedure, they
cannot say they were not informed of the changes if

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

120

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 120

Understanding Organizations

it is clear that they received a written notiﬁcation or
were present for a video detailing the procedure.
Mantone (2004) reports the case of a chief executive officer (CEO) who was nearly removed from
office because of great unrest in the medical staff
due to poor communication. Although the organization was providing information to and communicating with the elected leaders of the medical staff,
the information was not reaching the actual medical staff. The CEO learned that reinforcing the
message is as important as delivering it initially. It
is clear that the CEO should have communicated
not only with the leadership of the medical staff but
also with the medical staff as a whole, either in faceto-face meetings or in written format.
Upward communication occurs when employees
or managers who are subordinate to top level management send messages up through the chain of
command (Marquis and Huston, 2003). Each
employee is expected to respect the chain of command and submit the communication to an immediate manager. Organizations should establish a
culture that supports upward communication from
employees. Subordinates should be educated as to
how to use the chain of command to elicit information, provide input, and express concerns. If the
immediate manager is unable to address the issue, it
must be clear how that manager should move the
message through the organization in order to
respond to the person who submitted the message.
Employees often feel that their input and questions
are not welcomed and complain that they do not
receive satisfactory responses, which may have a
negative impact on employee satisfaction and productivity. It is generally easier to ﬁlter information
down through the layers than to ﬁlter information
upward (Keefe, 2004). For example, nursing staff
members may be concerned about inadequate
staffing on a unit. They bring their concerns to
their nurse manager, who listens to them and
assures them that their concerns are viable and will
be addressed. Several weeks pass, and the staff
nurses have had no further communication regarding staffing from the nurse manager. They again
pose their concerns to the nurse manager, who
assures them again that the administration is aware
of the staffing difficulties and is working toward a
solution. Nurses are likely to become increasingly
frustrated when more time elapses with no deﬁnitive communication from the nurse manager and
with no changes in the staffing patterns.

Horizontal Communication
Horizontal communication occurs when managers
and others communicate with people on the same
level in the organizational structure. Staff nurses
communicate with other staff nurses, or nurse
managers communicate with other managers.
Communicating with others at the same level in the
hierarchy is often more efficient than moving a
communication up and down through the chain.
Effective horizontal communication can facilitate
coordination between departments as well as problem solving and decision making. Horizontal communication provides a direct, often expedient, way
of solving problems and addressing issues critical to
the effective functioning of the organization.

Diagonal Communication
In diagonal communication, managers interact with
managers, physicians, and groups of people in other
departments in the organization who are not on the
same level in the hierarchy (Marquis and Huston,
2003). This type of interaction is important to the
functioning of the organization and usually does
not occur through formal means. Diagonal communication serves much the same function of being an
expedient, direct route of decision making and
problem solving as horizontal communication but
encompasses a wider range of people throughout
the organization. Diagonal communication allows
managers to go directly to a person at a different
level in the bureaucratic structure to resolve issues.
For example, a nurse executive might work with the
leadership of the medical staff to address a clinical
issue.

FORMAL VERSUS
INFORMAL COMMUNICATION
Organizations have both formal and informal communication networks. “Formal communication networks follow the formal line of authority in the
organization’s hierarchy. Informal communication
networks occur between people at the same or different levels of the organizational hierarchy but do
not represent formal lines of authority or responsibility” (Marquis & Huston, 2003, p. 339). Formal
communication occurs when a nurse manager takes
a unit problem to an immediate superior. Much
communication occurs informally between employees who are not formally connected within the hier-

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 121

Organizational Communication

archy. For example, nurses may have lunch with
employees from the laboratory and discuss a process
or procedure. Informal communication can occur in
chance encounters within the organization but may
be useful in accomplishing goals. Duemer and
Mendez-Morse (2002) believe that people who hold
higher positions in the organization have access to
more formal communication, and those lower in the
organization participate more easily in informal
communication. The higher positions in the organizational hierarchy provide more access to key people
in the organization, so formal communication can
occur fairly easily. Further, managerial and administrative people often conduct business in regularly
scheduled meetings. People who hold lower positions in the organization do not have the same
access to key people. Given the difficulty in upward
communication, employees may ﬁnd it more expedient and convenient to engage in informal communication networks. Informal communication may be
facilitated by proximity of employees to one
another, making communication convenient. Baker
(2002) observes that, traditionally, formal communication was considered to be the more effective
type of communication in large bureaucratic organizations. Informal communication, traditionally
considered as interpersonal or horizontal, was
thought to hinder effective communication. Today,
however, both formal and informal communication
may be necessary for effectively conducting the
work of modern organizations. Astute nurse executives recognize the need to incorporate informal
communication into the communication network.
The nurse executive may use informal communication, however, to clarify a formal communication, to
provide or seek additional information on an issue,
or as a vehicle for negotiation and persuasion.

GRAPEVINE
A common vehicle for informal communication in
organizations is the grapevine. “The grapevine is
the informal and unsanctioned information network within every organization” (Mishra, 1990,
p. 213). The grapevine is essentially the rumor mill
in an organization. Word is spread from one person
to another outside the formal communication
network. The grapevine is the spread of information without regard for the traditional networks of
communication. Because management does not

121

control the grapevine, it moves in every direction
within the organization. Dowd, Davidhizar, and
Dowd (1997) believe that in the absence of factual
information, employees will ﬁll in the lack of information with rumors. Grapevines carry both positive and negative messages. Rosnow (1983)
suggests that productivity and morale are decreased
when the grapevine consistently carries negative
messages. In those situations, Crampton, Hodge,
and Mishra (1998) believe management should
focus more on the conditions in the organization
that lead to the rumor rather than on the rumor
itself. They observe that rumors usually develop
when formal communication has been absent or
unclear. Rosnow suggests that the more anxious
people are, the more likely they are to participate
in rumors. When focusing on the conditions that
lead to rumors, managers should be aware of
employee satisfaction and employee concerns.
When employees believe they are being kept well
informed of issues important to them, they may
decrease the use of the grapevine. However, the
grapevine is not all negative. Rosnow uses the
example that if an employee is disciplined by a manager for tardiness, word will spread rapidly, and tardiness across the organization or department is
likely to decrease. The grapevine is faster than
memos or distributing policy or other more formal
means of communication because the rumors are
spread without regard for the conventional networks of communication dictated by the organizational structure.
Dowd, Davidhizar, and Dowd (1997) also believe
that rumors may have the positive effect of relieving
tension and helping employees adapt to change. If
employees are concerned about a proposed change
in policy or procedure, hearing others talk about the
change may provide employees the opportunity to
become accustomed to the idea. Further, if employees are worried about an issue or do not have complete official information about an impending
change, listening to and passing along what others
are saying or believing about the situation may
relieve some stress and tension.
It is clear that managers need both to monitor and manage the grapevine as appropriate. If
misinformation is rampant and is causing unrest,
managers must intervene and provide factual information quickly. The most astute managers not only
manage the grapevine but use it advantageously.
Leftridge et al. (1999) report a technique used for

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

122

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 122

Understanding Organizations

managing the grapevine at one hospital. Members
of management hung a grapevine wreath in the corridor of the nursing service and announced their
plan at a staff meeting. They encouraged staff to
write down any questions or rumors they wanted
addressed and post them anonymously to the
“grapevine.” Managers’ answers were written on
purple paper, posted by e-mail, answered in staff
meetings. and posted on the grapevine. This method
allowed employees to ask questions they might not
have asked in a formal setting. This exchange of
ideas and information between employees and managers can be highly advantageous to the organization. It serves as a means of providing factual
information and may serve to build trust between
employees and management. The grapevine is a fact
of life in every organization. The challenge becomes

ﬁnding the best ways to use it to the organization’s
advantage.

Gender and Generational
Differences in Communication
Many factors can affect communication in organizations where many people are involved in the
communication process. Two such variables
include gender and generational differences.

GENDER
It has long been recognized that men and women
differ in their communication styles and prefer-

chapter star
Nurse Manager M plans a staff meeting in order to share
organizational information with the staff of Medical Surgical
Unit 4 North. The information she received is vertical
information as it came from the Director of Nursing for all
medical-surgical areas, and there was no more opportunity
to provide feedback into the decision-making process. This
occurred during the budget preparation process. She
chooses the staff meeting because this is a formal monthly
meeting for her unit, and she has bad news about the next
year’s budget for the unit. Nurse Manger M wants to
provide the information to her staff in a face-to-face meeting
in order to provide an opportunity for questions. Three
meetings are planned, one from 8 to 9 a.m. for the night
shift, one from 2 to 3 p.m. for the evening shift, and one
from 3 to 4 p.m. for the day shift. Evening staff members are
on a weekday schedule at the time the monthly staff
meetings are planned. Thus, everyone who works on the
unit receives the same information in 1 day. Refreshments,
drinks, and a nutritious snack are available at the beginning
of each meeting. Nurse Manager M begins each of the
three meetings in the same manner. She invites the
employees into the meeting room and encourages them
to have some refreshments. She is aware of her nonverbal
behavior to assure that she appears formal, cordial, and
open to staff members beginning casual conversation.
She begins the meeting with an announcement about
upcoming continuing education (CE) offerings. Then she
proceeds to the budget information for next year’s budget.
She explains that, due to a projected lower census and

change in Medicare reimbursement, the merit pool for the
unit will only be 3%. She explains this means that if people
are eligible for a merit raise, they can receive a maximum of
only 3% of their base salary, and there will be no bonuses.
She also informs staff that the education budget for the
unit has been decreased. Therefore, they will be funded
to attend only CE offerings hosted by the hospital CE
Department. There will be no funds for anyone to attend
any external conferences. Staff Nurse B asks her to explain
the merit pool again. She repeats the same information.
Staff Nurse B asks if employees will still be permitted
administrative leave to attend an external conference if
they pay their own way. Nurse Manager M responds that if
staffing is covered and they do not have to use overtime or
agency nurses to cover a vacancy, that could be a
possibility. The meeting ends. She sends every staff
member a written memo containing the key points that
were covered at the meeting. The memo closes with
information about how to reach her via e-mail if questions
arise and the address of the hospital intranet, where
members may read an electronic copy of the memo and
have an opportunity to share ideas or ask questions. Nurse
Aide C e-mails a question about changes in the paid time
off accrual plan. Nurse Manager M responds by e-mail that
there will be no changes for the next budget year and
proofs and spellchecks the message before pressing the
send button. Staff members post ideas for saving money
for next year’s budget in order to replace the lost travel and
merit pool dollars.

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 123

Organizational Communication

ences. Tripp (2002) cites research by Nicotera and
Rancer in 1994, which suggests that males are
expected to and actually do exhibit more verbal
aggressiveness and are more argumentative than
females, which may place men in more credible
positions in the hierarchy. Vanfosson (1996)
reviewed the research on gender and communication and observed that men are more likely than
women to initiate interaction and are more likely to
interrupt other people than women. She ascertained that in meetings men obtain the “ﬂoor” more
often and hold it longer than women. Vanfossen
notes that the signiﬁcance of the ﬁndings is that
those who talk more in decision-making groups
tend to become leaders. People in more powerful
positions spend more time talking than people in
less powerful positions. Tripp suggests that socialization and acculturation account for the vast
majority of the differences in male and female communication behavior. He further notes that these
ﬁndings in basic research are important to those
involved in organizational communication. It is
important for nurse administrators and managers
to be aware of the general differences in communication patterns between males and females. This is
particularly important because nursing is a discipline consisting primarily of females functioning in
bureaucratic organizations potentially led by males.
Nurses need to be aware of their own and others’
communication styles so they can be equally effective within the organization as others. For example,
female nurses may be less willing to speak out in
meetings than their male counterparts but may ﬁnd
it necessary to do so in order to have equal input
into important issues. When males are interacting
within groups composed primarily of females, they
may ﬁnd it advantageous to modify their communication style to foster input from all members of the
group.

GENERATIONAL
An organization comprises people of many ages,
which can pose challenges for communicating
throughout the organization. People across generations have different socialization and experiences
that necessarily affect communication styles and
preferences. Generalizations about younger people
and older people and their attitudes about communication should be made cautiously, but some broad
generalizations may apply. Many older people com-

123

plain that younger people are too casual, do not
value face-to-face communication, and are too technology-dependent. Many younger people complain
that older people are set in their ways and are not
computer-savvy (Lieberman and Berardo, 2005).
Even though all members of a generation may not
share the same values and traits, most people are
shaped by the important events in their early to
middle years (Executive Update, 2000).
People of different generations prefer different
methods of communicating and have different
comfort levels with technology (Burke, 2004).
According to this author, providing important information in a variety of formats increases the likelihood of people receiving the information in a
format that they prefer.
Because people of different generations hold different goals, beliefs, and experiential backgrounds,
misunderstandings occur in the workplace. These
intergenerational misunderstandings can create
tensions and strife, which results in unproductive
use of time and energy (Executive Update, 2000).
To decrease such tensions, managers may engage
employees in team-building activities that draw on
the strengths of each generation and provide learning opportunities for all members of the team.
Having employees of several generations in an
organization can bring a richness of experience and
perspectives to the organization. Managers should
strive to create a positive, empowering work environment that is valued by all generations in the
workforce. Such a work environment can be
created by using team- and camaraderie-building
strategies and emphasizing communication. Management should provide information to employees
in a variety of formats and facilitate interaction
between people of all ages to foster mutual understanding and collaboration.

Information Technology
and Electronic Communication
Technology has transformed clinical practice and
has changed organizational communication itself.
Clinical information systems allow nurses to chart
at the bedside, eliminating duplicate documentation. Wireless technology allows nurses, for example, to access patient records, answer call lights from
remote locations, and access databases for clinical

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

124

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 124

Understanding Organizations

practice. Technology also allows caregivers to have
access to data when needed (Newbold, 2003).
As new clinical or administrative technology
is being introduced, communication concerning
resulting changes may be an important determinant
of success. Simpson (1996) observes that when
implementing an information technology system,
organizational communication about the technology must be tailored to the speciﬁc audience.
Employees should be kept well informed of the new
systems throughout the change process. If employees believe they have been a part of the change
process, they are more likely to accept the proposed
change.

ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS
It has been widely recognized that information
technology systems have the potential to improve
safety and quality of patient care. Electronic health
record (EHRs) are an integral part of the information technology system that can positively affect
patient care. Kauka (2005) recognizes several beneﬁts of EHRs, including facilitating faster and better
communication among providers, allowing for
faster and simultaneous access to patient data by
authorized providers, reducing errors resulting in
better outcomes and lower costs, and improving
patient conﬁdentiality.
The Institute of Medicine of the National
Academies has identiﬁed a set of core functions that
EHRs should fulﬁll in order to promote patient
safety and increase quality and efficiency in healthcare delivery (The National Academies, 2003). The
eight functions fall into the categories of: (1) health
information and data, (2) results management, (3)
order entry/management, (4) decision support, (5)
electronic communication and connectivity, (6)
patient support, (7) administrative processes, and
(8) reporting and population health management
(Institute of Medicine, 2003). The National
Academies (2003) note that immediate access to
health information and data regarding patients’
diagnoses, allergies, medications, laboratory test
results, etc., is useful in timely decision making.
Results management speaks to the ability of
providers of care in multiple settings to have quick
access to new and past data, such as laboratory test
results, thereby increasing patient safety and quality
of care. Decision support includes computerized
decision support systems to facilitate compliance

with best practices. It uses reminders, prompts, and
alerts; identiﬁes possible drug interactions; facilitates screenings and preventive practices; and facilitates diagnoses and treatments. The National
Academies go on to observe that electronic communication and connectivity include readily accessible
communication among providers and patients that
is secure, efficient, and readily accessible, which
reduces the frequency of adverse events through
timely diagnoses and treatment. Patient support
includes tools that assist patients in controlling
chronic conditions through home monitoring and
self-testing, having access to their health records,
and providing interactive patient education. Administrative processes include computerized tools that
improve provider efficiency. Reporting includes data
storage using uniform data standards, which help
health-care organizations fulﬁll reporting requirements. These functional categories will serve as a
basis for development of industry standards for
EHRs and will guide the development of software
that includes those functional areas (The National
Academies, 2003). Ideal EHRs are still in development, and health systems and vendors alike continue to work toward reﬁning them.
EHRs have the potential to alter the way patient
information is managed throughout the system
with positive effects on patient safety and quality of
care. Patients may view their medical records
through secure access using the Internet. Ross,
Moore, Earnest, Wittenvrongel, and Lin (2004)
state that such access to their medical records may
help patients in the management of chronic diseases. They conducted a study to ascertain the
effects on patient care and clinic operations of
patient-accessible online medical records concerning patients with congestive heart failure. They
used software that included an educational guide
and messaging system between patients and staff.
The sample included 107 patients, 54 of whom were
in the intervention group and 53 in the control
group. The researchers found that providing these
patients with an online medical record was not only
feasible but also improved treatment adherence
(Ross, et al., 2004).
The use of computerized systems has altered not
only methods of patient care delivery but also the
way people communicate in organizations. Norton
and Lester (1996) observed that electronic communication breaks down rigid organizational structure
and actually circumvents hierarchy because infor-

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 125

Organizational Communication

Practice Proof 8-1

Hassol et al. (2004) conducted a study to ascertain
patients’ attitudes toward access to their EHRs and Webbased communication with providers. Most respondents
indicated that they found the system easy to use and
that their medical records were complete, accurate, and
understandable. The researchers found that only a
minority of the respondents were concerned about
confidentiality of their records or about seeing abnormal
test results after they had received an electronic explanation of the results from their health-care provider.
The respondents preferred e-mail communication for
general medical information and prescription renewals
but preferred personal communication for getting treatment instructions. They did not indicate a preference
for telephone or written communication for any of their
needs. However, the physicians were more likely to prefer
telephone communication to e-mail communication.
1. Why might patients prefer personal communication
for treatment instructions as opposed to general
medical information and prescription renewals?
2. Identify at least one reason physicians may prefer
telephone communication to e-mail.
3. From the study, it is clear that EHRs must be complete,
understandable, and accurate if patients are to find
them useful. What other component is essential to
patients’ use of EHRs?

mation ﬂows around rather than through the traditional organizational hierarchy. They note that
organizational culture and common sense can control such communication fairly well and that there
should be rules and procedures to govern use of
information technology. For example, if a communication is sent to staff from the chief nurse executive, it should be made clear whether the staff
members can respond to the communication
directly or if they should go through their supervisor. In health care, there is always the overriding
issue of privacy, so each organization will have policies governing what information is accessible to categories of staff and under what circumstances.

INTRANETS
One way that organization-wide communication
has changed through technology is the establishment of intranets using Web technology. Intranets
are private, in-house systems that allow people to
communicate and share information easily and effi-

125

ciently (Cupito, 1997). Use of intranets varies, but
the commonality is that they improve communication. Notices that keep employees informed on a
given topic can be posted; information that is speciﬁc to the organization becomes accessible to staff,
such as policies, announcements, events, and so on.
White (2004) believes that in order to get the most
from an intranet, the intranet has to be a part of the
overall communication strategy of the organization.
He stresses the importance of people being able to
trust the information they obtain and being able to
ﬁnd current and correct information on the system.
Sinickas (2004) reports on research from 20 organizations over 4 years. Of the employees surveyed,
only about 33% said they would like to rely on
the intranet exclusively for communication in the
workplace, and about 50% said they would like it
to be a component of the communication system
in the organization. Only about 10% of the employees stated that they did not wish to receive any
information through the intranet. These ﬁndings
point out the necessity for managers to use a variety of techniques when communicating to a diverse
population.

E-MAIL AS COMMUNICATION
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a widely accepted communication technique. Organizations have come to
rely on e-mail as a fast, efficient means of communicating with large numbers of people or a single
person. Although e-mail allows the recipient to
answer when time allows, it is expected that e-mail
will be answered in a timely manner. A recent cartoon depicted a manager standing at the desk of an
employee, stating that the employee should have
checked his e-mail more often as he was ﬁred weeks
ago. This exempliﬁes two important points. E-mail
would be an inappropriate means of informing an
employee of something as serious as termination of
employment. It also points out the need for employees to read e-mails in a timely manner to stay
informed and receive current information.
E-mail allows large numbers of employees
to receive the same message at the same time.
However, e-mail is not a perfect way to communicate and should only be part of an overall communication strategy. Simpson (1996) notes that an
e-mail cannot be sent to 100 people with an expectation that the message will be commonly understood and interpreted correctly by all of the

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

126

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 126

Understanding Organizations

recipients. Managers must understand that employees may not all interpret an e-mail in exactly the
same way. Interpretation will vary, depending on
the topic, complexity of the message, position of the
employee in the organization, and personal perception. Sinickas (2004) notes that electronic communication seems to reduce employees’ need for or
expectation of face-to-face communication more
than it decreases their desire for printed communication. With the use of e-mail, employees seem to
have fewer expectations that communications in
the organization will occur face-to-face. Many people may still wish to have notices written and
posted or provided to them by some means other
than e-mail, however.
E-mail is an expedient way to communicate
within organizations but less conﬁdential and
secure than some other forms of communication.
When using this mode of communication, there is
need for security to avoid unauthorized disclosure
of patient information or other privileged information. Because the very nature of e-mail encourages
spontaneous communication, and because much
information in a health-care organization warrants
conﬁdentiality, organizations should have an e-mail
usage policy. The policy should be designed to protect conﬁdential information, ensure that the organization is in compliance with all relevant national
and state laws, and inform employees of the rules
that apply to their appropriate use of e-mail.
Organizations may establish rules that deal with
personal use of e-mail, including the kinds of messages and material that are suitable for transmission
in the workplace. Van Doren (1996) notes that
while employers consider monitoring of e-mail as
their responsibility to protect conﬁdential information, employees may view the monitoring as an
invasion of their privacy. Van Doren further
observes that e-mail communication of employees
in hospitals and long-term care facilities is being
obtained by the legal system and used as evidence
against them in lawsuits. The issue of liability
points out the importance of policies to govern use
of e-mail within an organization.
One major advantage of e-mail is that managers
can provide immediate information to many people
within the organization, for example, to counter the
rumors spread through the grapevine. Managers
should proofread their messages before they are
sent to be sure they are accurate and carry the

intended message. E-mail is a convenient way for
managers to keep employees feeling that they are
well informed of issues of importance to them.

Importance of Organizational
Communication
Effective communication is an essential component of organizational functioning. It is generally
accepted that communication directly affects patient
safety and quality of care. “According to ﬁndings
from a study released in a national brieﬁng of
healthcare stakeholders, the prevalent culture of
poor communication and collaboration among
health professionals relates signiﬁcantly to continued medical errors and staff turnovers” (Kohn &
Henderson, 2005). Adubato (2004) observes that
many thousands of people die each year from medical errors during their hospital stay. He states,
“These are not caused by high-tech medical equipment breakdown, but by sloppy, downright poor
communication by health-care professionals who
should know better” (p. 33). Amatayakul and
Cohen (2004) believe that optimal communication
is as important in reducing medication errors as
computerized physician order entry and other
efforts to improve patient safety.
Hanlon (1996) says that poor communication is
often cited as a source of stress for nurses. He
believes that when nurses have repeated unsatisfactory communication experiences, there is a cumulative effect that creates stress. This stress, according
to Hanlon, may contribute to burnout, job dissatisfaction, and increased turnover, all of which serve
to decrease the quality of care received by patients.
Similarly, Breisch (1999) believes that effective
communication, as well as accountability and recognition, is necessary for motivating employees. She
explains that nurses’ responsibilities have become
more complex with greater patient acuity, more rigorous documentation requirements, and technological advances. These factors support the need for
nurse managers to create a work environment
that supports the needs of the work group. In fact,
the importance of effective communication in the
organization is reflected in The Scope and
Standards for Nurse Administrators, which states
that the nurse administrator “creates a climate

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 127

Organizational Communication

of effective communication” (American Nurses
Association, p. 26).

PRACTICE TO STRIVE FOR
Adena Health System in Chillicothe, Ohio, developed an innovative way to meet the accreditation requirements of the Joint Commission
on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations
(JCAHO). Effective organizational communication
was key to Adena’s innovative approach to the
accreditation process.
JCAHO instituted a new process whereby surveyors selected approximately 11 active patients
and retraced their care through different departments. The surveyors observed care given, reviewed
policies and procedures, and questioned staff and
patients in different areas of the hospital. Because
of the uniqueness of each patient and the differences in each area of the hospital, preparing the
facility for a survey was challenging. The unpredictable nature of tracer activities proved to be difﬁcult for even the most experienced managers and
survey coordinators. Historically, Adena had used
mock surveys and electronic communication to prepare the staff for the JCAHO visit, but these
methodologies had failed to generate any enthusiasm among the staff. Further, following the accreditation visit, most practices returned to the way
they had been prior to the visit.
The “Survivor Adena” concept was developed
based on the popular Survivor television series. The
objectives of Survivor Adena were to provide a
framework to motivate and engage the organization
in survey readiness to sustain the results of the
preparation. A tribal council was developed to
lay the groundwork for Survivor Adena, which
focused on innovative ways to communicate effectively with staff to engage them in the accreditation
process, empower staff to make changes, and provide ongoing education needed to make the
required organizational changes. Adena’s staff was
given the task of developing over 120 “tribes.” Each
tribe had the challenge of picking an area of focus
that combined the concepts of JCAHO’s “Shared
Visions” tracer methodology and any “hot button”
areas such as patient safety, medication management, and infection control. Tribes were encouraged to collaborate with other departments and
collaborate on a common goal.

127

Weekly, mini-challenges were electronically
mailed to Adena’s staff. The mini-challenges were
quizzes that focused on speciﬁc topics or standards
of care. It was mandatory for staff to complete the
weekly quizzes. A Survivor Adena Fair was held to
bring various departments together to provide educational booths and fun activities to promote sustained excitement and motivation concerning the
upcoming survey. Complete participation was
expected from the staff, and 99% indicated on a
survey that the fair was beneﬁcial and provided a
good learning opportunity. Incentives were built
into the plan, with people and tribes earning tickets
that were cashed for various prizes at the end of the
18-month Survivor Adena project.
Adena had a successful survey and received very
few requirements for improvement. Dawn Allen,
Director of Quality Management and Medical Staff
Services at Adena, stated that the participation,
enthusiasm, and activity from the staff in preparing
for the JCAHO survey were unprecedented in this
system. She further noted that traditional methods
of a unilaterally driven project will no longer meet
the expectations of JCAHO’s Shared Vision framework and that creating a culture of continuous survey readiness is crucial. The system believes that
the shared vision at Adena of communicating effectively with employees and encouraging communication between departments was instrumental in
developing ownership of the concept of continuous
survey readiness. The outcome of their efforts is a
system with a culture of safety and quality that is
imbedded within the organization.

All Good Things…
Communication is essential to the goal attainment
and overall success of an organization. Effective
organizational communication is challenging in
many ways, given the complexity of health-care
systems. Because good communication is such an
important component of successful operation, it is
well worth the time and effort it takes to develop
effective communication strategies. Nurse administrators and managers responsible for internal
communication must recognize that people interpret messages differently, depending on several
factors, including their experiential background

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

128

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 128

Understanding Organizations

and position in the organization. Further, there are
gender and generational differences that must be
recognized and accommodated when communicating with many people in an organization. Managers
must choose the correct mode of communicating
messages depending on the intent of the message.
Some messages may need to be delivered face to
face, and others may be sent by memo, e-mail, in a
group setting in meetings, or some combination of
modes. Managers also have the obligation to ascertain whether important information has been
understood correctly by diverse employee groups.
Employees must understand their responsibility
in the communication process and how the ﬂow
of information is to occur from the level of the
employee to those at higher levels of the hierarchy.
Management is then obligated to address employee
concerns in a timely and effective manner.
Communication has been shown to require a
time commitment by managers in order for it to be
effective throughout the organization. This commitment is well worth the effort as effective communication inﬂuences employee satisfaction, quality care,
and customer satisfaction. Effective communication
within an organization improves the coordination of
decision making and may decrease the use of the
grapevine. Excellent organizational communication
facilitates the attainment of organizational goals and
is necessary for almost every aspect of operations.
Effective communication within the organization
should be a priority of every nurse manager and is
an essential component of effective leadership.

Let’s Talk
1. Name at least two beneﬁts of effective
organizational communication.
2. Think of an example of how interpersonal
communication, small-group communication,
and organizational communication can be
used in the organization.
3. Identify at least three factors that might
cause employees to interpret a message
differently.
4. Provide an example of vertical, horizontal,
and diagonal communication in a health-care
organization.

NCLEX Questions
1. A chief nurse executive sends a memorandum to
the nursing staff announcing a change in the
policy concerning absenteeism. This represents
an example of:
A. Horizontal communication.
B. Diagonal communication.
C. Upward communication.
D. Vertical communication.
2. Organizational communication involves relaying information to many people in order to
accomplish organizational goals. Organizational
communication includes small-group communication and:
A. Interpersonal communication.
B. Repetition.
C. Discipline of employees.
D. Role development.
3. The act of extracting meaning from symbols is
termed:
A. Encoding.
B. Symbolic code.
C. Transmission.
D. Decoding.
4. When communicating within an organization,
employees are expected to respect the:
A. Use of technology.
B. Chain of command.
C. Decision-making method.
D. Time factor in the communication process.
5. From an employee perspective, the most difficult
communication mode is often:
A. Horizontal communication.
B. Diagonal communication.
C. Verbal communication.
D. Upward communication.
6. If a nurse manager ﬁnds it necessary to terminate an employee, the most appropriate means of
delivering this message would be by:
A. E-mail.
B. Written letter.
C. Face-to-face discussion.
D. Memorandum.
7. Which type of communication is most likely to
be misinterpreted by employees?
A. Written messages.
B. Face-to-face communication.

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 129

Organizational Communication

C. Nonverbal communication.
D. Diagonal communication.
8. Nonverbal communication includes:
A. Facial expression.
B. Vocal tone.
C. Gestures.
D. All of the above.
9. Factors that may cause different interpretation
of messages by employees include personal
experiences, socialization, educational background, age, and ___________.
A. Years of service as an employee.
B. Gender.
C. Department in which employed.
D. Selective hearing.
10. Research has shown that e-mail seems to
decrease employees’ need for face-to face communication but does not necessarily reduce
their desire for:
A. Group meetings.
B. More conﬁdential means of communication.
C. Written communication.
D. Phone messages.
REFERENCES
Adamson, G., Emswiller, T., and Olliver, C. (1991). Communicating the vision; visions communicated. The Healthcare
Forum Journal, 34(12).
Adubato, S. (2004). Making the communication connection.
Nursing Management, 35(9), 33–35.
Amatayakul, M., & Cohen, M.R. (2004). First communication, then automation. Healthcare Financial Management,
58(5), 102–104. Retrieved March 14, 2005, from http://
proquest.umi.commmmmmm/pqdweb?did⫽639202301&
Fmt⫽3&clientID⫽52052&RQT⫽309&VName⫽PQD
Baker, K. (2002). Organizational communication Chapter 13.
Organizational Communication, June 8, 2002. Retrieved
March 8, 2005, from www.sc.doe.gov/sc-5/benchmark/
Ch%2013%20Organizational%20Communication%2006.08.
02.pdf
Barnum, B.S., & Kerfoot, K.M. (1995). The nurse as executive.
(4th ed.). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen.
Breisch, L. (1999). Motivate. Nursing Management, 30(3),
27–30
Burke, M.E. (2004). Generational differences survey report.
Society of Human Resource Management. Retrieved June 30,
2005, from www.shrm.org/hrresources/surveys_published/
Generational%20Differences%20Survery%20
Crampton, S.M., Hodge, J.W., & Mishra, J.M. (1998). The informal communication network: Factors inﬂuencing grapevine
activity. Public Personnel Management, 27(4), 569–584.
Crow, G. (2002). The relationship between trust, social
capital, and organizational success. Nursing Administration
Quarterly, 29(3), 1–11.

129

Cupito, M. (1997). Intranets: Communication for the internal
universe. Health Management Technology, 18(7), 20–24.
Retrieved March 14, 2005, from http://proquest.umi.com/
pqdweb?did⫽12566403&Fmt⫽4&clientId⫽52052&RQT⫽30
9&VName⫽PQD
Dahnke, G.L., & Clatterbuck, G.W. (1990). Human communication: Theory and research. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Dowd, S.B., Davidhizar, R., & Dowd, L. (1997). Rumors and gossip: A guide for the health care supervisor. The Health Care
Supervisor, 16(1), 65–71.
Duemer, L.S., & Mendez-Morse, S. (2002). Recovering
policy implementation: Understanding implementation
through informal communication. Education Policy Analysis
Archives, 10(39). Retrieved March 14, 2005, from http://
epaa.asu.edu/epaa/10n39.html
Executive Update. (July 2000). Uncommon threads: Mending the
generation gap at work. Retrieved June 30, 2005, from
http://www.centeronline.org/knowledge/article.cfm?ID⫽841
&ContentProﬁleID⫽122864&...
Gillies, D.A. (1994). Nursing management (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Hanlon, J.M. (1996). Teaching effective communication skills.
Nursing Management, 27(4), 48–49.
Hassol, A., et al. (2004). Patient experiences and attitudes about
access to a patient electronic health care record and linked web
messaging. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 11:505–513.
Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. (2003). Key
capabilities of an electronic heath record system. The National
Academies Press.
jamia.org/cgi/content/abstract/11/6/505
Kauka, M. (2005). Computerized patient record, electronic
medical record and electronic record: A comparison in differences. (2005). Retrieved November 30, 2005, from: http://
www.avazmd.com/resoures/emr_cpr_ehr.html
Keefe, L. (2004). Generating quality interaction. Occupational
Health and Safety, 73(5), 30–32.
Kelly-Heidenthal, P. (2003). Nursing leadership and management.
Canada: Thomson-Delmar Learning.
Kohn, K., & Henderson, C.W. (2005). Managed Care
Weekly, 5.
Leftridge, D.W., et al. (1999). Improved communication in a
shared governance system. Nursing Management, 30(3),
50–51.
Lieberman, S., & Berardo, K. (2005). Simma Lieberman
Associates. Retrieved June 30, 2005, from http://www.
simmalieberman.com/articles/archived_news/april_2005.html
Mantone, J. (2004). Communication is key. Modern Healthcare,
34(45), S12–13.
Marquis, B.L., & Huston, C.J. (2003). Leadership roles and management functions in nursing. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Mishra, J. (1990). Managing the grapevine. Public Personnel
Management, 19(2), 213–228.
National Academies. (2003). Institute of medicine report
identiﬁes core capabilities that should be part of an electronic health record system. Retrieved November 22, 2005,
from: http://www4.nationalacademies.org/news.nsf/isbn/
N1000427?
Newbold, S.K. (2003). New uses for wireless technology.
Nursing Management: IT Solutions. Retrieved March 6, 2005,

08Jones Leadership(F)-ch 08

130

1/14/07

4:10 PM

Page 130

Understanding Organizations

from
http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?did⫽44288665&
Fmt⫽3&clientid⫽52052&RQT⫽309&VName⫽PQD
Norton, M., & Lester, J. (1996). Digital accessibility: Information value in changing hierarchies. American Society for
Information Science. Bulletin of the American Society for
Information Science, 22(6), 21–25. Retrieved March 7, 2005,
from http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb? did⫽10220417&
FMT⫽3&clientId⫽52052&RQT⫽309& VName⫽PQD
Rosnow, R.D. (1983). Corporate rumors: How they start and
how to stop them. Management Review, 72(4), 44–50.
Ross, S., Moore, L., Earnest, M., Wittenvrongel, L., & Lin, C.
(2004). Providing a Web-based online medical record with
electronic communication capabilities to patients with congestive heart failure: A randomized trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 6(2), e12.
Schumann, M. (2004). Enhancing corporate credibility. Communication World, 28–32.
Scope and standards for nurse administrators. (2004).
(2nd ed.). American Nurses Association.
Simpson, R. (1996). What we have is a failure to communicate.
Nursing Management, 27(10), 18–20.
Sinickas, A.D. (2004). Intranet anyone? Take the guesswork
out of using electronic channels. Communication World,
January–February.
Spears, L.A. (1997). Writing business communications: Are
nurse managers prepared? Nursing Management, 28(12),
43–45.
Trenholm, S. (1991). Human communication theory (2nd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Tripp, M.A. Gender differences in communication. Retrieved
April 7, 2005, from http://www.umm.maine.edu/resources/
beharchive/bexstudents/MarkTripp/mt320.html
Van Doren, J.A. (1996). If you monitor e-mail, have a policy. The
Health Care Supervisor, 15(1), 12.
Vanfossen, B. (1996). Gender differences in communication.
Institute for Teaching and Research on Women, Towson

University, Towson, MD. Retrieved April 7, 2005, from
http://pages.towson.edu/itrow/wmcomm.htm
White, M. (2004). Does your intranet have a win-win strategy?
EContent Wilton, 27(3), 41. Retrieved March 14, 2005, from
http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?did⫽589394&Fmt⫽3&
clientId⫽52052&RQT⫽309&VName⫽PQD
Wolper, L.F. (2004). Health care administration (4th ed.). Boston:
Jones and Bartlett.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, D.A., Nelson, R.R., and Todd, P.A. (1993). A comparative evaluation of the impact of electronic and voice mail on
organizational communication. Information and Management,
22(1), 9–21.
Allen, D.G., & Griffith, R.W. (1997). Vertical and lateral information processing: The effects of gender, employee classiﬁcation level, and media richness on communication and work
outcomes. Human Relations, 50(10), 1230–1260.
Herring, S. (2000). Gender differences in CMC: ﬁndings and
implications. The CPSR Newsletter 18(1). http://www.cpsr.
org/prevsite/publications/newsletters/issues/2000/Winter
2000/herring.html
Ngwenyama, O.K., & Lee, A.S. (1997). Communication richness
in electronic mail: Critical social theory and the contextuality
of meaning. MIS Quarterly, 21(2), 145–167.
Rothenberg, R.L. (1995). Using information networks for
competitive advantage. Healthcare Financial Management
49(1), 73.
Weening, M.W.H. (1999). Communication networks in the
diffusion of an innovation in an organization. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 29(5), 1072–1092.
Yazici, H.J. (2002). The role of communication in organizational
change: An empirical investigation. Information and Management 39, 539–552.

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 131

chapter
9
Informatics
SHARON MCLANE, MBA, RN, BC
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Without continual growth and progress, such words as improvement,
achievement, and success have no meaning.”
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790)

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Define nursing informatics.
Compare and contrast the nursing process and standards of
informatics practice.
Describe the role of information system standards in supporting
communication between practitioners.
Discuss the implications of nursing terminology to future
nursing practice.
Identify the six goals of information systems in the 21st century.
Identify ways in which nursing informatics influences clinical
practice.
Identify personal accountabilities with regard to informatics.

131

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

132

N

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 132

Understanding Organizations

ursing informatics is a relatively new specialty,
which has been marked by rapid growth in terms of
numbers of practitioners as well in the explosion of
domain knowledge. Beginning with the Social
Security Act amendment of 1965, which established Medicare and Medicaid, the growth in the
use of computers in health care was assured. This
act required documentation of care, most notably
nursing care, and the progression of nursing documentation in the medical record received a signiﬁcant boost (Thede, 2003).
The ﬁrst nursing informatics specialists emerged
in 1981, when approximately 15 nurses identiﬁed
nursing informaticists as their practice specialty
(Saba & McCormick, 2006). Nursing informatics
was recognized as a specialty by the American
Nurses Association (ANA) in 1992, thereby denoting it as a distinct nursing practice specialty with a
unique scope of practice. In 1994, ANA published
the ﬁrst Scope of Practice for Nursing Informatics,
followed by the Standards of Practice for Nursing
Informatics in 1995. Once the scope and standards
of practice were clearly articulated, the American
Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) offered the
ﬁrst certiﬁcation examination in December 1995.
As of December 31, 2005, 566 nurses were certiﬁed
across the United States as Nurse Informaticists
(T. Norris, ANCC, personal communication, April
20, 2006).
Throughout the last two decades of the 20th century, informatics grew as a specialty in health care
as well as within the nursing profession. As the use
of electronic documentation systems grew from
small, isolated demonstration projects to a mainstream reality, it became clear to nursing leaders
that the profession needed to deﬁne taxonomies
and classiﬁcation models and minimum data sets
that could be coded for documentation, storage, and
retrieval in electronic medical record systems.
Additionally, demand was growing for nursing protocols, innovative methods to support nursing and
patient education, and expert systems incorporating knowledge representation and decision support
and evidence-based practice. With these compelling
objectives, nursing informatics has a practice
agenda on which to focus for the foreseeable future
(Saba, 2001).

Definition of Nursing Informatics
Graves and Corcoran provided the ﬁrst deﬁnition of
nursing informatics in 1989: “A combination of
computer science, information science, and nursing
science designed to assist in the management and
processing of nursing data, information, and knowledge to support the practice of nursing and the delivery of nursing care” (Graves & Corcoran, 1989, p.
227). These two scholars also clariﬁed that professional information systems serve as a foundation for
the dimensions of supporting decisions and advancing the knowledge of the discipline. The Graves and
Corcoran deﬁnition has been expanded by the ANA:
“Nursing informatics is a specialty that integrates
nursing science, computer science, and information
science to manage and communicate data, information, and knowledge in nursing practice. Nursing
informatics facilitates the integration of data, information, and knowledge to support patients, nurses,
and other providers in their decision making in
all roles and settings. This support is accomplished through the use of information structures,
information processes, and information technology”
(American Nurses Association, 2001, p. 17).
Several important factors are inherent in these
deﬁnitions. First, the deﬁnitions illustrate that
nursing informatics is a multidisciplinary science
practice. Second, the deﬁnitions clarify that nursing
informatics is not to be equated with the generic
term informatics; it is speciﬁc to nursing and nursing practice because of the inclusion of the nursing
science domain. Nurses specializing in nursing
informatics employ their nursing science knowledge to mold, provide direction to, and inﬂuence the
design of nursing information systems. Another
core component is computer science. Nursing informatics is not about computers but rather the core
elements derived from computers—data, information, and knowledge—and how best to structure
nursing documentation systems to ensure that the
output will meet the needs of patient care and nursing science. We will discuss these three concepts
later, but it is important to note that computer technology is the tool by which the outputs of information science are derived and which are an important
facet of nursing informatics.

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 133

Informatics

Dr. James Turley suggested the addition of cognitive science to the deﬁnition of nursing informatics. Understanding the processes employed in
structuring knowledge; representing knowledge;
and employing knowledge in decision making,
recall, and perception are important dimensions in
the practice and application of informatics.
Ongoing research in the cognitive domain provides
important understanding to guide the design of
information system software, helping to create systems that are increasingly more useful and more
effective in supporting decision making by clinicians.
Turley suggests a model that incorporates the
elements of Graves and Corcoran’s model—nursing, information, and computer science—and adds
the domain of cognitive science. Furthermore,
Turley suggests that the nursing science is the foundation on which the other three sciences rest.
Turley’s model also suggests that it is the intersection of the cognitive, information, and computer sciences that constitutes nursing informatics (Turley,
1996). Nursing science is the raison d’être of nursing informatics, and without the needs and context
of nursing science nursing informatics would have
no purpose. Turley’s model has the further advantage of ﬂexibility: the model can be translated to
other health-care science disciplines by changing
the foundational domain.
Nursing informatics has the purpose and the
potential to support and improve the care of
patients and communities through the collection,
management, and communication of information
about and for the patient. As well, nursing informatics can assist in making the contributions of
nursing visible in the medical record and assist the
nurse by providing decision support tools. Nurses
are presented with an increasing array and complexity of information that they are expected to synthesize and incorporate into their patient care
decisions. More information does not necessarily
result in better care unless it is thoughtfully analyzed, organized, and presented in ways that are
meaningful to nurses and their practice. The timing, content, and format of the information can
vary with the recipient; the information needs of
clinicians at the point of care are different from the
needs of the manager or administrator, and those
needs differ from the needs of the policy maker.

133

Nursing

Cognitive
Science

Information
Science
Informatics

Computer
Science

Science
FIGURE 9-1 Turley’s suggested model for nursing informatics.

Consequently, a pivotal role of the informaticist is
to collaborate with those individuals and groups to
discover their information needs and the decisions
that will result and translate those needs into creation of appropriate data collection, analysis, and
presentation formats.

Nursing Informatics
Standards of Practice
The standards of nursing informatics practice carefully parallel the nursing process (see Table 9-1).
The clinical nurse focuses on assessing the needs of
a patient and the individuals in the patient’s support system. The nurse then develops a plan of care
based on careful prioritizing of the nursing diagnoses. Then the plan is implemented and assessed
and evaluated according to the patient’s responses
to the plan. Data collected during evaluation are
thoughtfully analyzed, and appropriate modiﬁcations are made to the plan of care.
The focus of the nurse informaticist is assessment of systems problems as identiﬁed by a group of
clinical practitioners; identiﬁcation of the problems,

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

134

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 134

Understanding Organizations

TABLE 9-1

Comparing the Nursing Process and Nursing Informatics Standards of Practice

NURSING PROCESS

STANDARDS OF INFORMATICS PRACTICE

Assessment:
■ Collect data from physical examination of patient
■ Collect data from listening to patient and family
■ Analyze data
■ Identify patient’s problems related to health status

Identify the issue or problem:
■ Prepare a project charter and initial project plan based on
assessed problems, opportunities, and directives of the
project
■ Define business requirements for a new system
■ Define the desired functional requirements, or activities
and services, of the new system
Identify alternatives:
■ Analyze requirements in terms of data, processes,
interfaces, etc., the system will require
■ Analyze possible solutions in terms of technical,
operational, economic, and timeline feasibility
■ Prepare solution recommendation(s) for discussion with
the users
Choose and develop a solution:
■ Select a solution in collaboration with users
■ Create a project plan, which include timelines, dependencies, evaluation milestones, and evaluation metrics
Implement the solution:
■ Implement programming of the solution
■ At defined intervals, evaluate the developing solution in
collaboration with users
■ Implement the fully completed solution
Evaluate and modify:
■ Evaluate solution with evaluation metrics
■ Implement programming and workflow modifications in
response to feedback
■ Evaluate solution after completion of programming
modifications to determine further needs or issues
(Whitten, Bentley, & Dittman, 2000)

Diagnoses
Formulate a nursing diagnosis related to each health
problem
■ Prioritize the problems and diagnoses in collaboration
with patient and/or family
■

Plan:
■ Discuss patient’s expectations
■ Establish outcome goals for patient in collaboration with
patient and/or family
Implement:
■ Set plan of care in action, delegating responsibilities as
appropriate
■ Communicate plan of care to other team members
Evaluate:
Evaluate plan and implementation as ongoing events
■ Adjust plan as appropriate in context of data collected
■ Return to assessment in context of changing needs and
data collected
■

opportunities, and constraints; and description of
the outcomes the group desires to achieve. Using the
information gathered during the assessment phase,
the nurse informaticist prioritizes the problems and
constraints; carefully explores alternatives in the
context of time, ﬁscal, and resource constraints; and
prepares recommendations for the team to consider.
Working closely with the clinicians, the nurse informaticist facilitates and supports the clinical team in
selecting a solution from the options presented,
ensuring that the advantages and limitations of
each solution are explored carefully. Once the clinical team has chosen the most appropriate solution,
the nurse informaticist works with the system programmers during design of the software solution,
reviewing the progress of the plan with the clinical

team at key junctures. Upon completion of the programming process, the system is implemented, and
the evaluation phase begins. Employing evaluation
measures deﬁned during the planning phase, the
nurse informaticist gathers the evaluation data,
analyzes them, and works with the programmers
and the clinical team to deﬁne the nature of system
modiﬁcations necessary to resolve identiﬁed system
issues. The evaluation process and subsequent system modiﬁcation are iterative.
It is important to recognize that the above summary is just that—a very high-level summary. Just
as the brief description of the nursing process does
not begin to describe the details of interventions
and decisions a nurse makes during an episode of
patient care, the same can be said for the processes,

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 135

Informatics

interventions, and decisions of the nursing informaticist. It is also important to point out that the
process of identifying and implementing systems
solutions necessitates development of detailed
workﬂow information, and the solutions often
include changes in workﬂow that are not related to
the software solution. Nonetheless, there is value in
identifying and comparing the parallels between the
nursing processes of patient care and the analysis
processes of information system design and informatics.

Health-Care Data Standards
Data standards are intended to minimize confusion
and assure that data are collected, stored, transmitted, and retrieved in a manner that ensures that the
original meaning is intact and that actions taken in
response to the data are consistent with the original
meaning of the data (Sensmeier, 2006, p. 218). A
discussion of data standards should begin with a
clear understanding of what constitutes a standard.
A standard is an agreed-upon reference point, criterion, or value against which something can be
measured. To be effective, data standards include
discrete, precise deﬁnitions, adherence to which is
not optional (Thede, 2003, p. 205). Dr. Thede used
an apt analogy from the 19th century U.S. railroad
industry in discussing her vision of standards. In
the railroad’s early days, standards for track width,
or gauge, had not been established, and each railroad company was free to create its own gauge. The
problems associated with multiple widths quickly
became apparent when trains from different railroad companies could not travel beyond their own
territory. The problems this created for passenger
and product movement quickly became apparent
and necessitated that the competing companies
come to agreement on a standard gauge. In the
health-care industry, much work is focused on standard development. Some standards are widely
accepted, and others are evolving. The following
discussion will brieﬂy describe some of the collaborative work currently being conducted in the
United States and globally.
Interoperability is another term that is frequently used in discussions regarding health-care
information systems standards. Systems that can
effectively exchange data and effectively and effi-

135

ciently use the data that have been exchanged have
interoperability. Health-care data standards are
designed to support and enable interoperability.
Data standards include “methods, protocols, terminologies, and speciﬁcations for the collection,
exchange, storage, and retrieval of information associated with health care applications, including medical records, medications, radiological images,
payment and reimbursement, medical devices and
monitoring systems, and administrative processes”
(Washington Publishing Company, 1998). Data
standards encompass four primary areas:
1. Deﬁnition of data elements.
2. Determining data interchange formats to

establish how data elements are to be encoded
as well as to assure relationships between data
elements through deﬁning how documents
and information models should be structured.
3. Terminologies, which identify and deﬁne the
terms and concepts used to classify and code
data elements and establish relationships
between the concepts and terms.
4. Knowledge representation, as provided by
electronic medical literature, guidelines, evidence-based practice protocols, and clinical
decision support (Institute of Medicine, 2004,
pp. 128-129).

Data Elements
Data elements are the most basic pieces of information collected, and in order to be able to use the collected data they must be deﬁned clearly, discretely,
and unambiguously. Deﬁnition includes determining how the data are to be collected, by what software application, by what hardware, and when they
are to be collected. It is also important to establish
how the data will be entered into the software system, e.g., as free text or by selection of predeﬁned
responses using coded values. Without clearly
deﬁned, consistently entered, unambiguous data,
the ability to recover data with assurance of content
is greatly diminished, as is the potential of the use
of the data in future research.
The question of what data should be collected
was answered in part through the development of
minimum data sets, an example of which is the
Nursing Minimum Data Set (NMDS) (Table 9-2).

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

136

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 136

Understanding Organizations

TABLE 9-2

ANA-Approved Terminology Standards (February 24, 2006)

DATA SET

PURPOSE

NMDS (Nursing Minimum
Data Set)

The NMDS has 3 categories (nursing care, demographics, and service elements) with 16
data elements. This seminal work defined the minimum information that should be
collected for every patient receiving nursing care and contributed to the foundation
necessary for the development of nursing terminologies.
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/NI/collabs_files/Synopsis%20NMDS%20Nov%202003.pdf

NMMDS (Nursing Management
Minimum Data Set)

NMMDA was developed to meet the needs of nursing administrators. The NMMDS data
set includes 17 data elements across the categories of nursing environment, nursing
resources, and financial resources, and it is necessary to inform the strategic decisions of
the nurse executive. (Huber D., Schumacher L., & Delaney C. [1997]. Nursing management
minimum data set [NMMDS]. Journal of Nursing Administration, 27(4), 42–48.

TERMINOLOGIES

PURPOSE

CCC (Clinical Care Classification)

CCC emerged from a Medicare-funded nursing research study designed to assess and
classify patients to determine the resources required to provide home health services.
CCC comprises two interrelated taxonomies:
■ 182 nursing diagnoses and outcomes, modified by an expected outcome or actual
outcome axis, each of which is modified by three possible conditions: improved,
stabilized, or deteriorated.
■ 198 nursing interventions modified by four types of action: assess/monitor,
care/perform, teach/instruct, and manage/refer.
http://www.sabacare.com/

ICNP (International Classification for Nursing Practice)

International Council of Nurses (ICN) is a federation of national nurse associations
representing nursing in more than 128 member nations. ICNP is a derivative of the ICN,
with the goal of articulating the contribution of nurses around the world to health care
and promoting international standardization of nursing. ICNP includes nursing diagnoses,
nursing interventions, and outcomes.
http://www.icn.ch/icnp.htm

NANDA (North American
Nursing Diagnosis Association)

NANDA provides nurses at all levels and in all areas of practice with a standardized
nursing terminology with which to:
■ Name client responses to actual or potential health problems, life processes, and
wellness
■ Document care for reimbursement of nursing services
■ Contribute to the development of informatics and information standards, ensuring the
inclusion of nursing terminology in electronic health-care records
■ Facilitate study of the phenomena of concern to nurses for the purpose of improving
patient care.
http://www.nanda.org/

NIC (Nursing Intervention
Classification)

NIC includes the full range of nursing interventions from general practice to specialty
areas. Interventions include physiological and psychosocial, illness treatment and
prevention, and health promotion for individuals, families, and communities as well as
indirect care. Both independent and collaborative interventions are included.
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/centers/cncce/nic/index.htm

NOC (Nursing Outcome
Classification)

NOC labels and provides measures for comprehensive patient-focused outcomes that
respond to nursing intervention. The outcomes are intermediate to the achievement of
longer-range outcomes and employ a scale that provides quantifiable information. NIC
facilitates the identification of risk adjustment factors for population groups.
http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/centers/cncce/noc/index.htm

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 137

Informatics

137

DATA SET

PURPOSE

OMAHA System

This is a comprehensive practice and documentation tool for multidisciplinary healthcare practitioners in any setting. The three components of the system are problem
classification, intervention scheme, and problem rating for outcome.
http://www.omahasystem.org/

PCDS (Patient Care Data Set)

The PCDS was developed as a data dictionary of elements abstracted from clinical
information systems. The PCDS is multiaxial and combinatorial (a system in which atomic
terms are combined to create more complex concepts or problems or structures).
http://www.duke.edu/~goodw010/vocab/PCDS.html

PNDS (Perioperative Nursing
Data Set)

Developed by the Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses, the PNDS is a
standardized nursing vocabulary that addresses the perioperative patient experience
from preadmission through discharge. It is the first, and to date the only, nursing
language developed by a specialty organization that has been recognized by the ANA as
a data set useful for perioperative nursing practice.
http://www.aorn.org/research/pnds.htm

MULTIDISCIPLINARY
TERMINOLOGIES

PURPOSE

ABC (Alternative Billing
Codes)

ABC defines 5-character alphabetic symbols to represent thousands of integrative healthcare products and services. The codes reflect the care delivered by acupuncturists,
behavioral health-care workers, chiropractors, medical doctors, massage therapists,
mental health–care practitioners, midwives, nurses, nutritionists, etc.
http://www.abccodes.com/ali/abc_codes/

LOINC (Logical Observation
Identifiers Names and Codes)

The purpose of the LOINC database is to facilitate the exchange of laboratory and
diagnostic results, generated by vendor systems, with other clinical information systems.
LOINC creates the translation so that other systems can understand and file the data.
LOINC data are used by practitioners for clinical care, outcomes management, and
research.
http://www.regenstrief.org/loinc/

SNOMED-CT (Systemic
Nomenclature of Medicine
Clinical Terms)

SNOMED-CT consists of health-care concepts, with unique meanings and formal logicbased definitions, that are organized into hierarchies. The number of terms and attributes
presently enables approximately 1.5 million relationships to be defined in order to
support a robust and discrete terminology system. SNOMED-CT can also be mapped to
other medical terminologies and classification systems already in use.
http://www.snomed.org/

The NMDS identiﬁes a limited set of data elements
that should be collected for every patient. These elements are clearly deﬁned and serve as a foundation
for further data collection. Fortunately, these data
elements are generally collected by most electronic
medical record systems.
Data elements are the most basic pieces of information to be collected, and each element must have
a unique deﬁnition in order to ensure clear and consistent meaning. This process is not inconsequential. For example, “blood pressure” is a term often
assumed to be understood. The term, taken alone,
can have various meanings relative to the context of

the user: a physical therapist may think of blood
pressure in terms of pre- or postexercise; a neuronscience practitioner may think in terms of the position of the client at the time of measurement; the
nurse clinician may evaluate blood pressure in the
context of pre- or postprocedure. It becomes obvious just how critical it is to have a clear, discrete,
nonambiguous deﬁnition of each data element:
“Common data standards are essential to simplify
and streamline data requirements and allow the
information systems that carry the data to function
as an integrated whole” (Institute of Medicine,
2004, p. 132).

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

138

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 138

Understanding Organizations

Data can be appreciated best in the datainformation-knowledge continuum. Data are fundamental building blocks; they combine into a clear,
objective deﬁnition of a speciﬁc fact, without
attached meaning. Data are transformed into information when they are interpreted or analyzed and
when a structure or organization has been applied.
Information becomes knowledge when it is incorporated into the creation of thoughtful relationships
and used to support decision processes meaningfully (American Nurses Association, 2001). For
example, assessment of pain at a speciﬁc moment
in time provides data. The data gathered during
that assessment gain meaning when placed in the
context of previous pain assessments, and the pain
data become information. Finally, when this
pain assessment information is evaluated in the
context of information regarding recent pain medication administration and other pain alleviation
measures, the nurse develops knowledge regarding
the effectiveness of the patient’s pain management plan.
Knowledge work uses transformed information
in the context of specialized knowledge and expertise (Mayes, 2001). Registered nurses are knowledge workers by the very nature of the work they do
and the continual synthesis of information and
knowledge they weave throughout the decision
processes inherent in patient care. Clinical judgment implies that nurses use their knowledge to
interpret information in the context of the individual patient and apply that knowledge to higherlevel clinical plan development. The electronic
medical record systems and knowledge representation systems support and enhance the ready access
of the clinical nurse to such data, information, and
knowledge.

DATA INTERCHANGE STANDARDS
Four types of data interchange standards have been
developed in health care. These standards address:
1. Communication between medical devices and

between devices and electronic medical
records (EMRs)
2. Digital imaging communications
3. Administrative data exchange
4. Clinical data exchange (Mayes, 2001;
Sensmeier, 2006)
Transfer of physiological data from a cardiac
monitor to the EMR is an example of communica-

tion between devices and the EMR. Radiology
departments employ digital imaging communication every day as they make x-ray ﬁlms available to
practitioners over the Internet. Administrative data
exchange is an integral part of the billing systems of
hospitals, enabling information to be shared with
payers. Clinical data exchange is woven throughout
an EMR system as, for example, data from the laboratory information system are sent to the EMR for
integration in the patient record. The National
Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, through
its accountabilities under the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, recommended adoption of several standards for data
exchange. Table 9-3 is a sample of the more widely
known data standards and includes a brief description of the purpose of the standards. Each standard
addresses at least one type of data interchange. It is
important to know why these standards have been
created and that they are necessary for effective and
safe patient care. The speciﬁcs of the standards will
continue to evolve as a result of technological innovations.

Knowledge Representation
Effective data standards are fundamental to knowledge representation, and knowledge representation
is a cornerstone of establishing and communicating
best practices. As new knowledge is discovered,
best practices evolve and change. At this point, the
health-care industry does not have effective technological processes for quickly translating new knowledge into best practices. However, information
systems, particularly the EMR, offer considerable
promise. A major goal of information system developers is design of software systems that can translate up-to-the-moment evidence-based practice
guidelines into clinical decision support and provide that information to practitioners when they
work with the EMR (Institute of Medicine, 2004).
The promise is there, but the timeline for realization is not clear at this juncture.
One means of knowledge representation currently available is electronic linkage to the biomedical literature and other medical knowledge bases.
This level of functionality supports practitioner
access at the point-of-care, providing information to
support clinical decision making. Often the links to
literature, formulary, and other knowledge bases

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 139

Informatics

TABLE 9-3

139

Health-Care Data Standards Organizations

STANDARDS ORGANIZATION

PURPOSE

IEEE (Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers)

IEEE establishes international standards in a great number of fields, including medical
information devices. The IEEE standards enable communication between medical
devices and computer systems, providing real-time, automatic, comprehensive, and
consistent data capture and storage in computer systems. Equipment that uses IEEE
standards includes monitoring equipment, ECG devices, ventilators, infusion pumps,
and wireless transmission devices.
http://standards.ieee.org/announcements/pr_1073.html

DICOM (Digital Imaging and
Communications in Medicine)

Collaborating with the American College of Radiologists, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association has created and maintains international standards for communication of biomedical diagnostic and therapeutic information in disciplines that use
digital images and associated data. The goals of DICOM are to achieve compatibility
and to improve workflow efficiency between imaging systems and other information
systems in health-care environments worldwide.
http://www.nema.org/prod/med/

ACS (Accredited Standards
Committee)

ACS develops and maintains standards for electronic data interchange and document
structure standards to support business transactions. Within health care, these X12N
standards have been adopted nationally to facilitate administrative functions that support patient care, such as submission of claims, enrollment of participants, and similar
functions (Accredited Standards Committee, 2003). Given the unique nature of the
health-care environment in the United States, including the privacy provisions of
HIPAA, these standards are generally not used outside of the United States.
http://www.x12.org/

HL7 (Health Level Seven)

HL7 develops specifications for data transmission. The most widely used specification
is a standard that enables disparate health-care applications to exchange key sets of
clinical and administrative data. HL7 supports the exchange of information between
computer applications while preserving the meaning of the original message or
data. The primary focus of HL7 is clinical and administrative data. For example, HL7
supports transmission of medical orders, nursing documentation, and medication
administration records.
http://www.hl7.org/

LOINC (Logical Observation
Identifiers Names and Codes)

LOINC provides a standard set of universal names and codes for identifying individual
laboratory and clinical results and allows users to merge clinical results from many
sources into one database for patient care, clinical research, and management. LOINC
provides the translation of laboratory data, which are usually transmitted using the
internal codes of the specific laboratory system. LOINC codes allow the data to be
read and stored in the electronic medical record. LOINC is also designed to code
hemodynamic and other clinical and medication data.
http://www.regenstrief.org/loinc/

have embedded icons in EMR systems, demonstrating an immediate level of support for practitioners.
This type of knowledge representation brings the
most recent medical literature to the ﬁngertips of
the practitioner, thereby enabling the practitioner
to evaluate the information in the literature and
appropriately weave it into patient care as the individualized plan of care is developed.

An exciting next-generation dimension of clinical practice guidelines is evolving. Generally, implementation of practice guidelines beyond the local
setting has been severely limited. One limitation is
the lack of standards to support representing guidelines in a machine-readable format. A second limitation is that guidelines are not documented in a
language that is nonambiguous, with clear and

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

140

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 140

Understanding Organizations

nonredundant deﬁnitions. Third, clinical practice
guidelines must have access to stored data of the
patient, and that data repository must contain the
necessary clinical data that will support decision
making. Clinical practice guidelines to date have
been created using the relative simplicity of “ifthen” statements. More recent research, devoted to
creating software that will enable practitioners to
query large databases for best practices, structuring
the query to consider information and context speciﬁc to the subject patient, offers the promise of a
much more dynamic, real-time clinical decision support system (Institute of Medicine, 2004).

■
■

■

■

■

Terminologies
Terminology standards are part of health-care data
standards. Nursing terminologies have special
meaning to nursing practice. A suitable summary
for why nursing terminologies are needed is that “if
we cannot name it . . . we cannot control it, ﬁnance
it, research it, teach it or put it into public policy”
(Royal College of Nursing [UK], 2004). This quote
is an apt distillation of the importance of nursing
terminologies and the work that is being conducted
in this ﬁeld. Collectively, nursing does not have
standard terminology, and this is readily evidenced
within any given hospital or nursing unit that
does not have an electronic documentation system.
To a signiﬁcant extent, nursing has followed the
medical model, failing to articulate clearly a precise,
unique name and deﬁnition for much of the work of
nursing.
Nursing terminology is another critical standard
necessary to the evolving medical record. Nursing
terminology is a standard that is generally more
functionally apparent to practitioners than other
standards because users interact with the terminology throughout the electronic documentation experience. The underlying terminology guides the
selection of data elements to be included in the documentation screens, the deﬁnition of those elements, and the selection options available to the
nurse.
Standardized nursing terminologies, or languages, provide important beneﬁts to nursing practice, which include:
■

Consistency in documentation resulting from
the ability to trend or evaluate data longitudinally

■

■

Nursing clinical decision support
Signiﬁcantly enhanced nursing research ability resulting from easier and more comprehensive data retrieval from EMRs and use of data
from multiple geographic sites in research
studies
Evidence-based nursing practice resulting
from EMRs that support the process of developing evidence
Quality assessment and evaluation of practice
resulting from the ease of data retrieval and
subsequent analysis
Professional billing for nursing services;
unambiguous, consistent, comprehensive documentation is a necessary prerequisite to bill
for nursing services, and standardized languages are a cornerstone to realization of that
documentation
Creating visibility for the care provided by
nurses; the terms, deﬁnitions, and classiﬁcations that are inherent in standardized terminologies will ensure that care provided by
nurses will be deﬁnitively incorporated in the
patient medical record
A bridge between the different terms used by
the various care provider professions as well as
a bridge between regional terminology differences across the country; as our society
becomes increasingly multicultural, the need
for a clearly deﬁned and consistently employed
terminology system becomes more urgent to
help reduce communication ambiguity and
increase patient safety.

Given the beneﬁts that standardized terminologies offer the nursing profession, it may be
surprising to learn that consensus on nursing terminologies has not been achieved. Nursing is a very
complex and diverse profession, and no single terminology has been created to meet the data collection and documentation needs of the profession.
There is some agreement regarding the functional characteristics and structural attributes of
terminologies. These features include (Henry &
Mead, 1997):
1. The system should be complete and have

sufficient in-depth coverage and granularity
(depth and level of detail) to depict nursing
care processes. For example, the full spectrum of nursing diagnoses needs to be incorporated.

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 141

Informatics

2. The system needs to be comprehensive,

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

including each facet of the nursing care
process. For example, it should include risk
factors or the recipient or target of the education that is to be provided.
Concepts should be nonredundant, without
vagueness or ambiguity, and there should be
no overlapping meanings.
Concepts should be atomic, or separable into
their constituent components. For example, a
category should not be “pain” but instead
subdivided into chronic pain or acute pain.
Atomic elements must be able to be combined (compositional) to create concepts.
For example, an atomic element could be
chronic fatigue, which, combined with acute
fatigue, would create the larger concept of
fatigue.
The system needs to be able to support hierarchies of concepts, allowing linking of general and more speciﬁc terms, and support
multiple “parents” and “children.” For example, incontinence may be due to neurogenic
causes or bladder prolapse.
Each term and concept must have a clear and
concise deﬁnition.
The above list is a sample of the considerations and criteria employed in evaluating
or creating a terminology system. This brief
overview provides some insight into a complex process that is highly collaborative,
requiring consensus building and continual
review.

In 1995, the ANA established the Nursing
Information and Data Set Evaluation Center (NIDSEC) to evaluate standardized nursing and other
terminologies that have been developed by professional groups or information system vendors. The
purpose was to identify and recognize those terminologies that effectively represent nursing practice
and support documentation of nursing practice
in computer information systems. NIDSEC evaluation criteria incorporate nomenclature, data repository (how data are stored), clinical content, and
general characteristics of the system (NIDSEC Nursing Information and Data Set Evaluation).
As of February 24, 2006, NIDSEC recognized
two minimum data sets, eight nursing interface
terminologies, and three multidisciplinary terminologies. A brief description of each is included in
Table 9-2.

141

Nursing documentation in the paper medical
record has traditionally included one or more ﬂow
sheets as well as narrative notes. Documentation of
patient care in a paper medical record is relatively
unstructured, most speciﬁcally within the narrative
notes. Clearly, many health-care organizations have
documentation standards, such as documentation
by exception; however, within the deﬁned standard
there is generally signiﬁcant ﬂexibility. Narrative
notes have a number of limitations, including:
■

■

■

■
■

Differences in terminology between care
providers, even when the providers are referencing the same topic
Use of abbreviations and acronyms, resulting
in confusion and misinterpretation
Differences in writing style and content that
limit the development of continuity and the
ability to trend the clinical condition and
responses of the patient
Illegible handwriting
Difficult, very costly, and limited data retrieval
ability

Consequently, employing the use of terminologies represents a signiﬁcant change in documentation practice. Documentation in a well-designed
EMR is completed largely by selecting the appropriate option from prepared selection lists that are
coded to ensure consistent data storage.

Information System Goals
for the Early 21st Century
The report of the Institute of Medicine (IOM),
Crossing the Quality Chasm, identiﬁed six major
aims for improving the health-care system of the
21st century. Targeted to all health-care organizations, professional groups, and private and public
purchasers of health-care services, the focuses are:
safety, effectiveness, becoming patient-centered,
timeliness, efficiency, and equitability (Institute of
Medicine, 2001). Although not a panacea, the EMR
and the work of nurse informaticists in collaboration with clinical nurses can make signiﬁcant
contributions to the agenda set forth by the
IOM. Patient safety can be signiﬁcantly enhanced
through the use of EMR systems. Some examples
in which EMR systems support these goals
include:

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

142

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 142

Understanding Organizations

chapter star

Concerned about the variable computer skills and
documentation practices demonstrated by unit coworkers,
ABC, RN, made an appointment with the nurse manager to
discuss his observations. During their meeting, ABC shared
his concerns and indicated he would like to work on
supporting his peers and resolving the problems he had
noted. ABC also shared that his concern was predicated by
his understanding that nursing documentation in the EMR
would provide for better understanding of the outcomes of
patient care delivery on the unit and that he would support
quality improvement and nursing research in the months
and years to come. But, he said, those goals would not be
realized if the staff feared or were uncomfortable with the
system and did not use it in the way it was designed to be
used. The manager asked ABC if he could be more specific
in describing his concerns. ABC shared the following
observations made over the past 10-12 weeks, since
implementation of the most recent functionality of the
hospital EMR system. He indicated that each instance
involved a small subset of the staff. Although some staff
members had been observed having difficulty in more than
one of the situations, the situations represented a crosssection of the unit staff:
■
■

■

■

■

Difficulty navigating the EMR and finding key laboratory
data
Reluctance to use the nursing documentation system,
often reverting to paper documentation, indicating no
functional computers were available prior to the end of
the shift
Reluctance to document at the bedside, preferring to
record assessment and clinical data on paper and
subsequently transfer the information to the EMR later
in the shift
No changes in documentation of the clinical
assessment of the patient despite knowledge of
significant changes in the patient’s condition
Detailed recording of all the clinical tasks ordered for
the patient during shift report

The nurse manager shared that she had noted similar
behaviors and was concerned about supporting
the staff to ensure they effectively integrated the
EMR into their workflow. She asked ABC to prepare
recommendations regarding how he believed the
problems he had noted should be addressed. They
agreed to meet again in 10 days to discuss his
recommendations.

At their next meeting, ABC presented to the nurse
manager his recommendations, addressing each of
the concerns noted. ABC’s recommendations included:
1. Offer a basic computer skills class to staff. Rather than
focus the class on use of the EMR, he suggested they
frame the class as a “life skills” computer class, building
skill sets through use of simulated on-line banking,
personal budget development, computer-based
recipe files, etc.
2. Prepare and distribute a survey regarding concerns
and personal weaknesses in use of the EMR. The
survey would be anonymous, asking only for job
title.
3. Collaborate with technology staff responsible for
hardware and software support to create routine
preventive rounds on the unit, ensuring that all
computers would be assessed for performance
at least once a month. At the same time, post
signs at each computer listing the number of the
Help Desk for immediate reporting of computer
malfunctions.
4. Host a unit patient safety fair. Include in the fair a
poster and other information regarding how realtime documentation supports patient care, other
practitioners, and safety.
5. Request information from the EMR staff regarding
documentation performance of the unit. Provide
feedback to staff, celebrating the areas of high
performance. Share the areas where there are
opportunities for improvement, and commit time
during the staff meeting over the next 6 months to
discuss the data and discuss how performance
can be improved.
The nurse manager was pleased with the thoughtful
recommendations ABC prepared. They discussed
accountabilities, priorities, plan details, resources that
would be required, and a timeline. At the conclusion of
their discussion, the nurse manager committed to ABC
that 20% of his working time (8 hours each week) would
be scheduled as nonpatient care time. During that time,
ABC would prepare resources and execute the plan. The
nurse manager and ABC agreed to meet weekly to discuss the progress of the plan, resources, and support that
ABC needed. They would evaluate the plan and continuation of the 20% release time from patient care in 6
months.

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 143

Informatics
■

■

■

■

Legibility of handwriting and ready identiﬁcation of the authors of documentation are fully
supported in an EMR system. Error reduction
is achieved because drug dosages are clearly
written and documentation standards, such as
the use of leading zeros preceding decimals,
are ensured
Clinical alerts, such as drug-drug and drugallergy interactions, provided to the physician
at the time an order is entered in the EMR
save pharmacists and nurses time clarifying orders and enable the appropriate medication intervention to reach the patient more
quickly
Nurses receive allergy interaction information
at the time of medication administration
Positive patient identiﬁcation systems, such as
bedside bar-code scanning of patient wristbands, medications, and the medication
administration record, can support consistent
and clear veriﬁcation of the ﬁve patient rights
and can help to avoid medication errors.

Effective care can be supported by access to
evidence-based practice databases and up-to-date
protocols, helping to make sure that patients are
receiving care based on the most recent scientiﬁc
information. Presenting the most recent evidence to
practitioners can be achieved by clinical decision
support systems that offer recommendations or
that suggest treatment modalities based upon the
clinical condition and clinical data of the patient.
Effectiveness can be further supported through
data-mining (retrieval of selected clinical data from
the EMR); for example, some systems analyze the
response of patients with similar clinical presentations and diagnoses to speciﬁc clinical interventions.
EMR systems can also offer reminders to clinicians regarding best-practice recommendations for
laboratory testing, such as monitoring therapeutic
blood levels of an antibiotic or anticoagulant.
Preventive care screening recommendations, such
as annual mammograms or initial colonoscopy for
patients who have reached the age of 50, are
another example of assuring that patients receive
timely interventions. Patient-centered care is
enhanced as documentation by various practice disciplines, such as physicians, nurses, therapists, and
pharmacists, is integrated, and practice silos are
diminished or eliminated. For example, EMR sys-

143

tems support patient-focused problem lists, interdisciplinary communication through integration of
documentation entries, and elimination of redundant documentation through presentation of previously documented data when and where they are
needed in data screens.

Computer Hardware
Computer technology is changing rapidly, and the
half-life of what is considered to be a sophisticated
computer has become very short. Within that context, this section will brieﬂy discuss the components of a computer. Perhaps the place to begin is to
clarify that hardware refers to all of the physical

Practice to Strive For 9-1
The data collected, stored, and retrieved from the EMR comprise an important key to the future of nursing and the care
delivered to patients. However, data depend on the value
and respect individual practitioners have for what the data
represent for the patients for whom they care. Nurses need
to embrace accurate, complete, and real-time documentation. This documentation will enable them and their peers
and colleagues to make effective decisions for their patients.
This documentation will also serve as the database for
research and quality improvement efforts that will guide
the development of new evidence on which to base practice. Nurses need to become involved in the design, development, and feedback of the EMR systems in their hospitals.
They need to develop an understanding of the design and
underlying care philosophies that are used as guideposts in
the design of the EMR. Nurses need to articulate their workflow needs in order to influence the design of documentation and related policies so that they are realistic. Nurses
need to advocate for collection of baseline data prior to
implementation of major new functionality so that nursing
will be able to measure the changes that result from the
new documentation processes and workflow. Nurses need
to support their peers and reinforce the benefits of electronic documentation systems. Nurses must become
involved; through involvement they participate in shaping
their future, rather than respond to what others think the
future should be. The data nurses choose to collect and the
accuracy of those data will significantly influence how nursing is able to articulate the contribution of nursing care to
patient outcomes.

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

144

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 144

Understanding Organizations

components of the computer. This hardware is
often classiﬁed as processing components, memory,
and input and output devices. Familiarity with
these terms can diminish some of the mystery of
computers for those who are not accustomed to
using them or their component parts.

PROCESSING COMPONENTS
The central processing unit (CPU) is the brain of
the computer. Think of the CPU as the control center, directing the ﬂow of information while also
interpreting, directing, and monitoring the execution of instructions received from memory. The
CPU is also responsible for arithmetic logic, the
foundation of computer function.
The motherboard is another key element, providing the connective infrastructure of the computer. The CPU, chips, hard drives, and disk drives
are mounted on the motherboard, and the motherboard creates the internal organization and is the
location for addition of new components.
An important feature of any computer is the
speed at which the computer processes information.
Speed is usually described as clock speed, or the
number of electric pulse cycles that occur in a
deﬁned period. Hertz is the term used to measure
clock speed, and 1 hertz is 1 cycle per second.
Megahertz (MHz) is 1 million cycles per second,
and gigahertz (GHz) is 1 billion cycles per second.

INPUT AND OUTPUT DEVICES
In order to work and accomplish tasks using the
computer, input devices are necessary. Input
devices enable the user to enter data, such as numbers or words, that the computer then uses to perform computations based on commands that are
also entered by input devices. Another way of perceiving input devices is that they enable two-way
communication between the user and the computer. Commonly used input devices include the
keyboard, mouse, and scanner; some computers
support the use of light pens or touch-screens and
other devices. In most cases, a combination of input
devices, such as the keyboard and mouse, is needed
for entry of data and commands.
A means of extracting data from the computer is
also necessary; output devices are required for this
purpose. Output devices include disks, CDs, ﬂash

drives, electronic transmission to another computer, and printers, to name the more commonly
used devices.

MEMORY
Computer memory consists of read-only memory
(ROM), random access memory (RAM), and storage memory. ROM is memory used only by the computer and is protected from alteration, including
erasure, by the user. The information stored in
ROM supervises the overall function of the computer and enables certain computer functions, such
as starting computer operation, often referred to as
booting.
RAM is usually called the working memory of
the computer, and it is RAM that supports the various applications used, such as spreadsheet and
word processing. Another term associated with
RAM is volatile memory, a reference to the temporary nature of RAM storage. Instructions needed to
operate an application are retrieved from permanent storage, such as the hard drive, CD, or diskette,
and used by RAM while the application is in use.
Because RAM loses the information stored in it
each time the computer is turned off, any work
completed using applications must be saved to permanent storage so that it can be retrieved later.
The ﬁles created and saved while working on the
computer are placed in storage memory, sometimes
called permanent memory. The term permanent
memory should not be misleading; the ﬁles stored in
permanent memory reside there until such time as
they are erased or overwritten by new ﬁles. Hard
disks, CDs, and diskettes are used to store ﬁles.
Another, more recent, innovation for ﬁle storage is
the ﬂash drive, also known as a thumb drive or
memory stick. These highly portable devices are
available in ever increasing memory capacities
(Saba & McCormick, 2006; Thede, 2003).

COMPUTER POWER
The way in which the computer works with and
stores data is based on the binary system. A bit is
the smallest unit of storage in the computer. It has
two possible values, zero and one (0 and 1). If you
think of the bit as an on-off switch, the “on” position is equal to 1, and the “off ” position is equal to
0. Bits are combined in groups or units of eight bits,

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 145

Informatics

TABLE 9-4

Computer Memory in Bytes

PREFIX

UNITS (#
OF BYTES) NUMBER

Kilobyte
Megabyte
Gigabyte
Terabyte
Petabyte
Exabyte
Zettabyte
Yottabyte

Thousand
Million
Billion
Trillion
Quadrillion
Quintillion
Sextillion
Septillion

1,000
1,000,000
1,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000

which are known as a byte. A byte represents a single character, such as an M or the number 4 (Saba
& McCormick, 2006).
The number of possible combinations of 0 and 1
in a byte is 255, and in the early days of computer
technology 255 was the limit of the number of characters a computer could represent. With the advent
of newer technology, computers are able to express
increasingly more characters and graphics, greatly
expanding the ﬂexibility for image and other visual
displays. One expression of power today is to indicate the number of bytes the computer can handle:
Table 9-4 is a scale of the actual and theoretical storage capacity of computers; for example, at the time
this chapter was written, the yottabyte was theoretical storage capacity.

Privacy and the Protection
of Health-Care Data
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) was enacted by Congress in 1996
to protect workers by limiting employer denial of
health insurance coverage to employees with preexisting medical conditions. Interestingly, because the
act also directed the Department of Health and
Human Services to develop privacy rules for health
data contained in EMRs, HIPAA indirectly promoted signiﬁcant impetus for development of a
number of standards to support data transmission.
The privacy portion of this act, often referred to as
the Privacy Rule, affects all health-care providers
and health plans and speciﬁcally indicates that pro-

145

tected health information (PHI) may not be disclosed without the permission of the patient
(Flores, 2005).
HIPAA, although referred to as an act or government regulation, is more appropriately characterized as a process. As the years have passed since the
law was enacted in 1996, HIPAA has gradually
become recognized as a signiﬁcant source of change
in the culture of health care . The accountability for
protection of PHI has resulted in a changed organizational focus that extends beyond the tenets of the
original act. For example, quality assurance data
designed to monitor and improve patient safety
often include PHI information to enhance and
strengthen data analysis. The need to assure that
PHI is appropriately protected and that data are
effectively de-identiﬁed has resulted from the evolving awareness of the need to respectfully protect
information that could be traced back to individual
patients.
The future challenge for the health-care industry
will be to balance the need to protect the PHI with
the contrasting advantages that could be gained for
streamlined patient care as a result of access to medical record information. For example, in the event of
a widespread health emergency, access to personal
medical record information would support creation
of aggregate data pools or databases that would
greatly speed understanding and insight into the
problem and accelerate identiﬁcation of preventive
or treatment solutions.
Nurses have historically advocated for and protected patient privacy. HIPAA supports and
increases the accountability of the nurse, as a
health-care provider, to protect the privacy of the
patient. There are personal measures that are
deeply embedded in nurses’ daily practice to protect
patient privacy. For example, nurses can make certain that they protect the privacy of personal security passwords to information systems and refuse to
share their passwords. Experts advise against writing down passwords due to the risk of discovery by
others. All practitioners are responsible for all documentation made under their password, even if
they did not make the entry. This sobering fact
offers a compelling rationale for not sharing passwords and assuring that they cannot be discovered
by others.
Another example of protecting the privacy of the
patient occurs when using the EMR. By ensuring
that each session is closed and logged out each time

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

146

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 146

Understanding Organizations

one leaves the computer, the nurse is demonstrating
respect for this important patient right. Each of
these measures is part of the overall strategy present
in health-care organizations to honor and respect
the trust relationship with patients.

All Good Things...
Nursing informatics is a new and important part of
the nursing care arsenal. Working in partnership
with the other members of the team, informaticists
help the team deﬁne the clinical, administrative,
and research outcomes and how those outcomes
can be supported with comprehensive clinical data.
Informaticists assist in creating an infrastructure
that supports clear communication through the
design of documentation consisting of nonredundant data elements with nonambiguous deﬁnitions.
Nurse informaticists guide nursing leadership
through the selection of a terminology system that
meets the clinical and strategic goals of nursing
practice and supports patient care. Nurse informaticists actively participate with clinical and information systems leadership in designing the strategic
direction of the EMR system, ensuring the practice
needs and imperatives of nursing are incorporated.
Nursing informaticists also communicate and
interpret the role of nursing informatics to the nursing community. Effective staff training in effective
use of information systems is an ongoing focus of
nurse informaticists. An important facet of the role
is translation of key accountabilities of practicing
nurses as they use information systems and assisting the nursing community to perceive and understand the importance of its ongoing engagement and
input to the work of nursing informaticists.

Let’s Talk
1. Describe at least three situations or examples in
which clinical decision support beneﬁts patient
care.
2. Discuss the value that a terminology system
provides to nursing practice.
3. What are the drawbacks and limitations of
terminology systems?

4. How do EMR systems that are designed using a
terminology system differ from paper medical
record documentation?
5. Describe the role of a nursing informaticist.
Consider the educational preparation for such a
role in your response.
6. HIPAA was discussed as a motivating factor
for patient privacy concerns. Discuss the ways
in which patient privacy could be jeopardized
in the health-care environment.

NCLEX Questions
1. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) established six
major aims for improving the health-care system
in the 21st century. One major goal is improving
patient safety. Identify two of the remaining
goals.
A. Increase numbers of nurses and increase efficiency.
B. Enhance patient-centered focus and protect
privacy.
C. Improve effectiveness and reduce costs.
D. Increase timeliness and enhance patientcentered focus.
2. Computers have several types of memory to support their function. Which of the following
options is not a type of memory?
A. Flash drive.
B. ROM: read-only memory.
C. RIM: read internal memory.
D. RAM: random access memory.
3. Which of the following features is not an example of knowledge representation?
A. E-mail.
B. Clinical practice guidelines.
C. Systematic reviews of the literature.
D. Clinical decision support.
4. Nursing terminology systems support nursing
documentation in several important ways. Identify the option that is least important in the beneﬁts offered by terminology systems.
A. Ensure the value and visibility of nursing in
the medical record.
B. Eliminate lengthy narrative notes.
C. Support nursing research.
D. Support quality assurance and improvement
activities.

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 147

Informatics

5. Which response is the most accurate regarding
the purpose of data standards for information
systems?
A. Data collection and storage.
B. Data retrieval and transmission.
C. Both of the above.
D. Neither of the above.
6. Standardized nursing terminology affords nursing a number of beneﬁts. The beneﬁts include:
A. Increased medical record visibility of nursing
contributions to patient care.
B. A database that supports clinical research.
C. The ability to implement clinical decision
support.
D. A and B.
E. A, B, and C.
7. Nursing science serves as the foundation of nursing informatics. The domain of informatics exists
as the intersection of what other three sciences?
A. Communication, cognitive, and computer sciences.
B. Information, programming, and communication sciences.
C. Cognitive, computer, and information sciences.
D. Computer, information, and communication
sciences.
8. Protected health information (PHI) is individually identiﬁable health information. Which of
the following data elements is/are considered
PHI data?
A. Name and address.
B. Birth date.
C. Telephone number.
D. Social security number.
E. A, B, and D.
F. A, B, and C.
G. A, B, C, and D.
9. Patient safety can be improved through the features of an EMR system by a number of means.
Which of the following are patient safety outcomes of an EMR?
A. Legibility of the data entered.
B. Drug-allergy alerts at the time of medication
administration.
C. Costing of medications at the time of
ordering.
D. A and B.
E. A, B, and C.

147

10. Which of the following dimensions of computer hardware and function is/are not correct?
A. Hertz is the term used to represent the speed
of the computer.
B. Data are permanently stored in the hard
drive or output device.
C. A byte is eight bits.
D. A byte represents eight characters.
E. A and D.
F. B and C.

REFERENCES
ACS (The Accredited Standards Committee). (2003). ACS
X12. Retrieved May 1, 2006, from http://www.x12.org/
x12org/subcommittees/sc_home.cfm?sendTo⫽PurposeAndSc
ope%2Ecfm&doSet⫽TRUE&CFID⫽1748141&CFTOKEN⫽
8624906
American Nurses Association. (2001). Scope and standards
of nursing informatics practice. Washington, D.C.: American
Nurses Publishing.
Flores, J.A. (2005). HIPAA: Past, present and future implications for nurses. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 10(2),
131–147.
Graves, J.R., & Corcoran, S. (1989). The study of nursing informatics. Image: Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 21(4), 227–231.
Henry, S.B., & Mead, C.N. (1997). Nursing classiﬁcation systems: Necessary but not sufficient for representing “what
nurses do” for inclusion in computer-based patient record systems. Journal of the American Medical Information Association,
4(3), 222–232.
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming
the work environment of nurses. Washington, D.C.: National
Academies Press.
Mayes, R. (2001). Data standards. In Saba, V.K., & McCormick,
K.A. (Eds.). Essentials of computers for nurses: Informatics for
the new millennium. (3rd ed., pp. 167–176). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
NIDSE—Nursing Information and Data Set Evaluation.
Retrieved May 3, 2006, from http://www.nursingworld.org/
nidsec/
Office of Civil Rights. (May 2003). Summary of the HIPAA
privacy rule. Retrieved May 12, 2006, from http://www.hhs.
gov/ocr/privacysummary.pdf
Royal College of Nursing (UK). (April 15, 2004). Deﬁning nursing. Retrieved May 5, 2006, from http://www.rcn.org.
uk/news/display.php?ID⫽448&area⫽Press
Saba, V.K. (2001). Historical perspectives of nursing and
the computer. In Saba, V.K., & McCormick, K.A. (Eds.).
Essentials of computers for nurses: Informatics for the new millennium. (3rd ed., pp. 9–45). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Saba, V.K., & McCormick, K.A. (Eds.). (2006). Essentials of nursing informatics. (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sensmeier, J. (2006). Healthcare Data Standards. In Saba, V.K.,
& McCormick, K.A. (Eds.). (2006). Essentials of nursing informatics. (4th ed., pp. 217–228). New York: McGraw-Hill.

09Jones Leadership(F)-ch 09

148

1/14/07

3:39 PM

Page 148

Understanding Organizations

Thede, L.Q. (2003). Informatics and nursing: Opportunities &
challenges. (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.
Turley, J.P. (1996). Toward a model for nursing informatics.
Image: Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 28(4), 309–313.

Washington Publishing Company. (1998). Overview of healthcare
EDI transactions: A business primer.
Whitten, J.L., Bentley, L.D., & Dittman, K.C. (2000). Systems
analysis and design methods. (5th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill
Irwin.

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 149

SKILLS FOR
BEING AN
EFFECTIVE
LEADER

3

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 150

This page has been left intentionally blank.

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 151

chapter
10
Enhancing Your
Critical Thinking,
Decision Making, and
Problem Solving
DEBORAH A. JASOVSKY, MSN, PHD, RN, CNAA, BC
MARY KAMIENSKI, PHD, RN, APRN-C, FAEN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Successful problem-solving requires ﬁnding the right solution
to the right problem. The problems we select for solution and
the way we formulate them depends more on our philosophy
and our world view than on science and technology.”
Russell Ackoff, a social systems scientist

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■

Identify the relationships between critical thinking, decision
making, and problem solving.
Discuss various decision-making and problem-solving models.
Utilize various tools to make good decisions and solve complex
problems.
Utilize group techniques to enhance problem solving.

151

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

152

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 152

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

D

ecision making is one of the most frequent
activities performed by a professional nurse. At the
bedside or in the boardroom, nurses must make
decisions and solve problems to produce outcomes
that enhance patient care. Some decisions, like
when to brush your teeth, become habits, so one
does not think about them. Other decisions become
life-altering events that should be made with structured thought or after utilizing problem-solving
techniques. All decisions are not made in response
to problems, but all problems were resolved because
of decisions made along the way.
Driven by critical thinking and using a multidisciplinary knowledge base, nurses need to make
decisions that are appropriate to the context of the
situation and considerate of the culture where the
services are being provided. These decisions need to
be based on knowledge of the individuals, relationships, ethics, politics, and ﬁnancial considerations
of the situation. Decision making can be simple or
complex. The situation may require a quick
response or allow for reﬂection, collaboration with
others, and a carefully considered response. Nurses
need to develop and enhance ways to see all sides of
an issue, ﬁnd various approaches to solve problems,
and make careful, intelligent decisions. Critical
thinking is the foundation for examining all possibilities and arriving at reasonable and justiﬁed conclusions. This chapter will explore various ways to
make good decisions and solve problems effectively
by using creative critical thinking skills.

Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is a complex process that has many
deﬁnitions. Some authors state that it is a reﬂective
and reasonable way of thinking; others see it as an
attitude of inquiry. Still others describe it as a disciplined, self-directed thinking process. Most agree
that critical thinking does entail an orderly investigation of ideas, assumptions, principles, and conclusions. Critical thinking is the process that guides
scientiﬁc reasoning, the nursing process, problem
solving, and decision making. The cognitive skills
attributed to the critical thinking process include
divergent thinking, reasoning, reﬂection, creativity,
clariﬁcation, and basic support (Green, 2000).

■

■

■

■

■

Divergent thinking is the ability of an individual to analyze a variety of opinions and judgments.
Reasoning involves the use of logic and the
ability to discriminate between observation
and inference, fact and guessing.
Reflection allows one to deliberate about
something, whereas creativity enables one to
produce ideas and alternatives and consider
multiple solutions.
Clariﬁcation includes identifying similarities,
differences, and assumptions and deﬁning
terms.
Basic support involves the use of known facts
and background knowledge.

CRITICAL THINKING PROCESS
Critical thinking is a process that entails identifying
assumptions, considering context and meaning of
issues, and gathering data to consider alternatives
and outcomes (Box 10-1).

Identifying Assumptions
The critical thinking process begins by exploring
the assumptions underlying a situation. These
assumptions may be beliefs that inﬂuence how an
individual will reason or understand a situation
and may reﬂect a person’s point of view or perspective. These assumptions may not necessarily be
grounded in reality. For example, administering
medications is a common activity of nurses, and
ﬁnding strategies to avoid medication errors has
become an important concern and problem-solving
initiative in many organizations. If a patient
assumes the nurse will always administer the correct medication, it is unlikely that the patient will

Box 10-1
Critical Thinking Process
1. Identify assumptions underlying the issue.
2. Consider the context and meanings of the issue to all
of the individuals.
3. Gather enough data to allow for consideration of
alternatives and prediction of multiple possible
outcomes.

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 153

Enhancing Your Critical Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem Solving

question any medications the nurse offers. This
assumption will have an impact on any efforts to
include the patient in a program to decrease medication administration errors.

Choice
#1

Critical
Thinking

Considering the Context
The critical thinking process involves considering
the context of the present problem or situation.
Analysis and interpretation of the meanings of the
present issue or situation are essential to developing
a conclusion. Returning to the patient taking medication, a context could be when the patient is not
responsive or not physically or mentally capable of
being involved in taking the medications and cannot be safely included in the process. Another context is the patient taking medications at home
without direct nursing supervision. All these situations might involve different strategies to try to
avoid medication errors.

Data Collection
Data collection is the next step in the critical thinking process. All too frequently, snap decisions are
made based on ﬁrst impressions. Leaders who use
critical thinking skills do consider ﬁrst impressions,
but they are always careful to continue to gather
data and carefully evaluate all the alternatives and
possible outcomes. Nurses are often faced with clinical situations that require gathering assessment
data and considering various alternative interven-

To Adapt or Innovate
According to McNichol (2002), individuals either adapt or
innovate when faced with new or unknown situations
that may require problem solving or decision making.
Adaptors are naturally convergent thinkers, whereas
innovators are divergent thinkers. Adaptors fit the new
situation into known structures, systems, and models.
These people control activity and follow through on tasks
but tend to be stressed when lots of changes and
uncertain outcomes occur. On the other hand, innovators
enjoy experiencing new situations and look for
opportunities to do things differently. While valued for
generating ideas and identifying possibilities, these
workers are viewed as chaotic and unable to complete
their tasks.

153

Critical
Thinking
Decision

Choice
#3

Critical
Thinking

Choice
#2

FIGURE 10-1 Decision model.

tions while balancing the needs of the individual
patient and predicting potential outcomes. For
example, making a patient assignment involves
reviewing the acuity of the patients and where the
patients are geographically located, reviewing the
staff mix based on status of the nurses, the experience of the individual staff members, and the numbers of staff available.

Making Decisions
All nurses make decisions frequently. Making many
decisions, however, does not necessarily guarantee
that an individual will make good decisions. This
section will discuss ways to enhance decision-making skills and strategies. Because decision making is
a complex, abstract process, individuals may have
many different ways of thinking about it. A discussion of various decision-making models can be
helpful in explaining and understanding this phenomenon (Fig. 10-1).

MODELS RELEVANT
TO MAKING DECISIONS
Brief snapshots of the following models are
intended to guide readers to an understanding of
the decision-making process:

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

154

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 154

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

decision, with new plans being implemented
for alternative responses

chapter star

Dawn Wise is the nursing manager of a 40-bed medical/
surgical unit. Recently, full-time staff resignations for
relocation or retirement reasons have created many
openings on the 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. and 11 p.m. to 7 a.m.
schedule. Although the positions have been posted on
the hospital Website, Dawn decides she needs to have
her staff assist in filling the open positions on a temporary
basis. The problem of staffing offers several options for
the manager to consider: additional part-time coverage,
per diem staff, agency staff, overtime, or flex-time with
change to 12-hour coverage. Dawn’s hospital does not
have a central staffing office, nor are there extra nurses
from any other department who can work.
Using critical thinking skills, Dawn identifies the
underlying assumption that the staffing decision needs to
provide cost-effective and safe care for the patients on
the unit. She understands that the decision how to
provide the necessary coverage will be of great concern
to the staff, who want adequate numbers of people to
work each shift but will not want coverage decisions
mandated by management. Information about how to
make this decision will need group input to consider all
the possible alternatives.
She decides to discuss the problem and potential
solutions with her staff. After the staff meeting, in which
brainstorming took place, Dawn talks to each part-time
RN and receives a commitment for extra time. As the staff
requested, Dawn posts the remaining openings in the
next schedule for interested staff to sign up for overtime
before seeking per diem or agency staff. The staff agreed
with Dawn not to consider 12-hour shifts unless the
positions remained open for more than 2 months.
Dawn sums up the decision-making process in this
way: “Our philosophy includes shared governance, and
our nurses know how important their input is to the work
environment. Sharing the decision making increases our
shared accountability to the public for providing qualified,
competent staff. We rely on administration to support our
joint efforts in problem solving and decision making.”

Information Processing Model
In this model, decision making is seen on a continuum and not as an either/or process (Thompson,
1999). This model consists of two components:
short- and long-term memory. Short-term memory
contains the stimuli information necessary to
“unlock” factual and experimental knowledge that
is stored in the long-term memory. The clinician
uses a four-stage process to make decisions in this
theory:
1. Gather clinical patient data.
2. Generate hypotheses or predictions about the

issue.
3. Interpret the data and conﬁrm or refute the

hypotheses.
4. Weigh the pros and cons of each decision

alternative.
One of the strengths of this model is that it
allows the use of all types of assessment data,
including individual “memory” data, which is the
information each person carries consisting of previous knowledge and experiences. An experienced
clinician can use experience and knowledge to predict that a decision will or will not work. For example, an experienced nurse manager is faced with
completing the summer vacation schedule for the
unit. The manager is aware of the restrictions
placed by administration about the number of
individuals who may be on vacation for each shift
and other issues regarding seniority. After weighing
the pros and cons of the choices (allowing employee
choice takes more time; allowing employee choice
makes the nurses happier; allowing choice could
propel arguments), the manager could decide to:
1. Complete and post the vacation schedule.
2. Ask for requests in advance and post the

vacation schedule.
■

■

■

Information processing model: Continuum
consisting of short- and long-term memory
using a four-stage process, including weighing
the pros and cons of each decision alternative
Wheeler’s model: Knowing the context in
which choices can be made from options that
affect the individual and up through the society at large as represented in concentric circles
Nursing process: Evaluation process allows for
continual assessment of the response to any

3. Post a tentative schedule and ask for com-

ments and suggestions.
4. Post a blank schedule and ask everyone to

complete this schedule within the required
administrative restrictions by a certain date.
Based on experience and knowledge of human
nature regarding choice, he rejects options 1, 2, and
3 and decides to post a blank schedule. It is a good
model to use to process information because it
offers the opportunity to consider many alterna-

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 155

Enhancing Your Critical Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem Solving

tives and demonstrates the importance of a thorough assessment in order to develop alternative
choices.

Wheeler’s Model
Wheeler (2000) suggests that having choices and
knowing the context in which choices are made are
the most important elements of proactive decision
making. Being proactive allows the anticipation of
an event and allows one to generate actions before
the event. For instance, planning for staff replacement during a maternity leave provides options:
temporary replacement with additional part-time
use, agency nurses, overtime use, extended shifts,
and so on (Fig. 10-2).
Having a choice involves having at least two
options. One of the options may be not to act at all,

Staff Replacement for a Maternity Leave

Unit
RNs

Entire
Agency
Nursing
Department

Budget

Patient
Care

Choice #1
Use existing part-time staff
to take on additional shifts.

Choice #2
Use planned overtime and
extended shifts.

Choice #3
Use agency staff and
traveler RNs.

Choice #4
Provide no additional coverage.

FIGURE 10-2 Wheeler’s model.

155

but that does constitute a choice. In that situation,
the decision maker allows other people or events to
determine the outcome. Wheeler uses concentric
circles to conceptualize the relationships between
the ﬁve primary areas (contexts) for consideration
when determining choice and context. Knowing the
context helps to put the choices in perspective. The
personal arena is the ﬁrst level. Here, decisions
occur that pertain solely to the individual. The second level is the family arena. The third is the social
arena, where decisions can affect business associates and close friends. The fourth level is the community arena, which includes cultural, ethnic,
religious, and national groups. The ﬁfth level is the
global or international arena, involving philosophical, political, and ﬁnancial issues.
Wheeler’s model might have limited usefulness
in a nursing environment as it is described; however, changing the labels of the circles (see Fig.
10-2) might allow one to use it to determine context
and how far-reaching an anticipated decision might
be. For example, levels could be changed to reﬂect
unit personnel, patients/families, budget, the nursing organization, the entire agency, and so on.
Circles could be added to indicate a more complex
decision. The strength of this model is the fact that
it is graphic. In the example presented in Figure 102, choice #1 will affect the unit staff and may also
inﬂuence the budget to some extent. Choice #2 will
deﬁnitely affect the budget and may affect patient
care if staff becomes overextended or fatigued.
Choice #3 affects the existing staff to orient the
agency and traveling staff; patient care might be
affected, and the budget will be affected because of
the increased cost in hiring nurses. The nursing
department will become involved because these
nurses will be processed through other departments, such as Employee Health and Nursing
Education. Finally, choice #4, which is actually a
choice not to make a choice, will affect the entire
agency. After all, failing to provide adequate staffing
can result in poor clinical outcomes, dissatisﬁed
patients and nurses, increased complaints, the possibility of risk of liability to the agency, and damage
to the agency’s reputation. All the individuals
involved in the decision can judge what the impact
of the decision might be on their part of the entire
organization. This model allows one to look at the
perspectives of others and what their concerns and
issues might be. Finally, it encourages one to consider as many alternatives as possible to satisfy the
needs of everyone involved.

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

156

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 156

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Nursing Process
Although there are many decision-making models,
the nursing process may be the most familiar and
comfortable model for nurses to utilize to make
decisions.
The nursing process is ongoing and begins with
phase I, assessment, according to Figure 10-3. This
phase includes deﬁning the assumptions and context, collecting data, identifying and naming the
problem(s), and deciding on actions or interventions. Phase II is implementation or intervention as
planned in phase I. Phase III is evaluating the outcomes. Based on the evaluation, the process begins
over again with more data collection, if indicated.
For example, during a home visit to a patient, the
nurse is concerned about the safety of an elderly
man who is post–cerebral vascular accident (stroke)
with some mobility problems. She observes many
throw rugs on the ﬂoor, extension cords that are visible in the walking areas, and several cats who roam
around the patient when he gets up to walk into the
kitchen or bathroom. The nurse identiﬁes all these
as safety hazards and labels the problem “Alteration
in safety related to environmental hazards.” She
makes a plan to review the environment with the
patient and make necessary changes by eliminating
the throw rugs or anchoring them to the ﬂoor,
removing the extension cords or taping them down,
and discussing how the cats can be controlled when
the patient is walking through the house. The nurse
then discusses the problems and possible solutions
with the patient, comes to consensus about the
changes, and makes arrangements for the alterations. This is the implementation phase. Shortterm evaluation of the changes will occur on her
next home visit; long-term evaluation will be measured by the lack of falls by the patient. This nurse
used the nursing process to make decisions about
the care of this patient. The same process can be
used to make all decisions, even those that do not
involve patient care.
Using the nursing process as a guide, start the
decision-making process by collecting data and
assessing the situation. It is important to make decisions with as much information as possible. Leaders
make their most successful decisions when they
assess the strengths and weaknesses of the people
and the environment. Good decision making relies
on building relationships, knowing the politics of
the players, understanding the time and other envi-

II
Implementation/
Intervention

I
Assessment
Diagnosis
Plan
Nursing
Process

III
Evaluation
FIGURE 10-3 Nursing model.

ronmental constraints, integrating cultural values,
and staying true to personal and organization
ethics. Furthermore, the cultural diversity found in
any organization needs to be considered in any
decision that affects more than one person.
Differences in frames of reference, perspectives,
norms, values, and communication style are often
aggravated by prejudices, stereotypes, and misunderstandings (Broome, et al., 2002). In the home
care nursing example, major misunderstandings
could occur if the nurse did not include the patient
in any environmental alteration. The cats may be
very important to the patient, who may be willing
to risk falling rather than conﬁning them to a separate room.
Aside from its familiarity, the strength of this
model is its feedback mechanism. If evaluation
reveals an unanticipated or unacceptable outcome,
the assessment begins again. In today’s health-care
environment, the concept of evidence-based practice supports the need to gather as much evidence as
possible to make a decision that can lead to best
practices. Sources of data for decision making come
from more formal sources such as quality assurance,
benchmarking, and risk management data (see
Chapter 15). Observation and inquiry can also yield
information about a situation. Finally, scientiﬁc
research data make excellent assessment data and
should be the basis for much of decision making in
nursing whenever possible.

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 157

Enhancing Your Critical Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem Solving

TYPE OF DECISIONS
Not all decisions are critical or global in their
impact. Decisions are made at all levels of the hierarchy in organizations. Some experts believe that a
decision should be made as close to the action as
possible. At the same time, however, as demonstrated in the Wheeler model, good decision making
also means considering the impact the decision will
have beyond the immediate environment.
Routine decisions can be used to respond to frequently occurring, common, and reasonably welldefined issues. Policies and procedures and
established rules can be used to guide the decisionmaking process. The level of personnel that makes
routine decisions can range from the staff nurse to
top administrators. For example, when a patient
falls, there is a clearly deﬁned process to follow
regarding immediate intervention, reporting, and
follow-up. Decisions about who will do what and
when can be made easily, based on the incident.
Leaders should attempt to determine quickly if
there are established guidelines for a particular situation and apply them as soon as possible. Leaders
should be careful, however, to avoid generalizing
every situation and should make decisions that are
appropriate in the context of each event.
Innovative decisions are made when the situation or problem is unusual and the rules and guidelines do not clearly deﬁne or dictate a course of
action. Nurses, from the bedside to top administration, need to make these kinds of decisions frequently. For innovative decisions, it is helpful if the
nurse understands the art of decision making. In
any event, there is work to be done before implementing the decision-making process at any level.
Innovative decisions generally take longer to make
and require more attention to data collection and
assessment. Without rules and policies to guide the
decision-making process, the leader must be sure to
view all possible alternatives.

PRE–DECISION MAKING
Before making a decision, ask several questions
based on the assessment data. First, is there really a
need to make a decision? Is there a problem that
needs to be solved? The perception of a problem is
relative. A headache is painful to the individual but
is good for the pharmacist. A wise leader needs to

157

determine ﬁrst how the issue is affecting the current situation and if it truly requires intervention.
Another pre-decision question involves timing:
how quickly does the decision need to be made?
One of the characteristics of leadership is the ability
to think critically and make difficult decisions
quickly and effectively. But delaying decision making or not making a decision is actually making a
decision not to take any action. Striking a balance
between a knee-jerk response and a delayed or nonresponse is one hallmark of an effective leader. If
the decision will affect others and represent a
change in procedure, it might be necessary to assess
the readiness of others to accept the decision or
change (see Chapter 11).
Nurses are very aware of modiﬁable and nonmodiﬁable risk factors in relationship to cardiac
health. The same concept can be applied to decision
making. Some situations are controllable, and some
are uncontrollable. Before making a decision, a wise
leader will identify uncontrollable factors and avoid
spending time trying to alter them. Additionally,
leaders need to identify situations where factors
can be modiﬁed but not by them. It is difficult for
some leaders to let go of situations that do not fall
under their authority. For example, an emergency
department manager may be able to control the
process by which laboratory diagnostic test requests
are made but cannot control the volume of requests
that are made from within the department or
throughout the hospital.

TOOLS FOR MAKING DECISIONS
After determining that a decision must be made, the
effective leader turns to the decision-making tools.
The traditional problem-solving process is well
known and was the basis for the development of the
nursing process. This traditional model is a sevenstep process:
1. Identify the problem
2. Gather data

Pre–Decision Making Questions
Does a decision need to be made?
1. How soon does the decision need to be made?
2. Who has the power to make the decision?
3. What are the controllable and uncontrollable factors?

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

158

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

TABLE 10-1

Comparison of the Traditional, Managerial, and Nursing Process Models for Decision
Making and Problem Solving

TRADITIONAL
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Identify problem
Collect data
Explore alternatives
Identify alternatives
Evaluate alternatives
Select alternative
Implement
Evaluate results

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Page 158

MANAGEMENT
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Set objectives
Search for alternatives
Evaluate alternatives
Choose
Implement
Follow up
Control

Explore alternatives
Evaluate alternatives
Select the appropriate solution
Implement the solution
Evaluate the results

The managerial model is similar to the traditional model and comprises the following steps:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

NURSING

Set the objectives
Search for alternatives
Evaluate alternatives
Choose an alternative
Implement
Follow up
Control the outcomes

Decision making occurs at step four when a
choice is made.
Table 10-1 compares the traditional managerial,
and nursing process for decision making and problem solving. There are strengths and weaknesses in
each model. For example, in the managerial model
the objective is determined at the beginning.
Sometimes it is difficult to know what the objectives need to be to reach an outcome, and this model
does not focus on data collection in order to identify
the alternatives. The traditional model requires
problem identiﬁcation as a ﬁrst step, whereas the
nursing process collects data to determine if there is
a problem. Both methods can be useful in making a
decision, yet the nursing process allows for the possibility that there is no problem or no need to make
a decision or take any action. Problem identiﬁcation
is the foundation of good decision making. If the
correct problem is not identiﬁed initially, a very
good decision can be made for the wrong problem.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Assessment
Identify problem
Plan
Implement
Evaluate

Specific Decision-Making Tools
The use of tools is a systematic way to collect the
data necessary for making a good decision.
Speciﬁcally, pros and cons, SWOT analysis, and 2 ⫻
2 matrix are recommended for beginning nurse
managers.
Pros and Cons

A simple strategy is to make a list with one side
labeled “Pro (or Advantages)” and the other side
“Con (or Disadvantages).” Writing down options
helps to clarify the decision that needs to be made.
More accurate decisions can be made by assigning
weights to each factor, with 5 representing very signiﬁcant and 1 representing minor signiﬁcance.
Table 10-2 illustrates the use of this strategy to
make a decision about which shifts might be appropriate for a particular nursing unit. The use of a

Moving From 8- to
12-Hour Shifts

TABLE 10-2

PROS

WEIGHT

CONS

WEIGHT

Staff
satisfaction

5

Increased fatigue

4

Ease of
scheduling

3

Need more fulltime employees

3

Patient
satisfaction

5

Increased
absences

4

Patient
satisfaction

5

Totals

13

16

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 159

Enhancing Your Critical Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem Solving

weighting system allows the decision maker to
determine what the most important factors are.
SWOT Analysis

Once the problem has been identiﬁed, the SWOT
analysis can be extremely useful for decision making. SWOT stands for Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats. For example, a SWOT
analysis can be used to assess:
■
■
■
■
■

■
■
■
■
■

A nursing unit and its position in the agency
A nursing care delivery system
A scheduling process
A recruitment idea
A strategic option, such as developing a specialty unit
A new management hierarchy
Outsourcing a service
A new documentation method
A different communication system
A job description for unlicensed personnel

For example, if a nursing department needs to
determine the most effective and efficient method
for providing ongoing professional education and
development for staff, it can use a SWOT analysis
to identify the risks and beneﬁts in outsourcing this
service. Strengths include not paying beneﬁts and
having specialists to provide speciﬁc services as
opposed to generalists, yet there is a risk that the
individuals may not have a commitment to the
organization and may not be familiar with or comfortable with the culture of the organization. They
may be perceived as “outsiders,” which can pose a
threat to employee satisfaction. Making the ﬁnal
decision may involve determining how important
each strength, weakness, opportunity, and threat is
to the department. The ﬁnal decision can be made
only in the context of that nursing department,
within the ﬁnancial constraints of the organization, and in consideration of the culture of the
organization.
2 ⫻ 2 Matrix

Similar to the SWOT approach is the use of a 2 ⫻ 2
matrix. The 2 ⫻ 2 matrix is a relatively simple way
to visualize issues or concerns. It conveys the
choices available in relationship to a goal. According
to Lowy and Hood (2004), the x and y axes are used
to clarify issues; a complicated situation can be
reframed to allow everyone to understand all
aspects of the issue. Instead of looking for a single
right answer, conﬂicting goals are identiﬁed and
labeled. Rather than discouraging differing perspec-

159

Sample SWOT Analysis:
Outsourcing Nursing Education
STRENGTHS
■

■

■

Providing no benefits
will decrease overall
costs
Can use specialists
who may be more
competent than
generalists
Eliminates need to
perform non-core
activities

OPPORTUNITIES
■

■

■

Allows focus on core
activities, i.e., patient
care
May lead to other
outsourcing opportunities
Allows access to
other highly skilled
individuals

WEAKNESSES
■

■

■

Vendors may be
dissociated from the goals
of the organization
Because vendors are off
site, there may be a time
or scheduling issue
Need to learn culture of
units

THREATS
■

May lose information or
intellectual property

■

Employee satisfaction
issues

■

Lose management control

tives, this approach encourages these differences in
order to work toward a decision. A common issue
confronting individuals personally and professionally is that of too much to do and not enough time
in which to do it. Table 10-3 is an example of the use
of a 2 ⫻ 2 matrix to assist with decisions about time
management. The axes in this matrix are the importance of the tasks described versus the urgency of
completing these tasks. Striking a balance between
getting things done on time and doing important
work becomes the goal. Individuals can include
items in the matrix based on personal choice. For
instance, a nurse leader may include resolving a crisis and meeting deadlines as having high importance and high urgency but planning for the future,
preventing crises, and preserving relationships as
having high importance but low urgency. Another
individual may put planning and prevention in high
importance and high urgency boxes. This matrix
becomes a quick and visual method of deciding
what to do next.
Using a simple matrix model consistently can
help a novice leader develop these skills quickly and
continue to make good decisions in all areas. Even

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

160

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 160

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

TABLE 10-3

H
i
g
h
Importance

Sample Matrix: Time
Management

Unexpected crisis

Planning

Deadlines

Prevention
Relationships

1

2

3

4

L Returning calls
o
w Approving schedule
change requests
High

Reviewing mail
and e-mail
Answering
telephone
Low

with the best of models, however, there are some
common mistakes made by even the most experienced leaders. The following is a discussion on how
to recognize and avoid making some of these mistakes.

AVOIDING COMMON DECISIONMAKING MISTAKES
According to Anderson (2004a), emotions can bias
rational judgment because people have a subconscious tendency to decide what they want to do
before they know why they want to do it. Another
tendency is for people to be more engaged with
things they like than with things they dislike.
Anderson describes a number of traps into which
people may fall when making decisions. One is the
conﬁrming evidence trap. She suggests that individuals check for this trap by examining all the evidence with equal rigor. Seek people who can offer
independent information and opinions to play
devil’s advocate.
The framing trap occurs when a decision is made
based on how the choices are viewed or framed. For
example, in Hospital A, the postanesthesia recovery
unit (PACU) nurses who have been employed for
more than 10 years are no longer required to be on
call. But they are required to work a certain number
of holidays each year. Because the unit is closed on
holidays except for on-call emergencies, they are
required to work on another unit in order to fulﬁll
this obligation. The PACU nurses are not happy

Practice to Strive For 10-1
The nurse executive of a very successful nursing agency is
being interviewed. When asked how he makes decisions, he
responds that he walks and talks with his people. They
know what he is thinking and envisioning for the company.
They also know they can tell him what they see as the
future for the agency. When they have a problem, they
share the problem and the solution. He does not always
have the last word, even when making financial decisions.
He also gives people the power to make decisions that need
to be made quickly and always backs them up even when
he would not have made the same decision or carried one
out the same way. His guideline for decision making is well
known by everyone who works for the agency. It includes:

•
•

Making an analysis of all the components of the issue

•
•

Thinking everything through

•
•

Communicating the decision to others

Thinking of all the people who will be affected by the
decision
Having the self-confidence to make a short- or long-term
decision and the strength to stand by it
Having the ability to overcome the conflict that may arise
from the decision

He cautions never to forget evaluation after the decision is
made. The information obtained from evaluation can be
used to help make decisions in the future. This mantra is
posted throughout the agency. There are times when he
has to make a decision that will have far-reaching effects
on the agency and even beyond. He uses a graphic presentation of his decision-making process and posts the analysis. He often uses the SWOT analysis and even invents his
own graphics to reflect his thinking process and encourages
the staff to do the same. He frequently asks individuals to
show everyone the process that was used to arrive at different decisions. He believes that when the process is shared,
individuals understand the thinking and are more likely to
support the solution or decision. Using this method also
helps others to develop better decision-making skills by
example.

about this arrangement. In Hospital B, the same
rules apply. However, operative cases requiring
PACU nurses on a holiday are called “unscheduled”
rather than “emergencies.” PACU staff rotates coverage for unscheduled holiday cases with an option
to stay home and wait for a case or come into the
hospital and perform other duties in the PACU.
Those who choose to stay home are paid a percentage of their regular hourly rate plus a holiday

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 161

Enhancing Your Critical Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem Solving

bonus; those who come into the hospital are paid at
their regular hourly rate plus a holiday bonus.
Simply using different terms to describe the pay
rate and the obligation has resolved the on-call
problem, and the nurses are happy with the
arrangement. Try to reframe the problem or opportunity in several ways to maximize understanding
and potential solutions.
The status quo trap occurs when people look for
decisions that involve the least amount of change
(Anderson, 2004b). Keep in mind, however, that
change is necessary for growth. Look at possible
future situations when considering a change. Even
the status quo will change over time. The status quo
should never be the only alternative to consider.
It is difficult to change course or deviate from a
decision whenever an investment of time, money,
personal reputation, or other resources is at stake.
Making similar decisions that justify past actions is
comfortable but can become a trap (Anderson,
2004b). It can be risky to step off the path and
decide that decisions need to be made to go in a different direction. Cultivate a climate where individuals can admit mistakes without enduring penalties.
Do not apply sanctions or punishments when an
individual admits making a mistake. Analyze the
issues, and move on to different decisions.
The prudence trap intervenes when estimates
are made (and then making decisions based on
these estimates) using the worst case scenario
(Anderson, 2004a). This is sometimes called the
knee-jerk response. When a situation has occurred
with a negative outcome, it is tempting to make a
global change or decisions based on this one bad
event. For example, in an agency a patient fell in the
shower and was injured. The agency immediately
instituted a policy that patients could no longer
shower. Careful consideration should be given to
making any decisions based on one bad event.
Again, analyze the issue, and consider many scenarios. Similarly, individuals may fall into the
“recallability” trap, when overwhelming events and
experiences influence decision making, even
though the events are inapplicable to the current
decision.
Other mistakes can include relying too much on
“expert” information, overestimating the value of
information received from others, highly selective
hearing or seeing and, most important, not listening
to one’s own feelings or “gut reactions.” Whenever
possible, delay the decision, and the right choice

161

may become obvious. See Box 10-2 for some effective decision-making tips.

Problem Solving
The term “problem solving” is often used synonymously with decision making, but the processes are
not the same. Decision making may or may not
involve a problem but always involves selecting one
action from several alternatives. Problem solving
involves diagnosing or identifying a problem and
solving it and includes making decisions along the
way (Sullivan & Decker, 2001). In other words,
problem solving is broader in scope than decision
making in that it may include making many decisions in order to resolve the problem (Fig. 10-4). But
problem solving is also more narrow in scope than
decision making in that decisions are made about
many different issues, not just about problems.

Box 10-2
Decision-Making Tips
■

■
■

■
■
■

Do not make decisions that are not yours to make, and
do not waste your time making decisions that do not
have to be made.
Not making a decision is a decision; it is a decision to
not take action.
When making a decision, a choice is made from
options. A choice is not being made between right and
wrong.
Avoid snap decisions. Move quickly on the reversible
ones and slowly on the nonreversible ones.
Make decisions on paper. Make notes, and keep ideas
visible so all the relevant information can be viewed
Be sure to choose what is right, not who is right.
Make decisions as you go along. Do not let them
accumulate.
Consider those affected by a decision. Whenever
feasible, get people involved to increase their
commitment.
To be effective, a manager must have the luxury of
having the right to be wrong.
Once the decision has been made, do not look back.
Never regret a decision; it was the right thing to do at
the time.
As part of the decision-making process, always consider
how it will be implemented.

Text/image rights not available.
■
■

■
■

■

(Liraz Publishing Co., 2001)

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

162

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 162

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Decisions

Critical
Thinking
Problem

Solution

FIGURE 10-4 Decision model.

The problem-solving process can take some time
to deﬁne the problem and its scope and the goal for
problem solving. Problem solving should be a group
process, involving all individuals or groups affected
by the problem. Problems can also be viewed as
opportunities to make change and improve outcomes. Start the investigation with who, what,
when, where, why, and how. Either or both of the
following techniques present effective ways to
explore all aspects of the problem and obtain feedback about the decisions that are made along the
way.

BRAINSTORMING TECHNIQUE
Using the basic brainstorming technique to solve
problems can be a very powerful strategy. This is a
group process using a strong facilitator who can
control the discussion while allowing each individual the freedom to meet and express ideas without
threat of ridicule or sanction. The purpose of the
meeting must be clear to everyone involved, and the
facilitator has the task of keeping everyone focused
on that purpose. Deciding how much time will be
allowed to brainstorm is critical, and the facilitator
or leader should be prepared with ideas to get the
process started and keep it moving. Frequent clariﬁcation and summary will help keep the discussion
on track, and the outcomes should be apparent and
ﬂow logically from the discussion. The process
begins with deﬁning and agreeing on the objective
and continuing as follows:
■

■
■
■
■
■

Brainstorm ideas and suggestions with an
agreed upon time limit.
Categorize/condense/combine/reﬁne.
Assess/analyze effects or results.
Prioritize options/rank-list as appropriate.
Agree on action and period.
Control and monitor follow-up.

SEVEN HAT TECHNIQUE
A parallel thinking technique introduced by
deBono (1985) can enhance problem solving.
DeBono identiﬁed six thinking hats, with each colored hat representing a different viewpoint. This
deliberate method encourages a group to think
along similar lines at the same time so that personal
egos do not interfere in the creation of facts, information, or solutions. Each individual in the group is
expected to take a particular position or “wear a different color hat.” Individuals may be asked to
change hats and review the issues from a different
perspective.
■

■

■

Blue Hat thinking provides a formal structure
to the thinking at all times. One person, usually the group facilitator, wears this hat. The
blue hat is responsible for focusing the thinking at all times and keeping the various thinking hats trained on the correct tasks. One
suggested sequence, controlled at all times by
the blue hat, is to start with the white hat, followed by the red, yellow, green, and black hats.
White Hat thinking deals with ﬁgures and facts
in an objective or neutral way. Individual opinion is excluded. It provides an opportunity to
move back down the abstraction ladder to the
data, or lowest-rung, level. An example of
white hat thinking is “There are RNs and
UAPs in all nursing departments.” It would be
unacceptable to say “I think all nursing departments should consist of RNs and UAPs.”
Red Hat thinking involves emotion and is not
rational. It is based on feelings and intuitions
that can be positive or negative. The key to red
hat thinking is that explanations are unnecessary. The red hat puts positive and negative
feelings out in the open so they do not lurk in
the background and cloud the thinking

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 163

Enhancing Your Critical Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem Solving

■

■

■

process. The red hat acknowledges the fact
that feelings can shape perceptions.
Yellow Hat thinking is visionary. It is about
constructive thinking and making things happen. Here, alternatives are discussed and may
be speculative in nature. “Long shots” are
included because they expand the thinking
and provide the opportunity to clarify other
ideas. Ideas do not have to be new or unique;
yellow hat thinking is concerned about ﬁnding
effective ways to accomplish the task.
Green Hat thinking involves the creation of
new ideas or thinking about things in different
ways. This hat legitimizes the wild and crazy
ideas. It involves movement in a forward direction. Here, the fact that that there is more than
one right answer to a problem is acknowledged.
Black Hat thinking is logical and negative,
never emotional. This hat does not consider
arguments for or against, only negative statements that are based on reason and logic. Facts
produced in the white hat thinking can be challenged when wearing the black hat. Statements
take the form of “I am concerned about” and
“Can you help me with this concern?”

All Good Things…
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Critical thinking is the process that guides scientiﬁc reasoning, the nursing process, problem
solving, and decision making.
Critical thinking involves the use of the
cognitive process, which includes divergent
thinking, reasoning, reﬂection, creativity, clariﬁcation, and basic support.
Decision making and problem solving are not
synonymous.
Decision making involves identifying and
selecting a course of action from several alternatives.
Problem solving requires identifying a problem
and ﬁnding a solution.
There are many decision-making models,
which are derived from theories to guide the
process.
There are two types of decisions: routine and
innovative.
The problem-solving process involves identifying the problem, gathering and analyzing

163

information, developing and implementing the
solutions, and evaluating the outcomes.

Let’s Talk
The coordinator of a home care team has been
informed by administration that the team must
begin to care for patients who have external deﬁbrillators in the home. The nursing staff is not
familiar with this technology. The team leader
must decide who to assign to care for these
patients.
1. Use the pre–decision making process to analyze
this issue.
2. How soon does a decision need to be made?
Determine when the agency will be accepting
patients for home care who have external
deﬁbrillators.
3. Who has the power to make the decision?
Obviously, the administration made the decision
about accepting this type of patient. Determine if
you will be able to decide when and how many of
these patients are accepted for home care.
4. What are the controllable and uncontrollable
factors? After gathering this information, you
will be able to determine what you can control.
You can then move on to decide how best to
prepare the nurses to care for these patients.

NCLEX Questions
1. When the nurse manager of a busy rehabilitation unit decided the best way to reward staff
was to give a monetary bonus rather than time
off, many of the staff became upset and went to
administration with complaints. This manager
skipped which step of the critical thinking
process?
A. Obtaining a majority consensus of all of the
staff.
B. Considering the context and meaning of the
issues to each individual.
C. Not asking the staff how much money would
be considered an adequate reward.
D. Identifying assumptions underlying the issue.
2. The manager of a unit was concerned about the
plans for unit renovations. In an effort to be sure

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

164

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 164

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

the renovations would be “nurse-friendly” he
asked the staff to make a wish list of everything
they would like moved or ﬁxed on the existing
unit. This is an example of which part of the
decision-making process?
A. Assessment/data collection.
B. Planning.
C. Data interpretation.
D. Generating hypotheses.
3. S. Adams read the notice about the new intravenous pumps that had been purchased for the
unit. She reviewed the information and instructions for use and compared them with the
pumps they had been using. She listed all the
similarities in her mind and decided these new
pumps were not really very different and might
be easier to use than the old pumps. She is an
example of which kind of individual?
A. Chaotic thinker.
B. Innovative thinker.
C. Negative thinker.
D. Adaptive thinker.
4. A good decision maker is one who:
A. Uses various models to guide the process
based on the situation.
B. Adopts one model and uses it to guide all
decision making.
C. Does not use any models because they are not
at all useful.
D. Develops a model each time a decision needs
to be made.
5. Using Wheeler’s decision-making model with
concentric circles is useful only if:
A. One applies the model exactly as it is presented in the textbook.
B. One can absolutely predict the outcomes in
any given situation.
C. Everyone understands the model.
D. The labels are changed in the circles to represent the situation.
6. J. Strong, manager of an orthopedic unit, drafted
a policy to be used in his department to deﬁne
the process to have laboratory tests completed on
his unit. This policy included the times of regular collection and the process for emergency or
STAT laboratory testing. The policy and procedure were never followed because:
A. The policy was too complicated and included
too much information.

B. The policy and procedure made decisions
for another department.
C. The staff did not believe it was necessary to
follow any procedure.
D. None of the above.
7. Amazing fell into what trap when she decided
that all staff would be required to pick up all
medications from the pharmacy for their
patients because the unit secretary brought the
medications from a different unit, which
caused a half-hour delay in administering medications on the unit?
A. Status quo.
B. Framing.
C. Expert.
D. Prudence.
8. All nurses were advised to register any additional vehicles they might drive to work with
security. JJ could not decide which other car to
register so he did not register any additional
automobiles with security. When his primary
car was in the shop, he could not park in the
employee area and had to pay visitors’ parking
fees. This was what kind of decision making?
A. Not making a decision results in a decision
being made for you.
B. Making a decision that is not yours to make.
C. Relying on too much expert opinion.
D. Innovative decision making.
9. There were many new nurses working on the
unit, and many of them were from other countries. The manager became aware of many difﬁculties that seemed to be arising from this
cultural diversity. She decided to get the staff
together to talk about the differences and commonalities and decide on a plan to educate
every one working on the unit about the different cultures. This is an example of what kind of
problem-solving technique?
A. Seven hats.
B. Pros and cons.
C. Brainstorming.
D. Concentric circles.
10. When confronted with the controversy and
apparent poor morale of the 3-11 p.m. staff, the
manager decided the staff needed to take vacation days and began to schedule these days for
them. Many nurses became very upset with
this, and ﬁnally one nurse said that the problem

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 165

Enhancing Your Critical Thinking, Decision Making, and Problem Solving

was not the schedule but the difficulties the
nurses were having with the charge nurse with
the patient assignments. This is an example of
what kind of error in problem solving?
A. Not using a problem-solving model.
B. Poor evaluation of outcomes.
C. Not considering several alternatives.
D. Incorrect problem identiﬁcation.
REFERENCES
Anderson, K. (2004a). More of the most common decisionmaking mistakes people make. Accessed August 31, 2004, at
www.pertinent.com/articles/communications/KareCom
Anderson, K. (2004b). How we sometimes fool ourselves when
making decisions: Part I. Accessed August 31, 2004, atwww.
pertinent.com/articles/communications/KareCom1.asp
Broome, B.J., DeTurk, S., Kristjansdottir, E.S, et al. (2002).
Giving voice to diversity: An interactive approach to conﬂict
management and decision-making in culturally diverse work
environments. Journal of Business and Management, 8,
239–264.
deBono, E. (1985). Six Thinking Hats. Boston: Little, Brown
& Co.
Decision Making Tips. (2001). Liraz Publishing Co.
http://www.LIRAZ.com/tdecision.htm
Fralic, M.F., & Denby, C.B. (2000). Retooling the nurse executive
for the 21st century practice: Decision support systems.
Nursing Administration Quarterly, 24(2), 19–28.
Lowy, A., & Hood, P. (2004). The Power of the 2 ⫻ 2 Matrix. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Marketing Teacher, (n.d.). S.W.O.T. Analysis. http://www.
marketingteacher.com/index.html
McNichol, E. (2002). Thinking outside the box: Encouraging
flexible thinking for problems and decisions. Nursing
Management (London), 9(4), 19–22.
Sullivan, E.J., & Decker, P.J. (2001). Problem solving and decision making. Effective leadership and management in nursing.
(5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Thompson, C. (1999). A conceptual treadmill: The need for
“middle ground” in clinical decision making theory in nursing. Journal of Advance Nursing, 30, 1222–1229.
Wheeler, R. (2000). Being proactive, not reactive. In Fay L.
Bower (Ed.) Nurses taking the lead: Personal qualities of effective
leadership. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.

165

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in
clinical nursing practice. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Bruhn, J.G. (2004). Leaders who create change and those who
manage it: How leaders limit success. The Health Care
Manager, 23, 132–140.
Carlson, R. (1997). Don’t Sweat the Small Stuff . . . and It’s All
Small Stuff. New York: Hyperion Press.
Clancy, R.R. (2003). The art of decision-making. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 33, 343–349.
Fraser, K.D., & Strang, V. (2004). Decision-making and nurse
case management: A philosophical perspective. Advances in
Nursing Science, 27, 32–43.
Green, C. (2000). Critical thinking in nursing, Upper Saddle
River, N J: Prentice Hall Health.
Janis, I.L., & Mann, L. (1977). Decision making: A psychological
analysis of conﬂict, choice, and commitment. New York:
Macmillan.
Johnson, L.J. (1990). The inﬂuence of assumptions on effective
decision-making. Journal of Nursing Administration, 20(4),
35–39.
Kay, S. (1998). How employees process information. Supervision,
59(12), 6–7.
Kikuchi, J.F., & Simmons, H. (1999). Practical nursing judgment: A moderate realist conception. Scholarly Inquiry for
Nursing Practice, 13, 43–55.
Lindner, K. (2004). Crunch Time: 8 steps to Making the Right
Life Decisions When It Counts. New York: Gotham Books.
Accessed March 31, 2005, at http://www.msnbc.com/id/
6766123/
McGraw, P.C. (2000). Life strategies. New York: Hyperion
Press.
Peterson, T.O., & Lunsford, D.A. (1998). Parallel thinking: A
technique for group interaction and problem solving. Journal
of Management Education, 22, 537–554.
Rausch, E. (1999). Management/leadership decision guidelines:
Critical ingredients for competitiveness. Competitiveness
Review, 9(2), 19–27.
Smith, G.F. (2003). Beyond critical thinking and decision making: Teaching business students how to think. Journal of
Management Education, 27(1), 24–51.
Tucker-Ladd, C.E. (2002). Decision-making and problemsolving. Psychological Self-Help. Online book: Mental Health
Net. http://mentalhelp.net/psyhelp/chap13/chap13o.htm
Wheeler, J. (2001). Thinking your way to successful problemsolving. Nursing Times, 97(37), 36–37.

10Jones Leadership(F)-ch 10

1/14/07

3:40 PM

Page 166

This page has been left intentionally blank.

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 167

chapter
11
Nurses Leading Change
DEBRA A. MORGAN, EDD, RN
JEWETT G. JOHNSON, NSN, RN
DEBORAH R. GARRISON, PHD, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Nothing is permanent but change.”
Heraclitus (c. 500 BC)

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■

Apply change theories to clinical situations.
Identify strategies to overcome barriers to change.
Discuss the role of the change agent.
Identify common characteristics among various change
theories.
Use various change theories as frameworks for initiating
change.

167

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

168

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 168

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

C

hange is nothing new. In fact, it is often said
that change is the only constant. Change, particularly in the health-care environment, is complex and
is occurring at an unprecedented rate. Change is
driven by many factors: the increasing cost of
health-care delivery, the nursing shortage, the rapid
advancements in technology and information management, and new expectations by the public to have
a more active role in health-care decisions. Meeting
the health-care needs of the world requires that the
nurse be proactive and creative in guiding change.
The ability to create and manage meaningful change
is an essential skill for nurses in the 21st century.
Change fosters growth and innovation; progress
cannot occur without change. If nurses are to be
leaders of change, it is imperative that they understand the changes occurring in the health-care
arena, use political clout to have a hand in the
changes, and master the change process. This chapter will introduce readers to the principles of
planned change, barriers commonly encountered
when introducing change, strategies for overcoming
barriers, and the role of the nurse as the change
agent.

Elements of Change
Change is an integral part of any organization, and
the process can be uncomfortable and disturbing to
those who are affected. An awareness of the elements common to the change process is important.

DEFINING CHANGE
Change means to be different, to cause to be different, or to alter. Change may be personal or organizational and can occur suddenly or incrementally.
Change may be planned or unplanned. Unplanned
change, or reactive change, usually occurs suddenly
and in response to some event or set of circumstances. For example, an unanticipated rise in
patient census may precipitate the need for a change
in patient assignments. Decisions are made—and
change follows—as a reaction to an event. Planned
change, however, entails planning and application
of strategic actions designed to promote movement
toward a desired goal. Planned change is deliberate
and proactive. For example, changing staffing patterns from extensive use of unlicensed assistive per-

sonnel to an all-professional staff requires time and
planning. Speciﬁc strategies need to be developed
and implemented before such a sweeping change is
adopted. Generally, planned change is more likely
to occur incrementally, over time. Planned change
responds to anticipated events in the environment
or community.
Change may be initiated in response to internal
or external forces. Internal forces stem from within
the organization. Internal forces include organizational values and beliefs, culture, and past experiences with change. External forces come from
outside the organization. These can be social inﬂuences, economic factors, or legislation. For example,
a 1996 legislative mandate put the federal Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) in place (Public Law 104-191). This piece
of legislation forced all health-care agencies, schools
of nursing, and their governing bodies to plan and
implement major system-wide changes in the way
personal information is collected, handled, and
stored.
Another factor essential to change is the presence of a change agent. A change agent is one who
generates ideas, introduces the innovation, and
works to bring about the desired change. In fact, the
one who assumes the leadership role of change
agent in today’s health-care environment is the
nurse. Members of an organization assume different
roles in a change, depending on the nature of the
change and their role in the organization. A leader
often assumes the role of change agent and initiates
change; an effective follower actively participates in
the change effort and is essential to the successful
implementation of change. Registered nurses are
frequently in a position of leadership within healthcare organizations and, as such, are well positioned
to be the leaders of change.

ASSUMPTIONS REGARDING CHANGE
When initiating change, the following assumptions
are important to consider.

Assumption 1
Change of any kind represents loss. Even if the
change is positive, there is a loss of stability. This
loss of the familiar may produce anxiety and even
grief in many individuals. The leader of change
must be sensitive to the loss experienced by others.

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 169

Nurses Leading Change

Assumption 2
The more consistent the change goal is with the
individual’s personal values and beliefs, the more
likely the change is to be accepted. Likewise, the
more different the goal is from the individual’s personal values, the more likely it is to be rejected. The
change agent needs to know and respect the values
and beliefs of those most affected by the change.

Assumption 3
Those who actively participate in the change feel
accountable for the outcome. The more people who
are involved in the process, the more the group will
feel responsible for the outcome.

Assumption 4
With each successive change in a series of changes,
individuals’ psychological adjustment to the change
occurs more slowly. It is for this reason that the
leader of change must avoid initiating too many
changes at once. Timing is important.

Assumption 5
Power is important to the change process. Organizations with many layers of hierarchy between the
initiator of change and the ultimate decision makers may have difficulty with implementing change.
The shorter the distance the change proposal must
travel from the initiator to the decision maker, the
greater the likelihood that the change will be
accepted. Conversely, the greater the distance, the
more likely resistance will occur.

ASSESSING READINESS FOR CHANGE
Assessing readiness for change is generally the ﬁrst
step in any change project. Until participants
are ready for change, little can be done to bring
about change. According to Terry (1993), readiness
for change is assessed by answering the following
questions:
1. What is the ultimate purpose of the action/

change?
2. Why might I lead or be involved in this

change?
3. What is at stake if I lead or participate in this

change action?

169

4. What structures are in place either to foster

success or hinder the change?
5. Are the necessary resources available to

achieve this change action?
6. What is the stakeholders’ level of commit-

ment to the change?

Practice to Strive For 11-1
Betty R. is a practicing registered nurse who has worked in
the intensive care setting for several years and is highly
respected by her peers, supervisors, and hospital administrators. She is also a graduate student in a family nurse
practitioner program and has developed strong rapport
with the faculty in the program. Being in graduate school
has given her new perspective on the value of researchbased practice. Her clinical manager has also been attending graduate classes in nursing education and likewise
values research as a basis for practice. Betty has implemented a new evidence-based patient care initiative at
work. The facility is not new to change as it recently underwent a massive redesign in facility and organizational
structure. We will use Betty’s questions in the analysis of
this new evidenced-based change initiative.
The purpose of the change is to enhance patient care by
using evidence-based practice in the delivery of care. Betty is
in a position to lead this change because she can use the
information she gained in her master’s program to help
other nurses use research findings concerning patient care.
School has given her a fresh perspective on the nursing profession and the importance of using research rather than
tradition in providing patient care.
One of Betty’s concerns was that her peers might view her
as a “prima donna” or “stuck up.” Her motivation was that
patients would receive care based on evidence, which
would result in optimal patient outcomes. Betty has a good
rapport with individuals who are the informal leaders. Her
clinical manager and the vice president for patient services
have already indicated their support for this change. The
organization has demonstrated an ability to manage other
types of change effectively.
Betty’s relationships with faculty in the graduate program
also provided resources. One of her faculty members works
part-time at the hospital as a house supervisor and is
respected for her knowledge and expertise. Betty’s clinical
manager is prepared at the graduate level in another discipline and is currently pursuing a master of science degree in
nursing as a nurse educator. Moreover, as a stakeholder,
Betty herself is committed to the project as a part of her
graduate degree requirements. The administration has
a very high level of commitment as it is committed to
achieving the best patient outcomes through excellent
nursing care.

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

170

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 170

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Strategies for Leading
Planned Change
Those wishing to bring about change must develop
strategies to foster change. Bennis, Benne, and Chin
(1969), in their classic text, The Planning of Change,
identified three strategies to promote change:
rational-empirical, normative-re-educative, and
power-coercive. Decisions about which strategies to
employ depend, to a great extent, on three factors:
the type of change planned, the power of the change
agent, and the amount of resistance expected. These
strategies may be used independently or together.
More often than not, some combination of strategies is indicated: the larger the change and the more
resistance expected, the more strategies the change
agent must employ.

RATIONAL-EMPIRICAL
This strategy assumes that people are rational
beings and will adopt a change if it is justiﬁed and
in their self-interest. When using this strategy, the
change agent’s role includes communicating the
merit of the change to the group. If the change is
understood by the group to be justiﬁed and in the
best interest of the organization, it is likely to be
accepted. This strategy emphasizes reason and
knowledge. It presents those affected by the change
with the knowledge and rationale they need to
accept and implement the change. This strategy is
most useful when little resistance to a change is
expected. The power of the change agent is typically
not a factor in changes amenable to this strategy.
This strategy assumes that once given the knowledge and the rationales, people will internalize the
need for the change and value the result.

NORMATIVE-RE-EDUCATIVE
A second strategy takes into account social and
cultural implications of change and is based on
the assumption that group norms are used to socialize individuals. This strategy requires “winning
over” those affected by the change. Success is often
relationship-based; relationship, not information, is
the key to this strategy. The success of this approach
often requires a change in attitude, values, and/
or relationships. Sufficient time is essential to the

successful use of the normative-re-educative strategy. This strategy is most frequently used when the
change is based in the culture and relationships
within the organization. The power of the change
agent, both positional and informal, becomes integral to the change process. For example, one of the
most powerful changes in recent history occurred
when the norm changed regarding when to wear
surgical gloves for preventing the spread of infection. More than knowledge (rational-empirical) and
administrative directives were needed to bring
about this change: it took a change in cultural values that redeﬁned the practice norms.

POWER-COERCIVE
This strategy is based on power, authority, and control. Political or economic power is often used to
bring about desired change. The change agent
“orders” change, and those with less power comply.
This strategy requires that the change agent have
the positional power to mandate the change. Change
effected by this strategy is often based either on the
followers’ desire to please the leader or fear of the
consequences for not complying with the change.
This strategy is very effective for legislated changes,
but other changes accomplished using this strategy
are usually short-lived if people have not embraced
the need for the change through some other mechanism (Table 11-1).

Barriers to Change and
Strategies to Overcome Them
All changes have the potential for both gain and loss.
It is important to identify all the potential barriers to
change, to examine them contextually with those
affected by the proposed change, and to develop
strategies collectively to reduce or remove the barriers. Barriers most common to change within the
health-care environment are discussed below, along
with some strategies to overcome them. Additional
barriers appear in Table 11-2.
Change requires movement, which, as physics
indicates, is a kinetic activity that requires energy to
overcome resistance. Also, as in physics, an object at
rest (and that includes an organization) prefers to
remain at rest. Movement over barriers requires an

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 171

Nurses Leading Change

TABLE 11-1

171

Change Strategies

SITUATION

CHANGE STRATEGY

DISCUSSION

HIPAA

Power-coercive

Agencies were mandated to implement policies and practices to
bring them into compliance with legislation. There are negative
consequences of not following the mandate, including legal
actions and financial sanctions. Therefore, personnel have no
choice but to accept the change.

Changing visitation
hours in ICU

Normative-re-educative

This policy change, driven internally, represents social and
cultural adaptation within the organization. As society has
become less structured, visitation policies need to adapt to
allow interaction between family members and the critically
ill patient.

Changing from centralized
to decentralized staffing

Normative-re-educative

As nurses gain more autonomy in the profession and in their
roles in patient care settings, they also desire more autonomy in
scheduling their work hours. The formal and informal leadership
collaborate to foster and lead change.

Implementation of evidencebased research in practice

Rational-empirical

As nurses become more immersed in and committed to
evidence-based practice, the knowledge gained from research
drives change.

TABLE 11-2

Common Barriers to Change and Strategies to Overcome Them

BARRIER

DISCUSSION

STRATEGY

Desire to remain in our
comfort zone.

Those who become increasingly
attached to a familiar way of
doing things (comfort zone)
often view change as an
unwelcome disruption.

Rational-empirical strategies can be used effectively to
allow people to become comfortable with exploring
new ideas. Give people all the information available. For
example, a change in staffing patterns would be sooner
accepted if the nursing staff was part of the change process
from the beginning. As invested players in the change, staff
nurses are more likely to accept a change in staffing pattern
if they know and understand what the policies are and the
rationales for them.

Inadequate access to
information.

Do not rule out a lack of information as a barrier to change. Just
because information has been
made available does not mean it
has been read and understood
by all.

This is one of the easiest barriers to overcome. Use the
rational-empirical strategy. Provide information to the
members of the organization through every possible
means: e-mail, phone calls, memos, staff meetings, mail,
and informal gatherings to be sure everyone knows about
the change that is under way.

Lack of shared vision.

It is critical to have widespread
involvement, input, and ownership of the change. The lack of
a shared vision will cripple a
change effort.

The normative-re-educative strategy work effectively to
remove this barrier. Through dialogue and discussion,
the affected members can gain new insights and new
perspectives on the change proposal. This process is an
integral part of building trust and sharing vision and values.
(Continued on following page)

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

172

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 172

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

TABLE 11-2

Common Barriers to Change and Strategies to Overcome Them (continued)

BARRIER

DISCUSSION

STRATEGY

Lack of adequate
planning.

To manage change well,
ensure that the people affected
see it coming. Involving people
in the planning gives them a
sense of control and decreases
their resistance to the change.

Rational-empirical and normative-re-educative strategies
are helpful in overcoming this barrier. The leader’s role in
envisioning the future is vital. Efforts must be made to keep
all members of the organization informed about and
involved in organizational changes.

Lack of trust.

Trust is key to bringing about
change. People must trust the
change agent; they must also
trust that the change is in their
best interest.

Use both rational-empirical and normative-re-educative
strategies to develop trust. Provide all the information
people need. Include all individuals who are willing to
participate in the planning of change.

Resistance to change.

Achieving lasting and effective change requires the
cooperation and involvement
of the whole team, not isolated
individuals.

The normative-re-educative strategy is needed to help
overcome resistance to change. Work to empower people.
Offer them opportunities to develop skills and to use those
skills to become leaders in the change process.

Poor timing or inadequate
time planned.

Even desired change can fail
due to poor timing or a lack of
planning.

It is important to predict and anticipate system responses
to change. For instance, when planning how fast the
change will occur, remember that the larger the change,
the more people will be affected, and that more time will
be required. Timing is everything. It is imperative that
careful attention be given when a change plan is made
public and when it is implemented. Introducing a change
at a time when the staff is already feeling overwhelmed is
a certain guarantee for failure. Likewise, do not move too
quickly. Change that is made too rapidly removes the
opportunity for meaningful dialogue and discussion that
is essential for planned change to occur effectively.
Conversely, do not lag. When people are ready to move,
get moving.

Fear that power,
relationships, or control
will be lost.

Every change represents the
potential for loss to someone.

Normative-re-educative strategies are needed to alleviate
these fears. Employ strategies that include all those for
whom the change seems to represent loss. Help members
of the organization reframe the change so they can see
that what will be gained is greater than what will be lost.
(Emphasize direct and open communication and addressing of fears here. Maybe individual meetings would prove
most effective)

Even when a change is
desirable, the amount of
personal energy required
for the change to occur is
deemed too great.

Sometimes change is desired
but people are not willing to
do what is necessary to effect
the change.

This is not the time to give more information or employ
peer pressure. The best strategy may simply be to slow the
change process. Give people a chance to catch up and
reenergize. Remember the power of timing.

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 173

Nurses Leading Change

even greater expenditure of energy. The very energy
requirement to change may be too much of a drain
on an already overtaxed organization, and the
energy required to be a leader of change in a resistant group can be overwhelming. For this reason,
timing is a critical element of the change process.
Correctly determining when people are most receptive to the initiation of change can be the determining factor in the success or failure of the change
process. When people are dissatisﬁed with the status quo and yet not too overwhelmed with merely
trying to keep up, the time for change is ripe.
People become comfortable with what “is.” The
functional parameters are clear as are expectations
and rewards. Change, by its very nature, moves people away from their comfort zones. By providing
realistic planning of and adequate information
about how the impending change will affect each of
those areas, some—probably not all—of this resistance can be minimized.
Although legendary heroes and heroines led massive societal changes, within an organization change
rarely occurs without the assistance of others.
Frequently, individuals have great ideas that would
truly improve the function of the organization, but
because the idea cannot be implemented by one person, it becomes lost to the organization. The support
of both formal and informal leaders can be a critical
element to successful change. Both types of leaders
have their own audiences and their own abilities to
sway groups and inﬂuence the “buy-in.” That buyin and ownership of the change will become a
shared vision for the organization that will draw in
other supporters. Because the formal and informal
leaders have, in essence, “blessed” the change, a
number of trust issues for subordinates will also
have been overcome.

Change Theories
A number of theories exist to explain the change
process. These theories provide a framework within
which to guide change efforts. They are useful for
planning both personal change and organizational
change. Tiffany et al. (1994) surveyed 176 nurseauthored journal articles dealing with planned
change. This study identiﬁed the type and frequency
of planned change theories found in the nursing
literature. Lewin’s Change Theory was most com-

173

monly used as a framework for change. Several
other change theories were also frequently referenced. A brief description of Lewin’s theory, along
with Lippitt’s Phases of Change, Havelock’s Six Step
Change Model, and Rogers’ Diffusion of Innovations Theory, follows. These models of change are a
mere sampling of change models. They provide a
strong basis for understanding change theory.
Before exploring the change theories, consider this
brief discussion of change agents, an element in any
change theory.

CHANGE AGENTS
A change agent is the individual or group that
seeks to lead change. The change agent may be from
inside or outside the organization. Change agents
may have formal lines of authority or may be informal leaders. In either case, the change agent is
responsible for moving those affected by the change
through the process and implementing the change.
Effective change agents are masters of change. They
do three things correctly: they sense the right
moment to initiate the plan, they ﬁnd supporters for
their ideas, and they have vision (Bruning, 1993).
The successful change agent earns the respect and
trust of the target system (individuals, groups, or
organizations) by communicating openly and honestly, offering assistance, and demonstrating ability.
A change agent’s success depends on communication and consultation style, interpersonal skills, and
expert power. Ongoing communication is integral to
the role of the change agent (Box 11-1).

Becoming a Change Agent: A Practical Guide
Change is an inevitable part of life; learning to lead
change effectively is a skill that can be cultivated

Box 11-1
Roles of the Change Agent
VISIONER

FACILITATOR

IDEA PERSON

Communicator

Challenger

Problem solver

Advisor

Advocate

Objective observer

Coach

Educator

Resource linker

Provider of
feedback

Empowerer

Problem finder

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

174

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 174

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

and mastered with practice. If you have been given
the responsibility of leading an organizational
change, there are several practical steps you can
take to increase your chance for success.
1. Begin by articulating the change vision clearly

and concisely.
2. Select the change project team carefully.
3. Identify the formal and informal leaders who

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

can help you implement the change successfully.
Stay alert to political forces, both for and
against the change.
Develop communication skills. Keep communication lines open.
Practice problem-solving skills.
Develop conﬂict resolution skills.
Learn to trust yourself and your project team.

Functioning effectively as a change agent requires
the nurse to have an understanding of the theoretical frameworks of change. A discussion of several
classic, as well as emerging, theories of change follows.

KURT LEWIN’S FORCE FIELD ANALYSIS
Lewin’s Force Field Analysis is probably one of
the best known and frequently used change theories
(Tiffany et al., 1994). This theory conceptualizes
change as movement across time. Lewin views behavior as a dynamic balance of forces working in
opposite direction within a ﬁeld (individual or
organization). According to Lewin, change occurs in
response to disequilibrium within a system (Lewin,
1951). Therefore, in order to effect change, there
must be an imbalance between the forces that push
for change (driving forces) and those forces that
oppose change (restraining forces) staving to maintain the status quo. Basically, strategies for change
are aimed at increasing driving forces and decreasing restraining forces. Lewin identiﬁed three phases
of change: unfreezing, moving, and refreezing.

Unfreezing
Unfreezing the existing equilibrium involves motivating others for change. The change agent must
loosen, or “unfreeze,” the forces that are maintaining the status quo. This involves increasing the perceived need for change and creating discontent with

the system as it exists. If individuals do not see a
need for change, they are not likely to be motivated
or ready for change and may even hinder change.
Assessment of readiness for change is critical in this
phase.

Moving
During the moving phase, the change agent identiﬁes, plans, and implements strategies to bring about
the change. The change agent must do all that is
possible to reduce restraining forces and strengthen
driving forces. It is critical that the change agent
continue to work to build trust and enlist as many
others as possible. The more ownership there is in
the change, the more likely the change will be
adopted. Timing is also important during this phase.
People need time to assimilate change; therefore, the
change agent must allow enough time for people to
redeﬁne how they view this change cognitively.

Refreezing
During the refreezing phase, the change agent
reinforces new patterns of behavior brought about
by the change. Institutionalizing the change by creating new policies and procedures helps to refreeze
the system at a new level of equilibrium. Refreezing
has occurred when the new way of doing things
becomes the new status quo.

LIPPITT’S PHASES OF CHANGE
Lippitt’s Phases of Change Theory (1958) is built on
the Lewin model. He extended the model to include
seven steps in the change process. Lippitt’s model
focuses more on the role of the change agent than on
the evolution of the change process. Communication
skills, team building, and problem solving are central to this theory. The participation of key personnel, those most affected by the change, and those
most critical in promoting the change is essential to
the success of the change effort (Noone, 1987). The
seven steps of Lippitt’s phases of change are:

Step 1: Diagnosis of the Problem
The person or organization must believe there is a
problem that requires change. The change agent
helps others see the need for change and involves

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 175

Nurses Leading Change

key people in data collecting and problem solving.
The ideal situation exists when both the organization and the change agent recognize and accept the
need for change.

Step 2: Assessment of the Motivation
and Capacity for Change
Determine if people are ready for change. Assess the
ﬁnancial and human resources. Are they sufficient
for change? Analyze the structure and function of
the organization. Will it support the change, or does
there need to be organizational redesign? This process is essentially deﬁning the restraining and driving forces for change within the organization.

Step 3: Assessment of the Change
Agent’s Motivation and Resources
This step is crucial to achieving change. The change
agent (either an individual or a team) must count
the personal cost of change. The change agent must
be willing to make the commitment necessary to
bring about the planned change. He or she must
have the energy, time, and necessary power base to
be successful. The change agent may take on the
role of leader, expert consultant, facilitator, or cheerleader, but whatever role is assumed, the change
agent must be willing to see the change through.

Step 4: Selection of Progressive
Change Objectives
The change is clearly deﬁned in this step. Establish
the change objectives. Develop a plan of action;
include speciﬁc strategies for meeting the objectives. Decide how to evaluate the change plan and
ﬁnal result.

Step 5: Implement the Plan
It is critical to remain ﬂexible during implementation. If resistance is higher than anticipated, slow
down. Give others a chance to catch up. On the
other hand, if all is going well and the momentum
is good, keep the plan moving ahead.

Step 6: Maintenance of the Change
During this phase the change is integrated into the
organization. It is becoming the new norm. In this

175

phase, the role of the change agent is to provide support, positive feedback and, if necessary, make modiﬁcations to the change.

Step 7: Termination of
the Helping Relationship
The change agent gradually withdraws from the
role and resumes the role of member of the organization (Lippitt, Watson, & Wesley, 1958).

HAVELOCK’S MODEL
Havelock’s Six Step Change Model (1973) is another
variation of Lewin’s change theory. The emphasis of
this model is on the planning stage of change.
Havelock’s model asserts that with sufficient, careful, and thorough planning, change agents can overcome resistance to change. Using this model,
essential to the success of change is inclusion. It is
imperative that the change agent encourage participation at all levels. This follows the assumption that
the more people are part of the plan, the more they
feel responsible for the outcome, and the more likely
they will work to make the plan succeed.
The planning stage of Havelock’s model includes: (1) building a relationship; (2) diagnosing
the problem; and (3) acquiring resources. This planning stage is followed by the moving stage, which
includes choosing the solution and gaining acceptance. The last stage is stabilization and renewal
(Havelock, 1973).

ROGERS’ DIFFUSION OF INNOVATION
Everett Rogers (1983) developed a diffusion theory,
as opposed to a planned change theory. It is included
with change theories because it describes how an
individual or organization passes from “ﬁrst knowledge of an innovation” to conﬁrmation of the decision to adopt or reject an innovation or change.
Rogers deﬁned diffusion as “the process by which
innovation is communicated through certain channels over time among the members of a social system” (as cited in Hagerman and Tiffany, 1994,
p. 58). Rogers’ framework emphasizes the reversible
nature of change. Initial rejection of change does not
mean the change will never occur. Likewise, the
adoption of change does not ensure its continua-

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

176

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 176

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

tion. Rogers’ ﬁve-step innovation/decision-making
process is:

Step 1: Knowledge
The decision-making unit (individual, team, or
organization) is introduced to the innovation
(change) and begins to understand it.

Step 2: Persuasion
The change agent works to develop a favorable attitude toward the innovation (change).

“Life uses messes to get to well ordered solutions. Life
doesn’t seem to share our desires for efficiency or
neatness. It uses redundancy, fuzziness, dense webs
of relationships, and unending trials and errors to find
what works. Life is intent on finding what works, not
what’s “right.” It is the ability to keep finding solutions
that is important; any one solution is temporary. There
are no permanently right answers. The capacity to keep
changing, to find what works now, is what keeps any
organism alive” (Wheatley & Kellner-Rogers, 1996).

A decision is made to adopt or reject the innovation.

of change that are quickly becoming recognized in
leadership circles are the Learning Organizations
and Chaos theories.

Step 4: Implementation/Trial

Learning Organizations Theory

The innovation is put in place. Reinvention or alterations may occur.

The Learning Organizations Theory is based on systems theory. It is a framework for seeing the interrelatedness of relationships; the whole is not just
the sum of its parts, because each separate part
affects the whole. Indeed, each part is essential in
deﬁning the whole. Peter Senge (1990) described
learning organizations as organizations where people at all levels are collectively and continuously
working together to improve what they do. Learning organizations celebrate differences and recognize that every member of the organization has
something to contribute to organizational growth.
Over time, a learning organization embraces change
as a means of creating the organizational environment it desires. A learning organization develops
the capacity to recreate itself in response to change.
Senge describes ﬁve disciplines that must be mastered if an organization is to achieve the status of a
learning organization. Learning organizations
model the change process (Table 11-3).

Step 3: Decision

Step 5: Confirmation
The individual or decision-making unit seeks reinforcement that the decision made was correct. It is
at this point that a decision previously made may be
reversed.

EMERGING MODELS OF CHANGE
The classic models of change are linear. While they
have been used successfully in many situations,
they may not be as useful as they once were in the
complex, ever-changing health-care arena. Because
health care is changing so rapidly, health-care organizations must be able to organize and implement
change quickly. The linear models of the past may
not be sufficient to meet this challenge. Two models

Discipline 1: Personal Mastery

Characteristics Common
to Change Theories
Problem identification
Plan for innovation
Strategies to reduce resistance
Evaluation plan

First, the members of a learning organization must
develop personal mastery. Personal mastery
involves clarifying and deepening a personal vision.
There must be personal vision before there can be
shared vision. People with a high level of personal
mastery are continually expanding their ability to
create the results they want in life. Two important
characteristics of personal mastery are a clear
vision of what one wants and the ability to see cur-

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 177

Nurses Leading Change

TABLE 11-3

Senge’s Five Disciplines of
Learning Organizations

Discipline 1: Personal
mastery

Developing and clarifying a
personal vision

Discipline 2: Mental
models

Building an internal picture of the
world; the lens through which
the world is viewed

Discipline 3: Building
shared vision

Translating personal vision into a
collective vision and developing
a culture of common caring

Discipline 4: Team
learning

Fostering shared, participative
decision making

Discipline 5: Systems
thinking

Shifting from fragmentation to
holism

rent reality accurately. Creative tension exists when
there is a gap between the vision and the current
reality. In order to shorten the gap, change must
occur.
Discipline 2: Mental Models

A mental model is an internal picture of how one
views the world. Mental models are deeply held
thoughts or beliefs about how the world works.
They are the ﬁlters for everything one sees or hears.
Often, mental models are so deeply engrained that
individuals are not consciously aware of them.
Mental models shape action. Learning to recognize
and question mental models is crucial to becoming
part of a learning organization. Change will require
the development of new mental models.
Discipline 3: Building Shared Vision

Shared vision is translating a personal vision into a
collective vision, created together. Shared vision
derives its power from a common caring about
something the organization truly wants. Individuals
do not have to give up their personal beliefs or passions, but instead continue to learn and grow
together. Shared vision is essential if members of an
organization are going to work well together. Shared
vision takes time and ongoing conversation to create. When building shared vision, the goal is to create the most inclusive environment possible. It is a
process that requires commitment, not just compliance. Shared vision does not require knowing how

177

to get where you want to go; it does require knowing where you want to go.
Discipline 4: Team Learning

Team learning is the process of aligning and developing the capacity of organizational members to
achieve the vision. This requires much communication. It involves examining all ideas. It requires listening to others’ ideas and suspending judgment
for a time. When people suspend judgment and
think together, new ideas arise. The objective is to
go beyond personal understanding and gain new
insight into the issue. When this process is used,
people become observers of their own thinking, and
that leads to greater insight. Learning teams, as the
name implies, are highly participatory in decision
making. One person is not the teacher or leader;
rather, all members have something to teach and a
responsibility to lead. Team learning accepts both
individualism and collectivism.
Discipline 5: Systems Thinking

Systems thinking is the cornerstone for learning
organizations. This ﬁfth discipline weaves the other
four disciplines together into a cohesive body of theory and practice. It is a shift from seeing “parts” to
seeing “wholes.” When problems are identiﬁed in
the organization, they are examined through the
lens of a system. The question asked is, “What is
wrong with the system?” Systems thinking is about
ﬁnding solutions to problems, not placing blame.
Learning organizations are distinctive because of
their ability to learn and not simply be content with
what they are doing (Senge, 1990). The capacity to
reﬂect and to see patterns of interdependency is critical. Senge states “Systems thinking is the discipline
for seeing wholes. It is a framework for seeing interrelationships rather than things, for seeing patterns
of change rather than static snapshots” (p. 68). The
art of systems thinking lies in being able to recognize increasingly complex and subtle structures
amid the wealth of details, pressures, and cross-currents that exist in real management settings. The
essence of mastering systems thinking as a management discipline lies in seeing the patterns where
others see only singular events. Senge lists some of
the laws of the ﬁfth discipline:
1. Today’s problems come from yesterday’s

“solutions.”
2. The harder you push, the harder the system

pushes back.

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

178

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 178

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.

Behavior grows better before it grows worse.
The easy way out usually leads back in.
The cure can be worse than the disease.
Faster is slower.
Cause and effect are not closely related in
time and space.
Small changes can produce big results—but
the areas of highest leverage are often the
least obvious.
You can have your cake and eat it too, but
not at once.
Dividing an elephant in half does not produce two small elephants.
There is no blame.

Chaos Theory (1995)
Chaos Theory has its genesis in quantum physics.
The universe does not run rigidly in accordance
with the laws of classic physics. Hawking (1987)
noted that this uncertainty was likely the result of
tiny ﬂuctuations that interacted within systems and
resulted in large-scale effects. The result stems from
multiple interrelated changes within the universe.
Chaos Theory hypothesizes that chaos actually
has an order. Changes that seem to occur at random
are, in reality, the result of a complex order.
Complex systems give rise to complex and interrelated behaviors. The paradox that disorder can be a
source of order is particularly encouraging to nursing and to health care in general. Health care is in
chaos. Instability is caused by many interrelated
variables, including managed care, shifting demographics, age, gender, and ethnicity. According to
Valadez and Sportsman (1999), three principles can
be drawn from quantum/chaos theory to help leaders in nursing manage the environment: “a) the
world is unpredictable, b) the world is not independent of the observer; rather, the intent of the
observer inﬂuences what is seen; and c) the relationships among things are what counts, not the
things themselves” (p. 210). While strategic planning remains important to the life of an organization, the plan cannot remain static; it must change,
take into account new data, examine the relationships inherent in the system, and allow for the
exploration of differences of multiple perspectives
of stakeholders in the organization. Pascale (2002)
states that innovation increases near the edge of
chaos. In the face of threat or opportunity, organizations move into mutation and experimentation.

The challenge is to disturb the system in a manner
that will push the system in the direction of a
desired outcome. Just as the path of the universe
cannot be changed with complete accuracy, neither
can the path of health care be directed. But it can be
nudged in the right direction.
Example of Chaos Theory in Action

Consider this example of Chaos Theory in action at
Medical Surgical Services of Utopia Medical Center:
Mission Statement

It is the mission of our collaborative, interdisciplinary health-care team to provide holistic care for
the patients on our units and their families. We will
support each other in the accomplishment of our
responsibilities through open communication and
by striving for ﬂexibility through which to manage
the multiple priorities of our service.
Members of the Medical Surgical Services Team

Nurses
Physical therapists
Respiratory therapists
Radiology technicians
Physicians
Unlicensed assistive personnel
Registered dietitians
Situation

The nurses have approached their manager
about the problems associated with nursing care
that are caused by professionals from other disciplines who appear on the unit and commandeer the
patients. These situations have been long-standing,
are interrupting patient care, are causing delays in
administration of medication, and have resulted in
the inability of the nurses to conduct patient education sessions on much needed topics, such as diabetes care.
Problem Solving

The Director of Medical Surgical Services has
called a team meeting to discuss potential solutions
to these problems. Each discipline voices understanding of the problem, but there seems to be no
solution to which everyone can agree immediately.
This is an example that the world is not independent of the observer and that the intent of the
observer inﬂuences what is seen. Each discipline
agrees there is a problem but views it primarily
from its own frame of reference. The director asks
one of the charge nurses for ideas about how to
solve the dilemma. The charge nurse suggests that

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 179

Nurses Leading Change

the group focus on the mission statement for the
area. As the team discusses the implications of the
mission statement, it is reminded that holistic
patient care is the ultimate goal, and the members
recognize that fragmented care is not holistic care.
They also recognize that their environment is
complex and rapidly changing. Their worldview
recognizes unpredictability. They recall their commitment to supporting each other through open
communication and a ﬂexible approach. They

179

decide that, together, they can make a general
schedule for when certain activities will occur and
that through communication about exceptions or
crisis situations they can arrange to provide patient
care in a more organized, synchronized fashion.
The relationships among things is what counts,
not the things themselves. In this situation, the
mission statement served as the “strange attractor”
that brought the team together to meet a common
goal.

Eight Basic Lessons of the Paradigm of Change
Michael Fullan, in his classic book Change Forces, outlined eight lessons of change. Although Fullan’s work
is not technically a theory for change, it does offer wisdom for understanding change. Taken together, these
lessons help define the new paradigm of change
(Fullan, 1993).
Lesson One: You can’t mandate what matters.
“When complex change is involved, people do not and
cannot change by being told to do so. Effective change
agents neither embrace nor ignore mandates. They
use them as catalysts to examine what they are doing”
(Fullan, 1993, p. 24).
Lesson Two: Change is a journey, not a blueprint.
“Change is nonlinear and is loaded with uncertainty and
excitement. Even well-developed innovations represent
journeys for those who are encountering them for the first
time” (p. 25).
Lesson Three: Problems are our friends.
Problems are inevitable, and learning cannot happen
without them. In fact, avoiding problems is the enemy
of productive change. Openness and a spirit of inquiry
are essential to learning and therefore to change.
Lesson Four: Vision and strategic planning come later.

occurs in advance. Flexibility is needed early, vision will
follow. Then planning can occur.
Lesson Five: Individualism and collectivism must have equal
power.
The creative tension between individualism and collectivism can be a great asset to change. Typically, collectivism
(collaboration, participation) is touted as good, and it is.
One must be careful, however, not to allow collectivism
become group-think. Likewise, the ability to think and act
independently is good. The danger here is isolation. The
best strategy is to recognize that one does not have to be
exclusive of the other. Embrace them both.
Lesson Six: Neither centralization nor decentralization works
alone.
Both top-down and bottom-up strategies are necessary.
There needs to be a balance of pressure, control, and
support.
Lesson Seven: Connection with the wider environment is critical
for success.
The best organizations learn externally as well as internally.
“To prosper, organizations must be actively plugged into
their environments, responding to and contributing to the
issues of the day” (Fullan, 1993, p. 39).

“A shared vision is vision that many people are truly
committed to, because it reflects their own personal vision”
(Senge, 1990, p. 206). Vision requires reflection. Reflection
requires time. Spending too much time preplanning early
in the change process is a mistake. Ownership seldom

Lesson Eight: Every person is a change agent.

All Good Things...

the process of change. With this in mind, recognize
that change theories, regardless of the number of
steps involved, have several common elements. All
change theories begin with diagnosing a problem,
identifying what requires change. They provide a
thoughtful plan for an innovation—the change idea.
Change theories develop strategies to bring about

It is important to remember that change is a journey, not a destination; it is a process, not an outcome. It is less important to know how many steps
are in the change process than it is to understand

Change is too important to leave to the experts. “Since no
one person can possibly understand the complexities of
change in dynamically complex systems, it follows that we
cannot leave the responsibility to others” (Fullan, 1993, p. 39).

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

180

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 180

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

the change. These strategies include a plan for implementation, and contingency plans for overcoming obstacles to change. Finally, they should provide
a means for evaluation of the change.
Pascale (2002) wrote that “ships can’t steer if
they are not moving, and living systems—such as
organizations—can’t survive without change, challenge, variety, and surprise” (p. 17). Learn to lead
change, rather than let change lead you.

Let’s Talk
1. You are the nurse manager responsible for
implementing a change from total patient care
to a case management model of patient care on
your unit. Using Lewin’s Force Field Analysis as
a framework for implementing change, respond
to the following.
A. Describe the process you will undertake.
B. Identify the stage represented by each step
you plan.
C. What do you see as driving forces for this
change?
D. What are potential restraining forces
inhibiting this change?
2. Assume you are leading a task force to explore
the possibility of changing ICU visiting hours
from set times (such as 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.) to
open visitation.
A. Who are the stakeholders in this situation?
B. What would be the barriers to overcome?
C. What strategies would best be used to
overcome these barriers?
3. You are the charge nurse on a medical-surgical
unit. You wish to implement a new method of
“ﬂagging” charts that contain new doctors’
orders. Your staff members complain that they
like things the way they are and are openly
resistant to implementing this change. What
can you do to decrease resistance and win your
staff over?
4. What role does Chaos Theory play in innovation
in nursing?

NCLEX Questions
1. Which activity would be considered expected

behavior during the refreezing phase of planned
change?
A. Developing policies and procedures
B. Working to develop trust
C. Identifying restraining forces
D. Allowing time for people to assimilate the
change
2. The change agent can increase the likelihood of

the success of planned change by:
A. Implementing the change rapidly to prevent
development of the objections
B. Including only formal leaders in planning the
change to ensure management support
C. Instituting the change process during a
period of low staffing so fewer people will be
affected
D. Being sensitive to the internal and external
environment of the organization to ensure
the change will be culturally acceptable
3. Which change strategy is represented by chang-

ing the location of unit patient information
boards so the information cannot be seen except
by those who need the information in order to
provide patient care?
A. Rational-empirical
B. Normative-re-educative
C. Notional-intuitive
D. Power-coercive
4. Gaining trust is a fundamental element in

planned change. Which process or behavior
would hinder the development of trust?
A. Providing all necessary information
B. Providing only information deemed necessary by formal leaders
C. Achieving buy-in from formal and informal
leaders
D. Including all interested parties in the planning of the change
5. An organization that celebrates differences and

embraces change is known as:
A. An externally sensitive organization
B. An internally sensitive organization

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 181

Nurses Leading Change

C. A learning organization
D. A collective vision organization
6. Chaos Theory embraces which of the following

principles?
A. It is important that the observer not inﬂuence what is being observed
B. Certain parts of the world interact predictably with certain other parts
C. Relationships between objects are more
important than objects themselves
D. Change occurs following certain sequential
steps
7. Achieving a shared vision requires which of the

following?
A. That individuals sublimate their individual
goals and desires
B. That one individual champion a personal
vision
C. The exclusion of some individuals from the
collective
D. Commitment rather than compliance
8. Which of the following is best described as

change that applies strategic actions to promote
movement toward a speciﬁc goal?
A. Reactive change
B. Planned change
C. Internal force change
D. External force change
9. Which of the following is an important

assumption to make about change?
A. A positive change represents a gain for
everyone affected by the change
B. The fewer the people involved in the
process, the more likely the change will be
accepted
C. The shorter the gap between change initiator and decision maker, the more likely the
change will be implemented
D. When a series of changes is desired, it is
more efficient to implement them all at once

181

10. The change agent must do which of the follow-

ing?
A. Have a formal line of authority
B. Have a disregard for organizational politics
C. Be a member of the organization
D. Possess conﬂict resolution skills
REFERENCES
Baulcomb, J. (2003). Management of change through force ﬁeld
analysis. Journal of Nursing Management, 11, 275–280.
Bennett, M. (2003). The manager as agent of change. Nursing
Management, 10(7).
Bennis, W., Benne, K., & Chin, R. (1969). The Planning of
Change, (2nd ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Bruning, L. (1993). Managing change in a changing environment. Today’s OR Nurse, 9-11.
Fullan, M. (1993). Change forces. London: Falmer Press.
Hagerman, L., & Tiffany, C. (1994). Evaluating plan change theories. Nursing Management, 25(3), 54–57.
Havelock, R. (1973). The change agent’s guide to innovation in education. New Jersey: Educational Technology
Publication.
Hawking, S. (1988). A brief history of the universe: From the big
bang to black holes. NY: Bantam Books.
HIPAA Legislation Retrieved February 29, 2005, from
aspe.hhs.gov/adminsimp/p1104191.htm
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social service: Selected theoretical
papers. New York: Harper Brothers.
Lippitt, R., Watson, J., & Westley, B. (1958). The dynamics of
planned change. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Noone, J. (1987). Planned change: Putting theory into practice.
Clinical Nurse Specialist, 1(1), 25–29.
Pascale, R., Milleman, M., & Gioja, L. (2002). Surﬁng on the edge
of chaos: The laws of nature and the new laws of business. NY:
Three Rivers Press.
Rogers, E. (1983). Diffusion of innovations. New York: Free
Press.
Senge, P. (1990). The ﬁfth discipline: The art and practice of learning organizations. New York: Doubleday.
Terry, R.W. (1993). Authentic leadership. San Francisco: JosseyBass.
Tiffany, C., et al. (1994). Planned change theory: Survey of
nursing periodical literature. Nursing Management, 25(7),
54–59.
Valadez, A.M., & Sportsman, S. (1999). Environmental management: Principles from quantum theory. Journal of Professional
Nursing, 15(4), 209–213.
Wheatley, M., & Kellner-Rogers, M. (1996). A simpler way. San
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

11Jones Leadership(F)-ch 11

1/14/07

3:42 PM

Page 182

This page has been left intentionally blank.

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 183

chapter
12
Building Teams
for Productivity
and Efficiency
CAROL SEAVOR, EDD, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“People make fewer errors when they work in teams. When processes
are planned and standardized, each member knows his or her
responsibilities as well as those of teammates, and members ‘look out’
for one another, noticing errors before they cause an accident. In an
effective interdisciplinary team, members come to trust one another’s
judgments and attend to one another’s safety concerns.”
Institute of Medicine, 2000

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■

Describe the contributions of teams and teamwork to quality
patient care.
Discuss the relationship between good communication, healthy
group dynamics, and effective teamwork.
Understand the competencies needed for successful team
building and effective team leadership.

183

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

184

D

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 184

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

elivery of health care is quite complex. Even
though nurses may deliver care as individuals, they
are usually part of a caregiving team working in
concert. Even care delivered to patients by an individual nurse or other caregiver has probably been
inﬂuenced by others, through diagnosing, planning,
referral, or other types of collaboration. The admitting physician provides the initial medical diagnosis, the admitting nurse establishes the initial
nursing care plan, and other health-care disciplines,
such as social work, physical therapy, diet therapy,
and occupational therapy, may inﬂuence the plan of
care. Treatments, equipment, and medications have
been developed over time and studied and tested by
unknown numbers of professionals (many working
in teams) to develop the best models of care. Many
nursing interventions are also the result of nurse
researchers working in teams to broaden the repertoire of evidence-based practice. The complexity of
both the health-care arena and the nursing profession challenges nurses to become proﬁcient in the
skills of collaboration and team building. Most
health-care delivery agencies employ nurses with
varying credentials and levels of education. The
existence of multiple levels of nursing personnel
requires that all nurses understand the various roles
performed at each level. Doctoral, master, bachelor,
and associate degree nurses work along with
licensed practical nurses (LPN) and certiﬁed nursing assistants (CNA) in large medical centers. In
order for patients to receive effective, coordinated
optimal care, smooth teamwork must exist. Table
12-1 summarizes the levels of educational opportunities in nursing and the roles associated with
each.
As multiple roles have evolved within nursing, so too have the roles within other health-care
disciplines. For example, respiratory therapists,
physician assistants, occupational therapists and
occupational therapy assistants, surgical technologists, radiological technicians, and a myriad of
other supportive technicians are likely to be part of
the health-care team. Never has mutual understanding, mutual respect, group work, and teamwork been more important and more crucial to the
well-being of patients receiving care within the
health-care system. Table 12-2 provides examples of
the roles played by some of the health-care disciplines likely to be included in the care of hospitalized patients.

This chapter will review the importance of teamwork in nursing and health-care delivery. Learning
to be an effective team member and/or team leader
will serve you, your patients, and their loved ones
well. Understanding the dynamics that occur within
teams, the roles that members play, and the patterns
of communication that develop will help you be
an effective team member. Learning about these
dynamics will prepare you to ease some of the friction, avoid some of the conﬂict, and learn from both.
You will see that partnerships and collaboration are
essential for safe, efficient, and effective health care.
Teamwork with other nurses, teamwork with other
disciplines, and multidisciplinary teams will help
you provide the best possible care for your patients.
Good teamwork is essential for good nursing, and
good teamwork begins with good group work.

Group Work
Nurses usually work in diverse caregiving groups
and are expected to collaborate with others to produce positive patient care outcomes. The popular
adage “A camel is a horse designed by a committee”
is a reminder how ineffective group work may have
unintended and unwanted outcomes. Groups consist of people in relationships. As the size of the
group grows, group dynamics become more complex, and the opportunities for misunderstanding,
friction, and conﬂict grow. Those who share a
household with their children may recall the simplicity of life prior to parenthood. Similarly, those
who are oldest children in the birth order of their
family may harbor fond memories of a time when
sharing was not necessary or when negotiating was
not a daily event. Students expected to work within
a study group or required to complete group projects
have experienced how group work can be fraught
with pitfalls and frustration. Although groups may
differ in their purposes, structure, and processes,
most groups do have one characteristic in common:
the possibility of conﬂict. Understanding the phenomena associated with good group functioning
facilitates good group work and eases frustration
and conﬂict. When group members are aligned
about their purpose, work within a well-understood
structure, and have a strong and healthy group process, their group is poised to function as an effective
health-care team.

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 185

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency

TABLE 12-1

185

Levels of Nursing Education

CAREGIVER

ROLE

Nurse’s aide (NA)

Assistants who work under the direction of an LPN, registered nurse (RN), or physician provide basic
care for patients. Most states require a minimum number of hours of clinical practice and classroom
instruction in a formal program, usually at a community college, in adult education, or in a hospital
or nursing home. The program usually lasts for several weeks. In most states, an examination must
be passed for certification, and the aide is designated as a CNA.

Licensed practical
nurse (LPN) or
licensed vocational
nurse (LVN)

The LPN or LVN is an entry-level nurse who is responsible for providing basic nursing care, working
under the direction of a physician or RN. Educational programs usually last about 1 year and are
given in community colleges or hospital settings. LPN educational content is similar to that for RNs
but the amount of time, the number of hours required, the prerequisite courses, and the responsibilities and decision-making expectations are reduced. A national examination (NCLEX-PN) must be
passed for licensure.

RN

Requires completion of a formal education program in nursing at a community college, state
university, or private college. A national licensing examination (NCLEX-RN) must be passed for
licensure as an RN. Graduates of the following nursing programs are allowed to sit for the NCLEX-RN
examination: associate degree, baccalaureate degree, or entry level master’s degree. Associate
degree nurse (ADN) programs typically require 2 years of course work. Bachelor of science nurse
(BSN) programs require 4 years for completion. In some states, hospital-based programs (diploma
programs) offer training required for licensure without an academic degree, usually lasting 3 years.
An entry-level master’s degree is a graduate program that admits students with bachelor or higher
degrees in other fields and prepares graduates with an initial degree at the master’s level in nursing.

Master of Science
in Nursing (MSN)

Usually requires students to have a BSN degree and includes 1 or more years of course and clinical
work, offered by private and state universities. MSNs are prepared in several specialties, including
nursing education, nursing administration, medical/surgical, family, psychiatric, community, and
pediatrics obstetrics health nursing. They are also prepared for various practice roles such as clinical
nurse specialist (CNS), nurse practitioner (NP), family nurse practitioner (FNP), certified nurse midwife
(CNM), and certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA).

Doctoral prepared
nurse (for example, PhD, DNS)

Usually requires 3 or more years of education at a doctorate granting institution. These nurses have
strong research, theory, and practice skill and serve in nursing faculty positions, research positions,
direct research-based clinical specialty practice, or administrative positions.

GROUP PURPOSE
In caregiving agencies, groups (often in the form of
committees) exist or are created to fulﬁll an ongoing
function, responsibility, or task within the organization. Managers also create short-term groups (often
called ad hoc groups or task forces) to accomplish a
speciﬁc task or outcome. Long- and short-term
groups created and supported by the organization
are called formal groups. Informal groups may
also form within caregiving agencies. These groups
are not officially designated or supported by the
organization but exist because the participants
chose to be in a relationship to share a common
interest. Effective informal groups that demonstrate

a contribution to an organization may become a formal group. Groups containing members who are
clear about their purpose and are committed to
working toward achieving their purpose have the
best potential for success. Some illustrations of formal and informal groups include:
Formal:
■

■

■

■

A group of nurses assigned to the recovery
room or a surgical ﬂoor
A group of nurses employed by a visiting nurse
agency
The institutional research board of a community hospital
The curriculum committee of a nursing education program

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

TABLE 12-2

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 186

Examples of Team Member Roles

TEAM MEMBER

EXAMPLES OF PRACTICE ROLES

Patient/consumer/
client

Participates to extent possible in plan of care and goal setting; identifies cultural needs and
practices; reports own experience of progress

NURSING
RN, doctorate

Conducts clinical research; provides consultation to clinical staff and administrative leadership
within agency; serves as nursing faculty

RN, master’s

Within a specialty, provides comprehensive nursing care, health promotion, histories, and physicals
in outpatient and acute/home/long-term care settings; teaches and counsels; if certified as an
advanced practice nurse may order, conduct, and interpret laboratory and diagnostic tests as
allowed by state nurse practice act; provides consultation support for nursing staff; serves as
nursing faculty; provides administrative leadership within agency

RN, bachelor’s

Develops and implements comprehensive nursing care in all settings; provides leadership for
health-care teams

RN, associate

Develops and implements nursing care usually in settings where patients have stable and
predictable health needs

LPN

Delivers basic nursing skills as defined by the facility under the supervision of an RN or physician

CNA or NA

Assists with basic nursing skills as defined by the facility under the supervision of an RN; see
Chapter 22 for additional examples of unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP)

MEDICINE
Physician

Diagnoses and treats diseases and injuries, provides preventive care, prescribes drugs, and
performs medical or surgical specialty care according to preparation

Psychiatrist

Medical doctors who diagnose and treat mental, emotional, and behavioral disease and conditions

ALLIED HEALTH
Dietitian

Evaluates the nutritional status of patients; works with family members and medical team to
determine appropriate nutrition goals for patient

Occupational therapist

Utilizes therapeutic goal-directed activities to evaluate, prevent, or correct physical, mental, or
emotional dysfunction or to maximize functions for optimal independence

Pharmacist

Devises and revises patient’s medication therapy to meet medical and therapeutic needs;
information resource for the patient and medical team

Physical therapist

Evaluates, plans, utilizes exercises, rehabilitative procedures, massage, manipulations, and physical
agents such as mechanical devices, heat, cold, air, light, water, electricity, and sound in the aid of
diagnosis or treatment

Physician assistant (PA)

Practices medicine under the supervision of licensed physicians; provides a broad range of
diagnostic and therapeutic services

Speech language
pathologist

Assesses and treats speech, language, and swallowing disorders; provides individual or group
therapy to maximize functional communication and swallowing ability

OTHER PROFESSIONS
Chaplain

Provides spiritual support and ministry to patients and families

Psychologist

Assesses, treats, and manages mental disorders; provides psychotherapy with individuals, groups,
and families

Social worker

Assesses individual and family psychosocial functioning and provides care to help enhance or
restore capacities, including locating services or providing counseling

186

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 187

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency
■
■

The annual dinner ad hoc committee
A committee assigned to research the factors
related to an increased incidence of patient
falls on a nursing home unit

Informal:
■

■
■

A lunch group with an interest in starting a
local chapter of a nursing specialty group
A mutual support group of new employees
A group interested in research on empathy in
nursing

GROUP STRUCTURE
Formal and informal groups may be highly structured or have very little structure or few rules
that guide their collaboration. Formal groups with
longevity are apt to have more rules and provide
more guidelines for the expectations of behavior of
group members. The amount of structure in a group
is reﬂected by its written guidelines, record keeping,
style of leadership, process of decision making, and
membership. A highly structured group maintains
by-laws or other documents that deﬁne expectations of the group’s functions. These documents
may address, for example: purpose; goals; roles and
responsibilities of members; time, place, and order
of meetings; and how minutes will be recorded and
ﬁled. The leadership structure and process will be
deﬁned clearly as will lines of authority and responsibility. The process of decision making will be clear
and consistent. Members of structured groups are
usually chosen because of their competence or ability to meet the goals and purposes of the group and
are apt to have the same or similar backgrounds and
educational levels.
Groups with little structure take a more laissezfaire approach; roles and responsibilities are not
spelled out clearly, and group members decide
among themselves, often through trial and error,
how to proceed. The role of leader may rotate among
members, or a leader may evolve. Decision making
may be by consensus or ﬁat by a leader or member.
Perhaps little decision making will occur or be
needed. Members may not always be the same, and
backgrounds and educational levels may vary.
The extent of structure within a group has a
signiﬁcant impact on the group’s productivity and
effectiveness. For example, groups with clearly communicated guidelines for membership, roles, respon-

187

sibilities, meeting schedules, tasks, goals, purpose,
minutes, and agendas help members understand the
expectations of membership. These expectations
suggest appropriate and productive group and homework activities. Groups with a purpose but little or
no structure are likely to have confused and frustrated members. Productivity and achieving goals
become more difficult.

GROUP PROCESS
A group usually exists to get a job done a job that is
often referred to as the group task. Group process
comprises the dynamics that occur between and
among group members as they work to complete
the group task. Group process encompasses patterns of behavior and issues that occur as a group
forms and develops over time. Just as an individual
develops from infancy to adulthood and moves with
some predictability through patterns of behavior
and stages of development, so do groups. Having
an understanding of what to expect of an individual’s development helps parents to guide children
through each stage and successfully negotiate
growth and development. Understanding the dynamics of group process and what to expect as
groups grow and develop will help group members
function more effectively and more comfortably.

Group Stages of Development
Decades ago, Homans (1950, 1961) proposed a concise and easily understood process that described the
predictable progress and process of groups. His thesis has stood the test of time and has been reviewed
and expanded by others (Tuckman, 1965; Tuckman
& Jensen, 1977; Lacoursier, 1980; Drinka & Clark,
2000). Homans’ theory suggests that groups move
through four stages: forming, storming, norming,
and performing.

STAGE 1: FORMING
In this initial stage, group members look to the
leader for guidance. If there is no designated leader,
one may emerge, or several members may take a
leadership role at various times. Conversation is
polite; the goal is to create a safe environment and
ﬁnd common interests and areas of acceptance.

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

188

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 188

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Box 12-1
Group Members’ Thoughts
in the Forming Stage
I wonder what they are thinking about me?
Will I be accepted or rejected?
Will they think my ideas are stupid?
Will they pressure me to talk?
Will I fit in?
Will I say too much?
What if they find out what I am really like?
What if I say the wrong thing?
What if they ask me to do something I don’t want to do?

Members are alert to similarities and differences
that they will note for future reference when forming subgroups later. The group avoids controversial
or serious subjects. Discussion centers around how
to deﬁne the scope of the task, how to approach it.
See Box 12-1 for some of the thoughts and private
concerns that members are likely to be having at
this stage.
Characteristics of this stage can include impatience, confusion about group purpose, anxiety,
silence and awkwardness, and off-topic chatter.
General issues of trust are being considered as the
group struggles to ﬁnd a level of ease. To grow from
this stage to the next, each member must relinquish
the comfort of nonthreatening topics and risk the
possibility of conﬂict. As members take small steps
risking sharing their substantive ideas and begin
to experience positive reactions, group comfort will
grow, and the group will move to the next stage of
development. Consider the following example:
During the ﬁrst week of fall semester, eight members of a new junior-level class of nursing students
have agreed to join their college chapter of the
Nursing Student Association (NSA). They have
been told by the seniors who are the leaders of the
NSA that they should meet regularly and work
toward enrolling all of their junior-year classmates
into the NSA. They are expected to be the “front
runners,” who will convince their classmates of the
beneﬁts of joining this organization, and they need
to learn as much as they can about the organization
as quickly as possible so they can be effective mentors for others. The president of the NSA, Kerry,
has asked Kathryn to call the ﬁrst meeting as soon

as possible and to take responsibility for leading
future meetings. The goal is to enroll at least 75 of
the 100 juniors by November 1.
Kathryn has assembled the group of eight for the
ﬁrst meeting. Most are chatting quietly about the
courses they are taking, the faculty they have, and
their concerns about the seniors telling them how
difficult the next 2 years will be. Kathryn tells
everyone what Kerry expects them to do during the
next 6 weeks. All are quiet; sidelong glances are
passing through the group as each waits to see who
will be the ﬁrst to speak.
Amy thinks, “There’s no way anyone is going to
come up with $20 to join NSA because I ask them
to. I am a total failure at selling anything.” She says
edgily, “Why do we have to get members? Why
don’t the seniors do their own work? They are the
NSA officers.” More time passes quietly, and Greg
thinks “I know I won’t ﬁt in here because I’m a guy,
and they probably don’t even care if guys join or
not.” Lindsey thinks, “I never should have come to
this school; too many spoiled children will see me as
the ‘old lady’ with children of my own and think I
have nothing important to say.” Shanna says, “Can
anyone tell me where the bookstore is? I haven’t
bought my books yet.” Trent says, “Sure, I’ll show
you where it is. Where are you from?” Kathryn asks
tentatively, “Well, I know we have a big job to do. Is
anyone willing to help work on a plan for how to
begin?” Jane thinks, “I knew I shouldn’t have come
here. I’m already sure I’m going to fall behind in my
schoolwork and part-time job, and here I am being
asked to do more work. What’s wrong with me?”
Superﬁcial remarks go on for the course of the
meeting as members learn about each other’s
towns, mutual friends, dorms, and so on. Eventually, Greg and Shanna agree to meet with Kathryn
the next day and work on a plan of activities to
move them toward their goal. All agree to meet at
least once a week until November 1, when their list
of new members and the money must be turned in.
Over the next 2 weeks, there are three meetings of
the core group and two more where all eight attend.
By then, when all are gathered, there is more comfortable conversation. Some have met for dinner
and arrived together; two others have joined an aerobics class together and have arrived energized.
Others are trading notes from their leadership class.
Some are still shy, but most are ready to talk about
the next steps of their plan for approaching new
NSA members.

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 189

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency

STAGE 2: STORMING
As work begins on the job at hand (group task) and
the group tries to get organized, competition and
conﬂict develop among personal relations (group
process). This conﬂict occurs because many individuals attempt to contribute, blend, and mold their
ideas, feelings, attitudes, and beliefs as they try to
ﬁnd a way to approach the task at hand. As each
individual contributes to the group, there may be
fear of rejection, fear of failure, tentativeness, frustration, and a growing desire for structure, clariﬁcation, and sense of direction. Questions will arise
about the rules, who is responsible for what, what
the goals are, and how goals will be evaluated. These
questions and comments reﬂect emerging conﬂicts
over leadership, purpose, structure, authority, and
inﬂuence. As these areas of difference emerge, there
will be varying levels of comfort within the group as
well as wide differences in behaviors. Some members may become very silent and withdraw; others
will attempt to dominate. Cliques and subgroups
will develop as agreement and disagreement over
issues become apparent. Trivial matters may become the focus of attention but may be masking
frustration and an inability to deal openly with
larger issues.
In order to progress to the next stage, group members must move from a “testing and proving” to a
problem-solving mentality. Leadership and the ability of group members to listen to each other are critical for groups to move on to the next stage of
development. An effective group leader will utilize
skills of negotiation and consensus building, to help
group members develop greater tolerance for diverse
views, and the varying roles and contributions of all
the members. Think about the NSA group as they
continue developing into the storming stage.
The group has been experiencing some rocky
times. The meetings are often fraught with sullen
silences and sarcastic remarks. Frustration and
anger seem to be frequent visitors, and members are
sometimes missing with no explanation. Some of
the remarks heard during the last few meetings
include:
“It would be nice if someone would give us the
right information once in awhile. Are we supposed
to be collecting money from our classmates or not?”
“Looks like someone wants to take all the credit
for herself” (glancing sidelong at Kathryn, who had
just reported on the number of members joined).

189

“Just because someone happens to be dating a
senior, he thinks he knows what is going on better
than the rest of us.”
“I have lots of people who want to join. Why do
we have to collect the money and be so strict about
keeping a record? Why can’t we just take their word
for it and put their names on the new member list?”
“I think the four of us who live in Windsor Hall
should be a team and not have to keep meeting with
everyone every week.”
“If we can’t ﬁgure out a better way to work
together, we aren’t going to come anymore.”
After a couple of such discouraging meetings,
Kathryn talks with Greg and Shanna about what to
do next. They approach Dr. X, one of the NSA faculty advisors they trust, and explain the situation
and ask for help. The advisor explains she thinks
the group behaviors may reﬂect positive group
growth and signify that the group is moving out of
the “I”-centered forming stage and beginning to test
the tolerance of others. Some are showing their frustration with the group’s lack of productivity by
angry silences or by angry remarks. Dr. X agrees to
try and help. At the next meeting, Kathryn explains
they talked with Dr. X and asked her to help the
group get better organized. She asks if the group is
willing to have Dr. X work with them. The response
is lukewarm but, hearing no strong objections, Dr. X
thanks the group, hands out an agenda, and explains
some ground rules for the meeting. The ground
rules ask that all stay focused on the agenda items,
agree to speak only when recognized by the leader,
promise to make an effort to listen carefully with an
open mind to the person who is speaking, to make
notes for reference if they have something to add
when it is not their turn to speak, and to contribute
with serious, thoughtful, suggestions focused on the
problem being discussed. All agree to follow the
ground rules. Dr. X then shares her impressions of
the situation. She acknowledges the group’s frustration. She also notes the commitment of everyone, as
reﬂected by consistent attendance. She tells them
that their willingness to voice their frustration is
very likely related to their being people who do not
like to waste time and who are conscientious and
goal-oriented and want to get the job done well.
There are nods of agreement.
She passes out a feedback form, asking everyone
to take a few minutes to write about what they
value about this group, what they wish was different, what they would like to accomplish, and what

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

190

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 190

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

suggestions they have to accomplish the goals. They
spend the rest of the evening discussing the collective feedback of the group and brainstorm a list of
goals, a list of short-term objectives, a detailed plan
of tasks, and a list of volunteers to work on each
task. Finally, they develop a time line for the completion of each task. The next few meetings are
less chaotic, becoming more focused on the group
purpose.

and encourages those who may be having less than
stellar results. Dr. X attends meetings for a few minutes each week to offer her help but observes that
the group has shifted its focus from individual
needs to the group job. Many good ideas for ways to
encourage their classmates to join NSA are generated, and members are often heard complimenting
each other for their successes.

STAGE 4: PERFORMING
STAGE 3: NORMING
The next stage is called norming because, as the
group becomes more cohesive and tolerant of differences, the group process becomes calmer. Members
have had time to become more familiar with each
other and are better able to predict each other’s reactions and behaviors. This normalcy lessens anxiety
and builds trust as group norms begin to develop.
Over time and with good group leadership, roles and
responsibilities become clearer, and members begin
to feel less tension. More productive patterns of
behavior develop. Cliques dissolve, and members listen to and value facts, ideas, and opinions brought
to the group. Problem solving improves. The group
job during this stage entails actively engaging in
problem solving, sharing ideas, doing research, and
producing facts and information. The group members share feelings and ideas, solicit and offer feedback to one another, and explore actions related to
the task. Creativity is high. At this stage, interactions (group process) are characterized by more
acceptance, openness, and sharing on both a personal and task level. Consider the NSA group as it
embarks on group norming.
Over the next couple of weeks, group members
have additional interaction as they compare notes
and communicate between classes and in the evenings about how well tasks are being completed.
Greg is feeling more comfortable that his classmates
appreciate his record-keeping skills, even though he
does not share their interest in the shopping trip
they are planning. Jamie has experience selling
books door-to-door and is teaching the group the art
of how to convince others of the value of what you
are selling and how to follow through with collecting the money. Amy keeps everyone informed by
e-mail of the progress being made. Trent takes responsibility for safeguarding the money collected
and issuing receipts. Lindsey plays the role of being
the sounding board for the latest gripes, ideas, and
suggestions. She strives to keep everyone motivated

Not all groups reach the performing stage. If they do,
the capacity of the group members and the depth of
their relationships become truly interdependent; the
group has established a highly functioning team.
Group members can work independently, in subgroups, or as a total unit with equal facility. Roles,
authority, and responsibilities easily adjust to the
changing needs of the group and of individual members. Members feel secure, and the need for group
approval is no longer an issue. Members have
become highly task-oriented and people-oriented.
Morale and group identity are strong; group loyalty
is intense. The group is productive, engages in genuine problem solving, and creates effective solutions. The transformation from being a group of
individuals to being a highly functioning team is
complete.
November 1 was celebration day for the group.
Through the weeks, members produced steady
results and rallied around each other to overcome
obstacles. As midterm approached, all were challenged by increased demands on time. Greg admitted that he was behind in his research paper for
adult nursing; Shanna volunteered to keep records
for a week so he could catch up. Lindsey’s father
suffered a serious illness that required all her attention. The rest of the group took turns baby sitting
each evening for her and involved her two children
in stuffing membership envelopes. Trent took on
Lindsey’s role of encourager by making a large chart
showing progress toward the goals for the week.
Jamie invited a different senior to come each week
to talk about the fun and professional activities that
membership in the NSA offers. At one point, it
became clear to the group that several juniors
wanted to join NSA but could not afford membership. Kathryn, Jane, and Shanna had an idea that
was quickly embraced by the entire group. Kathryn
approached the manager of the local music store
where she worked, and he agreed to donate a $50
gift certiﬁcate to the group. The group organized a

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 191

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency

raffle. Each member committed to sell at least 12
tickets for $2 each, and they raised $200 from students, friends, family, and faculty. With the help of
Dr. X, the money was discreetly distributed to 10
qualiﬁed students to help them pay membership
dues. During this process, it was clear that the group
members were willing to work together toward
group goals, and each knew he or she could count on
teammates for help with tasks and personal support.
Not all groups develop to the performing stage,
but those that do become highly functioning, highly
effective teams. Many groups form and accomplish
a task without investing the time and energy necessary to become a team. But when work groups do
become teams, they return the highest level of productivity to their employers and the highest level of
service to their clients. The difference in effectiveness of teams versus lower-functioning groups that
have not negotiated through the group development
stages can mean the difference between optimal
nursing care and care fraught with inefficiency and

TABLE 12-3

191

error. Consider the level of nursing care that might
be delivered by a group at an early stage of development, perhaps at the storming stage, compared with
a team at the performing stage. See Table 12-3
(adapted from the Web page of Nondestructive
Testing, Teamwork in the Classroom [2004]).

Interdisciplinary Teams
As society has experienced a knowledge and technology explosion, the number of health-care disciplines has increased, and coordination of care has
become more complex. A patient entering the
health-care delivery system, even for an overnight
stay, is likely to be observed, interviewed, examined,
tested, treated, discharged, and monitored by a
dozen different caregivers representing several medical, nursing, and allied health disciplines. This
process offers the patient a breadth and depth of

Group Versus Team Characteristics

STORMING STAGE GROUPS

PERFORMING STAGE TEAMS

Members work independently and may not be
working toward the same goal.

Members work interdependently and work toward both personal
and shared team goals and understand these goals are accomplished best by mutual support.

Members focus mostly on themselves and are not
involved in the planning of their group’s objectives
and goals.

Members feel a sense of ownership toward their role in the
group because they committed themselves to achieving goals
they helped create.

Members are assigned tasks or told what their job is,
and suggestions are rarely welcomed.

Members collaborate and use their multiple talents and experiences to meet the team’s objectives.

Members are cautious about what they say and are
afraid to ask questions. They may not fully understand
what is taking place in their group.

Members base their success on trust and encourage all members
to express their opinions, varying views, and questions.

Members do not trust each other’s motives, and roles
are not clearly understood.

Members make a conscious effort to be honest and respectful
and listen to every person’s point of view.

Members may have a lot to contribute but hold back
because of superficial relationships with other members.

Members are encouraged to offer their skills and knowledge, and
in turn each member is able to contribute to the group’s success.

Members are bothered by differing opinions or disagreements because they consider them a threat.
There is no group support to help resolve problems.

Members consider conflict as a part of human nature, and they
react to it by treating it as an opportunity to hear about new
ideas and opinions. Everybody wants to resolve problems
constructively.

Members may or may not participate in group decision
making, and conformity is valued more than positive
results.

Members participate equally in decision making, and each
member understands that the leader might need to make the
final decision if the team cannot come to a consensus.

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

192

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 192

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

comprehensive knowledge and expertise and requires a high level of communication, collaboration,
mutual understanding, and respect among the caregivers. Caregivers may include a physician (perhaps
multiple specialists); physician assistant; nurses; respiratory, occupational, or physical therapist; social
worker; nutritionist; and a myriad of administrators, aides, and technicians. Clerical employees and
other support persons may be assisting each discipline. This plethora of personnel presents a serious
challenge to effective communication and efficient
teamwork.
Health-care agencies expect their caregivers to be
competent practitioners and effective team members. To be effective, each team member must understand the various roles played by each discipline.
Physicians are trained and educated to be the central
hub of the health-care team. They are likely to be the
ﬁrst point of contact, and they focus on the disease
process or condition that has caused the patient to
seek health-care services. Nurses are educated and
trained to focus on the holistic needs of the patients
as they respond to the stresses associated with their
disease or condition.
The critical importance of teamwork and communication in health care has been underscored by
several published reports in the last decade. These
studies document the association between quality
patient care and effective teamwork (Firth-Cozens,
2001; Institute of Medicine Study, 1999; Kaissi,
Johnson, & Kirschbaum, 2003; Majzun, 1998;
Sexton, Thomas, & Helmreich, 2000). The ﬁndings
suggest that teamwork enhances efficiency, contributes to improved morale and job satisfaction,
lowers stress, and improves patient satisfaction.
Risser et al. (1999) points out that effective teamwork provides a safety net against patient care
errors because it allows for coordinated and integrated clinical activities and gives caregivers more
control over their work environment. An earlier
study by Williamson et al. (1993) and cited by
Kaissi reported that 70%–80% of medical errors
are related to interpersonal interaction issues.
Communication and teamwork issues have been
often cited as shortcomings in the health-care system. Caregiver errors contribute to compromised
patient safety and diminish job satisfaction among
health-care professionals. A recent report, entitled
“Silence Kills,” (2005) published by VitalSmarts in
collaboration with the American Association of
Critical Care Nurses (AACN), addresses the need
for health team members to communicate better.

The study points out the need for professionals to
confront each other about detrimental caregiving
behaviors that contribute to hundreds of thousands
of patients being harmed each year. In addition, it
notes that 1 in 20 hospitalized patients will be given
a wrong medication; 3.5 million will get an infection due to lack of handwashing or good precautions (Wenzel & Edmond, 2001); and 195,000 will
die because of other mistakes made by caregivers
(HealthGrades Quality Study, 2004).

Practice Proof 12-1
Article: Silence Kills, The Seven Crucial Conversations for
Healthcare
Author: Maxfield D., et al. Source: VitalSmarts in Partnership with the American Association of Critical Nurses,
www.silencekills.com
This study addressed communication patterns among
caregivers in hospitals. Researchers collected data from a
sample of 1700 nurses, physicians, and other health-care
personnel in 13 U.S. hospitals during 2004. Data collection
methods included interviews, surveys, and observations.
They examined how caregivers communicate their
concerns to their coworkers when they observe them
providing care in ways that contribute to errors, reduced
productivity, poor morale, and high turnover. Results
suggest that the majority of health-care workers practice
safely and competently. More than half the caregivers
surveyed, however, reported observing some number
of workers who exhibit problem behaviors continuing
over long periods who were not held accountable. They
reported witnessing policy infractions, incompetence,
and mistakes. Yet fewer than one in ten discussed their
concerns with the coworker, and most indicated they
did not think it was possible to change and felt no
responsibility to raise their concerns. Twenty percent of
the physicians said they saw harm come to patients as a
result of these concerns, and 23% of nurses reported
considering seeking new positions as a result of these
concerns. About 10% of the respondents reported willingness to raise their concerns with their coworkers and as a
result observed better patient outcomes, more satisfaction, and commitment to staying in their positions. The
study results suggest that if more health-care workers
would communicate their concerns when they see inappropriate practice behaviors, there would be significantly
fewer errors, higher productivity, and lower turnover.
Most health-care workers want patients to get good care
yet they are reluctant to confront their coworkers when
they see risky behaviors. Why does that happen and can
you describe some examples of similar situations?

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 193

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency

Another signiﬁcant published work that calls
attention to the need for teamwork in the context of
patient safety is “To Err is Human: Building a Safer
Health Care System” prepared by the Institute of
Medicine (1999). This report cites many factors
related to health-care errors and makes many
recommendations for improvement, including the
need for excellent communication among health
team members and effective teamwork training.
The report calls for health-care organizations to
implement patient safety programs that promote
team functioning and to train in teams those
who are expected to work in teams. Drinka and
Clark (2000) support the “training in teams” concept. They recommend that students participate in
interdisciplinary courses during college. In their
courses, the goal is to develop an appreciation for
and an understanding of the differences and similarities among their professions. Students could
engage in learning about the theoretical and value
orientations of other professions and develop a
foundation for continued understanding and collaboration that will transfer to practice. McPherson,
Headrick, and Moss (2001) also support educational strategies that prepare learners to collaborate and provide a comprehensive review of
recent literature that identiﬁes the issues, examples,
methods, and conclusions about “interprofessional
education.”
Kaissi, Johnson, and Kirschbaum (2003) conducted a survey that explored the attitudes of
nurses related to patient safety and teamwork. The
nurse respondents were members of teams practicing in high-risk areas, such as operating room,
emergency room, and intensive care units. These
nurses believed that effective teamwork was as
important as clinical competency with respect to
patient safety. They also reported the need for
clearer team leadership roles, more team input into
patient care decisions, and better teamwork relations between nurses in high-risk areas and with
anesthesiologists and nurse anesthetists. These
reports strongly support the need for health caregivers to be proﬁcient and effective team members
and continually to build skills needed to be successful team leaders. Effective teams need the structure
of clear ground rules that all members know,
understand, and support. Teams with good structure, good communication, and good leadership will
far exceed the accomplishments of an individual.
Teams that invest the time and energy to learn and
execute team skills will provide uncommon results.

193

Practice to Strive For 12-1
The team must have clear goals. Team goals should call
for a specific performance objective that is expressed so
concisely that everyone knows when the objective has
been met.
The team must have a results-driven structure. Teams
need latitude to organize themselves in a way that will let
them produce results. Teams needs space, resources, members with expertise, self-defined roles, and time.
The team must have competent team members. The
problems given to the team should be those the members
can solve given their level of knowledge and experience.
The team must have unified commitment. This does not
mean that team members must always agree. It means
that all individuals must be directing their efforts toward
the goal. If a member’s efforts are going toward personal
goals, the team should address this and communicate the
need for commitment to goals from all.
The team must be collaborative. Trust produced by honest, open, consistent, and respectful behavior and communication is required. With trust, teams perform well; without
it, they fail.
The team must have high standards that are understood
by all. Team members must know what is expected of them
individually and collectively. All are responsible for clarifying
confusion and giving and asking for guidance when
needed.
The team must receive external support and encouragement. Encouragement and praise work just as well to
motivate teams as they do individuals.
The team must have principled leadership. Teams usually
need someone to lead the effort. Team members must
know the team leader is competent and is working for
the good of the team. Team members will not support
the leader motivated primarily by the need to achieve
personal recognition or other benefits not related to
achieving team goals.

Note some best practices based on the work of
Larson and LaFasto (1989).

Effective Communication
Within Teams
Many of the problems that occur within teams are
the direct result of people failing to communicate
effectively. Effective communication takes place
only if the receiver understands the exact informa-

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

194

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 194

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

tion or idea that the sender intended to transmit.
Most literature about effective communication
agrees that the communication process begins with
the sender having information in his or her mind. It
may be a thought, a conceptual idea, technical information, or a feeling. The sender “sends” this communication, using observable behaviors, to the
receiver, and the receiver “gets it” using senses, and
translates the words or message into information in
the receiver’s mind. This could be described as a
“mind to mind” transmission. During the process,
the receiver will receive a message about both the
content and the context of the message. Content is
the actual spoken or written language that can be
understood by those who speak the same language.
Misunderstandings or confusion may occur when
senders and receivers apply different interpretations
or usage to the same words. Context, sometimes
referred to as paralanguage, includes the additional
messages that may be sensed or perceived through
nonlanguage behaviors. Context may include tone
of voice, the look in the sender’s eyes, body language, hand gestures, or real or perceived state of
emotion (anger, fear, uncertainty, conﬁdence, etc.).
These multiple variables of paralanguage can easily
cause misinterpretation of or confusion about what
may appear to be clear content. Individuals believe
what they see over what they hear and tend to trust
the accuracy of nonverbal behaviors more than verbal behaviors (Schuster, 2000, p.13). Several nonverbal contextual behaviors that have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the way messages are received are
described in Box 12-2 (Arnold & Boggs, 1995;
Burgoon et al, 1996; Riley, 2000; Schuster, 2000).
In the process of communication, there are many
opportunities for a message to become distorted or
altered between the sending and receiving. For
example, many team leaders think they have communicated once they have told someone to do something (“I don’t know why it did not get done, I told
Jim to do it.”) Perhaps Jim did not hear or understand the message. The message has not been communicated unless the receiver has received and
understood it exactly as the sender intended it to be
understood. Communicators can validate if a message has been properly received by engaging in twoway communication (feedback). Communication
is an exchange, not just a one-way give, and both
parties must participate in the feedback process
to be sure nothing was “lost in translation.” One
excellent way to ensure effective two-way communication is with active listening and feedback.

Box 12-2
Common Nonverbal Behaviors
Vocal: Tone, pitch, rhythm, timbre, volume, and inflection
are nonverbal gauges of enthusiasm and interest. A
monotone sends a signal of boredom, dullness, and
disinterest.
Facial expressions: Smiling signals happiness, friendliness,
warmth, and liking to Smiling is likely to create comfort
and willingness to listen.
Eye contact: Signals interest in others. Initiates flow of the
message and conveys interest, concern, warmth, credibility, and presence.
Personal space: Dictated by cultural norms to signify
a comfortable physical distance for interaction with
others. Signals of discomfort caused by invading one’s
space include moving away, turning away, rocking, leg
swinging, finger tapping, averting eyes.
Speaking style: A lively speaking style captures the
listener’s attention, makes the conversation more
interesting, and facilitates understanding. Lack of
animation while speaking may be perceived as boredom, ill ease, and disinterest.
Posture and body orientation: Standing erect and
leaning forward communicate approachability,
receptivity, and friendliness. Interpersonal closeness
is created when sender and receiver face each other.
Turned to side or back, looking at the floor or ceiling
communicate disinterest and discomfort.

Active listening is listening with full attention with
the intention of understanding. It requires a conscious focus of energy and concentration and full
engagement of the listener. It requires listeners to
listen as if they will be asked to repeat every word
they have heard. Not only will this level of attention
promote effective communication of the message, it
will also nonverbally communicate full attention
and interest back to the sender. Some signs of active
listening appear in Box 12-3 (Arnold & Boggs,
1995; Burgoon et al, 1996; Riley, 2000).
Feedback is another powerful communication
tool because it helps to verify that the message
received was the one sent. Providing feedback may
entail the receiver paraphrasing or restating what
was perceived, such as “This is what I understood
you to say” or “This is what I understand you are
feeling. Am I correct?” The feedback process can
identify the need for further discussion to prevent
misunderstanding. Communication “in a hurry”
and without feedback can lead to errors, hurt feel-

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 195

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency

Box 12-3
Signs of Active Listening
Spends more time listening than talking.
Notices own biases. (We all have them. We need to
recognize them, acknowledge them, and ask ourselves
how they affect what we are hearing.)
Does not daydream or become preoccupied with own
thoughts when others talk.
Allows time for other speaker to talk. Does not dominate
the conversation.
Creates responses after the other person has finished
speaking, not while the person is speaking.
Provides feedback but does not interrupt incessantly.
Analyzes by looking at all the relevant factors and asking
open-ended questions. Reflects, summarizes, asks for
more information.
Stays attentive to what the speaker says; does not shift to
what interests the listener.
May take brief notes, which requires concentration on
what is being said.

ings, wasted time, and an inefficient and ineffective
work environment. When providing feedback, it is
important to stay positive and nonjudgmental.
Being nonjudgmental requires conscious effort on
the part of the listener. The listener must attempt
to resist being distracted by inner thoughts and
judgments that arise in reaction to the message
being heard. Attending to these inner thoughts and
judgments, instead of giving full attention to the
message, distracts the listener and may create misunderstanding. For example, if the listener experiences anger at what is being said during the ﬁrst
part of the message, it is likely that the feeling
of anger will become the focus of the listener, and
the rest of the message may be distorted or lost.
If the listener can make a conscious effort to wait
until the entire message is heard before attending to
any emotions that may be associated with the message, it will improve the effectiveness of the communication.
Dr. Carl Rogers, a noted psychologist during the
ﬁrst half of the 20th century, was an advocate for
nonjudgmental communication. He advocated
using several deliberate techniques to provide feedback. He recommended paraphrasing, interpreting,
providing supportive statements, probing for more
information, reﬂecting back the same words and/or
feelings, and sharing feelings. He advised that the

195

techniques be practiced and utilized with genuineness by the communicators. He cautioned that utilizing feedback techniques in a mechanical way or
as manipulations would likely be recognized as
such by the communicators and interfere with clear
communication and trust building. Effective communication is a cornerstone of effective teamwork,
and it works best when those involved are committed to utilizing excellent communication skills,
attempt to suspend personal judgments, and extend
respect and positive regard for their teammates.
Good communication is a rare and precious talent and requires practice. Nurses working together
must apply best practices of good communication to
minimize opportunities for errors or omissions in
care based on misunderstandings. Communication
skill is foundational to professionals being able
to share, collaborate, delegate, and integrate their
knowledge, expertise, and experiential wisdom.
Professional expertise that is shared and blended
among colleagues optimizes beneﬁts to patients.
Each discipline must understand its own roles as
well as the roles of other team members so that
appropriate referrals can be made and specialized
expertise applied.

Team Leading
Effective team leaders must understand the concepts and theories that explain how teams function
so they can meet the challenges inherent in this
complex leadership role. Adjusting to the complexities of caregiving settings, negotiating development
through group stages, facilitating effective communication, and maintaining patient safety is work to
be guided by the team leader. In fact, one of the
most important factors in overcoming these challenges and rising to the opportunities is having a
competent team leader.
LaFasto & Larson (2001) note “Your purpose
as a leader is to add value to your team’s effort”
(p. 99). The team leader’s primary job is to stay
focused on the results that the team has been
charged to produce. As tasks are shared, different
points of view are expressed during planning, or
conﬂicting feelings are shared about group events,
and the leader must react appropriately. The challenge will be to interpret and react while keeping
the ultimate goal of the team in mind. The best leaders will consistently monitor the progress toward

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

196

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 196

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

the goal and plan actions accordingly. The leader
must “keep an eye on the prize” and rally team
members to do the same.
Some skills to assist the leader to stay focused on
the goal include:
■

■
■

■

■

■

■

■

Deﬁne the goal often to the team and ask the
team to do the same.
Provide visual reminders of the goal.
Explain how tasks or assignments will contribute to accomplishment of the goal, and ask
members to do the same.
Keep the goal alive by discussing it frequently
and in different ways.
Use frequent examples of how all contributions are moving toward the goal.
Share examples of reports/stories/literature of
how others reached similar goals.
Help all to understand how/why difficult tasks
may be the key to creating the change.
Value team members, and trust them.

Team leaders must also invite active participation
of all team members and make it clear that all members’ input is valued. Team leaders should be honest
when providing feedback to members. Ground rules
must call for the expectation of honest communication delivered in a respectful manner. The leader
must set the tone and example for communicating
honestly and respectfully and must calmly and
respectfully confront others not observing this rule.
In most circumstances, the leader should expect,
acknowledge, and reward collaboration over competition (see Chapter 21). Providing guidance in
using a methodical and clear problem-solving
method is essential. A balance between tending to
the need for technical knowledge and expertise and
tending to interpersonal group process needs must
be met. There will be times that team effectiveness
is blocked because a deeper level of knowledge is
needed or times when progress is impeded because
team members are not working well together. The
good team leader will constantly monitor the team’s
progress toward its goals and provide the skill and
support that are needed to help the team progress.
This may take the form of exposing the team to new
information, or it may require mediating a disagreement between team members who are not working
well together. Providing effective leadership will
require diligent monitoring and holding high expectations of team members. Encouraging task assignments that have high expectations but are doable
will stretch the team’s ability. Success with stretch-

ing will build conﬁdence and create the opportunity
to experience a “win.” A leader who is fair and
impartial, shows no favoritism, and facilitates inclusiveness will create a team that is willing to take
greater and greater risks. Building conﬁdence will
create more motivation for positive action. A good
leader says “thank you” in as many verbal and nonverbal ways as can be imagined.
Effective leaders are mindful of the need for good
technical expertise. Teams need to have the necessary knowledge, experience, and background necessary to reach the goal. Hard work goes a long way
toward success, but without the right knowledge in
the right areas effective problem solving is unlikely.
A team leader who recognizes that a team has
knowledge deficits will search for assistance.
Possible solutions include adding more knowledgeable team members or providing the team with
strong consultation to assist members with building
the competence needed.
While keeping the team’s ultimate goal in mind, a
wise leader will also develop interim steps designed
to move toward goal achievement and will assist
members with prioritizing each step. To focus
energy and ensure efficiency, leader and members
must be clear about what work is essential and what
is not. Effective leaders set priorities by asking,
“What are the three most important steps for us to
achieve today (or by our next meeting)?” Teams can
not reach goals, work collaboratively, build conﬁdence, or apply their expertise if they are not clear
about the priorities or if they have too many priorities. The team leader must consistently communicate the priorities to be met and help envision how
the step-by-step priorities ﬁt within the big picture
of goal attainment.
Finally, the team leader must apply management
skills to facilitate effectiveness and productivity.
Nonperformers must be managed in a positive
way. The leader must communicate concern to nonperformers and provide clear descriptions of expected performance. Nonperformers must be made
aware of expected time lines and the rewards and
consequences that will be applied for improved or
continued lack of performance. Lack of response by
nonperformers will create deterioration of team
morale and will soon affect team productivity. Nonperformers will likely appreciate guidance toward
better performance or will welcome the opportunity to acknowledge they would prefer not to be
part of the team. Team leaders who guide their team
to stay focused on the goal, stay in a collaborative

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 197

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency

rather than competitive mode, maintain conﬁdence,
provide or build the necessary technical knowledge
for goal attainment, set priorities, and manage performance will ﬁnd themselves in constant demand

for service. They will also be appreciated by their
team members and will make a lasting contribution
to the safe and effective care of health-care consumers.

chapter star:

Two nurses and a physician have led formal performance
improvement teams, created with the approval and
support of hospital administration, to improve patient
care outcomes. Issues of care addressed by the teams
included length of stay and care of patients at risk for
or experiencing deep vein thrombosis, cardiac care,
pneumonia, and infections. Team membership varied with
the condition being addressed and involved a wide variety
of levels and disciplines, including physicians of multiple
specialties, nurses of multiple units and specialties, case
managers, pharmacists, compliance officers, education
consultants, telephone operators, unit secretaries, health
information managers, and technology support. Team
leaders unanimously agreed that their experience with
leading interdisciplinary teams left them with the beliefs
that good teams create safer and better patient care,
improve resource utilization, improve collaboration,
and contribute to more satisfied caregivers. Informal
conversations with these team leaders also revealed
eight recurring themes that exemplified the challenges,
opportunities, rewards, and value of effective team
leadership in caregiving settings. These themes are:
1. The need for clear goals. Leaders emphasized that a
condition for success was the identification of clear goals
and the need for leaders to facilitate the “buy-in” of goals
by all team members. Asking each team member to
commit to the success of the team one by one was
noted as a successful strategy within one team. The
importance of leaders having public support of the team
goals from highly regarded influential hospital leaders
was also noted as crucial. Adopting national quality
indicators for patient care issues was also noted as an
important element in goal setting. Leaders also noted the
need to revisit goals and articulate the vision loudly and
often.
2. The need for ground rules. Leaders agreed that
members need to know expectations for structure and
behavior and that leaders must make these clear. Ground
rules that were considered most important included:
clear expectations for time and place of meetings, attendance, communication, collaboration, and mutual
respect among members. Examples of interventions
that were applied by leaders to address the need to
follow ground rules included the next five themes.
3. Need for attendance. A leader discussed pattern of

197

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

poor attendance privately and respectfully with a
member and requested better performance in future.
After little improvement, member was confronted again
and given the opportunity to withdraw from the team
with the promise of joining at a future time when she
would have more time to devote to teamwork. This
proved to be an acceptable solution to all and preserved
integrity of team and member.
Need for mutual trust. Members expressed concern
that data-gathering protocols were not followed by
some group members. Leader acknowledged the
concern and evaluated data-gathering process. Leader
used the incident as an opportunity to facilitate open
discussion among team members about the need to
respect, trust, and value the competence and
contributions of all caregiving disciplines while
acknowledging the responsibility of the team to identify
concerns about inadequate performance.
Need for effective communication. Leaders believed
the need for good communication was imperative. They
noted that willingness to communicate created opportunity to solve problems effectively within the team. They
also noted that when team members became more
familiar with each other’s roles, communication
improved as did respect and collaboration.
Need for recognizing progression from norming to
storming. One member consistently monopolized team
time to criticize progress. Reactions from other team
members reflected frustration, sarcasm, defensiveness,
and clique formation. Leader led discussion with
reminders for respect and focus on issues. Resolved
by giving the criticizer the responsibility for a new task
that would improve productivity and take advantage
of his talent for attention to detail and doing it his way.
Need to facilitate scholarship oriented collaboration:
Improved relationship and respect for others led to sharing of professional literature and ideas. Assessment tools
and protocols were developed reflecting interdisciplinary
interests. Team members reported more collaborative
care and more satisfaction with their work environment.
Need to communicate across generations: New team
approach seemed to threaten autonomy and “old way
of doing things” for some practitioners. Team agreed to
enlist key peers of older generation (who were accepting of changes) to communicate rationale for changes.

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

198

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 198

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

All Good Things...
This chapter has explored the value of team building
and teamwork in health care. The innumerable
numbers and types of health-caregivers create
potential for chaos and require coordination of care
for patient safety. Coordination of care occurs best
with teamwork, and the elements of good teamwork
include good communication and good group work.
Effective communication is based on intentional
application of good sending and receiving techniques. Effective group work occurs when group
members understand group structure and process
and are committed to achieving group goals. Groups
grow through stages of development; those that are
highly developed become productive teams. The
best teams have effective leaders, excellent communication, group loyalty, clear goals, ﬂexibility, competence, and members who care about each other.
Teams are the cornerstone of high-quality patient
care and satisfying work environments.

Let’s Talk
1. Think about the various health-care workers you
have met. How well informed do you feel about
the roles they ﬁll? How does the nursing role
differ from the respiratory therapist role? How
are they the same? How could you ﬁnd out more
about their role and the roles of other health-care
disciplines?

NCLEX Questions
1. The situation that best exempliﬁes why nurses

must be skilled in functioning as an interdisciplinary team member is:
A. Nurses are frequently expected to serve as a
team leader on their nursing unit, which may
include several levels of nurse caregivers.
B. Most practicing nurses are expected to be a
member of or provide leadership for formal
nursing committees.
C. Nurses must be prepared to participate in
nursing research groups to improve nursing
care.

D. Most nurses function in hospitals that
employ specialists from many different caregiver groups who must work together to provide coordinated care.
2. Pick the situation below that would provide the

greatest opportunities for misunderstanding,
friction, and conﬂict based on the concepts
described in this chapter.
A. Ms. Hassad, AS, RN; Mr. Krank, CAN; and
Dr. Arrington, ER physician, are applying a
cast to Steven, a 4-year-old accident victim.
Steven’s mother, father, and grandparents are
present. The family is very anxious and
watching to be sure that Steven receives the
best care.
B. The staff members of the NICU (six BSN,
RNs; two CNAs, one medical director, one
surgical director, two respiratory therapists,
two unit administrative assistants, one pharmacist, and one MSN nurse manager) are
working as a team to lower the nosocomial
infection rate on their unit.
C. Ms. Carmen, BSN, RN, is a home health
nurse caring for Mr. Wolinski who lives alone
and is very depressed, argumentative, and
hard of hearing.
D. Six BSN nursing students enrolled in Nursing
301, Healthy Communities, have been
assigned to work as a group to develop a
teaching plan for smoking cessation.
3. Which of the statements below best describes

the relationship between nursing care, groups,
and teams?
A. Good teamwork is dependent on understanding how groups work
B. Good nursing care is dependent on good
teamwork, and good teamwork is dependent
on good group dynamics.
C. All three are equally important, and it is not
necessary to understand their relatedness.
D. Good group work has nothing to do with
good teamwork
4. All of the following groups are considered “for-

mal” groups except:
A. The nursing research committee of the NICU
B. Nurses who are friends and have a walkers’
group at lunchtime
C. Memorial Hospital Nursing Safety Committee
D. The IRB of University Medical Center

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 199

Building Teams for Productivity and Efficiency

5. Consider the following description of the NICU

staffing group in Question 2 above: All staff
members have been employed on this unit and
have been working together for at least 6 months.
All the staff caregivers deliver conscientious
quality care each day. Part of their caregiving
plan follows a special protocol that the group
developed (based on research about nosocomial
infections in the NICU). It includes careful handwashing, careful adherence to sterile technique
and universal precautions, careful adherence to
proper equipment use, and careful observation of
all caregiver behaviors to be sure they are aligned
with agreed upon standards of care. Disagreements occur and are discussed and resolved at
team meetings. When illness requires a change in
staff workdays, someone volunteers to cover;
members celebrate holidays and birthdays; they
do their homework and they work together to
screen new applicants for open positions to protect the collaborative culture and effective caregiving model they have developed. This group
best exempliﬁes what stage of group development?
A. Norming
B. Forming
C. Storming
D. Performing
6. The critical importance of teamwork and com-

munication in health care has been documented
in many published reports. These reports support the positive association between effective
teamwork and:
A. Quality patient care
B. Higher medication errors
C. Compromised patient safety
D. Lower staff morale
7. The best way to check to see if what you have

communicated has been understood the way you
meant it to be is to use:
A. Content and context clues
B. Nonverbal communication
C. Reliance on paralanguage
D. Active listening and feedback
8. Effective communication is a cornerstone of

effective teamwork and it works best when those
involved are committed to all of the following
except:

199

A. Utilizing mechanical techniques
B. Attempting to suspend personal judgments
C. Extending respect and positive regard for
their teammates.
D. Utilizing excellent communication skills
9. Skills of good team leaders include all of the

following except:
A. Clearly deﬁning the goal and providing
frequent visual reminders of the goal
B. Ignoring nonperformers and expecting
others to do so
C. Explaining how tasks or assignments will
contribute to accomplishment of the goal
and asking members to do the same
D. Using frequent examples of how all contributions are moving toward the goal
10. When a team leader recognizes a need for

improved technical expertise in the team, the
leader may address this problem by:
A. Demanding that the team members work
harder to gain more knowledge and experience in the necessary technical areas
B. Sharing disappointment with the team and
requesting that members solicit assistance
from a colleague to help them become more
competent
C. Adding a new team member who is knowledgeable and can provide the team with
strong consultation to assist other members
D. Explaining to the employer that the team
does not have the necessary knowledge and
skills to meet the team goals
REFERENCES
Arnold, E., & Boggs, K. (1995). Interpersonal Relationships (2nd
ed.). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
California Strategic Planning Committee for Nursing. Retrieved
September 9, 2004, from http://www.csuchico.edu/nurs/
levelsofnursed.htm
Burgoon, J.K., et al. (1996). Deceptive realities: Sender, reviewer,
and observer perspectives in deceptive conversations.
Communication Research, 23, 724–748.
Drinka, P., & Clark, P. (2000). Health care teamwork: Interdisciplinary practice and teaching. Westport, CT: Auburn
House.
Firth-Cozens, J. (2001). Cultures for improving patient safety
through learning: The role of teamwork. Quality in Health
Care, 10(Suppl II), 1126–1131.
Geriatric Interdisciplinary Team Training: A Curriculum
from the Huffinton Center on Aging at Baylor College
of Medicine. (2001). Long, D.M., & and Wilson, N.L. (eds.)
New York: John Hartford Foundation, Inc. Retrieved

12Jones Leadership(F)-ch 12

200

1/14/07

3:43 PM

Page 200

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

November 5, 2004, from http://www.hospice.va.gov/Bronx/
module_3.htm
HealthGrades Quality Study (2004). Patient safety in American
hospitals. HealthGrades, Inc.
Homans, G. (1950). The human group. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
Homans, G. (1961). Social behavior: Its elementary forms. New
York: Harcourt Brace.
Institute of Medicine (1999). To err is human: Building a safer
health system. Washington, DC.: National Academy Press.
Kaissi, A., Johnson, T., & Kirschbaum, M. (2003). Measuring
teamwork and patient safety attitudes of high risk areas.
Nursing Economics, 21(5), 211–218.
Lacoursiere, R.B. (1980). The life cycle of groups: Group development theory. New York: Human Sciences Press.
LaFasto, R., & Larson, C. (2001). When teams work best.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Larson, C.E., & LaFasto, F.M.J. (1989). Team work: What must go
right/what can go wrong. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Majzun, R. (1998). The role of teamwork in improving patient
satisfaction. Group Practice Journal, 47.
McPherson, K., Headrick, L., & Moss, F. (2001). Working and
learning together: Good quality care depends on it, but how
can we achieve it? Quality in Health Care, 2110(10): 47–53.
Nondestructive Testing (2004). Teamwork in the Classroom.
Retrieved October 29, 2004, from http://www.ndted.
org/TeachingResources/ClassroomTips/Teamwork.htm

Riley, J.B. (2000). Communication in nursing (4th ed.). St. Louis:
Mosby.
Risser, T.R., et al. (1999). The potential for improved teamwork
to reduce medical errors in the emergency department. Annals
of Emergency Medicine, 34(3): 373–383.
Rogers, C.R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Schuster, P.A. (2000). Communication: The key to the therapeutic
relationship. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Sexton, J., Thomas, F., & Helmreich, R. (2000). Error, stress, and
teamwork in medicine and aviation: Cross sectional surveys.
British Medical Journal, 320, 745–749.
Silence kills: The seven crucial conversations for healthcare
(2005). Retrieved July 2, 2005, at http://www.silencekills.
com
Stout, R., Salas, E., & Fowlkes, J. (1997). Enhancing teamwork
to complex environments through team training. Group
Dynamics: Theory, Research & Practice 1(2): 169–182.
Tuckman, B. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups.
Psychological Bulletin, 63, 384–399.
Tuckman, B., & Jensen, M. (1977). Stages of small group development. Group and Organizational Studies, 2, 419–427.
Wenzel, R., & Edmond, M. (2001). The impact of hospital
acquired bloodstream infections. Emerging Infectious Disease,
7(2).
Williamson, J., et al. (1993). Human failure: Analysis of 2000
incident reports. Anesthesia Intensive Care, 21(5): 678–683.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 201

chapter
13
Power, Politics,
and Policy
CAROLINE CAMUÑAS, EDD, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens
can change the world; indeed it is the only thing that ever has.”
Margaret Mead
“The ultimate measure of a person is not where one stands
in moments of comfort and convenience but where one stands
in times of challenge and controversy.”
Martin Luther King, Jr.

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■

To define power, politics, and policy.
To investigate and discuss power, politics, and policy in relation
to nursing and health care.
To examine outcomes of the workings of power, politics, and
policy.
To develop an understanding of how effective use of power,
politics, and policy can enhance nursing and health care.

201

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

202

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 202

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

P

ower, politics, and policy should be familiar concepts for all nurses and are especially important for
nursing leaders. Power, politics, and policy inﬂuence
nursing practice, education, and research, which in
turn inﬂuence health care. Power and politics are
intricately entwined concepts and are sometimes
difficult to differentiate. Both are used to achieve
ends or goals, and both do so through manipulation
of others. Power and politics also interact. People
who are powerful are able to exert more political
pressure; political success brings power that allows
people to accomplish goals through policy development and implementation.
Power is the ability to do or act; it is a state in
which one can manipulate others. Politics is negotiation for (scarce) resources; it is a process through
which one tries successfully or unsuccessfully to
reach a goal. Policy is the “consciously chosen
course of action (or inaction) directed toward some
end” (Kalish & Kalish, 1982, p. 61). Obtaining and
allocating resources are two examples of possession
and use of power. They also exemplify the use of politics in that inﬂuence is needed to get what you want
and need. Policies are guidelines that tell us how we
obtain and allocate those resources. Understanding
power, politics, and policy is crucial to effective
patient care because these concepts have a signiﬁcant impact on access to care, allocation of funds,
and standards of care.

ers. There are no deﬁnitive models of power, which
often makes aspects of power complex and contradictory. Power can shift; it is dynamic.
There are a variety of sources (types or bases) of
power that have been identiﬁed, as derived from the
work of French and Raven (1959), Hersey,
Blanchard, and Natemeyer (1979), Ferguson (1993),
and Joel and Kelly (2002). Understanding sources of
power facilitates analysis of individual and organizational behavior and enables prediction in speciﬁc
situations. Power sources or types are presented
below.

TYPES OR SOURCES
Power can be either positional and personal. Positional power is awarded or granted to a person, but
it is derived from a person’s position, office, or rank
in a formal organization system. Personal power, on
the other hand, is derived from followers. Leaders
who act in ways that are important to followers are
given power. An example is the nurse managers
who have power because they are seen as highly
competent, are good role models, or have some personal attribute that makes them effective in their
roles. Expertise (which is discussed below) is a way
to gain personal power. Common types of power
include (a) authority, (b) expertise, (c) reward, (d)
coercive, and (e) referent.

Authority and Administrative

Power
There are multiple deﬁnitions of power. Some
assert that power is an overall concept that includes
authority and inﬂuence. Others see authority and
inﬂuence as separate ideas or concepts; as such,
they require individual consideration. Power is the
ability to inﬂuence other people despite their resistance and may be actual or potential, intended or
unintended. It may be used for good or evil, for serious purposes or for frivolous and selﬁsh ones.
Power is the ability to control, dominate, or manipulate the actions of others or, as Rollo May stated,
“power is the ability to cause or prevent change”
(1972, p. 99). It is a term used freely by politicians,
policy analysts, and many others. Power is important to nursing because having it is necessary to
achieve goals as individuals, professionals, and lead-

Administrative (sometimes called legitimate) or
positional power requires that one serve in a line
position and have responsibility for management
and actions of other employees. This kind of
authority is given to a position rather than to a particular person, for it is part of a role regardless of
who ﬁlls that role. For example, although the chief
executive officer (CEO) in a health-care organization has the most power, the CEO is still answerable
to the board of trustees or directors. The chief nurse
executive (CNE) has the most power relative to the
nurses who are situated further down the chart of
the organization, such as supervisory staff, nurse
managers, and staff nurses. It is power accorded to
a person by virtue of the position held by that person. Nurse managers and team leaders have more
power than do staff nurses. CNEs, deans, senators,
mayors, governors, presidents, and other elected
officials have administrative power.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 203

Power, Politics, and Policy

Administrative authority is the power or right to
give orders or commands, to enforce compliance, to
take action, and to make ﬁnal decisions. For example, the dean of a nursing school has authoritative
power from her position. As dean, she has the
power to make decisions that have both short- and
long-term consequences and that directly affect
education and student life. Similarly, the primary
nurse has more authority in regard to her primary
patients than do other nurses or nursing assistants.
Authority can also be personal and as such is
deﬁned as power or inﬂuence that results from
knowledge or expertise. Professional authority is
granted by choice, not position, and applies to competent professionals, whereas administrative authority depends upon job descriptions and place in
the organization.
Authority has been a problem for nursing since
at least the Victorian Era, when nurses were ﬁrst
seen in the aggregate. For most of nursing’s modern
history, nurses were kept under the authority of
physicians. Reverby (1987a, b) states that nurses
had to limit revelation of the scope of their knowledge and the effectiveness of their care. They had
the responsibility for patient care without needed
authority. Reverby asserts that nurses are ordered
to care by a society that does not value care. Nurses
gained authority through knowledge, feminist inﬂuences on society, and slow increases in the scope of
practice. Nurse leaders worked hard to gain the
power of authority. Judicious, skilled use of power
and politics in an environment set for change
helped them to change policy with legislation and
regulations to achieve their goals. Nursing leaders
fought hard for standardization of nursing education, development of knowledge, and professionalization.
Feminism from the late 19th century to the present helped achieve increasing professionalization
and improved status. As education and professionalization grew, so did nursing’s scope of practice.
In 1972, New York State passed the ﬁrst nurse
practice act. For the ﬁrst time, the essential role
of nursing in dealing with human response to illness or treatment was stated, debated, and legislated (Diers & Molde, 1983). The nurse practice
act conferred authority on nurses and nursing.
Authority was, and is, necessary to nursing as it
gives status and power within institutions and communities to mobilize resources to achieve healthcare goals.

203

Expert
Expert power is inﬂuence that results from knowledge or expertise that is needed by others. It is
similar to personal authority, but it is gained and
affirmed through respect for expertise. Expertise
can be an indispensable source of power within
health-care organizations. Such power is granted by
choice to a person, not to a position, and applies to
competent professionals.
Nurses work in dynamic environments where
change is rapid and where power and inﬂuence
often take new forms. Expertise brings knowledge
and skills to the assessment of problems and issues,
which brings about solutions and change. Those
who are lifelong learners have an important effect
on deliberations and decision making because they
understand those changes and can participate fully
and ﬁnd and implement important and creative
solutions to situations or problems. Those who do
not keep their knowledge current fail to earn or
retain expert power. Continued acquisition of new
knowledge and skills is essential to maintain this
form of power. Expert nurses, nurse practitioners,
clinical specialists, and other nurses have power
based on their knowledge and expertise. Benner
(1984) asserts that nurses can use this power
source as they become expert practitioners. This is
a source of power that nurses can and must use,
because they have expertise that policy makers generally lack. Such professionals have power to exert
successful change. Expert power follows the person
as long as the person maintains his skills.

Reward
Reward power is the ability to offer rewards, which
is a potent type of power. It is the promise or perception of money, goods, services, recognition, and
other recompense in exchange for some action that
beneﬁts the powerful person. Behavior is affected in
that a person will often honor wishes or demands
for the potential (or actual) rewards from the powerful person. Managers, supervisors, and administrators have access and ability to use this power
through their authority to reward people with
bonuses, salary increases, promotions, and recognition. Appropriate use of reward power is the promotion of a nurse who has earned and is qualiﬁed for a
new position. Inappropriate use of rewards is the
assignment of a rotating nurse (bypassing others) to
the day shift in return for favors or friendship.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

204

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 204

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Power to punish is included in the concept of
reward. Those who have the capacity to reward also
have the ability to punish. In organizations the person with reward power can usually also discipline
and ﬁre employees.
Lobbyists often use reward power. They educate
legislators and other government officials. Lobbyists
bring a high degree of access to and accountability
from elected officials. They form coalitions to inﬂuence needed legislation and policy change and development. The American Nurses Association (ANA)
lobbies for legislation that is important to patient
care and nursing. Lobbyists or advocates can have
relationships with legislators where one rewards the
other. For example, lobbyists promise monetary support for reelection campaigns in exchange for favorable votes on beneﬁcial legislation. Legislators who
are found to participate in this kind of power brokering are prosecuted.

Coercion
Coercion is the real or perceived threat of pain or
harm of one person by another. Coercive power
may be physical, psychological, social, or economic
and involves the use of force in the form of penalties and rewards to effect change. It shows a lack of
respect for the autonomy of others and is seen in
sexual harassment and threats to livelihood. Those
who use coercion are interested in their own goals
and are rarely interested in the wants and needs of
subordinates. An example is the threat by a supervisor to ﬁre whistle-blowers (people who speak out
about a wrong). The threat of a state health commissioner to implement onerous regulations for
nurse practitioners or visiting nurses if some action
is not done is coercion. A volunteer religious group
that demands religious conversion by threatening to
withhold or withdraw education, expertise, materials, or care coerces the people it is there to help.

Referent
A leader who is followed based on admiration and
belief has referent power. The chair of a committee,
for example, has referent power for those who work
closely with her. Referent power is gained through
association with a powerful person or organization.
Selection of a powerful person as a mentor and
working on powerful committees are ways to
develop and hold referent power.

THE NEED FOR POWER
Nurses are predominantly women and provide the
most direct patient care in male-dominated organizations. Nurses have rarely had signiﬁcant power in
health-care organizations. Over the past 15 years,
nurse administrators have made progress in gaining
recognition at the top levels; some have even made
inroads to governance. These leaders are all too
often terminated, however, which is an all too
graphic indication that role acceptance has not been
accomplished (Camuñas, 1994a, b, 1998; Carroll,
DiVincenti, & Show, 1995; Donnelly, 2006; Kopala,
2001; Sabiston & Laschinger, 1995; Vestal, 1990;
Vestal, 1995).
Power commensurate with knowledge and expertise is needed to enable nurses to provide competent, humanistic, and affordable care to people; to
participate in health-care policy development; to
gain leverage proportionate with their numbers;
and to ensure that nursing is an attractive career
choice for all who want to provide care, inﬂuence,
and improve nursing, health care, and health policy.

WAYS TO ACHIEVE POWER
There are multiple ways to accumulate, or gain,
power. Some may be more appropriate at higher
positions in an organization. Skills to achieve and
maintain power take time and patience to learn,
develop, and reﬁne. Methods to acquire power
include the following:
■

■

■

■

■

■
■

■

Broad human networks: the more networks
and the more extensive they are, the more
power potential.
Broad information networks: the more diverse
types of information controlled, the more
power.
Multiple formal and informal leadership roles:
high engagement and visibility bring increased
power.
Ability to assess situations accurately (especially unstructured ones) and to solve problems.
Authority over others and resources via legitimate work organizational roles.
Vision for the future and creativity.
Ability to grant services to others, which
builds debts.
Expertise that is sought by others.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 205

Power, Politics, and Policy

Ways to Increase Expert Power
There are many ways to enhance your power, for
example. Professionals, to maintain their competence and develop their careers, use these tactics:
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■
■

Participate in interdisciplinary conferences to
broaden knowledge, develop skills, and build
networks
Keep knowledge and skills current to maintain
and extend power. Continuing education offerings, books, and journals are effective means.
Earn higher degrees; education brings expertise and enhances credibility.
Participate actively in professional associations
such as the ANA, state nurses associations,
and specialty groups to broaden networks,
hone expertise, and develop legitimate and referent power.
Participate in nursing research to develop
knowledge and increase expertise.
Problem-solve with colleagues in nursing and
other disciplines to develop expertise and networks and to polish skills.
Participate in nursing and interdisciplinary
committees to develop and enhance expert,
referent, and legitimate power.
Publish to develop expert power.
Learn from mentors; be a mentor (Flynn,
1997; Vance & Olson, 1998) to develop expertise and connections or referent power.

EMPOWERMENT
Empowerment is a sense of having both the ability
and the opportunity to act effectively. Empowerment is a process or strategy the goal of which is to
change the nature and distribution of power in a
speciﬁc context. It is a group activity that increases
political and social consciousness, is based on the
need for autonomy, and is accomplished with continuing cycles of assessment and action. Nursing
organizations seek to empower nurses; nurses
endeavor to empower patients to seek and adopt
healthy lifestyles. Likewise, nursing managers and
administrators take actions to empower nurses to
achieve effective, rewarding, competent practice.
Empowered nurses have three required characteristics that enable them to participate in policy
development. The ﬁrst is a raised consciousness of
the social, political, and economic realities of their
situation or environment and society. They are
aware of culture and diversity and of gender, race,

205

and class biases, prejudices, discrimination, and
stereotyping that produce the need for policy development or change. Such nurses can evaluate and
understand the dynamics of a situation or issue in
which they ﬁnd themselves and can more readily
ﬁnd or help to ﬁnd remedies..
The second quality empowered nurses have is a
positive sense of self and self-efficacy regarding their
ability to effect, or facilitate, change. They value
themselves and have voice to articulate and effect
change. Within an institution, for example, they can
identify situations that constrict professional practice, lower quality of care, waste resources, and
cause myriad other problems. They can also contribute to the resolution of problems that affect
health at the community, state, and national levels.
Development of skills that allow active participation in change processes is the third important
characteristic. Empowered nurses know how to use
traditional methods of power and politics in policy
making. Concrete knowledge and information
are necessary, as is understanding interpersonal communication skills, politics, and power and
how to use them (Kuokkanen & Katajisto, 2003;
Manojlovich & Laschinger, 2002).

Abuse of Power
Abuse of power is the control of people by some kind
of force. It is the use of power for one’s own benefit
(individual or group) and can be present in families,
organizations, and all levels of domestic and international government. It is always unethical. Poor, developing nations around the world are obvious examples.
Dictators abuse their people often to the point of
genocide. Industrialized nations engage in unfair
trade and often exploit workers.
Abuse of women, children, the elderly, the sick, and
innumerable others who cannot assert themselves is
not uncommon. To combat these types of abuse of
power, we use political negotiations to develop policies
to assuage or eliminate the problem. We have child
protection laws, laws to protect people with disabilities,
and laws that prevent emergency patients from being
transferred to other health-care organizations when doing
so puts the patient at risk. Around the world, abuse of
power causes violence, human suffering, and tragedy
on unimaginable scale (Farmer, 2005). Violence can be
physical, psychological, or structural (the absence of
health care, education, and just law enforcement for
the poor, for example). Leaders who enforce structural
and societal inequalities abuse power.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

206

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 206

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Power and politics are often discussed together in
the nursing literature. The linkage may be due to the
difficulty that arises in attempts to distinguish
them. Those with power ﬁnd it easy to participate
in politics, and those who participate in politics gain
power. Both power and politics serve to achieve
goals, and both do so through the ability to use skills
to convince others to serve the power holder’s purposes. Power and politics are the means to achieve
health-care goals in a compassionate and humane
way. Application of power and politics through collaboration, creativity, and empowerment are effective ways to inﬂuence policy.

Politics
Politics is the negotiation for, or inﬂuencing of, allocation of scarce resources. Inﬂuence is the act or

power to produce an effect without apparent use of
force or direct command. Politics is a neutral term
and a process. Flexibility is perhaps the most important trait of a good politician.

POLITICAL ACTION SPHERES
The process of inﬂuencing others, or politics, in
order to achieve ends can be seen in relation to four
arenas, spheres, or domains. These spheres are (a)
the workplace, (b) professional organizations, (c)
community, and (d) local, state, and federal governments. Although the ranges of these domains differ,
and the target publics to be inﬂuenced differ, the
political tactics and strategies are similar. These
spheres overlap; what happens in one affects the
other. Ignoring one can jeopardize outcomes in the
others. The fact that nurses have not consistently
paid attention to this has contributed to the fact
that the level of inﬂuence nurses possess is not com-

chapter star:

Florence Nightingale (1820–1910)
Florence Nightingale had a major impact on health-care
policy in the British army, in India, as well as on the development of nursing. Indeed, her effect on nursing and
health care is still felt today; her book, Notes on Nursing, is
still in print. That she was Victorian has special significance.
She gained power and affected policy in ways that were
unheard of for a woman to accomplish. Her leadership skills
were formidable.
Nightingale was born into a wealthy, educated,
extended family. The women especially were social activists
whose thinking was ahead of their time in significant ways.
Women had no public role and received education only
insofar as it would increase marriage possibilities. Florence
was a talented, gifted child who was educated by her father.
She learned Latin, Greek, mathematics, and religion; read
English classics; and learned controversial topics such as
poetry, philosophy, science, economics, and political theory.
Her Greek, which is more difficult than Latin, was at the level
where scholars consulted with her (Gill, 2005, p. 128). From
her father she learned to excel and to compete with the
men who ruled the British Empire. And she nursed people
in her family and on family estates and towns, which taught
her a great deal about caring for the sick.
Nightingale understood when she was in her early 20s
that the women she knew had no desire or want of power;
but she did want power. “In pursuit of knowledge Florence

was remorseless. She was brilliant, she was focused, she
was competitive, and she identified learning, correctly, as
an avenue to power” (Gill, 2005 p. 129). Nightingale also
understood that knowledge would not be enough
“considered how she, a woman of high social status, could
use her personal friendships and family alliances to effect
larger social goals such as improvement in national health
care” (p. 177). Her intellectual skills, family connections, and
understanding of power and politics enabled her to go to
Turkey to improve and reform care for the wounded of the
Crimean War. She was successful, had tested her abilities,
and had gained powerful authority in the highest reaches
of government, including Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.
Upon her return to England, she was appointed to two
commissions to reform public health. Nightingale was the
“chief strategist, chief correspondent, chief worker; in other
words, the one essential person upon whom the whole
male team of experts relied.” The work Nightingale
accomplished had significant effect on the army’s support
services, public health in England and India, and the
development of professional nursing. Even without
consideration that she was a Victorian woman, her work
was enormous. Understanding and use of power and
politics in development of effective health policy, which
is rare even in the early 21st century, made her a hero for
the ages.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 207

Power, Politics, and Policy

mensurate with the numbers of nurses, their abilities, and their responsibilities and contributions.

Workplace
Nurses work in organizations with varied characteristics—private or public; proﬁt, nonproﬁt, or charitable; large, small, or medium; and in large or small
cities, towns, small towns, or rural areas. In the
workplace, there are many issues with which nurses
are involved. Power and politics may be necessary to
resolve issues. Some issues that may be found in
some, or all, workplaces include the following:
■
■

■

■

■
■
■

■

■

Mandatory overtime work requirements.
A nursing clinical ladder program that rewards
excellence with promotions and pay incentives.
Work scheduling length of shift, evening and
night rotation, vacation priority.
A smoking ban in the entire facility; designation of smoking areas.
Visiting hours in special care units.
Identiﬁcation and security procedures.
Authority to delay discharge from or admission to special care units based on professional
nurse assessment.
Authority to refer patients to a home healthcare agency.
Decisions regarding substitution of unlicensed
personnel for RNs to provide care.

Politics are part of every organization; nurse executives have to use politics to administer their areas
of control. They have to negotiate with CEOs and
other administrators (their peers) for budgets to
meet organizational goals.

Professional Organizations
Professional organizations have been essential to
the “professionalization” of nursing. The modern
nursing movement began in 1873 in response to the
changing role of women. Pioneers of this movement
worked for a new profession for women and for better health for the public (Reverby, 1987a). These
women used political power to open nurse training
schools, organize professional associations, and participate in social issues such as women’s suffrage,
public health, and integration (Rogge, 1987). These
leaders sharpened their political expertise in nursing organizations they created beginning in 1893.
Professional organizations have made signiﬁcant
contributions in developing nursing practice. They

207

have set standards of practice, advocated for change
in the scope of practice and passage of nurse practice acts, and advocated for nurses in collective
action in the workplace. Such organizations have an
ever-increasing role in health policy development.
Fewer than 10% of nurses belong to the ANA,
even though it represents the interests of all nurses
in the United States (Foley, 2001). Membership in
specialty nursing organizations rarely exceeds 30%
of those eligible to join (Foley, 2001). These organizations are essential for advocating for nurses and
for humanistic health promotion. A strong professional organization needs to be a visible force: a
national organization should have national visibility; a local organization should be known locally.
For example, the ANA works on national issues in
Washington, DC; the state nurse associations work
on state-wide issues; and the local districts work on
issues in the local community. These three levels of
the ANA work in concert. Organizations can identify issues that concern nursing and health care,
bring them to the public, and take a leadership role
in advocating for development of policies that
improve health and ensure high-quality nursing
care. To achieve this, organizations need support of
nurses through their membership and through their
political acumen.
The New York State Nurses Association
(NYSNA), for instance, developed and championed
the legal deﬁnition of professional nursing in New
York State. The New York State Nurse Practice Act
was passed in 1972 and was the ﬁrst law to deﬁne
nursing as an independent profession. This deﬁnition of nursing still stands and has served as the
model for nurse practice acts in the other states. The
ANA is working to inﬂuence legislation to deal with
overcrowded emergency departments (Trossman,
2006).

Community
Community is most often deﬁned as a geographic
area with boundaries, but during the 1960s the idea
of community empowerment grew to deﬁne a group
with a common good that required coordinated
action. Power, politics, and policy became attached;
community, in this context, is deﬁned as a population, a neighborhood, a state, a nation, and the
world. It can be a nursing organization or an online
group. An individual is usually a member of more
than one community. The other three political
action spheres exist in the sphere of community. For

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

208

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 208

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

example, an individual can be a member of the education, religious, and nursing communities. The
countries of Western Europe have joined together to
become the European Economic Community; they
are also joined with the United States in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Nurses are members of a community with the
responsibility to promote the wellbeing of the community and its members. In exchange, the community provides important resources for nurses’ work
in health promotion and health-care delivery. Many
of the people who live in a community, such as
health-care administrators, corporate managers,
industrial leaders, elected and career government
officials, and patients, have power. These people
can, and do, participate in community activities;
they have status, expertise, and connections. By
building relationships with community members,
nurses can gain supporters to achieve goals. The
connections they make can transform into networks, and the people in the networks can be asked
to support agendas.
In exchange, nurses should support community
agendas to work to improve community life. There
are innumerable ways to participate actively in the
community. Groups such as parent-teacher associations, community boards, councils, conservancies,
civic groups, and soup kitchens are but some groups
that need and welcome participation and help.
Nurses can help mobilize communities on issues
such as recycling, environmental clean-up, safety,
energy conservation, health screening, and the like.
Although activism may grow out of private interests, it can affect professional life with increased
skills, knowledge, experience, and power development. In addition, nurses who are active and form
connections in their communities become role models and represent the whole profession.

the health and welfare of all. Government is needed
to ensure that what we need to get done is accomplished.
Government plays an essential role in nursing
and in health care. State government deﬁnes what
nursing is, and it deﬁnes what nurses do. It inﬂuences how our health-care system is organized.
Government inﬂuences reimbursement systems,
such as Medicare and Medicaid. Government inﬂuences and supports the current managed care
arrangement, which provides for reimbursement
for health and nursing care. To a large extent, government determines who has access to care and to
what type of care. Federal, state, and local governments make decisions about major health issues in
our society. Recent decisions include:
■

■
■
■
■

■

■

■

■

The kinds of foods and snacks available to
children at schools
Prohibition of smoking in some public places
The initiation and continuation of Head Start
Provision of meals for the poorest children
The health services available at schools and
whether schools may provide sexual and reproductive information; whether schools may provide condoms to sexually active students to
prevent the spread of human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) and acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS)
Whether public funds can be used to distribute
clean needles to intravenous drug users to
reduce the spread of HIV and AIDS
Whether women can receive full information
about reproductive rights and who can provide
that information
Whether violence is treated only as a crime or
also as a public health issue and whether to
regulate the use of hand guns
Allocation of funds for housing development
and maintenance

Government
Government affects most aspects of our lives. We
must document births, marriages, and deaths; the
buying and selling of real estate; and mandatory
childhood immunizations. Government establishes
the age at which people may drink alcohol, drive a
car, cast a vote, and join the military. Laws determine the health services and social security available to people in old age. Our collective society is
organized in ways that make us interdependent; the
health and welfare of each of us are dependent on

POLITICAL ANALYSIS
Effective use of power and politics to facilitate strategy development for the policy process requires systematic analysis of the issues. The following is a
framework for systematic analysis. Adroit use will
increase nurses’ political leverage. Although this is
directed at broad political action in government and
the community, it is also applicable to workplace
and organizational policy processes (see Box 13-1).

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 209

Power, Politics, and Policy

Box 13-1
The Problem
What is the scope, duration, and history, and whom does
it affect?
What data are available to describe the issue and its
implications?
Are there gaps in existing data? What else do we need to
know?
What types of additional research might be useful?

Components of Political Analysis
Identify and Analyze the Problem

Identiﬁcation and analysis of the problem or issue is
the ﬁrst step. The problem must be understood in
order to frame it in ways that will move elected officials to action. It must be carefully crafted in terms
that make sense; calls for public action must be
clearly justiﬁed. Use of public relations theory will
help with the expression of, or framing, the issue.
To frame the problem adequately, state the scope,
duration, and history of the problem. An important
point is to be explicit about whom this problem
affects. Then collect all data that are available to
describe the issue and its implications. Identify any
gaps in the data. Identify whether more research
might be useful and, if so, what types would help.
Outline and Analyze Proposed Solutions

Present possible solutions to public officials along
with the identiﬁed problem. It is best to develop
more than one solution because costs, effectiveness,
and durability differ from approach to approach.
For example, an enduring problem is the nursing
shortage; multiple proposals have been developed to
correct it and its effects. If increased access to nursing education is a proposed solution, then the proposal must include how this is to be accomplished.
The federal budget is limited; there are many
demands for funding for worthy goals, and they
must be considered. Competition for federal funds
is stiff; nursing education and health care are only
two goods among many. Each funding solution—
grants, tax incentives, and other sources—has different implications, and each must be understood
before making a proposal for federal aid.
A proposal for addressing safe patient handling
and prevention of musculoskeletal disorders
(MSDs) among nurses was promoted by NYSNA

209

and proposed for legislation. Research showed that
promoting proper body mechanics alone is an ineffective way to reduce MSDs in health-care workers.
The governor signed a measure for funding a
demonstration project. A change in policy will protect patients and health-care workers. Added beneﬁts include increased employee retention and
reduced worker replacement and compensation
costs (ANA, 2005, p. 4). The ANA and NYSNA
performed an effective problem analysis based on
solid data. They now have state funding to gather
more data and ultimately work for a change in
policy.
Understand the Background, Including Its
History and Attempts to Solve the Problem

It is important to understand what attempts have
been made to address an issue. The history, including why and how previous attempts failed, will provide an estimation of the potential success of the
current proposal. For example, the reform of our
health-care system, especially implementation of a
national health service, would require a review of
the background of the Medicare/Medicaid system
and also a review of President Clinton’s Health
Security Act. Assessment of the public’s perceptions of public funding and American emphasis on
individualism is needed so that political action can
be planned thoroughly. Knowledge of positions of
key public officials will also assist in planning.
Even in a workplace context, understanding the
background of an issue is important. If you believe
that the staffing on a unit needs to be changed to
improve patient care, efficiency, and nurse satisfaction, you must assess how the staffing was structured, why it was done in that particular way, and
why and how that format is outdated before you
present your proposal to the nurse manager or
appropriate committee.
Locate the Political Situation and Its Structure

After the problem and solutions have been delineated, assess and choose the appropriate political
venues. The choice is between the private sector
and government. If the decision made is to approach
government, decide on the level and branch. There
are times when both the public and private sectors
are involved, but in that case, only one has the decision-making responsibility. When all sectors have
equal power, no one sector has the responsibility to
make a decision nor the vested interest to prevent a
decision. Be sure to identify the political setting

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

210

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 210

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

accurately, because making an error can cause you a
loss of credibility and a loss of power. For example,
if nurses are concerned about an aspect of patient
care, the employer must be approached through the
organization structure. It is unfair and impolitic to
go to public officials before internal mechanisms
have been exhausted. It is also imprudent to exclude
the nurse manager and go directly to the chief nurse
executive or a supervisor. Again, so doing will cause
loss of face, credibility, and power.
Evaluate the Stakeholders

The next step is to identify the stakeholders.
Stakeholders are those who are affected by or have
inﬂuence over an issue or who could be recruited to
care about it. Stakeholders include policy makers
who have proposals related to the issue, special
interest groups, and those with a position on the
issue. For example, after her husband was fatally
shot and her son seriously wounded, Congresswoman Carolyn McCarthy, an LPN, became a
respected and powerful proponent for gun control.
She was able to recruit other stakeholders, such as
victims of gun violence, during her campaign. One
of the most important stakeholders she identiﬁed
was the American Academy of Pediatrics, which
has signiﬁcant power and resources. The congresswoman recently established the Carolyn McCarthy
Center on Gun Violence and Harm Reduction to
mobilize public support at the grassroots level for
new gun safety legislation.
Conduct a Values Assessment

All political issues have value or moral aspects.
Human rights, international health law, the right to
health, genetic engineering, embryonic stem cell
research, genetic technologies, terrorism, abortion,
and the death penalty are among the most visible
moral issues today (Annas, 2005). Issues necessitate that stakeholders assess their own values and
those of their opponents.
Ascertain Financial and Personnel
Needs to Attain Goals

Any effective political strategy must include assessment of resources needed to reach goals. In addition
to money, other needed resources include time,
connections or network, volunteers, contributors,
and intangibles, such as people who are strategists
and those with creative ideas. Short- and long-term
tactics and goals must be considered in resource
analysis.

The budget structure within an organization or
government agency must be considered. It is important to understand the budget process, including
how money is allocated to a cost center or line
budget, who makes decisions regarding expenditures, how use of funds is evaluated, and how an
individual or group can inﬂuence budget development and implementation.
Analyze Power Bases

In any setting, assessment of power bases of both
proponents and opponents is essential. Review the
section on power for further discussion.
After the political analysis is accomplished, it is
time to plan political strategies and identify tactics
and guidelines.

POLITICAL STRATEGIES
After the political analysis is completed, a plan of
action with strategies is developed. Strategies are
the plans to achieve political and policy goals. One
strategy does not work in all situations. To achieve
goals, it is useful to follow these tactics:
■

Persistence. Change takes time; conﬂict is
almost always part of policy change. Usually
there is much discussion, negotiation, and col-

Practice to Strive For 13-1
Many nurses and nursing associations voice the importance of political participation and activism to improve
health care for all people. This is not an easy task as our culture urges that health care should be organized as a commodity. Professional nurses must be politically active to
change the ethos of health care as commodity to the ethos
of health care as a right. Although the right to health care is
not in the constitution, society can make it so if it chooses.
To achieve this, nurses must become activists and move
beyond the passive activities of letter writing and slogans.
Nurses must assume broader roles to improve access to and
standards of care for all. Nurses must prepare themselves to
be capable in the world of power, politics, and policy. As
novices, nurses must learn subjects such as women’s studies, ethics, communication, economics and politics of
health care, history of social movements and reforms, and
strategies and tactics of politics. There are so many with
vested interests in health care that the system, health care,
and nursing are in danger and require reform. Nurses must
be visionary and politically skilled.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 211

Power, Politics, and Policy

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

laboration with attendant delays, retrenchment, and realignments. Policy change or new
policy development and implementation is a
long-term commitment and requires commitment and endurance.
Look at big picture. Always prepare for the
political process of policy development by clarifying aspects of the issue. This includes knowing your position and possible solutions
supported by data, assessing your power base
and that of others involved, planning strategies, and knowing the opposition and their
plans and rationales. Understand the context
of the issue.
Frame issue adequately. Understand the stakeholders and target audience to present the issue
in ways that are congruent with their values.
Develop and use networks. Use power that
accrues through personal connections, which
requires keeping track of what you have done
for others and asking them to reciprocate.
Assess timing. Consider carefully when is the
most opportune time to act. Knowing when
the time is right requires accurate assessment
of the values, concerns, goals, and resources of
those you have to convince that your way is
best.
Collaborate. Work with others to achieve policy goals. Collaboration usually achieves goals
more effectively than does individual action.
Prepare to take risks. Do a risk-and-beneﬁt
analysis of an action. This analysis entails consideration of the beneﬁts gained or goals
achieved in relation to the expenditure of all
resources, including personnel, money, time
spent that could have been used on another
endeavor, and coherence with values.
Understand the opposition. Put aside emotional positions, focus on the issues, and try to
understand the fears and concerns of the
opposition. Educate the opposition to appreciate the nursing position.

Political Tactics
The effective functioning of an organization
depends on the relationships between individuals
and groups. Effective use of politics in the workplace
can facilitate achievement of goals. A characteristic
of political action is that it creates obligation; that is,
to get something, something may be expected in

211

return. Such an approach may achieve only part of a
goal, but that partial achievement is a step toward
the goal.
■

■

■
■

■

■

■

Employ opportunism; act when the time is
right.
Use trade-offs; support a cause or person in
exchange for the goal at hand.
Sell votes on one issue for votes on another.
Negotiate; each side gives up lesser values to
achieve greater values.
Form coalitions; two or more smaller groups
band together to defeat a larger power.
Compromise; each side settles for a partial win
or part of what it hopes to achieve.
Lobby; attempt to build collectible debts with
persons who may inﬂuence (or vote) in your
favor.

Skills and Tactics in the Workplace
The effective functioning of an organization
depends on relationships between individuals and
groups. Often, problematic conﬂicts arise that are
threatening to groups. Resolution of these conﬂicts
requires signiﬁcant managerial skill. Effective use
of politics can facilitate conﬂict resolution and
achieve goals. Not all the following skills and tactics
may be acceptable, useful, or necessary in a particular situation, but they are useful and have a high
probability of success:
■

■

■

■

Build your own team. Executives, administrators, and managers are often defeated in their
roles because persons from the previous team
are unhappy, jealous, and disgruntled and do
not support, or actively sabotage, the work of
the new boss.
Choose your second-in-command carefully.
“An aggressive, ambitious, upwardly mobile
number two man (or woman) is dangerous
and often difficult to control” (McMurray,
1973, p. 70).
Establish alliances with superiors and peers.
Determine expectations and motivations of
others before you form true friendships.
Alliances with superiors and peers are needed
to achieve goals.
Use all possible channels of communication. Develop and maintain open, effective
channels of communication to avoid isolation,

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

212

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 212

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

pre-emption, and loss in power struggles. Be
fair, but learn to recognize aggressive, manipulative people.
Do not be naïve about how decisions are made.
Learn and understand the preferences and the
way powerful people act in the organization in
order to predict how they will make a decision;
then plan accordingly.
Know what takes priority. Know what the
goals are and how the organization generally
works to achieve those goals. In other words,
know the modus operandi.
Be courteous. Treat others with respect.
Respect can prevent feelings that can lead to
sabotage and retaliation.
Maintain a ﬂexible position and maneuverability. Identify what is ethically important and
nonnegotiable. Then you can maneuver conﬁdently to change and power.
Disclose information judiciously. In order to
work effectively, it may be necessary not to
disclose how power strategies are used.
Use passive resistance when appropriate to
gain time. Delay can be useful when time is
needed for gathering information.
Project an image of conﬁdence, status, power,
and material success. The image of weakness
conveys a lack of power and decreases ability
to act and achieve goals.
Learn to negotiate and collaborate. Do not be
ingratiating or conciliatory.

COALITIONS
Coalitions have great power to achieve a speciﬁc,
common goal. They bring diverse people together,
with different worldviews, and encourage collaboration, creativity, and empowerment. There is
strength in numbers, so coalitions increase the probability for success in political and policy processes.
Coalitions take many forms and usually arise out
of a challenge or opportunity. They are often disbanded when the goal is achieved, but sometimes
they can be long-term and function for years. When
they stay together, it is generally because after they
achieve their goal, another goal becomes apparent
and they choose to continue to work together.
Effective coalitions have three important characteristics that are necessary to use power and politics

skillfully and to inﬂuence policy processes. These
characteristics are (a) leadership, (b) membership,
and (c) creativity. Without these attributes, a coalition cannot identify, assess, plan, and implement or
seize opportunities to further its goals.
A coalition needs two types of leaders. One has
to have spirit and passion for the cause. This leader
has to motivate the membership to get the job done.
The second leader must be an organizational leader
who is adept at administration that supports the
coalition. This leader may be paid if the coalition
has funds; other leaders and members are volunteers.
The more members, the more effective the coalition becomes. Without members, the coalition
would not exist. Members do the work of the coalition and increase its visibility. Members beneﬁt the
coalition, but the coalition also beneﬁts them
because they learn and hone skills (Berkowitz &
Wolff, 2000).
The ability to recognize and seize an unexpected
opportunity and make the most of it is essential.
This requires creativity, innovation, and the willingness to take risks. It also requires that leaders and
members continually assess their environment, use
and enlarge their networks, and keep track of politics associated with their goals in their community.
It is hard work to keep a coalition on target to
achieve goals. Effective leadership, management,
and active, interested, and participating membership are essential to success. Coalitions bring
diverse people together for a common cause. They
meet regularly and implement or act on their plans.
Members must be active and receptive to fresh ideas
and innovations. Nurses and nursing must participate in coalitions to improve health care through
policy change. An example of an effective coalition
is that formed by nurse practitioners and nurse
midwives in Maine. Although they had won a
change in the nurse practice act, they did not have
third-party reimbursement. A coalition was formed
and after much work, they ﬁnally won payment
(Leavitt, 2002).

CONFLICT RESOLUTION
We have deﬁned power as the ability to act and politics as the allocation of resources that are used for
an identiﬁed end, goal, or policy. Often during this

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 213

Power, Politics, and Policy

process, conﬂicts develop and must be resolved. The
resolution process includes negotiation, which can
result in one side winning or both sides getting
something (often referred to respectively as winlose and win-win resolutions, discussed in Chapter
20). A summary of win-lose methods was identiﬁed
and characterized by Roe (1995): (1) denial or withdrawal, (2) suppression or smoothing over, (3)
power or dominance, and (4) compromise.

Win-Win Solutions

■

Win-win solutions, on the other hand, manage conﬂict in a way that neither party loses and the outcome is creative and productive. Collaboration and
principled negotiation are two approaches to winwin resolution to conﬂict. See Chapter 20 for further discussion.
Collaboration

The goal of collaboration is for parties to work
cooperatively with one another in a way that everyone wins and no one has to give up anything.
Marquis and Hurston (1994) explain that in collaboration “both parties set aside their original goals
and work together to establish a supraordinate
goal or common goal. Because both parties have
identiﬁed the joint goal, each believes they have
achieved their goal and an acceptable solution. The
focus throughout collaboration remains on problem
solving, and not on defeating the other party”
(p. 290).
Collaboration requires time and full commitment
to the resolution process. Mutual respect, communication skills, and an environment where all are
heard and considered are necessary for successful
collaboration. Collaboration is the ideal solution
where all parties are satisﬁed and all win. Senators
from opposite sides of the aisle collaborate when
they jointly propose a bill in the U.S. Senate.

■

Principled Negotiation

Principled negotiation is a form of conﬂict resolution developed at the Harvard Negotiation Project
and has four basic steps as identiﬁed by Fisher, Ury,
and Patton (1992). These steps are as follows.
■

Separate the people from the problem. This
step strives to depersonalize the argument. All
parties in the negotiation are persons with feelings, needs, values, experiences, and percep-

■

213

tions and come from different backgrounds.
Each person has a personal worldview that
must be respected. Because negotiation is easily inﬂuenced by the relationships and the
problem, it is essential to keep to the issues and
not let personalities and feelings intervene in
the conﬂict in such a way as to cut off communication and productive search for a solution.
Again, U.S. Senators may ﬁght on the ﬂoor but
it is done in a way that keeps the person out of
the argument. Mutual respect is a must.
Focus on interests, not positions. Interests
deﬁne the problem and are the motivators.
Positions are generally conﬂict needs, wants,
discomforts, and fears. For example, nursing
staff suffers because patients are difficult, abusive, and manipulative, and they are increasingly unhappy. Staff members believe that they
do not matter as people, that they cannot continue to act in professional ways. The interests
are adequate staff, material resources, and support to care for these patients. The positions of
the staff are anger at administration for allowing the situation to persist, anger at patients
who do not appreciate their hard work, fears
that they are inadequate, and so forth. The
administration fears for their jobs if they do
not allocate resources to in a responsible way.
Positions are the objectives that arise out of
interests. Identiﬁcation of interests leaves
room for alternative positions that serve
mutual interests. It is important to identify the
facts and feelings behind each party’s wants
and fears. Doing so will identify shared and
compatible interests. To focus on positions
limits ability to consider other options as parties will be too engaged in defending their
positions to negotiate in a meaningful way.
Invent options for mutual gain. Develop a large
number of possible solutions to avoid stymied,
narrow negotiations. The more options identiﬁed, the greater the possibility of creative, productive solutions.
Brainstorming is a frequently used successful
method to create options free of judgment.
Participants in the negotiation identify as
many ideas as possible without critique. The
expectation is that ideas should be congruent
with shared interests. These interests are goals
and need to be made explicit.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

214

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 214

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Box 13-2

Policy

Steps to Conflict Resolution
Identify who is involved in or the source of the conflict.
Identify interests and clarify issues.
Build mutual trust.
Separate the persons from the conflict (depersonalize the
conflict).
Stay in the present or look to the future; do not dwell in
the past.
Avoid placing blame.
Remain focused on the identified issues or problems.
Discover options; brainstorm.
Develop objective evaluation criteria.
Come to a consensus.

■

Insist on using objective criteria. Use of objective criteria such as research ﬁndings will
ensure a better agreement. The criteria must
be based on a fair standard and should be identiﬁed before agreement. Discuss criteria rather
than positions to be gained or lost. Focus on
objectives will preserve ego and keep relationships intact.

Nurses will continue to need expertise in conﬂict
resolution as change continues to challenge health
care. After all, so much is at stake. Negotiation
often occurs with participants of unequal power,
which puts the less powerful at a disadvantage that
is not often acknowledged. Justice, equity, and fairness are uncertain or unlikely in such situations.
Successful negotiation requires broad and deep
knowledge, the ability to synthesize diverse components of a situation in order to bring trust and
respect needed for conﬂict resolution. Adversity can
be a good teacher and impetus for change. Conﬂict
provides an opportunity for personal growth and
development, creativity, and innovation that nurses
would do well to use to improve health care. The
steps outlined in Box 13-2 are useful in conﬂict resolution.
Power and politics are used to achieve goals.
In nursing and health care, the goals are policies
that help nurses to deliver appropriate care to persons in local, state, national, and international communities.

Policies are written directives or actions to follow to
meet identiﬁed ends or goals. Policies reﬂect values;
stakeholders work for policies that are morally congruent with their values. A policy is a guideline that
has been formalized by administrative authority
and guides or directs action to an identiﬁed purpose
or speciﬁc goals. Policies are developed within organizations, associations, and governments at local,
state, federal, and international levels. Values and
goals are reﬂected in the choices an organization,
community, and society make. In nursing and in
health care, major choices relate to policies governing access to care, allocation of resources, and standards of care. Policies help organizations run
smoothly and protect both health-care providers
and patients.
A policy system is the total group of events and
rules to that policy. The three major parts of a policy system are (1) a purpose or goal, (2), a policy
rule, or how to achieve the goal, and (3) a written
directive (procedure) on actions to follow in implementing the rule. For instance, an institution may
have a policy that all nurses must participate in continuing education each year. This policy rule
requires a written directive on the actions to be
taken because the policy is still open to many interpretations. What is the content to be required? Can
it be done in-house or outside? When must it be
done? How many hours are needed?
In the United States, health-care policy is particularly rife with disagreement because of four goals
that are in conﬂict. These conﬂicting goals are (1)
provision of the best possible care for all, (2) provision of equal care for all, (3) freedom of choice on
the part of health-care providers and consumers,
and (4) containment of costs. These conﬂicting
goals and values demonstrate the reasons we have
not been able to develop satisfactory health-care
system reform. Accessible, cost-effective, equitable,
and high-quality care has been elusive. The power,
politics, and interests of the special lobbies of big
business, such as the insurance, pharmaceutical,
and supply industries, champion the free market for
health-care system reform. These industries have
great wealth and therefore great power to gain and
keep control of reform. Weakest in this equation
are the poor, the underinsured and the uninsured,
and increasingly the working and middle classes

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 215

Power, Politics, and Policy

who have little or no voice and power. Research has
consistently demonstrated prevalent race and gender discrimination in health-care allocation (Bach
et al., 2004; Bloche, 2004; Jha et al., 2005;
Shischehbor et al., 2006; Smedley, Stith, & Nelson,
2003; Steinbrook, 2004.)
The free market reforms that were implemented
have failed to achieve important goals of the system.
The amount of money spent on health care now
exceeds 15% of the gross domestic product (Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2003). The
Kaiser Family Foundation found that health care
grew to over 16% in 2006. Administration costs of
third-party payers have risen sharply. Both providers and consumers have little, if any, choice
regarding care. Disparities in standards of care are
growing. Fewer people have access to care; the number of people in 2004 without access was 45.8 million (American Journal of Nursing, 2006), which is
up from 37 million in 1990 (Kaiser Commission,
2004). These statistics reveal that the free-market
reforms have failed to improve access to care, control costs, and maintain standards of care. With
increased free-market policies, the number of people without access to care has increased, costs have
increased, and quality of care has decreased.
The health-care system is extremely complex and
is not wholly amenable to free-market forces. The
marketplace has failed to reform the health-care
system because of six characteristics or factors
(Alward & Camuñas, 1991). These factors are
(1) imperfect information, (2) third-party payers,
(3) gatekeepers, (4) forced purchase, (5) lack of
competition, and (6) distorted proﬁt motives. These
factors are discussed below.
In the free market, consumers have the ability to
gather all of the information they need to make
informed choices. This is not the case in health
care. It is difficult to obtain and understand all of
the relevant information. In many cases, data simply do not exist.
Third-party payers remove the issue of cost for
users (patients) and the direct providers of the service (physicians, nurses, hospitals). It is possible for
consumers of goods, such as televisions, compact
discs, clothing, or services such as lawn and hair
care, to shop for what they can afford and for that
which meets their wants and needs. When shopping for health care, it is the third-party payer who
pays, which decreases the importance of price as a
criterion regarding choice. Third-party payers also

215

allow providers, such as physicians and hospitals, to
charge what the market will bear. The patient is not
the consumer who pays, so there is little incentive
on the part of providers and consumers alike to contain costs. And yet, if individuals were left to pay all
the costs, only the very rich could afford health
care, as is the case in many developing nations. The
system would be tattered indeed; modern health
care and innovations would not be available and
health-care science would falter. Gatekeepers have a
profound effect on the efficacy of the free market in
health care. When consumers decide to eat in a
restaurant, buy a new car, or see a movie, they
decide when, where, and how to make the purchase.
In regard to health care, it is the physician, nurse, or
hospital insurance company who decides.
Very often, the purchase of health care is forced.
The woman who has a heart attack, the man who
has prostate cancer, the child who breaks a leg cannot plan, delay, or reasonably refuse or postpone
the purchase of care. Persons need health care when
they are hurt or sick. It is hard and often deadly to
put off health care in the face of illness and injury.
The lack of competition in health care further
distorts the marketplace. Insurance is most often
bought by employers who want to minimize costs,
bypassing patient choice. Patients do not know with
certainty if they will need health care, when, and
what type. When patients are given a wide choice, it
is confusing and difficult to make sense of all the
options. The plethora of drug prescription plans
available to Medicare recipients clearly demonstrates this.
A case in point is the diabetes epidemic. In New
York City, diabetes centers that delivered comprehensive care to diabetics had to close because they
could not ﬁnancially keep aﬂoat. Good care means
bad business (Urbina, 2006). Care that keeps people
well is not affordable; insurance does not adequately reimburse preventive care, such as hypertension, diabetic, and cardiac chronic care. They do
reimburse for care that deals with the complications
of diabetes (and other chronic illnesses) such as
renal dialysis and amputation.

POLICY DEVELOPMENT
The speciﬁc steps taken from identiﬁcation of a
policy problem to a functioning program to solve
the problem are referred to as the policy process.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

216

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 216

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Several models have been developed to implement
the policy process. These models include Kingdon’s
policy stream model (1995), Cohen, March, and
Olsen’s “garbage can” model (1972), and the stagesequential models of Ripley (1996) and Anderson
(1996). Stage-sequential models are systems-based
approaches and may be more accessible and useful
to the novice. A discussion of the stage-sequential
approach to the policy process follows.
A series of stages constitutes stage-sequential
models. These stages are analogous to the nursing
process (see Table 13-1).
A policy problem is identiﬁed and added to the
policy agenda. Then the policy is developed,
accepted, implemented, and evaluated. As with the
nursing process, the policy process is dynamic and
cyclical. Both are cyclical in that evaluation often
leads back to assessment, and so the process continues. Areas that are not well delineated by the stagesequential model are (a) who gets what and why,
and (b) the effect of stakeholder wants and the
implications of their ideas, values, and agendas during policy development. The growing problem of
childhood obesity and its solution can be examined
from a stage-sequential model. Childhood obesity
and its attendant risks are identiﬁed and are added
to the policy agenda. Assessment revealed that easy
access to junk food, high-calorie soft and sports
drinks, and poor school cafeteria menu choices are

TABLE 13-1

major contributors to obesity. Additionally, lack of
knowledge of good healthy food choices and lack of
exercise worsen the problem. Policies that change
foods available at schools, educate students and
families about good nutrition, change gym and
sports requirements, and educate regarding exercise
are developed and implemented. Outcomes of new
policies are evaluated for effectiveness, which
brings the process back to assessment.

Aspects of Policy Development
Health-care agencies, organizations, institutions,
and associations make private policy. Such policies
include directives that govern employment conditions and service guidelines or provisions. For
example, there are policies that stipulate licensure,
education, and experience requirements for speciﬁc
nursing positions. Other policies provide guidelines
for patient care: the use of side rails and methods
for dispensing medications are examples of service
provisions.
Local, state, and federal governments make public policy. Included are legislation, regulation, and
court rulings that are made at respective levels and
jurisdictions. In New York City, for example, a local
policy regarding health care is the no-smoking law
in public and workplaces. States control licensure
for professional practice, and the federal govern-

Comparison of Nursing Process and Policy-Setting Process
NURSING PROCESS

POLICY-SETTING PROCESS

Assess

Physical, emotional, psychological needs

Situation needs or dissatisfaction; identify context: social,
economic, ethical, legal, political stakeholders

Plan

Develop care plan

Identify options, goals, and objectives, a policy rule, policy
formulation

Intervention

Link patient to services; implement plan

Implement program, policy

Evaluate

Ensure needs are met

Ensure program efficacy

Reassess

What, if any, changes needed

Should program continue; sections of policy to remain, discard,
revise

Plan

Develop care plans, critical pathways

Revise policy as needed

Intervention

Implement changes; advocate

Continue, revise, terminate

Evaluation

Monitor and document progress; include
cost-effectiveness, quality

Monitor program; assess outcomes

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 217

Power, Politics, and Policy

ment controls Medicare. Private and public policy
have a linked relationship because public policy
directly affects private policy, and the need for new
or changed public policy arises from private institutions. Included in health policy are the private and
public policies that control service delivery and
reimbursement,
Government also develops and implements policies at the local, state, and federal levels. Health-care
organizations must develop and implement internal
policies as well. All policies have unanticipated outcomes that have both detrimental and positive
effects. Within an organization, positive outcomes
of a policy include rules that protect departmental
autonomy, provide support when making unpleasant decisions, and help decide between choices
when one does not have a clear advantage.
Unanticipated effects of policies are seen when
the original purpose is covert, unknown, or forgotten. Organizations sometimes have policies that are
blindly followed long after their usefulness has been
outgrown. An example is taking temperatures at 5
a.m. even when not warranted by patient condition
because it is policy and procedure. Change in circumstances without concomitant change in policy
can have detrimental consequences. Detrimental
effects also occur when policies are implemented in
ways not intended.
Despite the difficulties, risks, and hazards of policy change, change is often necessary. Change is a
better alternative than continuing with outdated
policies or working without a policy when one is
clearly needed. Given the difficulties of change, it is
essential to adhere to two rules before implementing the change: (1) test any new policy on a small
group or unit; this is similar to conducting a pilot or
feasibility study before initiating a research project
or study; and (2) identify the purpose of the policy
in the procedure or action directive. These steps
will identify problems with the new procedure early
so that changes may be made and will help with the
implementation of the new policy as intended. This
information will also be used in measuring the
effectiveness of the policy.

All Good Things...
From the beginning, nurses have used power, politics, and policy to further and achieve their goals. It

217

is important for nurses to develop group process,
problem-solving, conﬂict management, crisis intervention, and communication skills to effectively
help move toward goals to improve health and
health care. These human relation activities are
essential to exert such inﬂuence to make a positive
impact on policy. Collectivity and collegiality help
to empower nurse leaders who must position themselves to act to make policy rather than to react to
policy proposals of others.
Calls for health-care delivery reform are coming
from all segments of society. Big and small businesses want reform because the current system is
costly and in many ways ineffective, resulting in
reduced competitiveness. The high cost of health
care is passed on to the consumer and makes products more expensive. Providers of health care have
greatly reduced resources with which to provide
care. Fewer resources jeopardize access and quality
of care, resulting in less healthy populations, which
decreases productivity and increases costs throughout the economy.
Patients, families, and communities are increasingly dissatisﬁed with the quality and kinds of
health care and services available and received.
Frustration, fear, and helplessness are growing in
the face of a system unresponsive to needs. The
health-care system is in dire need of major policy
change. Health-care professionals must be proactive
and participate in health-care reform.
Nurses can and should be major participants in
reform. They know well the problematic areas, the
gaps, the weaknesses, the dysfunctionalities, and
the strengths of the current system. Nurses have
insight and knowledge of what works and what
does not in setting standards of care, access to care,
and allocation of resources. With adroit use of
power and political theory, nurses can participate in
shaping health policy to improve efficacy and distribution in an equitable way.
Health-care reform is a major challenge. With
increased scope of knowledge and skills, coupled
with conscious and conscientious development
and use of political action, nurses can participate
in and support policy development. Nurses are
needed to change and improve health care at
the institutional, community, state, and national
levels. Nursing provides abundant resources to do
so; nurses must develop and use political know-how
to influence important needed changes and
reforms.

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

218

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 218

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

Let’s Talk
1. List and describe types of power.
2. List several ways that a staff nurse might achieve
power and discuss.
3. List and describe ways to increase expert power.
4. List and discuss the components of a political
analysis.
5. What are the steps involved in conﬂict
resolution?
6. Describe coalitions as a skill or tactic for use in
the workplace.
7. List and compare the steps in the nursing process
with the steps in the policy-setting process.

NCLEX Questions
1. Empowerment is an important concept in nurs-

ing. Nurses often talk about empowering
patients. Empowerment is also important in
leadership as it inﬂuences:
A. Social and political reform
B. Productivity and effectiveness
C. Individual attributes
D. A and B
E. All of the above
2. Three characteristics of empowered nurses are:

A. Raised consciousness of social, political, and
economic realities
B. Conﬁdence in self as a change agent
C. Motivation to develop skills
D. All of the above
E. B and C
3. Power can be deﬁned as:

A. Authority or inﬂuence
B. Ability to cause or maintain the status quo
C. A negative attribute related to authoritative
leadership and hierarchical organization
D. All of the above
E. A and B
4. Politics are used in the following arena(s):

A. Federal and state government
B. Workplace

C. Organizations and associations
D. All of the above
E. A and C
5. Among decisions that politics inﬂuences are:

A. Allocation of resources such as staffing in
hospitals
B. Vacations
C. Scope of professional practice
D. All of the above
E. None of the above
6. In solving a problem, it is important to:

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Identify your position and stick with it
Present your solution as best
Identify ﬂaws in other positions
Seek a compromise
Collaborate

7. When evaluating courses of action, it is impor-

tant to:
A. Identify your values and those of stakeholders
B. Recognize that values are not important
C. Recognize that values confuse the issue and
increase difficulties
D. Always insist on your values
E. B and D
8. Policies in the workplace are:

A. Not needed; no one ever looks at the policy
and procedure book
B. Common sense
C. Not important to patient care
D. All of the above
E. None of the above
9. Policies:

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Eliminate disparities in care
Do not need to be reviewed and revised
Are inﬂexible
All of the above
None of the above

10. All of the following are true about power except:

A. Used to enable nurses to provide optimal
care
B. Used to inﬂuence national health policy
C. Is increased with an authoritarian approach
to leadership
D. Is not always commensurate with position
E. Is enhanced with education and continuing
education

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 219

Power, Politics, and Policy

REFERENCES
Alward, R.R., & Camuñas, C. (1991). The Nurse’s Guide to
Marketing. Albany, NY: Delmar.
American Journal of Nursing (2006). The US health care system
in crisis. American Journal of Nursing, 106(1), 20.
American Nurses Association. (Nov/Dec. 2005). In brief: New
York & safe patient handling. American Nurse, 37(6), 4.
Anderson, J.E. (1990). Public policymaking. Boston: HoughtonMifflin.
Annas, G.J. (2005). American bioethics: Crossing human rights
and health law boundaries. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bach, P.B., et al. (2004). Primary care physicians who treat
blacks and whites. New England Journal of Medicine, 351,
575–584.
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in
clinical nursing practice. Menlo Park, CA.
Berkowitz, B., & Wolff, T. (2000). The spirit of coalition.
Washington, DC: American Public Health Association.
Bloche, M. (2004). Health care disparities: Science, politics, and
race. New England Journal of Medicine, 350, 1568–1570.
Camuñas, C. (1994a). Ethical dilemmas of nurse executives Part
1. Journal of Nursing Administration, 24(7/8), 45–51.
Camuñas, C. (1994b). Ethical dilemmas of nurse executives Part
2. Journal of Nursing Administration, 24(9), 19–23.
Camuñas, C. (1998). Guest Editorial: Managed care, professional
integrity, and ethics. Journal of Nursing Administration, 28(3),
7–9.
Carroll, T.L., DiVincenti, M., & Show, E.V. (1995). Nurse executive job loss: Trauma or transition. Nursing Administration
Quarterly, 19(4), 11–17.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2003). National
health expenditures and projections, 1990–2013. Baltimore,
MD: Author. Retrieved April 16, 2005, from http://www.
cms.hhs.gov/statistics/nhe/projections-2003/tl.asp
Cohen, M.D., March, J.G., & Olsen J.P. (1972). A garbage can
model of organizational choice. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 17, 1–25.
Diers, D., & Molde, S. (1983). Nurses in primary care: The new
gatekeepers? American Journal of Nursing, 83, 742–745.
Donnelly, G.F. (2006). A futurescan of nursing: A journey to
tomorrow. Paper presented at the 43rd Annual Isabel Maitland
Stewart Conference on Research in Nursing, New York, NY.
Farmer, P. (2005). Pathologies of power. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Ferguson, V.D. (1993). Perspectives on power. In Mason, D.J.,
Talbott, S.W., & Leavitt, J.K. (Eds.). Policy and politics for
nurses: Action and change in the workplace, government, organizations, and community (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Fisher, R., Ury, W., & Patton, B. (1992). Getting to yes: Negotiating agreement without giving in (2nd ed.). New York:
Penguin.
Flynn, J.P. (Ed.). (1997). The role of the preceptor: A guide for
nurse educators and clinicians. New York: Springer.
Foley, M. (2001). ANA: Preserving the core while preparing for
the future. American Nurse, 33(2), 5.
French, J.R.P., & Raven, B. (1959). The basis of social power. In
Cartwright, D. (Ed.). Studies in social power. Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan.

219

Gill, G. (2005). Nightingales: The extraordinary upbringing and
curious life of Miss Florence Nightingale. New York: Ballantine
Books.
Hersey, P., Blanchard, K., & Natemeyer, W. (1976). Situational
leadership: Perception and impact of power. Group
Organizational Studies, 4, 418–428.
Jha, A.K., et al. (2005). Racial trends in the use of major procedures among the elderly. New England Journal of Medicine,
353(7), 683–691.
Joel, L., & Kelly, L. (2002). The nursing experience: Trends, challenges, and transitions (4th ed). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kaiser Commission (2004). The Kaiser Commission on Medicare
and the uninsured. (Fact sheet #1420-06) Washington, DC:
Kaiser Family Foundation. Retrieved April 21, 2005, from
http://www.kff.org
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2006). Snapshots: Health care costs.
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved May 10, 2006, from
www.kff.org
Kalish, B.J., & Kalish, P.A. (1982). Politics of nursing.
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Kingdon, J.W. (1995). Agendas, alternatives, and public
policies. Boston: Little, Brown.
Kopala, B. (2001). Professional nursing: Issues and ethics. In
Chaska, N.L. (Ed.). The nursing profession: Tomorrow and
beyond. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kuokkanen, L., & Katajisto, J. (2003). Promoting or impeding
empowerment? Nurses’ assessment of their work environment. Journal of Nursing Administration, 33(4), 209–215.
Leavitt, P. (2002). Managed care mandated coverage in Maine: A
grassroots success story. In Mason, D.J., Leavitt, J.K., &
Chaffee, M.W. (Eds.). Policy & politics in nursing and health
care (4th ed.). St Louis: W.B. Saunders.
Manojlovich, M., & Laschinger, H.K.S. (2002). The relationship
of empowerment and selected personality characteristics to
nursing job satisfaction. Journal of Nursing Administration,
32(11), 586–595.
Marquis, B., & Hurston, C. (1994). Management decision-making
for nurses (2nd ed). New York: J.B. Lippincott.
May, R. (1972). Power and innocence. New York: Dell.
McMurray, R.N. (1973). Power and the ambitious executive.
Harvard Business Review, 52(6), 69–74.
Reverby, S. (1987a). Ordered to care: The dilemma of American
nursing, 1850–1945. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Reverby, S. (1987b). A caring dilemma: Womanhood and nursing in perspective. Nursing Research, 36(1), 5–11.
Ripley, R.B. (1996). Stages of the policy process. In McCool, D.C.
(Ed.). Public policy theories, models, and concepts: An anthology.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Roe, S. (1995). Managing your work setting: Positive work relationships, conﬂict management, and negotiations. In Vestal,
K.W. (Ed.). Nursing management: Concepts and issues (2nd
ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Rogge, M.M. (1987). Nursing and politics: A forgotten legacy.
Nursing Research, 36(1), 26–30.
Sabiston, J.A., & Laschinger, H.K. (1995). Staff nurse work
empowerment and perceived autonomy. Testing Kanter’s theory of structural power in organizations. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 25(9), 42–50.
Shishehbor, M.H., et al. (2006). Association of socioeconomic
status with functional capacity, heart rate recovery, and all-

13Jones Leadership(F)-ch 13

220

1/14/07

3:44 PM

Page 220

Skills for Being an Effective Leader

cause mortality. Journal of the American Medical Association,
295, 784–792.
Smedley, B.D., Stith, A.Y., & Nelson, A.R. (2003). Unequal treatment: Confronting racial and ethnic disparities in health care.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Steinbrook, R. (2004). Disparities in health care: From politics to
policy. New England Journal of Medicine, 350, 1486–1488.
Trossman, S. (2006). A state of emergency: Nurses continue to
contend with crowded EDs. American Nurse, 38(1), 1, 7–8.

Urbina, I. (2006). In the treatment of diabetes, success often
does not pay. The New York Times, pp. A1, A22–23.
Vance, C., & Olson, R.K. (Eds.). (1998). The mentor connection.
New York: Springer.
Vestal, K. (1990). Fired! Managing the process. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 20(6), 14–16.
Vestal, K.W. (1995). Nurse executives: Career derailment, success, and dilemmas. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 19(4),
83–88.

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 221

SKILLS FOR
BEING AN
EFFECTIVE
MANAGER

4

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 222

This page has been left intentionally blank.

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 223

chapter
14
Planning and Marketing
for a Healthy Organization
ESPERANZA VILLANUEVA JOYCE, EDD, RN
PATRICIA MARTINEZ, MD
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“A man who does not think and plan long ahead will
ﬁnd trouble right at his door.”
Confucius

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Define planning, project planning, operational planning, and
strategic planning.
Describe the elements of the strategic planning process.
Recognize your organization’s mission statement.
Identify your unit’s/organization’s strengths and weaknesses.
Discuss the differences between threats and opportunities.
Discuss the relationship between goals and objectives.
Identify effective approaches in writing objectives.
Define marketing within the health-care setting.
Identify the components of marketing.
Identify specific marketing principles that transfer to the
health-care environment.

223

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

224

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 224

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

T

■

he environmental challenges of providing health
care in the 21st century require more sophisticated
problem-solving solutions. With shrinking ﬁscal
resources and increasing demands in the work
place, it is imperative that planning become a major
element in any manager’s job description. It is easy
to lose sight of the big picture when we are so busy
focusing on the small one. In our daily nursing routines, we sometimes fail to understand overriding
nursing administration goals and objectives. We
become so consumed with our shift’s activities that
we cannot see beyond them. As a result, we are not
always prepared to deal with situations that arise,
and we fail to anticipate situations that may have
beneﬁted from advance thought and planning.
Nurses are familiar with the process of planning.
Planning is an integral step in the nursing process.
We understand that without planning, our patients
would not fare well. We plan for patient care on a
short-term basis, and we anticipate needs on a longterm basis.
Planning differs with the job. A nurse at a unit
level may be concerned with daily operations so the
period for planning may be a few days, a week, or a
month. Middle managers generally plan for 1 to 3
years, whereas top executives plan for 3 to 7 years.
Middle managers, because they are involved at the
unit level, plan for unit activities such as length of
hospital stay, seasonal changes, staff assignments,
and so on. On the other hand, top executives plan
for activities that involve the entire hospital (both
physical and ﬁscal) operations, that involve larger
sums of money, and that require longer time to
complete. At the unit level, a 1-day retreat devoted
to planning may be sufficient. In larger organizations, it may take weeks to accomplish all of the
planning in various departments. This chapter
discusses various types of planning in an organization. It explores elements of the strategic planning process and defines the components of
marketing.

■

■

■

■

PROJECT PLANNING
Project planning entails planning for a project.
Project planning involves a one-time effort, for
example, to gather a team of nurses to conduct a
community fundraising event. Most unit managers
will involve their staff in project planning. This
type of planning requires that one:
■

■

■

■

Types of Planning
There are various types of planning such as:
■

Business planning, to plan a business organization, plan to test a product, plan a budget

Program planning, which involves a major
internal or external function such as planning
for the hospital’s 25th anniversary
Career planning, which involves educational
milestones for individuals or groups
Performance planning, which involves development, implementation, and evaluation of job
descriptions
Disaster planning, which involves guidelines,
protocols
This chapter covers project planning, operational planning, and strategic planning.

■

Identify the problem that the project will ultimately address.
Name the project. Selecting a name for the
project is important. For example, if your
department wants to recruit foreign nurses,
you may want to name it the Foreign Nurse
Exchange Project. Choose a name that will
help members quickly identify your project.
Once a project has been created, the name cannot be changed.
Determine the project goals. Setting goals and
measurable objectives will guide you through
the completion of the project. For example, if
a goal is to decrease the vacancy rate of nursing staff, your objective may read: within
6 months, staff will increase by 15%.
Specify tasks for each member. Determine the
size of the project team, and then distribute
the necessary tasks. For example, if you plan to
recruit foreign nurses, you may want to designate a person to review the literature to specify which countries export the largest number
of nurses. Another project member may meet
with the marketing department to start an
advertising campaign.
Identify resources needed. It is essential to list
the resources needed, such as travel monies if
the project manager is involved in interview-

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 225

Planning and Marketing for a Healthy Organization

■

■

■

ing staff nurses in another country or release
time for all team members to be able to plan
and monitor the project.
Indicate timelines for completion. To keep all
members aware of the progress of the project,
it is advantageous to display a chart or timeline
that provides the status of each activity and its
completion.
Implement the project. Once you have gathered all the data and know which group of
nurses to target, your team will determine by
whom and where the project will be implemented.
Evaluate the project. It is important to assess
the progress of the project so that evaluation becomes a natural step in the process.
Evaluation of the project should always go
back to the objectives. Were the objectives
accomplished? For example, if you were successful with your recruitment, at the end of the
6-month period, your evaluation should read:
35 (15%) nurses from the Philippines were
recruited.

One of the most common problems surrounding
plans for projects is the potential for procrastination. Some individuals tend to leave an assignment
for the last minute. Thus, it is extremely important
to identify a leader when planning a project. The
responsibilities of the project leader include clarifying the purpose of the project to all project members, identifying the roles and responsibilities of
each of the members, and keeping members on

TABLE 14-1

225

track. The project leader needs to facilitate and help
the project members overcome barriers to the project’s success. The leader is responsible for providing
necessary ﬁnancial and human resources to accomplish the project. The leader should recognize members for a job well done.

OPERATIONAL PLANNING
An operational plan is a detailed work plan for a
coming year. It is the blueprint by which the objectives of a unit, for example, are put into measurable
actions. It also describes the short-term (a ﬁscal
year) organizational objectives (Table 14-1). Operational planning involves the day-to-day execution of
objectives that assist in accomplishing the organization’s mission. This plan is used to identify the
responsibilities and resources needed to accomplish
the department/unit priorities in the current ﬁscal
year. Operational planning focuses on sustaining
the course of action and ensuring the employees’
ability to perform the designated tasks. Middle managers generally get involved in operational planning.
Managers examine measures that can reduce the
obstacles employees may encounter; this type of
planning should not be considered a rigid process.
The manager must ensure that all aspects of the
operational plan are implemented; the strategies to
accomplish the plan may need to change over time.
Like project planning or strategic planning (discussed below), operational planning addresses questions such as:

Operational Plan in a Medical-Surgical Unit

Mission: To provide high-quality care to patients
Vision: To become the leader in health care in the Southwest.
GOAL

OBJECTIVES

STRATEGIES

OUTCOMES

Improve patient
satisfaction on
3 West.

Within 6 weeks, 85% of patients
will report satisfaction with care
provided.

Orient patients on admission to the unit.
Inform patients of the unit’s policies and
procedures.
Answer patients’ call light within 2 minutes.

87% of patients in the
unit reported
satisfaction with care
provided.

Improve unit
staff’s cross
training.

Within 4 months, 50% of staff
members will cross train to at
least one other unit.

Provide a minimum of 30 clock hours of
training in mental health, obstetrics, and
pediatrics.
After training is completed, rotate two staff
to identified unit for 2 weeks.

62% of staff cross
trained to one unit.

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

226

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 226

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

TABLE 14-2

Gantt Chart

WEEK
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Recruit
staff
Market
center

Hire
staff

Assess
staff’s
strengths

Train staff
Order
furniture and
equipment

Train
staff

Install
furniture and
equipment

Install
information
system

Prepare
patient
medical
records

Hold
open
house

Admit
patients

■

■
■
■

Where is the unit/organization now? (assessment of the environment)
Where do we want to be? (goals and objectives)
How do we get there? (strategies)
How do we measure progress? (outcomes)

To answer such questions, the middle manager
must gather data (such as budget, patient, and quality improvement data) from both previous and current ﬁscal years. The operational plan must link
goals and objectives to the organization’s strategic
plan and link the strategies to the performance
indicators or outcomes.
Managers must ensure that employees at the
unit/department level are involved in the operational plan. This means that all employees determine
together what objectives need to be accomplished in
that particular unit and understand the strategies
that need to be implemented in order to meet the
unit’s goals. A variety of tools, such as ﬂowcharts,
diagrams, and matrices, can assist managers as they
create detailed operational plans. These tools use
arrows, lines, boxes, circles, and other symbols to
communicate processes. Some of the common tools
that managers use to create operational plans
include the Gantt chart (Finkler & Kovner, 2000),
critical path method (Baker 2006), and program
evaluation and review technique (McGuffin,1999),
which is a variation of the critical path method.

Gantt Chart
The Gantt chart is useful for planning and scheduling projects. It allows the manager to assess how
long a project should take, determine the resources
needed, and lay out the order in which tasks need
to be carried out. Gantt charts help the manager
monitor the project’s progress and stay on track.
Gantt charts help the manager plan out the tasks

that need to be completed by scheduling times that
the tasks will be carried out and allocating
resources. When establishing a surgical center, for
example, the manager’s ideal plan may include the
timeframe in Table 14-2.
The chart is also useful when working with multiple projects. See Table 14-3. An advantage of the
chart is the ability to review projects that are progressing in a timely fashion.

Critical Path Method
The critical path method (CPM) is another tool that
helps managers prepare a schedule and plan resources. During the management of a project, the
CPM allows a manager to monitor achievement of
project goals and take remedial action if the project
is not going well. The CPM consists of diagrams
that depict the activities and the time line required
(Fig. 14-1).
The diagram shows the start event (step 1) and
the completion of the task of recruiting staff and

TABLE 14-3

Gantt Control Chart

Cumulative
weeks

1

Project 1
orientation SNII

X

Project 2
orientation SNII
Project 3
SWOT seminars
Project 4
establish surgical
center

2

3

4

5

7

8

X
X

X

6

X
X

X

X
X

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 227

Planning and Marketing for a Healthy Organization

Step 4
Assess
staff
strengths

Step 3
Step 2
Step 1

Orient
staff

Hire
staff

Recruit
staff
Market
center

Week 1

Week 2

Week 3

FIGURE 14-1 Critical path method.

marketing the center (step 2). This activity should
take 1 week. One activity cannot start until another
is completed. Assessing the staff strengths (step 4)
cannot be done until completion of step 2 (hiring
staff) and step 3 (orientation). In the event that the
task is completed in less time, such as hiring staff,
the time of completion can be adjusted in the diagram. If you are not graphically oriented, this diagram can be difficult to draw without using
commercial software.

Program Evaluation and Review Technique
The program evaluation and review technique
(PERT) calculates a realistic timeframe by using the
shortest possible time each activity will take, the
most likely length of time, and the longest time it
might take. Managers can input these ﬁgures into
PERT to calculate the time to use for each project
stage. The formula follows:
Shortest time ⫹ 4 ⫻ likely time ⫹ longest time
ᎏᎏᎏᎏᎏᎏ
6
Example:
6 weeks ⫹ 4 ⫻12 weeks ⫹ 24 weeks
ᎏᎏᎏᎏᎏ ⫽ 24 weeks
6
Using the formula helps to bias time estimates
away from the unrealistically short time scales often
assumed. Using a realistic timeframe is helpful
when developing the strategic plan for your unit or
department.

227

Practice to Strive For 14-1
All nurses must be involved in the planning process in their
organizations. The daily routine activities, however, often
cause nurses to devote little time to planning. At the unit
level, especially when patient acuity is high, nurse managers have little time to plan for the future. Planning theory
(Roussel, 2006) indicates that the higher a manager is in the
organization, the greater the portion of time he/she should
spend on planning. Chief nurse executives should spend
half their time on planning and innovation. The proportion
of time spent in planning becomes less and less as one
moves down the ranks of nursing management. Yet, managers must insist that all staff participate in the strategic
planning process.
Thinking strategically is not reserved only for top administrators. Strategic plan participation should be in all nurse
managers’ job descriptions. Nurse managers should play
a significant role in the strategic planning process. In their
nursing area, the way the unit is organized to provide care,
the way it establishes staffing patterns to maximize care,
and the financial budgets it develops to get resources are all
outcomes of a strategic process managed at the unit level.
The current emphasis should be on managers working
to achieve the organization’s primary goal rather than
just focusing on short-term objectives and day-to-day
operations.

STRATEGIC PLANNING
Strategic planning is a systematic process that emphasizes assessment of the environment (economic,
political, social, and technological) both internally
and externally. It focuses on performance improvement and utilizes strategies to accomplish the organization’s desired outcomes. Business organizations
embraced the idea of strategic planning in the
1950s. And in the last 20 years, even institutions of
higher education have attempted to implement
strategic planning out of a need to respond to challenges with ﬁnances, student attrition, and educational demands.
Strategic planning is a management tool that
helps organizations set long-term goals. It assures
that the individuals working for the organization
work together to accomplish set goals and objectives. Executives in the organization are generally
responsible for initiating the strategic planning
process. The current trend in business is to plan for
2 to 3 years. Because of employee mobility and the
changing economy, industry usually is not able to

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

228

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 228

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

plan for more than 3 years. Strategic plans in certain
organizations may be drafted for 10 or more years.
The strategic plan, just like the project or operational plan, should be simple and easily understood
by the participants. The way a strategic plan is
developed depends on the nature of the organization’s leadership, culture of the organization, complexity of the organization’s environment, size, and
the expertise of the planners. Strategic planning
models can be issue-based, goal-based, and scenariobased.
Issue-based strategic planning utilizes a very
focused approach as is used in manufacturing businesses (Hiam, 1990) to improve productivity over a
speciﬁed period. Scenario-based strategic planning
is used frequently in human resources or marketing
operations (Hiam, 1990) to improve decision making and sales forecasting. The goal-based model is
the most widely used in organizations. Its key elements include: the organization’s assessment of the
environment, mission statement, vision, development of goals and objectives, strategies to accomplish the goals and objectives, and outcomes
(Table 14-4).
Unlike project planning or operational planning,
strategic planning requires a multidisciplinary
approach. Every single department or unit in an
organization must be involved in the plan to ensure
that staff members comply with goals and objectives
and that strategies are implemented. Managers may
initiate the strategic planning process by communicating the initiative in their monthly meetings.
They may invite an expert to provide a seminar to
inform all the employees about the process. Once
the employees are oriented to the strategic plan,
they volunteer to work with speciﬁc sections.
Without this involvement, employees may not buy
into the organization’s goals and objectives and may
hinder the plan’s success.
One beneﬁt of strategic planning is that it helps
managers make current decisions in light of future
consequences. For example, if your unit plans for
expansion from 16 to 32 beds within 6 months, you
need to start planning for staffing now. Planning
helps managers develop a comprehensive basis for
decision making and exercise maximum direction
in organizational control. In addition, strategic
planning assists managers to:
■

Resolve organizational problems goals; they
are shared with the entire organization

TABLE 14-4

Strategic Planning Process

External assessment
Opportunities and threats
Internal assessment
Strengths and weaknesses
Mission
Vision
Goals
Strategic
Organization
Operational
Department
Unit
Objectives
Strategies
Implementation
Outcomes
Evaluation

■

■

Improve performance strategies; they are
accepted by all staff
Build teamwork expertise; staff must work
together to identify goals and objectives and
determine strategies.

Strategic Planning Process
Strategic planning is a step-by-step process that
delineates ongoing group activity. Table 14-4
demonstrates the steps of the process.

ASSESSMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT
The ﬁrst step of any planning process is assessing
the environment. At any level, the assessment conducted is both external and internal (Table 14-5).
At the unit level, an environmental assessment
includes assessment of employees, for example. The
manager needs to examine how the staff is likely to
feel and react to the contents of the project, operational, or strategic plan. Even at an organizational

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 229

Planning and Marketing for a Healthy Organization

level, a nursing executive needs to know the staff in
the departments he/she oversees. Because staff
plays a crucial role in strategic planning, some key
questions that a manager should ask before any
type of planning occurs include:
■

■

■
■

■

■

■

Who are the best, most interested staff members in your unit/department?
What is the emotional or ﬁnancial interest
they have invested in the organization?
What motivates them?
Are there staff members who are not ambitious, who do minimal work?
What do staff members think about administration?
Who are the informal leaders who inﬂuence
the unit/department?
How can everyone be engaged in the planning
process?

Once they have answered these questions, managers need to inform all staff members about the
necessity of planning, answer the “what’s in it for
me” questions, and guide the staff toward the realization of the plan. Managers must talk to staff
directly if they perceive a lack of interest or a lack
of understanding of the process. Most people are
willing to share their views, and asking their opinions will make them feel like they are contributing
to the organization’s plans.
When creating a project or operational plan, it is
important to assess the department’s/unit’s immediate physical environment as well. When develop-

TABLE 14-5

Environmental Assessment

ASSESSMENT
OF EXTERNAL
ENVIRONMENT

ASSESSMENT
OF INTERNAL
ENVIRONMENT

Competition

Patient care

Markets

Financial resources

Health-care trends

Human resources

Economic factors

Information systems

PEST: Political, Educational,
Social, Technology factors

Research capabilities
Staff development
Educational systems

229

ing a staffing plan at the unit level, for example, you
must determine future patient census on the unit
based on past data. When does the patient census
peak? When does it drop? In which months of the
year does a particular disease become prevalent?
What kind of ﬁnancial resources will be required?
Based on these data, you can make projections and
continue in the planning process
When preparing a strategic plan, the assessment
becomes a bit more expansive. The manager must
assess the internal and external environment of the
organization thoroughly.
The external assessment should include the competition for services in the community. For example,
determine which hospitals are around the area and
what kind of specialized care they offer and compare it with yours. Take a look at the markets, and
identify your customers. Health-care trends also
inﬂuence planning. If the elderly population in your
community indicates an upward trend, your organization may choose to accommodate the elder’s
needs by planning a skill care unit or expanding the
cardiac care unit.
In order to assess the internal environment,
strategic planners must identify a variety of systems
within the organization. Important to assess are
patient care standards, not only to comply with
accrediting organizations but also to improve the
care offered. Other assessments include ﬁnancial
resources, information systems, research capabilities, staff development, and educational systems. In
any health-care organization, nursing is the largest
human resource group. Thus, it is imperative that
this segment of employees be taken into consideration as the organization conducts strategic planning. The quantity and quality of staff development
and educational systems need to be assessed, especially when considering expansion of services.

Environmental Assessment Techniques
One technique used to assess the environment is the
PEST, which stands for political, educational,
social, and technology factors that affect an environment. In the political realm, managers analyze
factors such as legislative activities, antitrust regulations, and environmental protection laws that may
affect the organization. In the economic environment, analysis includes trends, events, and economic indicators speciﬁc to the marketplace in

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

230

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 230

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

which the organization operates. The PEST also
assesses areas and services of potential growth and
monitors trends in industry, global economy, interest rates, and energy availability. In the societal
environment, it analyzes population growth, age
distribution, regional changes, health status of the
population (death rates, communicable diseases,
Medicare/Medicaid resources), and safety issues. In
the technological environment, it helps managers
focus on what the organization has or lacks in terms
of current technology as well as on what is available.
The SWOT technique is another tool to help
managers conduct a thorough environmental
assessment. The acronym stands for the strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats in an organization. SWOT requires analysis of multiple factors related to the health-care industry: human
resources, the physical facility, the population, and
the economic stability of the organization, for
example. Table 14-6 presents a brief example of a
SWOT analysis.
The risk analysis, another environmental assessment technique, helps the manager spot project
risks, weaknesses in the organization, and external
risks. For example, suppose an organization discovers that a group of physicians plans to build a neurology center and recruit nursing staff from your

TABLE 14-6

SWOT Technique

STRENGTHS

WEAKNESSES

10-year- old facility

Nursing staff turnover at 36%

Experienced senior staff

Lack of staff development

Strong information system

High nurse/patient ratio

Quality of clinical resources
OPPORTUNITIES

THREATS

Increase in the aging
population

Construction of three
specialty hospitals

Partnerships with
diverse groups

Urban population declining

Develop mentor
programs

High unemployment rate

Develop student preceptorship programs

Salary competition between
hospitals

units. This has the potential for affecting not only
the ﬁnances of the hospital but also the patient care
offered. Conducting a risk analysis helps the manager to make additional plans to neutralize some
risks.

MISSION AND VISION STATEMENTS
Mission statements identify why the organization
exists (see Chapter 4). They encapsulate the overriding purpose of the organization. Vision statements identify the future of the organization. They
provide the ultimate level the organization aims for.
Mission and vision statements can be one sentence,
a number of phrases, or multiple sentences. When
creating a mission statement, it is imperative that all
individuals in the organization understand the purpose of the content. For example, the mission statement at a hospital in Ashland, Kentucky, reads: “To
Care. To Serve. To Heal.” These phrases summarize
why the hospital exists. Such statements are generally simple so that employees can identify with and
remember them. A children’s hospital’s mission
statement in Virginia reads: “To provide the highest
level and quality of pediatric care available in our
community.” This statement is concise and easy to
interpret. St. George’s Hospital Medical School
University of London has a mission statement that
reads: “To promote by excellence in teaching, clinical practice, and research the prevention and understanding of disease.” This statement lets you know
that this is a teaching hospital with a medical school
where research is a priority. The vision statement
accompanies the mission statement but is more
future-oriented. It states where the organization is
going, the ultimate position that the organization
plans to achieve: “To achieve a local, regional and
national reputation as leader in health care.” This
could be a vision statement of an organization that
has been operating only at the local level. A hospital
could have a vision statement that reads: “To provide world-class care in our communities.” This is a
very clear, self-explanatory statement.

GOAL SETTING
Goals, in general, are global statements that help an
individual or an organization plan for the future in
a constructive way. Goals should delineate clearly

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 231

Planning and Marketing for a Healthy Organization

the desired end product. Goals may be short-term,
to be accomplished within a week, a month, or a
year. Or they may be long-term, indicating what the
organization aspires to become 5 to 10 years from
now. For planning purposes in organizations, goals
are written for the operational plan and the strategic plan.
Operational goals at the unit or department level
are statements that indicate future directions. Goals
are more speciﬁc statements of the organization’s
vision, enumerating the accomplishments to be
achieved if the vision is to become real. Strategic
plan goals are institutional goals often written by
executives or upper-level administration members
who oversee the organization’s activities and are
able to conduct environmental assessments. A current trend encourages all individuals in the organization to participate in the goal-setting process, but
involvement depends on the size of the organization. For large companies, involving all employees
may be next to impossible. Operational plan goals
are congruent with strategic plan goals (Table 14-7).

OBJECTIVES
Objectives are descriptions of performances or
activities. They are statements that make goals more
speciﬁc and measurable and give managers the ability to evaluate goal achievement. For this reason,
over the last two decades organizations have
included objectives in their operational and strate-

TABLE 14-7

TABLE 14-8

231

Objectives

OBJECTIVES

STRATEGIES

By 2007, provide wellqualified College of
Medicine faculty in
all departments.

Recruit board-certified
physicians.
a. Partner with university to
offer curriculum on site.

By 2009, all nursing staff
at the Medical Center
will be pursuing or have
a baccalaureate degree.

b. Negotiate tuition

reimbursement.

gic plans. When incorporating objectives into plans,
keep asking yourself, “Are you sure we can do this?”
Objectives are the speciﬁc, measurable results produced while implementing strategies (Table 14-8).
As you work with objectives, state them separately, and show related information that is linked
to strategies. This means that if you listed a number
1 under objectives, make sure you have a number 1
in the strategies. Objectives are written in a logical
sequence, preferably in numeric order. For example,
all objectives related to human resources (individuals), staff development, or clinical practice should
be grouped under those sections. Be sure that the
period for the objective is clear and realistic. The
time line ensures achievement of the outcome by
the target date. If there is no time line stated in an
objective, that objective is assumed to be bound by
the ﬁscal year covered by the plan.

Strategic and Operational Goals

STRATEGIES
STRATEGIC GOALS

OPERATIONAL GOALS
MEDICINE UNIT

1. Optimize the

a. Increase nursing visibility

resources of the
medical center.
2. Emphasize clinical
excellence.

within the medical center
and the community.
b. Assure cost containment at
the unit level. Evaluate the
performance of all
employees in a manner
that produces growth in
the employee and
upgrades service
standards.

Strategies are a series of actions or behaviors that
assist planners in achieving the objectives. Strategies
link to a particular objective and intended outcomes. Well-planned strategies provide speciﬁc
directions to achieve objectives (see Table 14-8; 149). Strategies are not static. They can change and be
modiﬁed during the implementation of the plan.
Strategies may be clustered under a common objective. For example, if the Human Resources department has an objective to increase the diversity of the
staff, the strategy may be to (a) travel to the South to
recruit minority physicians, and (b) advertise nursing positions in minority nursing journals. Strate-

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

232

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 232

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

TABLE 14-9

Outcomes

DEPARTMENT GOAL: OPTIMIZE TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES
OBJECTIVE

STRATEGY

OUTCOME

1. Within 2 years, provide

1 a. Solicit input from vendors.

1 a. Within 6 months, at least six

state-of-the-art computer
enhancement in the department

2. Nursing staff vacancy rate will

decrease below the national
standard of 12%.

b. Assess staff’s knowledge of

b.

computers.
c. Purchase wireless computers.

c.

2 a. Plan recruitment and retention

2 a.

activities.
b. Address workplace issues such
as mandatory overtime,
staffing, and quality care.
c. Address compensation and
benefit packages.

b.

gies must be resource driven and sequential. Being
resource driven means that the constraints of people, equipment, operating systems, money, and other
resources are considered when developing a strategy. Strategies must be designed after the desired
outcomes are written. Managers must assess whether the strategies produced the desired outcomes.

c.

vendors will visit the hospital and
demonstrate their products.
Within a year, at least 50% of the
staff will receive computer training.
Purchase seven computers by the
end of the fiscal year
Within 6 months, recruitment
activities will be conducted in 19
adjacent counties.
Within a year, RN staff:patient ratio
will be 1:6.
Annual RN salary will increase to
$52,000.

the effectiveness in meeting the expectations of the
planners. It is important to select benchmarks,
measures that compare the organization with others. For example, if your objective reads that the
nursing turnover rate in your facility will decrease
below the national standard, then your outcome
would be measured by comparing your rate with the
national average as a benchmark.

IMPLEMENTATION
In the implementation phase of the strategic plan,
all the strategies planned are carried out. The success in the implementation of the strategies depends
on the involvement of managers who must monitor
all the activities to ensure accomplishment of the
objectives.

OUTCOMES
Outcomes are the results that you plan to accomplish. Outcomes must be realistic and achievable. If
the vision is an expansive one, such as “to offer the
best service in the world,” managers need to determine how to write goals and objectives to assure
outcomes are achieved. Otherwise, outcomes may
fall short of expectations. Outcomes are indicators
against which you measure the success in meeting
your objectives (see Table 14-9). Outcomes reﬂect

EVALUATION
The evaluation determines the organization’s progress toward attaining the identiﬁed outcomes. How
did the organization respond to the implementation
of the plan? How was productivity achieved? To
what level? Was the budget sufficient? The evaluation compares outcomes or results with objectives.
Dashboards and scorecards (Table 14-10) are
tools that help organizations to achieve strategic
outcomes. These software application tools have
been used extensively in the last few years because
of their ability to amass large volumes of information, making it easy to monitor trends and to
respond to time-sensitive events. Dashboards and
scorecards can promote performance visibility and
effectiveness.
The purpose of the dashboards is to foster better
communication between managers and staff. The

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 233

Planning and Marketing for a Healthy Organization

Table 14-10

Dashboards and Scorecards

CHARACTERISTIC DASHBOARD SCORECARD
Purpose

Measures
individual or
group
performance

Charts the progress
of a planned
strategy or objective

Users

Supervisors

Executive
leadership, middle
managers, staff

Data

Specific
events

Summarizes the
progress or the
accomplishment of
goals

Display

Graphs, data

Graphs, tables

dashboard enables the user to communicate via
threaded discussions, and employees can monitor
metrics that are relevant to their roles. Supervisors
generally used scoreboards to measure individual or
group performances. These performances measure
productivity related to speciﬁc events. The dashboard evaluates performance against metrics (measurements) using predeﬁned goals. For example, in a
hospital setting, a supervisor will use the dashboard
to determine patient care hours during the months
of December through February, when most cardiac
patients increase the census on a medical ﬂoor.
These dashboards will give the nursing staff an idea
of how the unit should be staffed to maintain quality of care.
Scorecards are used by executives and middle
managers to monitor the progress of planned goals
and objectives. The executive or the manager presents summaries monthly or quarterly of unit goals
accomplished. The length of stay, for example, can
be measured by using the scorecards. If a unit’s goal
is to keep inpatients diagnosed with cellulitis for
only 2 days, the manager can compare the current
length of stay with that of the previous month or
quarter. In addition, the scorecards can be used to
compare the unit’s data with national benchmarks.
Other beneﬁts of the scorecards include increase in
employee participation, elimination of initiatives
that do not contribute to the unit or the organization’s goals, and development of consistent key performance indicators.

233

Marketing
A marketing plan is important for an organization to succeed. It should form part of the overall
strategic plan because marketing can make a large
contribution to the proﬁtability and success of
an organization. Whereas strategic planning is an
overall organizational plan, marketing can be organizational or departmental. It is the process of
exchanging resources for goods and services to meet
the needs and wants of the individual as well as of
society. In this sense, marketing ﬁts in with the
strategic plan because an organization such as a hospital has to be able to function by meeting the needs
of individuals. At a departmental level, marketing is
a tool used to advertise services or to recruit staff.
The health-care industry embraced marketing
concepts in the 1970s. Marketing concepts are
methods that create awareness about a particular
organization. Their purpose is to attract customers,
to sell their products, or to offer services. These
methods include public relations, such as news
releases, feature stories, press conferences, or open
houses; advertising and mass media, such as newspapers, magazines, and journals; broadcasting, such
as radio and television; or electronic, like banners,
links, and directories.
In a hospital setting, marketing means that
the hospital must produce services that the consumer needs. To this end, many hospitals maintain
a marketing department. The marketing manager
must understand ﬁnancial analysis because it is
important to know the ﬁnancial impact of proposed
marketing strategies. In addition, the marketing
manager must possess skill in market research,
product development and management, pricing,
negotiating, communicating, salesmanship, and recognizing new opportunities.
The basic components of a formal marketing
plan include a situational analysis, goals and objectives, marketing strategies, and evaluation.

MARKETING’S SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS
The SWOT analysis (see Table 14-6) is a very simple but effective means of carrying out an analysis
of the hospital or a product for marketing purposes.
Very speciﬁc questions that managers need to
answer include:

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

234

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 234

Skills for Being an Effective Manager
■

hot topic:

■

Marketing Your Hospital
The Magnet Hospital Recognition Program is a prestigious honor, that recognizes hospitals that are successful in recruiting and retaining nurses. The award is the
highest level of recognition awarded by the American
Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC). Hospitals that
achieve magnet status have a working environment
that supports nursing excellence. This award can be
used as an effective marketing tool by hospitals.
Hospitals that have received this honor display the
ANCC logo on their Web sites as well as in the hospital
units. This advertisement attracts nurses who are looking for environments that provide independence,
respect, and satisfaction in delivering patient care. It
also attracts physicians and other health-care workers
because of the team approaches that magnet hospitals
expect. From a patient’s perspective, going to a magnet
hospital eases anxiety about the care provided.
Research has verified that hospitals that are magnets
have higher patient satisfaction, lower rates of infection,
fewer complications, and improved morbidity and mortality rates. In addition, this status can also be used as a
marketing tool by hospitals when applying for funding,
because ANCC certifications are highly regarded across
the nation by federal, state, and local agencies.

■
■
■
■

■

Who are the hospital’s main competitors?
How do they position themselves?
What is their pricing structure?
What are the standard terms of business for
the health-care industry?
How does the hospital compare with its competitors?

The strengths of the hospital should be communicated in marketing promotional materials and all
advertising. The weaknesses that managers may
discover need to be corrected.
Hospitals operate in dynamic environments.
External inﬂuences (opportunities and threats) over
which managers have little or no control can make
or break the hospital. Marketing managers must
identify opportunities in order to exploit them and
anticipate threats in order to plan to handle them.
Some examples of opportunities or threats include:

■

■

■

Economic: unemployment rates, poverty, price
rise of equipment
Patients: know the current patient base: age,
gender, income, ethnic background, neighborhood, increase in the chronic nature of diseases, preventive care patterns or habits
Politics: changes in the legislature, decrease in
funding for Medicare/Medicaid
Technology: rapidly changing technology that
is costly; know how it affects your services;
know when it will become obsolete; know if
the hospital is equipped to adapt quickly to
changes
Competitors: establishment of new hospitals
or specialty centers, know exactly which services they offer, number of beds, number of
employees, know their location and the potential population from which they will draw

The challenge of the marketing plan is to monitor the external environment continuously to
anticipate threats and opportunities and set interventions in place that will protect the hospital from
the worst and enable the organization to proﬁt from
the best.

MARKETING GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
Major overall goals of health-care marketing
include: (1) maximizing the marketplace’s consumption of an organization’s products; (2) maximizing consumer satisfaction; and (3) contributing
to the quality of life. Thus, marketing plays an
important role in the entire health-care industry.
Hospitals offer a myriad of services in order to satisfy patients’ needs and increase their quality of life.
An example of a hospital marketing goal could be to
enhance its cardiovascular program. A marketing
objective could be: “within a year, increase by 20%
the number of open heart surgeries.”
Nursing departments can assist the organization
to accomplish marketing goals. Increasing the
awareness of patients for the services that the units
provide (Table 14-11), tracking costs at the unit
level, and assuring that length of stay is congruent
with diagnosis are examples of important nursing
activities that will affect patient outcomes. Providing nursing care with respect, courtesy, and safety
will improve customer satisfaction. Increasing the

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 235

Planning and Marketing for a Healthy Organization
■

TABLE 14-11

Goal: Increase
patient awareness
of department
services.

Unit-Specific Goals and
Objectives
Objectives:
1. Within 8 weeks, develop and
print brochure.
2. Provide brochure to patients on
admission.
3. Explain to patients which
services are offered within the
department and the hospital.

educational level of the nursing staff will directly
and indirectly affect patient quality of life as well.

MARKETING STRATEGIES
Marketing strategies are actions intended to accomplish the marketing plan objectives. Marketing has
been identiﬁed mostly with promotions and advertisement. But according to Philip Kotler (2002), one
winning marketing strategy is to “deﬁne the target
market.” In hospitals, the target market is patients.
At the department level or in a specialty hospital or
community-based program, the market may be
more speciﬁc, such as adolescents with eating disorders, people with heart problems, and children. A
hospital should strive to offer quality and unique
services to patients if the goal is to remain ahead of
the competition. In order to remain viable, an
organization must remain knowledgeable of the
changes in the population. For example, if the elderly become the majority of the population, the
organization must develop services to target that
population.
Marketing strategies that a hospital can employ
to remain visible and competitive include:
■

■

The design of a Web page that expresses the
hospital’s mission, vision, services, and other
attributes. The Web page should be attractive
and easily accessible, with links to questions
and answers related to hospital services or
with links to common disease information.
Offering free, on-site, classes for various age
groups. Through this effort, more potential
customers will be attracted.

■

235

Conducting other activities in the community
at large to publicize the hospital, including
health fairs, fundraising events, speaker’s
bureaus, and recruitment activities.
Promoting hospital services is another marketing strategy. Promotional methods include
newspaper articles, public service announcements, printed materials, newsletters, billboards, paid advertisement, and introductory
offers of special services, such as massage
therapy in conjunction with physical therapy,
and free demonstrations, consultations, and
seminars.

MARKETING EVALUATION
The nurse manager communicates with the marketing manager to receive periodic feedback evaluation throughout the planning and implementation
period. As with other plans, evaluation includes a
comparison of objectives with outcomes to assess
success. In marketing evaluation, actual ﬁgures are
compared with the ﬁgures determined in the environmental assessment to highlight any signiﬁcant
changes, trends, or results. The nurse manager
notes the trends and communicates these to staff to
incorporate in future plans.

Marketing Plan Sample
Marketing Plan Regional Medical System Surgical Center
Market Summary: Include information about potential
patients
Population characteristics (age, ethnicity, sex, income,
education)
Market needs: Accessibility, services, competitive
prices for procedures
Market trends: Patient census, need for services
Market growth: Determine factors such as various
seasonal services
SWOT Analysis:
Competition: Describe who your competitors are,
especially during seasonal variations; which organizations
offer what services and their capacity to decrease the
numbers of patients that your organization can attract.
(Continued on following page)

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

236

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 236

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Marketing Plan Sample (continued)
Services: Describe the services provided and the
environment in which the services are delivered.
Marketing: Determine your advertisement needs and the
venues to advertise, such as the Web, radio, billboards,
television. Describe the Center’s relationship to the
regional medical system.

2. When was the last time that your organization
reviewed the strategic plan? Does it have a
strategic plan? How are you involved in the
planning?
3. Identify some issues that you have questioned
in your workplace. What type of planning can
resolve your issues?

Mission: The Center’s mission must align with the regional
medical system’s mission.
Marketing objectives: Need to be specific and outcomeoriented.
Financial objectives: Need to be specific to the Center.
Budget: Determine your potential expenses and
revenues.
Controls: Monitor monthly expenses.

All Good Things...
In this chapter we addressed the importance of
planning at any level in an organization. Planning is
a systematic process in which all employees must be
involved to be able to accomplish the mission and
the vision of the organization. Identiﬁcation of
strengths, weaknesses, threats, and opportunities
will help employees understand the organization
and help them to establish realistic goals and objectives. A variety of tools for planning and scheduling
projects are available for managers to use in developing and implementing their operational or strategic plans. In addition, knowledge of marketing
concepts will prove essential for managers who
wish to capture a share of the target population and
stay ahead of their competitors in the demand for
health-care services.

Let’s Talk
1. Think about the marketing methods that your
employer uses. Have you seen a billboard on your
way to work? What kind of ad does it use in the
phone directory? How do you greet patients when
they are admitted to your unit? What do you
provide for the patients?

NCLEX Questions
1. One of the most critical criteria in the establish-

ment of a hospital’s strategic plan should be:
A. Based on the nature and number of employees
B. The involvement of every department or unit
C. The involvement of executives only
D. Based on the number of patients per department
2. A major challenge of strategic planning is to:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Assure commitment from top administrators
Delegate tasks to staff
Monitor all meetings and write reports
Involve all physicians

3. The most common strategic plan model employed

by hospitals is:
A. Issue-based
B. Goal-based
C. Scenario-based
D. Conﬂict-based
4. Marcus and his staff have been asked to partici-

pate in the plan to merge two outpatient units
and determine which services should be offered.
The priority task in this planning process is:
A. Evaluation
B. Implementation
C. Assessment
D. Categorizing services
5. Which of the following is an accurate statement

of an objective used in planning?
A. The hospital will achieve magnet status
B. Within 7 years all the staff in Unit D will be
baccalaureate-prepared
C. Most of the physicians will attend the planning meetings
D. Salaries for nursing staff will increase
tremendously

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 237

Planning and Marketing for a Healthy Organization

6. Hospital B has reduced the patient’s stay in the

emergency department from 5 hours to 3.5
hours. Hospital A states in the strategic plan
that an outcome in the emergency department
will be patient stay of 3.0 hours. How is hospital A using hospital B’s outcomes?
A. To benchmark
B. To collaborate
C. To differ
D. To antagonize
7. The Gantt chart, the performance evaluation

and review technique, and the critical path
method are used most commonly in:
A. Strategic planning
B. Operational planning
C. Conventional planning
D. Best practice planning
8. Placing an ad in the newspaper, sending a card

to recruit new graduates, or advertising new
hospital services are methods related to
A. Planning
B. Buying
C. Surveying
D. Marketing
9. Which of the following is useful for plann-

ing and scheduling projects? It allows the
manager to assess how long a project should
take, determine the resources needed, and lay
out the order in which tasks need to be carried
out.
A. Critical chart
B. Diagnosis chart
C. Gantt chart
D. mplementation chart
10. The program evaluation and review technique

calculates a realistic time frame by using the
shortest possible time each activity will take,
the most likely length of time, and the longest
time it might take.
A. True
B. False
REFERENCES
Ackermann, F. (2005). The Practice of making strategy: A step by
step guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

237

Anderson, L., & Krathwohl, D. (2001) A taxonomy for learning,
teaching and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives. New York: Longman.
Baker, S. (2006). www.hadm.sph.sc.edu/COURSES/J716/
CPM/CPM.html; accessed October 20, 2006.
Children’s Hospital of the King’s Daughters. www.chkd.org/
aboutus/overview.asp; accessed March 29, 2005.
Crossan, F. (2003). Strategic management and nurses: building foundations. Journal of Nursing Management, 11(5):
331–335.
Dienemann, J.A. (1998). Nursing administration: Managing
patient care. (2nd ed.). Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Eckerson, W. (2005). Performance dashboards: Measuring, monitoring, and managing your business. Indianapolis: John Wiley
& Sons.
Ellis, J.R., & Hartley, C.L. (2000). Managing and coordinating
nursing care. (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Finkler, S.A., & Kovner, C.T. (2000). Financial management for
nurse managers and executives. (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders.
Grant, R.M. (2005). Contemporary strategy analysis. (5th ed.).
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Grossman, S.C., & Valiga, T.M. (2005). The new leadership challenge: Creating the future of nursing. (2nd ed.). Philadelphia:
F.A. Davis.
Harrison, J.S., & St. John, C.H. (2004). Foundations in strategic
management. (2nd ed.). Cincinnati: South Western.
Hayes, R. (2005). Operations, strategy, and technology: Pursuing
the competitive edge. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hiam, A. (1990). The vest pocket CEO. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Kotler, P. (2002). Marketing management. (11th ed.). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Liedtka, J.M., & Majluf, N.S. (1996). The strategy concept and
process, a pragmatic approach. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Lighter, D.E., and Fair, D.C. (2000). Principles and methods of
quality management in health care. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen
Publication.
McGuffin, J. (1999). The nurse’s guide to successful management.
St. Louis: Mosby.
Mintzberg, H. (1994). The rise and the fall of strategic planning.
New York: Free Press.
Roney, C.W. (2004). Strategic management methodology:
Generally accepted principles for practitioners. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Roussel, L. (2006). Management and leadership for nurse administrators. (4th ed.). Boston: Jones & Bartlett.
Smith, C. (2004). New technology continues to invade healthcare: What are the strategic implications/outcomes? Nursing
Administration Quarterly, 28:92–98.
St. George’s Hospital Medical School University of London.
www.sghms.ac.uk; accessed March 29, 2005.
Tappen, R.M. (2004). Essentials of nursing leadership and management. (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
VA Healthcare Network Upstate New York. www1.va.
gov/visn02/network/strategic/missionplans.html; accessed
November 14, 2005.

14Jones Leadership(F)-ch 14

1/14/07

3:45 PM

Page 238

This page has been left intentionally blank.

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 239

chapter
15
Managing Quality
and Patient Safety
BARBARA B. BREWER, MBA, PHD, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Quality: a way of thinking, not a recipe.”
Dobyns & Crawford-Mason, 1991

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Define health-care quality and risk management.
Define patient safety and its relationship to quality.
Define standards and benchmarks.
Synthesize classic quality theories.
Describe the need for quality in nursing and health care.
Describe select quality tools and strategies.
Identify key elements of a successful quality program for
nursing and health care.

239

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

240

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 240

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

P

roviding evidence of the quality of our service has
become an important responsibility for all nursing
leaders. Traditionally, quality in health care was
judged by reputation, program features, and compliance with policies and procedures. These traditional
methods fall short of providing the level of assurance
that society currently demands. In today’s environment, nurses and other health-care leaders are
expected to identify evidence-based process and outcome indicators of importance to their patient populations, to measure current performance relative to
those indicators, and to continuously improve the
care provided to their patients (Mitchell, Ferketich,
& Jennings, 1998).
Galvanizing these already existing efforts is the
patient safety initiative. The Institute of Medicine
report To Err is Human reframed the quality dialogue around its startling ﬁnding that 48,000 to
98,000 lives are lost each year due to medical errors
(Kohn, Corrigan, & Donaldson, 2000).
And 5 years later, despite an engaged public and
industry-wide attention, there is still much work to
be done. Dr. Robert Wachter (2004) of the University of California, San Francisco, challenges us with
the following question: “What is the right mix of
ﬁnancial, educational, research, regulatory, organi-

Box 15-1
Quality Terms
To make certain we have an understanding of terms
commonly used in quality, we provide some definitions:
1. Quality health care: The degree to which health
services for individuals and populations are safe,
timely, efficient, equitable, effective, and patientcentered (Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality
of Health Care in America, 2001).
2. Error: “The failure of a planned action to be completed
as intended (i.e., error of execution) or the use of a
wrong plan to achieve an aim (i.e., error of planning)”
(Kohn, Corrigan, & Donaldson, 2000, p. 23).
3. Adverse event: “An injury caused by medical
management rather than the underlying condition of
the patient” (Kohn, Corrigan, & Donaldson, 2000, p. 23).
4. Benchmarking: A process used in performance
improvement to compare oneself with best practice.
5. Standards: Minimum levels of performance set by the
community, regulatory bodies, or professional
organizations.

zational, and cultural activities and force to catalyze
the far greater investment (in money, time, and
attention) that will be needed to make health care
signiﬁcantly safer?” Although major national and
international players, such as the Institute of
Medicine, the Institute for Health Care Improvement, and the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, address the issues
this question raises, nursing needs to be diligent in
advocating for quality patient care and must continue to educate the greater community on how to
achieve quality and thus a safer environment for
our patients. This chapter will provide background
information about theorists who pioneered performance improvement, theoretical frameworks for
use in practice, and basic tools and techniques for
improving quality and patient safety in everyday
health-care practice. See Box 15-1 on the words frequently used when discussing quality.

Drivers of Quality
An important indicator of quality is meeting customer expectations. Some organizational leaders
take that a step further; they are not satisﬁed until
they have exceeded customer expectations. Meeting
customer expectations can be a bit more difficult in
health care because, unlike in other industries, the
purchaser of health-care services is rarely the consumer of those same services. Nurse leaders play a
pivotal role in these efforts and therefore must
understand consumer quality expectations.

PATIENTS
As patients are exposed to more media attention to
health care, advertisements from hospitals and
pharmaceuticals, and access to information on
health care, they are becoming more discriminating
in what they expect and demand from providers.
Patients have a choice about health-care providers.
Customer satisfaction surveys are beginning to capture better what patients want and how they are
making their choices. Most recently, patients as
consumers have indicated that compassion, caring,
and excellence are what make a hospital the hospital of choice (Lee, 2004). Nursing is a vital component of all three. Laschinger et al. (2005) found
patient satisfaction with nursing care to be a strong

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 241

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

predictor of satisfaction with overall hospital care
and with patient intention to recommend the hospital to family and friends. A recommendation from
a trusted family member or friend can be an important inﬂuence on selection of a care provider, particularly for someone new to a community or who
has little or no experience maneuvering through
complex health-care systems.
Laschinger’s ﬁndings provide evidence of the
link between nursing and patient recommendations. With nursing playing a key role in achieving
patient satisfaction with the overall organization, it
becomes most important for nurses to understand
patient preferences. In their book Through the
Patient’s Eyes, Gerteis and colleagues (1993) suggest that patient-centered care consists of the following seven patient preferences:
1. Respect for patient values, preferences, and
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

expressed needs
Care coordination and integration
Education, communication, and information
Physical comfort
Emotional support
Involvement of family and friends
Transition and continuity

These preferences are applicable across all settings and patient populations. As you read about
the other drivers of quality, you will see that they all
tie themselves in some way to the patient. The
patient remains the center of all quality efforts.

THE REGULATORS
Regulators have been involved in setting minimum
standards for quality measurement for many years.
In more recent years they have joined forces with
other professional organizations and payers to drive
public reporting of quality measures.

Joint Commission on Accreditation
of Healthcare Organizations
The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) is the primary accreditation organization for health-care institutions.
Through its published standards of care, periodic
onsite inspections, and collection of quality data, it
helps drive providers to a higher level of care.
Achievement of accreditation provides evidence

241

that a health-care organization is meeting minimum
standards of care. Accreditation by either JCAHO or
a state health department is required for eligibility to receive Medicare reimbursement. Accreditation is therefore critically important to the ﬁnancial
health of most health-care providers, whether they
are inpatient or outpatient.
In 1997, the Joint Commission launched its
ORYX initiative, which integrates outcomes and
other performance measurement data into the
accreditation process. A component of the ORYX
initiative is the identiﬁcation and use of standardized—or core—performance measures (core measures). In 2002, hospitals began collecting core
measure data on two of four initial core measurement areas: acute myocardial infarction, heart
failure, community-acquired pneumonia, and pregnancy and related conditions. In 2003, hospitals
began quarterly transmission of their measurement
results to JCAHO. In 2004, another core measurement area was added—surgical infection prevention—and hospitals were required to submit to
JCAHO another core measure, for a total of three
measures. Using data submitted to JCAHO by 223
hospitals, Fonarow, Yancy, and Heywood (2005)
evaluated compliance with the heart failure core
measures and found improvement in compliance
with three of the four measures. The researchers,
whose study covered the period from July 2002
through December 2003, found that compliance
with discharge instructions improved from 28% to
56%, measurement of left ventricular function
improved from 83% to 86%, and smoking cessation
instructions improved from 38% to 66%.
More recently, JCAHO introduced the Tracer
method of evaluation, where a reviewer follows one
patient and one provider, such as a nurse. By using
the Tracer method, JCAHO expects to gain a more
comprehensive understanding of staff and organizational processes used to ensure quality patient care.
More and more, JCAHO is moving inspections from
the boardroom to the patient’s room, aligning itself
closer to the consumer movement. JCAHO has
also introduced failure mode and effects analysis
(FMEA). FMEA, which is explained further in the
section on quality tools, is a technique by which
process ﬂowcharting and risk categorization are
used to prioritize and redesign weak points within
care processes in order to reduce vulnerability to
committing serious medical errors. This comprehensive approach to understanding error is required

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

242

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 242

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

only once a year but can serve as a model for understanding multiple patient care services.
JCAHO (2005) has also incorporated National
Patient Safety goals into its accreditation criteria.
Goals are speciﬁc to the different care settings that
fall under its surveillance process. The settings
include ambulatory care and office-based surgery,
assisted living facilities, behavioral health, hospitals, disease-speciﬁc care, home care, laboratories,
long-term care, and networks. For 2006, the hospital goals encompass six areas: patient identiﬁcation,
communication between caregivers, infection control, patient falls, medication reconciliation, and
standardization of drugs. It is important for nurse
leaders to remain current on JCAHO standards in
order to ensure that their patients are receiving care
that is safe as well as evidence-based. By incorporating evidence-based care indicators, such as the
core measures, and improvement tools, such as
FMEA, into their accreditation standards, JCAHO
has brought focus to care processes supported by
research and the expectation of continuous
improvement.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) is the government institution that oversees
both Medicare and Medicaid programs, large consumers of health care. CMS can be considered a
driver of quality both from the perspective of a regulator and the perspective of a payer. Often, the two
perspectives meet to form one very powerful constituent and a heavy inﬂuence on health-care organizations. As a regulator, CMS not only looks at
JCAHO accreditation but requires quality indicator
reporting of its own, such as its Hospital Compare
initiative. Hospital leaders, who voluntarily submit
data on such indicators as the proportion of acute
myocardial infarction patients who receive aspirin
on admission to the hospital, receive a small percentage increase in their reimbursement. CMS then
publicizes these ﬁnding so consumers can compare
hospitals on a number of quality indicators. CMS
also has Nursing Home Compare and Home Health
Compare. CMS is also preparing to launch the ﬁrst
national survey of patients’ perception of hospital
care (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services &
Agency for Health are Research and Quality, 2005).
CMS has played a major role in inﬂuencing quality throughout its history. It contracts with state-

level organizations that oversee quality for Medicare
beneﬁciaries within their state. These groups provide oversight of nursing home quality, home health
services, physician office practices, and hospitals.
The state level organizations are called quality
improvement organizations (QIOs). The QIOs are
the link between CMS officials in Washington, DC,
and local patients, providers, their communities, and
the press. Before, they were known as peer review
organizations. QIOs also have educational programs
to assist providers with compliance and to help
Medicare beneﬁciaries understand their beneﬁts.
As the largest payer for individuals with limited
ﬁnancial resources, Medicaid has provided access to
services to many individuals who would not otherwise have been able to afford them. Since the mid1990s, states have become much more active about
monitoring the quality of services provided to
Medicaid beneﬁciaries. Quality indicators monitored by Medicaid programs include patient satisfaction, early prenatal care, childhood immunizations,
waiting times, diabetes control, cancer screenings,
and the availability of translators. Beneﬁciaries
in the majority of states are enrolled in managed
care plans administered by multiple health plans
within each state. Although states require managed
care plans to provide them with quality data, use
of the data by the states is variable (Landon et al.,
2004).

State Regulators
In addition to meeting quality standards set by
accreditation and federal agencies, health-care
providers are required to meet standards set by state
regulators. Typically, state oversight falls under the
state’s department of health, which administers
licenses to hospitals, day-care facilities, long-term
care, home care, laboratories, behavioral health facilities, and freestanding surgery centers.
State departments of health oversee quality in
several ways. They investigate patient or family
complaints regarding substandard care. They inspect
facilities to evaluate compliance with state regulations. The state inspections are generally unannounced and may or may not be in association with
annual licensure. As with JCAHO, state surveyors
look for evidence of self-monitoring of quality, a
continuous improvement program, and policies and
procedures directed at providing safe care by competent caregivers.

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 243

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

PAYERS
Employers constitute a large proportion of the payers of health-care services. Competition in global
markets, combined with escalating health-care costs,
is driving Fortune 500 companies to join consumers
on the quality bandwagon. In fact, 170 of these companies have formed the Leapfrog Group, the largest
purchasing group of health care. The Leapfrog
Group wants a system that keeps employees healthy,
gets them back to work earlier, and keeps costs
down. Some Leapfrog initiatives include support of
computerized order entry systems, evidence-based
hospital referral, and the use of intensivists in critical care units.
Employers who are not part of the Leapfrog
Group are interested in the same issues. Through
managed care plans and other forms of health insurance arrangements, employers help to bring focus to
inefficiencies of the health-care system. For example,
after learning about the long-term effects on health
of tight blood glucose management, a large employer
in Connecticut challenged the three local hospitals
that provided the majority of care to their employees
and their families to work together to develop an
integrated program of diabetes management. Moreover, an employers’ group in Indianapolis formed a
coalition to put pressure on hospitals and physicians
to provide it with outcome data that will be publicly
displayed at beneﬁts enrollment fairs. They are also
discussing ways of structuring their beneﬁts programs to have different co-payments, depending on
the provider’s outcomes. In this type of a program,
employees who choose providers with better outcomes would be responsible for lower co-payments
than employees who choose providers with poor
outcomes. These types of efforts on the part of
employers are putting tremendous pressure on
providers to improve outcomes.

243

Sciences. Members of the IOM serve as advisors in
health, medicine, and biomedical science. Members
are volunteers who are recognized experts in their
areas (Institute of Medicine, 2005). The IOM has
taken a leadership position in raising national
awareness of patient safety issues in hospitals and
has therefore spurred the quality movement. The
IOM has published several seminal reports: To Err is
Human, in which it reported that annual deaths of
hospitalized patients as a result of errors number
between 48,000 and 98,000; Crossing the Quality
Chasm (Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality
of Health Care in America, 2001), in which it recommended health-care reform to improve patient
outcomes and reduce error; and the most recent
report, Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work
Environment of Nurses (Page, 2004), in which it
reported patient safety issues and recommendations
for change to reduce the negative consequences
nurses’ work environments have on their ability to
provide safe care. In Crossing the Quality Chasm, the
Committee on Quality of Health Care in America
recommended six aims for improvement: systems
should be redesigned to provide care that is safe,
timely, efficient, effective, equitable, and patientcentered.
The IOM has been inﬂuential in shaping the
national agenda for improving quality and safety
outcomes for patients. The shocking nature of its
report attributing death of hospitalized patients to
medical error captured the attention of the media,
which provided wide public exposure beyond the
health-care community. The combination of loud
public outcry, personal inﬂuence of IOM members,
and the movement toward pay for performance has
contributed to current demands for greater accountability of providers, hospitals, and other health-care
agencies.

National Quality Forum

PROFESSIONAL GROUPS
The Institute of Medicine and National Quality
Forum consist of representatives across professional disciplines that have had tremendous inﬂuence on shaping the national quality agenda.

Institute of Medicine
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) was chartered in
1970 as an arm of the National Academy of

The National Quality Forum (NQF), a nonproﬁt
public-private partnership that works to improve
the health-care system through development and
dissemination of voluntary consensus standards,
recently recommended nursing performance standards (National Quality Forum, 2004). Member
organizations represent health-care providers, educational institutions, consumers, employers, state
and federal agencies, and research. Four nursing
organizations (American Nurses Association,

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

244

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 244

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

American Academy of Nursing, American Association of Colleges of Nursing, and American Association of Nurse Anesthetists) are represented
among NQF member organizations. The NQF
consists of councils, which provide the opportunity
for member organizations to discuss issues with
each other, and sets consensus standards on issues
of current relevance. Examples of these types of consensus standards are Cancer Care, Hospital
Standards, Patient Safety Standards, and NurseSensitive Quality Indicators (National Quality
Forum, 2000-2004). The nursing standards are the
ﬁrst nationally standardized set of performance
measures to assess the effect acute care nurses
have on patient health and safety outcomes.
Measures evaluate eight patient outcomes (failure to
rescue; pressure ulcer prevalence; falls prevalence;
restraint prevalence; falls with injury; and three
infections: urinary tract, central line, and ventilatorassociated pneumonia [VAP]), three process indicators (nurse counseling of smoking cessation for
patients with an acute myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, or pneumonia), and four structural measures (skill mix, nursing hours per patient
day, nursing work environment, and voluntary
turnover). The 15 indicators are intended to be an
initial set.
The notion behind the consensus standards is
that all of the NQF member organizations would
incorporate the consensus measures into the quality measures they require. By doing so, measurement would become standardized and consistent
across organizations and settings, which would
allow comparison. Additionally, inclusion of the
measures in the Medicare and Medicaid programs
gives them the power of regulation for those organizations and individual practitioners participating
in these programs. For example, JCAHO has incorporated the NQF nursing-sensitive indicators into
its staffing effectiveness measures. Organizations
accredited by JCAHO must evaluate nurse staffing
effectiveness on at least two of its units by collecting and analyzing two human resource indicators
and two clinical service indicators. The indicators
must be trended and are to be used internally to
evaluate performance. The 15 NQF indicators are
included in the set approved by JCAHO for meeting
this standard. As a result, use of these indicators
has spread quickly across multiple settings and
organizations; however, because the standard
requires internal monitoring, data are not sent to

JCAHO, and no comparison data are available for
organizations wishing to use external databases for
quality improvement.

American Nurses Association
In the mid-1990s, the American Nurses Association
(ANA) published a report containing process, outcome, and structural measures that have been
shown through research to be related to acute care
nursing (American Nurses Association, 1995).
These indicators are a subset of the larger set subsequently published by the National Quality Forum.
Some of the outcome indicators contained in the
report include patient mortality, length of stay,
adverse incidents such as medication errors and
patient falls, and complications such as nosocomial
infections and decubitus ulcers. Examples of process
measures are pain management, use of restraints,
and discharge planning. Process measures are phenomena associated with nursing interventions.
Structural measures involve, for example, nurse
staffing, such as skill mix, experience, and hours per
patient day. The report contains operational deﬁnitions for all quality indicators as well as references
for all evidence linking the indicator with nursing.
Quarterly submission of these data to the National
Dataset Nursing Quality Indicators is a requirement of Magnet certiﬁcation. In return for data
submittal, nurse leaders receive a quarterly report
that shows their data broken down by type of
unit, with comparisons with the average performance for all like units in the database. Having such
data allows nurses to understand how the results
of their care compares with that of other nurses,
helps focus attention on care processes that might
be substandard, and highlights areas where performance is stellar. By using these types of data to
determine where the greatest gaps exist between
their performance and that of other like units, leaders can prioritize improvement projects and direct
resources to those outcomes where the gaps are
greatest.
In addition to the acute care report card, the
ANA has published numerous standards of nursing
practice. Scope and standards documents have been
published for nurse administrators, clinical specialty areas, and nursing informatics. The standards
do not replace state law or regulations of individual
nurse practice acts; they serve as consensus standards of nurse experts in the areas of the published

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 245

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

standards (American Nurses Association, 2004).
The criteria for measurement of excellence in nursing care used by the Magnet Recognition Program
are based upon the ANA scope and standards for
nurse administrators (American Nurses Credentialing Center, 2004). The standards also serve as
the basis for specialty certiﬁcation examinations
(Box 15-2).

Models of Quality
Quality models serve as frameworks for diagnosing
and ﬁnding solutions to performance problems.
Often, organizational leadership sets the choice of a
model. This section describes models frequently
used in health-care settings.

PLAN, DO, STUDY, ACT CYCLE
The Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle is an
improvement model that is still practiced widely.
Dr. Deming advocated for this method of continual improvement. Each step of the model contains a distinct improvement phase. The model is
meant to be repeated over multiple improvement
cycles.
Use of the PDSA cycle assumes that a problem
has been identiﬁed and analyzed for its most likely

245

Box 15-2
Baldrige National Quality Award
Accrediting bodies and state and federal regulations set
minimum standards of quality. Organization leaders who
wish to be recognized for providing services of the
highest quality measure themselves against more
rigorous standards, such as those developed for the
Baldrige National Quality Award.
The Baldrige National Quality Award program, named for
Malcolm Baldrige, a former Secretary of Commerce, is
administered through the National Institute of Standards
and Technology. The award is based on meeting rigorous
quality standards that show an organization has achieved
an integrated approach to performance management.
The award criteria differ for different sectors of the
economy. There are specific health-care criteria, which
use a systems perspective to identify relationships among
seven criteria for performance excellence. The seven
categories encompass:
1. Leadership
2. Strategic planning
3. Focus on patients, other customers, and markets
4. Measurement, analysis, and knowledge management
5. Focus on staff
6. Process management
7. Results of organizational performance (National
Institute of Standards and Technology, 2004).
Only one health-care system and four hospitals have
achieved this distinction (National Institute of Standards
and Technology, 2005).

Historical Perspectives Box
The ideas of Deming, Juran, and Crosby underlie much of
the theory, tools, and techniques we use in quality today.
Understanding their work provides a historical context
of the quality movement and the beginning foundation
on which the rest of the information in this chapter will
build.
Dr. W. Edwards Deming
Dr. Deming (1950) was one of the pioneers of the quality
movement. Deming took a systems view of the world. As a
systems thinker, Deming understood that manufacturing a
product or delivering a service like health care consists of
multiple processes and decisions that are related to one
another. When we view our work from a systems
perspective, we begin to understand how our actions
influence others who follow us in providing care to

patients. Deming suggested that the style of management
being practiced in his day, which consisted of use of fear to
control workers, inspection of work to reduce defects in
manufacturing, and use of targets and quotas to drive
productivity, should undergo a transformation. He
suggested that his System of Profound Knowledge would
provide managers with a theoretical map, a tool that would
provide better understanding of their organization.
Deming’s System of Profound Knowledge contains four
interrelated parts:
1. Appreciation for a system: all work consists of multiple
interdependent processes.
2. Understanding of variation: differences in work
outcomes are a result of the system of work, not
individual worker performance.
(Continued on following page)

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

246

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 246

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Historical Perspectives Box (continued)
3. Theory of knowledge: when making improvements
we test new designs that we predict will produce
better outcomes. Our predictions are based on our
understanding of how work processes relate to one
another.
4. Psychology: understanding what motivates people
(Deming, 2000).
Dr. Deming proposed that variation among workers was
caused by their work system. Managers need to manage
the system of work to reduce variation among workers and
improve the consistency of their product. His model for
improvement was the Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) cycle.
An explanation of how the PDSA cycle is used in practice
is in the section of this chapter on quality models. Deming
was also known for his 14 Points for Management. The
14 points were developed in response to frequent
requests he received about his transformation of Japanese
manufacturing (Stoecklein, 2005). Deming believed it was
management’s responsibility to create an environment
where employees could produce high-quality products.
This philosophy can be seen in his 14 points, which cover
such elements as constancy of purpose for management,
working with vendors so that incoming materials are defectfree, driving out fear among workers, continuous attention
to improvement of quality and elimination of waste, and use
of statistical quality control rather than mass inspection. His
theory was instrumental in improving reliability of Japanese
products by guiding leaders to foster an environment
where front-line workers had the ability to reduce defects
in manufacturing by cooperating with each other.

JOSEPH JURAN

Joseph Juran (1950), who was trained as an engineer, was
another of the early pioneers in quality. Juran also spent
time in the early 1950s consulting with Japanese
industrialists. He is best known for his quality trilogy: quality
planning, quality improvement, and quality control (Juran &
Godfrey, 1999). Juran defined two different but interrelated
concepts, those aspects of a product that meet customer
needs and those aspects of a product that are free from
defects (Stoecklein, 2005).
Similar to Dr. Deming, Juran used statistical thinking to
understand process variation. He introduced the Pareto
principle as a method for understanding the “vital few”
contributors to the cause of a problem. According to Juran,

causes and that changes have been recommended
for eliminating the likely causes. Once the initial
problem analysis is completed, a plan is developed
to test one of the improvement changes. During the

20% of the causes contributes to 80% of the problem.
Pareto diagrams are used to identify the “vital few”; a full
explanation of their use is in the section on quality tools.

PHILIP CROSBY

Philip Crosby (1960) was another of the early pioneers in
quality. Crosby defined quality as the extent to which
processes are in conformance with requirements, i.e.,
providing what the customer needs and expects.
Consistent with the other quality theorists, Crosby believed
that leaders were responsible for creating an environment
that promoted continuous improvement. He is most
famous for two phrases, which are often found throughout
the quality literature: “do it right the first time” and “zero
defects” (Nielsen et al., 2004). In other words, managers
must not tolerate flaws or errors.
Deming, Juran, and Crosby all had a process focus. All three
theorists believed that improvement must be continuous
and that knowledge of customer needs and requirements
is essential. Whereas Deming, Juran, and Crosby pioneered
quality improvement in manufacturing, Donabedian was an
early quality advocate in health care.

AVEDIS DONABEDIAN

Dr. Donabedian (1960) is best known for the structure,
process, and outcome quality paradigm, which underpins
much of the health outcomes research performed by nurse
researchers and is the framework that underlies the Quality
Health Outcomes Model developed by the American
Academy of Nursing Expert Panel on Quality Health Care
(Mitchell, Ferketich, & Jennings, 1998). A description of the
Quality Health Outcomes Model is in the section on quality
models. Structure consists of organizational characteristics
such as staffing, models of care, patient types, and volumes.
Process consists of tools and techniques involved in
providing care. Nursing process and interventions are types
of process measures. Outcomes involve the results
achieved. They reflect the effectiveness of the structural
and process components (Donabedian, 1992; Lee et al.,
2005). Outcomes are a product of the structure we have
put in place and our care processes. Both components
need to be in place to achieve optimal outcomes. For
example, a medical-surgical nursing unit that wants to
improve its fall rate may need to make improvements in
staffing as well as develop a sound process for identifying
and protecting patients at high risk for a fall.

Do phase, the change is made, and data are collected
to evaluate results. Study involves analysis of the
data collected in the previous step. Data are evaluated for evidence that an improvement has been

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 247

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

Practice Proof 15-1

Article: Comparison of methods for detecting medication
errors in 36 hospitals and skilled-nursing facilities.
Authors: Flynn, E.A., et al. American Journal of HealthSystem Pharmacy 59(5): 436–446.
Note: This abstract is available online through PubMed.
The full-text may be accessed through libraries that have
subscriptions to Academic Search Premier.

ABSTRACT

The validity and cost-effectiveness of three methods
for detecting medication errors were examined. A
stratified random sample of 36 hospitals and skillednursing facilities in Colorado and Georgia was selected.
Medication administration errors were detected by
registered nurses (R.N.s), licensed practical nurses (L.P.N.s),
and pharmacy technicians from these facilities using
three methods: incident report review, chart review,
and direct observation. Each dose evaluated was
compared with the prescriber’s order. Deviations were
considered errors. Efficiency was measured by the time
spent evaluating each dose. A pharmacist performed
an independent determination of errors to assess the
accuracy of each data collector. Clinical significance was
judged by a panel of physicians. Observers detected
300 of 457 pharmacist-confirmed errors made on 2556
doses (11.7% error rate) compared with 17 errors detected
by chart reviewers (0.7% error rate), and 1 error detected
by incident report review (0.04% error rate). All errors
detected involved the same 2556 doses. All chart
reviewers and 7 of 10 observers achieved at least good
comparability with the pharmacist’s results. The mean
cost of error detection per dose was $4.82 for direct
observation and $0.63 for chart review. The technician
was the least expensive observer at $2.87 per dose
evaluated. R.N.s were the least expensive chart reviewers
at $0.50 per dose. Of 457 errors, 35 (8%) were deemed
potentially clinically significant; 71% of these were
detected by direct observation. Direct observation
was more efficient and accurate than reviewing charts
and incident reports in detecting medication errors.
Pharmacy technicians were more efficient and accurate
than R.N.s and L.P.N.s in collecting data about medication
errors.

QUESTIONS

1. Why do you think there was such a discrepancy
among the three methods of error detection?
2. What were the most two most frequent types of error
detected by direct observation?
3. If you were to replicate the three methods of data
collection used in this study, would there be a more
cost effective way to do data collection?

247

made. The Act step involves taking actions that will
“hardwire” the change so that the gains made by
the improvement are sustained over time.
The PDSA cycle has found widespread use in the
health-care setting. It is not unusual in such complex environments for multiple extraneous factors
to inﬂuence results. Through repetition of the PDSA
cycle, multiple corrective actions may be taken and
evaluated (Kondo & Kano, 1999).
The following example illustrates how the PDSA
cycle may be used in health care. A nurse manager
notices that the number of patient falls with injury
has been climbing steadily over the last few months.
She calls her staff together to brainstorm reasons
for the higher number of falls. After considering
several reasons, the staff develops a process for earlier identiﬁcation for patients who may be at risk
for a fall (the Plan phase of the PDSA cycle). The
staff implements its new risk appraisal process and
continues to collect data regarding the number of
patients who are injured as the result of a fall (the
Do phase). After a few weeks of data collection, the
staff reviews the injury data to determine if the new
risk appraisal process has resulted in fewer injured
patients (the Study phase). Finally, the staff members decide that the new risk appraisal process has
resulted in fewer falls, but they believe that they
could do better if they also added bed alarms to alert
them to high-risk patients who are attempting to get
out of bed without appropriate assistance. This is
the Act phase (making the risk appraisal process a
routine for all patients) and the beginning of
another PDSA cycle (implementation of bed
alarms). Once the bed alarms are put in place, the
staff will again collect patient fall data, examine the
data for improvement, and then decide whether the
bed alarms resulted in enough improvement to warrant permanent implementation. This example
illustrates how the PDSA cycle may be repeated
over multiple corrective actions to result in better
patient outcomes.

THE MODEL FOR IMPROVEMENT
Another model commonly found in health care is
the Model for Improvement (Langley et al., 1996).
The model uses a systems framework, which adds
three questions to the PDSA cycle. The questions
are meant to bring clarity to the improvement
process. The three questions are:

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

248

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 248

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

1. What are we trying to accomplish?
2. How will we know that a change is an

System

improvement?
3. What changes can we make that will result in
improvement? (Langley et al., 1996, p. xiv).
Once the three questions have been answered,
the improvement cycle proceeds using the PDSA
methodology. The three questions are designed to
help bring clarity to the PDSA cycle through goal
development, to remind people to collect data relevant to the goal and process they are attempting to
improve, and to clarify cause and effect. The Model
for Improvement is recommended by the Institute
for Healthcare Improvement as a way to accelerate
improvement (Institute for Healthcare Improvement, 2005). The model may be used for repetitive
tests of small changes.

QUALITY HEALTH OUTCOMES MODEL
The Quality Health Outcomes Model developed by
the Expert Panel on Quality Healthcare of the
American Academy of Nursing was proposed to
serve as a framework for quality activities as well
as nursing systems research (Mitchell, Ferketich, &
Jennings, 1998). The model’s four components
(Fig. 15-1)—intervention, system, client, and outcomes—were built on Donabedian’s structure,
process, outcomes paradigm (Mitchell & Lang,
2004). Additionally, the model, which speciﬁes
interdependent relationships among the model variables, was designed to allow measurement of the
four components at multiple levels. For example,
through the relationships speciﬁed by the model, it
is possible to examine the effect a hospital safety culture (a hospital-level system component) and a
“ventilator bundle” intervention (a patient-level
intervention variable) have on the rate of ventilatorassociated pneumonia (a unit outcome variable) in
critical care patients.

SIX SIGMA
Sigma is a letter from the Greek alphabet that is
used in statistics to indicate variability. Six Sigma
refers to six standard deviations from the mean and
is generally used in quality improvement to deﬁne

Patient Safety Culture

Outcomes

Intervention

Ventilator Associated
Pneumonia Rate

Ventilator “Bundle”

Client
FIGURE 15-1 Quality Health Outcomes Model. (Adapted from
Mitchell, Ferketich, and Jennings [1998].)

the number of acceptable defects or errors produced
by a process. In the Six Sigma model, the number of
acceptable errors is always 3.4 per million occurrences. As a result, it comes closest to Crosby’s zero
tolerance philosophy. Because this method focuses
on outcomes (the number of acceptable errors), it
may be used in conjunction with one of the processfocused methods, such as PDSA (Barry, Murcko, &
Brubaker, 2002).
Speciﬁcally, Six Sigma is a rigorous improvement
method tied to key business processes and customer requirements. The method contains ﬁve
steps: deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve, and control
(DMAIC). In the deﬁne step, questions are asked
about key customer requirements and key processes
to support those requirements. In the measure step,
key processes are identiﬁed, and data are collected.
In the analyze step, data are converted to information. Causes of process variation are identiﬁed. The
improve stage generates solutions and makes and
measures process changes. In the control stage,
processes that are performing in a predictable way at
a desirable level are in control. Monitoring to evaluate ongoing performance is done as part of this stage
(Lee et al., 2005). For example, if we go back to our
earlier example of patient falls with injury, in a hospital where the improvement model was Six Sigma,
improvement of the number of patient falls with
injury would not be achieved until there were fewer

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 249

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

than 3.4 injury falls per one million patient days.
Injury falls are typically measured per 1000 patient
days. As you can see, the Six Sigma approach is
100 times more stringent. If we were to use the
DMAIC model for falls, we might come up with the
following:
■

■

■

■

■

Deﬁne: Patients want to be safe and free from
falling.
Measure: Use information from incident
reports and clinical experience to identify key
processes associated with patient falls. We
might consider toileting, medications, frequency of fall risk assessment, etc. We would
then collect data about the processes identiﬁed
in this step.
Analyze: Use the gathered data to evaluate
the most frequent reasons patients are falling.
Determine which of the causes, if removed,
would result in the greatest improvement.
Improve: Design an intervention to remove
causes identiﬁed in the previous step. Implement intervention, and continue to measure
the number of patient falls. Evaluate whether
or not the intervention resulted in improvement.
Control: Monitor patient falls to ensure
improvements gained following the implementation of the improvement process continue.

LEAN
The ﬁnal improvement model we will discuss in this
section is the Lean methodology. The underlying
assumption of the Lean methodology is that all
processes contain waste. In their book, Lean
Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your
Organization, Womack and Jones (2003, p. 15)
deﬁne lean thinking as “lean because it provides a
way to do more and more with less and less—less
human effort, less equipment, less time, and less
space—while coming closer and closer to providing
customers with exactly what they want.” Lean
thinking was originated at Toyota and is also
known as the Toyota Production System (TPS).
TPS is built on four basic principles:
1. All work processes are highly speciﬁed.
2. Every customer and supplier relationship is

clear.

249

3. Pathways between people and process steps

are speciﬁc and consistent.
4. Improvements are made at the lowest possible

organizational level and based on scientiﬁc
method (Spear & Bowen, 1999).
Toyota’s success is based on the idea that each
employee identiﬁes problems and is taught how to
improve. Front-line workers make the improvements to their own jobs, and their supervisors provide direction and assistance as teachers. The TPS
method goes beyond those described previously in
this section because it incorporates ergonomics
involving the individual workers in its view of work
processes. For example, ergonomic process redesign
would include such elements as evaluating ways of
decreasing the distance of supply carts to point of
care or adding computer terminals to patient rooms
to decrease the number of steps nurses must make
to ﬁnd a place to chart patient information. Both of
these examples involve “waste” in the form of
unnecessary steps staff must take to complete their
care tasks.
It is difficult to ﬁnd examples of TPS in health
care because processes in health care are far more
complex than those found in manufacturing. In
addition, it is very difficult for a single individual to
redesign a process and test and reﬁne it within the
clinical setting without inﬂuencing other departments or individuals.
Many organizations have attempted to achieve
the exceptional performance Toyota has realized
through its TPS, but few have been capable of doing
so (Spear, 2004). Health-care organizations within
the Pittsburgh Regional Health Initiative have
adopted TPS as the improvement methodology. One
of the care processes they have redesigned using TPS
is medication administration (Thompson, Wolf, &
Spear, 2003). The authors described an improvement project that resulted from patient complaints
of discomfort following intravenous administration
of antibiotics. The major cause of discomfort was
the drug concentration, which was irritating
patients’ veins. Following careful diagramming of all
of the pathways required for a nurse to drip a more
dilute form of the antibiotic rather than push the
form sent by the pharmacy, it was discovered that a
small change by the pharmacy (sending the drug vial
attached to a minibag of intravenous solution)
would result in consistent delivery of the more

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

250

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 250

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

dilute form of the drug, less patient discomfort, and
a savings of 4 minutes of nursing time per dose.

Nursing Quality
Nurse leaders are pivotal to hospital-wide quality
initiatives. They must also lead initiatives that
improve nursing quality. Using the same tools and
techniques but with nurse-sensitive indicators,
nursing can improve processes directly related to the
practice of nursing. Nurse-sensitive indicators are
those that through research have been associated
with nursing care. Examples of some of these
indicators are patient falls, mortality, failure to
rescue, pressure ulcers, deep vein thrombosis, and
VAP. A more comprehensive explanation follows
below. Nursing quality improvement programs are
designed to enhance patient care through systematic
assessment and improvement of the quality and
appropriateness of care rendered. Opportunities to
improve patient care through evaluation of clinical
and operational performance measures are integrated into ongoing management processes. For
example, some nurse leaders use unit-based report
cards to share trended data regularly with their
staff. Many of these report cards are produced
monthly and contain such data as patient falls,
medication errors, turnover and vacancy rates, staff
satisfaction, patient satisfaction, and ﬁnancial indicators such as length of stay or cost per adjusted
discharge.

MEDICATION ERRORS
AND NURSING QUALITY
Nearly every quality initiative in this country
includes attention to medication errors. Nursing
leaders must work closely with pharmacists and
physicians to reduce medication errors. Leading the
nation in this arena is the Veterans Health
Administration, well known for its system-wide
computerized patient record system and bar code
medication administration. Bar code medication
administration reduces medication errors by combining positive patient identiﬁcation (bar code on
patient’s wristband) with positive drug identiﬁcation (bar code on medication package). When a bar-

coding system is integrated with computerized
physician order entry, errors associated with incorrect interpretation of physician medication orders
and nonintravenous-related medication errors are
eliminated. These types of systems do not address
errors associated with intravenous medication rates
resulting from incorrect programming of intravenous administration devices, however.
Adverse drug events or injuries caused by drug
therapy are frequent in hospitalized patients. In a
study performed in 36 accredited and nonaccredited hospitals and nursing homes, researchers
found that 19% of medication doses given were in
error (Barker et al., 2002, Flynn et al., 2002). Of
those errors, 7% were judged by a group of physician reviewers to be potentially harmful. Hatcher
and colleagues (2004, p. 438) suggest that more
than half of adverse medication errors are associated with drugs administered intravenously. They
suggest that a computerized point-of-care intravenous delivery system that “integrates infusion,
patient monitoring, and clinical best practice guidelines” is a necessary ingredient to reducing these
serious errors. Such systems, sometimes called
“smart pumps,” provide safety alerts when a nurse
attempts to program a dose outside of those established to be appropriate. In addition, they record in
an “events” log the number and type of errors
averted through use of the device. Data from the
events log may be used by nurse leaders to understand the types of medications, time of day, types of
patients, and nursing units associated with alarms.
Such data may be used to monitor change as a result
of quality improvement activities.
Nursing plays a major role in processes such as
medication administration. Medication errors must
be trended and studied for patterns within the
errors. For example, Barker and colleagues (2002)
observed nurses administer medications in 36 hospitals and nursing homes in Georgia and Colorado.
Researchers observed at least one nurse per institution during an entire pass of medications. This
approach allowed them to observe the entire medication distribution process of the observed nurse.
Of the 3216 doses observed, 19% resulted in a medication error. Errors by category were wrong time
(43%), omission (30%), wrong dose (17%), and
incorrect drug (4%).
Nurse leaders may learn about the types of errors
within their units by evaluating data from occur-

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 251

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

rence reports. Error data should be categorized in
order to identify the most frequent types of errors.
The most frequent types of errors should then be
examined for their root causes. In order to uncover
the root cause of a problem, it is necessary to ask ﬁve
“whys” (see root cause analysis below). Accepting
explanations before reaching the ﬁfth why may lead
to incorrect conclusions regarding cause. Systems
for medication distribution are very complex, often
involving multiple people and process steps.
Unraveling problem causes takes patience and discipline. For example, Thompson, Wolf, and Spear
(2003) point out how wrong conclusions about root
cause may be reached when explanations short of
the ﬁfth why are accepted. They reviewed a root
cause analysis of a missing 8 a.m. medication dose to
try to understand why the dose was not in the
patient’s medication drawer so that it could be given
by the nurse. The analysis revealed a far different
explanation at the end of the ﬁfth why (the ﬁrst,
midnight, dose of medication was in the wrong
drawer, causing the 8 a.m. dose to be given at midnight) from what would have been accepted as the
explanation (the pharmacy technician returned the
midnight dose, which should have been the 8 a.m.
dose, for credit) had staff not been disciplined
enough to keep pushing for the root cause.

PATIENT SATISFACTION
AND NURSING QUALITY
Patient satisfaction with nursing care is an important measure of the quality of nursing care. Because
nursing is at the core of the patient care experience,
patient satisfaction measures have always been of
interest to both hospital and nursing administration. Measures of satisfaction may include patient
perceptions of being well cared for, satisfaction with
nurse friendliness and timeliness of response to call
bells and pain medication as well as explanations
given to family and friends. Some organizations
have chosen to design and distribute their own
measures, and others have decided to use a thirdparty vendor, such as Press Ganey or NRC Picker,
which allows them to compare scores with other
like organizations. Whatever measure an organization chooses to evaluate patient satisfaction, it is
important to trend results over time so that changes
in satisfaction, both positive and negative, may be

251

spotted early. Moreover, staff satisfaction has been
found to be strongly correlated with two patient satisfaction indicators, intent to return and intent to
recommend the hospital to others (Atkins,
Marshall, & Javalgi, 1996).
One of the most inﬂuential books on measuring
patient care is Through the Patients’ Eyes (Gerteis
et al., 1993). The book draws on research from
the Picker/Commonwealth Program for PatientCentered Care. The authors suggest that patientcentered care includes the eight dimensions: access;
respect for patient’s values, preferences, and
expressed needs; coordination and integration of
care; information, communication, and education;
physical comfort; emotional support and alleviation
of fear and anxiety; involvement of family and
friends; and transition and continuity. See Box 15-3
for a brief description of each dimension.

Box 15-3
Picker Patient-Centered Care Dimensions
1. Access (including time spent waiting for admission or
time between admission and allocation to a bed in a
ward)
2. Respect for patient’s values, preferences, and
expressed needs (including impact of illness and
treatment on quality of life, involvement in decision
making, dignity, needs, and autonomy)
3. Coordination and integration of care (including
clinical care, ancillary and support services, and “frontline” care)
4. Information, communication, and education
(including clinical status, progress and prognosis,
processes of care, facilitation of autonomy, self-care,
and health promotion)
5. Physical comfort (including pain management, help
with activities of daily living, surroundings, and hospital
environment)
6. Emotional support and alleviation of fear and
anxiety (including clinical status, treatment and
prognosis, impact of illness on self and family,
financial impact of illness)
7. Involvement of family and friends (including social
and emotional support, involvement in decision
making, support for caregiving, impact on family
dynamics and functioning)
8. Transition and continuity (including information about
medication and danger signs to monitor after leaving
the hospital; coordination and discharge planning;
clinical, social, physical, and financial support).

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

252

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 252

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

As consumers become more engaged in choosing
health care, more patient satisfaction surveys
continue to evolve with a focus on the patient experience. Leading this effort is a joint initiative of
CMS and the Agency for Healthcare Research.
Together, with input from multiple groups, they
have developed the Hospital CAHPS, a standardized
survey instrument and data collection methodology
for measuring patients’ perspectives on hospital
care. Table 15-1 contains draft questions contained
in the survey. The questions in this instrument

TABLE 15-1

3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

you with courtesy and respect?
During this hospital stay, how often did nurses listen
carefully to you?
During this hospital stay, how often did nurses explain
things in a way you could understand?
During this hospital stay, after you pressed the call
button, how often did you get help as soon as you
wanted it?
During this hospital stay, how often did doctors treat
you with courtesy and respect?
During this hospital stay, how often did doctors listen
carefully to you?
During this hospital stay, how often did doctors explain
things in a way you could understand?

The Hospital Environment
8. During this hospital stay, how often were your room

and bathroom kept clean?
9. During this hospital stay, how often was the area

around your room quiet at night?
Your Experiences in this Hospital
10. During this hospital stay, did you need help from

11.
12.
13.
14.

Communication with doctors
Communication with nurses
Responsiveness of hospital staff
Cleanliness and noise level of the physical
environment
5. Pain control
6. Communication about medicines
7. Discharge information
1.
2.
3.
4.

Hospital Consumer Assessment of Health Plans (HCAHPS)*

1. During this hospital stay, how often did nurses treat
2.

encompass seven key topics related to patient experience:

nurses or other hospital staff in getting to the
bathroom or in using a bedpan?
How often did you get help in getting to the bathroom
or in using a bedpan as soon as you wanted?
During this hospital stay, did you need medicine for
pain?
During this hospital stay, how often was your pain well
controlled?
During this hospital stay, how often did the hospital
staff do everything they could to help you with your
pain?

Draft items as of 12/16/04.

15. Before giving you any new medicine, how often

did hospital staff tell you what the medicine was
for?
16. Before giving you any new medicine, how often
did hospital staff describe possible side effects in
a way you could understand?
When You Left the Hospital
17. After you left the hospital, did you go directly to your

own home, to someone else’s home, or to another
health facility?
18. During this hospital stay, did doctors, nurses, or
other hospital staff talk with you about whether you
would have the help you needed when you left the
hospital?
19. During this hospital stay, did you get information in
writing about what symptoms or health problems to
look out for after you left the hospital?
Overall Rating of Hospital
20. Using any number from 0 to 10, where 0 is the

worst hospital possible and 10 is the best hospital
possible, what number would you use to rate this
hospital?
21. Would you recommend this hospital to your friends
and family?
About You
22. In general, how would you rate your overall

health?
23. What is the highest grade or level of school that

you have completed?
24. Are you of Hispanic or Latino origin or descent?
25. What is your race? Please choose one or more.

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 253

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

Whichever tool a hospital or institution uses,
the role of the nurse leader is critical in this area.
The nurse leader will have measured information
directly linked to the patient experience upon
which she can improve patient care on the unit. For
example, if the nursing leaders on a unit decide
they want to improve pain management for their
patients, they may want to measure the level of
improvement by evaluating differences in patient
pain scores as well as changes in patients’ scores
on patient satisfaction questions asking them
about pain management. The quality of nursing
care is of strategic importance to most health-care
organizations. A nursing quality program must
ensure that standards are in place (quality assurance), but more importantly, it must include a
focus on performance improvement. Performance
improvement should be geared toward nursingsensitive indicators as well as patient satisfaction
and medication safety.
Margaret Gerteis and colleagues (1993, p. 299)
set forth a challenge and an imperative: “Unless
we understand and meet patients’ subjective
needs, we cannot hope to build conﬁdence and
trust in any provider, institution, or health care
system.”

Practice to Strive For 15-1
Many acute care and long-term care facilities are evaluating whether they should apply for recognition as a Magnet
facility. The Magnet certification program, overseen by the
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), is a rigorous
appraisal process to evaluate the quality of nursing programs. Organizations that wish to achieve recognition as a
Magnet facility must provide nursing care based on current
evidence and must evaluate quality indicators sensitive to
nursing. All Magnet facilities and those applying for Magnet
recognition submit data regarding patient falls, pressure
ulcer prevalence, and hours of staffing. Data are compared
with those of similar units in hospitals of similar bed size. In
addition, organizations must evaluate performance on two
other nursing-sensitive outcome indicators. Among the
additional indicators are length of stay, urinary tract infections, pneumonia, deep vein thrombosis, and cardiac arrest.
Less than excellent outcomes in chosen quality indicators
must be addressed through performance improvement. The
ANCC Magnet recognition program provides external
recognition of nursing excellence through high-quality
nursing outcomes.

253

The next section provides information regarding quality tools and strategies nurse leaders may
incorporate into their performance improvement
programs.

hot topic:
How Do We Stack Up?
We are constantly asked to compare our performance
against that of outside bodies, whether as a requirement for Magnet designation or JCAHO accreditation or
because we want to understand how our level of performance stacks up against the best. Before we can proceed, we must clarify terms that are sometimes used
inappropriately:
Benchmarks reflect outcomes achieved by the best performers. These values must be from the top 5% of all
organizations submitting data and, preferably, the highest value of all who submitted. Performance at or better
than the benchmark indicates excellence. Comparisons
or comparative data may be the benchmark, but not
necessarily so. Often, comparative indicators are the
mean or median value of all data submitted. When the
mean or median is used for comparison, performance
better than the comparison reflects performance better
than the bottom half of all organizations submitting
data; it does not reflect excellence.
Standards are the minimum level of acceptable performance. Meeting standards is not reflective of excellence or best performance.
So now that we have clarity on commonly used terms,
how do we decide which to use? The choice depends
upon your goal. If the goal is to settle for nothing less
than best practice, then a benchmark must be used. If
the goal is to provide acceptable care, then a comparison reflecting a mean or median might be an appropriate choice. Your goal must drive your choice.
Finding benchmark or comparative indicators may be
challenging. In order to make valid comparisons, the
indicators must come from organizations of similar type
and size as well as having similar acuity of patients. It
would not be valid to compare pressure ulcer data from
a nursing facility with data from critical care units. There
must be a logical reason for choosing comparisons.
Data, whether benchmark or comparative, may be
found on Web sites of regulatory agencies, such as
JCAHO and CMS. They may also be obtained from population-based registries, such as the National Registry of
Myocardial Infarction or from the literature.

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

254

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 254

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Quality Tools and Strategies

Box 15-4
Retrospective Versus Concurrent Audits

Nurse managers have many quality tools and strategies from which to choose. They should be looking
at their unit’s core processes and making improvements. Tools may be grouped into two categories:
(1) process analysis and data display and (2) statistical thinking and control charts. Process analysis
and data display involve diagramming processes to
understand the current situation and to decide
what might be causing wasted efforts, errors, or
patient dissatisfaction. Process analysis and data
display tools commonly used for improvement
include failure modes and effects analysis, root
cause or cause and effect diagrams, ﬂowcharts,
Pareto diagrams, and histograms. Statistical thinking involves understanding process variation and
methods for displaying process capability. Tools in
this category are run charts and control charts. The
following section will describe each of the major
tools and some basic information about variation
and control charts.

CHART AUDITS
Until electronic medical records replace paper
records, chart audits will remain the most common
method of collecting quality data. As anyone who
has ever performed chart audits can attest, this is a
time-consuming and expensive method of data collection. It is important before beginning an audit to
spend time considering the types of data required.
Once required data have been established, designing an audit tool to assist in data collection will
standardize recording of information and facilitate
data entry for analysis.
If multiple staff will do the chart reviews, it is
important to deﬁne the data elements being audited
so all staff collect data in the same way. For example, if the interest is to evaluate improvement in
pain scores following administration of pain medication, it is critical that scores immediately before
administration are recorded as well as scores following administration of the medication. It might
also be useful to include the name and route of medication administered, type and site of pain, and
patient age. Collecting all relevant data at the outset
will avoid having to repeat the audit for missing
pieces of information. Sometimes a concurrent

Consider doing concurrent audits when evaluating
compliance with a change in patient care practices.
Concurrent audits allow identification of missing care
elements while the patient is still within your care and
correction of deficits before discharge. Retrospective
audits are valuable tools for data collection, but do not
allow for staff reinforcement and correction of omitted
care elements.

audit may be more useful than a retrospective chart
audit. Box 15-4 provides features of each type of
audit.

FAILURE MODE AND EFFECTS
ANALYSIS: PROSPECTIVE REVIEW
JCAHO requires leaders to perform a proactive
annual failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) to
reduce risk of sentinel events. All systems have
design weaknesses. FMEA is tool that takes leaders
through evaluation of design weaknesses within
their processes, enables them to prioritize weaknesses that might be more likely to result in failure
(errors) and, based on priorities, decide where to
focus on process redesign aimed at improving
patient safety. Known causes for each failure are
identiﬁed, and a numerical score from 1 to 10 is
applied based on the probability of occurrence of the
cause (1 being unlikely, and 10 being inevitable).
The effects of each failure are listed and ranked
from 1 to 10 according to likelihood of detection and
severity, 1 reﬂecting no effect and 10 reﬂecting very
severe effect. Once all causes, effects, and likelihood
of detection have been ranked, the product of the
three scores results in a risk priority number for
each cause and effect. The risk priority number is
used to prioritize performance improvement projects aimed at eliminating high-risk failure modes.
Leaders should consider high-risk activities within
their own organization and those known to have
caused problems in other similar health-care settings (DeRosier et al., 2002). For example, we know
from the literature that heparin and insulin infusions are associated with high frequency and very
severe medication errors in the acute care setting.
FMEA should be used by quality leaders in all hos-

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 255

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

pitals to evaluate medication systems associated
with these drugs in order to eliminate system weaknesses that increase vulnerability of their patients to
injury resulting from an insulin or heparin infusion.

ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS:
RETROSPECTIVE REVIEW
A root cause analysis, or cause and effect diagram,
sometimes called a ﬁshbone diagram, is used retrospectively to evaluate potential causes of a problem
or sources of variation of a process. Possible causes
are generally grouped in four categories: people,
materials, policies and procedures, and equipment.
Causes are then listed by drawing branches to show
their relationship to one of the four categories. More
speciﬁc causes are shown as bones on its respective
branch. Causes are generated by asking a series of
“why” questions (Executive Learning, 2002). For
example, if a nurse made a medication error, the
ﬁrst “why” question would be: Why did the nurse
make the medication error? Assume the answer to
that question is because the 9 a.m. dose was not in
the medication drawer. The next “why” would be:
Why wasn’t the 9 a.m. dose in the medication
drawer? The answer might be because the 9 a.m.
dose was given at midnight. The next question then
would be: Why was the 9 a.m. dose given at midnight? The process of asking “why” questions
would continue until the root cause for omission of
the 9 a.m. dose was identiﬁed. As mentioned earlier
in the chapter, it is a rule of thumb that the root
cause is not reached until the ﬁfth “why” question
is answered. Once the causes have become speciﬁc
enough to be measured, they should be evaluated for
cost of correction and potential for improvement.

255

FLOWCHARTS
Flowcharts are diagrams that represent the steps in
a process. They are used to evaluate inefficiencies,
describe the current process, and train new staff. It
is very important to include “process experts” in
the development of ﬂowcharts describing the current process. Process experts are the individuals
who are actually performing the work being
depicted by the ﬂowchart. They are in the best position to describe what is really happening, which
contributes to understanding of rework, non–valueadded steps, and complexity.

PARETO DIAGRAM
A Pareto diagram is used to illustrate the 80/20 rule,
which states that 80% of all process variation is
produced by 20% of items. For example, if a nurse
manager had a high prevalence of pressure ulcers,
she might review prevalence data from the previous
year to evaluate what types of pressure ulcers were
occurring on her unit. She would then group the
data into categories based on the site of the pressure
ulcer. Next, she would place the categories in
descending order of frequency and use a bar graph
to display these data. She would add a second vertical axis to depict the cumulative percent represented by each successive category (Fig. 15-2). By
using this tool, she would see that two pressure
ulcer sites, coccyx and heels, represented 80% of
the different ulcers occurring on her unit. She
would have a place to focus improvement efforts by
studying the causes of coccyx and heel pressure
ulcers. Pareto diagrams provide a quick way to see
where to focus attention.
Pressure Ulcer Prevalence

18

100%

16

90%

14

80%
70%

12

60%

10

50%

8

40%

6

FIGURE 15-2 Pareto diagram of pressure
ulcer prevalence.

30%

4

20%

2

10%

0

Coccyx

Heel

Shoulder

Ankle

Elbow

Ear

Head

Knee

0%

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

256

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 256

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

HISTOGRAMS
Histograms provide another way to view distribution of data. A histogram may be used when a run
or control chart is not possible because the time
sequence of data has not been preserved (Executive
Learning, 2002). A histogram may be useful to
understand patterns in data that are not apparent
by examining lists or tabled values (Institute for
Healthcare Improvement, 2004). For example, if a
manager were trying to understand the types of
medication errors that occurred on her unit during
the previous year, she might use a histogram to
display the frequency of different categories of
errors. Using a graph rather than a table of numbers
to illustrate the frequency of error categories makes
it easier to see quickly where most errors are
occurring.

the median because of the 8 days when much
higher numbers of patients left. These 8 days represent extreme values and, as illustrated, have a
greater effect on the mean score than the median.
The run chart also shows a pattern in the data: two
extreme days occur in pairs and always following 5
days of lower values. After checking days of the
week associated with the extreme days, the manager noted that they were weekends.
Rules may be used with run charts to pinpoint
special cause variation. The previous example of the
extreme values on weekends represents a special
cause. Eight or more consecutive points, either
below or above the central line, represent a shift. Six
points all going up or all going down represent a
trend (Executive Learning, 2002).

STATISTICAL THINKING
AND CONTROL CHARTS

RUN CHARTS
Run charts are graphical displays of data over time.
The vertical axis depicts the key quality characteristic, or process variable. The horizontal axis represents time. Run charts should also contain a center
line representing either a mean or a median. A
median should be used if the data contain outliers,
which are less sensitive to extreme values. Figure
15-3 illustrates this point. Data regarding the number of patients who left an emergency department
without being seen by a physician were collected for
2 weeks preceding and 2 weeks following a process
change. The run chart contains two center lines, a
mean and a median. In both cases (before and after
adding another physician), the mean is greater than

The topic of statistical thinking involves three central concepts: thinking about all work as processes;
knowing that all processes exhibit variation; and
recognizing, appropriately responding to, and taking
steps to reduce unnecessary variation (Executive
Learning, 2002). When managers do not understand these three fundamental concepts, they tend
to react to the “ups and downs” of performance data
that they routinely scrutinize in managing their
departments. Statistical thinking helps us to understand when and how to react to changes in performance. When we do not use statistical thinking,
we can waste a great deal of our valuable time making changes or celebrating “improvements” that are
not sustainable. For example, we commonly exam-

Patients Left Without Being Seen
Added MD

20
05
8/
5/
20
05
8/
7/
20
05
8/
9/
20
05
8/
11
/2
00
5
8/
13
/2
00
5
8/
15
/2
00
5
8/
17
/2
00
5
8/
19
/2
00
5
8/
21
/2
00
5
8/
23
/2
00
5
8/
25
/2
00
5
8/
27
/2
00
5

3/
8/

8/

1/

20

05

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Patients

Mean

Median

FIGURE 15-3 Run chart reflecting
process change.

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 257

257

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

ine infection data on a monthly basis. We often compare the current month with the previous month or
quarter. Some months will have a greater number of
infections than others. Some months may have zero
infections. A person who understands statistical
thinking will know that these monthly ﬂuctuations
reflect normal variation inherent in the care
processes performed by the individuals caring for
the patients on the unit. If studied over time, the
monthly values generally will fall within boundaries
and ﬂuctuate above and below the mean point of the
monthly values. Figure 15-4 illustrates this point.
The ﬁgure contains a run chart of a critical care
unit’s VAP rate over an 18-month period. The data
reﬂect a rate varying between zero and ﬁve cases.
The central line was calculated from the rates during the 12 monthly rates in 2005. On close inspection, one will observe that the rate was zero on two
consecutive months, March and April, 2006.
Without an understanding of normal process variation, the ﬁrst month without cases may have caused
some excitement, with even greater excitement on
the second month of no cases, only to be dashed in
May when the rate bounces back to four cases. Once
viewed over time in the run chart, it becomes clear
that the months where the rate drops to zero are a
result of the same process that achieved rates of four
and ﬁve cases in previous months: no cause for celebration after all.
Run and control charts are two tools that we
have at our disposal to help us incorporate statistical thinking in our daily work. They enable us to
discern special-cause from common-cause variation. Common-cause variation is “due to the process
itself and is produced by interactions of variables of
that process” (Executive Learning, 2002). The VAP
example above illustrates this point. Special-cause

variation is “assignable to a speciﬁc cause or causes.
It arises because of special circumstances” (Executive Learning, 2002). The higher number of
patients on weekend days who left without being
seen in the emergency department is an example of
special-cause variation. Control charts help us to
predict the range of possible values we might expect
from a process. Upper- and lower-control limits,
based upon statistically calculated values, allow us
to predict process capability. Without systematically
changing a process, performance may fall anywhere
within the upper- or lower-control limits. Choice of
appropriate control charts and calculation of control limits will not be covered in this section. The
reference list contains resources for those who wish
to learn more about their use in health care.
Managers have many quality tools available to
them. Choosing the right tool is important and
should be based on the type of data or project goal.
If the goal is to demonstrate and prioritize problem
causes or categories of causes, then a Pareto diagram is the correct choice. If the goal is to examine
process variation over time, then a run chart is the
appropriate choice. If the goal is to understand
where process design weaknesses put you at greatest risk for errors, an FMEA is the most appropriate choice. The next section discusses the role of
risk management in identifying sets of conditions
that put our patients and staff at risk of experiencing and making medical errors.

Risk Management
Risk management is a process used to minimize the
loss of an organization’s ﬁnancial assets subsequent
Ventilator Associated Pneumonia Rate

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

VAP

Mean

M

ay
-

06

6
ar
-0
M

06
Ja
n-

05
vNo

p05
Se

05
Ju

ly-

5
-0
ay

ar
-0

5
M

FIGURE 15-4 Run chart reflecting normal
process variation.

M

Ja

n-

05

0

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

258

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 258

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

to injury to a patient, visitor, employee, or medical
staff member. Financial loss also may result from
destruction, theft, or loss of property (American
Society for Healthcare Risk Management, 2003).
Risk managers generally are nurses who have an
interest in this area. Some have an advanced degree
in law.
Historically, risk managers reviewed the facts
after any event thought to put the organization at
risk for a lawsuit. They would discuss the case with
the caregivers, review the charts for documentation
and, if necessary, get counsel from the organization’s attorney. A goal of the review was to assess
the level of the organization’s liability should a suit
be ﬁled. If the review resulted in a judgment that the
organization was at fault, the risk manager might
recommend that any lawsuit be settled out of court.
Should the review result in a judgment that the staff
had followed policies and procedures and that the
poor outcome was not a result of actions taken by
the staff involved, the risk manager might recommend that the case go to trial should a suit be ﬁled.
Today, many risk managers take a much more
proactive approach by raising awareness of systems
issues that might put staff at risk of making an
error. This more proactive approach involves performing root cause analyses of near misses of events
that might have caused harm had they occurred. A
near miss is an event that had it fully evolved would
have resulted in a medical error. Organizational
leaders who promote patient safety believe that the
majority of medical errors made by staff are the
result of the design of the systems in place to deliver
care, not individual staff negligence. Such leaders
devote staff and resources to studying conditions
that might result in errors so that processes might
be redesigned to reduce the chances of repeating the
error. In addition, communication processes are in
place to share details of the near miss with staff
who work in other areas within the organization in
order to raise awareness of the event and the conditions that led up to it. The goal is always to reduce
risk of reccurrence of the error and to improve the
level of safety for all patients.
In the event a patient does experience a bad outcome, risk managers evaluate whether care provided was consistent with the standard. A standard
of care is the minimum level of service a patient
should receive. Standards may be based on scientiﬁc
evidence, professional society guidelines, regulators
such as JCAHO, or traditional patterns of care.

Caregivers and organizations providing care that
falls below the standard are putting their patients at
risk of poorer outcomes and themselves at risk of
legal action.
Using current and best evidence to make patient
care decisions minimizes risk of providing care
that is substandard. The following section provides
information about evidence-based practice in
nursing.

EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE
According to Melnyk and Fineout-Overholt (2005,
p. 6), evidence-based practice “is a problem-solving
approach to clinical practice that integrates:
■

■
■

A systematic search for and critical appraisal
of the most relevant evidence to answer a
burning clinical question
One’s own clinical expertise
Patient preferences and values”

What nurse would not want to use the most relevant evidence, clinical expertise, and patient preferences in daily patient care? Yet, as a rule, we do not.
Many nurses say that the major barrier to incorporating the latest evidence into their practice is time
(Pravikoff, Tanner, & Pierce, 2005). They do not
have the time during their busy shifts to review literature or other resources. Pravikoff and colleagues
(2005) studied the readiness of nurses practicing in
the United States for evidence-based practice. The
results of their study indicated that the majority
(61%) of nurses require information at least
weekly. Of those needing information, two-thirds
preferred to seek information from colleagues rather
than research. Among the reasons provided for not
accessing research were lack of value for research,
lack of knowledge regarding electronic databases,
lack of access to a computer tied to the Internet, lack
of a medical library, and lack of skills regarding
reading and critiquing research articles.
Many studies have shown that patients do not
receive care consistent with the latest evidence
(Kerr et al., 2004). Williams and colleagues (2005)
studied improvement in quality indicators submitted to JCAHO for three patient populations: acute
myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, and
pneumonia. Eight quarters (third quarter 2002
through second quarter 2004) were analyzed for
absolute values and improvement in compliance

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 259

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

259

over time with these evidence-based indicators. One
indicator, smoking cessation instruction, is included
in each of the patient populations. The mean value
at baseline for smoking cessation counseling in each
of the patient populations was as follows: myocardial infarction, 65%; congestive heart failure, 39%;
pneumonia, 34%. At the end of the 2-year study
period, improvements were evident, but still many
patients were not receiving beneﬁt of counseling.
Kerr and colleagues (2004) evaluated the percentage of recommended care received by patients
residing in twelve communities in the United States.
Recommended care fell into one of three categories:
preventive, acute, and chronic. The results of their
study indicated that, on average, 50% to 60% of recommended care was provided to individuals residing in these communities. Communities included
major cities from all regions in the country. There
are many reasons why patients are not receiving
recommended care, but it is the leader’s responsibility to create an environment that values and facilitates the use of current evidence.

One idea to combat these barriers and build an
environment for best practice is to work with the
institution’s librarian, if your institution employs
one, to subscribe to online databases and electronic
journals, arrange for education regarding online
searches for research-based articles, and provide
education and a framework for making decisions
about the usefulness of particular studies to your
patient population. Other ideas involve inviting a
group of nurses to begin a journal club on a general
topic such as critical care or a more speciﬁc topic
such as care of patients with a tracheotomy or care
of patients post myocardial infarction, and then
expand to other topics or patient populations.
Leaders may also want to develop a relationship
with faculty from their schools of nursing who
could act as a resource in helping staff develop skills
in translation of clinical and administrative
research into daily practice.

BUILDING THE ENVIRONMENT

Outcomes measurement involves using scientiﬁc
rigor to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
our work. Scientiﬁc rigor involves selection of reliable and valid tools to evaluate process and outcomes of care. Measurement is generally performed
on a population of patients, such as patients with
congestive heart failure or patients who are post hip
replacement surgery. Outcomes may also be measured on heterogeneous patient populations, such as
all medical-surgical or critical care patients. Outcomes typically measured in acute care are length of
stay, mortality, complications, health-related quality
of life, functional assessment, and costs.
As discussed earlier in the chapter, quality indicators may include outcome, process, and structure
indicators. Unlike measurement of the other two
types of indicators, outcome measurement generally requires statistical adjustment for patients’ preexisting conditions and socioeconomic status.
Without appropriate adjustment, comparisons
among different care providers, patient care units,
nursing facilities, outpatient clinics, or hospitals are
meaningless. For example, patients who are chronically ill with conditions such as diabetes or congestive heart failure have a much greater chance of
developing a complication, such as a myocardial
infarction or renal failure, than patients who are

Creating an environment where evidence and best
practice are valued requires careful thought and
persistence on the leader’s part. Creating such an
environment involves more than improving access
to professional journals and other scholarly materials. Ready access for busy clinicians is critical, but
access alone will not result in the behavioral change
necessary to incorporate use of evidence in daily
practice. Providers must ﬁrst believe that the effort
will improve their practice and allow them to provide better care. Staff and nurse managers will have
varying amounts of understanding regarding translation of research into practice. Some staff members
will have completed a research course in their basic
nursing program, but others may not have done so.
Newhouse and colleagues (2005) identiﬁed four
barriers to implementing evidence-based practice:
inconsistency of the clinical question under study
and clinical priorities of the nursing unit, staff
knowledge deﬁcit concerning critiquing and using
research ﬁndings, staff feelings of being overwhelmed by the number of studies and different
types of evidence associated with each question,
and lack of time to focus on this activity so staff
could do it correctly.

Outcomes Measurement

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

260

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 260

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

newly diagnosed. Socioeconomic factors such as
age, income, and insurance status may also affect
patient outcomes, independent of the care they
received. For this reason, it is necessary to perform
a mathematical technique called risk adjustment to
“equalize” differences related to the patient’s severity of illness.
According to Wojner (2001, p. 126), “Severity is
a term used to describe a relative loss of function.”
Severity adjustment involves accounting for signiﬁcant physiological changes associated with a disease
state. Risk adjustment models, on the other hand,
are used to predict the probability that a patient or
group of patients will develop a poor outcome.
Variables that place a patient at higher risk for an
untoward event are identiﬁed from statistical analysis of similar cases predictive of the event, such as
mortality (Wojner, 2001). For example, conditions
that are predictive of death vary by patient population. Factors that might be associated with death of
an inpatient may be speciﬁc to their illness, such as
the presence of metastatic cancer.
There are many commercially available tools for
severity and risk adjustment. Such tools are case
mix index, all-patient-refined–diagnosis-relatedgroups (APR-DRGs), Acute Physiology and Chronic
Health Evaluation (APACHE) scores, and Medical
Illness Severity Grouping System (MedisGroups).
For example, APR-DRGs use clinical logic, patient
demographic information, comorbidities, and principal diagnosis to assign patients to one of four
severity and mortality levels: minor, moderate,
major, or extreme. Patients categorized as extreme
would use far more resources and be signiﬁcantly
more decompensated than those categorized as
minor. The same would hold true for the mortality
categories. Patients who are categorized as minor
risk for mortality (within their DRG) would be less
likely to die than those in the extreme category.
Because this type of categorizing system allows sorting of patients by severity class, it “equalizes” preexisting differences among patients and allows for
measurement of legitimate differences in outcomes.

All Good Things...
Quality is not a religion, but it does require a belief
and passion, discipline, and the application of
learned principles. The most common thread

throughout all of the quality literature is leadership.
And nurse leaders must answer that call. First, we
need to become technically proﬁcient in how to
ensure quality in our units. Second, nurse leaders
need to begin to see themselves as drivers of quality.
That requires additional competencies in risk taking, courage, and political governance. The most
important competency might be that of listening.
Nurse leaders create the environment that allows
the people closest to the work, the ones who “think
outside the box,” the innovators, to step forward
and drive and create change. Finally, nurse leaders
need to be acutely aware of, if not personally
involved in, the dynamic dialogue in this country
on how we are going to manage a health-care system that needs a complete redesign.
This chapter has presented a number of models,
tools, techniques, and suggestions for creating an
environment of improvement. Understanding quality and making improvements require use of data
and a disciplined approach to improvement. A number of tools and models have been provided for that
purpose. The chapter has also provided contextual
information so that nurse leaders may understand
how the current movement toward public reporting
of quality data and pay for performance ﬁts within
the bigger health-care picture. Nurses must ensure
practice is based on the best available evidence that
is delivered in a reliable, safe manner.

Let’s Talk
1. Think of a time when you knew your staff
members were delivering patient care
inconsistently. Perhaps physicians were
complaining about differences among the skill
level of your staff, or patient complaints began to
increase. You want to share your concerns with
your staff and, at the same time, encourage
members to use current evidence of best practice
to redesign care processes. How might the tools
and models suggested in this chapter help you
“make the case” for improvement to your staff?
2. After presenting a Pareto diagram of the most
frequent patient complaints received from
comments on patient satisfaction surveys and
calls to risk management, your staff members
decide to set a goal of zero patient complaints by

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 261

Managing Quality and Patient Safety

end of the year. Together you decide to tackle the
issue of untimely response to call lights. Where
would you begin?
3. You might consider using a cause-and-effect
diagram to get to the root cause of why response
time is long. Once you have narrowed the issue to
the root cause, you might want to do a literature
review to determine best practice. You might also
want to contact the patient satisfaction survey
vendor to check if the vendor will give you the
names of hospitals that have the best scores for
satisfaction with response to call bells. What
measures would you use to understand if you
were improving timely response to call lights?
4. You might want to check if it is possible to get a
patient call system report that provides average
call bell response time by time of day. If
available, you might want to use a run or control
chart to examine patterns of either short response
times or long response times by time of day and
day of week. If patterns exist, you could study
them so that you could build on the processes
where response times are short and eliminate
processes where response times are long. If a
report is unavailable, consider collecting data by
recording call bell response times for an hour
during randomly selected hours of the day and
days of the week. You might also use a run or
control chart to track patient responses to the call
bell question on your patient satisfaction survey.
How would you determine if improvements to
responsiveness to call bells were sustained?
5. Continue to monitor response times and patient
satisfaction indicators to determine if the
response times are stable (consistent over time)
and patient satisfaction scores remain within the
goal range. Post the response time and patient
satisfaction run charts in a place where they are
visible for staff.

NCLEX Questions
1. Drivers of quality are:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Nurses and physicians
Regulators
Payers
B and C

261

2. According to Gerteis and colleagues, patient-

centered care consists of the following patient
preferences:
A. Respect for patient values, preferences, and
expressed needs
B. Following the physician’s orders
C. Excluding family and friends from any discussions about the patient
D. Putting the patients’ physical comfort above
any safety measures
3. Dr. Deming viewed quality:

A.
B.
C.
D.

From a systems perspective
Involving unrelated processes and decisions
Involving management by fear
Based on the biological sciences

4. Joseph Duran is best known for:

A. The Pareto principle used to identify the
“vital few” contributors to a problem
B. The quality trilogy consisting of plan do, act
C. Two aspects of the product, quality and cost
D. Use of statistical thinking
5. Phillip Crosby was another quality theorist who:

A. Provided the customer with a nondefective
product
B. Involved leaders who practice contingency
leadership
C. Deﬁned quality as the extent to which processes are in conformance with requirements
D. All of the above
6. Dr. Avedis Donabedian is best known for which

perspective on quality?
A. Structures consist of how organizations
develop reporting structures
B. The structure, process, and outcome paradigm
C. Processes used to make nursing decisions
D. Outcomes related solely to the ﬁnances of a
hospital
7. The model for improvement involves the use of

which of the following questions?
A. How will we know that a change is an
improvement?
B. What are the defects in a process?
C. Nurse-patient staffing ratios?
D. All of the above
8. Process analysis and data display as quality tools:

A. Involve diagramming processes to understand
what causes waste, errors, or patient dissatisfaction

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

262

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 262

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

B. Involve use of run charts
C. Involve use of control charts
D. All of the above
9. Risk management is a process:

A. In which a risk manager assesses risk due to
ﬁnancial decisions
B. That involves managing problem employees
C. Used to minimize the loss of an organization’s ﬁnancial assessment subsequent to a
patient, visitor, employee, or medical staff
injury
D. A and C
10. Quality health may be deﬁned as:

A. The patient assuming little risk
B. A zero number of errors made in the provision of patient care by health-care providers
C. Occurring when the patient is cured of any
disease or ailment
D. The extent to which health services for
individuals and populations are safe, timely,
efficient, equitable, effective, and patientcentered
REFERENCES
American Nurses Association. (1995). Nursing Care Report Card
for Acute Care. Washington DC: American Nurses Publishing.
American Nurses Association. (2004). Scope and standards for
nurse administrators (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: nursesbooks.org, American Nurses Association.
American Nurses Credentialing Center. (2004). Magnet recognition program: 2005 application manual. Silver Spring, MD:
American Nurses Credentialing Center.
American Society for Healthcare Risk Management. (2003).
Barton certiﬁcate in health care risk management program
glossary. Retrieved August 28, 2005, from http://www.
ashrm.org/ashrm/resources/ﬁles/glossary.pdf
Atkins, P.M., Marshall, B.S., & Javalgi, R.G. (1996). Happy
employees lead to loyal patients. Journal of Health Care
Marketing, 16(4), 14–23.
Barker, K.N., et al. (2002). Medication errors observed in 36
health care facilities. Archives of Internal Medicine, 162(16),
1897–1903.
Barry, R., Murcko, A., & Brubaker, C. (2002). The six sigma book
for health care: Improving outcomes by reducing errors. Chicago:
Health Administration Press.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, & Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2005). Hospital
CAHPS® (HCAHPS®): Fact Sheet. Retrieved June 11, 2005,
from http://www.cms.hhs.gov/quality/hospital/HCAHPS
FactSheet.pdf
Deming, W.E. (2000). The new economics: For industry, government, education (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
DeRosier, J., et al. (2002). Using health care failure mode and

effect analysis: The VA National Center for Patient Safety’s
prospective risk analysis system. Joint Commission Journal on
Quality Improvement, 28(5), 248–267.
Dobyns, L., & Crawford-Mason, C. (1991). Quality or else: The
revolution in world business. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Donabedian, A. (1992). The role of outcomes in quality assessment and assurance. Quality Review Bulletin, 18, 356–360.
Executive Learning, I. (2002). Handbook for improvement: A reference guide for tools and concepts: Health care (3rd ed.).
Nashville: Healthcare Management Directions.
Fonarow, G.C., Yancy, C.W., & Heywood, J.T. (2005). Adherence
to heart failure quality-of-care indicators in US hospitals:
Analysis of the adhere registry. Archives of Internal Medicine,
165(13), 1469–1477.
Flynn, E.A., et al. (2002). Comparison of methods for detecting
medication errors in 36 hospitals and skilled-nursing facilities.
American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy, 59, 436–446.
Gerteis, M., et al. (1993). Through the patient’s eyes: Understanding and promoting patient-centered care. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Hatcher, I., et al. (2004). An intravenous medication safety system: Preventing high-risk medication errors at the point of
care. Journal of Nursing Administration, 34(10), 437–439.
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. (2004). Histogram.
Retrieved June 5, 2005, from http://www.ihi.org/NR/
rdonlyres/82F71CA3-5863-4FB8-9456-B0CB3F289777/
1055/Histogram1.pdf
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. (2005). How to improve:
Improvement methods. Retrieved April 30, 2005, from
http://www.ihi.org/IHI/Topics/Improvement/ImprovementM
ethods/HowToImprove/
Institute of Medicine. (2005). Institute of Medicine of the National
Academies: About. Retrieved June 11, 2005, from http://
www.iom.edu/about.asp
Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in
America. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press.
Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations. (2005). 2006 Critical Access Hospital and
Hospital National Patient Safety Goals. Retrieved June 5,
2005, from http://www.jcaho.org/accredited⫹organizations/
patient⫹safety/06_npsg/06_npsg_cah_hap.htm
Juran, J.M., & Godfrey, A.B. (1999). Juran’s quality handbook
(5th ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.
Kerr, E.A., et al. (2004). Proﬁling the quality of care in twelve
communities: Results from the CQI study. Health Affairs,
23(3), 247–256.
Kohn, L.T., Corrigan, J.M., & Donaldson, M.S. (2000). To Err is
Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
Kondo, Y., & Kano, N. (1999). Quality in Japan. In Juran, J.M.,
& Godfrey, A.B. (eds.). Juran’s quality handbook (5th ed., pp.
4141–4133). New York: McGraw Hill.
Landon, B.E., et al. (2004). The evolution of quality management in Medicaid-managed care. Health Affairs, 23(4),
245–254.
Langley, G.J., et al. (1996). The improvement guide: A practical
approach to enhancing organizational performance. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 263

Managing Quality and Patient Safety
Laschinger, H.S., et al. (2005). A psychometric analysis of the
patient satisfaction with nursing care quality questionnaire:
An actionable approach to measuring patient satisfaction.
Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 20(3), 220–230.
Lee, F. (2004). If Disney ran your hospital: 9 1/2 things you would
do differently. Bozeman, MT: Second River Health care Press.
Lee, K.W., et al. (2005). Statistical tools for quality improvement.
In Ransom, S.B., Joshi, M., & Nash D.B. (eds.). The health care
quality book: Vision, strategy, and tools (pp. 145–166). Chicago:
Health Administration Press.
Melnyk, B.M., & Fineout-Overholt, E. (2005). Making the case
for evidence-based practice. In Melnyk, B.M., & FineoutOverholt, E. (eds.). Evidence-based practice in nursing & health
care: A guide to best practice (pp. 3–24). Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Mitchell, P.H., Ferketich, S., & Jennings, B.M. (1998). Quality
health outcomes model. American Academy of Nursing
Expert Panel on Quality Health Care. Image Journal of Nursing
Scholarship, 30(1), 43–46.
Mitchell, P.H., & Lang, N.M. (2004). Framing the problem of
measuring and improving health care quality: Has the quality
health outcomes model been useful? Medical Care, 42(2
Suppl), II4-11.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2004). Baldrige
National Quality Program. 2005 Health Care Criteria for
Performance Excellence. In Dept of Commerce (ed.):
Technology Administration.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2005). Baldrige
National Quality Program. Award Recipients. Retrieved
December 6, 2005, from http://www.quality.nist.gov/Award_
Recipients.htm
National Quality Forum. (2000–2004). National Quality Forum
Current Activities Archive. Retrieved December 6, 2005, from
http://www.qualityforum.org/activities/ca_archive.htm
National Quality Forum. (2004). National voluntary consensus
standards for nursing-sensitive care: An initial performance
measure set. Washington DC: National Quality Forum.
Newhouse, R., et al. (2005). Evidence-based practice: A practical
approach to implementation. Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(1), 35–40.
Nielsen, D.M., et al. (2004). Can the gurus’ concepts cure health
care? Quality Progress, 25–34.
Page, A. (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the work
environment of nurses. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press.
Pravikoff, D.S, Tanner, A.B., & Pierce, S.T. (2005). Readiness of
U.S. nurses for evidence-based practice. American Journal of
Nursing, 105(9), 40–51.

263

Spear, S., & Bowen, H.K. (1999). Decoding the DNA of the
Toyota production system. Harvard Business Review, 77(5),
96–106
Spear, S.J. (2004). Learning to lead at Toyota. Harvard Business
Review, 82(5), 78–86.
Stoecklein, M. (2005). Quality improvement systems, theories,
and tools. In Ransom, S.B. Joshi, M., & Nash D.B. (eds.). The
health care quality book: Vision, strategy, and tools (pp. 63–86).
Chicago: Health Administration Press.
Thompson, D.N., Wolf, G.A., & Spear, S. J. (2003). Driving
improvement in patient care: Lessons from Toyota. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 33(11), 585–595.
Wachter, R.M. (2004). The end of the beginning: Patient safety
five years after ‘to err is human’. Health Affairs, 23,
4534–4545.
Williams, S.C., et al. (2005). Quality of care in U.S. Hospitals as
reﬂected by standardized measures, 2002-2004. New England
Journal of Medicine, 353, 255–264.
Wojner, A. (2001). Outcomes management: Applications to clinical practice. St. Louis: Mosby.
Womack, J.P., & Jones, D.T. (2003). Lean thinking: Banish waste
and create wealth in your corporation. New York: Free Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Carey, R.G. (2003). Improving health care with control charts:
Basic and advanced methods and case studies. Milwaukee: ASQ
Quality Press.
Ciliska, D., et al. (2005). Using models and strategies for
evidence-based practice. In Melnyk, B.M., & Fineout-Overholt,
E. (eds.) Evidence-based practice in nursing & health care: A
guide to best practice (pp. 185–219). Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Graham, K., & Logan, J. (2004). Using the Ottawa model of
research use to implement a skin care program. Journal of
Nursing Care Quality, 19(1), 18–26.
Lloyd, R.C. (2004). Quality health care: A guide to developing and
using indicators. Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
Ransom, S.B., Joshi, M., & Nash, D.B. (2005). The health care
quality book: Vision, strategy, and tools. Chicago: Health
Administration Press.
Stetler, C.B. (2001). Updating the Stetler model of research utilization to facilitate evidence-based practice. Nursing Outlook,
49(6), 272–279.
Wheeler, D.J. (1993). Understanding variation: The key to managing chaos. Knoxville, TN: SPC Press.
Wheeler, D.J. (2003). Making sense of data. Knoxville, TN: SPC
Press.

15Jones Leadership(F)-ch 15

1/14/07

3:47 PM

Page 264

This page has been left intentionally blank.

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 265

chapter
16
Budgeting
PATRICIA M. HAYNOR, DNSC, RN
STACY GRANT HOHENLEITNER, MSN, RN, CNA, NHA
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz followed the yellow brick road. Budgets are
maps that improve on the yellow brick approach!”
Patricia Haynor

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■

Introduce the concepts of budgeting.
Identify the steps in the budget process.
Describe the types of budgets.
Discuss budgeting as a management control process.

265

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

266

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 266

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

H

ealth care is undergoing a transformation that
embraces business values while trying to hold onto
the professional concept of caring. Health care is a
business with limited ﬁnancial resources. Nurses
are ﬁnding themselves providing care in an environment where the economics of health care are
highly competitive and the costs of health care are
closely monitored and frequently contemplated.
“Nurses are entering into a new reality of practice
that is controlled by costs” (Turkel, 2001, p. 69).
Nurses need to keep in mind that money spent in
any area must be budgeted. If unbudgeted money is
spent, if the category is over budget or over the projected budget, then that money must be subtracted
from another area. There is not an inﬁnite supply of
money that can be spent, no matter what the reason.
Take for example a personal budget. If you overspend, you try to accommodate this by spending
less in another area. Or you go into debt. In contrast, if you spend less than the budgeted amount
and are under your budget, you may have money
saved for another area or to compensate for overspending. We do, however, have more control over
our personal spending than the spending of our
organizations. Our organizations are subject to
many variables that inﬂuence both revenue and
expenses. Just think for a minute about the many
events that increase labor costs. Sick calls, leave of
absence, and an increase in census or acuity are just
a few of the incidents that increase the dollars budgeted for staff.

Fiscal Planning and Budgeting
“All planning involves choice a necessity to choose
from among alternatives. This implies that planning is a proactive and deliberate process” (Marquis
& Houston, 2006, p. 146). Planning skills are an
essential function of nursing management so that
personal as well as organizational needs and goals
can be met. Planning has speciﬁc purposes and is
one approach to strategy making. Planning also represents speciﬁc activities that lead to achievement
of objectives.
Fiscal planning is an important, but often
neglected, element of the planning process. Fiscal
planning must reﬂect the philosophy, goals, and
objectives of the health-care organization. As with

all elements of planning, ﬁscal planning must be
proactive, ﬂexible, and clearly stated in measurable
terms. The intended goal of ﬁscal planning is to create a budget that will meet the needs of the nurse
manager and unit. When creating the budget, a
function within ﬁscal planning, the nurse manager
should take into consideration what may occur in
the future that could potentially affect the unit’s
budget. The nurse manager must be proactive: look
to the future and estimate or try to predict the “what
ifs” or what could happen during the projected
budget period. When predicting the budget for the
ﬁscal year, start with what is currently known and
what has happened. Review the previous year’s
budget to determine where the spending has been
within the amount projected as well as areas where
the spending has resulted in a surplus or deﬁcit situation. It is important for the nurse manager to realize that there are uncontrollable factors that can
affect the bottom line of the budget. The nurse manager must clearly state, in a way that can be quantiﬁed or measured, what is to be included within the
budget and be ﬂexible to adjust for any unanticipated factors that can inﬂuence the budget. Fiscal
planning should incorporate short-term and longterm planning. When preparing to create the ﬁscal
budget, nurse managers should involve as many
staff in the input process as possible.
Keep in mind that practice makes perfect. Fiscal
planning and working with a budget are learned
skills. The more times managers plan and work with
ﬁscal budgets, the more they are able to improve
their skills and ability to complete the budget
process.
“An essential feature of ﬁscal planning is responsibility accounting, which means that each of an
organization’s revenues, expenses, assets, and liabilities is someone’s responsibility” (Marquis &
Houston, 2006, p. 215). This typically means that
the individual with the most direct control on any
of these ﬁnancial elements should be held accountable for them. In the department of nursing, this
accountability generally is integrated into the
responsibilities of the nurse manager. This results
in the manager needing to be an active participant
in unit budgeting, having a great deal of input into
what is to be included in the unit budget, receiving
regular budget data reports that compare actual
expenses with budgeted expenses, and being held
accountable for the ﬁnancial outcomes that result
from the operational budget.

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 267

Budgeting

The purpose of budgeting is to deﬁne a road map
for revenue and expense while identifying cash
needs. “A budget is a plan that uses numerical data
to predict the activities of an organization over a
period of time, and it provides a mechanism for
planning and control, as well as for promoting each
unit’s needs and contributions” (Carruth, Carruth,
& Noto, 2000, p. 16).
A budget’s value is directly correlated to its accuracy. The level of accuracy is directly connected
with the ﬁscal planning process. The more comprehensive the ﬁscal planning, the more people who
provide input, the greater the amount of information gathered prior to ﬁnalizing the budget, the
more accurately will the budget reﬂect the manager,
department, and organization. Marquis and Houston tell us “because a budget is at best a prediction,
a plan, and not a rule, ﬁscal planning requires ﬂexibility, ongoing evaluation, and revision” (2006,
p. 217). All budgeting is initiated through planning
and forecasting. Budgets serve a dual purpose: they
are numerical expressions of plans, and they
become control standards against which results are
compared or benchmarked. Types of budgets and
the time frames of the budgets may vary.
Budgets are management tools. Preparing and
working with a budget enable managers to reﬂect
upon previous expenses and to be aware of current and future costs as well as the amount of
resources that have been and will be utilized. As
part of working with and comparing budgets, a
manager will review periodic budget reports generally on a monthly basis. As part of this monthly
budget review, the manager will compare actual
expenditures for the month with the approved budgeted amount and the year-to-date budget status
(see Box 16-1).

Box 16-1
Objectives of the Budget Process
■
■
■
■

To provide a written expression, in quantitative terms,
of the plans of the organization.
To provide a basis to evaluate financial performance in
relation to the plans of the organization.
To provide a tool to measure fiscal and outcome
compliance with the stated plan.
To create a sensitivity and heightened awareness of
costs relative to resources used.

267

CREATING A BUDGET
Nurses have been expertly educated to use the nursing process. The same type of process is the most
widely used approach to preparing a budget:
Assessment → Planning → Implementation →
Evaluation

Assessment
The ﬁrst step within the context of the organization’s strategic plan and ﬁnancial plans is to assess
the department and determine what needs to be
covered in the budget to meet the organization’s
goals. The nurse manager assesses the needs of the
area for which the budget is being created. It is
important to involve as many staff members as possible in the budgeting process so that they have an
appreciation for the resources needed to deliver
their particular services or product. When nurse
managers and their staff are involved in ﬁscal planning, staff members become more cognizant of
what things cost and gain ﬁscal awareness that will
lead to cost-consciousness and potential savings.
In the assessment phase, a signiﬁcant amount of
effort is spent validating the standard of care hours
for patients in different cost centers. (i.e., intensive
care unit, nursery, etc.). The standard of care hours
is most frequently expressed as nursing hours per
patient day (NHPPD). In other words, how many
hours of care in 24 hours will be available to each
patient? This number is used in the budget preparation process as a target. Another term used more
recently to discuss the standard of care hours is
nurse/patient ratio. This is expressed as one nurse
to six patients (1:6), for example, and means that
there will be one nurse provided for every six
patients. California has legislation that mandates
this ratio for medical-surgical patients. Other states
are researching the outcomes of this legislative move
on patient care and resource use (Garretson, 2004).
NHPPD or nurse/patient ratios are calculated into
full-time equivalents (FTEs) to plan budgets. An
FTE is an accumulation of 2080 paid hours. It is not
a person or position. It may be four people being
paid for 502 hours each, or two people being paid
for 1040 hours each (Fig. 16-1). Rohloff states that
the majority of organizations deﬁne FTE by using 8
hours/day, 40 hours/week (8/40), and 2080 hours/
year. Also common practice is to hire many full-time
nurses at 12 hours/day, 36 hours/week (12/36), and

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

268

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 268

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Calculation
Average Daily Census (ADC) x NHPPD x 365 =
Required Productive Hours

Budget Definitions
■

30 x 8 x 365 = 87,600 productive hours
Productive Hours to FTEs
87600 / 1800 = 48.7 FTEs*

■

Productive FTE = 2080 paid hours – nonproductive hours
2080 – 280 = 1800 productive hours
*see Budget Definitions for further explanation of FTE

■

FIGURE 16-1 Nursing Hours per Patient Day (NHPPD).

1872 hours/year. Finance generally reﬂects these
nurses as 0.9 FTE (Rohloff, 2006).
The FTE calculates the paid hours until the FTE
hours of 2080 (or less if a 36-hour week) are
reached. These hours are paid but not necessarily
worked. Each accumulation of 2080 includes productive (actually worked) and nonproductive (holiday, vacation, sick) hours. The nonproductive
hours are also called paid time off. Nonproductive
hours become a significant budget calculation
because it is time that must have staff coverage, an
additional cost. Nonproductive calculations are
dependent on beneﬁt time off and vary from
employer to employer and personnel category. For
example, nonproductive time for a registered nurse
may include three weeks of vacation, four holidays,
and three education days. This is 28 nonproductive
days or 224 hours. Nonproductive time for budget
purposes is projected yearly during the planning
phase of budget preparation. It is based on the total
number of FTEs in each personnel category and
their respective nonproductive time based on beneﬁt polices. The salary costs are then calculated and
added to the budget.
The assessment phase also entails forecasting
and calculating the projected patient days for the
new budget period. Projected patient days are based
on historical trends, new programs approved for
implementation, changes in care delivery, and reimbursement levels. For example, last year’s actual
days in post partum were 5250. The new budget is
using these days and new patient days that reﬂect
the addition of two nurse midwives who have been
given privileges to care for and deliver patients. For
the new budget year, it is projected that 600 new
patient days will result from these new practition-

■

■

■

■

■

■

■
■

■
■

Accrual: An accounting method that records expenses
as they happen and revenue as it is earned. In nursing,
vacation time is accrued as the employee earns it. This
is usually recorded directly on an employee’s pay stub
in the pay period or month earned.
Bottom line: An expression that discusses the income
of an organization that is the result of revenue (money
earned) minus expenses: revenue - expenses ⫽ income
(bottom line)
Direct cost: Items that can be directly attributed to a
cost center and related to the service delivered. For
example, salaries of personnel and clerical supplies for a
particular patient care unit are direct costs.
Expense: This is the amount of money an organization spends to produce its services or products. For
example, wages are an expense to produce patient
care.
Fiscal year: A business accounting period. It is usually
12 months and is used to report fiscal activity of an
organization. This accounting period can start at any
month of the year and end 12 months later. For
example, it may begin November 1 and end the
following October 31, 20XX (the next year).
For-profit: An organization established with the
intention of making a profit to share with owners or
stockholders.
Full-time equivalent (FTE): An FTE is the equivalent
of the cost of one full-time employee working for
1 year. In general practice, this is calculated as
40 hours per week for 52 weeks per year, or a total
of 2080 paid hours per year. The 2080 hours include
productive (actually worked) and nonproductive time
(vacation, sick, holiday, education). More than one
employee may work to reach 2080 hours to make
up the FTE.
Indirect costs: These costs may not be directly related
to the cost center but are for the good of the
organization as a whole. For example, costs for an
advertisement for nursing positions and for
housekeeping of public areas are indirect costs.
Nonproductive: Time not worked but for which the
employee receives remuneration, e.g., pay for vacation
and sick days.
Not-for-profit: An organization that does not have
shareholders and reinvests its profits into the business.
Position control: A monitoring tool to compare actual
numbers of FTE employees with the number of FTEs
budgeted for the cost center.
Productive: Time actually worked by an employee.
Revenue: The amount of money the organization
receives for its services or product.

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 269

Budgeting

ers. The projected patient days for the new budget
year will be 5850 (5250 ⫹ 600).

Planning
The second step in the budgeting process is to
develop a plan. The length of time that the budget is
to cover must be determined, and this time frame is
the budget cycle. Budgets are usually developed to
cover a 12-month period, known as a ﬁscal year.
The ﬁscal year may or may not coincide with the
calendar year. A ﬁscal budget year is broken down
into quarters and typically further subdivided into
months.
Most budgets are created for a 1-year period;
when the budget period is over, the budget planning
process starts anew. Although a yearly budget is the
most common budget, a perpetual budget may be
utilized. A perpetual budget is a continual process
by which a budget is created each month so that a
continuous 12 months of future budget are always
available.
In the planning phase, the required personnel
and supply costs are calculated for the projected
patient days. This work is completed using a computerized spreadsheet application. The nurse manager begins the planning process by reviewing past
budget history to determine average supply costs
and the number of patient days or the average daily
census for the unit. The nurse manager needs to
determine if there will be any signiﬁcant changes
within the unit’s supplies, either quantity utilized
or if there will be any new supplies or an increase
in current supplies related to patient volume, acuity,
or diagnosis/procedure speciﬁc care. For example, a
surgeon has joined the staff and will be performing
a highly specialized robotic procedure. The surgeon
is projected to perform 1500 procedures per year.
The addition of this patient population will thereby:
(1) signiﬁcantly increase the patient days and the
average daily census that should be budgeted for the
unit, (2) increase the acuity of the patients cared for
by the nursing staff, and (3) result in the nurse
manager ordering high-cost specialty supplies to
care for this patient population. Table 16-1 presents
the remaining activities in the planning phase.
These activities take the budget plan through its
review and approval process. The budget process
begins with the organization setting a direction and
ends with implementation. This time frame is usu-

269

ally about 3 months. The activities from budget
spreadsheet to ﬁnal budget listed in Table 16-1 are
the mechanics and review process of a budget.
Usually the budget parameters are given to the manager as a spreadsheet application, which is the
working document for the manager’s cost center.
The budget is presented to the reviewers; when it
meets the operating standards set in the planning
phase by revenue and expenses, it goes forward to
the board of trustees for the last review. After
action is taken by the board, the budget is returned
to the manager for implementation.

Implementation
The third step is to implement the budget. Prior to
implementing the budget, the nurse manager
should thoroughly review the ﬁnal budget and be
certain that the budget is fully understood. The
nurse manager will typically meet with her direct
supervisor and a member of the ﬁnance department
to generate the budget for the ﬁscal year. Being
actively involved in the process allows the nurse
manager to communicate information about their
unit while learning the facility budget creation,
approval, and implementation process. A nurse
manager who is inexperienced in the area of budgeting should carefully review the budget for her
area and ensure that a thorough review of the facility budget process is provided in order to establish a
solid understanding of budgeting. The nurse manager should take the initiative to inquire about areas
of the budget about which she or her staff members
have questions.
During the implementation step of the budget
process, the nurse manager must be actively
involved in monitoring and analyzing budget activity to remain within the budgeted parameters and
to avoid inadequate or excess funds at the end of the
budget period. The nurse manager should review
the approved budget for the ﬁscal year with the unit
staff. It is especially important for the nurse manager to explain any changes from the previous
year’s budget. The staff needs to understand projected changes in staffing, patient population, and
supply usage. The more the staff understands the
budgetary goals and the plans to carry out those
goals, the more likely the goal will be attained.
The manager generally is accountable for deviations in the department’s budget. Some deviation

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

270

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 270

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

TABLE 16-1

Budget Preparation Process
ACTIVITY

RESPONSIBILITY

Organization

Organizational Plans

Senior Management

Direction

Objectives for Fiscal Year

Senior Management

Preparation
Care Standard/NHPPD
Nurse/Patient Ratio
Patient Days by Unit
Current Position Control
Projected Patient Days
New Programs
Supply Projections
Budget Spreadsheet
Current Data to Spreadsheet
Presentation of Budget Draft
Refine Budget Document
Budget Presentation to Finance
Budget Review
Organization Budget to Board
Final Budget to Manager

Unit/Dept. Manager
Policy/Historical
Legislation
Finance/Budget Manager
Human Resources
Finance/Budget Manager
Senior Management
Finance/Budget Manager
Finance/Budget Manager
Unit/Dept. Manager
Director/CNO
Manager
Manager &/or CNO
Finance/Budget Manager
CFO/CNO
CFO/CNO

Implementation of budget for new fiscal year

Unit/Dept. Manager

Ongoing review of budget for new fiscal year

Manager, CNO, finance

A

B
Planning & Assessment

C
Implementation
D
Evaluation
CFO ⫽ Chief Financial Officer
CNO ⫽ Chief Nursing Officer

from the proposed budget can be anticipated, but
large deviations must be examined for possible
causes, and corrective action must be taken. Box
16-2 lists the rules of budgeting that managers live
by. These rules or guidelines are the basic underpinnings that most organizations believe to be
essential for sound ﬁscal responsibility. Budgets
should be prepared, explained, and monitored by
the same person who will be accountable for compliance with the budget. This person understands
the workings of this budget best. This also means
that expenses are charged to the cost center (e.g.,
patient unit) that incurred them (spent the money)
and are under the control of the manager. Within

operating budgets for a cost center there are salary,
supply, and equipment dollars. These dollars can be
used only in these designated areas and cannot be
carried over to the next budget year if not spent.
Changes from the budget as planned are called variance and must be explained to the department head
and have steps taken to correct them.

Evaluation
The fourth step is evaluation. The budget should be
reviewed regularly to determine the level of adherence to the budgeted ﬁgures. The ﬁscal budget
should be reviewed as often as daily when the newly

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 271

Budgeting

271

Box 16-2

TYPES OF BUDGETS

Rules of Budgeting

The operating budget is a combination of the revenue and expense budget. It is a forecast of the revenue that is expected to be earned during the
deﬁned budget period and the expenses incurred to
earn the revenue during the same period. The personnel costs are a signiﬁcant part of this budget.
This budget is a plan for the unit’s or organization’s
daily operating revenue and expenses. It includes
the workload budget (FTEs); units of service, such
as patients days or visits; and expense budgets with
personnel costs, supplies, equipment, and overhead.
A program budget contains all the items that are
a cost in a particular care delivery program. This
type of budgeting is frequently completed for new
programs and expansions of existing programs of
care or services. This is usually completed in the
early phases of ﬁscal planning and budget preparation. If the new program is approved for implementation during the budget review process, then its
budget becomes part of the operating budget.
Capital budgets summarize the anticipated purchases for the ﬁscal year and usually have a dollar
minimum cost to be included (e.g. ⬎ $300). The life
span of equipment projected during this phase of
budget planning is usually longer than 3 or more
years. The capital budget is separate from the everyday operating budget, and the funds for these purchases are usually released by the finance
department when available for approved purchases.
The cash budget predicts expected revenue and
payments for resource or cash outﬂow. An example
of cash outﬂow is the payment of salaries for work
performed. This budget, is monitored carefully to
ensure adequate cash to pay bills in a timely manner and reduce the necessity to borrow funds to pay
bills.

■
■
■
■
■
■

Manager accountable for budget, must prepare budget
Expenses charged to cost center that spent the money
Expenses under control of manager
Unspent budgeted funds do not carry over to next
fiscal year
Funds do not transfer between salary, supplies, or
capital equipment money
Variance explanation also requires a corrective plan of
action

approved budget is implemented. If variances from
the approved projected budget are present, the nurse
manager must react quickly by examining the
budget closely. The nurse manager should determine what areas within the budget are either above
or below the projected budgeted amount. This is
accomplished by comparing the projected budgeted
amount with the actual amount spent. Modiﬁcations in spending should be made throughout the
budget period to accommodate for any deviation,
and corrective measures should be put in place to
bring the year-to-date total into the projected targeted amount. The budget process is continual and
cyclical in nature. As the evaluation step is being
completed, the nurse manager has begun to assess
any deviations from the budget, thereby beginning
the cycle once again (Fig. 16-2).

Steps in the
Budget Process

Planning

Evaluation

Assessment

Imp
lementation

FIGURE 16-2 Steps in the budget process.

Supply Budget
Supply budget predicts the use of medical-surgical
supply costs based on predicted case mix of patients
for the upcoming ﬁscal year. The supply budget
includes the expense of all supplies that are utilized
on the nursing unit to provide patient care. Supplies
are the area of the budget in which managers must
be actively involved and can make adjustments
to remain within the budget. The supply budget
reﬂects expenses that change in response to the

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

272

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 272

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

volume of service, above or below the budgeted census, and changes in acuity, requiring more, fewer, or
completely different supplies. Controlling the number of supplies used in excess or in a wasteful manner is the responsibility of the nurse manager. This
is not an easy task; it requires involvement of all
staff members at all levels.
Nurse managers must be thoroughly knowledgeable of the supplies that are stocked on their unit,
the amount that each supply costs, and the volume
of each supply that is used. Each health-care organization will have a different system to ensure that
supplies are available for use as well as for tracking
the amount used. The nurse manager needs to control the amount of supplies that are available in her
department as well as how these supplies are used.
Supplies should be researched to determine their
usefulness. Ask the question: is this supply being
utilized in the intended manner? Examine supplies
that are frequently used and that result in highvolume usage, therefore high cost. Is there a way to
decrease the amount of a supply that is used without
affecting the quality of care? For example, if the
manufacturer recommends applying one incontinence pad to a bed, and an employee applies four
incontinence pads, it results in an unnecessary
expense that can be prevented or controlled. Perhaps
buying one pad of a larger size is cheaper than using
two to four pads of a smaller, cheaper vendor. Look
at prepackaged supplies. As with many convenience
items, these can come with a higher price tag. If
prepackaged supplies are being utilized, is every supply item that is included in the package being used?
If not, compare cost with convenience; does the
expense of the prepackaged supply outweigh the
convenience?
Monitoring the supply process within the department must be an ongoing effort. This is not a singleperson effort. The nurse manager must educate
employees on the importance of utilizing supplies
efficiently and encourage them to become actively
involved in this cost-saving effort.

THE NURSE MANAGER’S
ROLE IN BUDGETING

not sought or valued. Today, health-care organizations have recognized the importance of nursing
involvement in the budget process. Nursing budgets
generally encompass the most personnel expenses
and are responsible for the largest share of the total
overall expenses in health-care organizations. It is
imperative that nurse managers gain expertise in
ﬁscal planning and the budget process.
Budgeting is a challenging managerial task because it involves both planning and control functions. A nurse manager must perfect the ability to
balance planning skills with control skills. Planning
requires an innovative approach to the situation,
whereas control can be perceived as restrictive or
essentially negative and conservative in nature. In
order for a nurse manager to utilize these skills successfully, he must be able to bring balance innovative and conservative view points. A nurse manager
could be tempted to request the latest and greatest
supplies, furniture, equipment, or increased staffing
levels as part of the ﬁscal planning process for the
next ﬁscal budget. The nurse manager must prioritize what is essential for his unit’s functioning in
order to deliver high-quality patient care. The nurse
manager must ask for what is really necessary or
utilize his planning skills while balancing this with
control functions or not asking for what would be
above what is necessary. This balance entails the
ability to look forward or forecast future activities
and anticipate what may be needed as well as the
ability to look to the past to reﬂect upon what has
already occurred. The manager needs to model scenarios that can change the forecasted numbers.
What if scenarios offer a snapshot of what may
happen if change occurs in the projected patient
days, the case mix index, the availability of staff, or
reduction in services offered. Forecasting is the
selection of the scenario that ﬁts the environment
best. Success in budgeting requires thoughtful and
deliberate forecasting along with the balancing act
of planning and controlling. The staff needs to
understand how the budget was planned and its
role in using the resources wisely to reach successful outcomes for the patients and the organization.

VARIANCE ANALYSIS
Historically, nursing management played a limited
role in ﬁscal planning within health-care organizations. The department of nursing was considered to
be non—income-producing; therefore, input was

After comparing the budget report, the approved
budgeted ﬁgure with the actual amount spent, the
manager determines if expenses are within, over, or

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 273

Budgeting

273

Budget Approaches
Fixed budget assumes that although there are variations
in revenue and expenses through the budget period, they
will balance out over time. This is a difficult budget to
manage if forecasting of revenue and expenses is not on
target. In spite of good planning, the fiscal environment
changes many times during the budget year, and
balancing over time may not occur without deliberate
changes to the revenue and expenses.
Flexible budget is one that is adjusted for changes in
the volume of services delivered. This is a reasonable
approach that matches revenue and expenses as volume
changes, allows for changes in the budget for volume
increases, and demands reduction in expenses when
volume decreases.
Zero-based budget starts with a blank sheet of paper,
and every expense must be justified by the predicted
objectives of the program. This type of budget is most
often used for new services. This is the most laborintensive approach to budgeting, but it encourages
cost-avoidance activities.
As part of working with and comparing budgets, a
manager will review periodic budget reports, generally
on a monthly basis. As part of this monthly budget
review, the manager will compare actual expenditures
for the month with the approved budgeted amount; the
year-to-date budget status is also reviewed at this time.
Reviewing the outcome of the month’s budget allows
the nurse manager to identify areas that occur outside
of the budget’s parameters, either above or below the
budget amount, and put corrective measures into place
in a timely fashion. A monthly review encourages the
nurse manager to utilize the budget as a daily
management tool, thereby increasing knowledge and
comfort level while working within the budget.
Nurse managers may encounter some difficulty with
fiscal planning and the budget process. This may occur
because the nurse manager has had little formal
education or training in this area. As with any learned
skill, practice is essential. Skills will improve with ongoing
experience. In an effort to prepare nurses to be involved
in the budget process, fiscal planning is included in
nursing curricula and in management preparation
courses.

under the budgeted amount. A deviation from the
actual budgeted amount is deﬁned as a variance.
Some common reasons for variances are higher- or
lower-than-budgeted patient average daily census,
higher or lower patient acuity, and staff replacement

chapter star:

“As a new nurse manager, my biggest challenge was the
planning and implementation of my first budget. I had
excellent support from my new peers, director and
budget manager in the assessment and planning phase
of the budget. However, the implementation and
responsibility to explain any variances from the budget
frightened me. I was a firm believer in staff participation
and I decided to involve them in the planning phase of
the budget. This did require a few education sessions to
explain budget terms like full time equivalents (FTEs),
NHPPD and others.
“In each of these sessions, we also discussed appropriate use of supplies and I provided examples of products most commonly used. As the planning process
proceeded, the staff and I reviewed opportunities to
practice with the budget and steps that could be taken
if we exceeded the hours of care planned or supply
overages. I expected from this process that staff members would understand how a budget was created
and implemented and would share responsibility to
be accountable for the resources we used. Imagine
my surprise when early in the budget year staff members
approached me with ideas about how to stay within
budget parameters when the average patient census
decreased on a day-to-day basis.”
Quoted from a new nurse manager working at an acute
care hospital

or overtime. Variances from the actual budgeted
amount (above or below the budgeted amount)
should be identiﬁed and closely examined and
investigated by the manager to determine the cause
of the variance. Identiﬁed variances can serve as signals in future months to steer the manager away
from the cause of the variance. At this point, the
manager will do a gap analysis to determine what
caused the difference from the budget projections.
In other words, the manager will investigate to ﬁnd
an explanation for the gap between planned and
actual. An increase in patient days might require
more staff and may explain why the total NHPPDs
are over budget.
In planning a budget, past variances should be
examined to determine any patterns of usage or any
areas in which the budget should be adjusted.
Figure 16-3 presents some examples of worked
FTEs, ﬂexed-budget worked FTEs, and the result-

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

274

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 274

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Cost
Center
Description
ICU

Actual
Worked
FTEs

Flexed
Budget
Worked
FTEs

Worked
FTE
Variance

37.25

35.41

1.84

Actual
Paid
FTEs

Flexed
Budget
Paid
FTEs

44.80

40.03

Paid
FTE
Variance
4.77

ED

34.39

33.42

0.97

40.52

37.78

2.74

4 North

34.81

33.79

1.02

40.04

38.28

1.76

3 North

34.25

32.26

1.99

38.93

36.45

2.48

1 North

13.44

13.15

0.29

15.36

14.75

0.61

1 South

42.42

43.85

-1.43

48.28

49.63

-1.35

Respiratory

15.33

15.08

0.25

17.55

16.71

0.84

Administration

1.75

1.73

0.02

2.04

1.92

0.12

ER Holds

0.76

0.87

-0.11

0.76

0.94

-0.18

EKG Lab

5.94

6.17

-0.23

6.59

6.86

-0.27

Nursing Admin

7.15

8.00

-0.85

8.18

8.90

-0.72

227.49

223.73

3.76

263.05

252.25

10.80

FIGURE 16-3 PSH Hospital salary expense summary.

ing variance. The manager in today’s environment
must explain why this variance occurred and what
corrective action steps will be taken to bring the
budget back on target. A solution might be beyond
the manager’s jurisdiction and may require a review
group for re-adjusting.
Variances are experienced in three ways: price,
outputs, or inputs. A price variance occurs when
the price paid for the resource is different than what
was budgeted. An example from a nursing budget is
when an agency nurse is used for staffing with the
resulting dollar per hour cost being higher. Output
variances may be higher or lower than planned
amounts and could be more or fewer patient days
delivered or change up or down in planned surgical
cases. The input variance would entail different
resource use than the budget plan. This might be
that the budgeted NHPPD was eight NHPPDs and
the actual was 10 NHPPDs. Actual NHPPDs
become FTEs and salary expense. Figure 16-3 illustrates actual worked FTEs and ﬂexed-budget FTEs.
The ﬂexed budget responds to the difference in
required FTEs and resulting variance.
Nurse managers control expenditures of a major
portion of institutional resources. Those resources
can be utilized most effectively when the manager

takes an active role in preparing and administering
the budget. The budget should be a perpetual cycle
of examining what has been spent, determining
variances within the budget, analyzing causes of
variances, and making modiﬁcations to correct the
causes of the variances.

Cost Containment
Cost containment refers to effective and efficient
delivery of services while generating needed revenues for continued organizational productivity.
The goal is to deliver the services with high quality
at the lowest possible cost. Cost containment is the
responsibility of every health-care provider. The
viability of health-care organizations today depends
on their ability to use their ﬁscal resources wisely.
“In a budget, expenses are classiﬁed as ﬁxed or
variable and either controllable or noncontrollable”
(Marquis & Houston, 2006, p. 217). Fixed expenses
do not vary with volume, whereas variable expenses
will increase or decrease based on volume. Fixed
expenses include a building’s mortgage payment and
the payroll of salary employees. Variable expenses

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 275

Budgeting

Practice Proof 16-1
Article: Struggling to find a balance: The paradox
between caring & economics
Author: Turkel, M.C. Source Nursing Administration
Quarterly, 2001, 26(1), 67–82.
[NOTE: Article is available as full text via libraries that
have subscriptions to CINAHL or ProQuest.]
This research study focused on the nurse-patient relationship within a framework of benefit and cost parameters
from the perspective of patients, nurses, and administrators. The author used grounded theory techniques to
guide the data collection and to accommodate the complexity of the nurse-patient relationship. A 250-bed forprofit hospital was selected for the study. The participants
were 10 patients, 10 nurses, and 8 administrators.
The results demonstrated that nurses are struggling
to find a balance between caring and fewer dollars.
Administrators in the study viewed “caring . . . as the cost
of doing things right and . . .the cost of providing quality”
(p.78). Patients in the study feared that a reduction in
nurses might occur to save money and expressed that
“care” was why they come to a hospital. The study
reinforces the idea that nurses and management must
work creatively together to maintain the caring
environment in fiscally challenged times.
1. This study focused on the nurse-patient caring relationship within the context of cost and benefits as
viewed by nurses, patients, and administrators. Did
you find any common themes discussed by these
participants.
2. What implications for nursing practice did the author
present?

Practice to Strive For 16-1
Best Budget Practices

•
•
•
•

Based on mission and strategic plan
Use conservative projections
Accurate budget targets
Monitoring variances and corrective action plans
Clark (2005)

might include supply costs and the payroll of hourly
employees. Controllable expenses are those that can
be managed or controlled. Controllable expenses

275

include the number of employees working each shift
or NHPPD. Uncontrollable expenses, such as equipment depreciation and supplies that are necessary to
deliver care, cannot be managed or controlled.
In today’s health-care market, the increasing
costs of health-care delivery have resulted in a
strained health-care system. It is essential for healthcare organizations to operate at the highest level of
efficiency and to be acutely aware of cost containment. Nurse managers need to become increasingly
aware of the need for cost containment. The old
“This is how we have always done it” will not work
in today’s health-care market. Cost containment
does not have to be thought of in negative terms.
It does not have to mean a deﬁciency of care;
think of it as doing things differently while delivering the same high quality of care, to save money
or, even better, so as not to waste money. See
Figure 16-4.

All Good Things...
The budget as a plan and management control tool
is a “guesstimate” at best. The historical trends,
assessment of the environmental changes, projected
patient days, and case mix index used to build the
budget are not a perfect science. Hence, the management of the budget during its ﬁscal year is an
ongoing activity. Understanding that resources are
limited and that each of us is accountable for what
we “consume” to provide our product of patient
care is a key point for all providers in the healthcare system.
Creativity and innovation are necessary to
deliver our product of patient care within the ﬁscal
limitations of our resources. Whether it’s our own
personal budget or that of the organization we work
for, resources are ﬁnite and as such must always be
monitored and carefully utilized. Dashboards as a
management tool provide timely opportunities to
recoup budget variances and plan new strategies to
avoid them in the future.
The manager may be the facilitator and monitor
of budget compliance, but all of us are the stewards
of the ﬁnancial resources available to provide our
product, patient care.

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

276

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 276

Skills for Being an Effective Manager
Date 3/21/200X

Budgeted Census

30

Budgeted NHPPD

Actual Census

24

Actual NHPPD

Budgeted Case
Mix Index

1.31

Budgeted Average
LOS

3.6

Actual Case
Mix Index

1.31

Actual Average
LOS

3.7

$1256

Actual Supplies

$1160

Budgeted Supplies

8 hrs x 30 = 240
260 hrs

Unusual Events: None in previous 24 hours
The newest tool to assist nurse managers and staff live within the budget plan
and help in monitoring costs and variances is commonly called a Dashboard.
In concept it presents information in one quick look, much like a car
dashboard but instead of gas gauges, oil levels and so on, it has Daily
Census, Nursing Hours Per Patient Day, Length of Stay, case mix and
supplies. It also may have an area to comment on unusual events of the past
24 hours, such as a unit census of 120% or a weather related call-out rate.
This tool facilitates problem solving early in the biweekly payroll and supply
cycle and gives the manager and staff the opportunity to avoid future
variances in the same area.

Let’s Talk
1. Think of a manager you have worked with in a
recent job. How did the manager involve the staff
in planning the budget? How would you like to
have been involved?
2. This past week your unit has experienced a
signiﬁcant decrease in census. Knowing what
the NHPPD standard is for your unit, how
would you expect your manager to respond
to this change?

NCLEX Questions
1. Which of the following is a leadership role in

ﬁscal planning?:
A. Coordinates the monitoring aspects of budget
control
B. Accurately assesses personnel needs using
agreed-on standards or an established patient
classiﬁcation system
C. Assesses the internal and external environment of the organization in forecasting to
identify driving forces and barriers to ﬁscal
planning
D. Is visionary in identifying short- and longterm unit ﬁscal needs

FIGURE 16-4 Dashboard calculation.

2. All department heads are required to rejustify

their ﬁscal needs annually during the budget
cycle. Budget allocations are made accordingly.
This is a description of:
A. Incremental budgeting
B. Perpetual budgeting
C. Zero-based budgeting
D. Capital budget
3. When over budget, you should accommodate by:

A. Spending less in another area
B. Closely monitoring and managing future
expenses
C. Examining budget variances to determine the
causes of excess spending
D. All of the above
4. If unbudgeted money is spent:

A. Money that was not budgeted has been
expended
B. There is an inﬁnite supply of money that can
be spent
C. The category is over the projected budget
D. A and C
5. The nurse manager has the following responsi-

bility for the budget process:
A. Should have a great deal of input into what is
included in the unit budget
B. Should be an inactive participant in the unit
budget process

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 277

Budgeting

C. Should receive budget reports on a
bimonthly basis
D. Should not be held accountable for the
ﬁnancial outcomes of the budget
6. All of the following are true about health care

except:
A. Health care is a business with limited ﬁnancial resources
B. Nurses are ﬁnding themselves delivering
care in an environment where the cost of
health care is not an issue
C. Health care is undergoing a transformation
that embraces business values while continuing to value the concept of caring
D. The costs of health care are closely monitored
7. The goal of ﬁscal planning is:

A. To control spending across the board
B. To create a budget that will meet the needs
of the nurse manager and the unit
C. To plan for only controllable factors
D. To implement a budget that does not require
monitoring
8. The term “cost containment” means:

A. Save money by not delivering all necessary
services
B. The health-care facility puts expenses back
on the insurance companies and patients
C. Delivery of effective and efficient healthcare services while generating needed revenues
D. Utilizing an excessive amount of supplies to
deliver care
9. A tool that assists nurse managers to stay

within the budget is called a dashboard. What
is monitored by using the dashboard tool?:
A. Daily census
B. Nursing hours per patient day
C. Length of stay
D. All of the above
10. During the assessment phase of strategic

planning:

277

A. The ﬁnance department should create this
ﬁscal budget based solely on last year’s
budget
B. The department should be assessed to
determine what should be included in the
budget in order to meet the organizational
goals
C. The standard of care hours or nursing hours
per patient day should be validated
D. B and C
REFERENCES
Carruth, A.K., Carruth, P.J., & Noto, E.C. (2000). Nurse managers ﬂex their budgetary might. Nursing Management, 31(2),
16–17.
Clark, J.J. (2005). Improving hospital budgeting and accountability: A best approach. Healthcare Financial Management,
59(7), 78–83.
Garretson, S. (2004). Nurse to patient ratios in American health
care. Nursing Standard, 15(19), 33–37.
Marquis, B.L., & Houston, C.J. (2006) Leadership roles and management functions in Nursing: Theory and application.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Rohloff, R.M. (2006). Full-time equivalents: What needs to be
assessed to meet patient care and create realistic budgets.
Nurse Leader, 4(11), 49–54.
Turkel, M.C. (2001). Struggling to ﬁnd a balance: The paradox
between caring and economics. Nursing Administration
Quarterly, 26(1), 67–82.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Brady, D.J., Cornett, E., & DeLetter, M. (1998). Cost reduction:
What a staff nurse can do. Nursing Economic$, 16(5), 273–274,
276.
Brown, B. (1999). How to develop a unit personnel budget.
Nursing Management, 30(6), 34–35.
Dowless, R.M. (1997). Using activity-based costing to guide
strategic decision making. Healthcare Financial Management,
51(6), 87–90.
Eckhart, J. (1993). Costing out nursing services: Examining the
research. NursingEconomic$, 11(2), 91–98.
Finkler, S.A. (2001). Budgeting concepts for nurse managers.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Finkler, S.A. (2004). Evidence-based ﬁnancial management:
What are we waiting for? Research in Healthcare Financial
Management, 9(1), 1–3.
Schmidt, D.Y. (1999). Financial and operational skills for
nurse managers. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 23(4),
16–28.

16Jones Leadership(F)-ch 16

1/14/07

3:48 PM

Page 278

This page has been left intentionally blank.

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 279

chapter
17
Staffing and Scheduling
BARBARA SHELDEN CZERWINSKI, PHD, RN, CNAA, BC, FAAN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“No system can endure that does not march.”
Florence Nightingale (Ulrich, 1992)

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■

Describe staffing as a process with a relationship to scheduling.
Describe various care delivery models and staffing and
scheduling systems utilized by nursing services.

279

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

280

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 280

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

T

he nurse manager’s staffing and scheduling
goals are to assure the presence of adequate, responsible, qualiﬁed, and competent personnel who will
provide quality nursing care services in a timely
manner and consistent with the Principles for
Nurse Staffing of the American Nurses Association
(ANA) (1999). Additional goals in staffing and
scheduling include sustaining congruence with the
mission, vision, values, philosophy, and strategic
plan of the organization and its nursing services and
maintaining compliance with regulatory guidelines.
Overarching objectives in providing nursing care
services include patient safety and patient satisfaction. This chapter will discuss the staffing process
with relationship to staffing plan, care delivery
models, staffing and scheduling systems, and scheduling outcomes.

Background
The late 1990s brought with them a nursing workforce shortage, which has had a signiﬁcant effect on
nursing care delivery systems. A widespread nursing shortage in the United States translated into
demanding and less attractive work environments
(Kimball & O’Neill, 2002). Compounding the nursing workforce shortage were the alarming ﬁndings
by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) in 2000, 2001,
and 2004. Based on the IOM quality chasm trilogy
series, which provided strong evidence for the need
for safer patient care environments in the healthcare delivery system, a redesign of health-care processes became imperative (IOM, 2000, 2001, 2004).
To redesign health-care processes, local, state, consumer, professional, and regulatory organizations
joined to seek solutions. The redesign would
include plans regarding nurse staffing.
The IOM reports identiﬁed nursing as a pillar of
quality and patient safety that must be strengthened
to keep patients safe and retain nurses. Transformation of the work environment of nurses requires
improving staffing adequacy, administrative support, and good nurse-physician relations (IOM,
2004). Staffing and resource adequacy are systemcentered measurements advocated by the National
Quality Forum (NQF) in conjunction with other
nurse-sensitive performance measures to achieve an
environment of safety (Kurtzman & Kizer, 2005).

NQF is a unique public-private partnership of more
than 170 organizations, including the ANA. Examples of measurable nursing-sensitive outcomes are
satisfaction, burnout, intent to leave, and costs.
Examples of patient-sensitive outcomes affected by
nursing care are mortality, failure to rescue, complications, satisfaction, and costs. Nurse staffing inﬂuences nursing and patient-sensitive outcomes.

Staffing
In 1999, the ANA published Principles for Nurse
Staffing, which emphasized the nursing work environment to provide safe patient care. Subsequently,
the ANA advocated a work environment that supports nurses in providing the best possible patient
care by budgeting enough positions, administrative support, good nurse-physician relations, career
advancement options, work ﬂexibility, and personal
choice in scheduling (ANA, 1999).
Staffing, according to the Center for American
Nurses (The American Nurse, 2006), refers to job
assignments. Job assignments include the following:
the volume of work assigned to individuals, the professional skills required for particular job assignments, the duration of experience in a particular job
category, and work schedules.
The process of staffing begins with an assessment of the current staffing situation. The assessment includes the qualiﬁcations and competence of
the staff available (ANA, 2004). The next step is to
formulate a plan to meet future needs. The staffing
process culminates with a schedule (organized
plan) of personnel to provide patient care services.
Scheduling variables are deﬁned as:
1. The number of patients, complexity of patient

condition, and nursing care required.
2. The physical environment in which nursing

care is to be provided.
3. The nursing staff members’ competency lev-

els, qualiﬁcations, skill range, knowledge or
ability, experience level.
4. The level of supervision required.
5. Availability of nursing staff members for the
assignment of responsibilities.
Appropriate allocation of nursing staff for
patient-focused care (American Association of
Colleges of Nursing [AACN]-Critical Care, 2001) or

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 281

Staffing and Scheduling

patient-centered and essential patient safe care
(Bleich & Hewlett, 2004) is the desired goal of nursing staffing levels.
The ANA Principles for Nurse Staffing (1999)
offer standards to incorporate and balance the
needs of patients, nurses, and organizations committed to positive patient outcomes. The principles
recognize that providing nursing care services can
be multivariate and complex. The ANCC Magnet
Recognition Program (2004) is an example of a
quality recognition organization that has incorporated the ANA Principles for Nurse Staffing as a program foundation.
The ANA patient care unit-related principle of
“appropriate staffing levels for a patient care unit
reﬂect analysis of individual and aggregate patient
needs” (ANA, 1999) is aligned with current research ﬁndings. Appropriate staffing concentrates
on a higher proportion of patient care hours provided by registered nurses as compared with patient
care provided by licensed practical nurses or unlicensed personnel for better patient outcomes. An
appropriate staffing system incorporates patient
needs, staff member skill sets, and staff mixes
(ANCC, 2004). The 2004 University HealthSystem
Consortium Nursing Work Environment Benchmarking Survey (2005) of 59 academic medical centers
found better patient outcomes and improved nurse
satisfaction when registered nurses deliver a higher
proportion of care.
Another nursing quality recognition program,
the Texas Nurses Association Nurse-Friendly
Hospital Criteria (TNA, 2005), has incorporated
the ANA principle of staff-related “clinical support
from experienced RNs should be readily available to
those RNs with less proﬁciency” (ANA, 1999).
TNA Nurse-Friendly Hospital Criteria are 12 essential elements identiﬁed as an ideal practice environment for nurses. One of the essential elements is
“nurse orientation.” The facility must demonstrate
that it has a nurse-speciﬁc orientation program that
considers the education, experience, and identiﬁed
strengths and weaknesses of the nurse being oriented (TNA, 2005).
The ANCC Magnet Recognition Program
(2004), a quality-focused organization, advocates
that the organization has a function and productive
system of shared decision making among the nursing staff members. An example of a shared decisionmaking process is a decentralized nurse staffing and
scheduling system that provides staffing throughout

281

Practice Proof 17-1
A University HealthSystem Consortium study consisted of
eight performance issues that identified staffing targets
using benchmark data (UHC, 2005). The measures used
were as follows: worked hours at or near organization
target, reduction in vacancy and turnover, reduction in
agency use, and increased nurse satisfaction. Evidence
suggests that better patient outcomes result when a
higher proportion of care hours are provided by registered nurses as compared with care provided by
licensed practical nurses or nursing assistants. Inadequate staffing also leads to nurse dissatisfaction,
burnout, and turnover (Gallant & Lanning 2001).
Research suggests that patient safety is affected not
only by nurse staffing levels but also by nurses’ education
levels (Aiken, et al., 2002). The UHC study looked at these
elements:
1. How staffing effectiveness is monitored and reported
2. The retention and recruitment plans of Human
Resources to decrease turnover and vacancy rates
3. The monitoring system in place for nurses working
over 60 hours per week and the amount of overtime
worked
4. How the centralized scheduling office obtains a broad
overview of staffing needs
5. The type of supplemental staffing or flex pools used to
reduce or eliminate agency use and manage behindthe-scenes staffing work (recordkeeping, calls for time
off, etc.)
Question: what factors discussed in this chapter might
affect staffing?

the nursing operations of the organization. The
organization’s personnel policies and programs
need to reﬂect minimal rotating shifts and creative
and ﬂexible staffing models. The staffing system
adapts and ﬂexes internal and external factors such
as staff illness, shift changes in workload, and other
uncontrollable variables. Trending data are to be
used to formulate the staffing plan and to acquire
necessary resources to make staffing adjustments in
response to ﬂuctuating patient workload and acuity
(e.g., agency staff, ﬂoat pool staff, overtime).
In contrast to appropriate staffing is inadequate
staffing. Inadequate staffing came to the forefront
of the nursing profession in the early 21st century
with such national published and publicized reports
as the IOM (2000, 2001, and 2004). In response to
the nursing shortage, nurse working condition
studies reported nurses’ dissatisfaction with inadequate staffing conditions (Unruh, 2005). For exam-

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

282

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 282

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

STAFFING PLAN
Healthcare Setting
Care Delivery Models
Patient Acuity
Nursing Staff

SCHEDULING &
STAFFING SYSTEMS
Centralized
Decentralized
Mixed

SCHEDULING
OUTCOMES
Daily Staffing
Patient Outcomes
Nursing Workloads
©B.S. Czerwinkski

FIGURE 17-1 Staffing process.

ple, inadequate staffing conditions are reported in
acute-care (Aiken et. al., 2002) and long-stay nursing home (Horn et. al., 2005) studies as well as in
national nursing (Stanton & Rutherford, 2004) and
health-care standardization organization (JCAHO,
2004) studies.
The goal of nursing care is to provide patientcentered and essential patient-safe care (Bleich &
Hewlett, 2004). The purpose of nurse staffing is to
ensure patient care needs are met. The staffing process starts with a staffing plan and ends with positive patient outcomes and acceptable nursing
workloads (Fig. 17-1).

STAFFING PROCESS
The staffing process is the linear incorporation of
the staffing plan, the scheduling and staffing system, and the scheduling outcomes into a systematic
ﬂowing process. The following discussion describes
the various components of each step of the process,
beginning with the staffing plan.

Staffing Plan
The staffing plan consists of four different elements
that must be addressed: the health-care setting, care
delivery model, patient acuity, and nursing staff.
They are then incorporated into the next step in
the process, the scheduling and staffing system. A
staffing plan can also be referred to as the staffing
matrix.
Health-Care Setting

The health-care setting is where the patient care
services are provided. It is the ﬁrst consideration in
developing the staffing plan. Geographical location
and architectural design of the health-care facility
will determine the accessibility of the nursing staff
to the patient, which has ramiﬁcations regarding
the work allocation and provision of the patient
care services. Speciﬁc examples in the development
of the staffing plan are the consideration of the location of the patient care supplies in relation to the
point-of-use at the bedside and the walking distances between the patient bedside and the nursing
station. The impact of the design of the health-care
setting on system metrics was addressed by Gabow
et. al. (2005). This study illustrated that nursing
turnover and vacancy rates are inﬂuenced by efficiency, workforce development, and architectural
effects on the work environment.
Care Delivery Models

Care delivery models, also referred to as nursing care
delivery systems or patient care delivery models, can
vary from one nursing unit to another, depending on
the type of patients, the care requirements, and
available resources. The focus of care delivery models is on the patient and how nursing care services
are developed and provided. Nurse clinical decision
making, work allocation (workload), communication, and management are included in care delivery
models. The choice of model used is dependent
on these factors, combined with the differing social
and economic forces (Tiedeman & Lookinland,
2004). A care delivery model needs to address four
components:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Patient needs
Patient population demographics
Number of nursing staff members
Ratio of nurses serving various roles and levels (ANCC Magnet, 2004, p. 46).

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 283

Staffing and Scheduling

Care delivery models are classiﬁed into three
main types: traditional, nontraditional, and emerging.
Traditional nursing care models are referred to
as total patient care, functional, team, and primary
nursing. Tiedeman and Lookinland (2004) found
studies of traditional models of care delivery lacked
the necessary methodological rigor. They were not
able to draw conclusions about the impact of the
model of care delivery on quality of care, cost, and
satisfaction. Subsequently, nontraditional models of
care delivery have been developed to address the
changing needs of health care.
Nontraditional models of care delivery came
about during the 1990s managed-care era. They
reduced the professional staff in the skill mix and
became a major cost-saving strategy in many organizations (Hall, 1998). Nontraditional models
reviewed by Lookinland, Tiedeman, and Crosson
(2005) used various combinations or skill mix of
licensed nurses (registered nurses and licensed
vocational nurses) and unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP). They found weak research evidence
for the nontraditional models. They recommended
that future studies must be rigorous and include
nursing-sensitive outcomes such as nursing productivity; patient, staff, and physician satisfaction; and
cost and quality indicators to allow comparisons
across studies (Lookinland, Tiedeman, & Crosson,
2005, p. 79)
The traditional and nontraditional models are
composed of division of labor, efficient use of time
to perform nursing care tasks, cost, and training.
These models use a mix of licensed and unlicensed
personnel. Most traditional and nontraditional
models are patient-centered. In speciﬁc patient populations such as adult critical-care and pediatrics, a
family-centered care model is used. In the familycentered care model, family members with the
patient are active participants in planning the care
of their loved ones, including a role as direct caregivers. Nursing care activities are organizing care
around the patient and the patient’s family
(Henneman & Cardin, 2002). In a redesigned
model for providing professional nursing care for
psychiatric patients, Allen et al. (2006) found the
relationship-based nursing model provides an integrated network of relationships based on the values
of caring: between nurses and patients, nurses and

283

nurses, nurses and mental health workers, nurses
and physicians, and nurses and the organization.
Hall and Doran (2004) studied three care delivery models in Canada: total patient care, team nursing, and primary nursing. The term “regulated
nurse” is the Canadian equivalent of the U.S. RN,
and in the total patient care model only regulated
nurses provide patient care services. Their ﬁndings
indicated that an all-regulated nurse staffing model
has better quality outcomes for patients. They also
determined that staffing models that include professional and unregulated staff may pose a challenge
for unit-based communication and the coordination
of care.
Donley (2005) advocates that care delivery models should emphasize radical redesign instead of
incremental layering of tasks that are quickly
becoming unmanageable. Summarily, the AACNCritical-Care (2005) found that health-care organizations have systems in place that facilitate team
members’ use of staffing and outcomes data to
develop more effective delivery models. Emerging
models are concepts that are being developed and
implemented. One emerging model of care delivery
is the acuity-adapted room model. The acuityadapted room model is patient-focused care that
brings care to the patient rather than bringing the
patient to the care. In this model, the room changes
around the patient instead of the patient changing
rooms. This is possible because each private patient
room is equipped to treat all levels of care. From a
joint research project conducted by a product manufacturer and a university health-care system, a cardiac universal bed was used in the acuity-adapted
rooms (Johnson, Brown, & Neal, 2003). The acuityadaptable rooms (also called universal bed or cardiac
universal bed model) are appropriate for speciﬁc
patient populations, such as coronary critical care
and step-down units combined into acuity-adaptable
rooms (Advocate Good Shepherd Hospital, 2005;
AIA, 2001; Dunton et al., 2004; Hendrich, Fay, &
Sorrells, 2004; Moody, 2005; and Pricewaterhouse
Coopers, 2004). Thus, the time-consuming and
costly patient transferring activities are eliminated.
The nursing staff works as a team and is adaptable
in scheduling to correspond to the patient acuities
(personal correspondence with C. Gallaher, RN,
MS, April 2005). The staffing plan is based on
patient needs by patient classiﬁcation level:

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

284
■

■

■

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 284

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Level 1 patient classiﬁcation: one nurse for
four to ﬁve patients
Level 2 patient classiﬁcation: one nurse for
one to three patients
Level 3 patient classiﬁcation: one nurse for
one patient

A new variation of the acuity-adapted room
model has been developed. In this model, the acuityadapted room within the health-care setting is
designed for the patient to be physically closer to
the nursing staff (Fig. 17-2). The diagram shows
that well-designed units lead to increased efficiency,

elevate the quality of patient care. and improve the
job satisfaction among the nursing staff. The objective of this model is to increase vigilance by the professional nursing staff, thereby enhancing patient
safety (Meyer & Lavin, 2005). Each patient room is
furnished with state-of-the-art medical equipment
and a private bath. There is a nursing station for
every two patient rooms. This arrangement allows
the patient to be closely monitored without undue
disturbance. Internet access is available in each of
the rooms so the nursing staff can do their charting
at the bedside. The rooms can accommodate family
members who stay overnight.

Text/image rights not available.

This architectural design provides a physical environment for nurses to be at
patients’ bedsides, the point of use.
The AACN-Critical-Care, the Society of Critical Care Medicine, and the American
Institute of Architects Academy on Architecture for Health have recently cosponsored an ICU design award to recognize excellence in resolving both functional
and humanitarian ICU design issues in a unique and complementary manner that
focuses on planning and design. Criteria included a demonstrated commitment to
creating a healing environment, promoting safety and security, efficiency, and
attention to innovative, unique, aesthetic, and creative design features.

FIGURE 17-2 Cardiac Universal Beds (CUBs)
floor plan at the Heart Center at La Porte
Hospital, La Porte, Indiana (used with permission).

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 285

Staffing and Scheduling

Acuity-adapted room models offer the following:
■

■
■
■
■
■

Reduce the need to transfer patients to different hospital units as their status improves or
worsens
Assist with the continuity of care
Increase patient satisfaction
Provide isolation for infectious diseases
Protect patient privacy
Provide personal patient environment of comfort and reduced disturbances

Additionally, nursing satisfaction can be positive
(Anderson, 2003).
Another emerging model is the Partnership Care
Delivery Model. The AACN (AACN-Colleges,
2004) has advanced the role of clinical nurse leader,
which requires the unit nurse leader to be prepared
as a generalist at the master’s level. The clinical
nurse leader (CNL) provides care in the model. The
CNL understands and interacts with the whole continuum and in partnership with all the disciplines
(Tornabeni, Stanhope, & Wiggins, 2006). Smith, et
al. (2006) reported a successful 6-month pilot using
the model in an acute care setting.
Another emerging model example is the Transforming Care at the Bedside (T-CAB). T-CAB focuses on achieving outcomes associated with work
reliability, patient centeredness, increased value
(including reducing paper work), and work force
vitality (Bleich and Hewlett, 2004). The T-CAB
model pulls together an interdisciplinary team to
assess problems, to develop, and to evaluate creative
approaches for addressing the problems. The interdisciplinary team then disseminates solutions to
other areas within the facility (Mason, 2006).
For critical care delivery in intensive care units,
a practice model (Brilli et al., 2001) has emerged
that is based on multidisciplinary group practice
using the team approach. The team is led by a fulltime critical care–trained physician in the intensive
care unit 24 hours per day. This model is based on
its ability to minimize mortality and to optimize
efficiency while preserving dignity and compassion
for patients. Nursing workloads in this model are
deﬁned by hours per patient day or the nurse-topatient ratios.
Needleman et al. (2006) examined three approaches to increasing nursing staffing in hospitals
and the cost of those approaches, without considering care delivery models. In an earlier study they
analyzed data from 799 nonfederal acute care gen-

285

eral hospitals in 11 states. In this study using the
earlier data, they simulated the effect of three
options to increase nurse staffing. They concluded
that for hospitals using both RNs and LPNs, greater
use of RNs appears to pay for itself in fewer patient
deaths, reduced lengths of hospital stay, and
decreased rates of hospital-linked complications,
such as urinary tract infections, pneumonia, and
cardiac arrest.
Regardless of what model of care is used, the
nursing education and practice must be client(patient)-centered, generate quality outcomes, and
be cost-effective (AACN-Colleges, 2004). Outcome
system-centered measures are skill mix (RN, LPN,
UAP, and contract), nursing care hours per patient
day (RN, LPN, and UAP), and practice environment measures that include staffing and resource
adequacy (Kurtzman & Kizer, 2005). The quality
and safety of the nursing services provided are tied
to the professional nurse and patient ratios and/or
the nurse/patient index.
Patient Acuity

Patient needs are summarized in patient acuity systems. Patient needs are speciﬁc to each patient, and
conditions may change from hour to hour, shift to
shift, day to day, and so on. Thus, staffing plans
need to be modiﬁed constantly. In patient acuity or
severity systems, patients are assigned a location in
a hospital based on an acuity system and/or admitting diagnoses. For example, patients can be
assigned to an intensive care, intermediate care, progressive care, medical-surgical, or obstetrical unit,
and by age such as pediatrics versus adults. Medicalsurgical unit patient assignments are often further
reﬁned into medical diagnoses or disease systems
such as cardiac, oncology, and transplant. Patients
are often transferred from one unit to another based
on nursing skill levels and/or medical therapeutic
and diagnostic procedures needed. Moving patients
from one unit to another increases the nursing
workload for admissions, transfers, and discharges
during a 24-hour period. These activities are not
usually accounted for in the daily patient census
accountings. Daily patient census counts are done
once during the 24 hours, most generally at midnight. The admission, transfer, and discharge activities of patient care add to the overall unit workload.
A benchmarking study of U.S. critical care units
found the number of nurses needed for basic staffing plans involves expected patient census, special-

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

286

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 286

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

ized skills for patient-care technologies (e.g., balloon
pumps, dialysis), and the skill mix of the staff
(Kirchhoff & Dahl, 2006, p. 20). A formal patient
acuity system has the lowest priority for staff planning. Patient activity is determined by services
(nursing, medical, and pharmacy interventions)
delivered and not by patient demographics. In a simulated model using actual data provided by Titler et
al. (2005), the cost is related to the nurse staff using
Nursing Interventions Classiﬁcation (NIC) data captured in an electronic documentation system from
11,756 hospitalizations from 8988 patients. Titler, et
al., analyzed the effects of staffing, treatment, pharmacy, and nursing intervention over cost. They
found increased costs with higher nurse-to-patient
ratios. The Titler study also found, however, that
RN staffing below the unit’s average (RN/patient
dip proportion variable) also costs money. It is interesting to note that this ﬁnding (low RN staffing) had
not been previously examined (p. 304).
Nursing Staff

The work activity of the nursing staff includes
direct care, indirect care, unit-related, personal
time, and documentation (Urden & Roode, 1997).
Staff members refer to all personnel reporting to the
nurse administrator (ANCC, 2004, p. 84). Staff
nurse refers to an RN responsible for the direct and
indirect care of patients in the hospital (McClure
and Hinshaw, 2002, p. 7). Staff members, as deﬁned
by Mosby (2005), are people who work toward a
common goal and are employed or supervised by
someone of higher rank, such as the nurses in a hospital. Staffing is the process of assigning people to
ﬁll the roles designed for an organizational structure through recruitment, selection, and placement.
According to the ANCC 2004 Magnet Recognition Guidelines, direct patient care nurses (staff
nurses) are responsible for patient-centered nursing
activities carried out in a patient’s presence (e.g.,
admission/transfer/discharge, patient teaching,
patient communications). Nursing staff categories
for direct patient care nurses include those counted
in the staffing matrix or plan, assigned greater than
50% to direct care responsibilities, and replaced
during a shift if they call in sick (ANCC, 2004,
p. 118).
Staff competencies and qualiﬁcations are outlined in job or position descriptions and measured
through continuing educational activities, manda-

tory education, and personnel evaluations. Those
who require licensure or certiﬁcations to perform
their job must keep up to date, with no lapse. Qualiﬁed nurses with disabilities can be successful practitioners with reasonable accommodations in the
workplace (Gatens, 1972). Historically, nursing has
been seen as a career requiring considerable physical function and strength. However, much of what
the modern nurse accomplishes is done through cognitive function. Such cognitive functions are assessment, problem solving, deduction, counseling, and
evaluation (Pischke-Winn, Andreoli, & Halstead,
2004).
A unit staffing plan needs to take into consideration speciﬁc patient dependency levels, high-risk
patient handling tasks, and the nursing staffs’ physical abilities. Nurses are working less in acute care
settings as they get older, choosing instead employment in areas not as physically demanding
(Norman et al., 2005). Work-site accommodations
aimed to prevent potentially career-ending back,
neck, and musculoskeletal injuries in nurses are
considerations. Staffing for patient handling and
nursing staff safety is determined by patient handling and lifting needs and institutional lifting policies and resources (Nelson & Baptiste, 2004). For
example, the nurses face challenges in caring for
morbidly obese patients in the acute care setting
(Drake et al., 2005). A patient-handling resource
example is the HoverMatt System for patient transfer using a lateral transfer and repositioning device
(Barry, 2006).

SCHEDULING AND STAFFING SYSTEMS
Once the variables of health-care setting, care delivery models, patient acuity, and nursing staff have
been determined, the staffing process continues into
the development of the schedule. Scheduling is
deﬁned as the process of making the personnel work
assignments for a speciﬁc period. Nursing schedules
are communicated to the staff in a manual format
(paper and pencil) or by computer. Computer software by traditional client server application is
available. Online tools—partly or exclusively on the
Internet—give personnel access to and responsibility for self-scheduling (Sabet, 2005). Automated
nurse scheduling operational systems are commercially available. Using techno-solutions for staffing

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 287

Staffing and Scheduling

and scheduling systems will increase efficiency and
improve patient care (Forte, 2004; Simpson, 2004).
Technological advancements such as Flexestaff offer
eShift and applications for computerized scheduling
and staffing. Another, Per-Sé Technologies’ ANSOS
One-Staff, provides resource management capabilities that include enterprise scheduling with shift
bidding and self-scheduling capabilities.
Depending on the organization, the period of the
schedule can be determined from a matter of weeks
up to a year in advance. Staffing refers to the ﬁlling
of open shifts, or time periods, on the work schedule. A scheduling system pulls all of the variables
together. The nurse manager’s goal is to uphold
standards to organize and schedule the nursing staff
to provide quality patient care services.
Consideration and variables needed to plan and
implement a nurse-staffing schedule are drawn from
institutional policies, regulatory agencies, and professional organization standards. Legislatively mandated minimum staffing ratios, public postings, and
collective bargaining agreements also help direct
scheduling. In conjunction with budgetary guidelines and staff vacancies, the nurses’ employment
status of seniority, probationary, in-orientation, fullor part-time, and career ladder classiﬁcation along
with vacation, sick leave, and leave of absence beneﬁts are also variables for consideration. Nursestaffing schedules are multifaceted and complicated
by seasonal changes, planned and unplanned lifechanging events, and disasters.
Unlike manufacturing facilities where standard
shifts and days off are the rule, hospitals and longterm health-care facilities operate 24 hours a day, 7
days a week, and face widely ﬂuctuating demands.
Hospitals primarily have ﬁve shifts: three 8-hour
shifts (7 a.m. to 3 p.m., 3–11 p.m., 11 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
and two 12-hour shifts (7 a.m. to 7 p.m.; 7 p.m. to 7
a.m.). Some hospitals utilize other shift times such
as 4- and 10-hour shifts.
Work schedules can be 4-hour, 8-hour, 10-hour,
12-hour, longer than 12-hour, or a combination.
The 40-hour work week typically constitutes fulltime employment. However, a 36-hour work week
is considered full-time in some organizations. Parttime employment status can vary by organization.
Shift rotation systems vary by start time and have
permanent designation or rotation combinations.
Actual time scheduled for a nurse to work centers around a normal working schedule of 40 hours

287

to be worked in a 7-day period. Shift, weekend, and
holiday rotations are considerations. For example, a
nurse cannot be scheduled to rotate more than two
different shifts in any 4-week scheduling period.
Other considerations (Ohio Nurses Association,
2005) for scheduling nursing staff can be as follows:
■

■

■

■

■

■

Staff should have at least two shifts off duty
during the transition from the completion of
working one shift or 8 hours to the starting
time of a different shift (referred to as recovery
time)
4-week schedules shall be posted at least 14
days prior to the beginning of the schedule
Staff should be scheduled to be off duty two
out of every four weekends
No nurse will be required to work more than 6
consecutive days without a day off
Flexible scheduling of 12 hours will be in
agreement with affected nurses and on particular units
Holiday time is rotated based on seniority

Scheduling and staffing models can be centralized, decentralized, or mixed (modiﬁed centralized
staffing) (Lauw & Gares, 2006; Sabet, 2005). Centralized staffing involves a system whereby a master
plan is developed as the top level of the organization
in a centralized location, frequently the central
nursing office. This system offers the opportunity
to oversee the entire organization’s nursing services
activities. Decentralized staffing is a unit-based
plan with corresponding schedules managed by the
unit nurse manager. Mixed staffing combines centralized and decentralized to offer a comprehensive
overview of a facility while offering individualization for unit and staff members.
Scheduling methodologies are rotational or cyclical scheduling, self-scheduling, and preference
scheduling, which is a combination of the ﬁrst two.
Scheduling plans with various methodologies can
be centralized, decentralized, and mixed, depending
on management and staff nurse participation.

Centralized
Cyclical staffing is a centralized system in which
workdays and time off for personnel are repeated
in regular cycles, such as every 6 weeks (Howell,
1966). Centralized staffing involves a system
whereby a master plan is developed at the top level

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

288

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 288

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

of the organization. A centralized system works well
in large organizations where management oversees
strategy, budget, resources, and process (Sabet,
2005). A centralized system offers management a
broader overview and closer control of the entire
scheduling and staffing system. An obvious disadvantage of the centralized system is that individual
considerations are minimized.

Decentralized
In decentralized staffing, the managers of individual
nursing units have more control over the budget,
resources, and process. For example, unit-based
staffing and utilization committees can develop
schedules. Membership consists of the nurse manager and staff members to oversee unit-speciﬁc
staffing utilization, providing safe patient care on
appropriate, efficient, and cost-effective bases.
Staffing levels would be monitored on an ongoing
basis (Texas Nursing, 2001). Under a decentralized
scheduling and staffing system, a nursing unit can
be accountable for outcomes and would be selfreliant for resources.

Mixed or Preference Scheduling
Mixed staffing combines centralized and decentralized staffing by offering individual units the ability
to manage regular schedules with assistance from
the central staffing office for shift coverage or other
clinical resources for patient activity changes.
Mixed staffing can accommodate nursing personnel’s need for ﬂexible or preference scheduling.
Flexible scheduling is one of the advantages of
working in health care because many facilities are
open 24 hours a day, but this also means some
health-care professionals have to work on holidays.
Flexible scheduling is a strategy aimed at improving
retention and offers balance and enhancement
between professional and personal-life activities.
Flexible scheduling can be combined with selfscheduling. Self-scheduling offers increased autonomy and job satisfaction. Nursing staff is able to
enjoy the ability to participate in self-scheduling as
well as being able to work shifts that are in 4- to 12hour increments. Many organizations now offer
ﬂexible schedules to accommodate the needs of both
practicing nurses and students (Kimball & O’Neil,
2002), and have thereby improved the work
environment.

hot topic:
Shift Bidding
Because nursing is a 24/7 business, scheduling modalities are always a topic of discussion. In the past, hospitals tried the following: the 12-hour shift, work 32
hours and paid for 40 hours, weekend schedule composed only of two to three 12-hour shifts, and selfscheduling. Today with the growth of health-care
informatics, shift bidding has become a popular
scheduling modality.
Shift bidding is accomplished by the purchase of a software system. The system allows the nurse to access the
software program via the Internet anywhere at any time
and review available shifts. eShift is the trademark of
one type of software. Shift bidding involves the use of
the software system by the staff nurse to bid for extra
shifts. Both part-time and full-time staff may choose
their committed shifts for a month at a time. Shift bidding is similar to eBay, as the nurse can bid auctionstyle on available nursing shifts over the Internet. Shiftbidding software systems incorporate an overtime
rate and a flat fee for the winning shift. Shift bidding
allows not only part-time or registry nurses to bid for
shifts but is also popular among health-care systems
where a nurse may choose to work overtime at a system hospital other than the one where she normally
works.
Shift bidding offers flexibility and control to the staff
nurse over their schedule and higher rates of pay,
which contribute to staff nurse satisfaction. The nurse
has the opportunity to control her schedule, rate of pay,
and in some cases commute to work. Shift bidding also
affords the staff nurse the opportunity to reverse auction. After the self-schedule process, remaining shifts
become available for auction. Shifts are posted with a
maximum hourly rate. The lowest bidder wins the shift
when the auction closes. Shift bidding automates the
scheduling system because nurses are tapped from
several pools. Hospitals save money in recruiting nurses
to work overtime, pay less money in overtime costs due
to the reduced use of agency nurses, and also reduce
vacancy rates for hard-to-fill shifts. Times savings are
another benefit for nursing management as shift bidding provides a 24-hour self-service process for staff
nurses. Registry nurses do not have to share administrative costs with an agency and can make more money.
Finally, shift bidding increases the quality of patient
care as the system provides more continuity in staffing
for units and hospitals.

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 289

Staffing and Scheduling

SCHEDULING OUTCOMES
The implementation of the planned schedule culminates in the daily activities of the patient care team
and the subsequent results of that care: the outcomes.

Daily Staffing
Daily staffing, or activation of schedule, is the outcome of the scheduling and staffing system for a
speciﬁc date and time. It dictates who speciﬁcally
will interact with which patient and when. Daily
staffing, the implementation of the staffing schedule, is affected by the actual assigned nursing workload to the scheduled nursing staff. Daily staffing
changes can be warranted for various reasons such
as call-ins, patient care needs, patient census
changes, and internal and external disasters. Often,
staffing adjustments are needed hour-to-hour
depending on the patient care activities and needs.
Balancing the staff scheduled and the daily staffing
workload is a major challenge to the nurse manager.
Daily staffing adjustments can be managed by the
following options: using other clinical resources
and hiring overtime and temporary staffing.
Examples of clinical resources for making staffing
adjustments include STAT, ﬂoat pool or admitting
nurses, and a rapid response team.
STAT nurses are a pool of nurses, usually with
critical-care experience, who respond to crisis situations such as sudden cardiac arrests (“codes”) or
traumas or who provide assistance with special procedures (e.g., conscious sedation, transport critically
ill patients) (Scalise, 2005). STAT nurses may also
be the skin and wound assessment team (Lancellot,
1996) to assist bedside nursing staff with prevention of hospital-acquired pressure ulcers.
Float pool nurses are experienced generalist or
specialized staff available to be assigned as needed
to any nursing unit. Often, these nurses can work 2
to 4 hours and move on to the next unit in need.
Some providers have created in-house nursing
agency pools to help meet seasonal demands.
Admitting nurses are an integral part of the
patient throughput process in acute-care settings
and intake process for home-health care. They complete databases, initiate consults (e.g., skin care
and pain management) and falls protocols, initiate
medical orders, and generally ease the patient’s
transition into hospital or home-care settings.

289

Rapid response team, also known as the medical
emergency team, is a team of clinicians who bring
clinical expertise to the patient bedside (Scholle &
Mininni, 2006). Similarly, a multidisciplinary system-wide action team (SWAT) coordinated by nursing leadership in response to increasing patient
census and acuity has been found to be effective for
diagnostic testing and scheduling, expediting the
admission process, reducing discharge delays, and
staffing to hospital census demands (Tachibana &
Hardy, 2001).
Temporary/supplemental staffing nurses come
from agencies often referred to as “rent-a-nurse”
providers, which, although not currently regulated,
can apply voluntarily for JCAHO certiﬁcation.
Traditionally, these temporary nurses are paid per
diem and are reimbursed for traveling expenses. Use
of temporary staffing personnel has great patient
safety implications because, often, credentials and
experiences are not easily veriﬁed. The fatigue factor becomes an issue as, in some cases, agency
nurses also work at another institution and do temporary staffing for extra income. There is a national
trend to reduce dependency on temporary staffing
options (Kovner et al., 2002; Morse et al., 2005).

Overtime
Overtime, or extended hours, is deﬁned as continuing to work beyond or before one’s scheduled
hours. Nurses can work extended hours under
mandatory and voluntary overtime scheduled conditions. Collective bargaining contracts often
address the issue of overtime by setting the terms for
mandating or requiring overtime work. An example
contract (Ohio Nurses Association, 2005) deﬁnes
mandatory overtime as no nurse will be required to
work overtime for a period of more than 4 hours.
No nurse may be mandated to work more than 16
hours of overtime in any 4-week schedule. A nurse
will have a minimum of 8 hours off between shifts,
when one such shift is a mandated shift. Overtime
work can leave nurses fatigued and affect their ability to provide adequate clinical judgments and care.
Gaines and Carter (1989) offer a decisionmaking framework in which to analyze the overtime situation by examining individual rights and
responsibilities as a professional nurse. Mandatory
overtime should not be a “routine” staffing backup
plan and should reﬂect staff nurse input (Shirey,

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

290

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 290

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

2005). Working long hours has caused nurse illness
and injury, fatigue and safety problems, workplace
violence, and depression (Mason and Kany, 2005).
Major national and state efforts are under way to
eliminate mandatory overtime (Unruh, 2005).
Currently, because there are no governmental
regulations restricting overtime, nurse overtime is
not federally limited. No state or federal regulations
restrict the number of hours a nurse may voluntarily work in 24 hours or in a 7-day period (IOM,
2004, p. 388). Several states have laws that protect
patients by limiting hospitals’ use of forced overtime. In states with these laws, however, nurses can
voluntarily work overtime, and the laws do not
apply in the case of a government-declared state of
emergency. Jacobsen et al. (2002) polled the nursing
staff on their opinions about both voluntary and
mandatory overtime and identiﬁed conditions that
inﬂuence the nursing staffs’ decisions and perceptions about overtime. This study enabled the nursing staff to develop strategies and policies to avoid
mandatory overtime and improve staff satisfaction
and quality patient care.

Patient Outcomes
The nurse staffing variables used to measure patient
outcomes are daily average hours of care, ratio of
RNs to average patient census, workload, and
skill mix. Patient outcomes most generally are based
on adverse occurrences such as unit rates of patient
falls, pressure ulcers, respiratory and urinary tract
infections, and family-patient complaints. Other
nursing-sensitive indicators for outcomes are RN
job satisfaction, RN education and certiﬁcation,
pediatric pain assessment cycle, pediatric intravenous inﬁltration rate, and patient assault rate.
Since 1994, a national database program, the
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators
(NDNQI), has been available to provide comparative information to health-care facilities for use in
quality improvement activities and to develop
national data on the relationship between nurse
staffing and patient outcomes (NDNQI 7/m, 12/05,
www.nursingquality.org). In the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts for public disclosure, health-care
consumers can go on line to access staffing plans for
comparisons with actual staffing numbers when
hospitalized (Scalise, 2006).

Nursing Workloads
Daily staffing is affected by the workload assigned
to the scheduled nursing staff, as evident in research
studies. Carayon and Gürses (2005) identiﬁed the
assigned workload as the situation-level workload.
Situation-level workloads are real-time performance
obstacles and facilitators that contribute to daily
workloads. For example, Tucker et al. (2002), in a
qualitative study, observed 22 nurses in 8 hospitals
for a total of 197 hours and documented 120 problems that prevented patient-care task completion.
The problems ranged from missing or incorrect
information, missing or broken equipment, waiting
for a resource, and missing or incorrect medications.
Similarly, Potter et al., (2005) found omissions
in patient care due to interruptions in an ethnographic study involving seven staff registered
nurses. Nurses were frequently interrupted during
interventional work such as administrating medications, problem-solving intravenous infusions, and
teaching patients. Interruptions pose risks for
medical errors. Daily staffing continues to be inﬂuenced by workload predictor/tools. More extensive
research and development of intensive care unit
(ICU)–speciﬁc nursing workload predictor/tools
are needed to determine the numbers of ICU nurses
and their educational backgrounds (Robnett,
2006).

All Good Things...
The staffing and scheduling process incorporates
professional nursing standards and accounts for the
health-care setting, the care delivery model, patient
acuity, and the nursing staff. Scheduling and
staffing systems can be centralized, decentralized,
or mixed. The outcomes of scheduling are the daily
staffing, patient outcomes, and nursing workloads.
The challenges faced by nurse managers in providing adequate staffing are the nurse shortage, the
advances in patient care technology, the high
patient acuity levels, and the health-care industry’s
continuous evolution. For the appropriate allocation of nursing staff for patient-focused care,
staffing is both a process and an outcome (AACNCritical Care, 2001).

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 291

Staffing and Scheduling

Let’s Talk
1. Describe staffing as a process with a relationship
to scheduling.
2. Describe a care delivery model utilized by
nursing services.

NCLEX Questions
1. The nurse manager’s staffing and scheduling

goals:
A. Are consistent with the Principles for Nurse
Staffing of the American Nurses Association
and other regulatory guidelines
B. Do not have to be congruent with the mission,
vision, values, philosophy, and strategic plan
of the organization and its nursing services
C. Promote patient safety and patient satisfaction
D. A and C
2. Staffing, according to the Center for American

Nurses, refers to:
A. The monthly work schedule produced for a
unit or clinic
B. The nursing hours per patient per day
C. The professional skills required for particular
job assignments
D. A nurse’s total years of experience
3. The process of staffing involves:

A. Assessment of the qualiﬁcations and competence of the staff available
B. Formulation of a strategic staffing plan to
meet future needs
C. Creation of a budget of personnel to provide
patient care services
D. Assigning nurses to the care of speciﬁc
patients
4. Scheduling variables are deﬁned as:

A. The number of patients, complexity of
patient condition, and nursing care required
B. The nursing staff members’ competency levels, qualiﬁcations, skill range, knowledge or
ability, and experience level
C. The level of supervision required
D. All of the above

291

5. An appropriate staffing system incorporates:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Patient needs
Staff members’ degrees and credentials
A speciﬁc ratio of RNs to LPNs
The personnel budget

6. Acuity-adapted room models offer the follow-

ing:
A. Transfer of patients to different hospital
units as their status improves or worsens
B. Assistance with the continuity of care
C. Decreased patient satisfaction
D. The use of patient room sharing
7. Nurse staff scheduling factors include:

A. Staff may work one shift or 8 hours prior
to the starting time of a different shift or
16 hours straight
B. 4-week schedules will be posted at least 1
week prior to the beginning of the schedule
C. Staff should be scheduled to be off duty one
out of every four weekends
D. No nurse will be required to work more
than 6 consecutive days without a day off
8. The nurse staffing variables used to measure

patient outcomes are:
A. Nursing hours provided for a patient
B. Ratios of RNs to nurse assistants
C. Numbers of units to which a nurse may
rotate
D. Skill mixes
9. Centralized staffing is:

A. Cyclical
B. A system in which workdays and time off
for personnel are changed monthly
C. Loose management control of the entire
scheduling and staffing system
D. A system in which individual problems are
always taken into consideration
10. Flexible scheduling is:

A. Difficult to accomplish because health-care
facilities are open 24 hours a day
B. A schedule for health-care professionals that
involves no work on holidays
C. A means to improve staff retention by offering balance and enhancement between professional and personal life activities
D. Not workable with self-scheduling

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

292

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 292

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

REFERENCES
Advocate Good Shepherd Hospital, Barrington, Illinois;
http://www.advocatehealth.com/gshp/gshp/info/library/
ham/win05/gshp1.htm; accessed February, 13, 2005.
Aiken, L.H., et al. (2002). Hospital nurse staffing and patient
mortality, nurse burnout, and job dissatisfaction. Journal of
American Medical Association, 288(16), 1987–1993.
Allen, D.E., et al. (2006). Relating outcomes to excellent nursing
practice. Journal of Nursing Administration, 36(3), 140–147.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN-Colleges)
(2004). Working paper on the role of the clinical nurse leader
(white paper). http://www.aacn.nche.edu/publications/
whitepapers/cnl.htm; accessed April 22, 2005.
American Association of Critical Care Nurses (2001). Maintaining patient-focused care in an environment of nursing staff
shortages and ﬁnancial constraints. Aliso Viejo, CA: Author.
American Association of Critical Care Nurses (2005). Standards
for Establishing and Sustaining Healthy Work Environments: A
Journey to Excellence. http://www.aacn.org/aacn/pubpolcy.
nsf/Files/HWEStandards/$ﬁle/HWEStanda-rds.pdf, accessed
April 22, 2005.
American Institute of Architects (2001). Guidelines for design
and construction of hospital and health facilities (pp. 42–45).
Washington, DC: Author.
The American Nurse (2006). A change will do you good. The
American Nurse, 38(1), 9.
American Nurses Association (1999). Principles for nurse
staffing. Washington, DC: Author. http://www.nursingworld.org/readroom/stffprnc.htm, accessed August 30, 2005.
American Nurses Association (2004). Scope and standards for
nurse administrators (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, MD: Author.
American Nurses Credentialing Center (2004). The magnet
recognition program® (2005 ed.). Silver Spring, MD: Author.
Anderson, P. (2003). Poster presentation: The universal bed concept. Quest for Excellence Nursing and Staff Development
Conference, The Ohio State University Medical Center,
Columbus, OH.
Artz, M. (2005). The politics of caring: solutions to RN staffing.
American Journal of Nursing, 105(11), 35.
Barry, J. (2006). The HoverMatt system for patient transfer.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 36(3), 114–117.
Bleich, M.R., & Hewlett, P.O. (2004). Dissipating the “perfect
storm”-responses from nursing and the health care industry to
protect the public’s health. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing,
9(2), www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic24/tpc24_4.htm
Bleich, M.R., et al. (2003). Analysis of the nursing workforce crisis: A call to action. American Journal of Nursing, 103(4),
66–74.
Brilli, R.J., et al. (2001). Critical care delivery in the intensive
care unit: Deﬁning clinical roles and the best practice model.
Critical Care Medicine, 29(10), 2007–2019.
Donley, S.R. (2005). Challenges for nursing in the 21st century.
Nursing Economic$, 23(6), 312–318.
Caryon, P., & Gürses, A.P. (2005). A human factors engineering
conceptual framework of nursing workload and patient safety
in intensive care units. Intensive and Critical Care Nursing,
21(5), 284–301.
Drake, D., et al. (2005). Challenges that nurses face in caring for
morbidly obese patients in the acute care setting. Surgery for
Obesity and Related Diseases, 1(5), 462–466.

Dunton, N., et al. (2004). Nurse staffing and patient falls on
acute care hospital units. Nursing Outlook, 52(1), 53–59.
Forte, J. (2004). Tap techno-solutions to workload measurement.
IT Solutions, 34, 12–14.
Gabow, P., et al. (2005). A toolkit for redesign in health care.
Washington, DC: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ Publication No. 05-0108-EF).
Gaines, C., & Carter, D. (1989). Overtime: A professional
responsibility? Focus on Critical Care, 16(4), 270–273.
Gallant, D., & Lanning, K. (2001). Streamlining patient care
processes through flexible room and equipment design.
Critical Care Nursing Quarterly, 24(3), 59–76.
Gatens, C.G. (1972). Who’s handicapped? ANA Clinical Sessions,
17(4), 176–178.
Hall, L.M. (1998). Policy implications when changing staff mix.
Nursing Economic$, 16(6), 291–312.
Hall, L.M., & Doran, D. (2004). Nurse staffing, care delivery
model and patient care quality. Journal of Nursing Care
Quality, 19(1), 27–33.
Hendrich, A.L., Fay, J., & Sorrells, A.K., (2004). Effects of acuity-adaptable rooms on ﬂow of patients and delivery of care.
American Journal of Critical Care, 13(1), 35–45.
Henneman, E.A., & Cardin, S. (2002). Family-centered critical
care: A practical approach to making it happen. Critical Care
Nurse, 22(6), 12–19.
Horn, S.D., et al. (2005). RN staffing time and outcomes of longstay nursing home residents. American Journal of Nursing,
105(11), 58–71.
Howell, J.P. (1966). Cyclical scheduling of nursing personnel.
Hospitals, 40(2), 77–85.
Institute of Medicine (2001). Assessing the quality chasm: A new
health system for the 21st century. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Institute of Medicine (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming
the work environment of nurses. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Institute of Medicine (2000). To err is human: Building a safer
health system. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Jacobsen, C., et al. (2002). Surviving the perfect storm: Staff perceptions of mandatory overtime. JONA’s Healthcare Law,
Ethics, and Regulation, 4(3), 57–66.
Johnson, J., Brown, K.K., & Neal, K. (2003). Designs that make
a difference: the Cardiac Universal Bed model. Journal of
Cardiovascular Management, 14(5), 16–20.
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations
(2004). JCAHO 2004 accreditation manual for hospitals
(AMH) standards. Chicago, IL: Author.
Kimball, B., & O’Neil, E. (2002). Health care’s human crisis: the
American nursing shortage. Princeton: The Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation.
Kirchhoff, K.T., & Dahl, N. (2006). American Association of
Critical Care Nurses’ National survey of facilities and units
providing critical care. American Journal of Critical Care,
15(1), 13–28.
Kovner, C., et al. (2002). Acute care: Nurse staffing and postsurgical events: An analysis of administrative data from a sample
of U.S. hospital, 1990–1996. Health Services Research, 37(3),
611.
Krail, K.A. (2005). Retaining the retiring nurse: Keeping the
nursing shortage at bay. Nurse Leader, April, 33–36.
Kramer, M., & Schmalenberg, C. (2005). Revising the essentials

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 293

Staffing and Scheduling
of magnetism tool: There is more to adequate staffing than
numbers. Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(4), 188–198.
Kurtzman, E.T., & Kizer, K.W. (2005). Evaluating the performance and contribution of nurses to achieve an environment of
safety. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 29(1), 14–23.
Lancellot, M. (1996). CNS combats pressure ulcers with skin
and wound assessment team (SWAT). Clinical Nurse
Specialist, 10(3), 154–160.
Lauw, C., & Gares, D. (2005). Resource management: What’s
right for you? Nursing Management, 36(12), 46–49.
Lookinland, S., Tiedeman, M.E., & Crosson, A.E.T. (2005).
Nontraditional models of care delivery: Have they solved
the problems? Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(2),
74–80.
Mason, D.J. (2006). Do the right thing: Advocate change, or ﬁnd
a workplace where you can do so. American Journal of
Nursing, 106(4), 11.
Mason, D.J., & Kany, K.A. (2005). The state of the science:
Focus on work environments. American Journal of Nursing,
105(3), 33–34.
McClure, M.L., & Hinshaw, A.S. (2002). Magnet hospitals revisited: Attraction and retention of professional nurses.
Washington, DC: American Academy of Nursing.
Meyer, G., & Lavin, M.A. (2005). Vigilance: The essence of
nursing. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 23(10), 8.
http://www.nursingworld.org/topic22/tpc22_6news.htm,
accessed June 29, 2005.
Moody, R.A. (2005). Patient delivery model: CUB (cardiac universal bed). (La Porte Hospital and Health Services, La Porte,
Indiana). Presentation at Sigma Theta Tau Annual Meeting,
Indianapolis, IN; http://stti.confex.com/stti/bcclinical38/
techprogram/paper_21066.htm, accessed April 27, 2005.
Morse, E.L, et al. (2005). One hospital’s strategic initiative to
eliminate agency staffing. Nurse Leader, April, 49–51.
Mosby’s Dictionary of Medical, Nursing and Health Professions
(7th ed.) (2005). St. Louis: Author.
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (2006). Kansas
City, KS: The National Center for Nursing Quality Indicators.
http://www.nursingworld.org/quality/database.htm or http://
www.nursingquality.org/; accessed April 22, 2005.
Needleman, J., et al. (2006). Nurse staffing in hospitals: Is there
a business case for quality? Health Affairs, 25(1), 204–211.
Nelson, A., & Baptiste, A.S. (2004). Evidence-based practices for
safe patient handling and movement. Online Journal of Issues
in Nursing, 9(3), www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic25_3.htm,
accessed March 15, 2006.
Norman, L.D., et al. (2005). The older nurse in the workplace:
does age matter? Nursing Economic$, 23(6), 282–289.
Ohio Nurses Association (2005). Agreement between the Ohio
Nurses Association and the Ohio State University, April 29,
2005 through July 1, 2007. Columbus, OH: Author.
Pischke-Winn, K.A., Andreoli, K.G., & Halstead, L.K. (2004).
Students with disabilities: Nursing education and practice.
Chicago: Rush University College of Nursing; http://
www.rushu.rush.edu/nursing/disable/fulldoc.pdf, accessed
September 24, 2005.
Potter, P., et al. (2005). Understanding the cognitive work of
nursing in the acute care environment. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 35(7/8), 327–335.
Price Waterhouse Coopers, LLP (2004). The role of hospital design
in the recruitment, retention and performance of NHS nurses in

293

England. www.cabe.org.uk (2004-healthyhospitals.org.uksykehusplan.no-cabe.org.uk-sykehusplan.org), accessed April
29, 2005.
Robnett, M.K. (2006). Critical care nursing: Workforce issues
and potential solutions. Critical Care Medicine, 34(3), (suppl)
S25–S31.
Sabet, L. (2005). Adopting online nurse scheduling and staffing systems. Oakland, CA: California HealthCare Foundation.
Scalise, D. (2005). Clinical staffing: SWAT nurses. Hospitals &
Heath Networks, 79(9), 28, 30.
Scalise, D. (2006). Staffing: public disclosure. Hospitals & Heath
Networks, 80(3), 20.
Scholle, C.C., & Mininni, N.C. (2006). Best-practice interventions: How a rapid response team saves lives. Nursing 2006,
36(1), 36–40.
Shirey, M.R. (2005). Ethical climate in nursing practice: the
leader’s role. JONA’s Healthcare Law, Ethics, and Regulation,
7(2), 59–67.
Simpson, R.L. (2004). Where will we be in 2015? Nursing
Management, 35(12): 38–44.
Smith, A., & Chalker, N.J. (2005). Preceptor continuity in the
nurse internship program: The nurse intern’s perception.
Journal of Nurses Staff Development, 21(2), 47–52.
Smith, S.L, et al. (2006). Application of the clinical nurse leader
role in an acute care delivery model. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 36(1), 29–33.
Stanton, M.W., & Rutherford, M.K. (2004). Hospital nurse
staffing and quality of care. Research in Action, 14. AHRQ
Publication No. 04-0029, March 2004. Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, Rockville, MD; http://www.ahrq.
gov/research/nursestaffing/nursestaff.htm, accessed April 19,
2005.
Tachibana, C., & Hardy, D. (2001). System-wide action team
(SWAT): A new level of collaboration. Seminars for Nurse
Managers, 9(2), 98–101.
Texas Nurses Association (2005). TNA Nurse-Friendly Criteria,
media release May 3, 2005, Austin, TX: Author.
http://www.texasnurses.org, accessed April 10, 2006.
Texas Nursing (2001). Rules proposal intended to clarify nurse
staffing. Texas Nursing, 76(March), 1–2.
Tiedeman, M.E., & Lookinland, S. (2004). Traditional models of
care delivery. Journal of Nursing Administration, 34(6),
291–297.
Titler, M., et al. (2005). Cost of hospital care for elderly at risk of
falling. Nursing Economic$, 23(6), 290–306.
Tornabeni, J., Stanhope, M., & Wiggins, M. (2006). The
CNL vision. Journal of Nursing Administration, 36(3), 103–108.
Tucker, A.L., Edmondson, A.C., & Spear, S. (2002). When problem solving prevents organizational learning. Journal of
Organizational Change Management, 15(2), 122–137.
Ulrich, B.T. (1992). Leadership and management according to
Florence Nightingale. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
University HealthSystem Consortium (UHC) (2005). Nursing work environment benchmarking project. Chicago, IL:
Author.
Unruh, L.Y. (2005). Employment conditions at the bedside: A
cause of and solution to the RN shortage. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 35(1), 11–14.
Urden, L.D., & Roode, J.I. (1997). Work sampling: a decisionmaking tool for determining resources and work redesign.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 27(9), 34–41.

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

294

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 294

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baggs, J.G., et al. (1999). Association between nurse-physician
collaboration and patient outcomes in three intensive care
units. Critical Care Medicine, 27(9), 1991–1998.
Baggot, D.M., et al. (2005). The new hire preceptor experience:
Cost-beneﬁt analysis of one retention strategy. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 35(3), 138–145.
Ballard, K.S. (2003). Patient safety: A shared responsibility.
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 8(3); http://www.nursing
world.org/ojin/topic22/tpc22_4.htm, accessed May 04, 2005.
Barrett, J. (1962). The head nurse. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
Beard, E. L. (2003). The Internet as an “essential function”
during an emergency. JONA’s Healthcare Law, Ethics, and
Regulation, 5(1), 2.
Benner, P. (1984/2001). From novice to expert: Excellence and
power in clinical nursing practice. Menlo Park, CA: AddisonWesley.
Berney, B., Needleman, J., & Kovner, C. (2005). Factors inﬂuencing the use of registered nurse overtime in hospitals,
1995–2000. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 37(2), 165–172.
Bolton, L.B., et al. (2003). Nurse staffing and patient perceptions
of nursing care. Journal of Nursing Administration, 33(11),
607–614.
Budd, K.W., Warino, L.S., & Patton, M.E. (2004). Traditional
and non-traditional collective bargaining: Strategies to
improve the patient care environment. Online Journal of Issues
in Nursing, 9(1), http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic23/
tpc23_5.htm, accessed May 5, 2005.
Buerhaus, P.I. (2004). Lucian Leape on patient safety in U.S.
hospitals. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 36(4), 366–370.
Buerhaus, P.I. (2005). Six-part series on the state of the RN workforce in the United States. Nursing Economic$, 23(2), 58–60.
Carayon, P., & Gürses, A.P. (2005). A human factors engineering conceptual framework of nursing workload and patient
safety in intensive care units. Intensive and Critical Care
Nursing, 21(5), 284–301.
Cheng, D.C., et al. (March). Randomized assessment of resource
use in fast-track cardiac surgery 1-year after hospital discharge. Anesthesiology, 98(3), 651–657.
Choi, J., et al. (2004). Perceived nursing work environment of
critical care nurses. Nursing Research, 53(6), 370–378.
Cimiotti, J.P., et al. (2005). The magnet process and the perceived work environment of nurses. Nursing Research, 54(6),
384–390.
Clarke, S.P. (2005). The policy implications of staffing-outcomes
research. Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(1), 17–19.
Clarke, S.P., & Aiken, L.H. (2003). Registered nurse staffing and
patient and nurse outcomes in hospitals: a commentary. Policy,
Politics, & Nursing Practice, 4(2), 104–111.
Coffman, J.M., Seago, J.A., & Spetz, J. (2002). Minimum nurseto patient ratios in acute care hospitals in California. Health
Affairs, 21(5), 53–64.
Colias, M. (2005). The disaster after the disaster. Hospitals &
Health Networks, 79(10), 36–38, 40, 42, 44.
Collins, M.L., & Thomas, T. L. (2005). Creation of a step-down
nurse internship program. Journal of Nurses Staff Development,
21(3), 115–119.

Connelly, L.M. (2005). Welcoming new employees. Journal of
Nursing Scholarship, 37(2), 163–164.
Cowan, D.T., Norman, I., & Coopamah, V.P. (2005). Competence
in nursing practice: A controversial concept: A focused review
of literature. Nurse Education Today, 25(5), 355–362.
Curtin, L.L. (2003). An integrated analysis of nurse staffing and
related variables: Effects on patient outcomes. Online Journal
of Issues in Nursing. http://nursingworld.org/ojin/topic22/
tpc22_5.htm, accessed April 22, 2005.
Diers, D. (2005). Reﬂections: Am I a nurse? I’m old but never
former. American Journal of Nursing, 105(10), 39.
Donovan, L. (2004). Mapping a staffing blueprint to match competencies. Nursing Management, 35(Supplement 5), 14.
Eriksen, W., Bruusgaard, D., & Knardahl, S. (2003). Work factors as predictors of sickness absence: A three-month prospective study of nurses’ aides. Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, 60(4), 271–278.
Estabrooks, C.A., et al. (2005). The impact of hospital nursing
characteristics on 30-day mortality. Nursing Research, 54(2),
74–84.
Flynn, M., et al. (2004). Fast-tracking revisited: Routine cardiac
surgical patients need minimal intensive care. European
Journal of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 25(1), 116–122.
Forman, H. (2004). Do we really practice relationship-based
care? Journal of Nursing Administration, 34(1), 9.
Goode, C.J., & Williams, C.A. (2004). Post-baccalaureate nurse
residency program. Journal of Nursing Administration, 34(2),
771–777.
Haberfelde, M, Bedecarré, D., & Buffum, M. (2005). Nursesensitive patient outcomes: An annotated bibliography.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(6), 293–299.
Heinz, D. (2004). Hospital nurse staffing and patient outcomes:
A review of current literature. Dimensions of Critical Care
Nursing, 23(1), 44–50.
Hendrich, A.L., Bender, P.S., & Nyhuis, A., (2003). Validation of
the Hendrich II fall risk model: A large concurrent case/control study of hospitalized patients. Applied Nursing Research,
16(1), 9–21.
Hess, A.K. (2005). Ensure a long and safe career. American
Journal of Nursing, 105(6), 96.
Hiser, B., et al. (2006). Implementing a pressure ulcer prevention
program and enhancing the role of the CWOCN: Impact on
outcomes. Ostomy Wound Management, 52(2), 48–59.
Hoban, V. (2004). Nurses taking second jobs. Nursing Times,
100(28), 20–22.
Hodge, M.B., et al. (2002). Developing indicators of nursing
quality to evaluate nurse staffing ratios. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 32(6), 338–345.
Hodge, M.B., et al. (2004). Licensed caregiver characteristics and
staffing in California acute care hospital units. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 34(3), 125–133.
Hu, J., Herrick, C., & Hodgin, K.A. (2004). Managing the multigenerational nursing team. Health Care Management, 23(4),
334–340.
Jennings, B.M. (2001). The role of research in the policy puzzle:
Nurse staffing research as a case in point. Research in Nursing
& Health, 24, 443–445.
Joseph, A.J. (2004). The chest pain center as an operational
model. Critical Pathways in Cardiology, 3(1), 14–17.

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 295

Staffing and Scheduling
Josten, E.J.C., Ng-A-Tham, J.E.E., & Thierry, H. (2003). The
effects of extended workdays on fatigue, health, performance
and satisfaction in nursing. Journal of Advanced Nursing,
44(6), 643–652.
Kaestner, R. (2005). An overview of public policy and the nursing shortage. Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(1), 8–9.
Kirkby, M., et al. (1998). Improving staffing with a resource
management plan. Journal of Nursing Administration, 28(11),
25–29.
Koviack, P. (2004). A review of the effect of an accommodation
program to support nurses with functional limitations.
Nursing Economics$, 22(6), 320–324, 355.
Krail, K.A. (2005). Retaining the retiring nurse: Keeping the
nursing shortage at bay. Nurse Leader, April, 33–36.
Kramer, M., & Schmalenberg, C. (2005). Revising the essentials of magnetism tool: There is more to adequate staffing
than numbers. Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(4),
188–198.
Manojlovich, M. (2005). Predictors of professional nursing practice behaviors in hospital setting. Nursing Research, 54(1),
41–47.
Manthey, M. (2001). A core incremental staffing plan. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 31(9), 424–425.
Manthey, M. (2003). AKA primary nursing. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 33(7/8), 369–370.
Massachusetts Nurse. (1999). Nurses hail California staffing law
mandating staffing levels. Massachusetts Nurse, 69(10), 11.
McCabe, P.J., & Kalpin, P. (2005). Using shared decision making
to implement evidence-based practice in progressive care.
Critical Care Nurse, 25(2), 76–87.
McCartney, P. (2005). Online bidding for open nursing shifts.
MCN American Journal of Maternal Child Nursing, 30(5), 335.
Miller, J.G. (1978). Living systems. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Murray, M.K., & Matchulat, J.J. (2005). Hospital charity care
and billing practices: The labor movement pans for gold.
Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(6), 286–292.
Naughton, C., Cheek, L., & O’Hara, K. (2005). Rapid recovery
following cardiac surgery: A nursing perspective. British
Journal of Nursing, 14(4), 214–219.
Needleman, J., et al. (2002). Nurse-staffing levels and the quality
of care in hospitals. New England Journal of Medicine, 346(22),
1715–1722.
Nelson, R. (2005). AJN reports: nurses with disabilities.
American Journal of Nursing, 105(6), 25–26.
Osborne, S. (2004). The art of rewarding and retaining staff:
Part 2. Nurse Leader, August, 43–45.
Potter, P., et al. (2003). Identifying nurse staffing and patient
outcome relationships: A guide for change in care delivery.
Nursing Economic$, 21(4), 158–166.
Robb, E.A., et al. (2003). Self-scheduling: Satisfaction guaranteed? Nursing Management, 34(7), 16–18.
Rogers, A.E., et al. (2004). The working hours of hospital staff
nurses and patient safety. Health Affairs, 23(4), 202–212.
Rosenfeld, P., et al. (2004). Nurse residency programs: A 5-year

295

evaluation from the participants’ perspective. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 34(4), 188–194.
Saba, J.L., & Bardwell, P.L. (2004). Universal design concepts in
the emergency department. Journal of Ambulatory Care
Management, 27(3), 224–236.
Schmidt, L. (1996). A seasonal staffing model. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 26(4), 52–55.
Schmidt, L.A. (2004). Patients’ perceptions of nursing staffing,
nursing care, adverse events, and overall satisfaction with the
hospital experience. Nursing Economic$, 22(6), 295–306.
Seago, J.A. (2002). A comparison of two patient classiﬁcation
instruments in an acute care hospital. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 32(5), 243–249.
Seago, J.A., Spetz, J., & Mitchell, S. (2004). Nurse staffing and
hospital ownership in California. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 34(5), 228–237.
Smith, L.N. (2003). Maximizing hospital capacity. Healthcare
Executive, 18(1), 58–59.
Spetz, J. (2005). Public policy and nurse staffing: What approach
is best? Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(1), 14–16.
Stone, P.W., et al. (2003). Evidence of nurse working conditions:
A global perspective. Policy, Politics, & Nursing Practice, 4(2),
120–130.
Stone, P.W., et al. (2004). Nurses’ working conditions: Implications for infectious disease. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
10(11), 1984–1989, www.cdc.gov/eid; accessed April 22,
2005.
Sugrue, N.M. (2005). Public policy initiatives and the nursing
shortage. Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(1), 19–22.
Texas State Board of Nursing Examiners (2005). Charge nurse
concerns for patient safety and an overworked staff nurse.
Texas Board of Nursing Bulletin, 36(2), 5–6.
Thomas, L. (1983). The youngest science: Notes of a medicinewatcher. New York: The Viking Press.
Thorgrimson, D.H., & Robinson, N.C. (2005). Building and sustaining an adequate RN workforce. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 35(11), 474–477.
Waters, T. (2004). Fourth annual safe patient handling & movement conference speech: State of the science in ergonomics.
Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 10(2), 4. http://www.
nursingworld.org/ojin/keynotes/speech4.htm, accessed April
4, 2005.
Weinstein, S.M. (2002). A nursing portfolio: Documenting your
professional journey. Journal of Infusion Nursing, 25(6),
357–362
Whitman, G.R., et al. (2002). The impact of staffing on patient
outcomes across specialty units. Journal of Nursing Administration, 32(12), 633–639.
Wilson, J.L. (2002). The impact of shift patterns on healthcare professionals. Journal of Nursing Management, 10(4),
211–219.
Youngblut, J.M., & Brooten, D. (2001). Evidence-based nursing
practice: Why is it important? AACN Clinical Issues, 12(4),
468–476.

17Jones Leadership(F)-ch 17

1/14/07

3:49 PM

Page 296

This page has been left intentionally blank.

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 297

chapter
18
Maximizing Employee
Performance
EMILY HARMAN, MSN, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Sandwich every bit of criticism between two layers of praise.”
Mary Kay Ash

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■

Define the terms: coaching, counseling, and discipline.
Discuss the purpose of performance appraisals.
Describe the relationship between management by objectives
(MBO) and performance appraisals.
Identify common types of performance appraisal tools.
Characterize common rater errors.

297

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

298

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 298

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

P

roviding safe, high-quality patient care is the
goal of health-care organizations. To accomplish
this goal, the organization depends on the teamwork of its personnel. The nursing administrator is
responsible for planning, organizing, directing, and
coordinating the activities of the nursing personnel.
Team building is a critical part of this process. The
objective of team building is to develop a group that
is committed to the work and each other (Creasia &
Parker, 2001, p. 171).
Another important responsibility of the nurse
manager and the focus of this chapter is monitoring
and evaluating the performance of personnel, a
function called controlling. According to Creasia &
Parker (2001), controlling includes personnel evaluation, discipline, and behavior modiﬁcation. For
nurse managers, this function requires interactive
contact with employees that is unlike any of their
other responsibilities. Successful nurse managers
require knowledge and skill in interpersonal relationships to enhance the performance of employees.
This chapter will focus on the role of the nurse manager in motivating employees to achieve their professional performance goals within the organization.

Performance Appraisal
Performance appraisal, as the term implies, is a formal evaluation of an employee’s performance. The
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations (JCAHO) requires regular performance appraisals, and most health-care organizations offer them annually. Regular oversight and
evaluation of performance are the responsibilities
of nursing administration, whether or not they are
required annually. The purpose of a performance
appraisal is to provide opportunities for personal
and professional growth and to ensure the quality
of nursing care (Creasia & Parker, 2001, p. 172).
Generally, the process is intended to clarify how
well the employee is performing the requirements of
the job. A job description often provides the baseline
or minimal performance criteria. Additional standards may be used to evaluate employees, depending
on the setting. For example, nurse educators in a
university setting would be held to university standards for annual merit and/or promotion. These
standards generally include guidelines for perfor-

mance in instruction or teaching; scholarly pursuits,
such as research; and service activities to the community and the university. In a clinical setting, the
standards or benchmarks for job performance often
include the American Nurses Association (ANA)
clinical standards and the JCAHO patient safety
guidelines.
Typically, upon hire, the individual will receive a
copy of the appraisal tool and the criteria that will be
used in the evaluation process. The type of tool used
will vary from organization to organization. YoderWise (1999, p. 273) described some of the most
commonly used tools for performance assessment as
either structured or ﬂexible. The most commonly
used structured tools are the forced distribution
scales and the rating scales. The low and high values
found on these types of scales may lead to problems
in evaluation.
Forced distribution scales are one of several comparative methods that can be used alone or in conjunction with other tools to evaluate employees. A
common practice in many organizations requires
the evaluator to place a certain percentage of employees into equally divided categories. For example,
each employee would be placed into one of three categories. In a forced distribution scale, these three
categories might be labeled: (a) above average, (b)
average, and (c) below average. To many employees
this seems unfair as any comparative differences in
their overall performance may be ever so slight.
When this method is used to determine merit raises,
it frequently lowers the morale of employees who
were found to be average or below (Fig. 18-1).
Most rating scales are constructed to evaluate the
performance of employees. They usually include a

After reviewing the performance of the RN Staff on your
unit, rank order them as follows: 10% (Excellent), 15%
(Above Average), 50% (Average), 15% (Below AverageNeed Improvement), and 10% (Poor Performance-Need
Assistance). On a unit with 40 employees, the result
should be similar to the example below:
10%

Excellent

4 employees

15%

Above Average

6 employees

50%

Average

15%

Below Average

6 employees

10%

Poor Performance

4 employees

20 employees

FIGURE 18-1 Sample directions for a forced distribution scale.

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 299

Maximizing Employee Performance

299

Directions: Complete this form by circling the number that most closely
corresponds to your observations of the employee. Do this on at least two
different occasions.
Scale:
1=Poor 2=Below Average

3=Average

4=Above Average

5=Excellent

Quality of Work:

1

2

3

4

5

Knowledge of Job:

1

2

3

4

5

Communication Skills:

1

2

3

4

5

Interpersonal Skills:

1

2

3

4

5

Concern for Patient Safety*:

1

2

3

4

5

Concern for Patient Comfort**:

1

2

3

4

5

Total:

________

* e.g. Observing universal precautions
Washing hands between patients
**e.g. Administering pain medication as needed
according to prescribed guidelines

Date: _________ Name of Employee: ___________________________
Supervisor’s Signature: ______________________________________
FIGURE 18-2 Sample performance evaluation tool.

variety of measures that are common to nursing
practice in general. The biggest problem with these
scales is that the behavior to be evaluated may not
actually be observed by the evaluators, leaving them
to make assumptions about the individual’s behavior. For example, an item like “provides safe nursing care” is rather ambiguous and perhaps even
circumstance-speciﬁc. The individual may be rated
low or high on that item depending on when she is
evaluated and whether previous evaluations were
low or high. Figure 18-2 is an example of a rating
scale.
Flexible tools like the behaviorally anchored rating scale (BARS), management by objectives
(MBO), and peer review give a better picture of the
individual’s performance and are less open to bias.
A variety of tools will be discussed later in this
chapter.
For staff members, the performance appraisal
process provides feedback about their progress
toward career goals and changes in performance

and provides an opportunity to review their last
evaluation. For the nursing administrator, the performance appraisal process provides opportunities
to review the quality of patient care, identify those
staff members with the potential for advancement,
identify problem employees, and make decisions
about the overall operation of various units within
the facility. For example, when a number of employees are not performing at optimum, this may indicate problems within the organization, such as high
acuity rates and low staffing numbers. If only one
or two individuals are having problems, it could
indicate a need for further training, coaching, or
counseling.
In most organizations, individuals will be evaluated using both formal and informal procedures.
Formal evaluations may occur only once or twice a
year (Tappen, 2001, p. 273). In most cases, formal
evaluation is required by accrediting agencies or is
part of the organization’s policy. With a formal evaluation, there is usually a written procedure or

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

300

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 300

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

timetable to be followed. Forms that must be completed by the nursing supervisor and/or administrator are also part of the typical process. All employees
should be aware of the procedure, the timetable, the
tools, and their own role in the process.
According to Tappen (2001, p. 274), informal
evaluation is commonly thought of as individual
feedback or information regarding one’s performance. The organization may or may not have a
procedure for conducting informal evaluations. In
most cases, the individual collects data from various
sources to document her performance during the
year. The wise administrator and/or supervisor
should being doing the same with each staff member. For example, the supervisor should make a
point of observing staff members in action and keep
anecdotal records, noting the date, time, circumstances, and employee performance. During these
periods, feedback should be honest so that any
employee who is not performing as expected can
take corrective action. Conversely, those employees
who are doing well should be told so.
According to Barnum and Kerfoot (1995, p.
256), feedback and correction should be ongoing,
spontaneous, and to the point. The employee
should not be made to wait for an official evaluation
date to receive this type of feedback. Ongoing feedback can help motivate the employee toward outstanding performance.

BASELINES FOR PERFORMANCE
APPRAISAL
Federal guidelines have stipulated that performance
appraisal of employees be based on a valid job
analysis. Because a job analysis is used for recruiting purposes as well as for evaluation and promotion guidelines, it should be current. A job analysis
generally describes the tasks, characteristics, skills,
knowledge, and abilities required to perform a speciﬁc job. As such, it serves as a basis for career
development, in-service training, job forecasting,
and performance appraisals. In most cases, the job
analysis helps determine the value of a job in terms
of compensation while ensuring that pay equity is
maintained. A job analysis includes a job description and the job speciﬁcations. Job speciﬁcations
generally describe the qualities and characteristics
of the person needed to perform the job. A job
description speciﬁes the duties and responsibilities
of a particular role. The job analysis is often used by

administration to determine recruitment needs and
to make forecasting decisions for staffing within the
organization.
Employees are generally given a job description
when they are hired or promoted. Job descriptions
are not as comprehensive as a job analysis because
they list only the basic requirements of the job
(Fig. 18-3).

Job Description
The employee’s job description details the basic
skills and abilities needed to fulﬁll the job’s responsibilities; it serves as the starting point for a performance appraisal. Ellis and Hartley (2004, p. 461)
deﬁned job descriptions as written statements stipulating the duties and functions of various jobs
within the organization and the scope of authority,
responsibility, and accountability involved in each
position. Job descriptions should deﬁne minimum
standards for effective job performance and employment and should not be too detailed (Swansburg &
Swansburg, 2002, p. 600). A comprehensive job
description should describe what is to be done, not
how to do it. For example, each nurse would be
expected to use aseptic technique when doing a
dressing change, but the dressing Nurse A applies
may not look like the dressing Nurse B applies, even
though both have maintained a sterile ﬁeld while
doing the procedure.
Most organizations have written job descriptions
in their policy manuals. As job responsibilities and
performance requirements for employees are constantly changing, job descriptions should be
reviewed and updated on a regular basis. Employees
should have an opportunity to provide input with
regard to their job descriptions.
ANA Standards and Guidelines

Contributing to job descriptions and to performance
evaluation criteria for nurses are the standards of
clinical practice established by the ANA and the
guidelines for patient safety established by JCAHO.
The standards and guidelines proffer the measurements to be used by hospitals and a variety of healthcare agencies when evaluating their employees.
They can also provide additional information about
job requirements for the nursing staff. Nursing is
guided by these ANA standards of practice and standards of professional performance (ANA, 2004,
p. 12). The ANA standards provide a framework for
the evaluation and improvement of nursing practice.

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 301

Maximizing Employee Performance

301

Position Type: Full Time
Education: BSN preferred
Experience: 2–5 years as a medical-surgical staff nurse, previous
experience in an Emergency Department desirable,
experience with telemetry monitoring desirable
Other: RN licensure, ACLS certification
Knowledge and Skills Required*:
• Assessing patient status
• Planning and implementing emergency care
• Evaluating responses to care
• Documenting nursing activities for individual clients
• Operating a variety of technical equipment
• Rapidly responding to trauma and disaster situations
• Participating as a team member with other nurses and physicians
• Coordinating activities related to the care of emergency and
trauma patients
• Communicating effectively with patients and family members
• Educating the public as needed in the following areas:
– Reducing preventable injuries
– Promoting health and safety
* The above list only covers basic responsibilities

FIGURE 18-3 Sample job description; emergency department nurse.

It makes sense, therefore, to include these standards
developed by the profession when evaluating the
performance of the practicing nurse. Most agencies
will incorporate many or all of these standards as
part of their performance appraisal process.
For instance, the ﬁrst six standards articulated by
the ANA are directly related to the practice of nursing. These standards should be quite familiar to
nurses and are more commonly known as the nursing process. Beginning with the assessment of
clients, the nurse is expected to proceed through a
series of steps that include diagnosis, outcomes
identiﬁcation, planning, implementation, and evaluation. The nursing process is based on a critical
thinking process and provides the foundation for
evidence-based nursing practice.
The standards of professional performance, on
the other hand, reﬂect the commitment of nurses to
the profession and the clientele they serve. These
standards include:
■
■

Quality of practice
Education

■
■
■
■
■
■

Professional practice evaluation
Collegiality
Ethics
Research
Resource utilization
Leadership

These standards are also included as part of most
performance appraisal tools. Quality of practice typically means that the nurse engages in activities to
improve nursing care and nursing practice. This
might include serving on committees to update or
improve policies and procedures or documenting
outcomes of practice. Continuing education can be
formal or informal. Most state boards require periodic continuing education for relicensing. Ideally,
nurses will seek educational opportunities to
enhance or improve the knowledge and skills
needed for their practice area. Lifelong learning is a
professional commitment.
Professional practice evaluation is a process. It
implies that nurses should seek feedback actively
on their performance as it relates to standards,

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

302

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 302

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

guidelines, and job descriptions. Feedback can come
from a variety of sources such as patients, peers,
and superiors. Nurses have a responsibility to evaluate the care they give. Soliciting input from others
is one way to determine the effectiveness of care
given. For example, nurses understand the importance of checking the patient’s response to medications and treatments. This can either be by
observing the response of the patient or asking the
patient how he is doing after receiving the said medication or treatment. Today’s nurses must continually assess their strengths as well as areas needing
improvement. Peer evaluation, for example, is one
means for ongoing self-assessment. Peers generally
have similar goals and experience. New nurse graduates often seek advice from their superiors with
experience when they take on new responsibilities.
Ongoing self-evaluation by nurses makes the performance appraisal process seem less threatening.
Periodic informal feedback should prepare nurses
for the more formal process when it occurs.
Nurses constantly interact with other health
team members. Collegial relationships serve several
purposes. For one, they provide a learning forum
for the nurse and enhance the outcome of the
patient’s situation. During the course of patient
care, the nurse collaborates with patients, families,
and colleagues. Collaboration through communication and documentation is one way to ensure continuity of care for the patient.
Patients and their families have a right to expect
nurses to engage in ethical practice, which is why it
has become a component of performance evaluation.
Patients expect conﬁdential handling of information
about them and to be treated with dignity and
respect. Today’s nurse is also expected to participate
in research at some level. This may include helping
to collect data, implementing new procedures based
on research, sharing research ﬁndings, or serving on
research committees. This type of activity may be
new to many nurses, but it can often be very rewarding. Many of the practice guidelines that nurses take
for granted are based on research ﬁndings.
The term “resource utilization” may be somewhat misleading but refers to keeping patients (as
consumers) informed about their options. Many
nurses have been doing this for some time. If there
is a less costly but safer treatment available, nurses
have usually discussed it with their clients. For
example, soap and water might work as well as an
expensive hand cleanser.

An additional component here is delegation
of patient care to unlicensed personnel. Delegation requires ﬁnding the right person for the
right job. The ﬁve rights of delegation identiﬁed
by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing are:
■
■
■
■
■

Right task
Right circumstance
Right person
Right direction
Right supervision

In short, using nursing judgment and following
these standards of delegation, nurses are able to
assign tasks to other caregivers safely. This is often
difficult for new nurses, who may not be familiar
with the job responsibilities of other health team
members. It is critical, however, that nurses use delegation appropriately to save themselves time and
energy and to distribute the workload better.
Leadership implies that the nurse assumes a
larger role in the community or outside of the practice setting. This may mean, for instance, teaching
ﬁrst-graders about hand washing or spreading
germs. Nurses are expected to participate in committees within the practice setting either as a member or a leader. They are also expected to take an
active role in advancing their profession, usually by
joining a professional organization.
One purpose of performance appraisal is to make
good employees better. According to Ash (1984),
good employees are a company’s number one asset.
Management usually describes a good employee as
one who is loyal to the organization and/or one
with good work ethics. Additionally, management
has indicated that these individuals seem satisﬁed
with their work and have low rates of absenteeism.
Ash believes that one way to make good employees
better is for management to help them reach their
potential.

MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES
Management by objectives (MBO) systems indicate
a two-way communication process of evaluation
(Houston, 1995). This implies that both management and employee establish goals to be discussed
during the evaluation process. Encouraging employees to set their own goals is often a good way to
enhance performance and behavior. Whereas there
is a sense of self-satisfaction derived from achieving

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 303

Maximizing Employee Performance

goals, there may also be some extrinsic reward as
well. Achieving one’s goals could result in a salary
increase or a promotion. This idea for setting one’s
own goals is based on McGregor’s theory of management and is often referred to as MBO.
Many health-care organizations have included
MBO as part of the performance appraisal process.
For the nursing staff, MBO offers an opportunity
to do a self-assessment and set goals that are realistic and meaningful to career aspirations. Some
details on developing goals as part of the MBO process follow:
■

■
■

■

■

■

The staff should limit their goals to two or
three.
Goals should be meaningful and realistic.
Strategies for achieving the goals should be
included as well.
An in-service session on writing goals and
strategies may be helpful when introducing
the idea of MBO.
The nurse manager and nursing supervisor
should review goals with staff members.
Before the goals are submitted, all parties
should agree on them.

Working with the nursing supervisor and/or
administrator, the performance appraisal process
can become a meaningful and rewarding experience. When one’s superior shows an interest in his
or her career goals and aspirations, the employee
may be motivated to reach his potential. This is a
win-win for both parties because the success of the
administrator is often measured by the success of
her subordinates.
The job description and standards of performance provide the starting point for assessing
employees. Performance appraisal, however, should
make use of additional data sources depending on
the requirements of the organization. Standardized
tools may be used to evaluate employees in some
organizations, while others may opt for the use of
tools developed in-house. In any case, the responsibility for data collection rests with the nursing
supervisor.

DATA COLLECTION
The employees’ immediate supervisor usually carries out data collection for evaluations at various
points during the review period. The employee
should be aware of the methods and have a copy of

303

the tool or tools that will be used to evaluate performance. Data collection methods might include:
(a) making notations on the tool based on observations, (b) keeping anecdotal notes, (c) reviewing
charting, (d) interviewing patients, (e) attending
staff meetings, (f) talking with the employee’s
coworkers, and/or (g) reviewing the employee’s
skills or competency evaluations. Any or all of these
may be used.

Performance Appraisal Tools
Input from nurses working in different settings suggested that organizations are using a wide variety of
tools. Sophisticated, standardized tools are used in
some organizations while others use simple checklists. There seemed to be little consistency in the
type of tool used from area to area. Checklists, ratings, rankings, anecdotal records, peer reviews, and
self-appraisals have their place in health-care organizations. Several of these methods are described
below in detail.
Peer Reviews

Peer reviews are one means of evaluating staff, especially in a decentralized organization. Peer review is
a process of assessing, monitoring, and evaluating
the quality of patient care provided. Acceptable
standards of practice are often used to determine the
quality of care. The process of peer review may vary
from organization to organization. Each institution
should establish guidelines for conducting peer
reviews. These guidelines should describe who,
what, when, how often, and under what circumstances. A method that is commonly used in many
institutions is critiquing patient records.
Generally, this involves a group of peer reviewers. One or more of those individuals might randomly review patient records with attention to
speciﬁc criteria. The same criteria should be used
when reviewing any patient records. Because
patient records are legal documents, certain criteria
should apply from institution to institution, such as
assessing the patient’s level of pain and documenting the patient’s response to any pain medication
that may have been administered. Other methods of
peer review may require one or more of the peer
reviewers to observe an employee giving patient
care. Here again, the criteria should be speciﬁed and
the same for each person being observed. Despite its
increasing popularity, employees may see peer
review as intimidating.

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

304

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 304

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Parks and Lindstrom (1995) reported that the
potential rewards for instituting unit-based peer
review included increased trust, communication,
and job satisfaction. In the situation they described,
performance appraisal was one of three reasons for
instituting peer review. Quality assurance and professional development were the other reasons given.
The peer review groups consisted of senior nurses
who were experienced in mentoring and adept at
group process skills.
Peer reviews can provide informal feedback to
the nursing staff. If used properly, peer evaluation
can provide a powerful incentive for personal and
professional development. According to Marquis
and Huston (2000, p. 427), peer review has the
potential to increase the accuracy of performance
appraisal. The idea of having colleagues or peers
evaluate each other makes sense from the standpoint of similarity of experiences, knowledge, and
familiarity with skill requirements. This practice is
becoming more widely accepted in health care and
lends more credence to the overall performance
evaluation of employees. Although peer review
offers some beneﬁts, it cannot be entered into
lightly, and it is unrealistic to think peers can be
involved with evaluations without extensive training (Barnum & Kerfoot, 1995, p. 256).
Checklists

Kelly-Heidenthal (2003, p. 558) described checklists
as the most commonly used type of performance
evaluation tool. Checklists are easy to use and only
require the rater to determine whether the person
being evaluated falls below the standards, meets the
standards, or exceeds the standards of the organization. The problem with checklists is that they often
lead to rater errors, especially central tendency.
Central tendency occurs when the evaluator rates
nearly everyone the same. Most often this happens
when the evaluator is not familiar with the persons
she is evaluating or because she has not actually
observed them in the performance of certain activities. In organizations where this type of tool is used,
employees often complain that they really have no
idea of whether they are doing well or improving
because their evaluations vary little year after year.
Rating Scales

Rating scales are also used to evaluate performance. The rater selects a number (usually between
1 and 5) that best describes the individual’s perfor-

mance (see Fig. 18-2). While rating scales are only
slightly more illuminating than a checklist, the rater
does have more options from which to choose.
Although ratings and rankings are intended to be
applied subjectively, any rating or ranking could
reﬂect the rater’s bias (Houston, 1995).
Ranking Employees

Rankings are sometimes used to determine how an
individual performs in relation to others in a similar situation. Nursing administrators are sometimes
required to rank subordinates based on a variety of
criteria. This method is one that is often used when
decisions have to be made about promotion or merit
raises. Typically, ranking requires assigning numerical points rather than narrative descriptors when
totaling data.
When ranking systems are used, the performance of individual employees is compared with
those of other employees, usually those at the same
level. Rankings should not be used alone, however,
because they do not address the quality of the performance. A ranking system is generally used in
organizations where performance is used to determine merit increases or promotions.
For example, in a recent merger at Central
Hospital, two staff nurses were being considered for
a newly created position in pediatrics. The nurse
manager was unable to determine which nurse,
Janet or Joyce, should be given the position. Both of
them had worked on the pediatric unit for 5 years,
and both of them had earned a bachelor’s degree in
nursing. Using the outcomes from the performance
appraisal data, the supervisor was able to differentiate between the two individuals in terms of their
overall performance for the past 3 years. On the 10
items listed on a rating scale similar to the one in
Figure 18-2, Janet had scored 35, 43, and 45, respectively, for the past 3 years. Joyce, on the other hand,
had scored 35, 40, and 40 during the past 3 years.
Their scores on several other tools also reﬂected
a similar pattern. As a result, Janet received the
job offer.
Anecdotal Records

Anecdotal records are generally written records of
observations. If used to evaluate performance, criteria should be established for the evaluator. For
example, the evaluator might observe the individual’s behavior in a given situation to ascertain
whether or not he has explained the side effects of

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 305

Maximizing Employee Performance

a client’s medications. When the behaviors to be
observed are clearly deﬁned, the evaluator knows
what to look for, and the individual knows the criteria by which he is being evaluated.
Skill Testing

Many organizations are now evaluating the skills of
their employees. Testing skills in working with specialized equipment or performing speciﬁc procedures is one way to evaluate the employee’s
performance in areas that are unlikely to be
observed in all situations. Skill testing may be part
of the orientation of new nurses in a given agency
to bridge the gap between education and practice.
When skill testing is involved, nurses are often
required to demonstrate expertise in such areas
as cardiopulmonary-resuscitation, handling the
crash cart, preparing and/or starting intravenous
medications, isolation techniques, tracheostomy
care, dressing changes, removing staples (sutures),
and other skills as deemed necessary by the agency.
Some agencies have ongoing in-service programs
whereby the staff are tested on a regular basis
to maintain their expertise. Brykczynski (1998)
recommends identifying and describing levels of
nursing skills into the performance evaluation.
Those demonstrating exemplary skills or the
expert nurses could then serve as role models for
the staff.
Patient Surveys

Most health-care agencies use some form of patient
survey. Whereas supervisors often depend on
patient surveys to evaluate the productivity and
performance of the agency itself, they may also be
used to assess patient satisfaction with care
received. Unfortunately, it is difficult to collect
information about individual employees in an acute
care setting using a patient survey form. There are
some rehabilitation centers and nursing care facilities that do provide opportunities for the residents
and family members to evaluate the staff. In some
cases, employees may be given a bonus for positive
comments on these surveys.
Reviewing patient satisfaction data is part of the
administrator’s responsibility. Client care is the
focus; when clients are dissatisﬁed, something is
amiss. Consumer satisfaction continues to be a
major concern of health-care agencies. Several tools
have been used, most of which only describe the
patient’s overall satisfaction or dissatisfaction with

305

the experience. For example, patients may be asked
if someone explained the treatments and medications they received and then how satisﬁed they
were with the explanations they received. Because
most patients are not required to give their names,
there may be no way of knowing who took care
of them or perhaps even when they were hospitalized. This kind of general information serves as
a starting point, but the current thinking is that
more relevant patient satisfaction measures should
be used, based on patient outcomes or evidencebased practice.

EVALUATOR BIAS
The more examples of behavior that the nursing
administrator has to work with, the less biased the
appraisal will be. Performance appraisal is an interpersonal process containing an element of subjectivity (Huber, 2000, p. 335). Regardless of the tool
used, someone must evaluate the employee. In most
instances, the employee’s immediate supervisor is
the person who does this. To guard against subjective attitudes and values inﬂuencing the appraisal,
the appraiser should develop an awareness of her
own biases and prejudices, according to Marquis
and Huston (2000). How can this be accomplished?
The nurse manager could consult with other managers when questions of personal bias exist, gather
data appropriately, and keep notes on observations,
others’ comments, chart reviews, and care plans
(p. 417).
Try as they might, raters are likely to be less
objective than the ideal. This could result in one or
more evaluator rating errors (Nauright, 1987).
Some of the most common rater errors include: (a)
central tendency, (b) “halo effect,” and (c) “horn
effect.” Central tendency occurs when the rater,
unsure of how persons are performing, ends up rating them as good or average on most items listed.
The “halo effect” occurs when the employee has
recently shown exceptional performance in one or
more areas. If this behavior is apparent to the rater
during the last few observations, the rater may rate
the employee as above average in most areas listed,
regardless of the actual performance in some of
those areas. The “horn effect” is the opposite of the
“halo effect.” In other words, an employee who has
recently displayed less than satisfactory behavior in
one or more performance areas may be rated as per-

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

306

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

3:50 PM

Page 306

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

TABLE 18-1
■

1/14/07

Rater Errors

Halo effect: Trait carryover; person whose performance
is good in several known areas is assumed to be good
in other perhaps unknown areas
Recency effect: Recent events (good or bad) could bias
the rater
Horn effect/problem distortion: One poor performance may weigh heavier with the rater than many
good performances
Sunflower effect: Rater may grade all employees high
if she thinks her team is great
Central tendency: Rater may mark everyone as average,
especially if she is unsure how certain people performed
Rater temperament effect: Different raters will be
stricter or more lenient than others
Strict ratings: The rater may score the person lower
than he deserves in an effort to motivate him
Lenient ratings: The rater may score the person higher
than he deserves so the person will think kindly of the
rater
Guessing error: “Guesstimates” by the rater about
a particular performance she did not really observe
Initial impression: Rater judges the person on
appearance or some personal attribute and therefore assumes the person is doing a good job if she
made a favorable impression, or perhaps the rater
assumes the performance is less than satisfactory
if the initial impression was less than favorable.
Status: Rater judges the person according to position,
education, or other criteria rather than on actual
performance

Nauright, L. (1987). Toward a comprehensive personnel system:
Performance appraisal part IV. Nursing Management, 18(8) 67–77.

forming below average in many other areas. This
may not be a fair reﬂection of the individual’s usual
behavior (Table 18-1)

The Appraisal Meeting
Once all the data are compiled, the nurse manager
sets aside time on her calendar for employee
appraisal meetings. As a rule, these are conducted at
about the same time each year for all employees.
The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the
employee’s performance for the year. At the conclusion of the meeting, both parties should reach an
agreement as to the employee’s overall performance

status, areas for improvement, and plans for maximizing performance.

THE ROLE OF THE EMPLOYEE
In preparation for performance appraisals, employees should collect their own data. They can begin by
listing their strengths, especially contributions to
the organization, as well as to patient safety and
welfare. In addition, they will want to identify any
accomplishments since their last review that indicate progress toward their stated goals. If little or no
progress was made, they should be able to explain
why. In most organizations, employees would have
been required to submit goals for the upcoming
appraisal meeting well in advance, perhaps at the
last meeting. The employee should be prepared to
address the goals they established at the time of
their performance appraisal meeting.
Some of the long-term goals may be ongoing,
while short-term goals may be completed or nearing
completion by the time of the meeting. Employees
should identify any problems encountered with
reaching their goals and ascertain why. For example, an employee may have determined that she
would have become a certiﬁed nurse midwife this
year. The employee might ﬁrst look at the needed
resources and/or strategies she identiﬁed in relation
to the stated goal. Next, the employee needs to ask
herself a series of questions about failure to meet
the goal. Was it due to time constraints? Was it a
matter of ﬁnances, or was it a lack of adequate experiences or preparation? Was there anything the
organization or the supervisor could have done to
assist the employee? The employee should be as
honest as possible when identifying the reasons the
goal was not accomplished.

Self-Appraisals
Self-appraisals are commonly used to address
whether or not employees have met established
goals and if not, why not. Self-appraisals can also
be used in conjunction with any of the other tools
as can anecdotal records. In fact, self-appraisals
should relate to performance of the job as deﬁned
by the job description, according to Swansburg and
Swansburg (2002). When all parties are using
like criteria or standards, there ought to be no surprises at the time of the appraisal interview. The
goals established by the employee should therefore
have relevance to the goals and mission of the

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 307

Maximizing Employee Performance

organizations as well as to her own career goals. For
example, a staff nurse who would someday like
to be the team leader would need to determine
what that job entails. Her goals should be deﬁned
clearly with that idea in mind. When meeting with
her supervisor, the discussion should center on
her career goals as well as on her capabilities as a
staff nurse.
Before the performance appraisal meeting, the
employee would be expected to submit self-appraisal
materials to the nurse manager, including the goals
developed for the coming year. This information
will be added to the data that have already been
compiled by the nurse manager.

THE ROLE OF THE NURSE MANAGER
Prior to meeting with her subordinates, the nurse
manager should organize materials for the upcoming meeting. This begins with reviewing the
employee’s past performance and goals established
for the past year. Next, the manager would review
data from tools, peer evaluations, self-evaluations,
and any anecdotal records. The beneﬁts of prior
planning cannot be overemphasized. The manager
should be in charge and prepared for all contingencies. According to Rondeau (1992), successful
performance appraisal sessions require a wellconceived and well-executed plan of action.
To evaluate subordinates better, the manager
needs to know as much about the person being evaluated as possible. For example, knowing the current
position held by the employee and how long she has
held that position could make a difference in terms
of how the person is evaluated. When looking at
records of any critical incidents, the manager should
remember that a single critical incident might not
represent a true picture of the individual.
A date and time for the meeting should be established well in advance, and the manager should
make certain the date and time for the meeting are
satisfactory for both parties. It is important that the
meeting be free of interruptions. The employee
should believe that the manager considers this time
to be important.
When employees are performing well, the meeting should go fairly smoothly for both parties. The
purpose of planning for the meeting is to review the
employee’s job-related behaviors and the available
evaluation materials. The focus of the meeting is
always on the performance level of the individual
past and present and the progress she has made

307

toward the established goals. The manager should
also review and be prepared to discuss any positive
comments from peers, patients, or the person’s
immediate supervisor. Anecdotal records can be
discussed if needed, but the employee deserves an
opportunity to discuss his self-analysis and career
aspirations as well.
When evaluating others, the nurse manager
engages in active listening and assertive communication. Assertive communication means being open
and honest but treating others fairly and with
respect. This means giving criticism when needed
and handing out praise when deserved. The focus
of performance appraisal should be on the individual’s performance, not on personal characteristics
or problems. The manager needs to think through
what he needs to discuss with the employee while
making every effort to put the person at ease.
According to Ash (1984), there is a gender difference in responses to criticism. Although many
societal changes have occurred for working women
in general, nursing has always consisted primarily
of women. In general, women are much more sensitive to criticism than men. In other words, women
take it much more personally and tend to react
more negatively to criticism.
Difficult as it may be, the nurse manager must
decide how to approach an employee who has
demonstrated an unsatisfactory performance. The
nurse manager’s role is to encourage and motivate
employees toward excellence in performance. None
of the manager’s roles is as personal as appraising
the work performance of others (Marquis &
Huston, 2000, p. 414). This aspect of the process is
considered extrinsic motivation. Because most
employees are sensitive to comments about their
performance, good interpersonal skills are as important as good leadership and managerial skills. At the
beginning of this chapter was a quote from Ash
(1984), “Sandwich every bit of criticism between
two layers of praise.” In short, this means that managers should start by focusing on the person’s good
points, then bring up the problems identiﬁed, and
end by discussing how these can be resolved.
Rondeau (1992) advocates using criticism sparingly
as it tends to build up individual resistance and shut
down communication.
Leaming (1998) described several improvement
pointers for academic leaders engaged in evaluation
of their subordinates. Many of these pointers would
work well for the nursing administrator in any setting. In general terms, it is important to:

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

308
■
■

■

■

■
■
■
■

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 308

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Keep channels of communication open
Let people know they are appreciated for their
contributions to the organization
Involve your subordinates in departmental
governance
Be positive and encourage an attitude of cooperativeness
Treat people fairly and with respect
Spread the workload around
Create a supportive culture in the workplace
Tolerate differences among subordinates (pp.
131–134).

THE MEETING
Once all the data are collected, the nursing manager
or supervisor can begin to summarize the ﬁndings.
A good rule of thumb is to list the strengths ﬁrst and
then to list the areas in need of improvement. If the
employee submitted goals for the year and provided
documentation, assess these as well. Although the
nursing manager can list a few strategies for
improving performance, the employee should take
the major responsibility for this. According to
Smith (2003), the appraisal meeting should be
scheduled at a convenient time for the employee so
the meeting can proceed uninterrupted for at least
45 minutes. She also recommends that the environment be nonthreatening and relaxed and that managers be prepared for the meeting. Lack of
preparation is a time-waster and sets a poor example for subordinates. It may also display a lack of
concern or interest in the employee. The meeting is
a very personal, face-to-face interaction and should
not be taken lightly by either party (Box 18-1).
The focus of the meeting should be to review the
employee’s performance and explore with him ideas
for being successful within the organization. The
manager sets the tone for the meeting by ﬁrst
explaining the purpose for the evaluation, which
may vary from organization to organization. When
merit raises or promotions are dependent on the
outcome of the appraisal, the employees are likely to
be somewhat nervous, so the manager should make
every effort to put the employee at ease.
The nurse manager should initiate the evaluation process by reviewing with employees their
goals for the year. From there she should proceed to
discuss her ﬁndings based on data collection. Next,

Box 18-1
Tips for a Successful Performance
Appraisal Meeting
■
■
■

Conduct the meeting in a nonthreatening or neutral
environment.
Allow 45–60 minutes per person.
Remember that information discussed during the
meeting is confidential and should be shared only
with committee members and the appropriate
administrators.

According to Hecht, et al., (pp. 109–110), the administrator
should:
■ Maintain the focus of the meeting on the individual’s
performance, not his personality.
■ Give specific suggestions for improving performance.
■ Establish a time frame for achieving the goals, and
review progress at that time.
■ Recognize and reward positive achievement following
unsatisfactory performance. If the employee has been
unsatisfactory but has turned around, be sure to make
note of improved behavior.

the manager can move on to the periodic observations or input from others, such as patients or
peers. Employees should have an opportunity to
respond to these ﬁndings and to discuss their performance and accomplishments.
By the conclusion of the meeting, the manager
and the employee should mutually agree on a plan
of action for the professional or career development
of the individual. Both long-term and short-term
goals should be addressed. A preprinted form can be
used for this purpose. Such a form should include a
space for a narrative summary and dated signatures
of both the supervisor and employee. This plan of
action might also include the employee’s future
goals with the organization.

FOLLOW-UP
Implementing the plan of action may require longterm intervention by the supervisor, such as motivating, coaching, or counseling the employee. If, at
the conclusion of the meeting, the manager is convinced that none of those approaches would be beneﬁcial to the employee, she may need to resort to
disciplinary measures.

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 309

Maximizing Employee Performance

309

Motivating
The nursing manager/leader is in the best position
to motivate employees to achieve their goals
because managers set the tone for an environment
that encourages productivity and success. When the
employees look good and perform well, the nursing manager/leader looks good and, in turn, the
organization looks good. A large part of motivation involves feelings related to self-worth and satisfaction. According to Swansburg and Swansburg
(2002), a motivating environment is one in which
the nurse leader/manager:
■
■
■

■

■
■

Establishes a career development program
Helps employees to meet their career goals
Communicates the organization’s goals and
priorities
Involves the staff in the development of department and organizational mission and goals
Encourages teamwork
Rewards teamwork, innovation, and creativity

While the above list does not cover all aspects of
motivation, the list speciﬁes those environmental
factors that would encourage excellence in employee
performance.

Coaching
In assisting employees to reach their goals and
develop professionally, the nurse manager often
assumes the role of a coach. According to Donner,
Wheeler, and Waddell (1997), coaching is an ongoing, face-to-face, collaborative process. The purpose
of coaching is to assist the employee in carrying out
job responsibilities or gaining knowledge and skills
required for the job. The immediate supervisor
often has ongoing contact with the employee and is
in the best position to evaluate progress and identify
areas for improvement. Coaching might be likened
to on-the-job training or teaching. The employee on
the receiving end of the coaching has the advantage
of immediate application of learning in the real
world. This is a common practice in many organizations when new hires or individuals being considered for promotion have no educational
experience related to the requisite knowledge or
skills the job requires. Loveridge and Cummings
(1996, p. 368) described coaching as informal counseling that can be used for the short term or over the

chapter star:
The Performance Appraisal Meeting
July is staff appraisal time for Unit X. Nurse Manger J (NMJ)
has scheduled her 30 staff nurses over the first two weeks
of July for performance review. Some appointments will
occur on the weekends for the weekend staff and at the
beginning of the evening shift and end of the night shift
to cover employees on those permanent rotations. Thus,
employees will not have to come in on an off day or offduty time.
All staff nurses set goals at last year’s appraisal meeting
and have submitted their progress reports in advance of
the meeting. In addition to meeting standard staff nurse
competencies, Staff Nurse A (SNA), who is scheduled for
the first meeting, sets the following goals:
1. Participation on one continuous quality improvement (CQI) project.
2. Attend a continuing education session on cardiac
arrhythmias.
3. Develop skills in reading EKGs.
NMJ has approved SNA’s attendance at the cardiac
arrhythmia workshop, noted that she participated in the
CQI project concerning reduction of length of stay for
cardiac pacemaker patients, and reviews her chart notes,
which state that SNA included notation of rhythm strips
on her assigned patients.
The performance appraisal meeting begins. NMJ
offers SNA a beverage of her choice. While the secretary
is bringing them, she inquires about SNA’s family to set
a friendly, concerned tone for the meeting. NMJ reviews
all of the staff nurse competencies, which are rated
“met” or “above or exceeds expectations.” She commends
NMA on her performance. Then she reviews her documentation on PRN pain medication and explains and
coaches SNA on how she might improve her notation
of the patient’s response by focusing on the following
key factors, i.e., pain scale rating after receipt of medication, location of pain, and duration of pain, etc., at
2 hours and 4 hours after receiving the PRN medication.
Together they plan to include objectives for the next
year to improve SNA’s documentation with milestones
three, six, and nine months out. SNA is informed that
she will receive an “exceeds expectations” for her overall rating and therefore will receive a 3.5% pay raise.
The meeting concludes in 45 minutes. SNA will forward
her finalized goals for the next year within the next
2 weeks.

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

310

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 310

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

long term. Short-term coaching is generally spontaneous, brief, and open. Long-term coaching can be
used to correct performance deﬁciencies. This type
of coaching is usually planned and behavior-speciﬁc
(Loveridge & Cummings, 1996, p. 200). Coaching
also might involve providing opportunities for the
employee to attend workshops or conferences or
serve on committees.

Counseling
The nurse managers may also ﬁnd themselves
counseling employees. According to Hecht, et al.
(1999, p. 111), this process provides the nursing
administrator with an opportunity to demonstrate
genuine interest in subordinates. Deciding if an
employee would beneﬁt from counseling requires
interpersonal contact between the nurse manager
and the employee. Counseling is one of the most productive functions to improve employee performance
(Loveridge & Cummings, 1996, p. 368). Counseling generally occurs in a private session where the
focus is on helping the employee solve a problem.
Generally, these are personal problems that may be
interfering with the employee’s performance.
Frequent absenteeism is a good example. While frequent absenteeism can be due to many other factors,
it is a common symptom of substance abuse.
Other problems that require counseling might
include disputes or conﬂicts with other employees.
In counseling sessions, the nurse manager should
help employees get to the bottom of problems and
adjust their attitude if necessary. Sometimes this
means separating the employees, putting them on
different shifts or on different units. If the problem
is potentially life-threatening or requires therapeutic intervention, the employee should be directed
where to seek help. Because nurses are not always
equipped or trained as therapists, the problem
employee may need referral to another agency or a
professional counselor for support.

Disciplining
Managers may also be required to mete out discipline. Although discipline is generally thought of as
some form of punishment for negative behavior,
Gillies (1994, p. 557) stated that its purpose is to
improve job performance. According to Webster’s
Dictionary (1995), disciplining can mean taking

corrective action or bringing about self-control
through instruction or training. The deﬁnition also
includes conformity to rules and regulations.
Marquis and Huston (2000, p. 442) stated that
when employees continue undesirable conduct,
either in breaking rules or in not performing their
job duties adequately, disciplinary action must be
taken. This approach may seem a little extreme, but
in any organization there are standards and guiding
principles. Employees are expected to conform and
perform accordingly. In health-care systems, many
of these standards exist to protect the patients and
others. One good example is universal precautions.
JCAHO (2005) published its list of disease-speciﬁc
care national patient safety goals, one of which
was to reduce the risk of health-care–associated
infections. One of the strategies listed was compliance with the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) hand hygiene guidelines.
Nurses learn early on that aseptic technique is
essential to preventing the spread of organisms
from person to person. But how often have nurses
been observed rushing from one situation to
another without taking the time to wash their
hands between patients? Most health-care agencies
have begun to post signs in plain sight in every
patient room and anywhere that hand washing is
considered essential. Some nurses might view this
as a form of discipline simply because somewhere,
someone did not take the time to wash his hands.
When considered in a broader perspective, however, most nurses realize that this is a reminder for
everyone who might transmit organisms: nursing
staff members, physicians, other health-care workers, family members, and even the patients.
Few responsibilities of the nursing manager are
as personal and time-consuming as performance
appraisal. The manager’s job includes a number of
other personnel responsibilities, including working with new employees, probationary employees,
and problem employees. Although most healthcare organizations have personnel departments, the
nursing manager is generally involved whenever
the nursing staff is the focus of attention.

New Employees and Probationary Employees
In this era of nursing shortages, new employees and
probationary employees rarely have the luxury of
a long orientation period. Agencies should take care

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 311

Maximizing Employee Performance

with new employees and develop an evaluation
procedure for determining their ability to succeed.
When the organization shows an interest in the
employee and is willing to spend time teaching him,
he may be more likely to stay. Metcalf (2001) stated
that it is crucial for newly graduated nurses that
the process of staff development begin at the commencement of and continue throughout their
employment. A collaborative environment is a motivating environment where the nursing administration provides ongoing support and encourages the
professional development of each employee.
Conversely, any new or probationary employee
who demonstrates problematic behavior in one
department is likely to have difficulty on other
units in the same facility. Documenting behavior
and evaluating abilities from the beginning of
employment provides the agency with information
about performance in general. New hires and probationary employees who do not measure up, especially with coaching and counseling efforts, may
need to be terminated.

THE PROBLEM EMPLOYEE
Once an employee is a part of the organization, the
administration has a responsibility to assist that
person. A variety of personal difficulties can lead to
poor performance in the workplace. Most notable
would be problems related to chemical impairment.
Chemical impairment refers to impairment due
to drug or alcohol addiction (Marquis & Huston,
2000, p. 459). Some common problems resulting
from these impairments are excessive absenteeism,
decreased quality of work, errors in judgment,
work-related accidents, and high rates of turnover.
When evaluating employees, the manager should
note when these problems occur with regularity.
Excessive absenteeism, tardiness, and sick leave can
create a serious staffing deﬁciency unless guidelines
or policies exist. Most unionized settings address
these problems, and nonunionized settings would
do well to address them as well (Box 18-2).
In many states, nursing organizations or boards
of nursing sponsor programs for the impaired nurse.
Many agencies and health insurance plans also
cover the cost of such programs. The nurse manager
needs to be familiar with the policies existing in the
organization and in the state. For example, in Ohio,
employers are required to report employees for con-

311

Box 18-2
Developing Organizational Policies for
Absenteeism, Tardiness, and Sick Leave
1. Recognize the existence of employee problems
2. Take a proactive approach for dealing with the
problem
3. Review existing policies
4. Solicit employee input
5. Determine how many absences per year are
considered excessive
6. Determine how many successive sick days are
permitted within a given period
7. Decide what action should be taken for violations of
the policy
8. Develop a staffing protocol to be instituted when
absenteeism and sick leaves occur
9. Distribute policy to all employees, post policy on each
unit, and add it to the policy manual

duct requiring disciplinary action, such as a positive drug screen, even if that employee has been
referred to an employee assistance program. Ohio
sponsors two programs for problem employees: a
program for nurses with substance abuse problems
and a program that requires nurses to obtain additional education to improve their practice skills.
Nurses in these programs are monitored by the
state board of nursing and are able to remain
employable with minimal threat to the public. Other
states as well as most professional organizations and
many health-care organizations offer similar programs.
Although most organizations have a personnel
department to deal with all kinds of issues that
develop during corporate changes such as reorganization and downsizing, the nurse manager may ﬁnd
herself called upon for input when the nursing staff
is involved. Nurse managers may also be involved at
the decision-making level when it comes to transferring or terminating nursing staff.

Transfers and Termination
Transfers and termination within an organization
can lead to increased productivity and success.
Good employees may be transferred to other areas
within an organization as part of a promotion package or to make better use of their potential. In some

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

312

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 312

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

instances problem employees may be transferred to
other areas where they may be more successful.
When an employee exhibits problem behavior
that is unlikely to change and may be detrimental
to the organization, she should be terminated.
Restructuring within an organization may result in
the termination of employees, even those with good
performance records.
Transfers

Transfers are common in the corporate world; they
often involve moving an employee to a new location, often with a promotion and an increase in
salary. In health-care organizations, this may not be
the case. Many employees, especially the nursing
staff, are place-bound and unwilling or unable to
move to another location. When mergers or acquisitions occur in the health-care industry, it is often
necessary to eliminate positions. Mergers occur
when two or more organizations join together to
form a single new organization (Lancaster, 1999,
p. 99). When one organization buys another, the
acquired organization no longer carries its original
identity (Lancaster, 1999, p. 99). In either of these
situations, for example, there may be no need to
have two evening supervisors for the intensive care
unit (ICU). One of them could, if willing, be transferred to another unit as a supervisor, if they were
unwilling to take a staff position in the ICU. One
type of transfer is the lateral transfer, meaning the
individual would be moved to a position with a similar scope of responsibilities within the same organization (Marquis & Huston, 2000). Another type
of transfer is the downward transfer, which occurs
when someone takes a position within the organization that is below his or her previous level
(p. 539). If the transfer is unrelated to performance,
the individual may be able to select a position that
best relates to her career goals. A person who eventually wants to be a nurse educator may opt to
switch to the education department. If this is not in
her future, she may decide to take the open position
as relief supervisor for the emergency department.
Downsizing refers to reducing the number of
positions within an organization, normally done to
reduce organizational costs and often accompanied
by changes in job design to enhance the productivity of the remaining staff (Lancaster, 1999, p. 93).
Two personnel issues related to downsizing are
transfers and termination of employees. Usually, a
transfer is no reﬂection on the employee’s performance because the person’s salary often remains the

same. With downsizing, this is becoming a fairly
common practice.
Termination

While termination is certainly possible with restructuring, the shortage of nurses makes it unlikely that
nursing personnel would be let go. More often, it is
the unlicensed personnel whose jobs are in jeopardy. Termination should be the ﬁnal step in the performance appraisal process, when other measures
have failed to bring about improvement of the
employee’s performance. As with other policies in
the organization, it is critical that a well-deﬁned procedure for termination be in place. The guidelines
should be followed strictly by the nursing administrator, after efforts at coaching, counseling, and disciplining have proved unsuccessful. When an
employee is a member of a collective bargaining
unit, the contract delineates the steps leading to
termination. In many organizations, outplacement
services are available for employees who have been
terminated. This might be a comprehensive program
that helps individuals to prepare résumés and applications and work with counselors as they search
for another job. This type of program may also be
instituted when an organization is going through a
major transition, such as downsizing or closing.
When valued employees must be terminated, they
may be recommended to other facilities within the
corporate system.

All Good Things...
The purpose of performance appraisal is to improve
the quality and productivity of the employee and
enhance career aspirations. The nursing administrator has the responsibility for overseeing the
performance appraisal and motivating the employee
toward excellence in practice. When employees
appear to need support or assistance in reaching goals, their supervisors may be able to work
with them, coaching and counseling as needed. Performance appraisal should be an ongoing process,
which has both informal and formal components.
Employees should take an active role in the process
by establishing meaningful career goals for themselves and working toward those goals. The outcome of the process should be satisﬁed employees
who realize their aspirations with the support of the
nursing administration.

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 313

Maximizing Employee Performance

NCLEX Questions
1. In most organizations, a current, valid job des-

cription should do all of the following except:
A. Outline the duties, skills, and knowledge
required for the job
B. Describe how the person is to carry out basic
responsibilities
C. Be used as the baseline for a performance
appraisal
D. Identify the department or unit for the work
assignment
2. Performance appraisals are primarily done for

which purpose?
A. Comparing the performance of employees on
the unit
B. Identifying employees with personal problems
C. Recruiting new employees into the organization
D. Improving the performance of individual
employees
3. A peer review may be done as part of the per-

formance appraisal to:
A. Compare the employee’s past and present
performance
B. Document a single outstanding observation
C. Assess the level of a colleague’s performance
D. Make a list of desirable employee behaviors
4. The following statements about management by

objectives are all true except:
A. Employees have an opportunity to appraise
their own performance
B. The employee’s supervisor establishes the
performance standards
C. Performance is compared with goals established by the employee
D. The end result is usually a more realistic
appraisal of performance
5. Which of the following methods is likely to be

most effective in motivating a new employee
with poor performance?
A. Coaching
B. Counseling
C. Disciplining
D. Supervisor praise
E. Additional training
6. In preparing for the yearly performance appraisal

meetings, Ellen Jones’ new supervisor noted that
Ellen had an unusual increase in the number of

313

absences and reported late to work on at least six
occasions during the previous year. Up until this
point, Ellen, an employee at the organization for
3 years, had received good, but not outstanding,
evaluations. What should the supervisor do?
A. Talk to Ellen as soon as possible and determine if this was due to some temporary problem or one that is likely to continue
B. Talk with Ellen’s previous supervisor and/or
her peers see if they are aware of any problems
C. Talk with Ellen about this when she comes in
for her performance appraisal next month
D. Talk to Ellen about seeing a counselor as her
attitude toward work seems to have taken a
turn for the worse
7. Janet Smith is a new employee at the hospital.

She graduated from nursing school 5 years ago,
passed the NCLEX, and worked part time in a
skilled care facility for a year. Janet since married
and had twin girls 2 years ago. As her supervisor,
you have noticed some knowledge and skill deﬁciencies. For example, she has not started an
IV recently and is unfamiliar with many of the
medications being given to patients on her unit.
Which of the following are most likely to be
helpful?
1) Give her a book on pharmacology
2) Tell her to contact the local nursing program and sign up for a pharmacology
course
3) Have her spend time in the hospital pharmacy
4) Make arrangements for her to spend
additional time with one of the preceptors
5) Arrange practice time for her in the hospital skills laboratory
A. 1 and 2
B. 3 and 4
C. 2, 4, and 5
D. 1, 2, and 3
E. 4 only
8. During a performance appraisal report, the super-

visor should focus on all of the following except:
A. The employee’s current level of performance
B. The employee’s career development plans
C. Determining why the employee may be performing poorly
D. Discussing the employee’s contributions to
the organization

18Jones Leadership(F)-ch 18

314

1/14/07

3:50 PM

Page 314

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

9. It is difficult for most supervisors to avoid bias

when evaluating their subordinates, mainly
because many of the tools lead to rater errors
like the halo effect, which can best be deﬁned
as:
A. Rating someone based on her education or
position
B. Giving someone an average rating because
the supervisor is unsure of the actual performance
C. Rating someone based on his most recent
positive behavior, not his overall performance
D. Giving someone a high rating because she is
popular with her peers
10. Which of the following is the last step in a pro-

gressive disciplinary procedure?
A. Reprimand
B. Counseling
C. Transfer
D. Termination
REFERENCES
American Nurses Association. (2004). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice. Washington, D.C.: ANA.
Ash, M.K. (1984). Mary Kay on people management. NY: Warner.
Barnum, B.S., & Kerfoot, K.M. (1995). The nurse as executive (4th
ed.). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen.
Brykczynski, K.A. (1998). Clinical exemplars describing expert
staff nursing practices. Journal of Nursing Management,
6(6):351–360.
Creasia, J.L., & Parker, B. (2001). Conceptual foundations: The
bridge to professional nursing practice (3rd ed.). St. Louis:
Mosby.
Donner, G.J., Wheeler, M.M., & Waddell, J. (1997). The nurse
manager as a career coach. Journal of Nursing Administration,
21(12), 14–18.
Ellis, J.R., & Hartley, C.L. (2000). Managing and coordinating
nursing care (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Ellis, J.R., & Hartley, C.L. (2004). Nursing in today’s world:
Trends, issues, and management (8th ed.). Philadelphia:
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Gillies, D.A. (1994). Nursing management: A systems approach
(3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders.

Hecht, I.W.D., et al. (1999). The department chair as academic
leader. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press.
Houston, R. (1995). Integrating CQI into performance
appraisals. Nursing Management, 26(3):48A-C.
Huber, D. (2000). Leadership and nursing care (2nd ed.).
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations
(JCAHO). (2005). 2005 Hospitals’ national patient safety
goals. Retrieved May 16, 2005, from http://www.jcaho.org/
accredited⫹organizations/patient⫹safety/05⫹npsg/05_npsg_
hap.htm
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations
(JCAHO). (2005). National patient safety goals for 2005.
Retrieved May 16, 2005, from http://www.jcaho.org/
accredited⫹organizations/patient⫹safety/npsg.htm
Kelly-Heidenthal, P. (2003). Nursing leadership & management.
Clifton Park, NY: Delmar.
Lancaster, J. (1999). Nursing issues in leading and managing
change. St. Louis: Mosby.
Leaming, D.R. (1998). Academic leadership: A practical guide to
chairing the department. Bolton, MA: Anker.
Loveridge, C.E., & Cummings, S.H. (1996). Nursing management
in the new paradigm. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen.
Marquis, B.L., & Huston, C.J. (2000). Leadership roles and management functions in nursing: Theory & application (3rd ed.).
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Merriam-Webster’s desk dictionary. (1995). Springﬁeld, MA:
Merriam-Webster.
Metcalf, C. (2001). The importance of performance appraisal and
staff development: A graduating nurse’s perspective.
International Journal of Nursing Practice, 7(1): 54–57.
Nauright, L. (1987). Toward a comprehensive personnel system:
Performance appraisal part IV. Nursing Management, 18(8),
67–77.
Parks, J., & Lindstrom, C.W. (1995). Taking the fear out of peer
review. Nursing Management, 26(3), 48–49.
Peterson, J.V., & Nisenholz, B. (1995). Orientation to counseling
(3rd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Rondeau, K.V. (1992). Constructive performance appraisal
feedback for healthcare employees. Hospital Topics, 70(2):
27-33.
Smith, M.H. (2003). Empower staff with praiseworthy
appraisals. Nursing Management, 34(1): 16–18.
Swansburg, R.C., & Swansburg, R.J. (2002). Introduction to
management and leadership for nurse managers (3rd ed.).
Boston: Jones & Bartlett.
Tappen, R.M. (2001). Nursing leadership and management:
Concepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia: Davis.
Yoder-Wise, P.S. (1999). Leading and managing in nursing (2nd
ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 315

chapter
19
Nursing Celebrates
Cultural Diversity
JOSEPHINE A. KAHLER, EDD, RN, CS
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Cultural diversity is not an obstacle, it’s a gift.”
Anonymous

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■

Define and explain the concept of culture.
Explain the foundational impact of culture on nursing practice
Discuss models describing cultural competence.
Describe the characteristics of some prominent cultures.
Analyze transcultural nursing perspectives as they pertain
to the work environment.
Evaluate the challenges of managing a culturally diverse
workforce.

315

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

316

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 316

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

T

he minority population in the United States is
expected to make up more than 40% of the total
population by 2035 (Giger & Davidhizer, 1995).
Addressing the needs of an increasingly diverse
population has become a major challenge to all
health-care providers, especially nurse leaders and
managers. Cultural diversity concerns can be
viewed from two perspectives: caring both physically and spiritually for a diverse client population
and providing a culturally diverse workforce with
positive work experiences (Dreher, 1996). With the
present-day nursing shortage, recruitment of foreign nurses will result in a new workforce of individuals who bring with them an understanding of
other cultures but also different values and beliefs.
This chapter explores the concept of cultural diversity, along with the theories used to explain cultural
differences. It offers guidance to nurses who are
providing leadership and care in an increasingly
more diverse health-care system, with increasing
diversity of team members. See Box 19-1 on terms
commonly used when discussing cultural diversity.

Foundations of Cultural Study
The swell in the ethnic diversity of the United
States has put new demands on health-care systems

Box 19-1
Cultural Terms
To ensure that there is an understanding of terms commonly used to describe culture, some definitions follow:
Culture: Shared values, beliefs, and practices of a
particular group of people that are transmitted from one
generation to the next and are identified as patterns that
guide thinking and action.
Cultural competence: Providing effective nursing care to
patients from many cultures in a respectful and knowing
way.
Cultural diversity: Differences in race, ethnicity, religion,
national origin, gender, and economic status.
Stereotyping: Assigning certain beliefs and behaviors to
groups without recognizing individuality.
Values: Abstract standards that give a person a sense of
what is right or wrong and establish a code of conduct for
living.

to provide health care that is culturally acceptable.
In order to achieve this, practitioners need to
increase their knowledge of the health-care practices of people from different sociocultural groups
and recognize the differences in perspectives
between themselves and their clients (Anderson,
1990).

CULTURAL CONCEPTS
Culture encompasses shared values, behaviors, and
beliefs that are reinforced through social interactions, shared by members of a particular group, and
transmitted from one generation to the next.
Culture exerts considerable inﬂuence over most of
an individual’s life experiences, including illness. It
can be perceived as a form of tradition for a group,
which is based on beliefs about survival of group
mores and customs. These concepts make culture
very distinct from external managerial control, such
as policies and procedures (Coeling & Simms,
1993). Culture is deeply rooted within the group
and within the human interpersonal dynamics that
occur naturally within the groups—brought about
by child rearing, language, and religious beliefs—
as a natural result of people in the groups.
Dochterman and Kennedy-Grace (2001) describe
culture as being a system of learned patterns unique
to members of a group. Spector (2000) has speciﬁed
that one’s cultural background is a fundamental
component of one’s ethnic heritage and should have
a vast impact on the type of nursing care that is rendered to patients. Culture has also been described as
differences and variety in customs and practices of
deﬁned social groups (Poss, 1999). Three levels of
culture have been identiﬁed by Schein (1985):
1. The visible level: this includes physical space

and social environment. What image is projected at ﬁrst encounter? Does the nurse use
sensitivity when admitting a client from
another culture? Are respect and understanding demonstrated by the nurse who is questioning the new client?
2. The values: this includes elements of what
ought to be; for example, nurses value caring
and high quality of care. Whose values should
predominate? Is there awareness of the values
within the culture of the client being cared
for, or is the client treated like any other
within the general population?

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 317

Nursing Celebrates Cultural Diversity

3. The basic underlying assumptions: this

includes the actual guides to behavior that are
deeply held and not open to challenge or
debate, such as the inﬂuence that our own cultural inheritance has on our personal health
beliefs (Betancourt, Green, & Carrillo, 2002).
Without an understanding of cultural differences, U.S. health-care providers tend to impose
Western ideas on individuals from other cultures,
which infringe on their values. Nurses tend to
respond to sick people based on their own socialization, culture, and education. For instance,
because the U.S. culture is an informal one, nurses
may be inclined to call patients by their ﬁrst names.
People who grew up in another culture, however,
may consider it disrespectful to address others by
their ﬁrst names, especially when there is an age
difference between the client and caregiver. The
caregiver should ask clients how they wish to be
addressed so as to not seem disrespectful. Moreover,
nurses are trained to respect patient autonomy and
decisions. Yet some Asian clients may expect nurses
to provide directives, be authoritative, and be expert
practitioners who take charge. Out of respect for
this authority, they may nod, smile, verbally agree
to anything that the nurse proposes, and may not
speak until spoken to (Giger & Davidhizar, 1999).
Nurses may also ﬁnd their perceptions of appropriate personal space called into question. Many people from South America and the Middle East stand
close to the person with whom they are conversing.
Many Americans feel very uncomfortable if someone is standing closer than 3 feet while conversing.
Hispanic patients expect the health-care provider to
shake hands with them at the beginning of the conversation, whereas most Japanese clients would feel
uncomfortable with shaking hands, preferring to
bow instead (Salimbene, 1998).
Most immigrants to the United States appear to
be fully acculturated and speak without a trace of a
foreign accent, such as those who immigrated from
Western Europe and other English-speaking countries. Values change as new generations adopt the
new country’s views over time. It is easy for healthcare practitioners to overlook the impact that cultural inheritance has had on both conscious and
subconscious health beliefs, however.
In the United States, individuals are classiﬁed
into ﬁve ethnic groups: African-Americans, AsianAmericans and Pacific Islanders, HispanicAmericans, Native Americans, and Caucasian

317

Americans. This tendency, however, does little to
promote understanding of the health beliefs, practices, needs, and diversity that are represented
within each of these population classiﬁcations. It
may, in fact, impose stereotypical judgments on persons within these groups because they are viewed
by the health-care providers in traditional ways. But
nurses should keep in mind, as Benner and Wrubel
(1998) observe, “changes in lifestyles and health
habits work best when they are integrated into the
person’s own cultural patterns and traditions, for it
is hard to sustain new patterns if they go against the
grain of one’s social patterns” (p. 155).

IMPACT OF CULTURE
ON NURSING PRACTICE
Nurses today are recognizing that awareness of cultural differences in their health-care delivery is
imperative for their practice. The role expectations
of nurses may even vary from culture to culture. A
common Anglo-American view of nurses is that
they treat people as equals, tend to be passive, and
take direction from physicians. These patients feel
free to ask questions of their nurses that they may
not ask of physicians.
Despite the fact that awareness of cultural diversity directly affects diagnosis, assessment, and
intervention strategies, cultural diversity is often
not seen as an essential variable in how nurses
mediate conﬂict, communicate, or interpret different behaviors.
For instance, in the Navajo culture, great value is
placed on keeping pain and discomfort to oneself.
Therefore, the nurse who expects clients from the
Navajo nation to request medication for pain may
make a false assumption on the client’s comfort
level, when the opposite is true (Kirkpatrick &
Deloughery, 1995).
Communication is a vital part of the cultural
interaction that takes place between the health-care
provider and client. Patterns of communication are
strongly inﬂuenced by culture and include not only
language differences but verbal and nonverbal
behaviors as well. Without a sense of their own cultural values, nurses fail to provide culturally competent care to patients. Nurses must culturally
assess each patient individually while keeping in
mind that differences can occur not only between
cultures but also within cultures. Culture directly
affects client care. Often, culture affects a client’s

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

318

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 318

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

compliance with medication directives, or culture
can affect who makes the health-care decisions
within a family. Differences such as these need to
be learned by nurses, who can be educated into
being culturally competent caregivers.

Models of Cultural Competence
Cultural competence models serve as frameworks
for providing effective nursing care to patients from
many cultures in a respectful and knowing way
(Bartol & Richardson, 1998). Cultural competence
is a vital component for practicing effective com-

Practice Proof 19-1
Article: Improving health outcomes in diverse populations: Competency in cross-cultural research with
indigenous Pacific Islander populations.
Authors and Journal: Palafox, N.A., et al. (2002). Journal of
Ethnicity and Health, 7(4), 270–285.
Abstract: The disparity in health status between the
indigenous Pacific Island populations and the United
States–associated Pacific Island populations was examined in order to acquire an understanding of their
unique paradigms of health knowledge and address their
disparate health issues. The researchers recognized that
U.S. institutions and federal agencies had been limited
in their ability to develop competency in cross-cultural
research in the past with these populations. A descriptive
review was used of the investigators’ experience in Hawaii
and other Pacific Island locations. The results confirmed
the researchers’ views that in order to conduct successful
culturally competent research, they need to recruit Pacific
Islanders from indigenous backgrounds. These Pacific
Island researchers with the skills and knowledge of
Western scientific inquiry were found to understand
the complex health situation of their own population
and determine the changes in health-care delivery that
could make a difference. Once this was accomplished,
the researchers felt that positive changes in health-care
disparity could be effected in the Pacific Island population.

QUESTIONS:

1. Why is cultural research important in determining
access to health care?
2. How does cultural awareness impact treatment of
Western Pacific nations?
3. Why is it important to include cultural competence
when studying other cultures?

munication, valuing, understanding, and caring in
health care (Poss, 1999).
The following models are frequently used in
health-care settings.
Purnell and Paulanka’s (1998) model for cultural
competence has been found useful in any setting
(Fig. 19-1). The outer zone of the model’s circle represents global society; the second zone depicts community; the third zone represents the family; and
the inner zone symbolizes the individual. The interior of the circle is divided into 12 pie-shaped
wedges depicting cultural domains and their concepts, i.e., family organization, workplace issues,
and health-care practices.
The innermost center circle is dark, depicting
unknown phenomena. Cultural consciousness is
expressed in behaviors from “unconsciously incompetent-consciously incompetent-consciously competent to unconsciously competent” (p. 9). This model
can be used in any health-care setting because of its
concise structure. Once the cultural data have been
analyzed, this model allows the nurse to determine
whether to adopt, modify, or reject health-care treatment regimens according to the needs of the client.
Ultimately, it can determine whether these treatment protocols improve the quality of health-care
delivery and the client’s own personal well-being (p.
9). This model allows the nurse to use culturally
competent care for the client by analyzing the
client’s care plan and adapting treatment modalities
to the client’s cultural needs.
Another model of culturally competent care was
developed by Campinha-Bacote in 1994. She identiﬁed four constructs: (1) awareness (including biases
and sensitivity); (2) skills (including use of assessment tools); (3) knowledge (including worldview
and frameworks); and (4) encounters (including
exposure and practice). In 1999, Campinha-Bacote
used this model to illustrate how cultural competence concepts could be used in nursing:
Cultural awareness should be a deliberate
process that assists the nurse in becoming aware of
and more sensitive to the client’s cultural differences while at the same time making caregivers
more conscious of their own cultural values so as
not to impose them on the client. This awareness
focus can be achieved by experiential exercises and
critical incidents.
Cultural knowledge can be obtained by education on different cultures and accumulating a
knowledge base of transcultural nursing. Cultural

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 319

319

Nursing Celebrates Cultural Diversity

Person

Bioc
ultu
ra l
E
Biolo cology
gica
l var
iatio
Skin
ns
co
Here lor
dity
Ge n
etics
En
Drug demics
meta
bolis
m

ly
Fami

Community

Fa
Pe
rso
n

H ea
lthca
r
Focu Practice e
s
s on
healt
Trad
h ca
ition
re
al pr
Majo
ac
r
Resp religious tices
onsib
belie
fs
ility fo
Self
r hea
med
lth
ic
Barr ation
Pain iers
/sick
role
Men
tal h
ealth
Barr
iers

F

n
rso
Pe

e
ar s
-c er f
tl h ion s o
a it on rs s
He act pti ne ner
o
Pr erce ctiti titio d s
P ra rac r an tatu
p p
e s
lk nd re
Fo Ge hca
t
l
a
he

s
Issue
force
on
Work
lturati
Accu
omy
Auton
rs
barrie
uage

Fam
ily

/H
view
s
Origin
ence
Resid
y
graph
Topo
omics
Econ
cs
Politi
ation
Educ
n
patio
Occu

Over

Gl
ob
a

Com
mun
Pe
Dom
icatio
inan
rso
n
t lan
n
Diale guage
cts
Con
textu
a
l
F
u
Volu
am
me/t se
Spa
H
tial d one
ea ily
istan
d O
Eye
cing
G G o rg
Facia contac
D oa en f ho ani
t
l exp
ev ls de u za
r
se t
a
e
r
Gree essions
R lop nd ro h io
tings
Ex ole me pr les old n
Tem
i
pora
o
s
t
n
li
So end of tal ritie
Time ty
t
s
e a
Al cial d f ged ask
Nam
a
t
s
es
lif ern sta mil
es a tu y
ty tive s
le
s

Lang

Person

e
eritag

Fam
ily

ily
am

ily
m

n
rso
e
P

Person

uality es
Spirit
ctic
ra
p
ious
er
Relig
f pray
Use o
f life
ing o
Mean strength
idual
lth
Indiv
& hea
uality
Spirit

Community

ily
Fam

y
iet
c
o
lS

y
iet
oc
lS

Gl
ob
a

Community

n

Fam

il y

P er so n

F a m il

Pe

y

il y

Fa m

n

r so

Fa

ty

n
r so

ie

Fa

S

r so

Pe

n

al

ty

s
al
itu ls
R ua t
th rit en
ea ath vem
e
D rea
Be

D

r so

ob

ie

Pe

oc

Pe

Gl
oc

il y

ion
Nutrit food
of
g
in
n
Mea
ds
on foo
Comm
ls
Ritua
s
iencie
Defic
tions
a
it
im
L
n
motio
h pro
Healt

il y

il y

m

Preg
nanc
Fer
y
View tility prac
s tow
tice
a
r
d pre s
Preg
gn
nanc
y be ancy
liefs
Birth
ing
Postp
artum

k
ris s
h- ior
g
v
Hi ha cco
gs
Be oba hol dru
T lco al
ity
A ion ctiv
at al a y
e
cr sic fet
Re hy Sa
P

m

Fa m

Text/image rights not available.

Gl

a
ob

lS

C o m m u nit y

Unconsciously
incompetent

Consciously
incompetent

Consciously
competent

Unconsciously
competent

FIGURE 19-1 Purnell’s Model for Cultural Competence

skill is achieved by the nurse learning how to do a
cultural assessment and identifying the client’s
beliefs, practices, and perceptions of health.
Cultural encounters are the actual face-to-face
encounters and interactions with the client.

Campinha-Bacote (1999) also deﬁnes cultural
competence as “the process in which the health-care
provider continuously strives to achieve the ability
to effectively work within the cultural context of
the client (i.e., individual, family or community)”

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

320

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 320

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

(p. 203). This author emphasizes the importance
during the awareness process of examining one’s
own biases and prejudices. She states that cultural
knowledge is gathered from receiving an eclectic
educational foundation, which provides various
global views of different cultures. “One’s world
view can be considered a paradigm or way of viewing the world and phenomena in it” (p. 204).
Without a sense of their own cultural values,
nurses fail to provide culturally competent care to
patients. Nurses must culturally assess each patient
individually while keeping in mind that differences

can occur not only between cultures but also within
cultures.

LEININGER’S MODEL OF
TRANSCULTURAL NURSING
Leininger developed a theory of transcultural nursing that depicts a relationship between the differences and commonalities in health beliefs and
practices of people from different countries or geographical regions (Fig. 19-2) (Leininger, 1991).

Cultural Care
(Worldview)

d
an rs
hip acto
ns
Ki ial F
c
So

Re
Ph ligio
ilo us
s
Fa oph and
cto ica
l
rs
Technological
Factors

Cultural Values
and Lifeways

Po
Le litic
ga al
l F an
ac d
tor
s

nd Social Structure Elem
ural a
ents
Cult

Influences
Care Expressions
Patterns and Practices
Holistic Health (Well-being)

ic
om
on ors
c
E act
F

Educational
Factors

Text/image rights not available.
Individuals, Families, Groups, Communities, and Institutions
in Diverse Health Systems

Generic
(Folk) Care

Nursing
Care

Professional
System(s)

Care Decisions and Actions

Cultural Care Preservation/Maintenance
Cultural Care Accommodation/Negotiation
Cultural Care Repatterning/Restructuring
Code:

(Influencers)
Culturally Congruent Care
(Health/Well-being)

FIGURE 19-2 Leininger’s Model of Transcultural Nursing. (Redrawn by Leininger, M. [1991]. Cultural care diversity and universality: A theory
of nursing. New York: National League of Nursing.)

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 321

Nursing Celebrates Cultural Diversity

Leininger (1991) is credited with developing a
theory of culture care. The theoretical framework,
depicted as “The Sunrise Model,” embraces the idea
that cultural constructs are embedded in each other
and their application is both broad and holistic. The
arrows on the model indicate “inﬂuencers” but are
not causal or linear relationships. The arrows ﬂow
in different areas and cross major factors to depict
the interrelatedness of factors and the ﬂuidity of
inﬂuencers. The dotted lines indicate an open world
or an open system of living reﬂective of the natural
world of most humans. Leininger (1990) describes
the upper part of the model as being extremely
important but often challenging to nurses because it
often leads to the discovery of embedded, deeply valued, and meaningful data about human care and
well-being. Transculturism describes a nurse who is
grounded in one’s own culture but has the skills to
be able to work in a multicultural environment.
Leininger (1997) emphasizes that there is a
greater need for cultural awareness because of
increased global mobility, the importance of cultural
identity, migration, and role change. Care, she
states, should be viewed as culturally deﬁned, with
predictors deﬁning health or illness. It should be
assumed that when persons are given “human caring” the person’s cultural characteristics will be
addressed and incorporated into the overall plan of
care. Leininger (2002) deﬁned cultural care as the
“synthesized and culturally constituted assistive,
supportive, and facilitated caring acts toward self or
others focused on evident or anticipated needs for
the client’s health or well-being or to face disabilities, death or other human conditions” (p. 83).
Leininger emphasizes that an important step in providing care to diverse clients is cultural assessment.
To demystify the process, it may be helpful to think
of cultural assessment as “merely asking people
their preferences, what they think, who we should
talk to in order to make a decision” (Villaire, 1994,
p. 138). Culturally competent nurses take cultural
differences into consideration when doing assessments. This assessment helps them to interpret
patient behavior accurately and recognize the
necessity for developing a culturally congruent plan
of care and to achieve outcomes. Leininger (1978)
identiﬁed the basic domains to review when conducting a cultural assessment:
1. Lifestyle patterns
2. Cultural norms and values

321

Cultural taboos and myths
Ethnocentric tendencies and worldviews
Health and life care rituals
Caring behaviors
Degree of cultural change
General features that the client perceives as
different from or similar to other cultures
9. Folk and professional health-illness systems
used
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

The Cultural Assessment Checklist (Box 19-2)
was originally designed for home health nurses but
is easily adapted for use in other settings. Its concise
yet comprehensive nature takes into account the
limited amount of time nurses may have to get to
know new patients.

Cultural Competence in Practice
Caring for culturally diverse clients presents the
nurse with many challenges. The nurse must be sensitive to differences such as language, interpretation
of communication, eye-contact norms, gender
issues, touching and physical contact, food practices,
and caregiver acceptability issues (Galanti, 1999).
For instance, a Native American man who is 22
years of age has been involved in a severe automobile accident and is in the intensive care unit in a
comatose state. Being aware of the culture involved
may make a difference between life and death
issues for this young man. An understanding of his
tribal customs and beliefs is an imperative part of
his care. The hospital staff in this case demonstrated that they understood the tribal customs and
beliefs of this client. They were able to accommodate the family’s wishes and individual needs in a
meaningful way. By using transcultural concepts
and principles, the staff prevented any cultural conﬂicts or clashes and were able to meet the needs of
the family with what proved to be the inevitable
death of their relative. Later, the staff was able to
evaluate the outcome of the intervention in a constructive way. This incident became a classic teaching tool for both medical and nursing students.
Attention to the spiritual domain in providing
holistic care to the above client depends on the
beliefs and values of both the client and nurse
(Oldnall, 1996). Watson (1985 and 1988) speciﬁcally advocates that nurses have an obligation to
identify the spiritual and religious beliefs in their

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

322

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 322

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Box 19-2
Cultural Assessment Checklist
Patient-identified cultural/ethnic group
Religion
Typical greeting. Form of address: Handshake appropriate?
Shoes worn in home?
Social customs before “business.” Social exchanges?
Refreshment?
Direct or indirect communication patterns?
Eye contact. Is eye contact considered polite or rude?
Tone of voice. What does a soft voice or a loud voice mean
in this culture?
Personal space. Is personal space wider or narrower than in
the American culture?
Facial expressions, gestures. What do smiles, nods, and
hand gestures mean?
Touch. When, where, and by whom can a patient be
touched?
Diagnosis. What do you call this illness? How would you
describe this problem?
Cause. What caused the problem? What might other
people think is wrong with you?

Course. How does the illness work? What does it do to you?
What do you fear most about this problem?
Treatment. How have you treated the illness? What
treatment should you receive? Who in your family or
community can help?
Prognosis. How long will the problem last? Is it serious?
Expectations. What are you hoping the nurses will do for
you when we come?
Pattern of meals. What is eaten? When are meals eaten?
Sick [comfort] foods.
Food intolerance and taboos.
Cultural responses to pain.
Patient’s perception of pain response.
Patient’s perception of Western medications.
Possible pharmacogenetic variations.
Decision maker.
Sick role.
Language barriers, translators.
Cultural/ethnic community resources.

Text/image rights not available.

From Narayan, M.C. (1997). Cultural assessment in home health care. Home Health Care Nurse 15(10), 663–672.

clients and respect them, no matter how unusual
they may seem. In some cultures, illness may be
deemed a punishment for some sinful action. At
times, clients may make decisions that conﬂict with
the beliefs of their religious communities or even
their caregivers. These decisions often affect the
physical, mental, and spiritual well-being of the
client. It must be recognized that spirituality is an
integral part of culture. The following is a classic
example of a client dealing with a religious dilemma
that leads to spiritual distress.
A patient is considering aborting a severely
handicapped child, knowing that it would go
against the teachings of her church. A visit from the
patient’s pastor has left her very upset and angry.
He told her that God may not forgive her for having
this abortion. Because of the patient’s high level of
distress, the nurse asked the hospital chaplain to
visit with the patient. This action resulted in both
prayer and discussion and eventual peace of mind
for the patient, who proceeded to have the planned
procedure.
Two cultural trends that have become prevalent
since the middle 1970s support the movement
toward spirituality in health care. First, managed

care consumers and clients complain that their
health needs are not being met. More than one-third
of American adults are seeking alternative solutions to health and illness problems from various
non-mainstream sources, including spiritual practices (Eisenberg, et al., 1992). The second trend is
the growth of well-designed and controlled research
that examines the relationship between spiritual
practices and health outcomes of both the clients
and providers of care (Byrd, 1988; Kass, et al.,
1991). In a study conducted (Byrd, 1988) on
patients in a coronary care unit, the group that
received regular intercessory prayer had fewer
episodes of cardiac arrest, congestive heart failure,
and pneumonia. The group also required fewer
antibiotics and diuretics and less ventilator assistance than the control group, which received no
prayer interventions (Box 19-3).
Clients often make cultural choices that are difficult for nurses to understand and accept. For
instance, based on religious beliefs, clients may
refuse commonplace treatments such as blood
transfusions, medications, or even minor surgery.
When patients’ wishes are contrary to the nurse’s
with respect to spirituality and religion, nurses

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 323

Nursing Celebrates Cultural Diversity

Box 19-3
Sociocultural Self Assessment
Directions: Use your answers to help yourself have a
better understanding of your own cultural and social
beliefs.
1. What is my cultural heritage? Which ethnic groups do
I belong to? My age group? My religious affiliation?
My socioeconomic status?
2. Do I assume that others have the same values and
beliefs that I have?
3. What type of contact have I had with persons from
different backgrounds? Do I assume that other people
have the same values and beliefs that I have?
4. What group affiliations am I proud of? Are my attitudes
and behavior ethnocentric? What would I change
about my group affiliations, if I could? Why?
5. Have I ever felt rejected by another group? Did this
experience make me more sensitive to other cultures
or cause me to vilify others who were different from
myself?
6. Did I get messages about people who were different
from me from family and friends? Have these attitudes
influenced my opinions today?
7. What are the main biases I have about individuals from
different cultures? Do these stereotypes impede me
from developing cultural sensitivity?
8. What attitudes do I need to change within myself in
order to work effectively with individuals from other
cultures?

Text/image rights not available.

Chitty, K.K. Illness and culture: Impact on patients, families and
nurses. (2005). In Professional Nursing: Concepts & Challenges,
St. Louis: Elsevier, p. 468.

should pose their responses to such situations in a
holistic way. Effective nursing practice recognizes
that there is a need to adopt nonjudgmental attitudes toward patients’ religious beliefs in order to
avoid conﬂicts and confrontation. It is important
for caregivers to diffuse any emotions by providing
respect, support, and understanding for the family’s
religious beliefs, even if they are contrary to their
own (Grube, et al., 1994)
In considering end-of-life decision making, cultural values and spirituality may be even more
important. Elderly clients who are dying may ﬁnd
their values in direct conﬂict with those of hospital
staff. Collaboration and cooperation are key components to ensure that patients receive optimal health
care. When end-of-life issues arise, there may be a
conﬂict between the physician’s and/or nurse’s own

323

personal religious beliefs and the desire to placate
the wishes of the family. This can occur even though
the patient has a living will on ﬁle in his chart. The
physician’s values in turn may create an ethical
dilemma, which could result in stressful working
conditions for the nursing staff. Subsequently, this
creates a conﬂict between the nursing staff’s value
system and the institution’s practices in honoring
the patient’s advance directives.
In the face of any conﬂict, however, Leininger
(1997) describes a culturally competent nurse as
one who demonstrates the following skills and
attributes:
1. Uses nursing concepts, principles, and avail-

able research ﬁndings to assess and guide
practices
2. Understands and values the cultural beliefs
and practices of designated cultures so that
nursing care is adapted to meet that individual client’s needs in a meaningful way
3. Knows how to avoid and prevent major cultural conﬂicts, clashes, or hurtful care practices
4. Demonstrates the conﬁdence to be able to
work effectively and knowingly with clients
from different cultures and is also able to evaluate transcultural nursing care outcomes
When clients have received culturally based
nursing care, they exhibit signs of satisfaction, are
pleased with the cultural accommodations that have
been made for them, and praise their overall care.

Managing a Culturally
Diverse Workforce
It is important for nurse managers to approach
every staff person as an individual when directing a
diverse team of health-care workers. Staff members,
like clients, may be diverse in values, beliefs, and
mannerisms. But they do have many things in common. They want to succeed in their jobs and be
accepted by others (Blank & Slipp, 1994). Nurse
managers hold the key to expose the full potential of
each person on the staff and should openly support
the contributions and competencies of staff members from all cultural groups. Husting (1995)
believes that management has a responsibility to
address cultural issues because of the rapidly chang-

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

324

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 324

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

hot topic:
Recruitment of Foreign Nurses
Delivery of high-quality health care in our multicultural
society will continue to be a challenge for many hospitals, especially with the present nursing shortage in the
United States. Due to the inability of the workforce to
keep pace with the demands for more health-care
providers, many health-care facilities are recruiting
nurses from other countries such as Canada, Ireland,
Great Britain, and the Philippines. The U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) (1998) has projected that nursing,
the largest health-care occupation, will grow faster than
average for all occupations in the next decade. Already,
the U.S. government has relaxed rules allowing temporary work visas for Canadian and Mexican nurses who
qualify. There are also provisions for allowing nurses
educated in other English-speaking countries to work in
the United States without taking the licensing examination. Some countries, such as the Philippines, train more
nurses than they can use, so some believe that hospitals in this country should be permitted to recruit them.
The nursing shortage dilemma will continue to generate many arguments both for and against importing
foreign nurses. Meanwhile, as the United States continues to be a melting pot of many nations, a culturally
diverse nursing workforce is a reality despite being
intentionally ignored in many parts of the United States
or being given rhetorical “lip service.” Nursing will need
to implement strategies to reflect the cultural mix of
society more closely. Recommendations from the
American Academy of Nursing expert panel on cultural
competence include recruitment and retention of a
diverse workforce (Meleis et al, 1995). Strategies include
mentoring by same-culture minorities together with
workshops, continuing education programs, and the
use of consultants who are trained to promote culturally competent care.

ing health-care workforce. Diversity of values and
beliefs can create conﬂict and result in a work environment that is not conducive to worker effectiveness and quality client care. One alternative Husting
proposes is to create equal worker partnerships that
capitalize on the best aspects of all cultures for an
effective, harmonious work setting. She suggests
that this can be accomplished by discussing cultural
viewpoints as a part of decision making and
acknowledging and respecting differing cultures,
such as rotating the chairing of staff meetings to

ensure equal participation and access to the agenda.
This approach, Husting states, eliminates one-way
communication within the work group and encourages alternative points of view and group discussion
while enhancing the concept of shared governance.
Managing one’s own personal thinking and
assisting coworkers to think in innovative ways are
part of the leading and management role in cultural
diversity. Management of issues that involve culture, whether gender, religious, ethnic, or any other
kind, requires patience, persistence, and a great deal
of understanding. When the workforce includes
nurses who speak English as a second language, the
nurse manager needs to carefully evaluate the communication systems that are in use along with the
manner in which messages are communicated.
Slowly repeating instructions may be necessary to
ensure comprehension and understanding of what
is required. Culturally skilled nurse managers can
provide cultural safety to patients by making sure
that messages about patient care are received and
understood. This might be accomplished by sitting
down with the staff nurse and analyzing the situation to make sure that understanding has occurred.
In addition, the nurse manager might use a communication notebook that allows the nurse to
slowly “understand” information by writing down
ideas that may appear to be unclear. By addressing
cultural diversity directly, the nurse manager is offsetting future negative effects on performance and
staff interactions (Meleis, et al., 1995).
Sullivan and Decker (2001) described the importance of communication and how cultural beliefs,
attitudes, and behavior affect communication.
Gestures, verbal tone, body movements, and physical closeness when communicating are all part of a
person’s culture. For the nurse manager, understanding these cultural behaviors is imperative in
accomplishing effective communication within the
workforce population. Tappen (2001) addressed
differences across cultures that the nurse manager
needs to monitor. These differences include spatial
differences, relationships to people in authority, eye
contact, expressions of feelings, thinking modes,
meanings in different languages, evidence-based
decision making, and preferred leadership/management style. Nurses need to ensure that effective
communication by staff with clients and others
does not lead to misunderstandings and eventual
alienation. Nurse managers must also work with
their staff to foster respect for different lifestyles.

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 325

Nursing Celebrates Cultural Diversity

The complexities of culture strongly inﬂuence opinions, perceptions, and generalizations.
Mancini (1997) wrote about the need for supervisors and nurse managers to be vigilant about attitudes and behaviors that encourage ethnic or racial
stereotypes and that inhibit trust and communication. Managers can help eliminate stereotyping by
presenting alternative views or referring to lists
of commonalities among the staff. Mancini believes
that a culturally skilled manager who understands
and values differences can build trust and enhance
communication, motivation, and production in a
team. Ultimately, experience working with a
diverse staff may be the best educational environment for learning about different cultures.
Lowenstein and Glanville (1996) challenge
nurse managers to use their leadership positions to
address communication and motivational issues
when working with nurses from other cultures.
They recommend that cultural conﬂicts be confronted and effective resolutions be reached. One
example is that staff members may be reluctant to
admit language problems that hamper their written
communication. Unit-oriented workshops arranged
by the nurse manager, together with effective mentoring by nurses trained in cross-cultural care, can
result in quality care outcomes.
Andrews (1998) reported on the increasingly
more diverse workforce in the United States. She
advocated development of a transcultural nursing
administration. She advocated that if nursing
administrators are committed to transcultural management, they should actively promote recruitment
of diverse staff members and be alert to any signs of
prejudice in their organization. Likewise, mission
statements and policies should be reviewed to
reﬂect workforce diversity.

All Good Things...
One must remember that in a multicultural society
as diverse as the United States, health care cannot
come in one form only to ﬁt the needs of everyone.
Culture has a powerful inﬂuence on the type of
health care that is both delivered and sought by
clients. Population demographic projections in the
United States show dramatic changes in ethnicity
and age groups. All individuals have the need to be
accepted by their health-care providers and have

325

Practice to Strive For 19-1
The nurse manager needs to employ strong cultural competence initiatives in order to be an effective leader in today’s
workplace environment. Cultural competence is illustrated
by cultural assessment, planning, and familiarity with and
respect for various traditional healing systems and beliefs.
Time should be taken to get to know and understand one’s
colleagues, which facilitates learning about their ethnic and
cultural heritages and assists in building trust and confidence in the leadership and management of the unit.
Planning workshops in cultural sensitivity to discuss issues
on cultural diversity can motivate others toward culturally
competent communication and ultimately leads others
toward cultural competence in their own nursing practice.
Integrating cultural diversity into the workplace and successfully organizing teams that include culturally diverse workers
are key to providing effective role models and mentors on
the unit. Treating all staff members equally and with
patience can provide them with a feeling of value, respect,
and dignity. All of these techniques are essential for enhancing, maintaining, and retaining culturally diverse professionals in today’s workforce (Office of Minority Health, 2000).

their cultural interpretations of health acknowledged and respected. Nurses have always accepted
the concept of holistic health care, more than any
other group in the health profession. Transcultural
nursing provides a theoretical base for nursing
regarding cultural competence. Nursing also needs
to implement effective strategies to reﬂect the cultural mix of society within the workforce. Thus,
with increased knowledge, sensitivity, respect, and
understanding, nurses can provide the highest quality of health care for clients in our multicultural
society.
This chapter has presented several models, tools,
and techniques for meeting the health-care needs of
an increasingly diverse population. Understanding
cultural diversity and its impact on effective healthcare delivery requires a commitment on the part of
all health-care providers. The chapter has also provided information to assist nurse leaders in providing effective management of a culturally diverse
workforce. It emphasized the importance of creating a culturally sensitive work environment.
Nurses need to stay abreast of major population
shifts in the United States and be prepared to manage diversity effectively in order to be competent
health-care providers.

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

326

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 326

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Let’s Talk
1. Think of a patient you have cared for from
another culture. Did you perceive you were able to
communicate effectively with the patient? Did
you believe the patient understood all aspects of
the care being provided? What did you do to
facilitate the care of your patient?
2. Think of a foreign nurse with whom you have
worked. Did you and your coworkers accept this
nurse? Was this nurse incorporated into the
“team” willingly? Did you have trouble
understanding the nurse’s accent?
3. Think of the nurse manager on this unit. How
did the manager help the foreign nurse
assimilate into the unit’s culture? Were
workshops conducted to assist the staff in
understanding some of the cultural differences?
How did the manager promote acceptance of this
foreign nurse by the other team members?

NCLEX Questions
1. Culture is:

A. Shared values, behaviors, and beliefs that are
reinforced through social interactions
B. Speciﬁc only to the individual
C. Transmitted from one generation to the next
D. A and C
2. Levels of culture that have been identiﬁed by

Schein (1985) include:
A. The visible level; this includes physical space
and social environment; for example, the
image that is projected at ﬁrst encounter
B. The values; this includes the nurse’s personal value system
C. Traditions; this includes behavior based on
ones’ ethnicity
D. B and C
3. Leininger (1991) is credited with developing a

theory of culture care that includes:
A. The ideas that cultural constructs are
embedded in each other and that their application is both broad and holistic
B. Inﬂuencers that are not causal or linear relationships

C. An open world or an open system of living
reﬂective of the natural world of most
humans
D. All of the above
4. Transculturism describes a nurse who:

A. Is grounded in his or her own culture
B. Has the skills to be able to work in a multicultural environment
C. Works with more than one culture
D. A and B
5. A cultural assessment involves:

A. Asking people their preferences
B. A detailed description of the patient’s ethnicity
C. A description of the traditions to which a
patient ascribes
D. All of the above
6. Leininger’s domains to review when conducting

a cultural assessment include all of the following
EXCEPT:
A. Bowel and bladder patterns
B. Cultural norms and values
C. Cultural taboos and myths
D. Ethnocentric tendencies and worldviews
7. Leininger describes a culturally competent nurse

as one who demonstrates all of the following
skills and attributes EXCEPT:
A. Uses nursing concepts, principles, and available research ﬁndings to assess and guide
practices
B. Understands and values the cultural beliefs
and practices of designated cultures so
that nursing care is adapted to meet that
individual client’s needs in a meaningful
way
C. Knows how to avoid and prevent major cultural conﬂicts, clashes, or hurtful care practices
D. Demonstrates use of the nursing process to
work effectively and knowingly with the
client
8. Spirituality is deﬁned as:

A. One’s religious preference
B. Each person’s unique life experience and
one’s personal effort to ﬁnd purpose and
meaning in life
C. Believing in a supreme being
D. All of the above

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 327

Nursing Celebrates Cultural Diversity

9. Cultural diversity is deﬁned as:

A. When a nurse cares for patients from different backgrounds
B. A hospital with patient demographics from
different ethnicities
C. Differences in race, ethnicity, religion,
national origin, gender, and economic status
D. A and B
10. Taboos and beliefs are:

A. Truths held by some cultures to be actual or
true, based on speciﬁc rationale
B. Beliefs that are morally wrong
C. Taboos that describe what one should not
do
D. Beliefs about what is right and taboos about
what is wrong
REFERENCES
Anderson, Y. (1990). Health care across cultures, Nursing
Outlook, 38(3), 136–139.
Andrews, M. (1998). Transcultural perspectives in nursing
administration. Journal of Nursing Administration, 28(11),
30–38.
Bartol, G., & Richardson, L. (1998). Using literature to create
cultural competence. Image, 301(1), 75–79.
Benner, P., & Wrubel, I. (1989). The primacy of caring: Stress
and caring in health and illness. Menlo Park, CA: AddisonWesley.
Betancourt, J., Green, A., & Carrillo, J. (2002). Cultural competence in health care: Emerging frameworks and practical
approaches (Field Report Publication No 576). New York: The
Commonwealth Fund.
Blank, R., & Slipp, S. (1994). Voices of diversity: Real people talk
about problems and solutions in a workplace where everyone is not
alike. New York: AMACON (American Management
Association).
Byrd, R. (1988). Positive therapeutic effects of intercessory
prayer in coronary care unit population. Southern Medical
Journal, 81(7), 826–829.
Campinha-Bacote, J. (1999). A model and instrument for
addressing cultural competence in health care. Journal of
Nursing Education, 38(5), 203–207.
Campinha-Bacote, J.(1994). Cultural competence in psychiatric
nursing: A conceptual model. Nursing Clinics of North
America, 29(1), 1–8.
Coeling, H., & Simms, L. (1993). Facilitating innovation at the
nursing unit level through cultural assessment, part 1: How to
keep management ideas from falling on deaf ears. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 23(4), 46–53.
Dochterman, Y., & Kennedy-Grace, H. (2001). Current issues in
nursing (6th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
Dreher, M. (1996). Nursing: A cultural phenomenon. Reﬂections, 22(4), 4.
Eisenberg, D., et al. (1992). Religion and spirituality deﬁned
according to current use in nursing literature. Journal of
Professional Nursing, 8(1), 41–47.

327

Galanti, G. (1999). Caring for culturally diverse patients at
home. Home Health Care Consultant, 6(1), 33–34.
Giger, J., & Davidhizer, R. (1995). Transcultural nursing (2nd
ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
Giger, J., & Davidhizer, R. (1999). Transcultural nursing (3rd
ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
Grube, J., et al. (1994). Inducing change in values, attitudes, and
behaviors: Belief system theory. Journal of Sociological Issues,
50(4), 153–173.
Husting, P. (1995). Managing a culturally diverse workforce.
Nursing Management, 26(8), 26, 28–29.
Kass, Y., et al. (1991). Health outcomes and a new index of spiritual experience. Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion, 30,
203–211.
Kirkpatrick, S. & Deloughery, G. (1995). Cultural inﬂuences on
nursing. In Deloughery, G.L. (ed.). Issues and trends in nursing,
St. Louis, Mosby.
Leininger, M. (1990). Culture: The conspicuous missing link to
understanding ethical and moral dimensions of human care.
In Leininger, M. (ed.). Ethical and moral dimensions of care.
Detroit: Wayne State University.
Leininger, M. (2002). The theory of culture care and ethno-nursing research method. In Leininger, M. (1997). Transcultural
nursing research to transform nursing education and practice:
40 years. Image, 29(4), 341–347.
Leininger, M. (1978). Transcultural nursing: Theories, concepts
and practices. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Leininger, M., & McFarland, M. Transcultural nursing: Concepts,
theories, research and practice (3rd ed., pp 71–98). New York:
McGraw.
Leininger, M.M. (ed.). Culture care diversity and universality: A
theory of nursing. (NLN Publication No. 15-2402, 5-68). New
York: National League for Nursing.
Lowenstein, A., & Glanville, C. (1996). Cultural diversity and
conﬂict in the health care workplace. Nursing Economics,
13(4), 203–209, 247.
Mancini, M. (1997). Managing cultural diversity. In Vestal, K.W.
(ed.).
Nursing management: Concepts and issues
(2nd ed). Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Meleis, A., Isenberg, M., Koerner, Y., Lacey, B., & Stern, P.
(1995). Diversity, marginalization, and culturally competent
health care issues in knowledge development. Washington, DC:
American Academy of Nursing.
Office of Minority Health (OMH). (2000). Assuring cultural
competence in health care: Recommendations for national
standards and an outcomes-focused research agenda. Federal
Register, 65(247), 80865–80879.
Oldnall, A. (1996). A critical analysis of nursing: Meeting the
spiritual needs of patients. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 23,
138–144.
Poss, Y. (1999). Providing culturally competent care: Is
there a role for health promoters? Nursing Outlook, 47(1),
30–36.
Purnell, L., & Paulanka, B. (1998). Transcultural health care: A
culturally competent approach. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Salimbene, S. (1998). Multicultural health care tips.
http://www.webofculture.com/edu/multicul.html
Schein, E., (1985). Organizational culture and leadership. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Spector, R.E. (2000). Cultural diversity in health & illness (5th
ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Health.

19Jones Leadership(F)-ch 19

328

1/14/07

3:51 PM

Page 328

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Sullivan, E., & Decker, P. (2001). Effective leadership and management in nursing (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Tappen, R. (2001). Nursing leadership and management: Concepts
and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Watson, Y. (1988). Human science and human theory of
care: Theory of nursing. New York: National League for
Nursing.
Watson, Y. (1985). Nursing: The philosophy and science of
caring. Boulder, CO: Colorado Associated University Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Andrews, M., & Boyle, J. (1999). Transcultural concepts in nursing care (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.
Health Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health
Professions. (2000). A national agenda for nursing workforce
racial/ethnic diversity, Washington, DC: Author.
Huff, R.M. (1999). Promoting health in multicultural populations:
A handbook for practitioners, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Kelley, M.L., & Fitzsimons, V.M. (1999). Understanding cultural
diversity: Culture, curriculum, and community in nursing.
Boston: Jones & Bartlett/NLN.
Leininger, M. (1994). Transcultural nursing education: a worldwide imperative. Nursing Health Care, 15(5), 254–257.
Munro, B.H. (2003). Caring for the Hispanic populations: The
state of the science. Journal of Transcultural Nursing, 14,
174–176.
Purnell, L.D., & Paulanka, B.J. (1998). Transcultural health care:
A culturally competent approach. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Rundle, A.K., Carvalho, M., & Robinson, M. (1999). Honoring
patient preferences: A guide to complying with multicultural
patient requirements. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Snyder, M., & Lindquist, R. (2002). Complementary/alternative
therapies in nursing (4th ed.). New York: Springer.
Tate, D.M. (2003). Cultural awareness: Bridging the gap between
caregivers and Hispanic patients. Journal of Continuing
Education in Nursing, 34, 213–217.
Villaire, M. (1994). Toni Tripp-Reimer: Crossing over the boundaries. Critical Care Nurse, 14(3), 134–141.

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 329

chapter
20
Constructive Conflict
Management
SUSAN SPORTSMAN, RN, PHD
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Conﬂict happens.”
Wilmot and Hocker

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■

■
■
■

Discuss the concept of conflict in health-care organizations.
Make a complete and accurate assessment of a conflict
situation, using the Parties, Events, Power, Regulation of
Conflict, and Style of Conflict (PEPRS) framework.
Choose appropriate management strategies to deal with
conflict.
Develop a negotiation plan designed to resolve conflict
constructively.
Consider the effect of collective bargaining in managing
conflict in health care.

329

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

330

W

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 330

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

hen two or more people interact, there is the
potential for conﬂict. The way conﬂict is managed
has a major impact on its outcome. The stereotypical response to a conﬂict is to prepare to “win.”
However, “beating your opponent” may not be possible, or it may not provide the most positive outcome to the conﬂict. In fact, depending on the
circumstances, the methods chosen to resolve the
conﬂict may have harmful consequences.
Since 2000, patient safety and the work environment have received major emphasis in health care.
Nearly three in four errors in health care are caused
by human factors associated with interpersonal interactions (Maxﬁeld, et al., 2005). A recently
released study, “Silence Kills,” a joint project of the
American Association of Critical Care Nurses
(AACN) and VitalSmarts, highlsights speciﬁc “difﬁcult to discuss” issues, which may contribute to
avoidable errors and other chronic communication
problems in health care (Maxﬁeld, et.al, 2005).
Accompanying this report are new AACN Standards to establish and sustain a healthy work environment. The ﬁrst of these standards is: “Nurses
must be as proﬁcient in communication skills as
they are in clinical skills” (AACN, 2005). One of
the communication skills that improves the work
environment is the ability to manage conﬂict constructively.
This chapter explores the concept of conﬂict in
health care and considers ways to deal constructively with interpersonal and professional conﬂicts
to reach a positive outcome. The chapter also considers strategies to assess conﬂict situations as well
as to use negotiation in constructive conﬂict management. A topic such as conﬂict management cannot be learned in a vacuum; it is discussed best by
using everyday examples. Consider the following
three conflict scenarios, which will be used
throughout the chapter to illustrate speciﬁc points
under discussion.
A. The nurse manager and the physician:
A nurse manager and a physician are having a
conﬂict over a protocol for teaching newly diagnosed diabetic patients. The nurse manager has
developed a protocol for teaching foot care based on
recently released nursing research. The physician is
not convinced that this approach is effective and
wants to use a protocol that has been endorsed by
the hospital for a number of years.

B. The nursing director of ICU and the director of respiratory care:
The nursing director of an intensive care unit
(ICU) and the director of respiratory care in a 500bed tertiary hospital, both of whom report to the
vice president of patient care services (VPPCS),
have an ongoing conﬂict over ﬁnancial resources
available for nursing and respiratory care staff.
Both disciplines believe they are short-staffed. The
VPPCS is a registered nurse, active in professional
nursing activities, and many believe she is partial to
nurses under her supervision. The conﬂict has escalated because there is a rumored plan to revise
the administrative organization from a traditional
discipline-speciﬁc departmental structure to an
interdisciplinary model.
C. A pediatric surgical service:
The nurse manager of a pediatric surgical service
and the night charge nurse on the unit are having a
conﬂict about timing for surgery preparation. The
nurse manager has asked that all children scheduled
for surgery on any given day be ready for their preoperative medication when the day shift arrives.
The nurse manager’s rationale is that the surgeries
are minor elective surgeries, and there is little lag
time between each surgery. If the day shift staff has
to do preoperative preparation, in addition to giving
preoperative medication, patients scheduled for surgeries later in the morning may not be ready when
the operating room (OR) staff arrives to transport
the children to the OR. As a result, the surgical
schedule is disrupted. The night charge nurse contends that waking children up early enough for the
night staff to complete all the preparation for all
children going to surgery that day means that some
of the children will be awakened earlier than necessary. Not only will the children not get sufficient
sleep but the resulting wait may increase the anxiety for the children and their families.

Dimensions of Conflict
In order to use conﬂict constructively, it is critical
first to understand the concept of conflict.
Traditionally, conﬂict has been viewed negatively
as a power struggle, with the intent to neutralize,
injure, or eliminate rivals. Several assumptions
drive the perception of conﬂict as negative:

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 331

Constructive Conflict Management
■
■
■

■

■

Harmony is normal and conﬂict is abnormal.
Conﬂict occurs because of personal problems.
Conﬂict should never be forced, because anger,
the predominant emotion, will escalate the
conﬂict.
Management of conﬂict should be polite and
orderly.
There is only one right way to resolve differences (Wilmot & Hocker, 2001, pp. 11–13).

In the 1960s, however, scholars began to suggest
that properly managed conﬂict could facilitate organizational and/or personal growth (Valentine,
1995). When conﬂict is viewed from a positive perspective, there are a number of beneﬁts to be gained.
Assumptions underlying a positive perception of
conﬂict include:
■

■
■
■

Conﬂict is inevitable; learning to manage it
effectively is necessary.
Conﬂict brings problems to the surface.
Conﬂict helps people discuss their goals.
Managing conﬂict can help to resolve resentments and increase understanding (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001, pp. 15–16).

Many different types of conﬂicts arise in organizations. Conﬂicts often instigate positive change in
organizations, but the parties involved must learn
to manage them constructively. Understanding
what conﬂict is and its potential outcome is a prerequisite to creating growth-producing experiences.

CONFLICT DEFINED
Conﬂict can be deﬁned as an expressed struggle
between at least two interdependent parties who
perceive that incompatible goals, scarce
resources, or interference from others are preventing them from achieving their goals (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001, p. 41). The words highlighted emphasize the key ingredients of a conﬂict. Identifying
these ingredients in a particular situation is the ﬁrst
step in addressing the conﬂict situation.
The conﬂict in situation A easily illustrates this
deﬁnition. The difference of opinion in this situation rises to the level of expressed struggle when the
nurse manager and the physician cannot agree how
to move forward in teaching foot care. The difference in opinion impedes progress because of the
interdependence of the manager and the physician.

331

The physician depends upon nurses to provide education for her diabetic patients; the nurses are
dependent upon the physician to admit patients to
their unit. Although both share the goal of ensuring
that patients are competent to deal with the effects
of their disease, the methods to reach the goal are in
conﬂict.

CONFLICTS CATEGORIZED
BY UNDERLYING ISSUES
Applying the deﬁnition of a conﬂict in a particular
situation is only the ﬁrst step in understanding a
conﬂict. Constructive conﬂict management also
requires an understanding of the underlying issues.
Classifying issues according to categories helps to
explain the subtleties of the conﬂict. Categories of
issues underlying conﬂict typically include: relationship, value, data, interest, and structural. Relationship conﬂicts occur when those in a relationship
hold different views, beliefs, or values that negatively affect the functioning of the relationship because of poor communication, strong negative
emotions, and/or misperceptions. Conﬂicts that
arise because of opposing values that have an impact
beyond a single relationship are often referred to as
value conﬂicts. Data conﬂicts result when parties
do not have sufficient information to make a decision or when the data required for decision making
are interpreted differently by the various parties.
Data conﬂicts may also occur when participants disagree about the relevance or interpretation of the
data. Interest conﬂicts result from perceived
incompatible needs. External forces, such as limited
physical resources, time, geographical constraints, or
organizational changes, often result in structural
conﬂicts (Wilmot & Hocker, 2001).
The conﬂict between the nursing director of the
ICU and the director of respiratory care services
(situation B) illustrates several categories of conﬂict. The directors are in conﬂict because both need
additional staff to care for patients with increasingly complex conditions. This conﬂict could be
considered an interest conﬂict, because there is
competition over perceived incompatible needs.
The reorganization at the director level aimed at
consolidating the number of departments into
fewer interdisciplinary teams represents a situation
in which one of the directors may lose power if her

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

332

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 332

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

position is eliminated. This results in a potential
structural conﬂict, which could escalate the conﬂict over resources. In addition, the relationship
the directors have with their supervisor may also
contribute to the conﬂict. For example, if the director of respiratory care believes that the vice president will favor the nursing director of the ICU
because they are both nurses, this perception may
escalate the conﬂict.

TYPES OF ORGANIZATIONAL CONFLICT
In addition to classifying conﬂicts by the underlying
interest, other frameworks have been used to categorize conﬂicts within organizations. For example,
Rowland and Rowland (1997, p. 381) identify seven

Practice Proof 20-1

Article: Seago, J., & Ash, M. (2002) Registered nurse unions
and patient outcomes. JONA, 2(3), 143–151.
Organizational characteristics in hospitals have been
shown to influence patient outcomes; however, the
association between RN unions and patient outcomes is
unclear. This study examined the relationship between
the presence of a bargaining unit for RNs and the acute
myocardial infarction (MI) mortality rate for acute care
hospitals in California. In California, 35% of hospitals had
unions. The signficant finding in the study is that
California hospitals with RN unions had a 5.7% lower
mortality rates for acute MIs after accounting for patient
age, gender, type of MI, other chronic diseases, and
several organizational characteristics. A causal relationship
between RN unions and patient outcomes could not be
determined.

QUESTIONS:

1. In the review of the literature, Seago and Ash (2002)
discuss various organizational characteristics that are
known to influence patient outcomes. What were
some of these variables?
2. The authors discussed some limitations to the study.
What were they and how did the authors address
these limitations? Do you see additional limitations to
this study?
3. What are the implications of the results for practice in
hospitals that have RN unions?
4. What are the implications of the results for practice in
hospitals that do not have RN unions?
5. What additional research questions do the results of
this study suggest?

types of organizational-speciﬁc conﬂicts that occur
when there is disagreement over work issues:
goal, affective, cognitive, vertical, horizontal,
line/staff, and role conﬂicts. At ﬁrst glance, some
of these categories may seem to be interpersonal; in
fact, they are organizational. The individuals
involved represent organizational units or levels that
are in conﬂict over resources, authority, or power.
Goal conﬂict occurs when preferred goals are
incompatible, such as in the situation between the
director of respiratory care and the nursing director
of the ICU (situation B). Both of the directors want
to hire new staff to work in the ICU and are competing for the limited available funding to do so.
Affective conﬂict occurs when feelings or emotions are incompatible. The feelings of injustice that
the director of respiratory care may harbor from
reporting to a nurse illustrate an affective conﬂict.
Cognitive conﬂict occurs when ideas or opinions
are believed to be incompatible. For example, the
conﬂict between the physician and the nurse manager over the proposed teaching protocol (situation
A) illustrates cognitive conﬂict.
Vertical conflict occurs between levels of
authority when superiors try to exert their authority over subordinates. The conﬂict between the
pediatric surgical service nurse manager and the
night charge nurse (situation C) illustrates such a
conﬂict. Horizontal conﬂict takes place between
those in the same hierarchical level. The conﬂict
between the nursing director of the ICU and the
director of respiratory care represents horizontal
conﬂict.
Role conﬂict occurs when there is inconsistency or misunderstanding about the way a job
should be performed. Line-staff conﬂict occurs
when line managers believe that staff members use
their technical knowledge to intrude on the line
manager’s area of legitimate authority. This sort of
conﬂict often erupts in the hospital setting, for
example, when the quality management staff dictates changes in practice without the supervisor’s
commitment to the process. An awareness of the
various categories of conﬂict assists in a complete
assessment of the circumstances. As will be discussed later in the chapter, these categories suggest
what direction the assessment should take. The
ability to assess factors inﬂuencing the conﬂict at its
beginning and through the resolution process is
crucial to constructive conﬂict management.

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 333

Constructive Conflict Management

Assessment of the
Conflict Situation
A constructive conflict resolution is one that
reaches an agreement and enhances future interaction. Wilmot and Hocker (2001, p. 93) note that the
outcome of a conﬂict can be considered positive
when agreements are made that are fair and durable
and that consider the interests of both parties. Such
an outcome cannot be achieved without an accurate
intial assessment of the conﬂict. In the same way
that a physical assessment can inform the diagnosis
of a physical problem, an assessment of the conﬂict
situation can direct the resolution of a conﬂict.
Sportsman (2005) described a framework,
adapted from Weber’s Conﬂict Map and the WilmotHocker Conﬂict Assessment Guide (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001), for use in assessing conﬂict within
the health-care environment. The major components of the framework are reﬂected in the acronym
PEPRS, which stands for:
■
■
■
■
■

Parties involved
Events/issues
Power
Regulation of conﬂict
Style of conﬂicts

A description of each of the components will
help in applying the framework.

PARTIES INVOLVED
Assessment of the conﬂict situation begins with
identiﬁcation of all involved participants. Conﬂict
participants may include primary, secondary, or
interested third parties. All have some level of interest in the conﬂict, although their distance from the
conﬂict situation dilutes the intensity of their concern (Sportsman, 2004).
In situation A, the physican and the nurse manager are the primary parties. Secondary parties
include diabetic patients on that unit, the nurses on
the unit who will implement the teaching protocol,
other physicians who admit to that unit, and the
nurse manager’s supervisors. Interested third parties might include nursing and medical staff members on other units.
Identiﬁcation of the parties involved is also
important to determine the type of organizational

333

conﬂict. For example, when the primary participants are involved in a vertical conﬂict between
supervisor and staff, as in situation C, the dynamics
are different than if there was a horizontal conﬂict
as described in situation B.

EVENTS/ISSUES
In an effort to determine the events or issues
involved in the conﬂict, it is important to outline
the triggering event, historical context, the level of
interdependence among the participants, the
“named” issues, available resources, and previously
considered solutions. Underpinning these elements
are communication behaviors of each party and
their perceptions of these behaviors. Because behaviors do not occur in a relational vacuum, the relationship between the conﬂict participants and the
meanings ascribed to their relationship(s) are also
important. In other words, if the relationship is
very important to all participants, the conﬂict will
have much more meaning than if the relationship is
a transient one. This is particularly true if participants deﬁne themselves through the relationship.
The perceptions of these relationships are inﬂuenced by gender, culture, and socioeconomic status
(Sportsman, 2005). For example, the attempt to
introduce the new teaching protocol was the triggering event in situation A. The historical relationship of nurses being “handmaidens” of physicians,
based in part on traditional male-female roles, may
also inﬂuence this conﬂict. Despite this historical
background, as previously noted, the physician and
nurses are interdependent in their ability to care for
diabetic patients.
In situation B, if the respiratory care director
believes that nothing he can do to demonstrate the
needs of his department will outweigh the professional relationship of two nurses, he reduces the
variety of behaviors he might use to resolve the
issue. Having the mindset that the vice president
will always give the majority of the resources to the
nursing director may reduce the energy he is willing
to expend to advocate for resources for his department. The ﬁnancial, human, and/or emotional
resources available to resolve the conﬂict also provide important information about the situation. In
situation B, if the hospital is experiencing ﬁnancial
difficulties, the options for resolving the need for

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

334

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 334

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

respiratory and nursing staff may be very different
than if the hospital is strong ﬁnancially.

DIVERGENT GOALS
The most signiﬁcant factors to assess in order to
deﬁne the event/issues are the divergent goals of the
various parties involved in the conﬂict. Goals inherent in a conﬂict are typically referred to as CRIP
because they fall into one or more of these types:
Content, Relational, Identity, and Process. Content
goals can be determined by asking “What do I
want?” Relational goals involve answering the
question, “Who are we to each other, and how does
this affect what I want?” Identity, or face-saving,
goals can be determined by answering “Who am I
in this interaction, and how does this affect what I
want?” Process goals involve asking “What
processes will be used in this interaction” (Wilmot
& Hocker, 2001).
In situation C, both the pediatric surgical-service
nurse manager and the night charge nurse have a
content goal of ensuring that children and their
families get appropriate preoperative care. The
nurse manager also has the content goal of maintaining the ﬂow of surgery. Her relationship goal
may be for her subordinate to follow her order. The
night charge nurse may also recognize that she is
subordinate to the nurse manager; therefore, her
relationship goal may be to maintain a positive
relationship with her supervisor. The identity
goals of these two nurses are inﬂuenced by the difference in their roles in the hierarchy. For example,
the nurse manager may be committed to demonstrating her power as a supervisor. On the other
hand, the night charge nurse, while recognizing her
subordinate role, may see herself as the main advocate for the children preparing for surgery and their
families. The process goals in situation C may
direct how the situation is resolved. If the nurse
manager’s process goal is to resolve the conﬂict by
exerting her authority, she will be less likely to
negotiate alternative outcomes, such as consulting
the nursing literature or requesting feedback from
other practice experts.
All types of goals are not present in all disputes,
and they may vary in importance in any given situation. Identity and relational goals typically underlie the content and process issues, which are more
likely to be named as the goals in dispute (Wilmot &

Hocker, 2001). For example, in the physician–nurse
manager conﬂict in situation A, implementing the
teaching protocol based on nursing research may be
the content goal for the nurse manager. His need,
however, to have the worth of nursing research, and
more importantly the worth of his own practice, recognized is an underlying identity goal in this conﬂict. If only the content goals are achieved, the
conﬂict is likely to remain (Wilmot & Hocker,
2001). For example, if the physician agrees to use
the teaching protocol suggested by the nurse manager but continues to belittle the underlying
research, the conﬂict has not been truly resolved.
As part of issue identiﬁcation in the conﬂict
assessment, goals must be clariﬁed. It may be difficult to deﬁne effective resolutions for vague goals
because such goals cannot be quantiﬁed (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001, pp. 91–92) For example, in situation
A, if the nurse manager has the goal that “ the
physicians in this hospital will respect nursing
research,” it will be difficult to know whether that
goal has been achieved. Instead, if the goal is to
implement the teaching protocol for diabetic
patients based on speciﬁc nursing research, its
achievement can be more easily determined.

POWER
All conﬂicts are based, in part, on attempts to protect participants’ self-esteem or alter perceived
inequities in power (Boule, 2001; Wilmot & Hocker,
2001). Therefore, examining the inﬂuence of power
related to conﬂict participants is central to assessing
and understanding the conﬂict. Boule (2001, p. 224)
describes some assumptions about power in conﬂict
that may be helpful in this examination:
■

■

■

There are many different contexts in which
there might be varying levels of power. Some
of these are easy to observe, and some are not.
All participants in a conﬂict have some power.
This may come from money, knowledge, or the
ability to damage or reward. It may also be
derived from rules, standards and principles,
the morality of the situation, and/or the need
to maintain or improve a reputation.
The perception of power may be more important than power itself.

The perception of power is fueled by certain
assumptions about what constitutes power. Kritek,

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 335

Constructive Conflict Management

in Marcus, et al. (1995), outlines assumptions about
power as translated into privilege in the United
States:
■

■
■

■

■

■

■

The wealthy are more privileged than the
poor.
Men are more privileged than women.
Professional people are more privileged than
laborers.
Healthy people are more privileged than the
ill.
Strong people are more privileged than the
weak.
Management is more privileged than employees.
People who act in a rational manner are more
privileged than those who are emotional.

In addition to power drawn from societal inﬂuences, assumptions can also be drawn about power
in organizations. Wilmot and Hocker (2001, p. 11),
synthesizing research on organizational power,
indicate that people have power in organizations
when they:
■
■
■

■
■

Are required to deal with important problems
Control valuable resources
Are closely connected to the work ﬂow of the
organization
Are not easily replaced
Have a history of using their power effectively

These characteristics are built on the “bases of
power” work of French and Raven (1960), which
describes power as coming from reward, coercive,
legitimate, referent, and expert power bases.
All told, the powerful in work or personal conﬂict are those who have the advantage of physical
and psychological strength by virtue of gender, education, health, or resources. The extent to which
this power is actualized contributes to the resolution
of the conﬂict. Therefore, it is important to assess
the power base of each participant in a conﬂict.
The bases of power should be used as a starting
point to assess the power of individuals. Nonetheless, Wilmot and Hocker (2001, p. 11) suggest
that in a conﬂict assessment, power is typically
deﬁned too narrowly, and too much emphasis is put
on the source of the inﬂuence. They recommend
including an assessment of the use of power within
the relationship in conﬂict rather than simply the
amount of power one participant potentially has
over another. For example, evaluating the decision-

335

making process within the relationship (who typically makes the decisions?) and the extent to which
each participant attempts to control conversation
can provide helpful information about the use of
power in a relationship. Identifying other methods
of using covert power, such as passive-aggressive
behavior or “submitting but resisting,” can also be
instructive (Wilmot & Hocker, 2001, p. 113).
The conﬂict in situation A between the nurse
manager and the physician illustrates principles
regarding power. From an organizational perspective, both parties hold signiﬁcant power. Both deal
with important relationships, control valuable
resources, and would be difficult to replace. Both
are central to the work ﬂow related to the care of
patients. To determine any inequities of power, one
must analyze the speciﬁc relationship. Questions
that might help in this analysis include: “What are
signs of dominance or passivity in their conversations?” and “What decision-making strategies have
been used in past conﬂicts?”
A broad assessment of power is critical to a constructive resolution of conﬂict because the relative
power of each party and the power within the speciﬁc relationship can be used to generate possible
solutions. If the possible solutions to the conﬂict are
only based on the power of each party in general,
the range of possible solutions will not reﬂect the
power distribution in their intimate relationship.
This narrow assessment will reduce the range of
possible solutions to the conﬂict. For example,
observing the way the physician and the nurse manager in situation A relate to each other can give
additional information about the power distribution in their relationship beyond what is assumed
from their relative positions in the organization.

REGULATING RESOURCES
The resources for constructive conﬂict management are available in every conﬂict situation. These
resources might include internal or external limiting factors, interested or neutral third parties, and
various styles used to manage conﬂict. Internal factors include common values of participants or the
value of the relationship to each of them. External
factors might include an authority with the ability
to intervene and force a settlement. Third parties
would include those trusted by both sides that can
facilitate a resolution acceptable to all. Possible con-

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

336

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 336

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

ﬂict management styles used by the participants,
which will be discussed in the next section of the
chapter, also have the potential for regulating the
conﬂict (Wilmot & Hocker, 2001, p. 204).
Situation C illustrates various internal and external resources likely to regulate this conﬂict. The
nurse manager and the night charge nurse share the
desire for patients to be prepared for surgery. In
addition, they recognize the interrelatedness of
their work. They also are both aware that others in
the hospital hierarchy could intervene if necessary,
providing an external regulator to this conﬂict. Both
participants value the need for adequate patient
preparation; however, the nurse manager may value
smooth collaboration between the operating room
and the patient unit more than the night charge
nurse. The effectiveness with which the conﬂict is
managed may be related to the extent to which regulating resources that support resolution rather
than continued conﬂict are available.
Some conﬂicts are relatively easy to resolve; others are more difficult. Lewicki, et al. (2001, p. 21)
suggest that the ease of resolution depends, in large
measure, upon the issue in conﬂict. An accurate
assessment, driven by identiﬁcation of the conﬂict
category, can help participants evaluate, in advance,
the possible ease of resolution. The size of “the
prize” to be won or lost, the level of interdependence of the participants, and the extent to which
participants must continue to work together inﬂuence the likelihood of a constructive resolution. The
extent to which the resolution process seems fair to
each participant also contributes to a constructive
resolution. Similarly, the structure that is in place to
encourage or discourage participant interaction and
conﬂict resolution also inﬂuences the ease of resolution (Lewicki, et al., 2001, p. 21).

STYLE OF CONFLICT MANAGEMENT
Conflict management styles are behavioral
approaches used to regulate or resolve the conﬂict.
When these behaviors are used together over time,
they become patterned responses. These patterns
develop over a lifetime, inﬂuenced by genetics, life
experiences, and personal philosophy. People tend
to use the same patterns over and over in a wide
range of conﬂicts. In some situations, these patterned responses may effectively resolve the conﬂict. In other circumstances, however, the same

pattern of behavior may only escalate the conﬂict.
To be effective in conﬂict management, one must be
able to choose consciously the behaviors that best ﬁt
the circumstances of the conﬂict.
There has been signﬁcant research on conﬂict
management styles in an effort to understand what
behavior is most appropriate in various situations.
For example, three groups of researchers, Blake and
Mouton (1964), Thomas and Kilmann (1974), and
Rahin (1990), have described ﬁve styles or behavioral patterns that might be used in a conﬂict. The
styles identiﬁed by the three groups of researchers,
although differently named, describe the same phenomena. Competing, forcing, or dominating
refer to a behavior pattern of being uncooperative
and demanding one’s own way. The results of such
an approach are often categorized as a win-lose situation. Sports analogies in conﬂict management
usually refer to competitive situations in which
achieving a goal takes place by blocking the opponent’s goal. In these situations, only one goal can be
met, resulting in a “winner take all” scenario.
Avoiding or withdrawing refers to avoiding
the conﬂict so that it cannot be resolved. The
result may be categorized as a lose-lose situation.
Accommodating, smoothing, or obliging/capitulation refers to being cooperative yet unassertive
so that only the other person’s needs are met. The
result may be considered a lose-win outcome. Compromise or sharing suggests that each party relinquishes something, which might be described as
a no-win no-loss resolution, because no one gains or
loses everything she or he wanted. Collaboration
or problem solving, which is the most timeconsuming process, may be considered a win-win
situation, in which new ideas are generated that
resolve most of the issues in the conﬂict. The
important point to understand is that each of these
styles has some merit; there is no one right way to
manage conﬂict. The style that is most effective in
reaching a constructive outcome to the conﬂict
depends on the participants and the context of the
conﬂict.
Effective collaboration or problem solving results
in the greatest beneﬁt (win-win) for all involved in
a conﬂict, so logically this should be the conﬂict
management style most often used. In reality, other
styles are frequently chosen over collaboration. In
some cases, particularly for short-term gain, it may
even be appropriate to choose avoiding (lose-lose)
as a solution. This choice may be made intention-

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 337

Constructive Conflict Management

ally, after comparing the time required for collaboration with the impact of the problem being
resolved. In situation C, for example, if the nurse
manager knows that the night charge nurse will be
resigning in a short time, it might be in everyone’s
best interest, including the patients’, to avoid a confrontation about this schedule.
Table 20-1 reviews the ﬁve conﬂict management
styles outlined by Thomas and Kilmann (1974) and
gives examples of circumstances in health care in
which each of the ﬁve styles might be appropriate.

CONFLICT STYLES IN NURSING
AND HEALTH CARE
No place is the need to use various conﬂict management styles more important than in the complex
world of health care. Health-care organizations are

TABLE 20-1

337

particularly vulnerable to the negative effects of
conﬂict among providers because of multiple stakeholders with competing interests and values
(Marcus, et al., 2001). There is some evidence to
suggest that increased positive interaction among
health-care disciplines positively inﬂuences outcomes of care for patients (Bartol, Parrish, &
McSweeney, 2001). Conversely, according to data
from the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO), breakdown in
team communications is a top contributor to sentinel events (AACN, 2005). Poor communication is
often the result of unresolved or poorly managed
conﬂict. Constructive conﬂict management is an
effective strategy in improving communication and,
in effect, improving patient safety.
Despite the recognition that use of a variety of
conﬂict management styles is necessary for constructive conﬂict resolution, many people uncon-

Conflict Management Styles

STYLE

SITUATION

Competition (win-lose)

■
■

Accommodation (lose-win)

■

■

Avoiding (lose-lose)

■

■

Compromise (no-win
no-loss)

■

■

Collaboration (win-win)

■

■

When patients’ well-being is clearly at stake and the opposing position would harm it
When working with a peer who would take advantage of you if you did not compete
When other staff members care about the results of the monthly schedule more than
you do
To counteract previous negative feelings, you agree to adopt a treatment protocol that is
not your first choice but appears to have positive patient results
When you know that an employee wants to discuss the promotion that you are not
prepared to give, you cancel a scheduled appointment with the employee. The
employee loses because she is unable to ask about the promotion, and you may also
lose the support of the employee, who sees you as unresponsive
When staff wants to buy a new piece of equipment, but administration has indicated
that no new equipment will be purchased for the next 6 months
When two hospital units need a new staff member but there is only sufficient funding for
one new employee and a 0.5 FTE position is assigned to each unit
When a new electronic charting system is scheduled to be implemented in 6 months
but accreditation processes require a change in documentation of a particular instance
immediately
When a new 23-hour unit is being opened as a cost-reduction strategy and the opinions
of multiple stakeholders are in conflict about how to proceed; the support of all the
stakeholders is needed to make the unit successful
When the discharge planning process is being revised and there has been long-term
animosity between the social workers and nurses; when representatives from the two
groups interact to revise the process, positive relationships may be forged

Adapted from Thomas and Kilmann (1974)

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

338

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 338

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

sciously use a predominant style regardless of the
circumstances. In numerous studies, staff nurses
have been found to use avoidance as their predominant style of conﬂict management (Cavanagh, 1991;
Eason & Brown, 1999; Hightower, 1986; and
Marriner, 1982). Operationally, this means that
nurses choose to avoid a conﬂict rather than use
other conﬂict management styles.
In two studies, nurses in supervisory positions
were found to use compromising most frequently as
a conﬂict management style (Barton, 1991; Woodtli,
1987). Eason and Brown (1999), however, found
that both supervisors and staff nurses used avoidance as their primary style, followed by accommodation. Despite the fact that these studies identiﬁed
different prevalent conﬂict management styles of
nurses, it is signiﬁcant that competition and, more
important, collaboration were used less often.
Because 92% of the nurses in the United States
are female (ANA, 2004), gender, professional socialization, or both probably inﬂuence choice of conﬂict
management styles. Research in non–health-care
environments suggests that gender inﬂuences the
choice of conﬂict management styles (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001). But because of the small number of
men in nursing, it has been difficult to weigh gender
differences as a factor in conﬂict management style
in nursing. Further research in this area may prove
instructive in determining whether it is gender or
other factors associated with choosing a career in
nursing that inﬂuence the choice of conﬂict management styles.
To update ﬁndings regarding nurses and allied
health-care professionals’ use of various conﬂict
management styles, Sportsman and Hamilton
(2007) studied the predominant conﬂict management style(s) of nurses and allied health professionals enrolled in professional programs at a
comprehensive university. Researchers identiﬁed
some trends when comparing different groups. In a
change from some of the earlier studies, nurses
tended to use compromise most often. Allied health
professionals tended to choose avoidance. Females
in all of the health professions tended to choose
compromise, and males tended to choose avoidance.
Each group used collaboration more often than
competition but less often than the other styles.
Although competition was the least prevalent style
for both, males chose it more frequently than
females, and nurses chose it the least. All groups
tended to choose more than one style.

The changes in the ﬁndings of the research on
conﬂict styles among health-care providers over the
last 15 years suggest that nurses may slowly be
increasing the variety of conﬂict management
styles they use. They seem reluctant, however, to
use styles such as collaboration and competition.
Given that collaboration is often recommended
in the literature as the best strategy to accomplish
systematic changes in an organization, nurses
must learn collaborative skills to effect change in
the health-care delivery system (Sportsman &
Hamilton, 2005).

Destructive Conflict Resolution
The outcome of any conflict may be positive or negative,
depending upon the skill with which the issues are
managed. Unfortunately, it is easier for an outcome of
a conflict to be destructive than for it to be positive.
Conflict may be considered destructive if participants are
dissatisfied with the outcome and believe that they have
“lost.” This feeling of loss often results in anger and the
desire to get even. While it is difficult to predict whether
the conflict will be constructive or destructive during the
process, Gottmann in Wilmot and Hocker (2001, p. 49)
identified four communication behaviors that portend
a destructive outcome. These include: criticism at the
beginning of the interaction, defensiveness, stonewalling, and contempt. Individually, these behaviors are
destructive; in addition, the use of one of the behaviors
will often encourage the use of others. Consider how
these behaviors might influence several of the situations
under discussion.
Criticism of one party by another will set a negative tone
for the conflict. Moreover, if one party becomes defensive,
the conflict will continue along a destructive path.
Stonewalling occurs when one person “withdraws” from
the interaction, even though the person continues to be
involved in the conflict (Wilmot & Hocker, 2001,
p. 51).
The identification of these behaviors as they occur is
important as the first step in moving from a destructive to a constructive conflict resolution. If participants
recognize these behaviors in their own communication,
they can make efforts to adopt a more neutral position,
perhaps apologizing to the opponent for unhelpful
behavior. It is important to avoid responding negatively
when others exhibit destructive behavior in a conflict.
In an emotionally charged issue, listening as a means
of learning will reduce defensiveness and turn the conflict around onto a more constructive course (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001, p. 50).

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 339

Constructive Conflict Management

The Role of Negotiation
in Constructive Conflict
Management

■

■

■

Negotiation, also known as bargaining, is the process by which a conﬂict is resolved between opposing parties. Negotiation occurs every day when
participants would rather reach an agreement
together than have another person resolve the issue
for them (Lewicki, et al., 2001).
Wilmot and Hocker (2001, p. 211) describe negotiation as the active phase of conﬂict resolution
when participants generate options and brainstorm
in an effort to get their needs met. This process
is helped or hindered by the choice of conﬂict management styles used during the negotiation. Negotiations are most successful when the parties:
■
■
■

■

■

Recognize their interdependence
Have been able to clarify their issues
Are willing to work on both incompatible and
overlapping goals
Have sufficient power to be able to participate
in the negotiation
Have formal and informal procedures to be
able to interact in problem solving

COMPETITIVE VERSUS
COLLABORATIVE NEGOTIATION
There are two different approaches to negotiation:
the competitive (distributive) approach and the
collaborative (integrative) approach. The choice
of approach depends upon the negotiator’s philosophy about conﬂict and the outcome desired, which
may then determine the speciﬁc conﬂict styles chosen. Competitive negotiation results in a win-lose
outcome. A competitive conﬂict management style
is the style most often used by the “winners” in a
distributive negotiation. Avoidance and accommodation are more likely to have been used by the
“losers.” The negotiator taking this approach is
typically not concerned about an ongoing relationship with the other party and is trying to maximize gain/minimize loss. The goal is to win as
much as possible, especially more than the other
side (Wilmot & Hocker, 2001, p. 222.). Behaviors that are typical of a competitive negotiation
include:

■

339

Making high opening demands and moving
downward slowly
Hiding information and using confrontation
and argument to make points
Being unwilling to respond to persuasion by
the other side
Exaggerating one’s own concession (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001, p. 222).

On the other hand, collaborative negotiation
assumes that people have both diverse and common
interests and that the negotiation can result in both
parties gaining something. This type of negotiation
is based upon the assumptions that interdependence is important and common interests can be
identiﬁed, even if there are some competing interests. Limited resources do exist, but they can usually be expanded through cooperation (Wilmot &
Hocker, 2001, p. 226). In a collaborative negotiation, both sides use collaboration and/or compromise most frequently.
In situation B, if the nursing director of the
intensive care unit and the director of respiratory care use a collaborative approach to negotiating, they may be able to expand the resources
available to their staff. For example, they might be
able to share the time of unlicensed assistive personnel to allow the professional staff in both departments more time for patient care. On the other
hand, if the nursing director uses a competitive
approach to negotiation, she may have sufficient
power to capture most of the resources for her staff.
In actual practice, the two types of negotiation are
not nearly so well delineated, and many negotiations have elements of both competition and collaboration.

NEGOTIATION PROCESS
Once the parties have decided to negotiate, six negotiation phases in three speciﬁc stages guide the
process. Based upon the work of Lewicki, et al.,
(2001), the stages incorporate the previously discussed assessment of the conﬂict, the development
of relationships, and the development of the negotiation plan. The negotiation model can be used in
either a competitive or collaborative interaction.
Table 20-2 outlines this negotiation model and
identiﬁes questions to be answered in order to move
through each stage and phase.

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

340

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 340

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

RELATIONSHIP DEVELOPMENT STAGE

hot topic:
Collective Bargaining: An Example
of Competitive Negotiation
The process of collective bargaining is built upon the
notion of competitive negotiation. Management and
labor are conceptualized as opposing forces where the
collective action of labor is necessary to overcome the
greater power of management.
Union activity in health care has been most common in
states with deep union penetration in other industries.
The growth in collective bargaining in health care in
the last 15 years, even in less unionized states, has been
stimulated by the health-care reorganization movement of the 1990s.
The collective bargaining model requires that representatives of the designated union negotiate work
contracts on behalf of the membership. Nursing
issues likely to be negotiated as part of a contract
include not only wages and benefits but also workplace issues such as staffing ratios that affect patients
and nurses. The process of negotiation provides an
opportunity for union representatives to articulate
the needs of staff nurses. Competitive negotiation
typically provides the framework for collective bargaining; however, most successful collective bargaining negotiators also use elements of the collaborative
approach. In addition, administration may also use
collaborative negotiation strategies at times other than
formal collective bargaining as a means of improving
staff-management relationships and/or preventing
unionization of their facility. For example, when hospital representatives know that, because of poor profit
margins, they are limited in the range of compensation they can offer, they may focus the negotiation
on the development of self-governance councils for
nurses.

ASSESSMENT STAGE
The assessment stage in the negotiation process
requires implementation of the conﬂict assessment
previously discussed. Data from the assessment can
help each party determine whether they will take a
competitive or collaborative approach to negotiation or a mixed approach that uses both some time
during the negotiation.

The relationship development stage of negotiation
involves framing the results of the assessment to
understand the other party. Determining the similarities and differences in the history, experience,
values, and expectations of the other party will provide a context for the negotiation plan, including
whether competition or collaboration is most valued
by the parties. For example, in situation A, if the
physician values being “right at all cost,” the nurse
manager may have to use competition in order to
have any chance of his protocol being accepted.

NEGOTIATION PLAN
DEVELOPMENT STAGE
Four phases make up the ﬁnal stage of negotiation
plan development: information synthesis, bidding,
closing the deal, and implementing the agreement.
In the information synthesis phase, the divergent
goals of each party will be clariﬁed from the
events/issues of the conﬂict. For purposes of the
negotiation process, these goals can be expressed
either as positions or interests. Positions involve
identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc outcome of the conﬂict
as the participant wishes it would be. Interests are
factors underlying participants’ claims and include
issues that are actually motivating the participants
in the conﬂict (Lewicki, et al., 2001, p. 62). If the
negotiation is centered on positions, the negotiation
is likely to be distributive. Conversely, if interests
guide the negotiation, collaborative negotiation is
more likely to result, because a variety of interests
are underlying the two positions in the conﬂict.
In situation A, for instance, the nurse manager’s
position is to implement the teaching protocol based
on nursing research. Negotiating with the nurse
manager’s narrow, speciﬁc position in mind may
prove difficult because the parties will either adopt
the protocol or they will not; his position does not
allow for compromise or collaboration. If the negotiation centers on the underlying interest of the
nurse manager (the need to integrate nursing
research into practice) however, it opens up the
negotiation to many more avenues of exploration
and resolution.
In the information synthesis phase, there is often
an opportunity to provide participants with infor-

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 341

Constructive Conflict Management

TABLE 20-2

341

Negotiation Model

PHASE

DATA TO BE COLLECTED

Assessment Stage of Conflict
Preparation

■

Use a conflict assessment guide, such as PEPRS.

Relationship Development Stage
Information framing

■
■
■
■

How are the opposing parties alike?
How are they different?
Can they accept value differences?
Are they committed to a positive outcome for both sides?

Negotiation Plan Development Stage
Information synthesis

■

■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Will the negotiation focus on positions or interests? (Will it be a competitive or
collaborative negotiation?)
What is the Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement (BATNA) for each party?
How likely are the various options to succeed?
What happens if negotiation fails?
What conflict management style(s) should be used?
What pieces of information can be used to support the negotiators’ case?
What clarifications can be made to resolve areas of conflict?
What options for resolution might be available?

■

If negotiators cannot have exactly what they want, what outcomes are they
willing to accept?
What steps should be taken to get there?

Closing the deal

■

What components must be in place for the negotiators to agree?

Implementing the agreement

■

Bidding

■

■
■

What are the next steps?
Who needs to take responsibility for various parts of the agreement?
Should there be a written contract, and what should it include?

Adapted from Lewicki, et al. (2001), pp. 52–53.

mation that might resolve some areas of conﬂict.
For example, if a data conﬂict exists, this stage may
provide an opportunity to clarify the data or provide new information that adds understanding to
the situation. In situation A, the nurse manager
might have an opportunity to bring additional published information to the physician regarding the
new teaching protocol. If a relationship conﬂict is
involved, this phase provides an opportunity to
clarify misperceptions and stereotypes and perhaps
improve communication skills needed for the interaction.
Also as part of the information synthesis phase,
Ury, Patton, and Fisher (1991) suggest that each
participant should determine the Best Alternative

To the Negotiated Agreement (BATNA) from
his/her own perspective. Table 20-3 outlines the
steps to using the BATNA in negotiation.
In situation A, the nurse manager might decide
that the best alternative would be implementation
of the teaching protocol over a trial period with a
subset of patients, using evaluation data from mutually agreed-upon outcome markers to decide if the
new teaching protocol would be fully implemented
on the unit. This alternative does not ensure immediate acceptance of the new protocol, but it does
provide an opportunity for a trial while recognizing
the physician’s concerns.
An important part of the information synthesis
is to consider what happens if the conﬂict is not

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

342

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 342

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

TABLE 20-3

Uses of BATNA in Negotiation

1. Determine the best alternative to the negotiated

agreement from your perspective.
2. Using information from the conflict assessment,

hypothesize what might be the best alternative to the
negotiated agreement from the viewpoint of the other
party.
3. Consider ways in which the other party’s BATNA can
be amended to meet your own goals while satisfying
the other party.
Adapted from Ury, Patton, and Fisher (1991).

resolved. Recognizing the consequences of a failure
in the negotiation may serve as a stimulus to continue to negotiate, even when a stalemate looms
ahead. Of equal importance is considering possible
options for resolution. This prepares each negotiator for the brainstorming that occurs as part of the
bidding process.
In the bidding phase, the negotiators work
together to determine options that might resolve the
conﬂict. If participants are clear about what they
are willing to accept, they can more easily reach a
desired outcome. This will allow them to outline the
components that must be in place for the negotiators to agree and close the deal. Depending upon the
formality of the negotiation, the implementation of
the agreement phase may include development of a
contract. In the most formal negotiation, a contract
is written to be legally enforceable. Even if the negotiation does not lead to a legally binding contract,
an informal written agreement at the end of negotiation increases the likelihood that the agreement
will be kept. This agreement should outline all
agreed-upon points.

All Good Things...
Conﬂict is inevitable and, in the high stakes of
health care, patient care can be negatively affected
by destructive conﬂict. As a result, nurses and other
health-care providers must use constructive conﬂict
management skills to resolve these issues.

Practice to Strive For 20-1
Analysis of a possible interaction between the nursing director of the intensive care unit (ICU) and the director of respiratory care in situation B can be instructive in applying the
negotiation model. Assume that the vice president of
patient care services has allotted $100,000 to increase the
nursing and respiratory staff assigned to the ICU. She has
indicated that the two directors must work together to
develop a plan to use this money. This strategy encourages
the two directors to negotiate on the basis of issues rather
than principles. Before meeting to develop a plan, each
director should assess the conflict situation. Each should
also analyze the assessment data independently, determining the BATNA for themselves as well as what they believe
the BATNA to be for the other party. In this situation, the
directors’ initial desire may be to hire several professional
staff members in each discipline to work in the ICU. The
limit of $100,000 may reduce the number of professional
staff members they can hire. As they begin to negotiate and
address what they are willing to take if they cannot have
what they want, however, they may find that hiring support/nonprofessional staff or reorganizing the way the ICU
nurses and respiratory care staff interact may be part of the
plan they develop.

A negotiation process model can be used to effect
a resolution. A complete and accurate assessment of
the conﬂict is the ﬁrst stage of the negotiation
model. Such an assessment includes the use of an
assessment framework, such as PEPRS, which
identiﬁes the parties involved, events and issues of
the situation, power underlying the conﬂict, regulating resources, and conﬂict management styles
typically used by the participants.
The second stage of the negotiation process
involves development of the relationships among
parties. The information gathered in the assessment
stage can be used to explore the similarities and differences of the parties in conﬂict and can determine
the context in which the parties will negotiate.
The third stage, the development of the negotiation plan, involves synthesis of the information
obtained from the ﬁrst two steps, bidding, closing
the deal, and implementing the agreement. In
health care, using a structured approach to conﬂict
management not only improves the working conditions for employees but also improves the outcomes
of patient care.

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 343

Constructive Conflict Management

Let’s Talk
1. How does your personal and professional background inﬂuence the ways in which you deal
with conﬂict?
2. What conﬂict management style(s) do you use
most frequently? How has this affected the
outcomes of conﬂicts you have been involved in?
3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of
competitive negotiation and collaborative negotiation? In what health-care situations might
each be useful?
4. Consider a conﬂict you have observed in a
clinical setting. What was its impact on the
primary participants of the conﬂict? the patients
being cared for by these participants? the work
environment? What strategies would you
recommend using to resolve this conﬂict?

NCLEX Questions
1. Factors that inﬂuence the ease with which a con-

ﬂict is resolved include all of the following
EXCEPT:
A. The level of interdependence of the parties
B. The importance of the outcome
C. The perceived fairness of the process of resolution
D. The extent to which support systems that
encourage resolution are in place
E. All of the above
2. An example of a role conﬂict is:

A. When the director of respiratory care and the
nursing director of the ICU both want to hire
a new employee in their discipline to work in
the ICU
B. When the director of respiratory care believes
she does not receive as many resources as the
nursing director of the ICU
C. When two secretaries are hired to help with
excess work load but the job expectations for
each of them is not clear
D. When line managers believe that support staff use their technical knowledge to
intrude on the line manager’s legitimate
authority

343

3. Which of the following is true regarding power

in conﬂict?
A. Some participants have no power in the conﬂict
B. An individual’s power in a conﬂict tends to
remain constant
C. The perception of power may be more important than the actual power
D. All of these are true
E. None of these is true
4. Value conﬂicts are likely to occur when:

A. Parties in conﬂict share values not held by the
general population
B. Parties in conﬂict hold opposing values
C. Parties in a conﬂict disagree about the facts in
a situation
D. Issues occur because of incompatible emotions
E. All of these are true
5. Which of the following questions assist in the

identiﬁcation of identity or face-saving goals in a
conﬂict?
A. What do I want?
B. Who are we in this relationship, and how
does this affect what I want?
C. What processes should be used in the resolution?
D. Who am I in this interaction, and how does it
affect what I want?
6. The most effective conﬂict management style:

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Is collaboration
Is competition
Is compromise
Depends on the situation
Depends upon the participant’s core personality traits.

7. Research over the last 15 years suggests that

nurses are most likely to use which of the conﬂict management styles?
A. Competition, compromise
B. Avoidance, accommodation, compromise
C. Competition, collaboration
D. All styles
8. Which of the following communication behav-

iors used in a conﬂict do NOT point to a destructive outcome?
A. Criticism
B. Defensiveness

20Jones Leadership(F)-ch 20

344

1/14/07

3:52 PM

Page 344

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

C. Stonewalling
D. Anger
E. Contempt
9. Which of the following is likely to be found in

integrative (collaborative) negotiation?
A. Hiding information
B. Exaggerating one’s concessions
C. Compromising
D. Using confrontation to make points
E. Moving slowly toward the other’s point of
view
10. Which of the following is true of distributive

(competitive) negotiation?
A. Competition is typically used by the “winner”
B. The ongoing relationship between the two
parties is an important element in the negotiation
C. Making a modest opening bid and moving
down slowly
D. All of these are true
E. None of these is true
REFERENCES
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (2005). AACN
standards for establishing and sustaining healthy work environments: A journey to excellence. www.aacn.org; accessed
February 2005.
American Nurses Association. www.nursingworld.org; accessed
March 2004.
Bartol, G.M., et al. (2001) Effective conﬂict management begins
with knowing your style. Journal for Nurses in Staff
Development, 17(1), 34–40.
Barton, A. (1991). Conﬂict resolution by nurse managers.
Nursing Management, 22(5), 83–86.
Blake, R., & Mouton, J. (1964). Managerial grid. Houston: Gulf
Publishing.
Boule, L. (2001). Mediation: Skills and techniques. Australia:
Butterworths Skill Series.
Cavanagh, S.L. (1991). The conﬂict management styles of staff
nurses and nurse managers. Journal of Advanced Nursing,
16(10), 1254–1260.

Eason, F.R., & Brown, S.T. (1999). Conﬂict management:
Assessing educational needs. Journal for Nurses in Staff
Development, 15(3) 92–96.
French, J. & Raven, B. (1960) Bases of social power. http://
www.valuebasedmanagement.net/methods_french_raven_
bases_social_power.htm. Accessed November, 2006.
JCAHO. (2005). Sentinel event resource index. www.jcaho.
org; accessed April 2005.
Ury, W., Patton, B., & Fisher, R. (1991). Getting to yes. (2nd ed.).
New York: Penguin Books.
Hightower, T. (1986). Subordinate choice of conflicthandling modes. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 11(1),
29–34.
Kritek, P. (2002) Negotiating at an uneven table: Developing moral
courage in resolving our conﬂicts. (2nd ed.). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass Publishing.
Lewicki, R., et al. (2001). Negotiation. (4th ed.). Boston: McGraw
Hill.
Marcus, L., et al. (2001). Renegotiating health care: Resolving
conﬂict to build collaboration. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Publishing.
Marriner, A. (1982). Managing conﬂict. Nursing Management,
13(6), 29–31.
Maxﬁeld, D., et al. (2005). Silence kills: The seven crucial conversations for health care. American Association of Critical-Care
Nurses & VitalSmarts. www.rxforbettercare.org; accessed
February 2005.
Rahim, M.A. (1990). Theory and research in conﬂict management.
NY: Praeger Publishers.
Rowland, H., & Rowland, B. (1997). Nursing administration
handbook. Gaitherburg: MD: Aspen Publications.
Sportsman, S. (2005). Build a framework for conﬂict assessment.
Nursing Management, 2005, 32–40.
Sportsman, S., & Hamilton, P. (2007). Conﬂict management
styes in nursing and allied health professionals. Journal of
Professional Nursing. January-February, 2007.
Thomas, K.W., & Kilmann, R. (1974). Thomas-Kilmann conﬂict
mode instrument. Tuxedo, NY: XICOM.
Valentine, P. (1995). Management of conﬂict: Do nurses/
women handle it differently? Journal of Advanced Nursing,
22(1), 142–149.
Warner, C. (1992). Treasury of women’s quotations. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Wilmot, W., & Hocker, J. (2001). Interpersonal conﬂict. (6th ed.).
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Woodtli, A. (1987). Deans of nursing: Perceived sources of conflict and conflict-handling modes. Journal of Nursing
Education, 26(7), 272–277.

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 345

chapter
21
Delegation: An Art of
Professional Practice
CAROLE A. MUTZEBAUGH, EDD, CNP, CNS, MS
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“It is neither to do everything yourself nor to appoint
a number of people to each duty, but to ensure
that each does that duty to which he [sic] is appointed.”
F. Nightingale, 1859

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■

Identify universal “rights” for delegation.
Define “delegation” as discussed in state/province nurse
practice acts.
Review key elements of successful delegation, along with
problems associated with task delegation.

345

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

346

N

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 346

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

ursing management is truly an art. Whether
an experienced manager or newly hired for the ﬁrst
professional position, the registered nurse (RN) seldom works alone. The interdisciplinary and interactive nature of nursing calls for juggling creative
applications of the art of nursing. Skills for interdependent health-care delivery begin with direct
patient care and can culminate in directing large
groups or organizations. Financial pressures inside
and outside the health-care agency, Medicare reimbursement reductions, managed care, and professional salaries create a greater need for increased
delegation.
The ideal nursing practice incorporates many
skill levels of health-care personnel with goals
for patient care, yet within legal deﬁnitions and
ﬁscal awareness. To achieve both patient care
goals and goals of employers, the RN plans to
extend his or her scope of practice through task delegation. Delegation is seen not only as a management skill but also as an ethical issue for nurses.
The Code of Ethics for Nurses (American Nurses
Association, 2001) endorses delegation where,
“[t]he nurse is responsible and accountable for individual nursing practice and determines the appropriate delegation of tasks consistent with the
nurse’s obligation to provide optimum patient
care.”
Within health-care systems, the nurse may delegate to a technician, an orderly, a management assistant, or another nurse. The National Council of
State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN, 1995) views delegation as “transferring to a competent individual,
the authority to perform a selected nursing task in a
selected situation. The nurse retains accountability
for the delegation.” The importance of delegation
in the delivery of nursing care is emphasized on
the NCLEX-RN study guide within the topics of
leadership, staffing, and communication (NCSBN,
2004).
Although delegation is the skill most used to
extend and expand the nurse’s sphere of inﬂuence,
certain aspects of the nursing process cannot be
delegated. For instance, the practice-deﬁning functions of assessment and evaluation, which require
nursing judgment, can never be delegated. Implementation of nursing care, even delegated care, still
remains the responsibility of the nurse.

Components of Delegation
Delegation to others in the workplace involves four
principal components: delegator, delegatee, task,
and client/situation.

DELEGATOR
The delegator possesses the authority to delegate
by virtue of both position in the agency and state
government license to do certain tasks. The license
deﬁnes the scope of practice within a profession,
whereas agency policy describes the role of employees. The RN degree, license, and policy create the
authority to delegate to another individual in the
workplace. Finally, delegation does not change the
delegator’s accountability or responsibility for
task completion. These two concepts mean that the
delegator can only delegate tasks within his or her
scope of practice and that the responsibility for the
skillful completion of the task remains with the delegator.

DELEGATEE
A delegatee receives direction for what to do from
the delegator. The relationship between the two
individuals exists within the workplace environment or through agency policy. The delegatee has
the obligation to refuse to accept tasks that are outside of his or her training, ability, or job description.
Although the delegatee may be registered or certiﬁed for certain skill sets, that is not always the case.
In fact, even when assistive persons holds a permit
to work as unlicensed assistive personnel
(UAP), that permit stipulates that performance of
activities occur under the direction or supervision
of a licensed nurse. A trained delegatee should have
skills that relate to the work setting, but the delegator is responsible for knowing the performance level
of each delegatee.

TASK
The task is the delegated activity. The delegated
activity generally should be a routine task. Routine

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 347

Delegation: An Art of Professional Practice

tasks have predictable outcomes, and a step-by-step
method exists to complete the task. Decision making on the part of the delegatee for delegated tasks
is limited to how to organize time and complete the
task with different patients or variations in equipment. The procedure for the task is found in training manuals for teaching skills.

CLIENT/SITUATION

347

Practice to Strive For 21-1
Without delegation, your work will not be done.
DO:
Select the right person for the task(s).
Communicate directions clearly.
Provide sufficient authority and independence to complete
tasks.
Remain available and approachable.

Identiﬁcation of a speciﬁc client or situation for delegated nursing care is necessary to ensure that goals
for patient care can be met by the delegatee.
Familiar situations and environments enhance
client safety and competent performance of any
task. Situations include client care, such as direct
care, responding to client calls for assistance, and
distributing meals, or involve other tasks such as
data entry, cleaning areas, stocking supplies, or
phoning to conﬁrm appointments. New situations
require orientation, even if the client and task are
familiar. Client-speciﬁc care fosters success with
delegated task performance.
Delegation is not easy and not simple. Delegation
is about getting other people to perform activities to
meet specific client and organizational goals.
Successful delegation means that the nurse understands nursing practice, knows UAP skills, identiﬁes tasks, clariﬁes goals for client care, reinforces
delegation, provides authority, fosters communication, and gives feedback.
Client care goals range from daily personal
hygiene to treatment or recovery from a health
problem. Organizational goals, on the other hand,
relate to providing cost-effective services to help
meet client care goals. Awareness of the rights, beneﬁts, and pitfalls of delegation helps you recognize
how to work through others with greater trust and
conﬁdence.

Rights of Delegation
Delegation is a precursor to the management functions of coordination and supervision. Without a
delegatee, there is no one to supervise and no activities to coordinate. The NCSBN developed Rights of
Delegation to guide the nurse in safe delegation in

Supervise and give feedback on performance.
Recognize efforts by others.
Use nursing staff for nursing decisions.
Know the scope of your practice and agency policy on delegation.
DON’T:
Think that you can delegate accountability.
Expect good results from poor delegation

response to an increasing number of nurse assistants or UAP in the workplace. The delegator nurse
assigns the Right Person to perform the Right Task
under the Right Circumstances and provides the
delegatee with the Right Direction and the Right
Supervision.

THE RIGHT PERSON
Delegation involves the nurse as either delegator or
delegatee. Matching the speciﬁc client care goals
and activities with the person to entrust with the
appropriate responsibility and authority is a challenge. Do you delegate care for an aging patient to
new UAP enrolled in a nursing program or to more
experienced employees? Do you focus on the beneﬁts of staff development or needs of the individual
client? Do you plan time to offer support or only
anticipate the outcome? How do you plan to supervise?

Delegating to UAP
The RN delegates client care to UAP in order to
provide nursing care to more patients. Knowing the
training of UAP can help make better delegation
decisions. Both RNs and licensed practical/voca-

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

348

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 348

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

tional nurses (LPN/LVN) are licensed nurses
within federal and state statutes unless speciﬁcally
differentiated. Both RNs and LPNs might have
authority to delegate care in circumstances deﬁned
by law and agency policy.
UAP can be a certiﬁed nursing assistant or home
health aide or hold a different work title within
almost any health-care setting. UAP refers to “any
unlicensed personnel, regardless of title, to whom
nursing tasks are delegated” (NCSBN, 1997). ANA
(1997) refers to UAP as an “unlicensed individual
who is trained to function in an assistive role to the
licensed registered nurse in the provision of
patient/client care activities as delegated by the
nurse.” Although states maintain registries and
titling of trained UAP and provide certiﬁcates or
registrations from the board of nursing, the most
inclusive title is UAP. See Box 21-1 for different
titles that fall under the umbrella of UAP.
The operative phrase for UAP is “assist the
nurse.” Assessment of the skills and strengths of
UAP is essential to obtain the beneﬁts of their assistance in the setting. UAP have always worked in
health care in some capacity, but the evolution
toward formalizing training of UAP is fairly recent.
The Nursing Home Reform Act, adopted by
Congress in 1987 as part of the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act, deﬁned training and evaluation
standards for UAP working in long-term healthcare facilities. Other health agencies developed similar policies for a variety of care settings.
It is important for delegators to understand the
scope and limitations of UAP based on training.
Content and duration of training are deﬁned further
by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid

Services—§484.36 (a)(1)—and includes observation, reporting, documentation skills, basic infection
control, recognition of emergencies, and skills for
personal hygiene and grooming (Box 21-2).
Training, instruction, and testing for manual skills
and written knowledge are conducted by public and
private contractors with approval of state nursing
boards. The National Nurse Aide Assessment
Program (NNAAP), developed by the NCSBN, operates in many states as a competency certiﬁcation
process. Results are then reported to a board of
nursing. Students enrolled in basic nursing programs (associate and baccalaureate degree) often
present as candidates for NNAAP testing. Successful completion of the test means that students can
be employed as UAP until graduating and passing
the NCLEX.
Generally, UAP work to assist licensed nurses in
caring for clients in hospitals, nursing homes,
patient residences, long-term care facilities, and
clinics. Physician offices, schools, day-care centers,
public health centers, and offices of other licensed
professionals also employ UAP. Because of the wide
range of employment settings, the nurse should be
cognizant of the training of UAP in his or her speciﬁc work setting.
“I can do this or that faster/better/more skillfully
by myself” is an attitude that prevents the nurse
from taking full advantage of UAP skills. Of course,
the nurse has more overall knowledge, but UAP
may have more experience with a particular type or
age of client. Care based on the knowledge of team
members helps the nurse to take full advantage of
strengths of other workers and promotes working
relationships. Working in a unit with other nurses

Box 21-2

Box 21-1

Training for Home Health Aides
(42 CFR §484.36)

Names for UAP
Attendant

Assistive Personnel

Certified Nurse Assistant (CNA.)

Dietary Assistant

Home Health Aide

Medication Technician

Nurse Aide

Nursing Assistant

Orderly
(PCA)

Patient Care Assistant

Health-Care Assistant
Personnel

Unlicensed Assistive

Registered Nurse Assistant (RNA.)

Technician

Duration: 75 hours classroom; 16 hours supervised
practice
Content: Reporting, documentation observation of
patient, and reading and recording of temperature, pulse
and respiration; basic infection control; basic body
function; clean and safe environment; respect for privacy
and property; personal hygiene and grooming; transfer
techniques; range of motion and position; nutrition and
fluid intake; and any other task that the HHA may choose
to have the. . . aide perform.

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 349

Delegation: An Art of Professional Practice

and UAP teams requires respect and judgment to
avoid delegation to UAP who are already assisting
other nurses. The UAP can receive conﬂicting
instructions or overlapping information, both of
which can serve to confuse and disorganize.
Similarly, do not expect the same kind of skill from
UAP unfamiliar with the patient population in your
area.

349

practice limitations to the physician. Physicians
who delegate to advance practice nurses (APNs)
retain responsibility for the task, whereas APNs
who function independently within the state nurse
practice act are responsible for the outcomes of
their decisions. During surgical procedures, a nurse
might function as a ﬁrst assistant with deﬁnitive
education and experience or perform a delegated
task usually assigned to a second physician.

Delegating to Nurses
To be promoted, a nurse manager must have competent personnel to step into her position. In health
care, advancement in the workplace often starts in
the same work area. Here, supervisors have an
opportunity to select from among the staff for promotion to management levels within their supervisory sphere. Selecting the right person requires
creative thinking: Who is reliable? Who has the
most appropriate experience? Who will take acceptable risks? Who understands the workload? Who
wants to succeed? Delegation can help the manager
to assess the ability and potential of staff nurses,
provide motivation through new challenges, and
contribute to development of other skills on the
team. As you become comfortable in an employment position, discuss your interest and willingness
to accept management tasks with your supervisor.
As a new employee, you might be the delegatee
for many activities, especially during the orientation period. Accepting delegated tasks assumes
that you have the time, authority, knowledge, and
skill to complete the job, but the delegator may not
transfer the responsibility to get something done.
Accepting delegated activities can leave you with little time left for your own workload; consequently,
delegated jobs may require that you negotiate performance requirements. If you are delegated the job
of “Arrange for a meeting of all staff on the unit,”
what does that mean? Do you set the time? The
location? The agenda? Do you provide substitute
staff during the meeting time? Do you order
refreshments? Understanding the anticipated outcomes and possessing adequate information and
authority for successful completion are crucial considerations.
Physicians, too, might choose to delegate a medical task to an RN without consideration of the
skills, education, and experience of that nurse. This
situation can create communication problems and a
risk to client safety if the nurse is not clear about

Physician Assistant Delegation
Where delegation of patient orders or treatment
plans becomes less clear is when a physician assistant (PA) is the delegator. A PA works in collaboration with an MD or DO and generally evaluates and
treats patients in clinics, medical offices, and sometimes in hospitals. When the PA delegates orders to
an RN, what is the responsibility of the RN to carry
out the order? Does he treat PA verbal and written
orders as if those directives came from the physician? Does he contact the physician to validate the
order? Does he do nothing because the order is not
given and signed by the physician? The answer to
the nurse’s response to a PA delegator is based on
the medical, nursing, and PA practice acts in the
state/province. In any event, the response is to do
something and not ignore the order for patient
treatment. Lack of response to a patient treatment
order can result in issues of negligence or malpractice. Questions about the authority of a prescribing
professional can be referred to a unit supervisor
until clear guidelines exist for the work setting. If
you happen to be the supervisor, the physician of
record can be contacted for clariﬁcation.

APN Delegation
Delegation is clearly an empowerment issue. The
nurse is empowered, by statute and often by agency
policy, to give direction to others. However, along
with the power to direct others remain the authority
and responsibility to see that the delegated activity is
safely and correctly performed. This principle exists
for nurses who delegate to UAP or for APNs who
give verbal or written orders for other nurses to perform such activities as treatment or medication
administration. The authority of the APN to delegate medical orders depends upon the state/provincial regulations. In Minnesota, for example, a
Memorandum of Understanding between an APN

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

350

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 350

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

and a physician deﬁnes delegated responsibilities
related to the prescription of drugs, related devices,
and activities (MN Statutes 2005, 148.171, subd.6,
13, 15). The relationship of the hospital or nursing
home to an APN determines the extent to which
patients can be admitted and treated independent of
a physician order. If you are working in a setting
where APNs routinely manage care for patients,
that information will be part of the unit orientation.
Again, when you are unclear about assuming a delegated task, refer the issue to the supervisor.

Appropriate tasks for delegation to UAP must
fall within the delegator’s scope of practice unless
otherwise prohibited and should meet all ﬁve criteria: Standardized procedure, Technical in nature,
Routine task, Unlikely risk, and Predictable results
(STRUP).
■

Student Delegation
Can a student nurse accept delegation from an RN
who is not a faculty member? What are the consequences of refusing to complete a delegated task?
The student role is fraught with ambiguities: the
student wants a variety of clinical experiences but
might not have covered the content in class, or a
long time might have elapsed since learning academic content relative to the clinical practice.
Before entering the clinical setting, faculty members should provide clear guidelines to students on
accepting delegated tasks not yet addressed in the
curriculum. Guidelines might include options for
the student: contact the faculty to ask permission to
proceed with the task; ask the delegator to observe
the student doing the task; ask if the task can be
delayed until the faculty is present; assist task completion with the staff person. Each situation will
vary.

RIGHT TASK
One reason to delegate is that each nurse has ﬁnite
time and energy to care for clients, maintain the
environment, and communicate with other health
professionals. Tappen (2001) uses a framework of
time management to explain delegation. When a
nurse has responsibility for 5, 8, or 20 patients, routine and repetitive aspects of care can be assigned to
“a competent individual with the authority to perform in a selected situation a selected nursing task
included in the practice of professional nursing as
deﬁned by state statute in the Nurse Practice Act”
(Colorado Revised Statutes, 2004). Inappropriate
delegation or otherwise unauthorized performance
of nursing tasks by UAP could lead to legal action
against the licensed nurse and the UAP by the
board of nursing and employer.

■

■

Standardized procedure: A standardized procedure is taught in training classes, written in
an agency manual in a “how to” approach, and
performed the same way by persons with similar training. Often, one standardized procedure, such as Bed Bath, is coupled with
another, such as Changing Bed Sheets, to
become a series of standardized procedures
that comprise Personal Hygiene. Standardization does not mean that UAP cannot vary
procedures, sequence, or combination for the
individual client.
Technical in nature: Technical tasks require
little decision making about performance of
the task. However, the ability to recognize normal from abnormal condition of the client and
usual from unusual response to the task is part
of UAP-tested competency. UAP need to recognize client response, determine if the task can
be safely completed, and seek clariﬁcation as to
how to continue if there is a question about
safe care. Examples of technical tasks are listed
as Personal Hygiene training (Box 21-3).
Routine task: Routine implies that the task is
recurring for both the client and the UAP.
UAP are experienced in completing the task;
the client has experienced the task previously.
There is no task that is routine the ﬁrst time

Box 21-3
Personal Hygiene Training for Home
Health Aides
Home Health Services General Provisions: 42 Code of
Federal Regulations §484.36 (2004).
Bed bath
Sponge, tub, or shower bath
Shampoo, sink, tub, or bed
Nail and skin care
Oral hygiene
Toileting and elimination
Safe transfer techniques and ambulating
Normal range of motion and positioning
Adequate nutrition and fluid intake

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 351

Delegation: An Art of Professional Practice

■

■

that you perform it. Even Measuring Intake
and Output becomes routine only after the
training is completed, competency is tested,
and accuracy is established. Even the most
routine tasks become “new” when the equipment changes.
Unlikely risk: The stability of the client’s condition predicts risk. Here, focus is on delegator
knowledge of the person and the task.
Unlikely risk of adverse or unexpected events
during the task also relates to safety. An
unlikely risk does not mean that a bad event
never happens, only that the delegator considers the likelihood of an unusual event. The
nurse delegates Personal Hygiene to UAP and
does not expect the client to fall from the bed,
incur an infection, or choke on candy.
Similarly, UAP are not expected to incur low
back strain, fall on a water spill, or be
assaulted by the client. Problems happen.
Conscientious supervision and active listening
to UAP concerns can aid in delegating situations that pose an unlikely risk to client and
worker.
Predictable results: Before delegation of any
activity, the nurse anticipates the result of the
activity. Outcomes of tasks assigned to UAP
need to be predictable. Assignment of Personal
Hygiene for a group of clients can be predicted
and easily assessed. Are the clients clean? Is
there an odor about anyone? Is hair combed?
Is the area clean and orderly? Are clients safe
in their environment?

Review all tasks for delegation to ensure that personnel receive the appropriate level of delegation.
The delegation decision model (Fig. 21-1) can serve
as a guide. Delegate, do not “dump.” Dumping can
be a perceptual or a real issue. Clariﬁcation of roles
and open discussions of dumping less desirable
assignments can promote understanding (Cohen,
2004). Repeated assignment of difficult clients or
boring, unchallenging, nonclient duties to the same
UAP can result in frustration.

Refusing Delegated Task
Refusal to administer an inappropriate medicine or
to carry out a procedure that may place the patient
at risk or cause harm are common occurrences.
Medication orders that create risk for patient wel-

351

fare include routes, dosage, frequency, and the drug
itself. A Dutch study by di Bie and others cited
refusal of orders by nurses because the nurses did
not perceive that they had the authority needed to
do a risky procedure (2005, p. 765). Interestingly,
although fewer than 30% of the survey nurses
experienced problems, most of the refusals, both
actual and contemplated, involved medication
policy.

RIGHT CIRCUMSTANCES
When one nurse cares for one client, there is little need to delegate care. True or false? False.
Complexities of science and technology have
changed the concept of “private duty” nursing
except in the realm of home care. Even nurses in
critical care units require assistance with the multiplicity of client, housekeeping, and non-nursing
tasks. Delegating tasks that do not require decision
making, assessment, or evaluation allows the nurse
to concentrate on complex interventions.
What are the right circumstances in which to
designate other care providers? The right circumstance for delegation is whenever a task can be
appropriately completed by UAP or whenever an
opportunity arises for education of another nurse
in clinical or managerial experiences. Often, a delegating situation permits on-site observations of staff
and the opportunity to answer questions and
improve performance.
Often, the ultimate goal of health care is cost
containment. The nurse can extend practice inﬂuence to more clients through delegation, thereby
reducing the cost of routine client care to the
agency. Experienced nurses seem able to delegate
through emergencies in client care or staffing.
Minute-to-minute “on-the-ﬂy” delegation is not
innate; it is learned through experiences during previous circumstances and knowledge of the capabilities of personnel in the setting (Hoban, 2003).
Failure to delegate prevents the recent graduate or
nurse who has changed jobs from having the opportunity to participate in a variety of situations and
events that translate into experience.
Failure to delegate results in expensive overtime
and fatigue on the part of employees. As the RN
delegator in the role of managing client care
or managing all unit activities for a shift, consistent inability of staff to complete workload on time

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

352

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 352

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

Assessment completed by Licensed Nurse for client nursing needs
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

Tasks for care needs within Nurse Scope of Practice
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

Delegating Nurse directly responsible for client care
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

Task DOES NOT require nursing judgment, evaluation, or decision making
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

Task technical, routine, and written procedure states
predictable results with unlikely client risk
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

Client stable in familiar setting
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

UAP has appropriate training and documented competency
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

UAP willing and able to accept delegation
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

Nurse delegator available for supervision
YES

NO

DELEGATE

DO NOT DELEGATE

FIGURE 21-1 Delegation decision model. (Adapted from Arkansas State Board of Nursing [1996]. Delegation Model. Arkansas State Board
of Nursing, Rules and Regulations.)

can be a symptom of lack of delegation or poor delegation.
Cost factors are apparent when valued employees
look for other health-care jobs that are more “chal-

lenging” with “greater opportunity.” Additionally,
work that is not challenging leads to complacency
and boredom; opportunities are missed to sharpen
professional decision-making skills, and mistakes

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 353

Delegation: An Art of Professional Practice

353

RIGHT DIRECTION

hot topic:
Institutional License or Delegation?
Can any worker in a health-care setting legally give
medications? The answer may be “yes” using the concept of delegation. Physicians and nurses can delegate
tasks and that includes medication. However, as Dr. Starr,
JD, writes, “Delegation is a high-risk activity because
there are many things that can go wrong” (2005).
“Pill pushing” or medication administration has long
been the domain of the RN in the hospital setting.
Schools, occupational and community health clinics,
medical offices, and nursing care centers once identified the RN as the health worker with sufficient education and knowledge to select and give the correct
medicine to the right person. Currently, the responsibility of maintaining prescribed medical treatment
through medication administration varies widely.
Many state statutes and regulations as well as federal
rules already contain wording that permits delegation of medication administration to UAP—42 CFR
§484.36(a)(xiii). One caveat to delegated medication
administration is clear in the Colorado Nurse Practice
Act—12-38-132(1); for example, where a specific prohibition is given for PRN type of time or dosing schedules: “In no event may a registered nurse delegate to
another person the authority to select medications if
such person is not, independent of such delegation,
authorized by law to select medications.” Consider the
range of situations where “selection of medication”
might be encountered. One such example may be providing acetaminophen for joint pain to an assisted living resident. At the other end of the spectrum might
be a variable narcotic dose.
Prisons, boarding homes, assisted living residences,
schools, and other settings already have short-term
training programs that “qualify” employees with no
health training to administer a variety of scheduled oral
prescription drugs and medications taken for specific
problems. Over-the-counter analgesics are often given
upon request or upon a description of symptoms by
that person. Agency or institutional employees are
trained by a nurse working for the system or a contracted trainer. In-house training programs offer an institutional certificate to the employee to perform the tasks.

are made. Finally, failure to delegate is not efficient
use of professional expertise. Use nursing staff for
nursing decisions.

Clear, accurate, written directions convey the best
direction for delegation. When that information is
both written and verbal, chances are even greater
that communication is understood.
Communication that provides more information
or direction in delegation is preferred to too little
detail. Directions should include what is to be done,
where or to whom it is to be done, how it should
be done, when it should be done, and what criteria
will judge completeness. Consider the difference
between the following two directives: “Provide a
bath to the woman in Room 2314” and “Provide a
shower with this antibacterial soap to Ms. Lee in
Room 2314 before 7:30 a.m. as she will be going
surgery at 8:00. Remind her to soap twice and to
dress in surgery garb afterwards.”
The manner of delegation is important as well.
Directions can be deﬁned verbally, in writing, or
both. Written client assignment(s) reinforced with
up-to-date verbal information is superior to a single communication method. Distraction or inattention can cause the delegatee to miss a piece of information or a detail. Written details and time frames
serve as a guide to assigned tasks; follow-up through
oral report provides timely information and reinforces the assignment. Additionally, using both
methods allows for questions or negotiation of the
assignment. Again, assignment making takes time,
but using written and verbal delegation reduces
misinterpretation and, as a consequence, mistakes.
Provide time to confer brieﬂy with each delegatee at least twice during the shift to collect information about clients and evaluate the progress of UAP
performance. Planned communication helps predict
and anticipate changes during the shift and avoid
surprises. Finally, provide feedback about performance to UAP. Recognize individual contributions
to team functions. Public recognition and private
corrective actions encourage team relationships.
Any delegated direction should provide the
opportunity to ask questions or clarify information.
To achieve clarity, the delegator must be available.
Availability is sometimes a speciﬁc board of nursing
criterion for delegation to UAP. Availability may be
direct or indirect and is deﬁned by the agency and
board of nursing. For example, a pager may constitute availability for groups of delegatees, whereas
physical presence may be required for other situations. In either event, it is important to commu-

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

354

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 354

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

nicate how you can be reached and under what
circumstances. UAP discover availability quickly
and the reception that questions receive.

RIGHT SUPERVISION
Just as training is a critical component of the delegation decision, supervision of personnel is essential to ensure safety and completeness of client care.
Pairing experienced UAP with a less experienced
supervisor does not eliminate the need for supervision. Recall your own experiences as faculty, nurse

Practice Proof 21-1

Article: McLaughlin, F.E., et al. (2000). Perceptions of
registered nurses working with assistive personnel in the
United Kingdom and the United States. International
Journal of Nursing Practice, 6(1), 46–57.

The use of UAP to expand and augment the scope of
nursing practice is an international concern. Articles that
study UAP and their relationship to nurses have been
published in nursing journals representing the United
States, Canada, United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy, Australia,
and New Zealand. Perceptions of individual nurses,
UAP, managers, and clients have, for the most part,
examined attitudes, satisfaction, preferences, and working
conditions among various groups. This study compares
perceptions of RN role change when working with
different types of UAP. Another variable in the study
examined perceptions between U.S. and U.K. nurses
about UAP performance of delegated tasks, communication of important client information, and increasing time for professional nursing activities. U.K. nurses
perceived less role change when working with UAP
and showed more satisfaction with their use than U.S.
nurses.

QUESTIONS:
1. What are the independent and dependent variables in
the study?
2. Speculate as to how your workplace might compare
with the study group variables.
3. The theoretical framework for this study was based on
role theory; that is, the norms, behaviors, and values of
the RN in the nursing role of delegator of patient care
or “team leader.” Discuss other frameworks that might
have been used in a cross-cultural nursing study.
4. What impact would Project 2000 have if the study
were repeated today?
5. Evaluate the study, citing both shortcomings and
useful findings.

managers, and other employers have supervised
your performance. What was helpful for professional growth, and what situations created distress,
anger, or resentment?
NCSBN (1997) deﬁned supervision as “provision of guidance and direction, evaluation and
follow-up by the licensed nurse for the accomplishment of a nursing task delegated to UAP.” Onsite supervision becomes a strong tool for gathering
information for personnel evaluation or corrective
action. Also, personal contact through supervision
gives the delegatee an opportunity to ask questions
and learn skills.
The amount of supervision depends upon the
competency of the delegatee for nursing care or
other duties. The key to delegation is to understand
how your board of nursing deﬁnes nursing practice
and the skills required by UAP that deﬁne competence. The NCSBN (1997) describes competence of
the licensed nurse as “applying knowledge and
interpersonal, decision-making, and psychomotor skills expected in the practice role within the
context of public health, safety and welfare.”
Competency is performance judged by others in the
profession or occupation that exhibits requisite
knowledge, skill, and judgment for appropriate certiﬁcation or license by virtue of completed education, training, and/or experience. UAP competence
is summarized as the ability to use effective communication, collect basic objective and subjective
data, perform simple nursing activities safely and
according to standard procedures, and to seek direction when appropriate.
How does a nurse determine UAP or even
another nurse’s competence? It is not sufficient to
simply ask UAP, “Are you able to do this task?”
Begin by reviewing a list of UAP competencies
for the work area; then locate the procedure manual
for your agency, and compare the two sources.
Competencies should include skills comparable to
Training for Home Health Aides (see Box 21-2) and
personal hygiene tasks included in Personal
Hygiene Training for Home Health Aides (see Box
21-3). A look at UAP certiﬁcations, hire dates, and
completed in-service education programs will provide more background to keep supervision appropriate and expectations of performance realistic.
Temporary staff members from other units or
staffing companies create concern about skill level
during initial assignment in a work setting. In this
circumstance, asking about skill level and experi-

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 355

Delegation: An Art of Professional Practice

ence is the only option until direct observation of
performance has occurred. The delegator RN is still
responsible for direct knowledge that UAP can, in
fact, perform the skills assigned.

All Good Things...
Delegation is a primary function of management
and includes both tasks delegated to the RN from
other RNs and physicians as well as tasks delegated
by the RN to others involved in the delivery of
health care. State nurse practice acts specify RN delegator functions within designated environments.
Agency policies offer guidance for delegating appropriately and lawfully, and job descriptions further
guide the functions of practical nurses and UAP.
Accountability and responsibility are part of a
licensed position and cannot be delegated. Tips for
appropriate delegation are based on the four components and ﬁve Rights of Delegation.
The NCSBN offers many resources about the
process of delegation. Outcomes of thoughtful,
appropriate delegation reﬂect partnership with
UAP and safe, satisﬁed clients. Inappropriate delegation carries the risk of professional censure, legal
action, and possible loss of license.

Let’s Talk
1. Obtain the nurse practice act for your state,
including the sections on RN, LPN, LVN,
and nurse aide/HHA. Compare the sections
on scope of practice and delegation. Discuss the
tasks and level of performance for the three
groups.
2. Obtain a copy of the manual used to teach
nurse aide/HHA candidates in your community.
List the skills that are taught in a recognized
program. Select 10 skills, and explain how these
skills are considered to be standard procedure,
technical in nature, routine, unlikely to carry
risk, and have predictable results.
3. Discuss the implications for the nurse of the
directive pertaining to UAP delegation “any
other task that the HHA may choose to have the
home health aide perform.”

355

NCLEX Questions
1. Delegation is a primary function of:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Evaluation
Management
Mentoring
Training

2. Aspects of professional nursing practice that

CANNOT be delegated are:
A. Monitoring and recording
B. Implementation and planning
C. Assessment and evaluation
D. Reporting and recording
3. Effective delegation:

A. Gets something done by someone else
B. Permits an agency to operate with fewer RN
staff
C. Provides licensed nurses with recognition for
heavy patient loads
D. Uses skills of less educated employees in
nursing homes
4. The transfer of authority to perform a selected

nursing task in a selected situation to a competent individual is called:
A. Assignment
B. Buck passing
C. Delegation
D. Transference
5. Nancy Nurse, RN, completes an assessment on

Patti Patient and delegates bathing, mobility, and
nutrition care to a newly hired certiﬁed nurse
assistant. Nancy Nurse, RN, is then able to admit
another patient to the agency. The principle of
delegation that Nancy must remember here is:
A. Implementation of nursing care, including
delegated care, remains the responsibility of
the nurse
B. New employees have completed an orientation program to ascertain skill levels
C. Certiﬁed nursing assistants are licensed by a
national testing agency
D. Skills involved in this scenario are common,
and completion can be expected
6. The licensed nurse delegator can delegate only

tasks:
A. Approved by the nursing standards committee in each state or province
B. That were included in training programs for
assistive personnel

21Jones Leadership(F)-ch 21

356

1/15/07

6:45 PM

Page 356

Skills for Being an Effective Manager

C. Within his or her area of responsibility and
scope of practice
D. When an appropriate licensed person is not
available to complete those tasks
7. With each task delegated, accountability and

responsibility for the skillful completion of the
task remain
A. Part of the physician’s oversight
B. With the delegator
C. With the delegatee
D. With the nurse supervisor
8. The Right Person to receive a delegated task is:

A. A licensed or unlicensed delegatee with
training in the delegated tasks
B. Always UAP
C. Available with sufficient time to complete
the task
D. One who has done the task before
9. The Right Circumstance for delegation by the

licensed nurse:
A. Is a routine and recurring event for a speciﬁc client
B. May change from situation to situation
C. Occurs with the patient approval and assent
D. Occurs on the evening and night schedule
rotations
10. The agency that determines the scope of prac-

tice for a licensed nurse, and therefore determines what can and cannot be delegated, is:
A. American Nurses Association
B. Council of State Boards of Nursing
C. State/Provincial Board of Nursing
D. National League of Nursing
REFERENCES
American Nurses Association (1997). Five rights of delegation:
Unlicensed assistive personal legislation, 1997. Washington,
DC: American Nurses Publishing.

American Nurses Association. (2001). Code for nurses with interpretive statements. Washington, DC: American Nurses
Association.
Cohen, S. (2004). Delegating vs. dumping: Teach the difference.
Nursing Management, 35(10), 14,18.
di Bie, J., et al. (2005). Risky procedures by nurses in hospitals:
problems and (contemplated) refusals of orders by physicians,
and views of physicians and nurses, International Journal of
Nursing Studies, 42(7), 759–771.
Hoban, V. (2003). How to enhance your delegation skills.
Nursing Times, 99(13), 37–38.
Home Health Services General Provisions. 42 Code of Federal
Regulations. §484 (2004).
Hospice Care. 42 Code of Federal Regulations. §418 (2004).
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (1995). Delegation:
Concepts and decision-making process. December, 1–4.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (1998). National
Council position paper. Delegation: Concepts and decision-making process. The Delegation Resource Folder. Chicago: National
Council of State Boards of Nursing, Inc.
National Council of Boards of Nursing (2004). Working with
others: A position paper. Chicago: Author.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (1997). Delegation
concepts and decision making process. Chicago: Author.
Nightingale, F. (1859). Notes on nursing: What it is and what it is
not. London: Harrison and Sons. (Reprinted 1992).
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Nurse Practice Act 17, Arkansas Code of 1987, Replacement Acts
1995. Chapter 86. (1996)
Nurse Practice Act, 12, Colorado Revised Statutes. §38 (2004).
Registered Nursed Association of British Columbia. (2004).
Assignment between nurses. Nursing Practice Guideline.
Vancouver, BC: Registered Nurses Association of British
Columbia.
Regulations relating to training of certiﬁed nursing assistants. 32
M.R.S.A. §2102-380 Chapter 5 (2003). Augusta, ME.
Starr, D.S. (2005). The art of effective delegation. The Clinical
Advisor. April, 86.
Tappen, R.M. (2001). Nursing leadership and management: concepts and practice (4th ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Virginia Department of Health. (2001). Delegation of nursing
tasks to unlicensed personnel, Retrieved July 9, 2004,
from
http://www.vahealth.org/wih/Perinatal%20Guide
lines/SECTION%203.pdf

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 357

SKILLS FOR A
SUCCESSFUL
CAREER

5

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 358

This page has been left intentionally blank.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 359

chapter
22
Manage Yourself for a
More Fulfilling Career
THERESA L. CARROLL, PHD, RN, CNAA
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Destiny is not a matter of chance, it is a matter of choice;
it is not a thing to be waited for, it is a thing to be achieved.”
William Jennings Bryan

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■

Critically reflect on who you are as a person and a professional
nurse.
Determine what you want and where you want to go.
Take charge of the process of meeting the challenges of
balancing personal and professional goals.
Transition successfully from student to professional nurse.

359

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

360

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 360

Skills for a Successful Career

S

■

elf-management is all about knowing who you
are, what you want, and where you want to go, and
then taking charge of the process of gathering the
resources and positioning yourself to get there. Selfmanagement is the focused drive that enables us to
achieve our goals (Goleman, Boyatis, & McKee,
2002). Self-management is important because it
enables you to maximize experiences and achieve
goals that ultimately lead to personal happiness and
fulﬁllment. Learning the skills of self-management
can help individuals to cope with personal and professional challenges that occur naturally in life’s
journey. When planning a nursing career, selfmanagement becomes critical to achieving happiness because of the many challenges inherent in
balancing personal responsibilities, like family life,
and professional demands such as ﬁnding time for
continuing education. This chapter will talk about
the skills that are necessary to be successful at selfmanagement. Speciﬁcally, the chapter will challenge you to:

■

■

1. Critically reﬂect on who you are as a person

and a professional nurse.
2. Determine what you want/where you want to

go in terms of your career.
3. Take charge of the process of meeting the

challenges of balancing personal and professional goals.
4. Transition successfully from the student to
the professional nurse role.

Who Am I?
The ﬁrst step to self-management is discovering
who you are. This is the psychological process of
developing a self-concept. Self-concept is an overall
term that is used to describe:
■

■

Our thoughts and evaluations regarding speciﬁc aspects of self, such as gender, racial identity, and social class membership
The ideal self, which includes hopes and
dreams about personal attributes such as being
scholastically able, having a sense of humor,
and forming plans for the future, like becoming well-educated or achieving a leadership
position in a career

■

Overall self-esteem and self-acceptance, which
includes how we evaluate our own abilities in
relationship to others and learn to accept what
we can and cannot do (Wylie, 1979).
Self-concept evolves from a self-awareness of
one’s place in the world. From such awareness, self-concept becomes personalized as “a
picture of one’s self within a role, situation or
position, performing a set of functions, or in
some web of relationships” (Super, in Niles &
Harris-Bowlsbey, 2002, p. 36).
Self-concept is constantly evolving and
requires a lifelong process of making decisions
and adjusting to these choices. The person that
you are now is a result of all the choices you
have made to date (Luciani, 2004). For example, several years ago you made a decision to
become a nurse. That decision led to other
choices such as what school you would attend,
when you would start, how you would pay
for this education, and how much time you
were willing to devote to your studies. Your
self-concept is expanding to include becoming
employed as a professional nurse.
Many of the choices that affect self-concept
reﬂect our needs and values. Needs vary from
the most basic, such as food, clothing, shelter,
and safety, to more complex needs like acceptance, belonging, and love. Once our needs are
clearly identiﬁed, we can make a conscious
effort to manage our behaviors to get these
needs met. In order to understand how we go
about meeting these needs and in what order
we choose to meet them involves identifying
and clarifying our personal values. Values
determine what we care about the most.
Values also provide a compass to keep our life
and career on course and allow us to make
wise decisions that move us forward rather
than backward or off course entirely (Borgatti,
2004). For example, think about why you
decided to enter a nursing program at this particular time. Some answers might include any
or all of the following: the need for a steadily
paying job to support yourself and family, a
desire to work with a special population such
as the elderly or childbearing families, or
because you or a family member experienced
care from a special nurse who impressed you
with her knowledge and understanding of

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 361

Manage Yourself for a More Fulfilling Career

■

■

■

your problems. Examining why you decided to
enter the nursing profession is an exercise in
identifying and understanding personal values. Examining our values also contributes to
the self-concept by providing us with an
understanding of what “feeds our soul and
makes us happy” (Borgatti, 2004, p. 1).
Personal values form the basis for recognizing and developing professional values.
Professional values are the beliefs that provide
a guide for how we practice professional nursing. A constant awareness of both personal
and professional values helps us to set goals
and make choices that move our career in
directions that help to create and sustain
personal happiness and professional satisfaction.
One strategy that can help us articulate our
personal and professional values is to write a
personal mission statement. A personal mission statement should focus on “what you
want to be (character) and to do (contributions and achievements) and on the values and
principles upon which being and doing are
based” (Covey, 1990, p. 106). You could call
the personal mission statement your personal
constitution; like the U.S. Constitution, it can
provide the fundamental standard by which
you set priorities and make personal and professional decisions. When this personal mission statement is based on an honest
assessment and clear articulation of personal
and professional values, it can provide a compass for steering these decisions in times of
rapid and turbulent change.
Self-management is about being proactive, taking charge, and making conscious decisions
that are consistent with self-concept and personal and professional values about issues,
such as “What do I want, and where do I want
to go?”

“WHAT DO I WANT, AND
WHERE DO I WANT TO GO”
Effective self-management behaviors require developing a plan that encompasses a personal and professional perspective and goals. One way of
managing both personal and professional perspec-

361

tives is to view life as a journey. Successfully managing life’s journey involves learning from the past,
handling the challenges of the present. and preparing for the future. There are two different ways
of viewing the journey of life. The ﬁrst perspective
focuses on external goals like achieving a leadership
position, establishing a happy family, completing
an academic program, and becoming a professional nurse. Life events are stepping stones, hurdles, or
crossroads in the journey. This journey has a
recognizable destination that is so desirable that
people are willing to withstand hardships along
the way. The downside of viewing life’s journey as
a means to a destination is the risk of feeling,
“Is that all there is?” after achieving the goal. This
revelation leads to the need to re-evaluate the destination when the journey is complete (Bridges,
1994).
The second kind of journey focuses on becoming
the person we are meant to be. This metaphor of life
as a journey toward “becoming” frames difficulties
along the way not so much as hurdles to be cleared
but as signals to be attended to or even lessons to
be learned. It views our experiences as messages.
The traveler on the journey to “becoming” ﬁnds the
whole world full of guides, and events become the
guideposts that indicate whether the path is correct
(Bridges, 1994, pp. 132–133). These two views of
life’s journey as a destination and “becoming” are
not necessarily mutually exclusive. Probably the
most holistic view incorporates elements of both
destinations in the same journey. For example, our
destination may be to become employed as a professional registered nurse, and we can also view this
job as a way of becoming a better, more fulﬁlled,
and happier person. Both the successes and challenges we encounter in the process of becoming a
professional nurse are viewed as ways to learn
about ourselves and provide guides for future decision making. Happiness and satisfaction occur
when we make choices that are consistent with our
self-concept and values.
Whatever metaphor a person chooses to use
to interpret life events, one thing is certain: selfmanagement requires taking charge of both personal and professional destinations. In order to live
meaningfully in a changing world, individuals need
a skill set so that they can adapt to change but at the
same time stay true to the values that are integral to
the self-concept.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

362

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 362

Skills for a Successful Career

Achieving Goals
Goal setting is an important self-management tool.
Long-term goals provide a more abstract direction
for what needs to be done to achieve the preferred
future. Short-term goals describe what needs to be
done daily, weekly, or monthly in order to achieve
the preferred future. During times of change and
uncertainty, goals can provide a framework for setting priorities, judging progress, and maintaining
focus. Goals provide structure and organization to
daily life and help with maintaining a sense of control and organization. In order to be useful, goals
need to follow the SMART guidelines: goals should
be Speciﬁc, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic,
and Time-oriented. The more speciﬁc the goal, the
easier it is to determine what needs to be done
to accomplish it. Goals need to be measurable in
order to chart progress and to be able to know when
replanning may be necessary. In order for goals
to be attainable, they need to be realistic and timeoriented. If goals are not attainable, then instead of
providing a benchmark that can motivate, they
become frustrations and lead to feelings of defeat.
For example, you may set a goal to walk a minimum
of 10 miles per week. This goal is speciﬁc, measurable, and time-oriented. But if you are working fulltime, going to school part-time, and have three
active children who require transportation to multiple after-school activities, the 10-mile-per-week goal
may be unrealistic and probably unattainable. It
might be more realistic to walk 1 mile each time you
drop one of the children at soccer practice, for a
total of 3 miles/week. This goal may ﬁt the SMART
formula of Speciﬁc, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic, and Time-oriented better than the original 10
miles/week goal.
Another factor to consider when setting goals is
a realistic understanding of whether something is
within or outside of our control to change. Stephen
Covey (1990) uses two circles to depict the sphere
of concern and the sphere of inﬂuence. Within the
sphere of concern are the things over which we
have no control, such as the weather, the availability of funds for a raise, or the price of gasoline. The
sphere of inﬂuence includes the things that we can
do something about. For example, we cannot
change the weather but we can be prepared for the
kind of weather that is predicted; we cannot affect

whether our employer will have funds available for
a raise, but we can be sure that our performance is
at a level that would merit a raise if money is available; and we cannot control the price of gasoline,
but we can affect how much money we spend
on gasoline by organizing a car pool, taking public transportation, or driving a more fuel-efficient
vehicle.
Understanding what is controllable and what is
not can eliminate the huge frustration of setting
goals that are inherently unattainable because realistically the situation is beyond our ability to
change. In addition, understanding what is within
one’s control can help the individual to avoid the
victim mentality. The victim mentality arises
when an individual feels helpless to change a situation that is interpreted to affect him negatively.
Differentiating the sphere of concern from the
sphere of inﬂuence allows individuals to realize that
they are accountable only for their own choices,
responses, and happiness. While they may be able
to inﬂuence what other people think and do, they
cannot control others.

STRATEGIES FOR ACHIEVING
SMART GOALS
Establishing SMART goals is just the beginning
of self-management. There are potentially many
challenges to achieving these goals. Some of these
challenges include encountering seemingly insurmountable obstacles like managing relationships
with difficult people; coping with stress or sleep
deprivation; and never having enough time to do
the things life and living require. Some strategies for
dealing with these challenges include positive selftalk; developing emotional intelligence; and stress,
sleep, and time management.

Positive Self-Talk
Even though you establish goals using the SMART
formula, challenges can occur between goal planning and achievement. Positive self-talk, or positive
self-affirmation, can help with moving forward
toward goal achievement. An affirmation is simply
a sentence spoken in the present tense that reﬂects
what you want to happen or want to be. The successful use of affirmation is based upon a belief that
the power of words can create reality. Repeated

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 363

Manage Yourself for a More Fulfilling Career

affirmations help to develop a positive mind-set
about the ability to achieve desired goals (Borgatti,
2004, p. 61). The positive mind-set translates into
the actions that make the words reality. For example, a person who establishes a goal of being able to
give 5-minute presentations before professional
groups might engage in positive self-talk by repeating the phrases “I am prepared. I have rehearsed
this speech. I know the material. I have something
important to say. I know that I can deliver my message to this group.” The assumption inherent in
positive self-talk is that the capacity to do anything
resides within the individual. This includes creating the experience and life that you want (Luciani,
2004).

Emotional Intelligence
Self-management requires that we have an understanding of what factors contribute to our behavior.
Both intellectual capacity and emotions contribute
to how we act toward and interact with others.
Much of the time spent in formal academic experiences focuses on developing intellectual capacity,
which leads to such skills as knowledge synthesis
and critical thinking. Little attention is paid to
developing emotional intelligence. Research has
demonstrated that intellectual capacity alone cannot account for success and goal achievement.
Emotional intelligence has been identiﬁed and
described as at least as important as intellectual
capacity in managing life’s journey (Goleman,
1995). Intellectual capacity and emotional intelligence provide two fundamentally different ways of
knowing and learning about the world. The emotional and rational minds are semi-independent
parts that have physiological and neural connections to each other. The emotional and rational
minds are distinguished in folklore as the
dichotomy between “heart” and “head” (Goleman,
1995, p.8).
The intellectual, or rational, mind focuses on
comprehension, allowing a person to interpret
thoughts, ponder, and reﬂect. The emotional mind
promotes knowing from feelings. “Ordinarily there
is balance between the emotional and rational
minds, with emotion feeding into and informing
the operations of the rational mind and the rational
mind reﬁning and sometimes vetoing the inputs of
the emotions” (Goleman, 1995, p. 9). This exquisite

363

coordination allows thought to contribute to feeling
and feeling to contribute to thought. “But when
passions surge, the balance tips” (p. 9). It is the
emotional mind that highjacks and controls the
decision to act. Behavior that results from this emotional highjacking can be destructive to both personal and professional relationships. Learning to
control this emotional highjacking is at the heart of
emotional intelligence. Acquiring emotional intelligence can lead to healthier interaction with family,
friends, and colleagues.
The ﬁrst step in gaining emotional intelligence is
developing self-awareness. Self-awareness entails
paying attention to one’s inner state and includes
attention both to our moods and thoughts about our
moods. Self-awareness contributes to emotional
intelligence because it allows individuals effectively
to turn that self-awareness into actions that translate into positive self- and social management.
Enhancing our emotional intelligence can have
many beneﬁts in the work environment because
emotional intelligence is a key component to being
a successful professional nurse. An employee who
is attuned to the feelings of others and is able to
handle disagreements so they do not escalate is recognized as a valuable asset. In terms of our own
careers, “there is nothing more essential than recognizing our deepest feelings about what we do—
and what changes might make us more truly
satisﬁed with our work” (Goleman, 1995, p. 149).
For example, you may really want to work with
children, yet you take a position working on an
adult medical-surgical unit because you have been
told that “everyone needs at least 1 year of medicalsurgical experience” before working in a specialty
area. Nine months into your ﬁrst job you begin to
ﬁnd the patient requests annoying, the other staff
demanding, and your enthusiasm for nursing
decreasing. Emotional reactions and feelings are
very complex, and there can be many reasons for
these feelings. But as a beginning action, it may be
time to reﬂect and reconnect with your original values and motivations for becoming a nurse and your
original desire to work with children. In this case,
your emotional reaction to the work situation may
be based at least in part on not being able to work
with the children. It may be time to negotiate a
change in job setting and population. Box 22-1
describes the competencies and skills that will help
you to increase your emotional intelligence.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

364

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 364

Skills for a Successful Career

Box 22-1

Stress Management

Emotional Intelligence Domains
and Associated Competencies

Along the journey toward achieving your goals,
there may be barriers. Some of these barriers
include stress; sleep deprivation, especially when
transitioning to shift work; and the challenges of
time management while juggling multiple personal
and professional roles. Self-management involves
not just recognizing these challenges but proactively planning ways to avoid, cope with, and/or
overcome these barriers.
In the 1950s, Hans Selye coined the term stress
to mean “the nonspeciﬁc response of the organism
to any pressure or demand” (Selye, in Kabat-Zinn,
1990, p. 236). “Stressor” is used to describe the
stimulus or event that produced the stress response.
The stress response is nonspecific because it
involves both mind and body and may yield physiological, psychological, and/or social outcomes.
Stress is a natural part of life and cannot be avoided.
Therefore, the stress response needs to be managed.
Research has demonstrated that it is not the stressor
itself that causes a stress response but how it is perceived and handled that determines what, whether,
or how much stress it causes (Kabat-Zinn, 1990).
Some common sources of stress include:

Personal Competence: These capabilities determine how
we manage ourselves.
Self-Awareness:

Emotional self-awareness: Reading one’s own emotions
and recognizing their impact, using “gut sense” to
guide decisions
■ Accurate self-assessment: Knowing one’s strengths and
limits
■ Self-confidence: A sound sense of self-worth and
capabilities
Self-Management:
■ Emotional self-control: Keeping disruptive emotions
and impulses under control
■ Transparency: Displaying honesty, integrity, and
trustworthiness
■ Adaptability: Flexibility in adapting to changing situations or overcoming obstacles
■ Achievement: The drive to improve performance to
meet inner standards of excellence
■ Initiative: Readiness to act and seize opportunities
■ Optimism: Seeing the up side in activities and
events
■

Social Competence: These capabilities determine how
we manage relationships

Text/image
rights not available.
Social Awareness:
■
■
■

Empathy: Sensing others’ emotions, understanding
their perspectives
Organizational awareness: Reading decision networks
and politics at the organizational level
Service: Recognizing and meeting follower, client, or
customer needs

Relationship Management:
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Inspirational leadership: Guiding and motivating with a
compelling vision
Influence: Wielding a range of tactics for persuasion
Developing others: Bolstering others’ abilities through
feedback and guidance
Change catalyst: Initiating, managing, and leading
in a new direction
Conflict management: Resolving disagreements
Building bonds: Cultivating and maintaining a web of
relationships
Teamwork and collaboration: Cooperation and team
building

Goleman, D., Boyatis, R., & McKee, A. (2002) Primal leadership.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press, p. 39.

1. Problems with weight management
2. Substance abuse issues, such as alcohol, drugs,

cigarette smoking
3. Mental disorders such as untreated depres4.
5.
6.
7.

sion or anxiety
Dysfunctional relationships
Lack of exercise
Shift work
Inability to manage time effectively

Strategies to resolve these stressors involve a personal commitment to lifestyle changes and sometimes interventions planned with professional help.
Tips for stress management, adapted from the
National Chronic Pain Society Facilitators Training
Manual, are in Box 22-2. A discussion of how to
cope with the common stressors sleep deprivation,
clutter, and time management follows.
Sleep Deprivation

A major source of stress for nurses and others who
rotate shifts even when working a steady tour is
sleep deprivation. More than 22 million Americans
work evening, night, rotating, or on-call shifts. Shift
work has the potential to cause social, psychologi-

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 365

Manage Yourself for a More Fulfilling Career

365

Box 22-2
Tips for Stress Management
*1. Get enough sleep. “Sleep isn’t just ‘time out’ from daily
life. It is an active state important for renewing our
mental and physical health each day. Yet more than 100
million Americans of all ages . . . fail to get a good night’s
sleep” (American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2000, p. 1)
2. Prepare ahead for the morning the night before.
Think about everything you will need for the morning,
and organize the items where they can be easily
accessed.
3. Simplify your life. Clutter is a stressor. Get rid of clothes
you do not wear, things that collect dust, furniture
you hate. Do not put up with things that do not work
properly. If something is an aggravation, get rid of it or
replace it.
*4. Schedule more fun. Do at least one thing that you like
every day. Schedule time for solitude like taking a brisk
walk, practicing low-impact yoga, or meditation. Do
not give up seeing friends and doing things you enjoy
because you “do not have time.”
*5. Practice preventive maintenance on your car, home,
health, and relationships. Preventive maintenance saves
time and frustration (and health!).
*6. Anticipate your needs, and plan ahead. Do not let the
gas tank get below half full, especially when traveling
at night. Keep a well-stocked first aid kit in your home
and vehicle. Buy postage stamps when you get halfway
through the booklet.
*7. Schedule a realistic day. Allow ample time between
appointments so you do not have to rush, worry,
apologize for being late, or get a speeding ticket. Take
advantage of your body rhythms. If you are a morning
person, then schedule complicated tasks that require
concentration in the morning. If you do not reach your
peak until later in the day, start with easier things first
that do not require much thought. Keep reading
material with you to help cope with long waits in line
or for appointments.
8. Make contingency plans. Make alternate plans “just in
case” the primary plan does not work

9. Rearrange work hours if possible. A 30-minute
change in arrival or departure time can make a
big difference in traffic, crowds, and other stress
producers. When traveling, allow extra time to arrive
well ahead of schedule. It is better to arrive well ahead
of schedule than to fret over every stop light or traffic
jam along the way. Use red traffic lights to remind
yourself to breathe.
10. Choose friends wisely. Choose to spend time with
people who are positive, upbeat, and nonworriers.
Spending time with friends gives us time to share
problems, explore solutions, and unwind.
11. Change your outlook. For everything that goes
wrong, there are 50 more things that go right.
Count them. Maintain a sense of humor.
12. Write thoughts and feelings in a journal to help
clarify things and put them in perspective.
13. Do not over-extend yourself. Learn to say “No, thank
you” to extra projects when you do not have the time
or energy to complete the tasks to which you have
already committed. Make promises sparingly, and
keep them faithfully when you do commit.
14. Ask for help with the jobs you hate. If you find that
certain chores always make you tense, such as paying
bills, grocery shopping, defrosting the freezer, or
scrubbing tubs, get someone else to do them for you
or with you. Relax your standards. Life is a lot easier if
you ignore a little dirt.
*15. Do not rely on your memory. Take time out to make
lists. Write down addresses and phone numbers in an
organized place. Ask questions. You are less likely to
make mistakes or get lost if you make sure to get
detailed directions first.
*16. Take time out. Breathe deeply, stretch your muscles
when tense, nap, meditate, and take a long soak in
the tub. Unplug the telephone, or take a walk. Tensecond “breathers” at work can help.
17. Think . . . think . . . think. Use this list to get started in
creating your own de-stressors.

*Relate need for time management skills
Earl, R. (2004). Stress management: De-stress your life. Chronic Pain Report 4(4), 3, 5.

cal, and physical problems. The reason that shift
work is detrimental to health is because the body is
so sensitive to changes in circadian rhythms. A
circadian rhythm is the body’s alternating cycle of
sleep and waking. Predictions about how long it
takes to adjust circadian rhythms to a shift-work

schedule range from 3 years to never. Yet whether
sleep issues become a stressor is very dependent on
the individual. Some people are more naturally
suited to working one kind of shift or another.
“Night people” adjust to the night shift better than
“morning people.” Older workers in general ﬁnd it

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

366

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 366

Skills for a Successful Career

harder to work nights or rotate shifts. For example,
one person who rotates to the night shift may adapt
well and enjoy the quiet time during the day when
family members are at school and at work to sleep.
Another person may have difficulty sleeping, which
may lead to difficulty with family and peer relationships because of constant fatigue and resulting
ill temper. Left unmanaged, the stress response can
result in profound physical and/or psychological
strain and even illness. Making sleep a priority can
reduce stress levels and enhance the effectiveness of
your behavior. Suggestions for managing sleep are
in Box 22-3.

In addition to managing sleep issues, other
strategies for managing fatigue include eliminating
surreptitious energy drains (Borgatti, 2004).
Surreptitious energy drains are those things in life
that, by their mere existence, sap away at our vigor
a little at a time, which in turn drains away energy
needed to deal with daily tasks. Clutter is an example of a surreptitious energy drain because it
reminds us that we really do not have things under
control. Eliminating clutter provides immediate
rewards of both physical and psychological space
(Borgatti, 2004). Some suggestions (Bryce, 2004)
for dealing with clutter include:
■

Box 22-3
How to Sleep Well
■
■
■

■
■

■
■

■
■
■

■

■

Maintain a regular waking time, even on days off work
and on weekends.
Try to go to bed only when you are drowsy.
If you are not drowsy and are unable to fall asleep for
about 20 minutes, leave your bedroom, and engage in
quiet activity elsewhere. Return to bed when, and only
when, you are sleepy. Repeat this process as often as
necessary throughout the night.
Use your bedroom only for sleep, sex, and times of
illness.
Avoid napping during the daytime. If you nap, try to do
so at the same time every day and for no more than 1
hour. Mid-afternoon (no later than 3 p.m.) is best for
most people.
Establish relaxing presleep rituals such as a warm bath,
a light bedtime snack, or 10 minutes of reading.
Keep a regular schedule. Regular times for meals,
medications, chores, and other activities help the inner
clock run smoothly.
A light snack before bedtime can help promote sound
sleep; avoid large meals.
Avoid ingestion of caffeine within 6 hours of bedtime.
Do not drink alcohol when sleepy. Even a small dose of
alcohol can have a potent effect when combined with
tiredness
Sleeping pills should be used only conservatively. Most
doctors avoid prescribing sleeping pills for periods
longer than 3 weeks
Do not drink alcohol when taking sleeping pills and
other medication.

American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2000). Coping with shift
work. Rochester, MN: American Academy of Sleep Medicine, pp.
10–12.

■

■

■

When sorting the clutter, e.g., piles of paper or
clothing, start small, and go through one stack
at a time.
When deciding what to throw away, ask yourself “Have I ever used it? Will I ever use it?
Can I ﬁnd it somewhere else?”
On your desk, keep one tray for reading and
one tray for ﬁling.
Periodically schedule yourself to take care of
the clutter, e.g., organize, ﬁle, or hang up discarded clothing.

Time Management

Time management is another common potential
stressor. Unﬁnished tasks represent another surreptitious drain on energy. Unﬁnished tasks can
include such things as an overdue writing assignment, a stack of unpaid bills, or an unﬁnished academic program. Unﬁnished tasks drain energy
because they are always present in either conscious
or unconscious awareness. Whatever the task, recognizing and making a ﬁrm commitment to act can
help to stop the surreptitious energy drain (Borgatti,
2004). Some suggestions for managing time and getting to unﬁnished tasks include:
■

■

■

■

Use a planner or electronic calendar for your
appointments and “to do’s”
Block off time in your planner to work on
projects
On your “to do” list, do the worst or oldest
task ﬁrst
Learn to say “no.” Being aware of your own
limitations, priorities, and boundaries is
important.

Some additional strategies for more effectively
managing time are included in Box 22-4.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 367

Manage Yourself for a More Fulfilling Career

Box 22-4
Time Management
■

■

■

■

■

■
■

■

Do two things at one time but only if neither requires
special concentration, e.g., listen to the news while
preparing meals; combine exercising with socializing:
walk or jog with a friend.
Go low-maintenance, e.g., buy low-maintenance
clothing, get a wash-and-wear hairstyle, and select food
that requires little preparation; eating raw or plain food
is healthier anyway.
Keep lists for all regular or routine activities, e. g., avoid
extra trips to the store by putting items on your list as
soon as they are used; maintain a weekly errand list;
combine as many trips as possible, and plan an efficient
route to minimize time and mileage.
Always carry your daily schedule book with you. Attach
a post-it notepad to the inside cover to make
temporary notes. Clip a pen on the inside cover.
Organize a filing system. Keep a “pending” file and sort
through it once a month. Keep unanswered letters or
e-mails filed, and schedule a regular time to respond.
Keep a file of unpaid bills, and review this every 2
weeks. Keep a “health” file with all medical, pharmacy,
dental, and optometry records.
Keep a current alphabetical directory of all people and
businesses important in your life.
Have a regular assigned place for everything. This
applies especially to small articles like keys, pagers, cell
phone, watches, wallets, and pens.
Do things when other people do not do them: go to
the movies at 5 p.m. and eat afterward; avoid the
grocery store at 6 p.m.

Adapted from Kelman, E., & Straker, K. (2000) Study without stress.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing Inc., pp. 36–37.

Transitioning From Student
to Professional Nurse
Self-management involves understanding and balancing multiple roles with all of their inherent
changes and transitions. As you give up the role
of student, you are also giving up your dependency
on the presence of a clinical instructor and/or a
preceptor. You are giving up the uniform of a student for that of a professional nurse and employee.
These are external signs of the changes you are
experiencing. There are also more subtle transi-

367

tions taking place, such as the way you think
about yourself, including the full weight of responsibility that you assume for your behavior as a
nurse.
Sociologists have studied these times of transition and formulated several theories about the transition from student to employee and professional.
Role theory provides the underpinnings for interpretation of roles in society. Symbolic interaction
and social structural role theory are the two major
branches of role theory. Although they vary on a
number of parameters, both theories have in common such concepts as role, role behavior, norms,
sanctions, and status. These concepts are deﬁned in
Box 22-5.
An example of a role behavior is the systematic
way a nurse approaches an initial assessment of a
patient. Within the employment settings there are
policies and procedures and probably a form to
guide the assessment process. The policy deﬁnes the
expected role behavior, e.g., the initial assessment
must be completed within 8 hours of the patient’s
admission to the hospital. If the nurse consistently
fails to follow policy regarding completing the
assessment, the nurse may be reprimanded by the
manager for this failure. The reprimand represents
a negative sanction. The status of the nurse manager is determined by the official designation
within the hospital structure as one who is in

Box 22-5
Definitions for Role Theory
Role: Term commonly used to refer to both the expected
and actual behaviors associated with a position (Hardy
& Conway, 1988, p. 165)
Role behaviors: Position-specific norms that identify
attitudes, expectations, behaviors, and cognitions
required and anticipated for a role occupant (Hardy &
Conway, 1988, p. 165).
Norms: Rules, standards, or guidelines that suggest what
role occupants should and should not do (Hardy &
Conway, 1988, p. 164).
Sanctions: Incentives or disincentives used to modify
behavior and maximize adherence to prevailing group
norms or prescriptions. Sanctions may be either
negative or positive (Hardy & Conway, 1988, p. 164).
Status: The official location of a role in the social structure
(Hardy & Conway, 1988, p. 164).

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

368

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 368

Skills for a Successful Career

charge of supervising other nurses in the provision
of care to patients.
Normal human development follows a pattern of
transitions that have their own set of unique characteristics and tasks. For example, an infant transitions to the toddler period. Both the infancy and
toddler stages have a distinct set of developmental
tasks. Yet each individual child experiences the
infancy and toddler stages in a unique way. The
transition from student to professional nurse is not
unlike the transition from infancy to toddler. There
are predictable developmental tasks and skills to be
achieved. Yet each transition is unique to the experience of each nurse. One of the developmental
tasks of adulthood involves a recognition of responsibility for our reaction to circumstances and any
resulting behavior. Self-management skills empower
the student to proactively transition from the student role to that of professional nurse.

chapter star

John M. is a staff nurse in a critical care unit of a medical
center hospital. John is working 12-hour shifts and is
frequently called upon to work extra shifts to cover
unit staffing. John’s goal has always been to become a
nurse anesthetist. He has delayed enrollment because
anesthesia programs require students to be full-time,
which allows little time for part-time work. He is married
to Kira, who is a nurse manager in the same institution
and is on permanent call to assist with unit decision
making; e.g., she frequently works a 10-hour day and
receives calls at home about unit problems. In addition
to working full-time, Kira is pursuing an MSN on a parttime basis. When Kira becomes pregnant, John and Kira
are excited about becoming parents but realize that their
lifestyle will need to adjust with the birth of their first
child. They discuss their personal goals for school and
career and consider their mutual goals for family lifestyle,
home life, and their relationship. After carefully assessing
their economic situation, they decide that they can afford
for Kira to resign her position when the baby is born and
to continue to attend school and finish her MSN as a
full-time student. Meanwhile, John will continue to work
at his job as a staff nurse. When Kira is near finishing her
MSN, they agree to reassess their personal and mutual
goals as a family and determine when it might be feasible for John to enroll in a program to become a nurse
anesthetist.

ADJUSTING TO THE ROLE
OF PROFESSIONAL NURSE
The nursing student, new graduate nurse, and staff
nurse roles each have role behaviors, norms, sanctions, and status dimensions that are unique to
their speciﬁc designation. When a person changes
roles, the process of learning the new role is called
socialization. Professional socialization is a term
used to describe the social processes that occur
between the time a student enters a nursing program and graduates. The professional socialization
that goes on during education in a professional
nursing program is designed to shape attitudes, values, self-identity, role skills, role knowledge, and
role behavior (Hardy & Conway, 1988). As intense
as the socialization is during the nursing program,
there is still need for socialization to the nursing
role within the employment setting. During the
orientation to the employment setting, the new
graduate nurse must reconcile the values and expectations of the educational program with the values
and expectations of the job. For example, while a
student, the usual assignment may be one or two
patients. This allows the student time to provide
total patient care, including a bath and all treatments. The expectation is the student is learning
skills and gaining in-depth knowledge of all aspects
of the patient’s condition. As a nurse, the assignment may increase to six to eight patients, and the
bath and treatments may be delegated to a nurse
aide. It may take new nurses time to adjust to the
idea that while they alone are not giving total
patient care, they are responsible for all care for the
patient whether they physically supply that care or
delegate it to another employee. The transition from
student to professional nurse employed in an organization frequently involves giving up the practice
of personally providing total patient care to being
sure that patient care is accomplished according to
the model of care delivery that is adopted by the
hospital or other organization.
Making a successful transition from student to
new graduate to professional nurse is affected by
past experience with transitions as well as the
socialization to the profession that went on in the
educational program. The transition to an employment setting is particularly important because this
experience can establish precedents and patterns
for dealing with the many future transitions that

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 369

Manage Yourself for a More Fulfilling Career

can be anticipated in the rapidly changing healthcare delivery system. The transition from student to
professional nurse involves unplugging from the
world of student and plugging into the values and
expectations of becoming an employee and staff
nurse. In general, all role transitions involve:
1. Letting go of old ways and old identities
2. An “in-between time” when the old is gone

but the new identity is not fully operational,
which involves psychological realignments
and repatterning of behavior
3. Emerging from transition when the new identity is established and a new sense of purpose
arises (Bridges, 1980; Bridges, 2003).
Moreover, role transitions may elicit a sense of
loss and/or anxiety as old roles fade and new
roles—and accompanying expectations—demand
attention. For example, as the role of professional
nurse demands more time and attention, the days of
being able to call the instructor when a new procedure must be done are being replaced with locating
the procedure manual or co-opting the assistance of
an experienced nurse to help with the learning
process. The realization that you are totally responsible for patient care can produce much anxiety
until you can gain conﬁdence through experience
and successfully access the resources of the workplace to provide help and support for your professional practice.

REALITY SHOCK
Role transition from student to new graduate to registered professional nurse is a process that has been
studied from a variety of perspectives and disciplinary orientations.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Marlene Kramer studied
the new graduate adjustment to the hospital work
world. She concluded that during the process of
adjusting to the professional nurse role in the hospital, the new graduate may recognize that there are
differences in the values and expectations between
school and workplace. Dr. Kramer called this phenomenon reality shock. Reality shock is a universal phenomenon used primarily to describe
newcomers’ reactions when they move into an
occupation, after years of arduous preparation, only
to ﬁnd that many of the professional ideals and values learned in school are not operational and go

369

unrewarded in the work setting. They end up feeling less than competent and uncomfortable.
Resolving reality shock occurs when the new nurse
learns to live comfortably with the values and
expectations of the work world and the profession
(Kramer & Schmalenberg, 1977).
Reality shock has several phases, including the
honeymoon, shock, recovery, and resolution. The
honeymoon phase occurs early after hire when only
the best aspects of the job are apparent. During the
honeymoon phase, nurses believe that the good
things they experience far outweigh any negative
experiences. Shock occurs when the full extent of
the differences in expectations between being a student and being a graduate nurse becomes apparent.
The recovery stage involves the new graduate
regaining a balanced and modiﬁed view of the work
world. For example, the new graduate may continue
the commitment to learning but recognize that the
kind of learning involved in the work setting will be
focused primarily on the task at hand and the procedure as dictated by the agency. Resolution takes
place when the conﬂicts become resolved, new
expectations are met, and the new graduate
becomes assimilated into the culture of the work
world and able to position professional values
within the work environment (Kramer, 1974).
Resolution takes place as new nurses realize that
they can handle a patient assignment and complete
tasks within the given shift. New nurses begins to
hear from peers, managers and, most important, the
patients that they are doing a good job. Resolution
comes as new nurses experience a sense of accomplishment and purpose.
Experience has demonstrated that many new
graduates experience this phenomenon to some
extent. In order to ease the transition from school to
work, nursing programs have initiated role transition experiences like partnering with a preceptor
and working the preceptor’s schedule. This provides experiences that are closer to the reality of the
work world while still in school. These experiences
are aimed at easing the transition from school to
work.

TRANSITIONING TO ROLE
OF SKILLED CLINICIAN
Embedded within the transition from school to
work is the process of becoming a skilled clinician.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

370

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 370

Skills for a Successful Career

Dr. Patricia Benner studied the process of new
nurse skill acquisition and critical thinking and
concluded that new graduates’ perceptions of complex clinical situations were signiﬁcantly different
from those of nurses with more experience and skill
(Benner, 1984; Benner, Tanner, & Chesla, 1996).
Benner (1984) identiﬁed the stages of skill acquisition as novice, advanced beginner, competent,
proﬁcient, and expert. Knowing about the characteristics of these stages allows an individual to
increase his awareness of what he is experiencing.
This awareness is the ﬁrst step of learning to manage the transition from new graduate to skilled
clinician.
Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1996), whose work with
chess players provided the basis for Benner’s work,
offer the following descriptions of this process of
skill acquisition. The novice stage is a time of
using the theory and translating the lessons of the
nursing program into the real-life patient care environment. This is a time for learning the rules and
rule-based reasoning. The beginnings of intuition
related to patient care start developing during this
stage. The new graduate begins the professional
nursing career as a novice. After experiencing a
variety of real patient care settings, the novice progresses to the advanced beginner stage, during
which professional performance improves to
become marginally acceptable. During this stage,
the nurse is beginning to discern the situational elements to clinical decision making. The nurse knows
the rules that govern care in a situation but begins
to understand how and when the rules can be
applied based upon the patient’s condition, desire,
and needs. Both rules and skills become more complex, and it is not unusual for the advanced beginner to feel overwhelmed “by the effort required to
notice all relevant elements and to remember an
increasing number of more and more complicated
rules” (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1996, p. 38). During the
competence stage, the number of elements that
the nurse is able to recognize as relevant in a clinical care situation may still be overwhelming. But
during this stage the nurse begins to understand
and adopt a hierarchical perspective, i.e., to categorize the rules according to relevance and set priorities. Nurses at this stage must devise a plan to
determine which elements in a situation are
deemed to be important enough to require action or

intervention. These new rules cannot be taught by
lecture or come from a textbook. Another characteristic of this stage is recognition that by making
decisions that affect the outcome, the competent
nurse becomes emotionally involved in the outcome. The competent nurse begins to assume and
feel responsibility. This emotional involvement
marks the end to the detached rule-following stance
of the advanced beginner and the beginning of the
rather frightening acceptance of risk and responsibility that sets the stage for further advancement.
The hallmark of the proﬁcient stage of performance involves approaching a care situation
with both concern and involvement and knowing
intuitively what the priorities are and being able to
perform the required procedures with proﬁciency,
speed, and conﬁdence. Action becomes easier and
less stressful as the nurse simply sees what needs
to be achieved and does it (Dreyfus & Dreyfus,
1996, p. 41).
The expert nurse can handle complex and
unique situations. Achieving the expert level
requires the ability to discriminate and set priorities
among situations all seen as important and to know
how to achieve goals once a decision has been made.
This ability to discriminate and choose one priority
over another requires both maturity and practice
(Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1996). Not every nurse
achieves the expert stage of practice. Furthermore,
when a nurse transfers from one specialty area to
another, a proﬁcient nurse may return for a time to
the competence stage while he learns and gains
experience in the new specialty.
Results from Kramer’s and Benner’s work have
been applied by employers to design new graduate
orientations, internships, and residencies: these
reflect the nursing profession’s concern with
actively managing the transition from student to
employee and to professional nurse. These efforts
are also a response to the high turnover rate of new
graduates within the ﬁrst year of employment
(Goode & Williams, 2004).
Part of self-management is ﬁnding an organization where you can meet your professional goals.
Within the job search and interview process for
that ﬁrst job, you need to assess whether a potential
employer offers a special orientation, internship, or
residency for new graduates and whether this is
something that will be available to you.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 371

Manage Yourself for a More Fulfilling Career

Practice to Strive For 22-1
In order to ease the transition from nursing student to graduate nurse and to decrease attrition, many health-care
organizations have initiated nurse internship programs.
These programs extend the period of traditional orientation
from several weeks to as long as a year. When this period is
extended to a year, it is frequently referred to as a nurse residency program. Both the duration and content of the program are determined by a variety of factors, including but
not limited to financial and human resources of the organization, type of specialty unit, number of new graduates
hired, and type of academic program attended by the
majority of new graduates. Whatever the duration of the
program, the goals in general are to:

•

Help the new graduate develop clinical knowledge and
skill to function as an independent professional nurse.

•

Provide support for the new graduate during the transition from student to nurse employee.

•

Help the new graduate gain increased awareness of the
patient/family needs and how to access the resources of
the system to meet these needs.

The format for most internship programs includes experiences in the classroom, skills and computer laboratories,
and on the clinical units. While classroom and laboratory
experiences are directed by instructors from the education
department, experience on the clinical units is directed by a
preceptor who is an experienced RN who works closely with
the new nurse to supervise patient care and introduce her
to the culture of the clinical unit and the nursing organization. Some organizations predetermine how long the new
nurse must work with the preceptor; other organizations
establish an expected time frame for the relationship.
Usually, the new nurse works the same schedule as the preceptor until the new nurse has achieved self-confidence and
the trust of the preceptor. (Blanzola, Linderman, & King,
2004; Bowes & Candela, 2005; Casey, et al., 2004; Ihlenfeld,
2005; Rosenfeld, et al., 2005).

BALANCING CAREER/LIFE LINKAGES
Adjustment to the role of professional nurse does
not occur in a vacuum, away from the expectations
of other life roles and transitions. “Recognizing ties
between one’s personal well-being and work life is
what is called ‘career life linkages.’ It is impossible to segregate work and personal life” (Miller,
2003). Being able to balance the interaction of professional and personal life roles results in “life sat-

371

isfaction, which differs from the sum total of the
marital, job, leisure and other role indices taken
separately. High-functioning people have welldeveloped and prioritized values” (Brown & Crace,
in Niles & Harris-Bowlsbey, 2002, p. 81). People
who are happy and satisﬁed know what they want
and have a plan for achieving their goals that are
consistent with their personal and professional values. Achieving and balancing personal and professional goals require self-management. Balancing
career/life linkages involves timing and pacing.
Timing involves deciding when to begin a new
project or approach a new goal. Pacing is about how
quickly one proceeds with implementing the project
or achieving the goal. An example of timing
involves a decision about when to start the next
educational program. Pacing relates to the decision
whether one will attend full- or part-time and, if
part-time, whether one will enroll in one or two
courses a term. Balancing career/life linkages adds
the dimension of personal to this professional decision. For example, the decision to enroll part-time
may be affected by the need to work full-time and
use employer-provided tuition beneﬁts or the need
for quality time with school-age children. There are
no hard and fast rules about achieving a career/life
balance for everyone. The best strategy is to
approach goal setting and planning with a realistic
understanding about what is possible for you and
those who are important in your life. Any potential
decisions about plans, including timing and pacing,
need to take into account your personal and professional values and the values and preferences of the
important others in your life.

All Good Things...
People who are happy and satisﬁed know what they
want and have a plan for achieving their goals that
are consistent with their personal and professional
values. They proactively take charge and make conscious decisions to act in ways that lead to goal
achievement, i.e., they are skilled in self-management. Self-management is built upon a clear differentiation between what is within our power to
control and what we can only inﬂuence. With this
understanding, goal setting can be speciﬁc, measur-

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

372

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 372

Skills for a Successful Career

able, attainable, realistic, and time-oriented. Strategies that help with goal achievement include positive self-talk and developing emotional intelligence.
Managing life to achieve goals involves dealing
with the barriers along the way. One of the biggest
barriers is stress. Stress is a natural part of life and
cannot be avoided, but the stress response can be
managed and controlled. The ﬁrst step in managing
stress is identifying sources of stress. Some examples of stressors that frequently affect the lives of
nurses are sleep deprivation, surreptitious energy
drains, and lack of time to manage all the competing
demands of our fast-paced lives with their multiple
roles. There are many strategies for dealing with
each of these stressors.
A stressor that has received attention from the
nursing profession is the process of transitioning
from student role to the role of professional nurse to
expert clinician. Two nurse researchers have studied this process. Evidence-based programs can help
you with these transitions in many employment settings. Dr. Marlene Kramer has identiﬁed this
process as reality shock. Many employers have programs in the form of orientations, internships, and
residencies aimed at helping you to cope with this
transition and the resulting reality shock. Dr.
Patricia Benner studied the process of acquiring
nursing skill and outlined a series of stages that
nurses pass through on the journey from novice to
expert. Many hospitals have adopted a novice-toexpert model for progression within a clinical career
ladder.
Decisions that you make in your career will
affect your personal life, and what goes on in your
personal life affects your professional development.
These career/life linkages must also be managed to
achieve personal happiness and professional fulﬁllment. Having a clear understanding of personal and
professional values helps to provide the compass for
decisions about timing and pacing related to both
personal and professional issues and these linkages.

Let’s Talk
1. Write a personal mission statement to meet the
following criteria: What you want to be
(character); what you want to do (contributions
and achievements); what values and principles
you will use to accomplish “being” and “doing.”

2. Based on the mission statement, develop a longterm goal (something that will take more than a
year to achieve), and then develop some shortterm goals to operationalize the long-term goal.
Evaluate the goals using the SMART criteria.
3. Develop a list of things that are within your
control, that are outside of your control, and the
things that you may be able to inﬂuence. How
does this realization of the ability to control, have
no control, and possibly inﬂuence affect the kinds
of goals that we set for ourselves?
4. Review the characteristics of emotional
intelligence. Identify someone you think is
emotionally intelligent. Describe the behaviors
that this person exhibits that demonstrate
emotional intelligence. How does your behavior
compare with the behavior of the person? How
would you go about developing your own
emotional intelligence?
5. Identify a time when you experienced a great
amount of stress, but others around you did not
perceive the situation as stressful. What factors
made the situation stressful for you? Why did
other people respond in different ways to the
same experience?
6. As this chapter is about self-management, what
stressors do you anticipate, and how do you plan
to manage your stress response?

NCLEX Questions
1. Self-management is all of the following EXCEPT:

A. Knowing who you are
B. Knowing what you want and where you
want to go
C. Taking charge of the process of gathering the
resources and positioning yourself to achieve
your goals
D. Developing a time line for activities of daily
living
2. Self-concept is an overall term that is used to

describe all of the following EXCEPT:
A. Thoughts and evaluations regarding speciﬁc
aspects of self, such as gender, racial identity,
and social class membership
B. The ideal self, which includes hopes and
dreams about personal attributes

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 373

Manage Yourself for a More Fulfilling Career

373

C. Overall self-esteem and self-acceptance
D. One’s position in the job hierarchy of an
organization

C. Service: belonging to one’s professional
organizations
D. Developing interpersonal relationships

3. In order to be useful, goals need to follow the fol-

9. Social competence involves the following rela-

lowing guidelines:
A. Be broad and cover a 10-year period
B. Be measurable
C. Be attainable within 30 days
D. Cover the social and work aspects of one’s life

tionship management capability:
A. Transformational leadership: guiding and
motivating by transforming followers
B. Inﬂuence others via monetary rewards
C. Developing others through continuing education
D. Teamwork and collaboration

4. Strategies for dealing with challenges to achiev-

ing personal goals include all of the following
EXCEPT:
A. Positive self-talk
B. Developing emotional intelligence
C. Stress, sleep, and time management
D. Working longer hours to achieve the goal
5. Some common sources of stress include:

A. Problems with weight management
B. Substance abuse issues such as alcohol,
drugs, and cigarette smoking
C. Mental disorders such as untreated depression or anxiety
D. All of the above
6. Strategies for time management include all of the

following EXCEPT:
A. Use a planner or electronic calendar for your
appointments
B. Always schedule projects for completion as
the last thing on your “to do” list
C. Complete the worst or oldest task ﬁrst
D. Be aware of your own limitations, priorities,
and boundaries
7. Role transition from student nurse to staff nurse

involves:
A. Letting go of old ways and old identities
B. Psychological realignments and repatterning
of behavior
C. Emerging from transition when the new
identity is established and a new sense of purpose arises
D. All of the above
8. Social competence involves the following social

awareness capability that determines how one
manages relationships:
A. Sympathy: showing sorrow for another’s
losses
B. Organizational awareness: reading decision
networks and politics at the organizational
level

10. Strategies to promote a good night’s sleep

include:
A. Maintain a regular waking time, even on
days off work and weekends
B. Try to go to bed only when you are drowsy
C. Establish pre–sleep rituals that energize
you, such as physical activity
D. A and B
REFERENCES
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2000). Coping with shift
work. Rochester, MN: American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert. Menlo Park, CA:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Benner, P., Tanner, C., & Chesla, C. (1996). Expertise in nursing
practice: Caring, clinical judgment, and ethics. New York:
Springer Publishing.
Blanzola, C., Linderman, R., & King, M. (2004). Nurse internship pathway to clinical comfort, conﬁdence, and competency.
Journal for Nurses in Staff Development, 20(1), 27–37.
Borgatti, J. (2004). Frazzled, fried . . . ﬁnished? Boston: Borgatti
Communications.
Bowles, C., & Candela, L. (2005). First job experiences of recent
RN graduates. Journal of Nursing Administration, 35(3),
130–137.
Bridges, W. (1994) Jobshift. Reading, MA: Perseus Books.
Bridges, W. (2003) Managing transitions. (2nd ed). Cambridge,
MA: DaCapo Press.
Bridges, W. (1980). Transitions. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Bryce, C.(2004). Stress on the job: Beating it before it beats you.
MD Anderson Cancer Center Messenger, 33(6), 4–6.
Casey, K., et al. (2004). The graduate nurse experience. Journal
of Nursing Administration, 34(6), 303–311.
Covey, S. (1990). The 7 habits of highly successful people. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Dreyfus, S., & Dreyfus, H. The relationship of theory and practice in the acquisition of skill. In Benner, P., Tanner, C. &
Chesla, C. (1996). Expertise in nursing practice: Caring, clinical
judgment, and ethics. New York: Springer Publishing.
Earl, R. (2004). Stress management: De-stress your life. Chronic
Pain Report, 4(4), 3, 5.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam
Books.
Goleman, D., Boyatis, R., & McKee, A. (2002). Primal leadership.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 22

374

1/14/07

3:54 PM

Page 374

Skills for a Successful Career

Goode, C., & Williams, C. (2004). Post-baccalaureate nurse residency program. Journal of Nursing Administration, 34(2),
71–77.
Hardy, M., & Conway, M. (1988). Role theory: Perspectives for
health professionals. (2nd ed.). Norwalk, CN: Appleton &
Lange.
Ihlenfeld, J. (2005). Hiring and mentoring graduate nurses in
intensive care units. Dimensions of Critical Care Nursing,
24(4), 175–178.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living. New York: Delta.
Kelman, E., & Straker, K. (2000). Study without stress. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing.
Kramer, M. (1974). Reality shock. St. Louis: Mosby.
Kramer, M., & Schmalenberg, C. (1977). Path to biculturalism.
Wakeﬁeld, MA: Contemporary Publishing.

Luciani, J. (2004). The power of self-coaching: The ﬁve essential
steps to creating the life you want. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons.
Miller, T. (2003). Building and managing a career in nursing.
New York: Nurse Week Publishing.
Niles, S.G., & Harris-Bowlsbey, J. (2002) Career development
interventions in the 21st century. Columbus, OH: Merrill–
Prentice Hall.
Rosenfeld, P., et al. Nurse residency program: A ﬁve-year evaluation from the participants’ perspective. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 34(4), 188–194.
Wylie, R. (1979). The self concept: Theory and research on selected
topics. (Rev. ed.). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 375

chapter
23
Getting Your First Job
SHARON WALKER, MA
SHARON BATOR, MSN, RN, ABD
JACQUELINE J. HILL, PHD, RN, CRRN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“Very few people ever make it alone. We all need someone
to lead the way, to show us the ropes, to tell us the norms,
to encourage, support, and make it a little easier for us.”
N. Josefowitz, 1980, p. 93.

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■

■
■
■

Use an organized process for developing your résumé,
succeeding at interviewing, and finding your first job in nursing.
Capitalize on your critical thinking, “soft” skills (caring), and
technological savvy as a basis for your résumé, interview,
and correspondence processing.
Use networking opportunities to facilitate obtaining your
first job in nursing.
Avoid procrastination, a major barrier to a successful
career path.
Understand how the Hallmarks of the Professional Nursing
Practice Environment, the Core Competencies for Health
Professionals, and the Pew Foundation’s Twenty-One
Competencies for the 21st Century provide guidance to
your career journey.

375

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

376

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 376

Skills for a Successful Career

T

he purpose of this chapter is to show you how
to approach getting your ﬁrst job in nursing by creating a résumé and interviewing successfully. The
uninformed view of landing your ﬁrst job is that it
is something you should be able to do naturally;
however, this is not always the case. In some situations, career development requires the guidance of
someone who is experienced in that area, such as
a career planning specialist. In this chapter, you
will be given the essential guidelines to assist you
in securing the best job for you. Upon obtaining
employment as a registered nurse, you alone will
have to take the responsibility for understanding
how the Hallmarks of the Professional Nursing
Practice Environment and Core Competencies for
Health Professionals undergird the integrity of your
choice of where to work. Using the exercises and
suggestions integrated throughout the chapter, you
will be able to write your résumé with scrupulous accuracy. Additionally, you will be prepared to
interview as appealingly as possible by being able to
articulate your nursing skills, related experiences,
and potential as a new graduate. Hiring a novice
registered nurse (RN) is appealing to employers
because they have the opportunity to more easily
integrate you as a member of their institution, training you in its values and mission. In order to select
your ﬁrst job successfully, you will need to strike a
balance between selling yourself and carefully scrutinizing the intricacies of the professional environment where you believe you would like to work.

Getting Your First Job
Getting that ﬁrst job as an RN can be both exciting
and scary. It is exciting ﬁnally to get an opportunity
to work as an RN. You have worked hard to complete nursing school and pass the NCLEX-RN
examination, and you will now get to reap some of
the beneﬁts of being a nurse. The scary aspect of
transitioning from student to RN is that you are on
your own; your professors will not be there to guide
you anymore. It is at this juncture that having a
mentor is important (Box 23-1).

SELECTING A WORK ENVIRONMENT
With a serious nursing shortage projected far into
the 21st century, you will face challenges to main-

Box 23-1
Mentors
A mentor is an experienced person who can “show you
the ropes” of the profession. Specifically, a mentor is “a
person who oversees the career and development of
another person, usually a junior, through teaching,
counseling, providing psychological support, protecting,
and at times promoting or sponsoring” (Zey, 1984, p. 7).
Some of the attributes that mentees look for in a mentor
are experience, personality, reputation, and common
interests (Hill, 2004). The benefits noted by mentees from
being in a mentoring relationship include self-confidence,
self-awareness, and enhanced productivity (Hill, 2004).
One of the outcomes of mentoring can be summed up in
the following quote by a nurse leader: “I learned to
believe in myself. My confidence grew and once realizing
I had abilities, I was able to recognize where I could go
with them. My mentor made me feel more comfortable
and competent in my skills and knowledge. I knew I had
something to offer and subsequently I could not be as
easily intimidated when the challenges came and they
did come” (Hill, 2004, p. 79).

tain the integrity of your practice (Billings &
Halstead, 2005; Catalano, 2003). For now, however,
new graduates will reap the beneﬁts of the law of
supply and demand. Accordingly, better salaries
will emerge as well as the availability of health beneﬁts and educational and career ladder opportunities. For this reason, prospecting for your ﬁrst job in
nursing will offer many possibilities. It is up to you
to align your job options with your personal and
professional strengths (Catalano, 2003; Nunnery,
2005). The downside of the supply and demand
principle regarding the nursing shortage is that
poor staffing ratios may emerge, which risks your
own health as well as that of your patients
(Nunnery, 2005). It is therefore very important to
search for your job with care and to analyze your
potential working environment. The environment
“greatly affects how the nurse can meet the role
obligations” (Catalano, 2003, p. 209).
The American Association of Colleges of
Nursing (AACN) provides direction in the selection
of a working environment that fosters growth as an
RN and better outcomes for the patients. The
AACN has published information online that can
provide guidance to “What Every Nursing School
Graduate Should Consider When Seeking Employment.” This AACN literature outlines Hallmarks

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 377

Getting Your First Job

of the Professional Nursing Practice Setting, which
you can access through www.aacn.nche.edu for
more details.
More speciﬁcally, AACN has identiﬁed key
characteristics to look for in a potential employer
and suggested interview questions of the future
employer you are researching. There are eight key
characteristics with action suggestions that are
brieﬂy summarized as follows:
1. Manifest a philosophy of clinical care empha-

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

sizing quality, safety, interdisciplinary collaboration, continuity of care, and professional
accountability. (Check the published mission
statement to conﬁrm that nurses have input;
check nurse/patient ratios; and conﬁrm an
organization’s commitment to its published
philosophy.)
Recognize the value of nurses’ expertise on
clinical care quality and patient outcomes.
(Are nurses working in areas that ﬁt their
expertise?)
Promote executive-level nursing leadership.
(Are nurses represented in governance? Does
the top nurse executive have an appropriate
position and inﬂuence?)
Empower nurses’ participation in clinical
decision making and organization of clinical
care systems. (Do nurses control decisions
related to nursing practice and care delivery?
Staffing? Quality control?)
Demonstrate professional development support for nurses. (What resources are made
available? Mentors? Internships? Educational
assistance?)
Maintain clinical advancement programs
based on education, certification, and
advanced preparation. (What rewards are
available for professional and educational
development?)
Create collaborative relationships among
members of the health-care team. (Are there
interdisciplinary leadership, quality, peer
review, and patient care models?)
Utilize technological advances in clinical care
and information systems. (Do nurses have
electronic access to clinical and health-care
research results? Is there an integrated information system?)

AACN also suggests other statistics and information to request from a potential employer, such as,
“RN vacancy rate and RN turnover rate, patient

377

satisfaction scores, employee satisfaction scores,
average tenure of nursing staff, education mix of
nursing staff, percentage of registry/travelers used,
key human resource policies, copy of the most
recent JCAHO report, whether nurses are unionized, and a copy of a contract” (p. 18). AACN also
illuminates the advantage of a health-care facility
having magnet status. Knowledge of this information can help you choose a job where your health as
well as the health of your patients has greater
potential for a positive outcome.
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) also indirectly
reinforces the importance of acquiring these statistics when it writes about risk factors for patient
safety in the nursing work environment. The risk
factors germane to AACN’s suggested statistics and
other information are “high staff turnover, long
working hours, rapid increase in new knowledge
and technology, and increased interruptions and
demands in nurse’s time” (Page, 2004, pp. 37–40).
Having such high risks threatens patient care and
increases the potential for legal interventions. From
both legal and ethical perspectives, the choice of
where you work deeply affects your health, the
patients, and the community in which you decide to
provide nursing care.
In conjunction with understanding the choice of
the environment you choose to work in, you also
need to understand the expectations of all healthcare professionals that were outlined by the
Institute of Medicine (IOM, 2003). These expectations provide insight into attributes that you want
to develop as a new RN and that employers will
want to foster in order to provide the best possible
collaboration with other health-care professionals
in the delivery of patient care. These attributes are
fostered in the type of work environment outlined
by IOM and are as follows:
■
■
■
■
■
■

Individual clinical competence
Mutual trust and respect
Shared understanding of goals and roles
Effective communication
Shared decision making
Conﬂict management (Nunnery, 2005)

Your relationships with the multidisciplinary
health-care teams of which you are a part will be
successful and rewarding as you continue to take
responsibility for developing these attributes over
time.
Finally, concomitant with AACN’s position on
selecting the right work environment to develop

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

378

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 378

Skills for a Successful Career

Box 23-2
Pew Foundation’s Twenty-One
Competencies for the 21st Century
1. Embrace a personal ethic of social responsibility and
service.
2. Exhibit ethical behavior in all professional activities.
3. Provide evidence-based clinically competent care.
4. Incorporate the multiple determinants of health in
clinical care.
5. Apply knowledge of the new sciences.
6. Demonstrate critical thinking, reflection, and
problem-solving skills.
7. Understand the role of primary care.
8. Rigorously practice preventive health care.
9. Integrate population-based care and services into
practice.
10. Improve access to health care for those with unmet
health needs.
11. Practice relationship-centered care with individuals
and families.
12. Provide culturally sensitive care to a diverse society.
13. Partner with communities in health-care decisions.
14. Use communication and information technology
effectively and appropriately.
15. Work in interdisciplinary teams.
16. Ensure care that balances individual, professional,
system, and societal needs.
17. Practice leadership.
18. Take responsibility for quality of care and health
outcomes at all levels.
19. Contribute to continuous improvement of the
health-care system.
20. Advocate for public policy that promotes and
protects the health of the public.
21. Continue to learn and help others learn (Nunnery,
p. 509)

IOM’s professional attributes for all health-care
workers is the Pew Foundation’s Twenty-One
Competencies for the 21st Century (Box 23-2).
These competencies reﬂect the reality that “pursuing a career involves life-long learning” (Tappen,
2001, p. 138). Your ﬁrst job selection is just the
beginning of a portfolio of experiences and ongoing
education you will need to develop and integrate
into your résumé as you go from being a “novice to
an expert” (Benner, 1984). As you develop your
résumé over time in your career, look toward polishing these 21 competencies through formal and
informal educational opportunities. First, you need
to understand the nuts and bolts of prospecting for
a job (Box 23-3).

Practice What You Preach
and Teach: Use an Organized
Process for Job Prospecting
Most nurses are excellent at applying standard protocols to provide patient-centered care but often
seem “unable to do the same for themselves”
(Catalano, 2003, pp. 220–221). In light of Catalano’s
criticism, the résumé, interview, and hiring aspects
of this chapter are described using an organized
process. In this case, the speciﬁc purpose is ﬁnding a
ﬁrst job in nursing that is truly a healthy ﬁt between
you and the organization to which you are applying.

STEP I: SELF-APPRAISAL
Self-appraisal is the ﬁrst step of the organizing
process. It incorporates an evaluation of one’s goals
and prospects. In the case of landing your ﬁrst job,
it involves creating an objective to maximize your
career satisfaction and foster your own health. This
means you are assessing what is best for you in light
of your own strengths and limitations as well as

Box 23-3
Using the Internet to Search for a Job
On a practical level, landing your first job can be
facilitated by having Internet savvy. Using an Internet
search engine and inputting “RN” or “Nurse” as the search
criterion, you will have access to 300,000 sites and online
job application features for suitable positions. You can
also list a university site with an associated health science
center and enter into the postings of nursing positions at
that center.
Here is a list of popular Internet sites for nursing positions:
www.nursingjobs.com
www.allnurses.com
www.greatnurse.com
www.hoovers.com
www.hospitalsoup.com
www.idealist.org
www.miracleworkers.com
www.monster.com
www.nursejobs.com
www.nursing jobs.org
www.careers.yahoo.com
www.degreehunter.com

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 379

Getting Your First Job

future patients and future team members with
whom you will work. Throughout your student
career and now as you work toward landing your
ﬁrst job, you will have worked with a career planning specialist who can help you with this selfappraisal. The appraisal phase always takes the
longest; if not done properly, the remaining steps
will not be on target. For example, a new graduate
may want to work in a coronary intensive care unit,
but in looking at her strengths she discovers some
physical limitations that would preclude the hectic
physical pace of such a unit.

STEP II: DISCERNMENT
Discern and deal with potential issues that might
arise in your job-prospecting process. For example,
literature suggests that there are generational issues
and generational expectations of potential employees. Generation X expects to be able to have a balanced work schedule so that family and personal
time are not lost. Hiring agencies that expect new
employees from Generation X to work 12–20 hours
per week of overtime will have a problem with covering the unit when there is short (inadequate)
staffing (Greene, 2005).

STEP III: CREATE A PLAN
Planning involves the creation of the sequence of
actions that will lead to the desired outcome. The job
seeker’s plan must include the creation of a cogent
and compelling résumé of his/her skills and experience. Box 23-4 outlines how to write a résumé, and
Box 23-5 is a sample résumé. Subsequent planning
must include the determination of recipient organizations or persons and how to obtain the attention
and approval of hiring decision makers.

Résumé Writing
As you actually begin to write your résumé and
prepare for an interview, you need to ask yourself
the following questions:
■
■
■

What am I prepared to do?
What do I really want to do?
What type of positions are available? (Tappen,
2001, p. 492)

A résumé is a “reﬂection of your professional
persona” (Prasad, 2004, p. 57). Your résumé needs
to show your current state of knowledge and

chapter star

379

Clara Adams-Ender retired from the Army as a Brigadier
General. She started out as a staff nurse and eventually
became chief executive officer of 22,000 nurses. One of
the very first nurses to attain that rank, she ascribes her
success to doing the best job possible in positions with
visibility. Along with her skills and work ethic, she also took
time to build relationships with mentors and colleagues
who could give advice on how to manage her career.
One of 10 children in a black sharecropper family, she
credits her parents’ work ethic, moral training, and high
expectations for much of her success. She is a dynamic
leader who has 10 honorary doctoral degrees in law,
public service, humane letters, and science. She models
through her career accomplishments the path that new
graduates need to follow in landing their first job and
continuing on through decades of professional nursing.
Adams-Ender cultivated mentor relationships, clearly
communicated her professional goals, and always
earned her next job with an enthusiastic and excellent
performance in the one that preceded it. Her moral
principles, personal integrity, expertise, future planning, and mentoring are qualities that undergird an
outstanding résumé and successful career over time.
Her aphorisms are helpful to the new graduate nurse in
landing a first job and building one’s career over time.
“Clara’s Aphorisms” are as follows (Adams-Ender, p. 243):
1. Whatever you do, do it with enthusiasm.
2. In all relationships with people, relate to them so that
they will speak kindly of you, especially when you are
not present.
3. There is only one thing in life over which you have
total control, and that is your attitude.
4. Always encourage others, especially youngsters.
5. Taking action will cure most fears.
6. Keep your body tuned.
7. Only to the extent that you love yourself can you ever
love another person.
8. Possess high expectations of yourself. After all, it is
what you expect of you that really counts.
9. You have choices in all situations—whether you like
them or not.
10. To not decide is also to make a decision.
11. Giving service makes you feel better about yourself
that you made a difference in someone’s life.
12. It is not what happens to you in life that is important—
it’s how you react to what happens to you.
13. A good sense of humor will help you over many
rough spots.
14. Take your work seriously, but never take yourself too
seriously.
15. Above all else, be kind.
www.claracares.com

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

380

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 380

Skills for a Successful Career

Box 23-4
Tips for Résumé Writing
Résumés should be one page long, unless you have
extensive experience in the position for which you are
applying
■ Light blue, ivory, white, or beige paper (if you mail your
résumé, the envelope must be same color)
■ Use Times Roman or similar font; no fancy fonts; do not
use underline or italics because they do not scan
correctly
■ Margins should be 1 inch top, bottom, and sides
■ Use 12-point font if possible, no smaller than 10-point
font
■ Do not use pronouns
Name and Address Section: May be centered on page or
split on each margin; name should be in a slightly larger
font than the rest of résumé; name should be bold; list
phone number where you can be reached: list home
and/or cell number and make sure you have an answering
machine or message capability so a message can be left for
you (ensure that greeting on answering machine is
appropriate for a potential employer to hear); use e-mail
address, and check it several times a day.
■

Objective: Be very specific, even if you have to list more
than one job title; if not specific, omit this section.
Education: List college, city, and state (not street address),
years attended
■ List graduation date or anticipated graduation date
■ List degree, major, or program
■ Give your grade point average (GPA) (if your overall GPA
is not good, give your GPA in your major if it is better;
e.g., Nursing GPA 3.5)
■ Once you have graduated, you can list your degree first,
then the school and date
■ If you have graduated from a college or university, you
do not need to list your high school

expertise so that employers can hire the best nurse
who can help their patients achieve the best possible outcomes for patient health in mind, body, and
spirit. Résumés reﬂect professional achievements
and abilities and minimize weaknesses.
As you work on your résumé, you may see references about a “curriculum vitae” (CV). The CV is a
form of résumé, mostly used in educational environments for teaching and administrative level positions. Like a résumé, it summarizes educational,
professional, and scholarly experience. Therefore,
keep a journal of all that you do as you build your
repertoire of career experiences so that you can be a

Relevant Skills and Experience or Accomplishments: Use
bullet format for clinical rotations, volunteer experiences,
accomplishments at other jobs if relevant, computer skills
Job History:
List jobs starting with the most recent, and work back
from there
■ List name of company, city, state (not street address),
years you worked (not months)
■ Give your job title
■ Use bullets to state your accomplishments
■ Begin each bullet statement with an ACTION VERB; use
present tense for current job only, past tense for all
previous jobs
■ Do not use “responsible for” or “duties include”; list
accomplishments in each job
■ If you have had jobs in the health-care field or experience relevant to the job you are now seeking, give it
more space on your résumé; jobs that are unrelated to
what you are seeking can be given minimal space
■

Professional Affiliations and Honors:
List any organizations as a student and/or other jobs you
have had; honors; honor societies
■ Do not put References Available on Request at the
bottom of the résumé
■ References are always listed on a separate page that you
can take with you to an interview
■ Do not list personal information (age, marital status,
height, weight, etc.)
■ Debated issue: hobbies (some experts say this is not
appropriate; some say it humanizes the candidate)
■

Proofread! Proofread! and Proofread Again!
Have someone else proofread your résumé. Do not rely on
computer software.

successful candidate for any job for which you
decide to apply in the future.
Note that the human resources person may
devote only 15–30 seconds to looking at your
résumé on the ﬁrst pass, so it is important that it be
error-free and have the appropriate “buzz” words
that identify your résumé as one that merits further
scrutiny (Kelly-Heidenthal, 2003). Employers want
graduates who can function “independently, require
little retraining or orientation, and can supervise a
variety of less educated and unlicensed employees”
(Catalano, 2003, p. 210). They look for preceptorships and internships in the heart of the résumé that

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 381

Getting Your First Job

381

Box 23-5
Sample Résumé
NAME (ALL CAPS, BOLD)

Job History

Street Address

Best Hospital, Baton Rouge, LA, 2003–Present

City, State, Zip
Phone Number
e-mail address
Objective: To obtain a position as a Registered
Nurse
Education
Caring College, Baton Rouge, LA, 2002–Present
Anticipated date of graduation: May 2007
Nursing Program GPA: 3.8
List other colleges or universities you have attended, years
attended, major while there
Relevant Skills and Experience
■ List clinical rotations you have had and/or related courses
■ List experience you have had as a volunteer
■ List specific experience you have had in a job that
pertains to the one you are applying for or that
demonstrates desirable qualities (teamwork,
organizational skills, communication skills, attention
to details, etc)
■ Computer skills

give clues to having a more independent new graduate (Dunham & Smith, 2005). Important words that
reﬂect the independent abilities that employers are
looking for on the résumé are referred to as buzzwords. For those individuals who are using an
online computer program, there are informatic
words programmed into a computer that will pull
out your résumé over others if it has the proper
words. Box 23-6 lists the common buzzwords
needed for a human resources person to select your
résumé from among many. It also lists the common
“informatic” words that would cause a computer
program to select your résumé and arrange for
human resources to have an interview with you.

STEP IV: ACTIONS TO
CARRY OUT THE PLAN

Volunteer
Assist patients in filling out paperwork and locating
physicians’ offices
■ Document arrival and departure times of patients
■ Provide directions and instructions
■

XYZ Hospital, Baton Rouge, LA, 2001–2003
Nursing Assistant
Scheduled appointments for four physicians
■ Accompanied patients to rooms and took vital
signs
■ Assisted patients with meals
■

ABC Clinic, Baton Rouge, LA, 1999–2000
Office Assistant
Directed patients to appropriate physician’s office
■ Received co-pays and other payments
■ Answered questions from patients regarding
insurance
■

Professional Affiliations and Honors
Student Nursing Association
Student Government Association
Dean’s List 2002-2005

cover letter with each résumé to the selected targets,
gaining an interview, and carrying out strategies for
an effective interview.

Cover Letter
Cover letters are very important. They reveal:
■ How well you communicate
■ What your experience and qualiﬁcations are in
brief
■ Your level of professionalism
■ Clues to your personality
■ How detail-oriented you are (i.e., are there
typos or other errors?)
Box 23-7 summarizes qualities of effective cover
letters; Box 23-8 is an example of a cover letter.

Interview Preparation
After creating the plan—the résumé and where to
send it—it is time to put the plan into action.
Putting the plan into action entails sending out a

The key to a successful interview is preparation.
Have you researched the company where you are

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

382

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 382

Skills for a Successful Career

Practice to Strive For 23-1
Your résumé is both a subjective and objective self-portrait
that reflects a professional and empowered attitude. The
purpose of the résumé is to get you the right job at the right
time in the right place on the right team at the right salary.
Résumés can be written in a chronological or functional
format. The chronological résumé lists information in order,
beginning with the most recent, whereas the functional
résumé focuses on the strengths that align best with the
position being sought. The following are some of the major
do’s and don’t’s to consider when preparing your résumé:
DO:

•

Remember that your résumé is your first introduction to a
prospective employer, so be careful in how you present
yourself

•

“Know thyself” so that you can communicate your value
to a prospective employer

•

Work as hard at getting the right job as you did getting
into school

•
•

Write as though the job market is tight even if it isn’t

•

Consult a career planning specialist or online source to
assist with résumé writing

•
•

Limit cover letters to one page

•

Write a concise, interesting, and error-free résumé that is
truly worthy of you

•

Get someone to proofread your résumé several times
before mailing it

•

Send your résumé with a cover letter addressed to a specific person, showing knowledge of the company

•

Remember: 80% of positions are gained through networking

•

Remember to write a thank-you note within 48 hours
after an interview

Have a plan where you want to be now and in 4 to 5
years (your next job target)

Type cover letter and résumé on visually appealing cotton paper

DON’T:

•
•
•

Use white copy paper (less appealing)
Procrastinate
Exaggerate or fabricate; be honest

interviewing? Do you know the approximate industry standard salary for the position you are seeking?
Have you written out answers to the typical, most
frequently asked interview questions? Have you
practiced answering questions with family, friends,

Box 23-6
Action Words and Phrases for Health-Care
Résumés and Cover Letters
Assessed
Diagnosed
Directed
Educated
Prepared treatment plans
Provided follow-up care
Implemented
Quality assurance
Safe environment
Compliance
Managed
Variety
Teamwork
Self-motivated
Time management
Organizational skills
Accuracy
Flexibility
Professionalism
Dedicated
Detail-oriented
Volunteerism
Insertion and maintenance of invasive lines
Committed to quality patient care
Compassion
Ensuring continuity of patient care
Absolutely reliable and punctual
Total patient care
Determined needs of patients
Initiated beneficial changes
Established nursing care plans
Developed comprehensive patient histories
Maintained strict confidentiality in compliance with all
federal, state, and institutional policies
Proactive approach to patient care
Fulfilled basic patient assistance
Coordinated patient care
Ordered laboratory studies
Ordered referrals
Contacted insurance companies
Liaison between provider and patient
Performed direct patient care
Presented in-services
Planned, organized, and managed nursing care
Carried out detailed assessments
Taught proper high-tech care to patients and families
Communicated findings to physicians and other health
professionals
Gave case presentations
Participated in treatment planning and family conferences

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 383

Getting Your First Job

Box 23-7
Qualities of an Effective Cover Letter
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Brief, neat, without errors
In business format
Name and title of person to whom the letter is
addressed
Why interested and what position would like to apply
for
Appointed time for taking NCLEX-RN
Express appreciation for consideration and eagerness
to be part of team
How can be reached (telephone number)
Use 9- by 12-inch envelope to send résumé and cover
letter (first-class mail)
Expect response to letter in 2 weeks
If not, call after 3 weeks; check with Human Resources

Box 23-8
Example of an Effective Cover Letter
May 1, 2006
Elizabeth B. Wise, PhD, RN
Director of Nurse Recruitment and Hiring
Caring Hospital USA
Joy City, LA 70777
RE: Nursing Position on Medical-Surgical Unit
Dear Dr. Wise:
I have just graduated from Caring College and would like
to apply for a new graduate nurse position on MedicalSurgical Unit II at Caring Hospital. I served there as a nurse
technician while going through nursing school. I will take
the NCLEX-RN exam on June 7, 2005, and will be available
to start work by June 21, 2005.
Having worked as a nurse technician on Medical-Surgical
Unit II for 3 years, I developed positive interpersonal and
professional relationships with the team. Furthermore, I
am well organized, have effective time-management
skills, and am enthusiastic about the prospect of returning
to the unit. I am proud to have worked at Caring Hospital
for 3 years in light of its high rating and Magnet status.
The mission of Caring Hospital is congruent with my
values.
Thank you very much for your consideration. You may
reach me any time on my cell phone at (999) 709-2525. I
look forward to hearing from you to schedule an
interview at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Scelitta Source

383

or professionals? Do you have the appropriate
clothes to go on a moment’s notice? These are steps
you should be taking in preparation for your job
interview. See Boxes 23-9 through 23-12 for further
interview preparation.
What are employers looking for in an interview?
Of course, they are looking for the basic educational
requirements for an entry-level nurse. After that
requirement, what are they seeking? Many human
resources managers have found that employers are
looking for nurses who exhibit excitement and
enthusiasm and who are a “good ﬁt” with the people
who are already working there. When the Divisional
Director of People Services at a large regional medical center was recently asked, “What do you look
for in an interview to convince you to hire that person?” she was quoted as saying “Are you a job ﬁt?
‘Fit’ means do you have the qualiﬁcations, and do
you have the attitude? We hire for attitude and train
for skills. If you do it the other way, you’re usually
not that successful. You can train someone what to
do, but you can’t usually train ‘attitude’ ” (personal
communication, Lulu Ford, Our Lady of the Lake
Regional Medical Center, 2005).
The interview process begins when you are
called to schedule your interview. Keep your schedule handy, and speak professionally. Ask where the
interview will be conducted—the address and directions if you are not familiar with the facility—and
who you will be interviewing with. Write this information down, and take it with you. Research the
institution. Go online, conduct a search, and read
all available information.
It is always helpful to anticipate possible interview questions. Categories of potential questions
include:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Self-assessment
Career goals
General information
Behavioral
Professional

While going through the interview, you also may
have questions you want to ask. It is helpful to have
these questions written down ahead of time so that
you do not forget or get distracted from what you
want to know. Do not ask about salary or beneﬁts
unless the interviewer initiates this conversation;
the best time to discuss these issues is after you
have been offered the job. Review the questions in
Box 23-12.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

384

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 384

Skills for a Successful Career

Box 23-9

Box 23-10

Essentials to Know for Interview
Preparation

Appropriate Dress

What to Take to the Interview
■ A simple portfolio or a new, clean, file folder
■ Pen/pencil and paper to make brief notes if
necessary
■ Extra copies of your résumé
■ Your reference sheet
■ List of questions you want to ask
■ Copy of your license, certifications, and any special
training you have had

This person is dressed appropriately for a job interview. She is wearing a conservative suit, minimal
and tasteful jewelry, and she projects a confident and
professional appearance. Her smile shows a relaxed,
comfortable demeanor that would put others at ease
(Fig. 23-1).

What to Wear to the Interview
Dress in business or business-casual attire; suit, nice
dress, or pants suit and appropriate hose and shoes
in good condition; no jeans, tight clothes, or low-cut
blouses (see Box 23-10)
■ Clean hair, nails, and clothes; simple jewelry; no
excess rings, dangling earrings; only ear piercings
noticeable
■ Avoid perfume or cologne—many medical institutions
are fragrance-free
■

Manners
Be courteous and friendly to all personnel you
encounter—parking attendant, information desk
personnel, secretaries
■ Arrive about 10 minutes early; do not be late
■

First Impressions With Interview
First impressions are lasting and occur in the first 20–30
seconds
■ Walk in confidently; introduce yourself if necessary,
give the interviewer a firm handshake, make direct
eye contact, acknowledge other people in the
room
■ Do not be surprised if there is more than one person
present to interview you; often there will be a human
resources staff member and possibly the immediate
supervisor and/or department manager
■ Smile and try to relax; smiling will relax you as well as
the interviewer
■

After the Interview
Thank everyone present for the interview
■ Offer your reference sheet
■ Ask when a decision is expected
■ Ask the next step in the interview process
■ When you get home, immediately write a short
thank-you note/letter to everyone who interviewed
you
■ If you have not heard from them by the time they
indicated a decision would be made, call and talk to
the person who interviewed you and ask the status
of the position
■

FIGURE 23-1 Photo of woman dressed for an interview.

STEP V: FOLLOW UP
After the interview, the candidate must determine
whether the goals/outcomes were met and, if not,
what follow-up needs to be done. Box 23-13 offers
questions you may want to ask once you are offered
the job.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 385

Getting Your First Job

385

Box 23-11
Possible Self-Assessment Interview Questions
Self-Assessment Questions
1. Tell me about yourself.
2. Briefly summarize your educational and work history for
me.
3. What clinical rotations did you have in your nursing
program?
4. Which clinical rotation did you like the least? Why?
5. What do you think are the most important
characteristics and abilities a person must have to be a
successful nurse?
6. What do you consider your greatest strength?
7. What do you consider your greatest weakness?
8. What personal characteristics are your greatest
assets?
9. What personal characteristics cause you the most
difficulty?
10. Give me three adjectives you think describe you.
11. What types of situations frustrate you the most? How
do you usually cope with them?
12. Tell me about a time when you had difficulty with a
supervisor or coworker and how you resolved the
conflict.
13. Why do you want to be a nurse?
14. How do you work under pressure? Give me an
example.
15. Is there any reason why you might not be able to work
as regularly scheduled?
16. Tell me about a time when you had to adapt to a new
situation.
17. What makes you the best person for this job, and why
should we hire you?
Career Goals Questions
1. What are your career goals?
2. Where do you see yourself 5 years from now?

Box 23-12
Possible Questions You May Want To Ask
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

What unit will I be placed in?
Who will be my immediate supervisor?
What is the nurse-patient ratio in that unit?
What kind of orientation is available? How long is
orientation?
What are the goals of the unit?
What is the length of service of other nurses in this unit?
Can I have a tour of the unit in which I will be working?
Will I have a preceptor?
What is the turnover rate for nurses?

3. How does this job fit in with your overall career goals?
4. What can you offer this company/organization?
5. What would you most like to accomplish if you had this
job? What future educational endeavors do you plan?
General Questions
1. What criteria are you using to evaluate this job?
2. What is most important to you in this job?
3. What are your expectations regarding promotions and
salary increases?
4. Nursing can be a very stressful job. What do you do to
relieve your stress outside the job?
5. What do you know about our organization? Do you
have any questions?
Behavioral Questions
1. Tell me about a time in which you had to handle an
irate physician or patient/family member. How did you
handle the individual, and what were the results? What
would you do differently next time?
2. What has been the most difficult decision you have ever
had to make? Are you satisfied with the outcome?
3. Have you ever been asked to do something that was
unethical, illegal, or against your own personal belief or
integrity standards? What did you do? If not, what would
you do in such a case?
4. Tell me about a situation in which you disagreed with
instructions given to you by a physician, supervisor, or
instructor. What did you do?
Professional Questions
1. What nursing organizations do you belong to?
2. What journals do you read?
3. How do you plan to stay current in your profession?
4. What continuing education areas are of interest to
you?

Box 23-13
Possible Questions to Ask When
You Are Offered the Job
What is the salary?
What is the shift or hours I will work?
What are the benefits?
Is there any mandatory overtime?
Do you offer tuition reimbursement, loan repayment,
or sign-on bonus?
6. When is orientation?
7. When and where do I report for work?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

386

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 386

Skills for a Successful Career

VI. RESTART THE PROCESS
Suppose you discover that you have chosen the
wrong job, or you begin to feel that you are suffering “burnout.” Suppose that the organization in
which you have invested your career violates its
promises. In nursing, as in any relationship, there is
a predictable pattern. Usually, and ideally ﬁrst, is
the honeymoon phase when you are accepted and
your work is enthusiastic and productive. Then
comes the period where only experience can give
you skills, and you are working the extra hours,
sometimes the long shifts, and enjoying a sense of
success. As in a long marriage, you evolve into the
maintenance period. This is often the most difficult
time as there are not a lot of new, exciting developments. It is up to you to build on educational opportunities, maintain good personal health, and make
the maintenance phase more productive. Then one
day, you may begin to feel that you have overstayed
your welcome and exhausted the learning opportunities at that workplace. Then it is time to leave. It
is actually better to leave and ﬁnd a new job before
feeling burnout and to be at the top of the cycle of
your energy, positive patient outcomes, and interdisciplinary collaborative relationships. When you
leave, there are happy memories for both you and
the employers. Move on. Creating your career is an
ongoing process during which it may be healthy to
seek a change of scene (Sullivan, 2004).

All Good Things...
You have done a great deal of work to get to this
point. You are ready to enter the job market to start
a career in nursing. Applying some of the talents
that have helped you up to this time should ease the
transition from school into a new position.
Gather trusted advisors to help you form a career
plan. Then try to target a position that will move
you in the right direction toward that plan’s attainment. Having a mentor during the job-seeking
process can be as helpful as having one after landing
the job.
Prepare a résumé that accurately represents your
achievements, talents, and potential, and then work
hard to present yourself well in the interview
process. After getting the job, do the best you can to

make your colleagues, your department, and your
entire organization a success.
Finally, as your career progresses, remember to
re-evaluate your goals, your plans for their achievement, and take action to realign when necessary.
Remember that you are entering nursing in the
21st century when there is an actual nursing shortage that will continue for decades. Use AACN’s
Hallmarks of the Professional Nursing Environment to help guide you into selecting the best position for you.

Let’s Talk
1. What are your priorities regarding your career?
2. What do you believe is most important to
accomplish immediately upon completing
nursing school?
3. As a new graduate, who or what do you consider
to be your greatest resource as you start your
journey into the workforce?
4. How important is it to gain technical skills that
become second nature on your ﬁrst job?
5. What professional organizations would be most
helpful for you to join and where perhaps you
could meet a mentor?
6. What are your beliefs about returning to school
for an advanced degree? Do you believe it is
necessary?

NCLEX Questions
1. The chronological résumé includes:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Education section
Listing of jobs starting with most recent job
Objective statement
All of the above

2. A functional résumé is:

A. Used only in the nursing profession
B. Used when you want to emphasize skills and
abilities
C. Used when you are changing careers
D. B and C

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 387

Getting Your First Job

3. A career planning specialist can help you:

A. Determine the jobs for which you are a good
ﬁt
B. Develop a winning résumé
C. Prepare for an interview
D. All of the above

387

10. According to experts, what percentage of jobs

are gained through networking?
A. 50%
B. 80%
C. 10%
D. 100%

4. You need a two-page resume when:

A. You have extensive experience in the job for
which you are applying
B. You have had more than four jobs
C. You are older than 40 years
D. You have a master’s degree or above
5. Each bullet statement in your résumé should

begin with:
A. The pronoun “I”
B. An action verb
C. The words “responsible for”
D. None of the above
6. The key to a successful interview is:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Who you know
Preparation
Wearing a black suit
A cordial relationship between you and the
interviewer

7. Your references should:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Be included on your résumé
Call the employer before the interview
Be listed on a separate page
Be provided only if you are asked

8. You should take the following to an interview:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Extra copies of your résumé
A list of questions to ask the interviewer
Pen and paper to take notes
All of the above

9. You prepare for an interview by:

A. Researching the company
B. Knowing industry standard salary for the
position
C. Writing out and practicing answers to typical
interview questions
D. All of the above

REFERENCES
Adams-Ender, C. (2001). My rise to the stars. Lake Ridge, VA:
CAPE Associates.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) (2002).
Hallmarks of the professional nursing practice environment.
Washington, DC: Author. http://www.aacn.nche. edu/
Publications/positions/cerreg.htm.
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in
clinical nursing practice. Menlo Park, CA: Addison Wesley.
Billings, D.M., & Halstead, J. (2005). Teaching in nursing: A
guide for faculty. St. Louis: Elsevier/Saunders.
Catalano, J.T. (2003). Nursing now! (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F.A.
Davis.
Dunham, K.S., & Smith, S.J. (2005). How to survive and maybe
even love your life as a nurse. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Greene, J. (2005). Different generations different expectations,
Hospitals & Health Networks Research, (3)34–42.
Hill, J.J. (2004). The role of mentoring in the development of
African American nurse leaders. Dissertation Abstracts
International (UMI No. 3136177).
Institute of Medicine. (2003). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the work environment of nurses. http://www.ion.edu/
report.asp? id=16173.
Josefowitz, N. (1980). Paths to top power: A working woman’s
guide from 1st job to top executive. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Kelly-Heidenthal, P. (2003). Nursing leadership & management.
Clifton Park, NY: Thomson/Delmar Learning.
Nunnery, R.K. (2005). Advancing your career: Concepts of professional nursing. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Page, A. (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the work of
nurses. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
PEW Health Professions Commission. (1995). Critical challenges: Revitalizing the health professions for the 21st century.
San Fancisco: UCSF Center for the Health Professions.
Prasad, C. (2004). Outwitting the job market. Guilford, CT: The
Lyons Press.
Sullivan, E.J. (2004). Becoming inﬂuential: A guide for nurses. NJ:
Pearson/Prentice Hall.
Tappen, R.M. (2001). Nursing leadership and management:
Concepts and practice. Philadelphia: F.A. Davis.
Zey, Michael G. (1984). The mentor connection. Homewood, IL:
Dow Jones-Irvin.

23Jones Leadership(F)-ch 23

1/14/07

4:08 PM

Page 388

This page has been left intentionally blank.

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 389

chapter
24
Career Development
DENISE TOP RHINE, MED, RN, CEN
JUDY A. DAVIS, MS, MPH, APN, CNP
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

“There is no security on this earth, only opportunity.”
Douglas MacArthur

CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Identify and differentiate among the three career models.
Describe nursing as a profession and career.
Identify key innovative opportunities: entrepreneurship and
intrapreneurship.
Differentiate between nurse intrapreneur and nurse
entrepreneur.
Identify the career planning and development phases.
Describe the dynamic environmental forces that promote
nursing career growth.
Describe qualities, roles, options, and benefits of the nurse
intrapreneur and entrepreneur.
Describe organization characteristics that support
intrapreneurship.
Define marketing, mentoring, and networking, and relate them
to the roles of nurse intrapreneur and entrepreneur.

389

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

390

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 390

Skills for a Successful Career

I

n nursing, even more so than in other ﬁelds, leaders will need to think creatively to conceive new
ways of working in today’s cyberworld. It is critical
to recognize one’s personal joys and to take advantage of (and to seek) opportunities as they develop
during the course of your career. Developing a
nursing career extends through a lifetime and is not
limited to the institution in which you work; be in
tune with opportunities that arise within a changing environment.
Opportunities emerge while one assesses future
health-care needs. Equally important is for the
nurse to be ready to take action when opportunity
knocks by positioning herself educationally and
experientially to meet health-care needs. Selecting
mentors, seeking a supportive working environment, networking successfully, and positioning
yourself strategically will require having people
skills. Whether the goal is to become a valued member within the organization as an intrapreneur or
to branch out as an entrepreneur, the nurse will
need the skills to predict people’s reactions and
needs and the ability to interact with different populations and personalities. Thus begins the process
of building or rejuvenating oneself, recognizing
what gives joy, breaking away from old beliefs and
assumptions, reassessing strengths, networking to
open new doors, seeking mentors to learn new
skills and, most important, taking a risk. Opportunities arise outside and inside the organizations and
outside and within one’s position. So tailoring or
reﬁning personal career goals requires the nurse to
keep abreast of the world’s economic and political
forces while keeping attuned to the health-care
organization.
This chapter focuses on nurses, from early career
to later. The aim is to help guide nurses who desire
to take charge of career development and shape
their careers and themselves more intentionally
within the dynamic world in which they live.

Building a Nursing Career:
A Chance to Grow
Given today’s health-care environment, what does
an individual nurse do to continue in nursing, yet

manage job frustrations and achieve satisfaction at
the end of the day? Building a career of enduring
depth, breadth, and growth is a lifelong process, not
unlike growth in one’s personal intellectual development. With the advent of advanced practice,
higher education in nursing, and the economic
necessity of full-time employment, most nurses
have come to realize that nursing is a career and
profession, not just a job. The evolution of your
career should not be left to chance; when you do not
plan a direction for job movement, the stage is set
for stagnation and inertia. Haphazardly moving
from one position to another based on intangibles
and whims negates the ability to achieve career
goals. Although nursing positions are still plentiful
and the need for nurses promises to increase,
today’s nurse wants more than a paycheck. For too
long, nursing placed importance on the way nurses
worked and the tasks they completed, not on what
they do to bring about successful patient outcomes.
In reality, satisfaction with the employment environment, commitment to patient care needs, and
enjoyment of pertinent activities and patient-nurse
interactions are requisites for career enhancement
and stability.

NURSING AS CAREER DEVELOPMENT
Nursing, as a profession and a career, is founded
upon principles of science, arts, and the humanities
(Chinn & Kramer, 1999). Its education and practice
are accredited by the various nursing education
organizations and accrediting bodies that ensure
the quality and integrity of the profession and its
educational curriculum (Bellack & O’Neil, 2000).
Characteristics of a profession are described by the
American Nurses Association (ANA, 1975, 1991)
as attaining a common body of knowledge, practicing with agreed performance standards and a code
of ethics, having an agreed certiﬁcation procedure,
having a representative professional organization,
and having an external perception as a profession.
Nursing’s core value is centered on people and serving the good of society (Strader & Decker, 1999);
these values are timeless, but the nature of the nursing practice evolves with the times and environment. ANA (1975) described nurses as having
“specialized skills essential to the performance of a

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 391

Career Development

unique professional role” (p. 3). The specialized
skills, unique to the professional, are sensitive and
responsive to the dynamic environmental forces
and to the future advancements (Williams-Evans &
Carnegie, 2002). Hence, the profession of nursing
melds its timeless core values with its ability to
adapt to the needs of the dynamic environment.
Career development is a dynamic, growing, and
continuous process requiring ongoing contemplation and planning. Not unlike a development of a
life skill, it involves sets of steps or phases of development whereby there are markers to ensure
achievement to its maximum potential. There are
various permutations of the career developing or
building process. It can be viewed from a perspective of mapping (Ellis & Hartley, 2005); mobility
(Hall, 2002; Riverin-Simard, 2000); staging
(Broscio, Paulick, & Scherer, 2005); patterns
(Super, 1980); and styles (Coombs, 1987; Driver,
1979a; Gardner, 1992; Orr, 1991).
Current literature on career models has moved
away from static views; whereas earlier career models, such as career mapping, helped to keep the
vision of a career alive, this merely provided a snapshot of what direction to go in terms of career goals.
It did not provide a road map that reﬂects changing
environmental conditions, such as “detours ahead”
or “alternate routes” to take “due to inclement conditions.” Likewise, linear career mobility, which
once had natural “up the ladder” promotions, does
not reﬂect today’s careers, which are more ﬂuid and
unstable.
Today’s career development tends to be more
ﬂuid, dynamic, and sensitive to socioeconomic
forces and requirements of family household needs.
Therefore, careers reﬂect more complex trajectories
and work patterns, typical of today’s two-career
family households (Hall, 2002). When it comes to
career trajectory, it is more apt to appear jagged
with erratic turns rather than linear. Brown and
associates (cited in Hall, 2002) found in their interviews of career experts that an average person will
change careers (not jobs) ﬁve to seven times within
his or her lifetime. In nursing, although there does
not seem to be such a dramatic exiting of the profession, there does appear to be greater “entrance
and exit” mobility to parallel family needs and commitments (Gardner, 1992; McLees, 1988). Nurses
have become more accustomed to tailoring their

391

career mobility to their family stage and personal
needs (Gardner, 1992; Hall, 2002; McLees, 1988;
Moen, 1998). Nicholson (1996) noted that careers
that do not follow a steady pattern of continuous
service and regular and steady promotion are likely
to be considered “imperfect,” when in fact they can
be a creative way of negotiating the potentially
incongruent goals of a successful career and a successful family life. Typical of a two-career family
with children, nurses may enter, exit, and reenter
the job market multiple times within their career
development, thus maintaining a ﬂuid, ﬂexible
work schedule. Even later in their careers, as a prelude to retirement preparation, nurses are apt to
reenter the job market, not solely for ﬁnancial
supplement but purportedly due to career identity
and career satisfaction (Riverin-Simard, 2000) and
personal and family needs (Gardner, 1992; Hall,
2002, McLees, 1988; Moen, 1998).
Berg (2004) noted that, after retiring, many
nurses either remain in the workforce or later
return to it and/or return to society what Erikson
(1997) termed “generativity.” Quietly advocating
for patients/families as they provide care, retired
nurses ﬁnd a variety of job opportunities to ﬁt their
needs of retirement, ﬁnancial situations, and interests. Part-time work is becoming increasingly common among retirees, with a third working part-time
for “interest and enjoyment” (Roper, 2002). The
ﬂexible hours, no commitment to grown family, and
unique jobs across country and abroad are opening
up virtually all possibilities. Many retired nurses,
viewing their personal values as integral to their
professional values, ﬁnd creative means to share
this with the community. There are numerous stories about retired nurses, with a wealth of lifetime
experience, who use their integrated knowledge and
skills to volunteer and work part-time in various
settings: teaching in classrooms and hospitals, being
involved in ministries abroad, leading community
groups, recruiting new nursing students, lobbying
for political causes, and helping professional organizations. Some take leadership positions, volunteering for a local hospital board of trustees,
fundraising for scholarships, working with inner
city grassroot organizations. It is ironic that as nursing shortages worsen, the pool of Baby Boom retired
nurses may become the “safety net” for our overworked profession.

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

392

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 392

Skills for a Successful Career

Innovative Opportunities:
Entrepreneurship
and Intrapreneurship
Scientiﬁc and technological advances occur by
quantum leaps. They are creating a complex landscape that futurists caution will be vastly different
from our present or past. In terms of the health-care
system, how the care will be delivered and what
will be required of its providers and consumers will
differ (Kressley, 1998; Porter-O’Grady, 2000;
Porter-O’Grady & Wilson, 1999). The work of providing care will also be altered, especially for nurses
(Porter-O’Grady, 2000). Neuhauser, Bender, and
Stromberg (2000) described today’s world and its
pace of the employment environment as “a jump to
warp speed.” Organizations are predicted to coalesce more on short-term teams of experts to
accomplish speciﬁc goals and to deliver results. This
new consultative way of working requires work to
be channeled expediently through technological
communications, which paradoxically will result
in a greater demand for relationship building
(Neuhauser, Bender, & Stromberg, 2000). Also in
an era that points to the national and global nursing
shortage, organizational leaders will need to seek
nurses to fulﬁll organization capacity. They will
need to attract nurses who can build top-notch
teams and who are clinically advanced, technologically smart, and relationship advanced.
Supply and demand shortages lead to demandbased pricing. More now than ever, the nursing
shortage brings the highest priority to nursing leaders and educators to retain those experts in the profession and to attract the brightest and best into the
ﬁeld. This calls for leaders with innovative product/service ideas and an eclectic repertoire of people skills who can make, have, and address more
critical decision making and conceptualized ideas.
Equally important will be to attract nurses who are
politically astute, have negotiating skills, are wellversed in the art of compromise, and are tuned into
the values of a growing culturally diverse nation.
These qualities are present in the people with
entrepreneurial and intrapreneurial spirit. Motivated by opportunities and driven by increasing
consumer power, the promise of genetic research
(Human Genome Program, 2005) and new drug
and medical advancement, global trade and investment in system technology, today’s RNs work in an

Practice to Strive For 24-1
Amongst nursing academics today, various topranked institutions with entrepreneurial programs
(Entrepreneur.com, 2005) are identified, with curricula
ranging from limited to comprehensive courses designed
for nursing entrepreneurship. One of the comprehensively
designed entrepreneur curricula is the first-of-its-kind New
Center for Nursing Entrepreneurship (NCNE, 2005). The
NCNE of the University of Rochester advertises that it
“melds the essence of nursing with inventive business
concepts, opening doors to career opportunities and
responding to the evolution of health care.” NCNE has
also created a listserv and coined the word “nurspreneur”
designed for “conversation and dissemination of information relevant to intrapreneurship and entrepreneurship
in nursing.” As an outgrowth of its recent symposium,
Nursing Intrapreneurship and Entrepreneurship: Education, Practice, and Research, the nurspreneur listserv was
established, sponsored in tandem with the Kaufmann
Foundation Campus Initiative. Also, the Center for Nursing
Entrepreneurs was established as an academic-business
“think tank.” It was developed for “people who have business ideas, designed to give nurses the resources and skills
to get started, offering a way to stay in nursing and continue to provide health care to consumers” (NCNE, 2005).

incredible environment to enrich their professional
development and carve out their niches in professional practice.

Career Planning and
Development: Phases
Career planning follows a carefully designed, stepby-step method, whereas career development is a
repetitive, continuous, and evolving nonlinear
process. Both begin with an assessment of where the
nurse has been experientially as well as a look at the
current work environment. Donner and Wheeler
(2001) described these bidirectional inﬂuences of
self and environment as a “life skill, one that nurses
can apply in their workplace, and in their personal
life” (p. 8). Relating it to a series of phases of selfassessment, the career development process integrates the knowledge of self with the existing
environmental opportunities. Donner and Wheeler
broke these two basic interactive forces into ﬁve
phases, “scanning your environment, completing

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 393

Career Development

your self-assessment and reality, creating your
career vision, developing your strategic career plan,
and marketing yourself”(p. 9). These discrete and
yet ﬂuid processes can be expanded relative to the
process of becoming an entrepreneur or intrapreneur. For example, it is important to build personal
characteristics that promote the entrepreneurial
mindset, take control of self-knowledge gained,
become aware of the dynamic forces that may ultimately shape your career, integrate the knowledge
of self with the existing environmental opportunities, and then to take the risk and take action.
Finally, the nurse is ready to use critical thinking
and decision making to build a strategic plan that
includes self-marketing.

CAREER ASSESSMENT
Career assessment as a part of career development
is key to ﬁnding career satisfaction while maintaining ethical integrity. Nurses need to take a SWOT
(Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats)
analysis of their job situations and their individual
characteristics and values to ascertain if they are
congruent or divergent. Why do they like their chosen areas of work? What are the strengths and
weaknesses of their professional areas? When and
where are there opportunities? What are the threats
to success? Assessing your current status is the ﬁrst
step of planning a career. Remember the adage, “If
one fails to plan, one plans to fail.” Perhaps there is
still a chance to maintain ties within the organization yet meet career goals. McGillis-Hall, et al.
(2004) noted, “Nurses who are committed to the
organization in which they work and have the skills
and ﬂexibility to link personal effectiveness and
satisfaction with achievement of the organization’s
strategic objectives” (p. 232) may continue to prosper. Currently, viewing supply and demand economics of nurses willing to work within an institution, nurses can see that this can work in their
favor. Contino (2001) noted, “Accepting that hospital revenues are somewhat ﬁxed, nurses need to
ﬁnd ways to help hospitals control costs, increase
proﬁtable service lines, and meet staff’s scheduling
and income needs.” (p. 21). To assess the career
development process, you need to ask the following
questions:
■
■

What are the basic values in nursing?
How do nurses merge these core values to
address the environmental needs?

■

393

What forms of nursing bring greatest satisfaction in meeting the needs of their patients and
society?

Answering such questions can help the nurse
determine whether it is possible to continue to
work within the status quo or go in the direction of
change. Two areas that many nurses identify as
basic career needs are the ability to feel in control of
their practice and to have ﬂexibility in their work.
Autonomy in decision making, as long as it is
within the scope of the organization’s policies and
procedures, allows nurses the ﬂexibility to individualize care, think critically, and set patient priorities
according to established standards of practice.
Comparing one’s own practice standards with those
observed in the work environment will supply vital
data that the nurse can use to decide whether to
continue to practice in that setting.

PERSISTENCE: PUSHING THE ENVELOPE
Bellack and O’Neil (2000) described nursing as
being at its “crossroads” with a chance to grow and
develop its own vision of its professional practice.
As entrepreneurial “free agents,” notable nursing
leaders such as Florence Nightingale, Lillian Wald,
and Mary Breckinridge all carved out their own
missions beyond their immediate callings to help
patients or address community needs. They took

chapter star

Mary Seacole, referred to as the “Black Nightingale,” was
a daughter of a well-respected “doctress” who practiced
Creole medicine in Jamaica. Guided by her mother, Mary
was repeatedly rejected (due to the social constraints
of the times and the color of her skin) in her quest to join
Florence Nightingale in aiding the soldiers during the
Crimean war. After many rejections, she funded her own
trip and established an innovative entrepreneurial way
of responding to battle-fatigued and injured soldiers by
opening a comfort and recovering center in a British
hotel. Returning to England destitute and ill, the press
came to her aid by publishing her plight; this resulted
in a grand military festival to raise money for her efforts
and led to her being decorated with some of the highest medals of honor: the Crimean Medal, the Legion
of Honour, and a Turkish medal (Florence Nightingale
Museum, 1997).

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

394

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 394

Skills for a Successful Career

action to reach beyond their usual practice, to create
nontraditional nursing roles, to publish, to use epidemiological methods to address populations at
risk, to lobby for health-care reform, to raise philanthropic funds, and to bring awareness of the
plight of the poor and their lack of access to health
care. These quests all stemmed from personal values
about which they felt passionate, and they all channeled their voices through their professional practice (Carper, 1978). These entrepreneurial spirits
pushed their goals and stirred up the social, political, and policy status quo to bring new standards to
health care and nursing practice (Bellack & O’Neil,
2000).
Not unlike our predecessors, today’s cyberworld
requires nurses to challenge their old beliefs and
assumptions of the way the nursing profession is
envisioned. It will require nurses to break loose
from worn-out thinking and to dream of new ways
of practicing the profession. Porter-O’Grady (2000)
noted the difficulties of change; however, humans
naturally prefer the familiar and resist change. The
greatest challenge for nurses will be to leave the
familiar industrial era model of task-oriented nursing care, which served organizations well but left
nurse/patient interactions to suffer.
Roy (2000) illustrated the power of entrenched
minds and the strength of resistance: A major hospital chain in the 1980s hired a futurist ﬁrm to envision what changes the hospital should make by the
1990s, given the changing trends in society. The
futurist predicted accurately, but with the hospital
operating at its peak of ﬁnancial growth the hospital administration failed to respond and so missed
opportunities that would have beneﬁted the organization. The lesson to be learned here is two-fold:
what may be working today will not necessarily
work in the future, and the time to change is when
things are going well. Pushing the envelope necessitates getting out of your comfort zone and being
proactive rather than reactive to change.

TAKING CONTROL: QUEST
FOR A VISIONARY CHANGE
Donner and Wheeler (2001) urged “nurses to be
proactive, to assert more control over their careers”
(p. 80). Yet traditionally nurses have not articulated
their expertise well, especially in health-care settings
where high levels of accountability and evidenced-

based practice were concerned (Hardy, et al., 2002).
Whereas nurses are people-skilled and interface
with a large network of disciplines, such as medicine, business, policy, and government, their core
competencies in communication and group interactive skills have gone unrecognized. Furthermore,
beyond their expert clinical skills in delivering
patient care, their role in successes in patient outcomes has also not been acknowledged. As a result,
nursing has allowed others to direct its own job
redesign whenever hospital chief executive officers
(CEOs) have sought operation efficiency or costcutting tactics; nurses have been treated as no more
than dispensable production task-oriented workers.
Such lack of recognition has suppressed nurses’ ability to contribute actively to the goals of improving
patient care. Short-term downsizing business tactics
have phased out lifelong employment tenure and
ignored the beneﬁts of nurses’ contributions and
loyalty to institutions. These trends have damaged
nurses’ morale, led to shortages of nursing supply
through professional attrition, and threatened
patient safety.
In response to skyrocketing costs of health care
in the United States over the last three decades, various forms of structural funding and payment mechanisms evolved, fundamentally changing treatment
of patients. With decreasing length of costly hospital stays and a shift toward treating more acute care
in the ambulatory and home settings, the need
for experienced, highly skilled nurses dramatically
increased outside hospital settings. Many nurses
who remained committed to in-hospital settings
found themselves unemployed and having to shift
toward community-based care. Even for those who
deemed themselves lucky to remain employed
within their chosen setting, the heavy demands
began to take a toll.
For nurses to take control of their careers, they
will need to steer away from the old assembly-line
shift-work mentality and to take active responsibility in managing their careers and actively marketing themselves. This will require nurses to identify
their core competencies and to gain conﬁdence in
articulating to others (and to themselves) what they
can market beyond their tenured process-oriented
care. Regularly, nurses are faced with complex decision making, both in managing acutely ill patients
and working collaboratively with multidisciplinary
professionals and business organizations. Yet for
nurses to take credit for their innovative care, they

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 395

Career Development

will need to show evidence that such interventions
are proven to bring successes, especially when it
comes to patient outcomes. This will be a challenge,
as nursing care has traditionally been viewed as an
extension of medicine, a tool in which medical care
is provided, and not as a distinct profession in
which the art of caring is founded on empirically
based scientiﬁc principles.
Asoh, et al. (2005) noted, “Nursing presents an
excellent opportunity for entrepreneurial activities
since they (nurses) are trained in a holistic manner
to care for patients rather than treat speciﬁc diseases” (p. 218). Beyond nurses’ expertise in caring
for patients, Roggenkamp and White (1995) found
that nurses exhibited entrepreneurial characteristics of “commitment to service, desire to stay close
to their customer, and had risk-taking, assertive and
strong leadership skills” (p. 8). Above all other factors, the most dominant motivating factor was their
“love for nursing” (p. 8). The biggest challenge in
this visionary transformation may be the process of
change in the image of self and instilling the image
of nursing as innovative intrapreneurs. The ﬁrst
step toward gaining control of your career is becoming aware of one’s valued contribution in bringing
successful patient outcomes. Once the transformation has begun, nurses need to identify the value of
their product (their expert ability), to take control
of their careers, to shape them, and actively market
so that other professionals and consumers will recognize nursing’s unique knowledge base and innovative care. Only then can nurses expect to become
valued players and be invited into the circle of caregiver experts.
Gaining control of your career entails deﬁning
the value of your product in the marketplace. To
build a valued product line (or career specialty),
nurses will need to recognize what knowledge and
specialty skills they can offer to either fulﬁll or create a market demand so as to create career opportunities that will grow. Finally, for nurses to develop
their careers and identify marketable expertise, they
will need work environments and leaders who will
be supportive of the nurse’s intrapreneurial ventures. In selecting where the nurse will market her
wares, it will be important to select organizations
that promote a culture that rewards shared and creative ideas, translates creative ideas into action,
acknowledges successes, and puts failures into perspective. Failures are lessons that improve ideas and
help build an even better product. Therefore, gain-

395

ing control requires an environment that is supportive of your professional practice and career
goals and personal goals.
Broscio, Paulick, and Scherer (2005) warn that
careers will need to be more responsive to the freemarket ideology; there will be a need to employ
free agents with specialized skills. Paradoxically,
working in a virtual world, what one presumes as
a greater emphasis for autonomous and independent work will actually require greater emphasis
on interconnected relationships and communication (Neuhauser, Bender, & Stromberg, 2000).
Moreover, effective communication is strongly
inﬂuenced by previous experiences, culture, and
relationships. For example, as in a global interface,
without face-to-face contact, without language ﬂuency, more emphasis is placed on communication in
both the transmission and feedback loop. There will
need to be a check and balance between parties in
communication and a greater reliance on the nonverbal communication that requires being sensitive
to diverse human beliefs, values, and modes of communication. Nurses are people-skilled and interface
with a variety of multidisciplinary teams, regularly
implementing and utilizing collaboration, negotiating, and building partnerships in their collaborative
interactions with a highly educated network of professionals.
Complex environments require complex decision
making; therefore, a bureaucratic hierarchy model
of top-down communication does not ﬁt the needs
of today’s dynamic, unstable environment. Where
environmental boundaries have become blurred,
our response to such complex dynamic forces
requires decentralized decision making that is ﬂexible and rapid-response. Popularized by the proﬁt
center concept developed during World War II,
decentralized decision making allows for those who
are closest to the operations to exert greater freedom to take control. Decisions need to be made
closer to the operational level or at the point of
patient care. Whereas physicians and other health
professionals have expertise in the disease management or various elements of the human body, it is
the nurse who has the greatest patient contact in
hospitals and in the home. Knowledgeable about
human responses to illnesses during the most vulnerable times in people’s lives, nurses have unique
caring ways to bring patients back to health through
their expert clinical skills and human interactions.
Again, nurses’ expertise in “knowing the patient”

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

396

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 396

Skills for a Successful Career

brings unique skills that help motivate clients with
their self-care; thus, nurses have a unique ability to
carve out patient education niches within the marketplace.

DYNAMIC FORCES: SHAPING
NURSES’ FUTURE CAREERS
Amidst the optimism of scientiﬁc and technological
advances, health care is under the shadows of a
growing socioeconomic crisis: issues of the growing
uninsured and entitlement costs of the soon to
retire Baby Boomers (Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, 1999). Such opposing forces create a
complex landscape, vastly different from that of the
past. In terms of the health-care system, how the
care will be delivered, what will be required of its
providers and consumers, and what provider roles
will be expected to address in terms of institutional
capacity needs will also differ (Kressley, 1998;
Porter-O’Grady, 2000; Porter-O’Grady & Wilson,
1999). For nurses, the work of providing care will
be greatly altered as well (Porter-O’Grady, 2000).
Clearly, nurses’ skills and career paths will need
to mirror the changing health-care environment
(Porter-O’Grady, 2000). Taking stock of the world
in which we live is the ﬁrst step to shaping our
careers. Porter-O’Grady (2000) outlined three major
converging forces that are changing our healthcare landscape, which directly and indirectly affect
nursing: economic, sociopolitical, and technological
forces.

National Forces: Economic and Sociopolitical
Today’s U.S. health-care system is faced with some
daunting challenges. Economic forces drive the
health-care delivery system to monitor its service
use and patient health outcomes. Closely related to
economics are sociopolitical forces as the healthcare industry shifted its focus of care from costly
curative hospital-based care to a less costly preventive consumer-accountable community-based care.
The change from cost-based to prospective pay has
brought managed care to its third decade of maturity; yet the great hope of curbing escalating healthcare costs has still not been fully realized. To
improve U.S. health-care shortfalls, U.S. health-care
leaders are now rethinking forms of funding and
mechanisms for health-care alternatives, even
learning from other countries.

Accompanying such sociopolitical forces is the
change in America’s demographic topography in
terms of age and ethnicity: fewer young productive
citizens to support aging Baby Boomers, increased
ethnic diversity, with growing economic gaps leading to even greater disparities. The “wide-angle
image” shows inadequate insurance coverage that is
inching up toward middle class Americans, along
with an insecure entitlement reimbursement for the
retired. In the next decade, our nation is projected
to have one of the highest dependency ratios of
younger ethnically diverse underemployed to older
retired citizens.
The close-up brings to view images of the plight
of the nursing and labor shortages, which create a
patient dependency ratio that exceeds that of hospital capacity. The current nursing shortage is said to
be unlike that in the past; it is deemed more dire
and enduring (Nevidjon & Erickson, 2001). Fueled
by the aging demographics, its primary shortfall is
the result of attrition, both in nurses and nursing
educators. According to Nevidjon and Erickson,
“from an economic perspective, this shortage is
being driven more by the supply side of the supply/demand equation” (p. 1). Adding to the nursing
shortfall are the shortages in allied health professionals and ancillary staff, such as secretaries and
support staff. Thus, this is a more complex shortage, which promises to worsen during the next
decade as more health-care professionals and educators retire. Such shortages all adversely affect the
health-care delivery system. Early in the 1990s, for
cost-cutting reasons, hospital executives increased
the use of unlicensed assistive personnel; however, these models failed due to increasing patient
acuities, higher patient nurse ratios, concerns
over medical errors, and the declining numbers
of ancillary personnel. The impact was felt by
the patients as well, as nurses are deemed to have
the most continuous contact and develop the
closest relationships with the patients and their
families.

Global Forces: Sociopolitical Economy,
Nursing Shortage, Unintended Consequences
With globalization, today’s world has become interdependent, yet highly competitive. International
boundaries have become more ﬂuid, especially in
terms of U.S. interdependency in global trading.
The blurring of domestic and international bound-

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 397

Career Development

aries has shaped the environment in which we work
and live. Its impact has ﬁltered down to everyday
American lives and work (Hall, 2002; RiverinSimard, 2000). Our social sphere is growing smaller,
with tightly interwoven diversity, both racially and
ethnically. Partly the result of the American’s insatiable consumerism, our link with foreign labor
markets is much more visible. The 2000 U.S. Census
indicated that, between 1990 and 2000, 33 million
people were added to the total U.S. population, with
the fastest and second fastest racial/ethnic groups
being Hispanics and Asians, respectively. Such dramatic demographic change can be viewed positively
as an enriched cultural mix for our society, or it can
be viewed by others as a menacing mix of clashing
values that threaten our society. In our country’s
efforts to assimilate our newcomers into society
quickly, there is a demand not only for bilingual
nurses but also a greater demand for employees who
are sensitive to the nuances of working within a
racially/ethnically mixed culture. Culture has a signiﬁcant impact on how people interpret health and
illness (Spector, 2000). This provides nurses greater
career opportunities. Nurses are inherently peoplesensitive, which ﬁts the required portrait of the type
of leader that is needed for tomorrow’s culturally
diverse employees (Vicere, 2004). Indeed, nurses
are not only advocates and care experts to individuals, families, populations, and communities,
but their leadership skills often include mentoring
employees of diverse cultures. So in terms of expertise, nurses have a wealth of possible career development options that could be carved into a specialty
niche to ﬁt the needs of a growing international
community.
With the increasing size and mobility of the
human population, there are direct and unintended
consequences of emerging diseases that pose a continuing threat to global health. Historically, the
United States had come to see open trading as
“a means not only of advancing its own economic
interests but also as a key to building peaceful relations among nations” (Garrett, 1998, p. 787). Yet
even with economic incentives and peaceful motivations, there are subtle political ideologies promoted. This can create ideological clashes between
diverse nations, which can surface as trade disputes
and power struggles. Ideological clashes have
caused America (and other nations) to be targeted
for terrorist attacks as protests against American
policy.

397

Global unrest and international instability can
have overreaching effects on countries and their
people. The global outreach in nursing is extensive,
and it encompasses a full spectrum of expertise and
services, from policy-making, capacity-building
efforts to point-of-service primary health-care delivery. International organizations, such as the World
Health Organization (WHO) and the International
Council of Nurses (ICN), provide opportunities for
nurses to work abroad and to mix their expertise
with their love of travel and learning about diverse
populations. With growing global disputes, traveling
outside the United States has become increasingly
risky for Americans, especially to the most severely
economically depressed, war-torn countries. Such
global unrest has curbed the activities of many
nurses and medical volunteers who otherwise
would reach out with humanitarian efforts to serve
where the nursing (and medical) shortages are the
greatest.
International trade agreements have transformed
the capacity of governments to monitor and to protect public health by regulating occupational and
environmental health conditions, exporting and
importing food products, and ensuring affordable
access to medications (Shaffer, et al., 2005).
Proposals are under way for the World Trade
Organization’s General Agreement on Trade in
Services (GATS) and the regional Free Trade Area
of the Americas (FTAA) agreement to seek coverage of a wide range of health services, health facilities, sanitation services, and clinician licensing.
Linkages among global trade, international trade
agreements, and public health will no doubt open
new opportunities for global exchange, especially
for nurses to participate overseas in a wide spectrum of entrepreneurial-type services.
Linkages among global trade, international trade
agreements, and public health deserve greater attention. The effects of interdependency in trade of
products can be seen in human resources as well.
Shortages in the health workforce, especially nurses,
present a major challenge for health-care policy
makers nationally and internationally. The nursing
shortage is worldwide, even in developed countries
such as the United Kingdom, Canada, and Sweden.
International exchanges, especially in nursing
resources, could become an area of dispute. Working
under North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) status, current trade of foreign market
is keenly felt in the area of nursing shortages;

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

398

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 398

Skills for a Successful Career

recruitment continues from various foreign countries such as the Philippines, Canada, Mexico, and
others. But while there has been an increasing trend
to recruit foreign-born nurses to increase the U.S.
labor market, the shift in supply to the United States
does little for the global shortage of nurses and the
demand it creates within the countries they left
(Booth, 2002; Zurn, Dolea, & Stilwell, 2005). More
recently, South Korean nurses have been proposed
as an answer to the current shortage of nursing
educators. Living in a highly competitive Korean
job market, many Korean faculties are already doctorally prepared nurses and English-proﬁcient and
have taken the NCLEX International (2005) examination administered by the National Council of
State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN). In the Western
Paciﬁc, Korea is among three nations that have
reported a surplus of nurses at present (SocioEconomic News, 2003).
With the potential inﬂux of nurses into the
United States from diverse countries, the most
poignant question that U.S. nursing professionals
ask is, “Do foreign nurses hold similar professional
nursing values and practice models as nurses in the
United States?” Flynn and Aiken (2002), in their
secondary analysis of nearly 800 nurses surveyed
(with nearly a third from 34 other countries), challenged the prevailing sentiment that foreign nurses
would have different nursing values and professional practice models compared with U.S. nurses.
The ﬁndings also revealed that in the absence of a
professional practice environment, foreign-born
nurses would experience similar high levels of
burnout as U.S. nurses. Although one answer to the
nursing shortage might be to recruit from foreign
countries, health-care administrators will still need
to ensure that organizational and leadership attributes are congruent with a professional nursing
practice environment.
With blurred boundaries, the world has become
increasingly vulnerable to both (re)emerging infectious diseases, once thought controlled or never
experienced before, and to natural disasters, such as
earthquakes and hurricanes. Given the current size
and mobility of the global community, the world is
at risk for pandemic outbreaks and increasing climatic disasters. For example, increasing contact
between humans and animal disease reservoirs contributed to the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Ecological changes, such as habitat
fragmentation by deforestation, may increase the

contact between people and reservoir species, all
contributing to zoonoses (e.g., hemorrhagic fever
virus). Early recognition of cases and application of
appropriate infection control measures will be critical in controlling future outbreaks. Moreover, global
warming has been identiﬁed as contributing to the
spread of dengue beyond tropical regions and possibly contributing to the global climatic and typological turbulence.

Technological Forces and
Unintended Consequences
Scientiﬁc and technological advances promise revolutionary changes in the health-care system. Yet
such promises of technology and its ability to ﬁx
human ills may need to be balanced with cautious
optimism. Beyond the impact on global communication capabilities, technology promises to offer
resources to improve the quality and length of people’s lives. It promises to transform the way diseases
are diagnosed and treated. The technology presents
new possibilities to design innovative methods for
(1) preparing future generations of nurses, (2)
addressing the issues of medical errors and the
nursing shortage, and (3) satisfying and extending
the requirements for entry-level RN practice in
terms of knowledge, skills, and abilities.
One exciting example for nursing education and
practice is the ability “to practice” low-frequency
high-risk patient events through the use of simulation technology. Such technology has multiple
applications in helping to reduce nursing and medical errors, advancing nursing skills, and improving
teamwork without putting real patients in harm’s
way. Not unlike the military ﬁeld training for combat, the simulation laboratories can be created as
virtual hospital rooms and clinical settings with
physiologically/verbally responsive mannequins for
nurses, students, and other medical teams to act out
realistic scenarios that simulate actual events. The
impact of this technological training tool is enormous as it addresses multiple educational, nursing,
and organizational issues. It provides a safe environment in which novice nurses and students can
train; allows for errors to take place without putting
an actual patient in harm’s way; permits organizations to gather data and develop system changes to
protect patients and adjust policies to improve
patient safety; provides new possibilities for preparing novice nurses to expert level in a shorter time;

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 399

Career Development

promotes teamwork by helping the health-care team
to communicate with each other (where the majority of medical errors occur); and trains nurses and
other medical members to improve their communication with patients/families (Institute of Medicine,
2000).
The ﬂip side of technology is its unintended consequences. With any new technological advances,
we need to scrutinize and critically think through
what the unintended effects might be on the greater
whole: the world. Without getting into the philosophical debate about the beneﬁts/risks of reliance
on technology, William Barrett (1979), in his classic
The Illusion of Technique, warned about placing such
high reliance on technology to solve human problems. Similarly, Ehrenfeld (1981) critiqued society’s
reliance on humanistic power to solve the world’s
problems. Some questions that need to be asked are:
■
■
■
■
■

How is the technology to be applied?
Who will be applying it?
To whom is it being applied?
What are alternate uses of such technology?
How and whom might it harm?

The Human Genome Program (2005) is an example that illustrates the cost of technology. It affects
myriad social and clinical applications, but there are
a number of ethical dilemmas attending its use,
ranging from ensuring privacy to informed consent.

CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION:
THINKING AND PRODUCING
Rollo May (cited in Driver, 1971b) wrote, “out of
the creative act is born symbols and myths. It brings
to our awareness what was previously hidden and
points to new life. The experience is one of heightened consciousness—ecstasy.” Creative expression
is vital to quality life, and everyone has the creative
potential if they follow their interests. Although
“creativity” continues to elude empirical measurement, we can see creativity in a person’s affective
“act of doing,” seeing their spark through their
being in the world/nature-at-large, and discovering
their interactions with us and exploring their effect
on us. Because creativity is an intrinsically motivating trait, its action may be associated with nonconformity, independence, persistent questioning, and
persistent in-depth inquiry. This internal drive is
what pushes entrepreneurs and intrapreneurs
toward excellence. The adage, “time ﬂies when

399

you’re having fun” can be applied to the process and
outcomes of creativity. Csikszentmihalyi (1997)
identiﬁed the spark as the heightened consciousness, or the creative ﬂow, an energy that is not necessarily an isolated experience but can result as a
synergy working with others. To learn how creativity worked, Csikszentmihalyi (1995) interviewed
90 leaders in various disciplines and discovered that
they regularly experienced this state of ﬂow, a
heightened state of pleasure experienced when one
is engaged in physical or mental challenges that
absorb us and give us joy. Based on these interviews
with some of the most creative people in the world,
Csikszentmihalyi (1995) listed the steps that individuals could take to cultivate one’s creativity.
Furthermore, he recommended (1995) that one
needs “to acquire many interests, abilities, and
goals and to use them in such a way they harmonize
with one another” (p. 30).
Creativity and innovation reﬂect “thinking and
producing” respectively; both share in creating
something new. Merriam-Webster (2005) describes
creativity as a reﬂection of these two parts: creativity as “the ability or power to create something new”
and innovation as “the power that puts the creative
inspiration into action.” The three key personality
elements required to build a new vision of oneself as
creative include having a high tolerance for ambiguity, being comfortable with the unknown, and having faith in yourself to handle any outcome.

CREATING VISIONARY CHANGE: SELFREFLECTING AND REALITY CHECKS
Sister Callista Roy (2000), renowned theorist on
adaptive nursing theory, wrote that nursing faces a
great challenge: to create a visionary change within
its own profession. However, Carper, Chinn, and
Kramer (cited in Roy, 2000) revealed that nurses all
too often struggle to ﬁnd effective strategies for
developing integrated knowledge, deﬁned as a way
of knowing that comes with synthesizing “the personal, ethical, aesthetic, and sociopolitical knowledge” (p. 118). Self-reﬂective thinking brings the
“invisible” knowledge of self into clearer view. This
process requires a nurse to assess what in his current position gives him joy and what he believes
and values about life and the people around him
(White, 1995).
Guided by the Professional Standards of Nursing
Practice, nurses’ core values and practice of nursing

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

400

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 400

Skills for a Successful Career

are centered on people and serving the good of society, which is unchanging and timeless (Strader &
Decker, 1999; White, 1995). Conversely, nursing
skills evolve to reﬂect the context of the time and
environment (Williams-Evans & Carnegie, 2002).
Specialized skills evolve over time, as one can see
with many nurse practitioner skills. Their skills
of assessment, diagnosing, and prescribing medications evolved from both the greater push for nursing practice and to ﬁll the need of the primary care
physician shortage. Yet the core of nursing values
remains immutable, to advocate for the needy populace and to promote the good of society; thus, these
values are embedded in each nurse’s personal values and beliefs.
Creating the vision for career necessitates selfreﬂective thinking, a process that requires nurses to
assess what in their position gives them joy and
what they believe and value about life and the people around them. Nurses can then bring this selfreﬂection and compare it with how others perceive
them (Donner & Wheeler, 2001). This process
helps to identify the “invisible” personal and professional values (Roy, 2000). This vision of self is
then linked to how you ﬁt into the environment,
how your values ﬁt with the organization and
whether the organization ﬁts with your values, a
reality check. This begins the “self-reflective”
process of wondering and thinking:
■
■
■
■

■

■
■

Where am I?
Where do I want to be?
Where have I been?
How can I use my experience, and what else
do I need to know?
Who do I go to for more information and direction?
How do I get there?
How can I salvage what I already know?

INTEGRATING THE SELF WITH THE
ENVIRONMENTAL OPPORTUNITIES
Nurses too often struggle to ﬁnd strategies for integrating the self into the environmental opportunities (Carper, et al., 1978; cited in Roy, 2000). After
completing a career self-assessment, you need to
repeat the environmental assessment discussed earlier in the chapter. Through this repetitive process
of self-assessing and seeking feedback from colleagues, the level of self-awareness deepens. With

an accurate picture of your values, strengths, and
desires, you can immerse yourself in the offerings
within and outside the health-care ﬁeld.
It is vital to scope the environment and keep
abreast of the surrounding marketplace, to view the
trends in business and organizations, both related
and unrelated to the health-care system. Scanning
the environment means following the technological
development and immersing yourself in the global
news and local and national current events: identifying the sociopolitical and economic issues that
directly or indirectly affect our nation and our profession. For example, topics of importance to hospital industry, business, and global news can easily be
identiﬁed and collected by simply typing in the subject of interest through a search engine, such as
Google. For example, a search of hospital CEOs
concerning the ﬁnancial outlook for health care
resulted in a survey of hospital CEOs done by
Deloitte and Touche, USA (2005). It reported that
the industry was taking a more optimistic outlook of
its ﬁnancial future (Deloitte and Touche, USA,
2005). With a consumer-empowered market, it
reported that the United States offers a more interconnected economy, which offers consumers greater
advances in new drugs and medicine, promises of
genetic research and its potential curative application to chronic diseases, greater investment in
telemedicine, and new cyber- and biomedicine technology (Deloitte & Touche, USA, 2005).
Sources of information need to be widespread
and diverse. Both online and library sources can
bring a wealth of literature information. Also
important is networking with a variety of people
both inside and outside the field of nursing.
Attending national conferences to learn about the
national and global trends and ongoing issues and
to meet others within and outside the ﬁeld can be
energizing and valuable. Information can be gathered easily online by signing up on a listserv, such
as KaiserFoundation.org, which provides continuous legislative and policy information and updates
relevant to one’s interest area. Other access to information may be through a live or archival recorded
Webcast of national and international conferences.
Searching professional journals within and outside
nursing, and even searching popular magazines,
would give insight into current events and what the
public is reading.
Once the environmental search is completed, sift
through the materials identifying similar, related,

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 401

Career Development

and dissimilar issues within diverse disciplines.
Analyzing the dissonance and the interconnectedness between various disciplines allows one to
bring the pieces together, the parts brought together
to bring a new whole, a synthesis of new ideas.
Pulling this together, one can begin to identify the
gaps, view the needs within the environment, and
bring one’s strength of expertise to develop a strategic plan, a blueprint of actions.

OPPORTUNITY SEEKING
AND RISK TAKING: TAKING
THE ENTREPRENEURIAL LEAP
Taking the “entrepreneurial leap” is the same for
the intrapreneur as it is for the entrepreneur.
Taking the leap requires the entrepreneur and
intrapreneur to view themselves as opportunity
seeking (Gordon, 1985; cited in Hisrich, 1990) and
as having the ability to recognize opportunity
(Paterson, 1985; cited in Hisrich, 1990). For the
entrepreneur, that means seeking the opportunity
outside the current employment; whereas, for the
intrapreneur it means seeking an opportunity
within the current workplace. In fact, many budding entrepreneurs arise from having evolved as
intrapreneurs (Manion, 2001). Brugleman (cited
in Hisrich, 1990) integrated these two traits of
seeking opportunity and recognizing opportunity to
describe entrepreneurship as “seeking to ﬁnd and
recognizing when opportunity knocks.”
These traits give entrepreneurs and intrapreneurs the leading edge in developing and diversifying their businesses. For the nurse entrepreneur
and intrapreneur, this can mean developing new
skills to create a new role outside and inside of
nursing. It is the discovery of something new, the
creativity that ignites the entrepreneur’s (and intrepreneur’s) innovative ideas and propels her forward
to the opportunity (Gordon, 1985; Paterson, 1985;
cited in Hisrich, 1990).
Beyond the risk-bearing attributes, entrepreneurs
and intrapreneurs themselves are known to have
other unique personality attributes. They quest for
quality, a willingness to move beyond the standard
solution in preference for creating a new “original
idea.” McClelland (1965) noted that entrepreneurs
had a need for high achievement, and Roscoe (cited
in Bird, 1989) found they had a strong drive for
independence and an exceptional belief in themselves. Smilor (cited in Baum & Locke, 2004)

401

suggested that passion is “perhaps the most
observed phenomenon of the entrepreneurial
process” (p. 342). Locke (cited in Baum & Locke,
2004) identiﬁed, in a qualitative analysis, core characteristics of famous wealth creators, such as Bill
Gates and Michael Bloomberg: their zeal and their
love for their work. Moreover, Lackman (cited in
Bird, 1989) found that entrepreneurs held the personal values of honesty, integrity, duty, responsibility, and ethical behavior constant and applied them
toward their life and work. Consistent with these
values, Cunningham and Lischeron (cited in Bird,
1989) deemed high self-esteem as a notable characteristic of entrepreneurs. As leaders, they were
found to be more ﬂexible and adapted their leadership style to the needs of the people (Katz and
Brockhaus, 1995).

BUILDING A STRATEGIC PLAN: CRITICAL
THINKING AND DECISION MAKING
As discussed earlier, one of the ﬁrst steps for a
nurse considering the role of an entrepreneur or
intrapreneur is to look within herself to see
whether she has the ambition, fortitude, and inner
strength needed to venture outside the role deﬁnitions that have been used in the past. As nurses
begin to imagine what their professional lives could
be, they need to do some critical thinking about
their present environment. Can their goals and professional achievements be fostered from within
their current organization, or must a break be
made? A nursing process model, combined with
critical thinking, is an excellent framework to use
as a problem-solving method of career analysis.
Nurses are expert at assessing, planning, synthesizing data to form diagnoses, setting goals, creating
interventions, and evaluating. Nurses can immediately evaluate a plan of action according to its riskbeneﬁt probability and can use critical thinking to
develop a short-term evaluation of the consequences, both positive and negative.
The assessment includes looking at the organization in which nurses are employed; the organizational structure and leadership style should support
decentralized decision making. As they survey their
present organization, nurses should make judgments regarding its culture of human respect, its
value of autonomy, and its ability to accept new
ideas and discard old ones. Another important
point to consider is whether the organization will

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

402

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 402

Skills for a Successful Career

thrive and grow or stagnate. The question that
needs to be answered is whether to stay in the present organization, move to another one, or move outside of any organization. Or even whether to
remain in the role of a nurse. McLees (1988) stated,
“Former nurses developed careers in other professions that offered them greater outlets to express
their individuality, creativity and freedom.” The
intrapreneur can work effectively within an
enlightened organization, whereas an entrepreneur
is destined to work from the outside, often with
many different organizations. After the decision for
a role change has been reached, the nurse needs to
look at what needs to be done and what advantages
can be gained from a strategic plan for marketing
the idea or product. The environment needs to be
assessed relative to the networking possibilities and
the availability of potential mentors.

Marketing, Networking,
and Mentoring
A nurse considering a move to intrapreneur or
entrepreneur must become familiar with the concepts of marketing, networking, and mentoring;
these are vital to a successful intraprise or enterprise.

MARKETING
Marketing lets potential users know about a product’s existence and advantages. The dictionary
deﬁnes marketing as “the process or technique of
promoting, selling, and distributing a product or
service” (Merriam-Webster, 2005). For nurses, marketing often becomes indistinguishable from selfmarketing, which involves promoting who they are
and what they do. Having a business plan will allow
the nurse to answer objective questions about the
product or service as to what it is, the advantages of
it relative to its competitors, the innovation of it in
relation to the status quo, the worth or value in
monetary terms, the break-even point, the potential
buyers, what might motivate them to purchase, and
what the contractual obligations should entail. In
order to sell the product or service, the nurse needs
to become an expert on the needs of the organization. This involves research and tapping into people

who may be able to help within the pertinent network as well as soliciting the advice of a mentor.
Nurses are experts in picking up on behavioral cues
and applying them to outcome criteria for their
patients. Many of the same skills are useful in negotiating with potential clients. Reading books on selling and practicing with others who might agree to
pose as “buyers” will help to bolster conﬁdence and
allow the nurse to anticipate questions and formulate conﬁdent answers beforehand.
Competition and the task of constantly proving
one’s worth to organizations can be emotionally
draining. The independent contractor must be
politically savvy within his current organization
and able to apply these skills to new situations and
people. Even though the nurse entrepreneur can,
in theory, choose his own clients, when one is just
beginning to get established this is usually not a
reality. The nurse needs to please as many new
clients as possible and follow up on other potential
clients while they are still interested. The role of
nurse entrepreneur brings the potential for increasing income, but at ﬁrst there is often meager remuneration. Many unpaid work hours will be
necessary to get the business started. Sometimes the
ﬂedgling entrepreneur must provide services and
consultation almost for free just to get started Once
the nurse has an established a reputation, fees can
be increased and cancellation clauses introduced
into written contracts. The business plan will
include some of the start-up costs; typical needs are
a computer with fax and color printer, ﬁle cabinets,
and copier. Also important are business cards
describing the nurse and the services available as
well as a mailer or cover letter that can be given to
prospective clients. Mailings and Web-site design
may become eventual investments. Keeping the
overhead down can do a lot to keep a ﬂedgling business aﬂoat. The nurse entrepreneur may need to
borrow money to compensate for business setbacks
or to fulﬁll orders that are not affordable within the
current budget. Much depends on the type of service or product that the nurse entrepreneur intends
to provide.

NETWORKING
Another important concept to consider in order to
become a successful intrapreneur or entrepreneur is
networking. The word “network” literally means a
framework of nets. It has recently been used as a

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 403

Career Development

verb, referring to meeting people for the purpose of
establishing links or contacts to further a goal.
Hisrich (1990) found that “the density of the entrepreneur’s business contacts or linkages” was important to start a new business and that “maintaining
contacts were a signiﬁcant predictor for early proﬁt”
(p. 6). For the nurse, it means becoming visible, getting to know people in other areas of the job site,
ﬁnding out what they do and who they know. A
more formal deﬁnition is offered by Benton (1997):
“a way of establishing and using contacts for information, support and other assistance to further
career goals, or as a way of building relationships”
(p. 58). Most networks are made up of people who
are receptive to communicating with one another.
Benton sees the beneﬁt of networks as a vehicle to
gather “feedback” on a particular issue or on the
nurse’s performance. It may be a way for the nurse
to “inﬂuence” or be inﬂuenced by a particular point
of view. One of the more traditional reasons to network is to act on or procure a “referral” (p. 59). A
network can also act as an excellent advertising
vehicle (Hisrich, 1990): “satisﬁed customers help
establish a winning business reputation and promote goodwill” (p. 6). Many individuals network to
test the job market or to help secure a position outside of the organization. For the intrapreneur or
entrepreneur, it may help to locate an area of need
within the organization. This can serve as a springboard to ﬁll the vacancy either permanently or temporarily as a consultant.
Some nurses are afraid to network because they
think that it will involve small talk and taking
advantage of a colleague or friend. Networking
should be mutually advantageous for both parties
involved. It is important that this give-and-take be
implied at the outset. It may be difficult to see the
immediate monetary or career rewards to networking because some contacts take more than one meeting in order to cultivate useful information. But at
the very least a foundation has been formed. Beck
and Utz (1996) sees the beneﬁts as “increasing contacts, sharing resources, and gaining peer support to
contribute to an ultimate goal” (p. 786). Networking is also “an effective means of fulﬁlling [the]
responsibility of collegiality, while at the same time
achieving personal and professional goals” (p. 786).
Benton (1997) advises that successful networking is
a “dynamic process,” so it is important to strike a
balance, keeping in touch with contacts but not
becoming a nuisance. Follow up promptly on a

403

promise of information or help, as reciprocity of a
favor may be important in the future. It is important
not to ask for favors or information that the person
is unable to provide. Discretion is also extremely
important as comments made to one person about
another are bound to reach the ears of the one discussed, especially if the network is small (p. 52).
It is always advantageous to carry a good supply
of business cards. Some nurses carry more than one
type; one may describe the current job, and another
highlights the nurse’s intrapreneurial or entrepreneurial abilities. Obviously, this is also a good way
of marketing one’s skills or product. Within an
organization, it is important to approach people
who work in unfamiliar areas and get information
on what their jobs entail and how their departments function. The nurse can approach a staff
member whom she would like to know better and
offer to treat the person to lunch in exchange for
some information about how that person does an
assigned job. The colleague will probably be ﬂattered if the nurse is diplomatic. Benton (1997) recommends getting on mailing lists of professional
organizations so that follow-up is possible with
members related to newsletter submissions and
advises the nurse to write or e-mail journal authors
to establish contact and “open up a new network
connection” (p. 53).
West (1997) offers many useful networking
strategies, particularly if a new position is sought.
When attending a large professional conference, circulate and meet as many new contacts as possible,
disseminating business cards and collecting them
from all. When a new contact asks, “What do you
do?” it is best to describe it in behavioral terms to
highlight particular skills. It is advisable to write
notes on the back of the person’s business card so
that pertinent information is not forgotten. Even if
a new permanent position is not being sought, ﬁnding out from contacts and nursing journals about
vacant jobs will give useful information about
where professional expertise may be needed and
consultation opportunities exist. Whenever there is
a chance to meet new people, it is also a good idea
to have an updated résumé. Sometimes, a potential
client is so enthusiastic that he will ask for one.
It is beneﬁcial to join professional organizations
and volunteer to serve on committees or task forces
(Benton, 1997). West (1997) advises “diversiﬁcation of the networking group by adding social
acquaintances, college classmates, alumni, profes-

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

404

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 404

Skills for a Successful Career

sors, church ministers, church members, and local
business and social club officials. Even the family
lawyer, doctor, dentist, insurance agent, and banker
may be in a position to help” (p. 334). Web
logs, known as blogs, are an emerging writing tool
that is easy to use and that can enhance health
professionals’ communication, collaboration, and
information-gathering skills and help to manage
information, diminish medical error, and support
decision making (Maag, 2005). Nurses can read
and comment on others’ blogs as well as starting
blogs themselves. Maag noted that “Daily blogging
will enhance positive writing skills, instill selfconﬁdence in voicing personal opinions, and promote reﬂective thinking that, in turn, will allow the
writer to appreciate his or her personal opinions or
ideas” (p. 2). Bloggers must be careful about what
they write online; a number of bloggers have been
ﬁred for criticizing their employers or presenting
themselves in an unprofessional way online.
Getting in touch with a wide range of global information and insight will facilitate knowing and
becoming known. Having a perspective on worldwide nursing issues gives the professional an ability
to interpret situations with greater accuracy.

MENTORS
The other concept that is vital to a successful career
as an intrapreneur or entrepreneur is mentorship.
The term “mentor” is originally from the Greek legends and “refers to Mentor, the loyal friend and
wise advisor to Odysseus and the teacher and
guardian of Odysseus’ son Telemachus” (MerriamWebster, 2005) (p. 920). The individual needs a
personal moral support and a morale-building system and a professional network of contacts and
advisors. A role model who will agree to give counsel and act as a sounding board for potential career
plans and activities is an invaluable resource, particularly at the inception of a new business venture
or even at the beginning of a nursing career. Byrne
and Keefe (2002) describe a shift “in the nursing literature from an early emphasis on mentoring primarily for executive leadership roles to a current
emphasis on special mentorships for clinician,
researcher and other roles” (p. 391). Recommendations for mentoring of clinicians include support of
new RN graduates (Andrews and Wallis, 1999;
cited in Byrne and Keefe, 2002), novice nurse prac-

titioners (Hayes, 1998, and Hockenberry-Eaton &
Kline, 1995; cited in Byrne and Keefe, 2002), and
nurses making specialty transitions (Esper, 1999;
cited in Byrne and Keefe, 2002). Byrne and Keefe
noted, “Within nursing the experience of mentoring has sometimes been perceived as a learning continuum which extends from peer support and role
modeling, through instructive preceptorship, selfinitiated and guided networking, and ﬁnally the
intense and personal occurrence of focused mentorship” (p. 396). Nursing is unique in that newly
acquired knowledge, whether evidence-based or
hypothesis-related, can almost immediately be put
into practice. Nurses can immediately evaluate a
plan of action according to its risk/beneﬁt probability and, by using critical thinking, develop a shortterm evaluation of the consequences, both positive
and negative. If new nurses burn out because of the
lack of available support and advice, they will not
survive the rigors of the initial practice environment to become advanced practitioners, intrapreneurs, and entrepreneurs. Nurses are cognizant of
the need to support, encourage, and teach new graduates and novice practitioners and are committed to
helping them become competent, self-conﬁdent,
and enthusiastic nurses.
Having a mentor within an organization can
help a budding intrapreneur to gauge the advisability of assuming a new role. Finding someone who
has worked in the same place for a number of years
is a bonus; he knows the history of various programs and people. He can give a synopsis of what
has been tried and why it was dropped or changed.
This is vital information for the nurse who is planning to offer a “unique” and important service in
order to occupy a niche within the hospital, healthcare center, or community facility. A mentor can
give helpful feedback on ideas and proposals before
they are presented. Temporary setbacks can be analyzed and a new plan theorized. For the nurse entrepreneur, it is advisable to seek a mentor with a
business background as well as another within the
health-care sector.

Nurse Intrapreneurs
A comprehensive perspective on the development
of intrapreneurs and entrepreneurs in nursing

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 405

Career Development

involves looking at the qualities, roles, options, and
successes of each designation.

QUALITIES
As described by Gifford Pinchot in 1986 relating to
the corporate sector, “intrapreneur” refers to a person who wants to be entrepreneurial but does not
want to change his/her workplace. “Behind most
successful nurse leaders, executives, and entrepreneurs winds a long road of successful intrapreneurship, or innovation within an organization”
(Manion, 2001, p. 5). The nurse intrapreneur
develops skills that are needed by the organization,
thus creating a visible, marketable, talent niche.
“These professionals are continually seeking and
recognizing opportunities for personal growth and
development and are undeterred by typical organizational barriers to innovation” (Manion, 2001, p.
5). Because many of the intrapreneur’s skills and
internal innovations save the facility money, the
organization directly beneﬁts from the service.
Intrapreneurs are loyal to the organization and
want to be useful and feel appreciated. They are
also conﬁdent, assertive, and willing to speak up
when they see a situation that could be ameliorated
or made more efficient. They are open to exploring
new ideas, not mired in traditional mindsets or
bound by convention. They can take two “old”
environmental objects and synthesize a new one
that becomes more than the sum of its parts. This
nurse is also typically talented, innovative, and
proactive; the facility wants to keep this valuable
nurse on its payroll rather than lose the intrapreneur to a competitor.

ROLES
How can a nurse become an intrapreneur? Having
a creative outlook is the ﬁrst step. “The greatest
obstacle to workplace creativity is the we-alwaysdo-it-this-way mentality” (Cohen, 2002, p. 10).
Intrapreneurs may recognize systems that need
changing, skills that will become necessary to master new equipment, better ideas for organizing or
sorting data or personnel—the possibilities are endless. By becoming a valued contributor to an organization, the nurse can build job security and
increase professional and personal satisfaction with

405

her career trajectory. One of the ﬁrst steps is to get
to know people in the organization and ﬁnd out
what they do. Having a network of individuals will
help to identify problems and how they may have
been solved in other departments. Finding multiple
mentors is also important; they may all have expertise in different areas and may offer many possibilities for innovation. It is also important to look at
the strategic plan and see where the organization
will go in the future. An important tactic involves
volunteering for task forces and committee assignments. It is both a good way to meet people and will
acquaint the budding intrapreneur with the way the
organization solves problems with its people and
who has the power to make change. It is also important to adopt a philosophy of lifelong learning, to
stay current in the newest innovations in nursing,
and to be aware of what is happening in other ﬁelds.
The intrapreneur needs to research what therapies
are innovative and how they are being implemented
at the facility; the next step would be to write an
article for publication or make a presentation to
other facilities. Entrepreneurs may be competitive
with an established company, but the nurse
intrapreneurs can maintain their security within
the facility. Koch (1996) noted intrapreneurs “capitalize on the reputation of the organization and can
readily access a diverse network of professionals
who are crucial for answering questions, giving
assistance and helping make ideas become realities”
(Koch, 1996, p. 2). Nurse intrapreneurs can also
utilize the facilities’ meeting areas, copying, and
Internet services, saving them the ﬁnancial outlay
that entrepreneurs must absorb as part of the cost of
doing business on their own. Intrapreneurs have
the relative safety to discuss new ideas as a means
to a possible “intraprise” without worrying that
someone from within the organization will steal
their innovation.
What kind of culture would welcome the nurse
intrapreneur? There must be a dynamic mindset
with “networking, teamwork, sponsors, and mentors abounding; trust and close working relationships where tasks are viewed as fun activities (not
chores) with participants gladly putting in the
amount of hours necessary to get the job done.
Instead of building barriers to protect turf, advice
and cross-fertilization freely occur within and
across functional areas and even divisions”
(Hisrich, 1990, p. 7). The environment, including

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

406

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 406

Skills for a Successful Career

top management, needs to be open to new ideas
and willing to experiment. Of course, some hypotheses do not work, and failure needs to be tolerated.

NURSE INTRAPRENEUR OPTIONS
AND SUCCESSES

l
l

For the umbrella organization, the nurse intrapreneur is visible as a change agent and a role model for
other staff members who may also have good ideas,
inspiring and inﬂuencing others to become innovators “while advancing the science of nursing
through clarifying, reﬁning, and expanding the
nursing knowledge base” (Koch, 2004, p. 9). One
example is an operating room nurse who designed
the “ﬁrst hospital-based surgical recycling program
in the country, a newly-created position of waste
reduction specialist, and eventually into a national
consulting business” (Manion, 2001). A nurse with
demonstrated excellence in sterile technique and
wound management might ﬂoat from one hospital
unit to another, helping nurses change complicated
dressings or manage wound vacuum systems.
Keeping before-and-after pictures and showing how
patient days and money were saved may make the
hospital realize that a wound care nurse is an asset.
The hospital pays to send this nurse for an advanced
certiﬁcate or to become a wound care specialist.
Similarly, a nurse with experience with colostomies
or ileostomies might become an enterostomal therapist. A nurse with a combination of computer and
clinical expertise can become the in-house informatics consultant, responsible for orienting new staff,
troubleshooting system glitches, and formulating
new ways to use technology at the bedside. Some
health-care facilities will have computers with
Internet capabilities available at the bedside. It will
be important for a nurse with computer expertise to
help patients select and navigate the many healthcare consumer Web sites for information, to be
someone who can integrate the education according
to the disease and wellness needs of the patient.
Nursing job niches are only limited to the imagination of the nurse intrapreneur. A nurse with children may create a job where there is the possibility
of working at home or at an adjacent day-care site.
Perhaps self-staffing began with nurses deciding
that they could do it better. Traveling nurses, with
experience in many cities and job sites, may bring
new ideas about doing things to each site, making
them very desirable as permanent hires should they

decide to stay. A nurse who enjoys animals may volunteer while a pet visits its owners who are hospitalized or living in a rehabilitation center and may
eventually convince her supervisor that a resident
dog or cat needs her constant services as a petpatient liaison. Facilities are always looking for an
idea that they can promote to capture a particular
market and become more competitive. It may just
take a nurse intrapreneur to point them in a promising direction.

Nurse Entrepreneurs
It is important to compare the previously discussed
qualities, roles, and options of the nurse intrapreneur with those of the nurse entrepreneur. There
are many similarities but also some marked differences.

QUALITIES
It is important to look at the component parts of the
nurse entrepreneur deﬁnition and assess whether
the individual has what it takes to become selfmade and successful. The deﬁnition speaks to a talented, independent, and experienced nurse who
sees an available health-care business niche and
decides to ﬁll it. Consider what the individual does
well professionally as well as what she likes and
wants to do. Many entrepreneurs were once
intrapreneurs with a particular talent that was recognized within an organization; subsequently, they
embellished and magniﬁed this talent so that other
organizations would ﬁnd it valuable also. Sullivan
and Christopher (1999) describe many of the characteristics that are desirable in order to become a
successful nurse entrepreneur. It is important to be
a creative thinker and be willing to assume the leadership role to get an idea from concept to reality.
Being a decision maker who is action-oriented
rather than deliberative is essential to make change
happen quickly. Having a high tolerance for ambiguity and knowing that there is always a transition
period from the inception of an innovation until it
ﬁnally takes a cohesive shape are integral to the role
of entrepreneur. It is important to include nurse
entrepreneurial activities as a part of the educational curriculum for management courses (really,

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 407

Career Development

at any level) to foster innovative ways to approach
traditional patient care activities (Sullivan &
Christopher, 1999). Sullivan noted, “Thus, it is possible to learn the basics of entrepreneurship while
studying management, including strategic planning,
continuous quality improvement, business plan
development, marketing, management information
systems, leadership, and ﬁnancial management” (p.
329). Although it is vital to practice nursing according to principles and care standards, it is also important to forgo rigidity and a procedural mindset.

ROLES
Merriam-Webster deﬁnes entrepreneur as a “person
who organizes and manages a business undertaking,
assuming the risk for the sake of proﬁt” (MerriamWebster, 2005). The term commonly refers to a selfmade individual with a good idea who, despite many
setbacks, perseveres and becomes successful and
wealthy. The term has been used often in the business community. The number of successful entrepreneurs and new companies has steadily increased,
despite the high rate of failure for a ﬂedgling business. The American culture is particularly supportive of the process. Hisrich (1990) noted, “Although
dissatisfaction with various aspects of one’s job—
challenge, promotional opportunities, frustration,
and boredom—often motivates the launching of a
new venture, previous technical and industry experience is important once the decision to launch has
been made” (p. 210). Whether a person possesses
the qualities necessary for success in this venture
may be determined by family support, education,
personal motivation and, to some extent, age.
Hisrich (1990) noted, “Generally, male entrepreneurs tend to start their ﬁrst signiﬁcant venture in
their early 30s whereas female entrepreneurs tend
to do this in their middle 30s.” Although independence is usually the primary motivating factor,
“money is the second reason for starting a new venture for men, whereas job satisfaction, achievement,
opportunity, and money are the reasons in rank
order for women” (p. 212).
If the job that an entrepreneur desires is not
attainable with current skills, then it is necessary to
ﬁnd out what is needed and acquire it. Sometimes
education will open the door to a new market.
Education does not have to occur in a traditional
manner, but having a baccalaureate, master’s degree,

407

or doctorate will open doors to previously unattainable positions or establish the credibility necessary
for consulting. This will obviously be a longer-term
goal, but with careful planning, the present company or hospital may actually pay for that credential
as part of its employee beneﬁts. One or more certiﬁcations and practice in another area may pave the
way for a different career path. Accomplishing these
things while still employed is time-consuming but
may allow the nurse time to save money; extra startup money may be necessary later when beginning to
work as an entrepreneur. Perhaps a degree or certiﬁcate in law, hospital management, marketing, or
business would complement the assets of a healthcare background. The nurse must consider what
will make her unique and sought as an entrepreneur. Sometimes working in the desired area parttime or in an entry-level position will help identify
what is needed and how it can be supplied. Working
with or observing a person who already has the
desired type of job will supply invaluable experience, especially if it can be used as an apprenticeship. Often a lack of experience is a stumbling block
to moving into a new job. Orientation and training
are expensive for any organization, and if nurse
entrepreneurs can “hit the ground running” they
will have an advantage over the competition.

OPTIONS AND SUCCESSES
There are many ways in which a nurse can make
the leap to an entrepreneurial role. For instance, a
nurse who demonstrated excellence as a patient
educator could become a corporate wellness coordinator. The nurse who had a position as an educator
could subcontract to other health-care agencies
without educators. Some hospitals and geriatric
facilities have eliminated their educator positions as
cost-cutting measures and now ﬁnd that an educational consultant is cheaper than paying one fulltime. A nurse manager who has coordinated care
for multiple units has proven leadership ability;
would-be coordinators might prove a marketable
commodity. “Current research on complementary
therapies, such as music therapy, guided imagery,
and relaxation, can provide a springboard for
the nurse entrepreneur who wants to apply
research to practice and/or education” (Sullivan &
Christopher, 1999, p. 332). A care manager or
case manager may deliver registry or agency ser-

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

408

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 408

Skills for a Successful Career

vices to insurance companies or health-care management agencies. “With the aid of videoconferencing, fax, and e-mail transmission, practitioners can
participate in operations, review laboratory data,
and even perform a virtual physical exam.
Telehealth is a major factor [that is] forcing state
and federal regulatory bodies to reexamine their
antiquated regulatory systems” (Shaffer & Sheets,
2001, p. 40). The nurse considering multistate consulting or giving advice via health-care information
hotlines that cross state lines or country borders
must consider the necessity and impact of multistate licensure.
Nurses have succeeded in their own businesses
as business and health-care writers; educational
consultants to hospitals, universities, and corporations; legal nurse consultants; health care and nursing Web design; state board examination tutoring;
and home care nursing. Bensing (2005) illustrated a
story about Richard C. Thompson in “How I
Became a Nurse Entrepreneur” (pp. 36–37).
Thompson started an agency that supplied nurses
to hospitals and extended care facilities and guaranteed that shifts would be covered; if necessary, he
replaced the ill nurse scheduled at the facility himself. This made his agency very attractive to hospitals. He also paid more money to his nurses than his
competitors did, which made his agency very popular with his employees. There are many other
opportunities for nurse entrepreneurs. Many
nurses have begun agency staffing services for hospitals and home health. Other nurses have acted as
their own brokers of services to hospitals and traveling nurse agencies. A nurse who found publishers
unwilling to print submissions from nurses started
her own publishing company (Lowder, 1997; cited
in Bensing, 2005). Another nurse organized educational cruises. Still another became a ﬁnancial consultant specializing in the nursing market. Some
became cost-containment experts, able to market
their services to facilities and families. Many nurse
practitioners have set up independent practices in
rehabilitation services and in as many areas as there
are specialties.
In the last 10 years, as the “sandwich generation” has had to deal simultaneously with raising
children and arranging for services for aging parents, nurse-run businesses have sprung up in the
popular retirement states. These businesses arrange

for extended care or nursing home placement of
aging parents of children living at opposite ends of
the country. They also make sure to provide followup care and regular updates if the adult children are
unable to visit frequently. Nurses have also
invented and patented useful products. Downey
and Freidin (1997) invented communication vehicles for ventilator patients. Dr. Laura Gasparis
Vonfrolio is a well-known nurse entrepreneur who
began her ﬁrst business with corporate cardiopulmonary resuscitation and professional education
and eventually owned many businesses. Dr. Leslie
Nicoll is an RN who has written “The Nurses’
Guide to the Internet” and is editor-in-chief of CIN:
Computers, Informatics, Nursing and the Journal of
Hospice and Palliative Nursing. She is also “the
principal and owner of Maine Desk, an entrepreneurial venture that helps nurses become published” (Bensing, 2005, p. 12).

All Good Things...
The future of nursing is largely unexplored; the
required expertise and what the new roles will be
are vastly different from how we envision nursing
and its practice today. It will be increasingly important for nurses to develop and articulate their
expertise in a growing global health-care environment. To develop this expertise, nurses will ﬁrst
need to be ﬁrmly grounded with their core values;
second, they will need to be vigilant in scouting the
dynamic environment; and third, they will need to
merge their core values with environmental needs
to bring together an expertise, a marketing niche.
Developing new models of care will require nurses
to craft themselves creatively and then take action
to sell their product. Taking it to action will require
nurses to articulate their nursing expertise in terms
of unique care models and as “value of their product” and to speak a common language to market, to
partner with other sellers, and to trade with buyers.
In an ever-expanding trading market, nurses will
interface with a variety of people, locally, nationally, and internationally. Thus, one no longer can
view nursing in isolation or within one setting; the
impact of one’s action is now felt worldwide.
Therefore, any action taken must be within nurs-

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 409

Career Development

ing’s social consciousness, considering the unintended consequences.
The focus on the process of nursing care rather
than the outcome of nursing care has buried nurses’
contribution in bringing successful patient outcomes. The current importance we place on evidence-based practice promises to link the nursing
delivery process to its successful client outcomes. In
turn this “product-line designing” advances nurses
toward developing standards of practice and moves
nursing toward greater competency.
Nurses will need to learn a new way to measure
their successes; no longer will professional satisfaction be gained through traditional hierarchical
advancement. The vertical structure that supports
promotion of one administrative step at a time no
longer ﬁts the expert nursing model of care. Such a
bureaucratic decision-making structure does not
allow for that quick decision making required in the
fast-paced, dynamic environment in which we live.
Decision making will need to be streamlined to
bring authority to those care experts who are at the
point of care. Recently, nurses have begun to
advance laterally within organizations as care
experts and care managers and even through
advanced practice into expanded roles as nurse
practitioners and clinical nurse specialists.
The future of nursing and the work of providing care will be greatly altered and open doors to
many new opportunities. Matched to keep pace
with tomorrow’s environment, the opportunities
for practice will open from local to global. Organizations will coalesce to gather teams of experts, to
accomplish specific goals and deliver results
quickly. If nursing is to gain membership within
this team of experts, it will need to articulate clearly
its expertise to others on the health-care team. In
addition to clinical knowledge, nurses offer expertise in top-notch team building, technological savvy,
and the ability to foster many different types of relationships. This new consultative way of working
offers nurses great entrepreneurial and intrapreneurial opportunities within an unstable environment. The phases in career development offer
nurses ways to develop a clearer vision of their
expertise as they develop expert practice models
that ﬁt a unique marketing niche. Expert models of
care will provide nurses greater autonomy, respect,
and career satisfaction.

409

Let’s Talk
1. What is unique about the mentor role?
2. How is the mentor role different from the
teaching role?
3. Deﬁne entrepreneur and intrapreneur.
What are the key differences between the
two professionals?
4. List four personal qualities that help the nurse
entrepreneur to succeed.
5. Discuss the process of networking. Who might
be important people or organizations that
might be included in a nurse’s network?
6. Compare and contrast the various advanced
practice roles and discuss how they could
become intrapreneurs and entrepreneurs.
7. Relate critical thinking, decision making,
and creativity to the process of career
management. The nurse intrapreneur or
entrepreneur needs to look at situations
objectively and insightfully to come to one or
more conclusions. This information needs to
be infused with creativity and incorporate
the potential for innovation into the eventual decision. Several scenarios need to be
hypothesized, and the selection process
should include a risk/beneﬁt analysis.
8. Describe the process of completing a SWOT
analysis.
9. List the phases of career development.
10. Name ﬁve economic, sociopolitical, and
technological forces that face the health
career industry and will inﬂuence nursing
career choices.
11. What are the global forces that inﬂuence
health care and nursing practice choices?

NCLEX Questions
1. A nurse entrepreneur attends a national nursing

convention and hears from a colleague that her
hospital is in need of educational consulting

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

410

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 410

Skills for a Successful Career

services that the entrepreneur can provide. This
information was obtained by utilizing the
process of:
A. Mentoring
B. Assimilation
C. Marketing
D. Networking
2. The term “marketing” is best deﬁned as:

A. The process or technique of promoting, selling, and distributing a product or service
B. Counseling related to products and services
C. Using advanced practice knowledge to determine patient care needs
D. Health-care budgeting
3. A beginning nurse entrepreneur lists the phases

of career development. One phase that is not in
accord with most theories is:
A. Integrating the self with the environment
B. Opportunity-seeking and risk-taking
C. Leaving nursing to pursue the dry-cleaning
business
D. Building a strategic plan

D. A calling, vocation, or employment requiring specialized knowledge and often long
and intensive academic preparation
7. “Innovator” is a word that:

A. Applies only to a nurse intrapreneur
B. Applies only to a nurse entrepreneur
C. Could apply to both a nurse intrapreneur
and entrepreneur
D. Is not a requirement for either the intrapreneur or entrepreneur role
8. The best deﬁnition of “networking” as it is

used by a nurse entrepreneur is:
A. A group of networks
B. Using people for ﬁscal gain
C. Meeting people for the purpose of establishing links or contacts
D. A group that functions as a unit
9. The term “mentor” is best deﬁned as:

A.
B.
C.
D.

Role model or counselor
A mental process of analyzing or evaluating
Selecting a course of action
Promoting or selling

4. A quality that may only pertain to the role of

10. A nurse entrepreneur sends pamphlets outlin-

nurse entrepreneur is:
A. Working within an established organization
B. Establishing an organizational niche
C. Being ﬁnancially responsible for supporting a
business
D. Utilizing the employer’s equipment and
expertise

ing products and services to the managers of
cost centers at all of the area hospitals. This is
an example of:
A. Networking
B. Mentoring
C. Educating
D. Marketing

5. A new nurse intrapreneur consults with a nurse

from another facility who occupies a role to
which the intrapreneur aspires. The second
nurse agrees to coach and evaluate her progress
in moving into the new role. The second nurse is
acting as a (an):
A. Mentor
B. Marketer
C. Teacher
D. Orientee
6. The term “niche” is often associated with the

position of a nurse intrapreneur. The best
description of this word is:
A. A place, employment status, or activity for
which a person or thing is best ﬁtted
B. A mentoring role
C. A way to market a product

REFERENCES
American Nurses Association. (1999). ANA to focus on core
issues. American Nurse, Nov/Dec, 17–19.
American Nurses Association (2005). Code of Ethics. Retrieved
March 12, 2005, http://www.nursingworld.org/ancc/
magnet.html
American Nurses Association. (1975). Standards for nursing
education. Kansas City, MO: Author.
American Nurses Association. (1991). Standards of clinical nursing practice. Kansas City, MO: Author.
American Nurses Credentialing Center. (2005). NCC magnet
recognition program recognizing excellence in nursing services;
retrieved March 13, 2005, http://www.nursingworld.
org/ancc/magnet.html
Asoh, D.A., et al. (2005). Entrepreneurial propensity in health
care: Models and propositions for empirical research. Health
Care Management Review, 30(8), 212–230.
Barrett, W. (1979). The illusion of technique. New York: Anchor
Press/Doubleday.

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 411

Career Development
Baum, J.R., & Locke, E.A. (2004). The relationship of
entrepreneurial traits, skill, and motivation, to subsequent
venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(4), 587–598.
Beck, S.M., & Utz, P.K. (1996). Perioperative educators network
promotes collegiality. AORN Online, 64(5), 786–791.
Bellack, J.P., & O’Neil, E.H. (2000). Recreating nursing practice
for a new century: Recommendations and implications of the
Pew Health Professions Commission’s ﬁnal report. Nursing
Health Care Perspective, 21, 14–21.
Bensing, K. (2005). Five star nurse. Advance for Nurses: Greater
Chicago/Wisconsin/Indiana, 3, 12.
Benton, D.C. (1997). Networking. Nursing Standard, 11(35),
47–56.
Berg, J. (2004). Active reserves: Retired RNs prove a valuable
resource in time of nursing shortage. Nurse Week News.
Retrieved March 13, 2005, from http://www.nurseweek.
com/edNote/04/0920004
Bird, B. (1989). Entrepreneurial behavior. Glenview, IL: Scott
Foresman & Co.
Booth, R.Z. (2002). El déﬁcit de la enfermería: Un problema
mundial. Revista Latino-Americana Enfermagem; retrieved
December 13, 2005, from http://www.scielo.br/pdf/rlae/
v10n3/13348.pdf
Broscio, M., Paulick, S.S., & Scherer, J. (2005). New ways of
thinking about career success. Careers, 6–11.
Byrne, M.W., & Keefe, M.R. (2002). Building research
competence in nursing through mentoring. Journal of Nursing
Scholarship, Sigma Theta Tau International, 34(4), 391–396.
Carper, B.A. (1978). Fundamental patterns of knowing in nursing. Advances in Nursing Science, 1(1), 13–23.
Center for Nursing Entrepreneurship. (2005). Great career and
care delivery ideas have a place to grow. Retrieved December
31, 2005, from http://www.urmc.rochester.edu/son/CNC/
pdf/New_center_Entre.pdf
Chinn, P.L., & Kramer, M.K. (1999). Theory and nursing: Integrated knowledge development (5th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby.
Cohen, S. (2002). Manager’s fast track: Don’t overlook creative
thinking. Nursing Management, 33(8), 9–10.
Contino, D.S. (2001). Supply and demand: It’s your business.
Nursing Management, 32(12), 20–21.
Coombs, M.W. (1987). Measuring career concepts: An examination of the concepts, constructs, and validity of the career concept questionnaire. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
University of Southern California.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1995). Creativity. New York:
HarperCollins.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Finding ﬂow. New York: Basic
Books.
Deloitte & Touche USA (2005). Hospital CEOs more optimistic
in ﬁnancial outlook but face daunting decisions for the future:
Deloitte survey ﬁnds U.S. hospital CEOs cite uninsured and
government’s involvement as upcoming challenges. Retrieved
December 9, 2005, from http://www.deloitte.com/dtt/
cda/doc/content/US_LSHC_Study_Highlights.pdf
Donner, G., & Wheeler, M. (2001). Career planning and development for nurses: The time has come. International Nursing
Review, 48(4), 279–285.
Downey, J., and Freidin, M. (1997). How I became a nurse entrepreneur: Tales from 50 nurses in business. Staten Island, NY:
Power Publications.

411

Driver, M.J. (1979). Career concepts and career management in
organizations. In Cooper, C.L. (ed.). Behavioral problems in
organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Driver, M.J. (1971). Individual decision making and creativity.
In Kerr, S. (ed.). Organizational behavior. Columbus, OH: Grid
Publishing.
Ehrenfeld, D. (1981). The arrogance of humanism. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ellis, J.R., & Hartley, C.L. (2005). Advancing your career. In
Managing and coordinating nursing care (4th ed.).
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Entrepreneur.com: Solutions for growing business (2005).
Ranking of 100 university and colleges in the nation with
the best entrepreneurial programs. Retrieved December 31,
2005, from http://www.entrepreneur.com/topcolleges/
0,6441,,00.html
Erikson, E., & Erikson, J.M. (1997). The life cycle completed. New
York: W.W. Norton.
Florence Nightingale Museum Trust (1997). The Florence
Nightingale museum’s school visit pack. London: Author.
Flynn, L., & Aiken, L.H. (2002). Does international nurse
recruitment inﬂuence practice values in U.S. hospitals?
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 34(1), 67–72.
Gardner, D.L. (1992). Career commitment in nursing. Journal of
Professional Nursing, 8(3), 155–160.
Garrett, G. (1998). Global markets and national politics:
Collision course or virtuous circle? International Organization,
52(4), 787–824.
Hall, D.T. (1986). Career development in organizations. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hall, D.T. (2002). Careers in and out of organizations. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002.
Hardy, S., et al. (2002). Exploring nursing expertise: Nurses talk
nursing. Nursing Inquiry, 9(3), 196–202.
Hisrich, R.D. (1990). Entrepreneurship/intrapreneurship.
American Psychologist, 45(2), 209–222.
Holland, J. (1985) Making vocational choices: A theory of vocational personalities and work environments. (2nd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Human Genome Program of the U.S. Department of Energy
Office of Science. (2005). Ethical, legal, and social issues.
Retrieved December 10, 2005, from http://www.ornl.gov/
sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/elsi.shtml
Institute of Medicine. (2000). To err is human: Building a safer
health system. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Ireland, R.D., Hitt, M.A., & Sirmon, D.G. (2003). A model of
strategic entrepreneurship: The construct and its dimension.
Journal of Management, 29(6), 963–989.
Katz, J.A. (2003). Core publications in entrepreneurship and
related fields: A guide to getting published. Retrieved
December 31, 2005, from http://eweb.slu.edu/booklist.htm
Katz, J.A. (1991). The institution and infrastructure of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship: Theory & practice, 15(3),
85–102.
Katz, J.A., & Brockhaus, Sr. (1995). Advances in entrepreneurship, ﬁrm emergence, and growth. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Koch, R. (1996). Intrapreneurship: Bloom where you’re planted.
Tennessee Nurse, 59(2), 1–2.
Kressley, K. (1998). Living the third millennium. New York:
Factor Press.

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

412

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 412

Skills for a Successful Career

Lancaster, L., & Stillman, D. (2003). When generations collide.
New York: First HarperBusiness.
Maag, M. (2005). The potential use of blogs in nursing education. Computer Information Nursing, 23(1), 16–24.
MacArthur, D. Quotes.com. Retrieved March 8, 2005, from
http://www.military-quotes.com/Macarthur.htm
Manion, J. (2001). Enhancing career marketability through
intrapreneurship. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 25(2),
5–10.
May, R. (1975). The courage to create. New York: W.W. Norton.
McClelland, D.C. (1965). Achievement and entrepreneurship: A
longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
1, 389–392.
McGillis-Hall, L. et al. (2004). Outcomes of a career planning
and development program for registered nurses. Nursing
Economics, 22(5), 231–238.
McLees, M.A. (1988). The career patterns and orientation of
nurses. Doctoral dissertation, University of Alberta, Canada,
1988.
McMaster, G.E., Voorhis, D., & Anderson, C.W. (1997). The formation and management of teams: A proposed quantitative
approach. Proceedings of the Western Decision Sciences
Conference, Seattle, Washington.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary on-line (2005) http://www.
m-w.com/cgi-bin/dictionary. Retrieved March 11, 2005.
Moen, P. (1998). Recasting careers: Changing reference groups,
risks, and realities. Generations, 22(1), 40–45.
Moore, K., & Coddington, D. (1999). The next wave of innovation. Health Forum Journal, 42(6), 45–51.
NCLEX-RN, International. (2005). Testing services. National
Council of State Board of Nursing. Retrieved March 8, 2005,
from http://www.ncsbn.org/testing/index.asp
Neuhauser, P., Bender, R., & Stromberg, K. (2000). Culture.com:
Building corporate culture in the connected workplace. Toronto:
John Wiley & Sons Canada.
Nevidjon, B., et al. The nursing shortage: Solutions for the short
and long term Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. Retrieved
March 14, 2005, from http://www.nursingworld.org/ojin/
topic14/tpc14_4.htm
New Center for Nurse Entrepreneurship. Retrieved December
31, 2005, from http://www.urmc.rochester.edu/son/CNC/
index.cfm
Nicholson, P. (1996). Gender, power, and organization: A psychological perspective. New York: Routledge.
Orr, E.L. (1991). Career orientations, career patterns, and career
satisfaction of nurses. Doctoral dissertation, Boston
University, 1991.
Pinchot, G. (1986). Intrapreneuring: Why you don’t have to leave
the corporation to become an entrepreneur. New York: HarperCollins.
Porter-O’Grady, T. (2000). Visions for the 21st century: New
horizons, new health care. Nursing Administration Quarterly,
25(10), 30–38.
Porter-O’Grady, T., & Wilson, C. (1999). Leading the revolution
in health care. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Ray, M.A., Turkel, M.C., & Marino, F. (2002). The transformative process for nursing in workforce redevelopment. Nursing
Administration Quarterly, 26(2), 1–14.
Riverin-Simard, D. (2000). Career development in a changing
context of the second part of working life. In Collin, A., &

Young, R.A. (eds.). The future of career. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. (1999). The Robert Wood
Johnson Annual Report, Americans without health insurance:
Myths and realities. Princeton, NJ: Author.
Roggenkamp, S.D., & White, K.R. (1998). Four nurse entrepreneurs: What motivated them to start their own business?
Health Care Management Review, 23(3), 67–75.
Roper. (2002). Staying ahead of the curve: The American association of retired people (AARP work and career study.
Washington, D.C.: Roper Starch Worldwide & AARP.
Roy, C., Sr. (2000). The visible and invisible ﬁelds that shape the
future of the nursing care system. Nursing Administration
Quarterly, 25(1), 119–131.
Shaffer, E.R., et al. (2005). Global trade and public health.
American Journal of Public Health, 95(1), 23–34.
Shaffer, F.A., & Sheets, V.(2001) Multistate licensure: opportunities for nurses to practice in new ways. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 25(2), 38–42.
Socio-Economic News (2003, January-March). Global issues in
the supply and demand of nurses. Retrieved December 27,
2005, from http://www.icn.ch/sewjan-march03.htm
Spector, R.E. (2000). Cultural diversity in health and illness (5th
ed.). Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Strader, M.K., & Decker, P.J. (1999). Role transition to patient
care management. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange.
Sullivan E.J., & Christopher, M.J. (1999). Ethical issues. In
Sullivan, E.J. (ed.). Creating nursing’s future: Issues, opportunities, and challenges. St. Louis: Mosby.
Super, D.E. (1980). A life span, life space approach to
career development. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 13,
282–298.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2005) Foreign trade statistics. Retrieved
December 12, 2005, from http://www.census.gov/
foreign-trade/www/
Vicere, A. (2004). Entrepreneurs on the inside. Leader
values. Retrieved March 15, 2005 from http://www.leadervalues.com/Content/detail.asp?ContentDetail ID⫽89
West, J. S. (1997) Networking can lead to new career opportunities in perioperative nursing. AORN Online, 66(2)
334–335
White, J. (1995). Patterns of knowing: Review, critique, and
update. Advances in Nursing Science, 17(4), 73–86.
Williams-Evans, S.A.A. & Carnegie, M.E. (2002). The evolution
of professional nursing. In Contemporary nursing: Issues,
trends, & management (Barbara Cherry and Susan R. Jacob,
Eds.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby, Inc.
Zurn, P., Dolea, C., & Stilwell, B. (2005). Nurse retention and
recruitment: Developing a motivated workforce. The Global
Nursing Review Initiative. Issue Paper 4. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Council of Nurses.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aidemark, L., & Lindvist, L. (2004). The vision gives wings: A
study of two hospitals run as limited companies. Management
Accounting Research, 15, 305–318.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (2005).
Commission on collegiate nursing education moves to consider
for accreditation only practice doctorates with the DNP

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 413

Career Development
degree title. Retrieved December 11, 2005 from http://
www.aacn.nche.edu/Media/NewsReleases/2005/CCNEDNP.
htm
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (2003). Position
statement: Nursing education’s agenda for the 21st century,
Washington, D.C., ACCN, www.accne.nche.edu
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (2005). The clinical nurse leader. Retrieved December 15, 2005. from
http://www.aacn.nche,edu/cnl
American Association of Occupational Health Nurses (2005). A
tool for business professionals to assess their company’s bottomline healthcare costs. Retrieved December 6, 2005.
http://www.bizhealthcheck.com/
American Nurses Association (2005b) Nursing Facts: Today’s
Registered Nurse – Numbers and Demographics. Retrieved
March 12, 2005. http://www.ana.org/readroom/fsdemogrpt.
htm#Gender
Benner, P. (2005). Patricia Benner’s nursing theories. Retrieved
February 20, 2005 from Rutgers University. Website:
http://www.eden.rutgers.edu/~kmckee/description.html
Buerhaus, D. (2004). New signs of a strengthening U.S. nurse labor
market? Retrieved December 12, 2005. http://content.
healthaffairs.org/cgi/content/full/hlthaff.w4.526/DC1
Bruner, J.S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. New York,
NY: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, (2004)
Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2004–2005 Edition,
Entrepreneurship. Retrieved June 8, 2004 from http://www.
bls.gov/oco/ocos083.htm
Griffith, J. (1998). Designing 21st century heath care.
Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers
Harrison, J.P. and Sexton, C. (2004). The paradox of the notfor-proﬁt hospital. The Health Care Manager, 23(3), 192–204.
Health Resources and Services Administration (2001). The registered nurse population: National sample survey of registered
nurses – March 2000. HRSA Bureau of Health Professions
Division of Nursing.

413

Hess, R. (1994). Shared governance: Innovation or imitation?
Nursing Economics, 12(1), 28–34.
Institute of Medicine (2003). Health professions education:
A bridge to quality. Washington D.C.: National Academy
Press.
National League of Nurses (2005). Transforming nursing education. Retrieved December 14, 2005, from http://www.nln.org/
aboutnln/PositionStatements/transforming052005.pdf
Nursing Facts. Retrieved March 12, 2005, from http://www.
nursingworld.org/readroom/fsdemogrpt.htm
Phillips, Kelly (2005). Hospitals must make accommodations to
retain, recruit older RNs NurseZone.com Retrieved March 13,
2005. http://www.nursezone.com/stories/SpotlightOnNurses.
asp?articleID⫽12579
Shanteau, J. (1992). Competence in experts: The role of task
characteristics. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 53, 252–266. Retrieved December 27, 2005, from
http://www.k-state.edu/psych/cws/pdf/obhdp_paper91.
PDF
Simpson, R.L. (1998) Making the Move from Nurse to Nursing
Informatics Consultant. Nursing Management, 29(5)22, 24–25
U.S.Info.state.gov (2005). Foreign trade and global economic
policies. Retrieved December 12, 2005 from http://usinfo.
state.gov/products/pubs/oecon/chap10.htm
Valanis, B. (1999). Epidemiology in health care. Stamford, CT:
Appleton & Lange.
Von Bertalenffy, L. (1972). General systems theory: Foundations, development, and applications. New York, NY: George
Braziller, Inc.
Von Stamm, B. (2003). Managing Innovation, Design &
Creativity. NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
Williamson, M.H.R. (1990). Factors affecting the nursing career
choice. (Doctoral dissertation, The University of Texas at
Austin, 1990). Dissertation Abstracts International, 179.
Wolf, G.A. (2000). Vision 2000: The transformation of professional practice. Nursing Administrative Quarterly 24(2),
45–51.

24Jones Leadership(F)-ch 24

1/14/07

3:56 PM

Page 414

This page has been left intentionally blank.

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 415

chapter
25
Managing Your
Professional and
Financial Future
GEORGIANNA THOMAS, EDD, RN
MARY E. HORTON ELLIOTT, DNSC, RN
CHAPTER MOTIVATION

Professionalism is knowing how to do what you
want to do, when to do it, and getting it done.
CHAPTER MOTIVES
■
■
■
■
■
■

Relate the unique position that the nursing profession
possesses in the diversity of its educational paths to licensure.
Identify the importance of advanced education to a profession.
Define the purpose and importance of licensure and
certification to the profession and the public.
Relate the importance of professional organizations to the
profession.
Recognize the importance of scholarship opportunities
available in nursing.
Recognize methods of planning for retirement.

415

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

416

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 416

Skills for a Successful Career

N

ursing is regarded as a profession, and its
members are expected to demonstrate evidence of
professional characteristics. These characteristics
have developed from the study of professionalism
by Greenwood in 1957, which proposed ﬁve characteristics or attributes of a profession. These
attributes can be applied to any functioning profession to defend its status, including nursing. The
attributes are:
1. Systematic knowledge base, including a theo-

2.

3.

4.
5.

retical foundation unique to the profession as
well as those adapted from other disciplines
Authority, which occurs through education
and experience and gives the nurse knowledge and skill to make professional judgments
Community sanction, which occurs through
statutes, rules, and regulations deﬁning practice and role expectations
Code of ethics applicable to the practice area
Culture, which consists of formal and informal groups representing the profession

Individuals in nursing must demonstrate a high
level of personal, ethical, and skill-related characteristics and career orientation to be considered professional. Performing the responsibilities should not be
considered “just a job.” To become a professional,
one has to be appropriately qualiﬁed, licensed, credentialed, committed to lifelong learning, and
career-oriented. To achieve this goal requires ﬁnancial means, time, commitment, and caring.
The challenge of making the right educational
choice begins now. Once licensed, many avenues
exist for professional advancement. Examples
include formal coursework that would lead to
another degree, certiﬁcation following a specialized
study in an area, and continuing education.
Continuing education involves updating knowledge
needed for an individual’s work environment or
certiﬁcation maintenance.
Education is only one element of a nurse’s
career, however. Learning how to function as a professional is also critical. By being involved in professional and community organizations and sharing
information through scholarly activity such as making presentations, writing for publications, and/or
performing research to help build the evidencebased scientiﬁc foundation for nursing practice, a
nurse comes to realize that nursing is more than
just “a job.”

This chapter is meant to help readers plan their
careers. It includes levels of nursing education, certiﬁcations after graduation from a formal program,
pursuit of scholarship in nursing, and ﬁnancial
planning to secure a comfortable retirement for the
nurse professional.

Nursing Education
Nursing is unique in that it has multiple related
educational paths that lead to licensure and professional status. These paths, however, have led to a
great deal of public consternation and confusion
about the profession.
“The origins of the present diversity in education stem from its historic roots” (Catalano, 1996,
p. 68). Starting as an apprentice-like system in early
society, nursing was further developed by religious
orders during the Middle Ages in Europe. These
programs were independent in nature and varied by
culture. The student learned what was believed to
be of importance for practice in the culture. No formal plans for content or study existed. It was under
these religious inﬂuences that Florence Nightingale
obtained her education. She was also inﬂuenced by
the secular health-care practices of her native
England. From her work in the Crimean War, the
earliest “best practices” were set for a formal systematic education in both the theoretical and practice arenas.
From the beginning of nursing education
(hospital-based diploma schools) to its current status (in college settings), the scope of knowledge
required for practice has grown continuously. This
growth includes the development of standardized
nursing curricula with variations by individual colleges. In the educational community, there was a
belief as early as the early 1900s that nursing education should be housed in an academic environment, such as a college. The earliest nurse training
school in America was started in 1871 (Worcester,
1927).
In 1949, the National Nursing Accrediting
Service, working with the National League for
Nursing Education, became the licensing body for
all nursing schools. The ﬁrst formal accreditation of
schools came about in 1952. The accreditation of a
school of nursing required that speciﬁc criteria,
standards, and curricula be adopted and followed.

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 417

Managing Your Professional and Financial Future

From the 1950s through the 1970s, an increased
awareness of nursing as a profession was evident.
During that time, nursing strove to align public perception of nursing with its reality. The events of a
growing society after World War II—the population
explosion during and after the war; the need for
more health-care workers (especially nurses); political, economic, and educational changes—contributed to the development of the multiple entry
levels into the profession (Bullough & Bullough,
1984; Schorr & Kennedy, 1999). Table 25-1 shows
the various levels of nursing education.
Diploma programs have been phased out in many
parts of the country. Most nurses today initially
become licensed attending associate degree or baccalaureate degree programs and work in a variety of
clinical settings. Presently, advanced practice nurses
acquire their license through graduate study and
passing certiﬁcation examinations. Many nurses
with this degree work as nurse practitioners, teach,
and serve as administrators in hospitals or as clinical nurse specialists at the bedside. The highest level
of education available is the doctorate. Many nurses
prepared at this level perform research, teach, or
continue in clinical practice.
Choosing the path of nursing study requires
examining many factors in planning for the longterm goal. These factors include length of program,
cost of education, distance learning, travel and
selection of clinical sites for use in the program,
pass rate of the students of the program on the
National State Board for Nursing examination,

TABLE 25-1

Nursing Educational Programs

PROGRAM
TYPE

OUTCOME
MEASURE

DURATION
OF STUDY

Registered nurse

Diploma

1–3 years

Associate degree
nurse

Associate
degree

2⫹ years

Baccalaureate
nurse

Baccalaureate 4⫹ years
degree

Master’s-prepared Master’s
nurse
degree

1–2 years
post-baccalaureate

Doctoral degree

Up to 8 years
post-master’s

Doctoral
degree

417

personal and work time commitments needed, and
student ﬁnancial needs.

Certification
Certiﬁcation has been utilized in many professions
and is the process to acquire formal recognition as
having expertise in a given area. It signiﬁes knowledge beyond the minimum required for licensure.
The process is believed to determine and maintain
speciﬁc standards, knowledge, and skills to ensure
the safety of the clients in a speciﬁed area of practice. Becoming certiﬁed helps to build conﬁdence
professionally and serves as a testimonial to one’s
dedication and accountability to a profession.
Health-care consumers are familiar with this
process when they seek physicians; however, that is
not necessarily the case when working with nurses.
Educating the public on this issue is one mechanism to help the public understand that certiﬁed
nurses are available for consultation and care management/teaching.
Organizations that provide certiﬁcation status
usually do so on a voluntary basis and are not controlled by the government. Therefore, the certiﬁcation credential may have a more professional than
legal value. Individuals acquiring a credential are
believed to be good for consumers by protecting the
public and enabling the public to identify competent practitioners more readily.
Registered nurses (RNs) seeking certiﬁcation
must present evidence of an RN license, appropriate
education, and experience in the area of specialization for which certiﬁcation is requested. Requirements vary with the level of certiﬁcation requested.
The roles and responsibilities for advanced practice
nursing, for example, are determined through many
sources, beginning with each state’s nurse practice
act. The RN must contact the American Nurses
Credentialing Center (ANCC) and the specialty
practice organization of interest to determine the
requirements for certiﬁcation for both the basic and
advanced practice levels. On September 1, 2004,
ANCC began providing certiﬁcation candidates
with a handbook: the General Testing Information
booklet, which includes key information on planning for certiﬁcation and scheduling the computer–based examination. The test is administered
by authorized testing agencies. Manual paper-and-

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

418

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 418

Skills for a Successful Career

pencil examinations can also be taken and are generally given twice a year. Examination dates are
provided by the authorized testing agencies when
an individual registers for the examination. A test
content outline and sample examination questions
may be obtained through the ANCC Web site. Making and following a plan of action for the examination process will assist the individual in assessing,
implementing, and completing the certiﬁcation
process. Table 25-2 provides information regarding
certiﬁcation opportunities.

Professional Organizations
The existence of professional organizations is considered to be a deﬁning characteristic of a profession, as noted earlier in the chapter. Professional

TABLE 25-2

organizations are developed to meet the needs
of their members and their common interests.
Whereas state governments have legal control over
licensure issues, these organizations provide professional standards of practice and ethical conduct to
ensure the public of the availability of high-quality
services (Mancino, 2001). Governed by members
through bylaws and protocol derived from a board
of directors and approved by members, professional
organizations work to fulﬁll varied missions for
nursing service in society. It is through organizations that the power of the professional can be recognized and consolidated to perform a variety of
services and to provide leadership development
opportunities.
Nursing associations have three major constituents: the public, the nursing profession, and the
individual members (Mancino, 2001, p. 102). The
public is served by the development of standards for

Examples of Certification Opportunities

ORGANIZATION

CERTIFICATION

CREDENTIAL

American Nurses Credentialing
Center (part of ANA)
www.nursingworld.org

Advanced Practice Registered
Nurse, Board Certified
Registered Nurse, Board Certified
(For Baccalaureate Nurses)
Registered Nurse, Certified
(For Associate Degree Nurses)
Clinical Nurse Specialists
Informatics
Administration
See Web site for others

APRN, BC

National League for Nursing
www.nln.org/faculty

Academic Nurse Educator
Certification Program: Certified
Nurse Educator

CNE

American Association of Critical Care Nursing
certcorp@aacn.org

Critical Care Nursing Certification

CCRN

National Certification Board for
Diabetes Educators
www.ncbde.org

Certified Diabetes Educator

CDE

Board of Certification for Emergency Nursing
www.ena.org/bcen

Certified Emergency Nurse

CEN

Rehabilitation Nursing
www.rehabnurse.org

Certified Rehabilitation Nurse

CRRN

For a comprehensive overview, see
www.nursingcenter.com

RN, BC
RN,C
APRN, BC
RN, CAN, BC
RN,
CNAA,BC

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 419

Managing Your Professional and Financial Future

practice and education and by ethical codes to
ensure protection of human rights in practice.
Professional organizations serve their members collectively to help deﬁne the role of the nurse and
politically by helping to deﬁne actions of the nurse.
This can be accomplished through continuing education courses and certiﬁcations to keep the nurse
up to date with theory and research in caring for
clients. In addition, the organizations provide leadership opportunities, such as serving as an officer,
performing as an accrediting surveyor, assuming
the role of project director on a local or national
issue, becoming a board member, working with or
becoming a lobbyist, or serving as a volunteer.
These opportunities are available at the national,
state, and local level.
Nurses have a responsibility to join professional
organizations, to serve in a professional capacity,
and to help deﬁne and better the profession. In
general, there are three types of associations available: broad-purpose, specialty practice, and special
interest. Deciding on the association that will best
serve you may be difficult. Review the purpose,
opportunities for involvement, beneﬁts of membership, cost-effectiveness of membership, success of
the political arm and issues it covers, and your personal goals before making a choice.

THE AMERICAN NURSES ASSOCIATION
The American Nurses Association (ANA) was
established in 1896 by a group of nurses. In its early
years, it focused primarily on standardizing nursing education and licensure. Today, the welfare of
nurses and the public they serve is a cornerstone of
the organization. The Code of Ethics helps guide
practice and research policy, and clinical standards
guide care and practice measures. This is evidenced
in all settings by professional nurses. Public policy
plays an integral role in monitoring and lobbying
for measures to be adopted for practice, leading to
quality and safe care. Membership is open to all
nurses in each state of the country and in U.S. territories. Membership dues are used to maintain the
organization and its programs. Joining and participating are carried out through national, state, and
local district avenues. The ANA offers its members
major programs and services, including legislative
involvement, standards setting, formal and continuing education, and maintenance of quality practice.

419

In 1992, an International Nursing Center was
established to collaborate with nurses internationally and to work for the common good.

NATIONAL STUDENT
NURSES’ ASSOCIATION
Created in 1952 through the ANA, the National
Student Nurses’ Association provides a means for
all students in RN programs to develop as responsible, accountable, and career-oriented members of
the profession. This organization allows students to
have a voice in nursing. This is accomplished by
working with faculty and students who network
with each other and the ANA. The main purpose is
to “help maintain high standards of education in
schools of nursing with the ultimate goals of educating high quality nurses who will provide excellent health care” (Catalano, p. 180).

NATIONAL LEAGUE FOR NURSING (NLN)
Established in 1952, this organization claims to be
the oldest nursing organization in this country
(Mancino, 2001). The NLN is concerned with the
quality of all nursing education, from practical
nursing through master’s degree programs. In 1917,
the precursor to this organization drafted and disseminated the ﬁrst standard curriculum for nursing
schools. In 1952, the National Organization for
Public Health Nursing and the Association of
Collegiate Schools of Nursing joined to establish the
NLN. This organization is utilized by all levels of
nurses in practice today Membership is open to all
nurses interested in the purpose of the organization—professional and public—at the state and
national levels.

SIGMA THETA TAU (STT)
Sigma Theta Tau (STT) was established in 1922
by six students from Indiana University Training
School for Nurses. STT has become the national
honor society of nursing and recognizes the value
of scholarship and excellence in nursing practice,
technology, and research, striving to improve nursing care and health worldwide. Programs involved
in this organization include mentoring programs
in leadership, encouraging members to become in-

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

420

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 420

Skills for a Successful Career

volved in chapter, regional, and international
efforts of study, task forces, and work.
Membership in STT is acquired through organized chapters within accredited schools of nursing that grant baccalaureate and higher degrees.
Students usually enter the organization through
their college chapter. Community leaders are also
eligible and can apply through these same chapters.
They must also meet requirements of a baccalaureate degree in nursing, and they must demonstrate marked achievement in education, practice,
research, administration, or publication for membership. Being a member of this organization is
considered an honor and creates many new opportunities in professional development, scholarship,
and leadership.

SPECIALTY ORGANIZATIONS
There are multiple specialty organizations available for nurses to join: the American Association
for Critical Care Nursing, the American Heart
Association, the Emergency Nursing Organization
represent a few. The area of nursing in which the
RN practices might be of assistance when determining the most appropriate specialty organization.
Every possible specialty in the nursing profession
is represented by an organization. The work setting, the Internet, or a library search will help you
locate the most appropriate organization. Dues are
expected in most.

Scholarship
Scholarship is the culmination of activities that
advance teaching, research, and the practice of a
profession through rigorous study (Boyer, 1990).
Nursing scholarship, like scholarship in other disciplines, also includes presentations and service. Even
though the practice of nursing has been in existence
since before Florence Nightingale, it was not considered to be a profession until much later. Concept,
theory, and knowledge development continue today,
as they must if nursing is to maintain its relevance
and achieve its purpose. For some, nursing is too
practical, too pragmatic, and too ordinary to be
paired with the ancient, lofty, traditional, and selfdisciplined idea of scholarship (Kitson, 1999).
According to a position statement by the American

Association of Colleges of Nursing: “Scholarship in
nursing can be deﬁned as those activities that systematically advance the teaching, research, and

chapter star

Valerie J. Matthiesen, RN, DNSc, APRN, BC
Professor and Associate Dean
Graduate Nursing and Research
West Suburban College of Nursing
Oak Park, Illinois
Dr. Matthiesen began her journey as a nurse by
attending a hospital school of nursing, receiving a
diploma, and becoming a licensed RN. In addition to
completing a bachelor’s degree in sociology, she
completed a baccalaureate in nursing degree. After
working as a staff nurse in orthopedic nursing, she desired
a specialty practice in geriatric nursing. She completed
a master’s degree with a clinical specialty in geriatric
nursing (CNS). After practicing as a CNS in a geriatric
hospital and teaching in a baccalaureate nursing program, she completed a doctorate in nursing science
at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago. In addition,
she completed postgraduate work, which allowed her
to become certified as a nurse practitioner (NP) in both
geriatric and adult health advanced practice nursing. After
practicing in women’s health as an NP for 2 years, she also
became certified as a primary care NP in the subspecialty
of Gynecology and Reproductive Health.
In addition, Dr. Matthiesen has more than 25 years
of progressive teaching and educational administrative
experience in nursing. She presently serves as the
Associate Dean of Graduate Programs and Research in
a specialty college of nursing. She as also served as a
coordinator for NP educational programs.
Dr. Matthiesen has been active in a number of
professional nursing organizations, including the ANA,
STT, and the National Conference of Gerontological
Nurse Practitioners, in which she served on the national
executive board of directors. In regard to scholarship,
her research, presentations, posters, and publications
have focused on geriatric clinical problems of pressure
sore prevention, physical restraint use by nurses, and
Alzheimer’s disease. In addition, she has been a regional
speaker for caregivers of Alzheimer’s patients. Presently,
she is doing collaborative research on pain management
in adults with sickle cell disease.
Dr. Matthiesn’s journey as a professional nurse exemplifies a career pathway of lifelong learning in nursing.
Her achievements require a continual commitment of
time, energy, and responsibility to professional nursing.

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 421

Managing Your Professional and Financial Future

practice of nursing through rigorous inquiry that 1)
is signiﬁcant to the profession, 2) is creative, 3) can
be documented, 4) can be replicated or elaborated,
and 5) can be peer-reviewed through various methods” (AACN, 1999, p. 373)
Nursing practice is rooted in the scientiﬁc principles of scholarly research. Nursing education, certiﬁcation, and organizations, as described in the
earlier sections of this chapter, rank nursing as a
profession among its peers. It is important to understand that, until recently, scholarship was measured
by the following:
■
■

■

■
■

Signiﬁcance of research questions asked
How productively the results of the investigation are communicated
Strictly followed research methods; how answers are found
The soundness of the theoretical base
How signiﬁcant the answers are to the ﬁeld
and to humanity (Meleis, 2001).

The competition to obtain grant funding for
research is stringent. Research is now being measured by the standards of grant funding, “indirect
cost returns, evidenced-based practice, and outcome
measures” (Meleis, 2001). Scholarship is a means by
which the registered nurse’s career can be advanced
while advancing the profession of nursing. The
nurse engaging in scholarship gains the opportunity
to delve into areas of nursing science of interest to
the nurse as well as share those areas of interest as
they apply to others and the ﬁeld of nursing. There
is also motivation for the RN to engage in scholarship through the monetary and promotion incentives maintained by colleges and universities that
employ nursing professionals.

WRITING AND PUBLISHING
SCHOLARSHIP IN NURSING
Nursing, along with other disciplines, is in the process of redeﬁning scholarship as it relates to itself
as a discipline (Edwards, et al., 2000). Scholarship
is pertinent to the individual members of the profession, whether faculty, administrator, or practitioner. Publishing, which includes writing articles,
editorials, and books; integration and application of
knowledge; curriculum development; and teaching
methods and techniques, is another vital aspect of
scholarship (Box 25-1).

421

Box 25-1
Writer Assistance From Experts
Writing is time-consuming, complex, and exacting;
however, much has been written about the “how-to”
of writing and publishing that will be of use to the
interested nurse writer. Institutions have employed
writing coaches to aid faculty through the writing process to publication (Baldwin & Chandler, 2002). The
“mentor-guided analytical thinking method” is a method
used to guide the novice writer in nursing to identify issues important to nursing, how to “make finer
distinctions in a topic” that will aid the nurse writer
to make writing and thinking changes (Lang, 2002).
Whatever the method used to encourage and support
nurses to write for publication, if the results increase
scientific and professional publications, then that
method is appropriate.
Good writing consists of at least four elements: readability, correctness, appropriateness, and thought.
Readability refers to the process of stating complex
ideas in an understandable way (Henry, 2002). It is
important for the reader to be able to read the work with
some ease. The second element is correctness, which
is as much about coherency and logical thought as it is
about correct punctuation and grammar. If sentences and
paragraphs do not flow in an orderly fashion, manuscripts will be too difficult to follow. The third element is
appropriateness. A tone that would insult or demean or
preach must be avoided. The fourth element is thought. It
is important to write from an outline and to think before,
while, and after writing (Henry, 2002; Sullivan, 2002).
Plagiarism seems to be the most difficult concept to
grasp. Plagiarism is the presentation of any substantial
portion of the work of another without giving the other
author credit by citing the work (APA, 2001). A publishing
professional from any discipline respects other writers by
giving them credit for their work by citing those writers
in the body of the work (APA, 2001). Plagiarism causes
harm to the one whose work is plagiarized, to the one
committing plagiarism, to the institutions of both, and
to the journal publishing the article (APA, 2001). If it is at
all possible to find the original work, that work must be
given credit. Prospective authors must research potential
publishers or journals for particular requirements prior to
submission of any work.

General Writing Guidelines
A shopping list of errors exists for which a work
might be rejected. Many authors submit their work
before they have closely scrutinized it for errors.
Authors of any type of scholarly work—print,

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

422

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 422

Skills for a Successful Career

computer, or ﬁlm—must make sure they have chosen the appropriate medium and ensure that the
material will meet the needs of their audience.
Some media will appeal to a limited clinical audience, whereas others will have a larger, more general audience. In some cases, the work may be well
written, but the content may be too old, or the
material does not supply new information, or the
work does not make a speciﬁc point. Sloppy work
does not represent scholarship.

SCHOLARSHIP IN PRESENTATIONS
Presentations may be made in on-unit in-services,
hospital grand rounds, case studies, classroom lectures, professional meetings, and the community.
There are several methods by which scholarship
can be presented. Two methods discussed here will
be speaking and poster presentations because they
are the methods used most often at conferences and
workshops. When the professional nurse has developed a speciﬁc idea or conducted research, it is the
responsibility of the nurse to share that new knowledge with the discipline of nursing and/or other
interested parties.

Speaking Presentations
Presenting papers and projects to large and small
audiences, from national conferences to unit meetings, is a skill learned by doing and is perfected over
time. After deciding the broad area of focus for the
presentation (e.g., in-patient psychiatric care) and
narrowing the focus to something manageable (comparing care for eating disorders—anorexia nervosa
and bulimia), it always helpful to develop an outline
(Strickland, 1999). The outline will serve two functions: it will guide the writer by delineating speciﬁc
sections and details to be covered, and it will provide
the conference attendees with a guide to follow at
the actual presentation (Gregg & Pierce, 1994).
Walker prepared a “Survival Guide” to assist the
professional with presentations. It includes the
development of a title, an abstract, and audiovisual
materials (Walker, 1997). The title of the presentation introduces the attendees to the session and tells
them what it will be about. The title should be well
considered. Clever titles are usually not informative and should be avoided in lieu of a clear and
concise title that will invite people to attend the
presentation.

An abstract is a concise statement that introduces
and summarizes the work. The abstract should be
accurate, comprehensive, and self-contained. It is
used to present the pertinent information about the
work to the reader. The conference committee will
use the material to determine the suitability of the
work for presentation at the conference. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, an abstract should be only up to
250 words; if it is more, it might be shortened by the
service requiring the abstract (APA, 2001).
Much of what is read, seen, or heard is forgotten;
however, when visual and audio media are combined, 70% is retained (Rawlins, 1993). Even in
today’s world of the computer and PowerPoint
presentations, it continues to be important that
all audiovisuals be prepared with care and thought
to the material they will represent. Audiovisual
materials include everything from PowerPoint
slides, charts, posters, videotapes, and clips from
movies to handouts. Overhead transparencies continue to be used as well. The type of media chosen
is at the discretion of the presenter and should be
determined by size of the room and audience, availability of equipment, availability of resources to
develop the media, type of presentation, and time
available for presentation (Gregg & Pierce, 1994).
Depending on resources and ability, the presenter may decide to personally develop the media or to
have it professionally developed. No matter how the
media are developed, they must represent and support the presentation. It is important to note here
that slides/media should never be read to the audience. The speaker should highlight the presentation—points that can help the audience recall
details long after the presentation has ended. The
media can be considered an annotated outline, making points upon which the presenter will expound.
When parts of videos or ﬁlms are used, they must be
chosen and prepared carefully. Only a speciﬁc portion of these media will be of importance to the
presentation, and it must be absolutely pertinent
(Gregg & Pierce, 1994). It is better to have too little
than too much of a ﬁlm because the presenter can
always add what might have been omitted. See
Table 25-3 for helpful hints when preparing and
making presentations.

Presenting a Poster
Posters are the other main type of presentations
used to disseminate information at conferences.

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 423

Managing Your Professional and Financial Future

TABLE 25-3

423

Helpful Hints for Presentations

HELPFUL HINTS
1. Be prepared.

Come early, stay late.
Know the room.
2. Know the equipment.

Know how to use it.
Know who will assist in setup.
3. Ensure media can be seen and heard from every
angle of the room.
4. Bring two sets of slides.
5. Make sure slides are in proper sequence; number

or tag slides.
6. Prepare PowerPoint carefully.

Not too many slides, not too much material on
one slide.

7. Try out different colors for the background and

font on the slides.
8. Make PowerPoint printout with space available

for note-taking.
9. Insert blank slides for spaces when slides not

being addressed.
10. Choose topic carefully. It should be a topic you

know and love.
11. Dress professionally for the occasion.

Do not buy new shoes or clothes.
12. Bring many business cards.
13. Practice relaxation techniques—deep breathing,

RATIONALE
It will reduce your anxiety and allow for a more polished
presentation.
Your audience may want to know more about your
research and presentation.
Familiarity with equipment will help reduce anxiety.
The technician will know how to assist where needed.
Prevents audience from straining to see and hear and
losing interest.
Allows time for adjustments to be made.
In case of loss or damage to a set.
Prevents uncomfortable pauses, makes smoother
presentation, reduces anxiety.
Crowded slides are difficult to read and points may get
lost in the wordiness.
Too many slides might prevent all materials from being
presented.
Presenter might use too much time.
Slides must act to highlight the presentation.
Some colors and combinations of colors make slides
difficult to read or see.
Can use as outline for presenter, and handout for
audience.
Aids audience to focus on presenter’s words versus words
on slide
Your knowledge and love will be demonstrated in your
presentation.
New clothes and shoes may prove uncomfortable before
the presentation is over.
Your audience may want to contact you.
These activities will enhance your presentation.

progressive relaxation.
14. Make eye contact with each person in the audience;

don’t stare straight ahead or only in one place.
15. Stand behind the podium.
16. Do not try to memorize your presentation.

Make note cards to which you can refer.

Poster presentations are less formal than oral presentations and usually require less discussion from
the presenter. Posters are primarily visual and are
expected to “stand alone” in their ability to depict
the message of the researcher or presenter (Ryan,
1989). The poster might include photographs, bullet points, and tables and graphs because these

Prevents boredom and holds the interest of the audience.
If you feel anxious or feel your legs will shake, it will give
you something on which to hold.
You might forget, lose your place, and cause a hitch in
your otherwise smooth presentation. (Gregg & Pierce,
1994; Walker, 1997)

methods allow much information to be communicated quickly.
Even though there is no formal verbal presentation, the researcher may be expected to remain in
the vicinity of the poster during poster sessions. As
attendees enjoy the posters, the researchers will be
available to present speciﬁc information about the

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

424

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 424

Skills for a Successful Career

poster and research and to answer any questions
the attendees might have. Poster sessions are also
prime opportunities for professional networking
with clinicians and researchers (Polit & Beck, 2006:
Ryan, 1989).
Poster presentations generally follow the
IMRAD format—Introduction, Methods, Results,
and Discussion (Polit & Beck, 2006, p. 68). The
introduction presents the rationale for the study by
describing the research problem, its signiﬁcance,
and the framework in which it was developed. The
literature review is usually included in the introduction section. The method section gives a detailed
description of how the researcher conducted the
research, facilitating another researcher to be able
to replicate the work. The method section will usually include a description of the research design, the
setting and sample, how data were collected and
instruments used, and how data were analyzed
and/or processed. In a quantitative study, results of
the study give a factual summary of the statistical
analysis. Results in qualitative studies may include
the emergence of themes and new theory; the report
of data and the interpretation of the data may be
intertwined. Actual edited quotes of the participants may also be included to tell the story of the
research. The discussion section allows the presenter to include the main ﬁndings and what those ﬁndings mean, the validity of the results and the
interpretations, comparison of results with prior
knowledge, and implications of the ﬁnding to nursing and nursing research. The name and institution
of the investigator and a brief abstract would also be
included on the poster (Burns & Grove, 1993).
The appearance of the poster is very important
because it must stand alone and draw spectators.
The conference committee will determine the size
of the poster and whether it will have one, two,
three, or four panels. The title must be descriptive
of the research as well as large enough to be seen
easily from a distance. Keep in mind that some
colors do not promote clarity and visibility of the
poster. It is important to make a mock poster before
completing the ﬁnal copy; ﬁnances of the presenter
determine whether the poster is produced by a
professional artist. Some of the helpful hints in
Table 25-3 may also be applicable with poster presentations.
In the process of making a name for yourself in
the professional nursing community, you must consider ﬁnancial planning for the future.

Practice to Strive For 25-1
1. Nurses must decide early to advance in the profession
beyond the undergraduate degree.
2. Becoming an active member in a professional organization early in one’s nursing career indicates a probable
commitment to continued growth and involvement
toward shaping the future of nursing.
3. It is the commitment to scholarship—through education, research, and service—that will maintain high
standards of care to advance the profession and give
evidence for the actions of the nurse.
4. Nursing is a very demanding profession, and the members must plan early for their financial future so their
retirement years may afford them some stability in an
ever-changing world.

Future Financial Planning
Nursing, a helping profession, is also a traditionally
female profession. Helpers and women are not usually the groups that plan for their ﬁnancial futures.
In many instances, nurses tend to neglect their own
future ﬁnancial affairs (La Plante, 2003). According
to Bartruff (2003), nurses tend to be too busy with
their jobs for ﬁnancial planning; or they change
employment for greater ﬁnancial beneﬁts before
they can build a substantial portfolio with any one
employer. Nevertheless (and for these and perhaps
other reasons), nurses should plan for their ﬁnancial futures.
In people’s early working years, ages 20–30,
nurses, like many other professionals, are concerned with building a career, paying off college
loans, and establishing an initial savings plan. The
focus shifts toward preparing for retirement when
the employee reaches the late 30s and 40s (Hawke,
2000). It has been found that increased salaries and
career ladders greatly inﬂuence job satisfaction
(Bruce, 1990); many health-care organizations are
improving their beneﬁts packages in other ways.
According to a survey by the American Hospital
Association, many health-care organizations are
“reworking their retirement plans to recruit and
retain healthcare workers,” thus hoping to assist in
slowing the trend of nurses changing jobs in search
of better beneﬁts, better pay, and better retirement

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 425

Managing Your Professional and Financial Future

425

before they can develop a substantial portfolio (The
American Nurse, September/October, 2003; Runy,
2003).There is a need for nurses to recognize that
retirement plans are necessary. Too large a percentage of nurses do not take advantage of employerprovided retirement plans. Nurses must require of
their employers a retirement plan explanation and,
with assistance, must develop goals for their ﬁnancial retirement plans (Cook, 1997). Health-care
organizations are increasing their spending on
retirement plans and are offering ancillary services
such as investment advice and ﬂexible account
spending services (Reilly, 2003).
Retirement planning includes planning for
ﬁnances as well as health care. It also includes psychological adjustment to and acceptance of the
aging process, the transition from an active working
lifestyle to one which is, in many instances, far less
active (Lee, 2003). According to MacEwen, et al.
(1995), retirement preparation affects the individual’s anxiety level. Financial savings must begin
years before the psychological planning is needed if
the individual is to accomplish the emotional state
of one Canadian nurse who took an early retirement; she says she is not bored, but pleasantly busy
and glad to be retired (Leeson, 2003).

planning the ﬁnances for those activities is a vital
part of retirement ﬁnancial planning.

EDUCATE YOURSELF

La Plante (2003) cautions the reader to maintain
insurance, have emergency savings, and live a relatively debt-free lifestyle. Other advice includes
changing from saving to investing because of more

Nurses already multitask, but they must add
another task to the list: gaining knowledge of retirement planning. It would simplify the process if all
necessary information on retirement planning
could be found in one place, but that is not the case.
Therefore, nurses must actively search for the
knowledge they require (Lewis & Hounsell, 2003).
The nurse can also seek advice from the human
resources department in the individual’s place of
employment.

PSYCHOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE
According to La Plante (2003), each individual
must determine what retirement means personally.
At retirement, some may want to travel; others may
plan to work longer and/or even part-time and do
special interest activities. Others may want to pursue more education in areas in or outside of the
nursing ﬁeld. Whatever the retired nurse may do,

DOLLARS AND SENSE
There are many formulas for determining the
finances required for retirement. Lewis and
Hounsell (1999) have suggested a general rule of
planning for the individual to maintain the same
lifestyle in retirement as before retirement. These
authors suggest that 65% to 80% of one’s pre-retirement income is needed. Therefore, if the individual
earned $50,000 annually, the retirement income
would need to be $32,000 to $40,000 annually. It is
possible that, given the present state of the economy
and the current rate of inﬂation of about 4%, the
same amount of income may be required after
retirement as before. They also suggest that nurses
know their:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Savings on hand
Value of Social Security beneﬁts
Current pension plan in detail
Rights to a spouse’s pension
Values of other savings plans. Those plans
may include: 401(k), 403(b), 503(c), 401(a),
457(b), and 457(f). See Box 25-2.

Box 25-2
Various Retirement Plans
1. 401(k)—Participants save for retirement by making
pre-tax contributions to a profit-sharing, target benefit, or stock bonus plan. Sponsors can also make
contributions into the fund for the contributor. Funds
are not taxed until withdrawn.
2. 403(b)—A tax-deferred plan for employees of
educational institutions. Funds are not taxed until
withdrawn.
3. 503(c)—Employer-determined plan for amount
contributed, benefits earned, requirements for receipt
on contributions, and circumstances under which
money can be made available.
4. 457—Plan designed as a benefit for public employees
to supplement other existing plans (Runy, 2003; Ward,
2005).

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

426

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 426

Skills for a Successful Career

rapidly increased returns. When nurses control
their future ﬁnancial plans, they are participating in
the control of their destinies.

401(k)
According to Cook (1997), the 401(k) [the 403(b)
in non-proﬁt organizations] plan quickly became
the retirement vehicle of choice for ﬁnancial planning in the 1990s and possibly into the 21st century
as well. There are proposals, however, to replace
public and private contribution plans with investment savings accounts that are sponsored by the
employer (Ward, 2005).
Cook stated that hospital employees will have a
greater advantage when choosing ﬁnancial retirement plans if they understand risk and diversiﬁcation. Diversiﬁcation must not be confused with
having a number of investment options (Cook,
1997). A clear understanding of risk and return is
vital when making investment decisions.
Asset Allocation Strategies

Decisions regarding risk tolerance and the amount
of time required to invest before the funds are
acquired at retirement are at the discretion of the
individual. There are at least four strategies for allocating assets for retirement funds. The conservative
strategy is for individuals who have only a few
years to invest (fewer than 4) and who cannot tolerate investment risk (experiencing their invested
funds increase and decrease as the stock market
loses and gains). The balanced strategy is for the
individual who can tolerate only a moderate
amount of investment risk and has at least 6 years
to invest before retirement. The individual’s funds
will be distributed equally between rapidly growing
investments and safer investments, which grow at a
much slower rate. The growth strategy is for the
individual who has at least 6 years to invest before
retirement and who has a fairly high tolerance for
investment risk. In this instance, the rapidly growing, more risky investments will consume more of
the person’s funds, and fewer funds will be attributed to the slower-growing safer investments. The
last strategy, the aggressive growth strategy, is for
the individual who has at least 7 to 10 years to
invest, who wants a high rate of return, and who
can tolerate greater investment risk. There are spe-

ciﬁc formulas that delineate this philosophy (Keefe,
2005).
Another concept to consider regarding investment plans is what to do with your funds when you
leave one job for another. Nurses tend to change
jobs frequently; thus, nurses may have investment
funds in several different places. Four choices have
been suggested for handling retirement assets in
previous accounts. The individual can roll over the
invested funds from the previous position into an
individual retirement account (IRA), transfer previously invested funds to the new employer’s
401(k) plan, allow the previously invested funds to
remain in the former employer’s plan, or take the
previously invested funds in cash. One serious
problem with “cashing out” investment funds is the
considerable amount of taxes due for those funds
because they are saved as pretax funds, and there
are penalties for early withdrawal (Kohrmann,
2003). Another problem is the temptation to use
the funds to pay for present ﬁnancial responsibilities. This temptation should be resisted in lieu of a
brighter ﬁnancial future in retirement.
Changes in society, in nurses, and in the nursing
profession are reﬂected in the way nurses are viewing and participating in ﬁnancial planning for the
future. Although acceptance of the aging process,
transitioning from the working lifestyle to a much
less active lifestyle, and planning for health care
during retirement are extremely important, it is
vital that the working nurse plan ﬁnancially for
retirement. The ﬁnancial retirement once available
for individuals through Social Security will no
longer meet the needs of a population that is living
longer and is more active. Time and risk tolerance
might (in some cases) seem prohibitive in ﬁnancial
planning; however, the invested funds are the property of the individual, and the decision about how
to manage them is for the individual to plan and
make wisely.

All Good Things...
Professions demonstrate ﬁve attributes to defend
their status. Nursing has declared itself to be a profession. To defend this status, nursing has met the
attributes in the following manner: (1) it functions

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 427

Managing Your Professional and Financial Future

from a systematic knowledge base unique to the profession based on scholarship activities as well as
knowledge from other disciplines; (2) it has authority, through education and experience, allowing the
nurse to make professional judgments; (3) it demonstrates community sanction through licensing, certiﬁcation, and deﬁning practice through rules and
regulations set at the state level; (4) it has a code of
ethics for practice to protect both the nurse and the
client; and (5) it has been identiﬁed as a culture
through licensing, professional organizations, community organizations, and the educational programs in place for students and licensed nurses.
Scholarship is a key foundation to the basis for
nursing practice. Commonly thought of as purely
the research process, this is not scholarship’s only
component. Scholarship also includes dissemination of the information gained through study via
writing (editorials, articles, books) and presenting
(speaking, papers, or posters) related to the information. Guidelines for these activities include
reviewing reading/writing level, using visuals (pictures, backgrounds, color schemes), using formats
(PowerPoint IMRAD), and monitoring personal
appearance (dress, eye contact, voice). Like the
research process, time and planning are crucial
for any of these activities to have a positive outcome.
Finally, it is never too late for planning one’s
ﬁnancial future in retirement. Although this was
not on the minds of many individuals in the past,
now is believed to be a good time to start investing,
even a small amount, toward this goal. Nurses must
consider this fact and educate themselves through
their employer’s human resource department or
select a ﬁnancial advisor to assist them in this
process, no matter where they are in their career
presently.
There are many formulas for determining
ﬁnances required for retirement. Factors to help
determine a plan include one’s savings, the value of
Social Security beneﬁts, detailed information on
current pension plan, and rights related to a
spouse’s pension. Once known, it is important to
review other savings plans, such as the 401(k),
403(b), 503(c), 401(a), 457(b), and 457(f), along
with their risks and diversiﬁcation. Based on the
understanding of this information, a decision can
be made.

427

Let’s Talk
1. Identify the barriers one should consider when
deciding which paths to take in planning for a
nursing career.
2. How does the level of nursing education relate to
the standards of a profession, and does nursing
meet the standard?
3. Although certiﬁcation is considered of value to
the consumer in selecting a physician, why is this
not demanded from the public for nursing?
4. Professional organizations in nursing are not
unlike those of other professions. Why are these
organizations beneﬁcial to their members, and
why do the organizations in nursing have
difficulty in attracting/maintaining members?
5. Scholarship opportunities take on a myriad of
possibilities for one to practice. Why are these
opportunities valuable to nursing, and how can
we encourage nurses in practice to pursue these
possibilities?
6. Retirement notes the end of the journey of a
lifetime in professional practice. When is the
best time to begin thinking about this aspect of
life, and how do various opportunities for saving
compare?

NCLEX Questions
1. Functioning as a professional nurse involves

which of the following EXCEPT:
A. Being involved in community and nursing
organizations
B. Sharing information through scholarly activity such as research and publications
C. Thinking of nursing as a job
D. Obtaining specialty certiﬁcation
2. Deﬁning characteristics of a profession are

exempliﬁed through their organizations. These
characteristics include:
A. Attaining a common body of knowledge
B. Practicing with agreed-upon performance
standards

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

428

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 428

Skills for a Successful Career

C. Providing a certiﬁcation process
D. All of the above
3. The American Nurses Association describes

some of the characteristics of the nursing profession as:
A. Attaining a common body of knowledge
B. Practicing with agreed-upon performance
standards
C. Having a representative professional organization
D. Possessing a certiﬁcation procedure
E. All of the above
4. When assessing one’s career, nurses need to take

a SWOT test of their job situation. An identiﬁcation and description of which letter is correct?
A. S—Satisfaction with one’s current situation
B. W—Wellness assessment of patients in one’s
care
C. O—Opportunities available for nurse to pursue
D. T—Thinking as a part of decision making
5. Opportunities for nurse entrepreneurial activi-

ties continue to be necessary to advance nursing
in today’s world. Some activities engaged in by
previous nurse entrepreneurs and appropriate
for present-day nurses include all EXCEPT:
A. Creating nontraditional nursing roles
B. Use of epidemiological methods to address
populations at risk
C. Raising funds for the plight of the poor or
underserved
D. Working within known parameters
6. The profession of nursing has allowed others to

usurp its recognition for many of the functions.
This situation has caused many problems for the
profession and has:
A. Revealed nurses’ contributions to patient care
B. Improved nurses’ morale
C. Led to shortages in nursing supply
D. Improved patient safety
7. Forces that determine the shaping of the nursing

profession include:
A. Technological forces such as simulation and
computer technology
B. Dynamic forces such as the aging of the “baby
boomers”
C. National forces such as the need for national
health-care reform

D. Global forces that affect the cultural mix for
our society
E. All of the above
8. Marketing is one of the concepts to be consid-

ered by nurses in the process of planning and
developing a career in nursing. Marketing is:
A. The meeting of people for the purpose of
establishing links to meet speciﬁc goals
B. The establishing of relationships for personal and professional support
C. The promotion of self and of personal and
professional abilities
D. Making small talk and taking advantage of a
colleague
9. The nurse intrapreneur is beneﬁcial to the

organization and possesses all of the following
traits EXCEPT:
A. Wants to change his/her workplace
B. Develops skills needed by the organization
C. Saves the institution money
D. Is loyal to the institution
10. The value of an entrepreneur in nursing is:

A. They are nursing’s action-oriented decision
makers
B. They are able to make change in nursing
happen quickly
C. They are able to ﬁnd innovative ways for
resolution of traditional patient problems
D. They promote formal education as the only
way to attain their goals
REFERENCES
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (1999). Position
statement: Deﬁning scholarship for the discipline of nursing.
Journal of Professional Nursing, 15(6), 372–376.
American Nurse. (2003). September/October.
Baldwin, C., & Chandler, G.E. (2002). Improving faculty publication output: The role of a writing coach. Journal of Professional Nursing, 18(1), 8–15.
Bartruff, B. (2003). A ﬁnancial wake-up call. The Nursing
Spectrum.
Boyer, E.L. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities of the professorate. Princeton, NJ: Carnegie Endowment for the
Advancement of Teaching.
Brown, S., et al. (1995). Nursing perspective on Boyer’s scholarship paradigm. Nurse Educator, 20(5), 26–30.
Bruce, J.A. (1990). Reward strategies for the retention of professional nurses. Doctoral dissertation, University of Massachusetts, 1990.
Bullough, V.L., & Bullough, B. (1984). History, trends, and politics in nursing. CT: Appleton-Century-Croft.

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 429

Managing Your Professional and Financial Future
Burns, N., & Grove, S.K. (1993). Understanding nursing research
(3rd ed.). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Catalano, J.T. (1996). Contemporary nursing. Philadelphia: F.A.
Davis.
Cook, M.F. (1997). The human resources yearbook: 1997/1998.
Prentice Hall.
Edwards, J., et al. (2000). Position statement on deﬁning scholarship for the discipline of nursing. Journal of Child and
Family Nursing, May/June, 244–248.
Fidelity Investments Tax-Exempt Services Company. (2003).
Understanding the basics of investing. Fidelity Investments,
3–4.
Gregg, M.M., & Pierce, L.L. (1994). Developing a paper for conference presentations. Gastroenterology Nursing, 17(1), 6–10.
Greenwood, E. (1957). Attributes of a profession. Social Work,
2(3),45–55.
Hawke, M. (2000). Building a secure ﬁnancial future: Part 2.
Nursing Spectrum.
Henry, B. (2002). Writing for scientiﬁc publication. Acta Paul
Enf. Sao Paulo, 15(1), 59–71.
In Brief. (2003). Reworking retirement plans. The American
Nurse, 9.
Keefe, J. (2005). High time. Plansponsor, 11(5), 120–123.
Kitson, A. (1999). The relevance of scholarship for nursing
research and practice. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 29(4),
773–775.
Kohrmann, J. (2003). Teach your old 401(k) assets new tricks.
Physical Therapy (PT) Magazine, 35–36.
Lang, T.A. (2002). Mentor-guided analytical thinking (MAT): A
method for training medical writers and editors. American
Medical Writers’ Association Journal, 17(1), 26–27.
La Plante, C. (2003). The basics of retirement planning. Massage
Therapy Journal, 44–55.
Lee, W.K.M. (2003). Women and retirement planning: Towards
the “feminization of poverty” in an aging Hong Kong. Journal
of Women & Aging, 15(1), 31–53.
Leeson, E. (2003). Ode to retirement. Hand in Hand, 115–123.
Lewis, J.R., & Hounsell, C. (1999). Planning for retirement.
Physical Therapy Magazine, 34–37.
MacEwen, K.E., et al. (1995). Predicting retirement anxiety: The
role of parental socialization and personal planning. Journal of
Social Psychology, 135, 203–213.
Mancino., D. (2001). Professional associations. In Chitty, K.
Professional nursing: Concepts and challenges (3rd ed.).
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Meleis, A.I. (2001). Scholarship and the RO1. Journal of Nursing
Scholarship, 104–105.

429

National League of Nursing. 1992. Characteristics of associate degree education in Nursing. Council of Associate
Degree Programs. National League of Nursing, New
York.
Polit, D.F., & Beck, C.T. (2006). Essentials of nursing research:
Methods, appraisal, and utilization. (6th ed.). Philadelphia:
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association.
(2001). (5th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Rawlins, K. (1993). Presentations communication skills: A handbook for practitioners. Basingstoke: Macmillan Magazines.
Rawlins, K. (2004). Reap the benefits of joining NSNA.
American Nursing Student, 56(2):19.
Reilly, P. (2003). Sweetening the offer: Organizations adding
retirement, ancillary beneﬁts to lure workers. Modern healthcare, 12.
Reworking retirement plans. (2003). American Nurse.
35(5), 9.
Riley, J.M., et al. (2002). Revisioning nursing scholarship.
Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 34(4), 383–389.
Robinson, R. (2003). Don’t send it yet! Getting your manuscript
ready to submit. Nurse Author and Editor 1–7.
Runy, L.A. (2003). Retirement beneﬁts as a recruitment and
retention tool. American Hospital Association Magazine,
www.ahamag.com.
Ryan, N.M. (1989). Developing and presenting a research poster.
Applied Nursing Research, 2(1), 52–55.
Scherubel, J. 2005. Nursing licensure and certiﬁcation. In
Cherry, B., & Jacob S. Contemporary Nursing: Issues, trends and
management. (3rd ed). St. Louis: Elsevier Mosby.
Schorr, T.M., & Kennedy, M.S. (1999). 100 years of American
nursing: Celebrating a century of caring. Philadelphia:
Lippincott.
Strickland, T. (1999). Conference presentations with conﬁdence.
The Case Manager, 68–70.
Stromborg, M.F., et al. (2005). Specialty certiﬁcation: More than
a title. Nursing Management, 36–46.
Sullivan, E.J. (2002). Top 10 reasons a manuscript is rejected.
Journal of Professional Nursing, 18(1), 1–2.
Walker, M. (1997). A survival guide to paper presentation.
British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 60(1), 26–28.
Ward, J. (2005). Beside themselves. Plansponsor, 108–112.
Webster. (2004). Miriam Webster Dictionary. (11th ed.).
Springﬁeld, MA: Merriam-Webster.
Worcester, A. (1927). Nurses and nursing. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

25Jones Leadership(F)-ch 25

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 430

This page has been left intentionally blank.

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 431

index
Page numbers followed by b indicate boxed material
Page numbers followed by f indicate ﬁgures
Page numbers followed by t indicate tables
A
AACN. See American Association of Colleges of Nursing
(AACN); American Association of Critical Care Nurses
(AACN)
AAN. See American Academy of Nursing (AAN)
ABC. See Alternative Billing Codes (ABC)
Absenteeism, 310, 311b
Abuse of power, 205
Access to capital, not-for proﬁts organizations and, 108
Accommodation, in conﬂict management, 336, 337t
Accountability
of delegators, 346
in organizational chart, 47
Accreditation
deﬁnition of, 85
as nursing regulation, 85–86
Accredited Standards Committee (ACS), 139t
Accrual, deﬁnition of, 268
Achievement
as attribute in leadership, 8
as need category, 31
ACS. See Accredited Standards Committee (ACS)
Act and react, in leadership, 5
Active listening
in effective communication, 194
in employee evaluation, 307
signs of, 195b
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE),
260
ADA. See Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)
Adaptors, 153
Adena Health System, 127
Ad hoc/adhocracy structure, 50–51
Administrative law, 62
Administrative (positional) power, 202–203
Admitting nurses, 289
Advance directives, 63
Advanced beginner, in transition to skilled clinician, 370
Advanced nursing practice, competencies critical to, 80–82
Advanced practice nurse (APN)
core standards for, 72b
deﬁnition of, 71, 71b
delegation to, 349–350
regulating, 71–72, 71b
scope of practice, 73b
standards of care for, 71–74
Adverse drug events, 250
Adverse events, deﬁnition of, 240b
Affective conﬂict, 332
Affiliation, 31
Affirmation, 362–363
Affirming values, in leadership tasks, 6

Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 1967, 59b
Agency for Healthcare Research, 252
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, 88
Aggressive growth strategy for asset allocation, 426
Alderfer, C. P., 30
Alienated followers, 6
Alliances, in political tactics, 211
All-patient-reﬁned diagnosis-related groups (APR-DRGs), 260
Alternative Billing Codes (ABC), 137t
Altruism, 66b
Ambulatory payment classiﬁcations (APCs), 103
American Academy of Nursing (AAN), 52
American Academy of Nursing Expert Panel on Quality Health
Care, 246, 248
American Academy of Pediatrics, 210
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN), 26, 66,
66b, 192, 376, 420
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN)-Colleges,
285
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN)-Critical
Care, 280, 283, 284f, 290
American Association of Critical Care Nurses (AACN), 330,
418t, 420
American Healthcare Corporation of America, 108
American Heart Association, 420
American Hospital Association, 424
American Hospital Association Survey, 108
American Nurses Association (ANA)
approved terminology standards, 136–137t
clinical standards, 298
Code of Ethics for Nurses, 69, 346, 419
Code of Ethics with Interpretative Statements, 62
as drivers of quality, 244–245
Ethics and Human Rights Position Statements, 65
focus of, 419
on information and knowledge, 138
job description standards and guidelines, 300–302
legislation, 204, 207
nursing informatics, 132
policies and procedures, 86
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), 20–21, 53,
132, 234, 245, 253, 417, 418t
American Society of Association Executives Foundation
Forum, 9
American Society of Healthcare Risk Management, 258
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), 58
ANCC. See American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC)
Androgynous leader, 9
Anecdotal records, 304–305, 307
APACHE. See Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation
(APACHE)
APCs. See Ambulatory payment classiﬁcations (APCs)

431

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

432

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 432

Index

APN. See Advanced practice nurse (APN)
Appearance, in nonverbal communication, 119
Appraisal. See Performance appraisal
Appropriateness element, in writing, 421b
Approved terminology standards, ANA, 136–137t
APR-DRGs. See All-patient-reﬁned diagnosis-related groups
(APR-DRGs)
Art of Chaordic Leadership, The, 13
Assertive communication, 307
Assessment
career, 393
cultural, 321
of environment, 228–230, 229t
in negotiation process, 340, 341t
in nursing process, 134t
in organizational strategic plan, 267–269
of readiness for change, 169
of resources, 210
timing, in political strategies, 211
of values, 210
Asset allocation strategies, 426
Assigned workload, 290
Associate degree nurse programs, 8, 417t
Association of Collegiate Schools of Nursing, 419
Assumptions, identifying, in critical thinking process, 152–153
“Asynchronous” communication, 25
Attainable goals, 362
Attendant, 348b
Attention management, 5
Attitudes, communication and, 324
Attractor, 22t
Attributes of successful leaders, 8
Authority
deﬁnition of, 203
of delegators, 346
as principle of management, 18t
Autonomy
essential values and behaviors in, 66b
as ethical principle, 64, 64b
and work enrichment, 33
Average patient census, 290
Avoiding, in conﬂict management, 336, 337t

B
Baby Boomers, 32, 396
Baccalaureate nurse program, 417t
Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997, 102
Balanced Budget Relief Act of 1999, 102
Balanced strategy for asset allocation, 426
Baldrige, Malcolm, 245b
Baldrige National Quality Award, 245b
Bar code medication administration, 250
Bar code on medication package, 250
Bar code on patient’s wristband, 250
BARS. See Behaviorally anchored rating scale (BARS)
BATNA. See Best Alternative to the Negotiated Agreement
(BATNA)
Baylor University Hospital, 100
BBA of 1997. See Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997
Beginning nurse, computer competencies of, 76, 82b

Behavioral management movement, 19–20
Behavioral patterns, in conﬂict, 336
Behaviorally anchored rating scale (BARS), 299
Behavior(s)
communication and, 324
essential, 66b
learned, 115
nonverbal, 115, 122, 194b
role, 367, 367b, 368
Benchmarks/benchmarking, 240b, 253
Beneﬁcence, as ethical principle, 64, 64b
Benner, Patricia, 370, 372
Bennis, Warren, 9, 15
Best Alternative to the Negotiated Agreement (BATNA), 341,
342t
Best practice, 89
Best Practices for Reducing the Risk of Malpractice Litigation
(Catalano), 62
Bethiaume v. Pratt, 62
Beverly Enterprises, 108
Bidding, in negotiation plan development, 340, 341t, 342
Bifurcation, 22t
Big Town Nursing Home, Inc. v. Newman, 61
“Black Nightingale”, 393
Black’s Law Dictionary, 73
Blue Cross/Blue Shield, 100–101
BNE. See Board of nurse examiners (BNE)
Board of Certiﬁcation for Emergency Nursing, 418t
Board of nurse examiners (BNE)
deﬁnition of advanced practice nurse, 71b
nursing profession and, 70
standards of nursing practice for registered nurse, 70b
Body movements, in nonverbal communication, 119
Body orientation, in nonverbal behavior, 194b
Bottom line, deﬁnition of, 268
Bottom line–oriented manager, 15
Brainstorming
in principled negotiation, 213–214
technique of, 162
Breach of duty, in malpractice, 60, 60b
Broad (wide) span of control, 43, 50
Budgeting. See Fiscal planning and budgeting
Building conﬁdence, 196
Building shared vision, in learning organizations, 45, 177,
177t
Bureaucracy, 49–50
Bureaucratic management, 18–19
Bureaucratic model of organization structure, 43
Business planning, 224
Buzzwords, 381

C
California program for registered and nonregistered nurses, 71
California State Department of Health, 71
Call bell response, 261
Call system report, 261
Capital budget, 271
Capitation, health-care payment systems and, 99–100
Care/case manager, 407–408
Care competency, 76

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 433

Index
Care delivery models, 282–285
Care experts, 397
Career development. See also Career planning and development
building nursing care, 390–391
entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship opportunities, 392
marketing, networking, and mentoring, 402–404
of nurse entrepreneurs, 406–408
of nurse intrapreneurs, 404–406
Career life linkages, 371
Career planning and development
building strategic plan, 401–402
career assessment, 393
creating visionary change, 399–400
creativity and innovation, 399
forces shaping careers, 396–399
integrating self with environmental opportunities, 400–401
opportunity seeking and risk taking, 401
overview of, 392–393
persistence in, 393–394
taking control of career, 394–396
Career planning specialist, 379
Caring leadership, 5
Carolyn McCarthy Center on Gun Violence and Harm
Reduction, 210
Case law, 58, 59
Caseload Management Competency, 77
Cash budget, 271
Causation, in malpractice, 60, 60b
Cause and effect diagram. See Root cause analysis
Cause and effect ideas, 21
CBT. See Computer-based training (CBT)
CCC. See Clinical Care Classiﬁcation (CCC)
CDC. See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
CDM. See Charge description master (CDM)
Center for American Nurses, 280
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 86, 88, 310
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), 86–87, 97,
101, 103, 215, 242, 252
Central processing unit (CPU), 144
Central tendency, 305, 306t
Centralization/decentralization principle of management, 18t
Centralized decision making, 49
Centralized staffing, 287–288
Centralized structure, 49–50
Certiﬁcation, 70, 417–418, 418t
Certiﬁed Nurse Assistant (CNA), 348b
CES. See Coates Caring Efficacy Scale (CES)
Chain of command, 43, 47, 116
Change
about, 168
agent, 168, 170, 173–174, 173b
assessing readiness for, 169
assumptions regarding, 168–169
deﬁnition of, 168
lessons of the paradigm of, 179
strategies to overcome, 170, 171–172t, 173
theories of, 173–179
visionary transformation and, 394–396
Change agent motivation and resources assessment, in Lippitt’s
phases of change, 175
Change Forces (Fullan), 179

433

Chaordic, deﬁnition of, 21
Chaos theory
in action, 178–179
concept within, 44
curricular changes and, 21
genesis and hypothesis of, 178
Chaplain, role of, 186t
Charge description master (CDM), 97
Charge nurse competencies, 81b
Charge-based reimbursement, 98
Charitable sources, 108
Chart audits, 254
Checklists, as performance appraisal tool, 304
Chemical impairment, 310
Chief nurse executive (CNE)
power of, 202
role of, 186t
CIN. See Computers, Informatics, Nursing (CIN)
Circadian rhythms, 365
Civil law, 59
Civil Rights Act, 1964, 59b
Clariﬁcation, 152
Classical principles of organizational design, 42
Classical theory, 42–43
Client role of nurse manager, 26t
Client/situation, identiﬁcation for delegation, 347
Climate of organizations, 53
Clinical Care Classiﬁcation (CCC), 136
Clinical decision-making course, 21
Clinical nurse leader (CNL), 285
Clinical nurse specialist (CNS), 72, 409
Clinical practice, portfolio of competence in, 78–79
Closing the deal, in negotiation plan development, 340, 341t,
342
Clutter, dealing with, 366
CMS. See Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
CNA. See Certiﬁed Nurse Assistant (CNA)
CNL. See Clinical nurse leader (CNL)
CNS. See Clinical nurse specialist (CNS)
Coaching, in implementing plan of action, 309
Coalitions, 212
Coates Caring Efficacy Scale (CES), 76
Coercive power, 204
Cognitive conﬂict, 332
Cognitive science, 133, 133f
Cognitive skills, in critical thinking, 152
Collaboration
in conﬂict management, 336, 337t
effective, leaders and, 10
in political strategies, 211
with professionals, nurses and, 14
reward, 196
in win-win solutions, 213
Collaborative negotiation, competitive vs., 339
Collegiality, in professional performance, 301, 302
Colorado Board of Nursing, 60
Colorado Nurse Practice Act, 353
Command of activity among personnel concept, 18t
Commercial insurers, 101
Common law, 58, 59
Common-cause variation, 257

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

434

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 434

Index

Communicating priorities, as leaders skills, 196
Communication. See also Communication skills; Effective communication; Organizational communication
among caregivers, 192
assertive, 307
asynchronous, 25
with clients, 62
cultural beliefs and attitudes and, 324
cultural interaction and, 317–318
deﬁnition of, 119
diagonal, 120
downward, 119
e-mail as, 125–126
formal channels of, 47
formal vs. informal, 120–121
gender and, 123
generations and, 123
horizontal, 120
interpersonal, 114, 117
motivating, 34–35
nonverbal, 119
organization-wide, 125
theories of, 114–116
vertical, 119–120
Communication management, 5
Communication skills
in leadership, 8
in Lippitt’s phases of change, 174
Communicator, nurse as, 25
Community
networking, power and, 10
not-for-proﬁts organizations and, 108
politics and, 207–208
Competence/competency(ies). See also Computer competencies;
Cultural competence
of charge nurse, 81b
in critical care, 81
critical to advanced nursing practice, 80–82
critical to nursing management, 80
of emotional intelligence, 364b
generalist vs. specialist nursing, 80–81, 80b
of leaders, 9
measuring in clinical practice, 77–80
of nurse managers, 26t
of nurses, 8
nursing, 70, 75–77
in nursing informatics, 81–82
of Pew Foundation, 378b
social, 364b
in specialty practice, 77
supervision and, 354
in transition to skilled clinician, 370
Competency-based orientation, 78
Competition
in conﬂict management, 336, 337t, 338
vs. collaborative negotiation, 339
Competitive negotiation
collective bargaining as example of, 340
vs. collaborative negotiation, 339
Complexity science
about, 14, 22
language of, 22t

Complexity theory, 15, 21
Comprehensive job description, 300
Compromise, in conﬂict management style, 336, 337t
Computer competencies. See also Competence/competency(ies)
of beginning nurse, 76, 82b
of nursing informatics, 83b
Computer science, 132, 133f
Computer-based training (CBT), 80
Computerized risk assessment programs, 92
Computers
hardware, 143–144
input and output devices, 144
memory of, 144, 145t
power of, 144–145
processing components, 144
Computers, Informatics, Nursing (CIN), 408
Concurrent audit, retrospective audit vs., 254b
Conﬁdence
building, 196
in political tactics, 212
Conﬁrmation, in Rogers’ diffusion of innovation, 176
Conﬂict resolution
destructive, 338
resolution process, 212–213
steps to, 214, 214b
win-win solutions in, 213–214
Confusion, 61
Consciousness, cultural, 318
Consequentialism, 63
Conservative strategy for asset allocation, 426
Considering context, in critical thinking process, 153
Constructive conﬂict management. See also Conﬂict resolution
affective, 332
categorization of, 331–332
cognitive, 332
conﬂict management styles, 336–337, 337t
conﬂict situation assessment, 333–338
deﬁnition of, 337
deﬁnition of conﬂict, 331
dimensions of, 330–332
organizational conﬂict types, 332
role of negotiation in, 339–342
scenarios, 330
styles in nursing and health care, 337–338
Consumer satisfaction, 305
Content, in effective communication, 194
Content goals, 334
Contingency theory, 4, 44
Continuing education, 416, 419
Continuous quality improvement (CQI) project, 309
Contract law, 62
Contracts, 59
Contributors, 6
Control charts, 256–257, 261
Control taking, in career planning and development, 394–396
Control theory, 32b
Control through rules and procedures concept, 18t
Controllable expenses, 274–275
Coordination of parts into uniﬁed whole concept, 18t
Core competency of caring, 76
Core measures, 241
Correctness element, in writing, 421b

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 435

Index
Cost-based reimbursement, 98
Cost containment, 274–275, 276f
Counseling, in implementing plan of action, 310
Courage, in leadership, 8
Courtesy, in political tactics, 212
Cover letter(s)
action words and phrases for, 382b
example of, 383b
importance of, 381
qualities of, 383b
CPM. See Critical path method (CPM)
CPU. See Central processing unit (CPU)
CQI project. See Continuous quality improvement (CQI)
project
Create a plan phase, in job prospecting, 379–381
Creating opportunities, 5
Creativity, nursing career and, 399
Credibility, in leadership strategies, 5
Criminal law, 59
Critical care, competencies in, 81
Critical path method (CPM), 226–227, 227f
Critical thinking
in building strategic plan, 393, 401–402
process of, 152–153, 152b
skills of, 154
Criticism, in performance appraisal, 307
Crosby, Philip, 246
Crossing the Quality Chasm (IOM), 141, 243
Cultural assessment, 321
checklist of, 322b
Cultural awareness, 321
of nurses, 8, 318
Cultural beliefs, communication and, 324
Cultural care, 321
Cultural competence. See also Competence/competency(ies)
deﬁnition of, 316b, 319
models of, 318–320, 319f, 320f
nurse managers and, 325
in practice, 321–323
Cultural consciousness, 318
Cultural diversity, 316, 316b, 317
Cultural encounters, 319
Cultural knowledge, 318
Cultural skill, 319
Culturally diverse workforce, managing, 323–325
Culture. See also Cultural competence
of candor, leaders and, 9
concepts of, 316–317
deﬁnition of, 316b
impact on nursing practice, 317–318
nurse intrapreneurs and, 405–406
of organizations, 53
terms describing, 316b
Curricular changes and chaos theory, 21
Curriculum vitae (CV), 380
Cyclical staffing, 287–288

D
Daily patient census, 285
Daily staffing, in scheduling outcome, 289
Damages, in malpractice, 60, 60b

435

Dashboards
as management tool, 276–277
in strategic planning process, 232–233, 233t
Data collection
chart audits and, 254
in critical thinking process, 153
in performance appraisal, 303–305
Data conﬂicts, 331
Data display tools, 254
Data elements, 135–138
Data interchange standards, 138
Data standards
components of, 135
of health-care organizations, 139t
terminology standards, 140–141, 142
Dataset Nursing Quality Indicators, 244
Decentralization/centralization principle of management, 18t
Decentralized decision making, 49
Decentralized staffing, 287, 288
Decentralized structure, 50, 50f
Decision, in Rogers’ diffusion of innovation, 176
Decision maker, nurse as, 24–25
Decision making, 393
activity of, 152
autonomy in, 33
avoiding common mistakes in, 160–162
brainstorming technique in, 162
building strategic plan and, 401–402
centralized, 49
ethical, 58, 65–66
ethics, MORAL model of, 65, 65b
models of, 153–156, 153f
pre-, 157
problem-solving process, 160, 161f
seven hat technique, 162–163
tips for, 161b
tools for, 157–160
types of decisions, 157
Decoding, 116
Deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve, and control (DMAIC),
248–249
Delegatee, in delegation, 346
Delegation, 302. See also Right person in delegation; Rights of
delegation
client/situation in, 347
delegatee in, 346
delegators in, 346
right circumstances for, 351–353
task in, 346–347
Delegation decision model, 351, 352f
Delegators
accountability or responsibility of, 346
nurse as, 25–26
Demand theory, 104–105, 106f
Deming, W. Edwards, 245–246
Deontology, 63
Department of Education, 101
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW), 101
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), 101, 145
Destructive conﬂict resolution, 338
Diagnosis phase, in nursing process, 134t
Diagnosis-related group (DRG) system, 101, 102, 103

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

436

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 436

Index

Diagonal communication, 120
DICOM. See Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
(DICOM)
Dietitian, role of, 186t
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM),
139t
Direct care activity, 286
Direct care competency, 76
Direct cost, deﬁnition of, 268
Direction
deﬁnition of, 353
right, 353–354
Disaster planning, 224
Discernment phase, in job prospecting, 379
Discipline principle of management, 18t
Disciplining, in implementing plan of action, 310
Distributed control, 22t
Divergent goals, in conﬂict situation, 334
Divergent thinking, 152
Diversiﬁcation, 426
Diversity, cultural, 316, 316b, 317
Division of work principle of management, 18t
DMAIC. See Deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve, and control
(DMAIC)
DNR orders. See Do not resuscitate (DNR) orders
Do not resuscitate (DNR) orders, 63
Doctoral degree nurse program, 417t
Doctoral prepared nurse, 184, 185t
Documentation, 286
Dominating, in conﬂict management, 336
Donabedian, Avedis, 246
Donations, 108
Downsizing, 312
Downward communication, 119
Downward transfer, 312
DRG system. See Diagnosis-related group (DRG) system
Drivers of quality
patients as, 240–241
payers as, 243
professional groups as, 243–245
regulators as, 241–243
Drucker, Peter, 16, 22, 41
Durable power of attorney, 63
Duty to client, in malpractice, 59–60, 60b

E
Economic inﬂuences
demand and supply theories, 104–106
maximizing proﬁts, 106–109
in shaping nurses’ careers, 396
status of health care in U.S., 96–100
third-party payers, 100–104
Economic theories of supply and demand, 104–109
Edge of chaos, 22t
Education. See also Nursing education
continuing, 416, 419
in professional performance, 301
staff, 85
Effective coalitions, 212

Effective communication. See also Communication
leaders and, 10
organizations and, 114, 117, 126
within teams, 193–195
Effective followers, 6
Effective leaders, 10
Effective leadership, 15
EHRs. See Electronic health records (EHRs)
Electronic communication, information technology and,
123–126
Electronic health records (EHRs), 124–125
Electronic medical records (EMRs), 138, 141, 143
Elements of change, 168–169
E-mail, as communication tool, 125–126
Emergency department nurse, sample job description of, 301f
Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Law
(EMTALA), 58
Emergency Nursing Organization, 420
Emotional intelligence
domains and competencies of, 364b
as strategy in achieving goals, 363
Employees. See also Employers; Performance appraisal
motivated, 43
new, 310–311
probationary, 310–311
problem of, 311–312
ranking of, as performance appraisal tool, 304
role in performance appraisal, 306
theories of motivation, 30–32
Employers, characteristics to look for in, 377
Empowerment, 205–206
EMRs. See Electronic medical records (EMRs)
EMTALA. See Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor
Law (EMTALA)
Encoding, 116
End-of-life issues, cultural values and, 323
“Entrepreneurial leap”, 401
Entrepreneurship, 392
Environment
building, for best practice, 259
external, assessment of, 229, 229t
integrating self with, 400–401
Environmental assessment techniques, 229–230
Envisioning goals, in leadership tasks, 6
Equal Pay Act, 193, 59b
Equilibrium price, 105–106, 106f
Equity principle of management, 18t
Equity theory, 32b
Error, deﬁnition of, 240b
eShift, 288
Ethical decision making, 58, 65–66
Ethical foundations of legal system, 62–66
Ethical principles of legal system, 64–65
Ethical theory of teleology, 63
Ethics
of care, 63
deﬁnition of, 58
in professional performance, 301
Ethics and Human Rights Position Statements, ANA,
1992, 65

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 437

Index
Ethnic groups, in United States, 317
Evaluation
marketing, 235
in nursing process, 134t
in strategic planning process, 232–233, 233t, 270–271
Evaluator bias, 305
Events/issues, in conﬂict situation, 333–334
Evidence-based nursing practice. See also Evidence-based
practice
deﬁnition of, 83
integration into nursing process, 83–84
policies and procedures and, 86
Evidence-based practice
model for developing, 84
overview of, 258–259
as part of nursing standard of care, 83–84
policies and procedures and, 86
through nursing research, 84–85
Executive Learning 2000, 255, 256, 257
Exemplary followers, 6
Existence needs, in ERG theory, 30
Expenditures. See also Expenses
on health care, 96
national health, 97f
of personal health care, 98f
Expenses. See also Expenditures
controllable, 274–275
deﬁnition of, 268
ﬁxed, 274
uncontrollable, 275
variable, 274
Expert nurse, in transition to skilled clinician, 370
Expert power
about, 203
ways to increase, 205
Explaining, in leadership tasks, 6
External environment, assessment of, 229, 229t
Extrinsic motivation, 307
Extrinsic needs, in Herzberg theory, 30–31
Eye contact, in nonverbal behavior, 194b

F
Face-to-face communication, 118
Face-saving goals, 334
Facial expression
in nonverbal behavior, 194b
in nonverbal communication, 119
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA), 241, 254–255, 257
Fatigue, managing, 366
Fayol’s principles of management, 17–18, 18t
FDA. See Federal Drug Administration (FDA)
Federal Drug Administration (FDA), 103
Federal legislation, 58, 59b
Federal policy, 217
Feedback
in effective communication, 194–195
in professional practice evaluation, 302
Fee-for-service payment methods, 98
Fidelity, 65

437

Financial incentives and risk, in health-care payment systems,
100
Financial planning, future, 424–426
First job
job prospecting process, 378–386
selecting work environment, 376–378
Fiscal planning and budgeting
budget approaches, 273
budget preparation process, 270t
budget process objectives, 267b
cash budget, 271
cost containment, 274–275, 276f
creating budgets, 267–271
deﬁnitions of budget, 268–269, 275
importance and features of, 266–267
perpetual budget, 269
in the planning process, 266–267
role of nurse manager in, 272
rules of budgeting, 271b
steps in budget process, 271f
types of budgets, 271–272
variance analysis, 272–274
Fiscal year, deﬁnition of, 268
Fishbone diagram. See Root cause analysis
503(c) retirement plan, 425b
“Five Minds of a Manager, The”, 23b
Five Ps, 307
Fixed budget, 273
Fixed expenses, 274
Flat structure, 50, 50f
Flexestaff, 287
Flexibility, in political tactics, 212
Flexible budget, 273
Flexible scheduling, 288
Flexible tools, in performance assessment, 299
Float pool nurses, 289
Flowcharts, 255
FMEA. See Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA)
Followers
regular recognition of, 9
role of, 6
Followership, types of, 6
Follow-up
after the interview, 384
in performance appraisal, 308–310
Force ﬁeld analysis, 174
Forced distribution scales, 298, 298f
Forcing, in conﬂict management, 336
Formal communication, 25
Formal evaluations, in performance appraisal, 299–300
Formal groups, 185
Formal lines of authority, in organizational chart, 47
Formal vs. informal communication, 120–121
Formalism, 63. See Deontology
Forming stage, in group development, 187–188, 188b
For-proﬁt, deﬁnition of, 268
For-proﬁt health organizations, 107–109
Forseeability, in malpractice, 60, 60b
457 retirement plan, 425b
401(k) retirement plan, 425b, 426

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

438

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 438

Index

403(b) retirement plan, 425b
Fractals, 22t
Fraud, 61
Free market reforms, 215
From Novice to Expert (Benner), 79
FTAA. See Regional Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA)
FTEs. See Full-time equivalents (FTEs)
Fullan, Michael, 179
Full-time equivalents (FTEs), 267–268, 271, 273, 274f
Functional foremanship concept, 17
Future ﬁnancial planning, 424–426

G
Gantt chart, 226, 226t
Gap analysis, 273
“Garbage can” model, 216
GATS. See World Trade Organization’s General Agreement on
Trade in Services (GATS)
Gender
communication and, 123
conﬂict management style and, 338
General administrative theory, 17–18
General Testing Information, 417
Generalist competencies, 80–81, 80b
Generation affects motivation, 32
Generations and communication, 123
Generativity, 391
Gesture, in nonverbal communication, 119
Glances, in nonverbal communication, 119
Global unrest, nursing careers and, 397
Goal-based model, 228
Goal conﬂict, 332
Goals
achieving, strategies for, 362–367
attainable, 362
content, 334
envisioning, in leadership tasks, 6
marketing, 234–235, 235t
of organizations, 46, 231, 231t
personal and professional, developing, 361
sample list of goals, 47b
setting, 362
Government, politics and, 208
Government insurance programs, 101–104
Grapevine, as informal communication, 121–122
Great Man theory, 4
Ground rules, 193
Group communication in organizations, 117
Group(s)
job, 190
processes, 184, 187, 190
purposes, 184, 187
representation, in leadership tasks, 6
stages of development, 187–191
structure, 184, 187
task, 187
vs. team characteristics, 191t
work, 184
Growth needs, in ERG theory, 30

Growth strategy for asset allocation, 426
Guessing error, 306t
Guesstimates, 306t

H
Hallmarks of the Professional Nursing Practice Environment,
376, 377
Halo effect, 305, 306t
Hardware of computers, 143–144
Harvard Negotiation Project, 213
Havelock’s Six Step Change Model, 175
Hawthorne Effect, 19–20
Haynor, Patricia, 265
HCAHPS. See Hospital Consumer Assessment of Health Plans
(HCAHPS)
HCFA. See Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA)
Health care. See also Health-care organizations; Health-care payment systems
action words for résumé and cover letters in, 382b
agencies, 192
conﬂict styles in, 337–338
current status in United States, 96
delivery of, 184, 217
government and, 208
inﬂuence of culture on, 325
organizational structure of, 51
policy, 214–215
quality, 240
rationing of, 109
reform, 217
types of services, 51–52
union activity in, 340
Health-care assistant, 348b
Health-care data, privacy and protection of, 145–146
Health-care data standards
about, 135
organizations, 139t
terminology standards, 140–141, 142
Healthcare Financial Management, 107
Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), 101
Health-care industry, marketing concepts in, 233
Health-care organizations, 45
charge description master in, 97
deﬁnition of, 116
leadership programs in, 10
nurse satisfaction and, 34
nursing in, 42
pressures faced by, 106
traditional management theory and, 19
Health-care payment systems
capitation and, 99–100
overview of, 96–97
reimbursement models and, 98–99
uninsured consumers and, 97–98, 98f
Health-care providers, reimbursement and ﬁnancial risks of,
100
Health-care rationing, 109
Health-care setting, staffing plan in, 282
Health-care system, economic and sociopolitical forces in, 396

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 439

Index
Health insurance, 96
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA),
58, 85, 87, 145, 168
Health Level Seven (HL7), 139t
Health maintenance organization (HMO), 52, 101
Health organizations, for proﬁt vs. not-for-proﬁt, 107–109
Health Promotion Competency, 76
Helping relationship termination, in Lippitt’s phases of change,
175
Herzberg, Frederick, 30–31
HEW. See Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
(HEW)
Hierarchical power, 10
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA)
Histograms, 256
HL7. See Health Level Seven (HL7)
HMO. See Health maintenance organization (HMO)
Home health aides
personal hygiene training for, 350b, 354
training for, 348t
Home Health Compare, 242
Honeymoon phase, in reality shock, 369
Horizontal communication, 120
Horizontal conﬂict, 332
Horizontal integration, 51
Horn effect, 305
Horn effect/problem distortion, 306t
Hospice nurses, job satisfaction and, 33
Hospital Compare initiative, 242
Hospital Consumer Assessment of Health Plans (HCAHPS),
251, 251t
Hospital Intranet, utilization of, 79–80
Hospitals
marketing in, 233–234
marketing strategies of, 235
How to Sleep Well, 366b
Human dignity, 66b
Human Genome Program, 399
Humanistic theory (neoclassical theory), 43

I
ICN. See International Council of Nurses (ICN)
ICNP. See International Classiﬁcation for Nursing Practice
(ICNP)
Ideal bureaucracy, 18–19
Ideal leader, 7
Identity goals, 334
Impersonality, 19
Implementation
of budget, 269–270, 273
in Lippitt’s phases of change, 175
in strategic planning process, 232
trial, in Rogers’ diffusion of innovation, 176
Implementing the agreement, in negotiation plan development,
340, 341t, 342
IMRAD format (Introduction, Methods, Results, and
Discussion), 424
Indemniﬁcation, 61

439

Indirect care, 286
Indirect costs, deﬁnition of, 268
Individual retirement account (IRA), 426
Informal evaluations, in performance appraisal, 300
Informal groups, 185, 187
Informatic words, 381
Informatics. See Nursing informatics (NI)
Information, organizational, 122
Information communication, 25
Information processing model, 154
Information science, 132, 133f
Information synthesis phase, in negotiation plan development,
340–342, 341t
Information technology, electronic communication and,
123–126
Informed consent, 61
Initial impression, 306t
Initiative principle of management, 18t
Innovation, nursing career and, 399
Innovative decisions, 157
Innovators, 153
Inpatient prospective payment system, 102–103
Input devices, 144
Institute of Healthcare Improvement, 240, 248, 256
Institute of Medicine (IOM), 88, 183, 240, 243, 280, 281, 377
Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, 124
Institutional license or delegation, 353
Insurance
government programs, 101–104
health, 96
Insurers, commercial, 101
Integrated health-care system, 51
Integrating self with environmental opportunities, 400–401
Integrity, 66b
as organizational value, 46b
Intellectual capacity, 363
Intelligence, as attribute in leadership, 8
Intemperate use, 75b
Intentional torts, 61–62
Interactionist perspective of communication, 115–116
Interdisciplinary teams, 191–193
Interest conﬂicts, 331
Interests
focus on, 213
in negotiation plan development stage, 340
Internal environment, assessment of, 229, 229t
International Classiﬁcation for Nursing Practice (ICNP), 136t
International Council of Nurses (ICN), 397
Internet, searching for jobs on, 378b
Interoperability, 135
Interpersonal communication, 114, 117
Interpersonal Communication Competency, 76
Interstate compact, 73
Interview
appropriate dress for, 384b
follow-up after, 384
preparation for, 381–383, 384b
questions to ask in, 385b
self-assessment questions, 385b
Intranet, utilization of, 79–80

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

440

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 440

Index

Intranet-delivered computer-based training, 79
Intranets, 125
Intrapreneurship, 392
Intrinsic needs, in Herzberg theory, 30–31
Introduction, Methods, Results, and Discussion (IMRAD
format), 424
Invasion of privacy, 61–62
IOM. See Institute of Medicine (IOM)
IRA. See Individual retirement account (IRA)
Issue-based strategic planning, 228

J
Japanese management style, 20–21, 20t
JCAHO. See Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospital
Organizations (JCAHO)
Job analysis, 300
Job assignments, 280
Job Characteristics Model of Work, 33
Job description
ANA standards and guidelines, 300–302
deﬁnition of, 300
evaluating employees and, 298
motivation and, 33
sample of, 301f
Job offer, questions to ask in, 385b
Job prospecting process, 378–386
cover letter and, 381, 383b
discernment step, 379
follow-up step, 384, 385b
Internet job searching, 378b
interview preparation, 381–383, 384b, 385b
plan creation step, 379–381
restarting the process, 386
résumé writing tips, 380b
sample résumé, 381b
self-appraisal step, 378–379
Job satisfaction, 33
Job searching, using the Internet for, 378b
Job speciﬁcations, 300
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations (JCAHO), 85–86, 127, 240, 241–242, 254,
258, 298, 310, 337
Journal of Hospice and Palliative Nursing, 408
Judgment, good, as attribute in leadership, 8
Juran, Joseph, 246
Justice, as ethical principle, 64, 64b

K
Kaiser Family Foundation, 215
Kaizen, 20
Kaufmann Foundation Campus Initiative, 392
Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work Environment of
Nurses, 243
Kimball, Justin Ford, 100
Kindon’s policy stream model, 216
Knowledge
cultural, 318
in Rogers’ diffusion of innovation, 176
and skills of nurses, 62
Knowledge representation, 138–140

“Knowledge workers”, 2, 16
Kramer, Marlene, 369, 372
Kurt Lewin’s force ﬁled analysis, 174

L
Lateral transfer, 312
Leader, ideal, 7
Leaders. See also Followers; Leadership; Nursing leaders;
Team leaders
androgynous, 9
in coalitions, 212
competencies of, 9
effective collaboration and, 10
ideal, 7
men, 9
participative, 24
patient outcomes and, 35
self-awareness and, 5
transformational, 5, 24, 35
vs. managers, 7
women, 9
Leadership. See also Leadership theory(ies)
concept of, 15–16
description of, 4
effective, 15
gaining power and, 9–10
gender differences in, 9
mantle of, 10–11
nurse, 10, 15
of organization, 49
practices and tasks, 5–6
in professional performance, 301, 302
qualities of, 8–9
vs. management, 6–7
and worker motivation, 34–35
Leadership theory(ies), 4–5, 14
Great Man theory, 4
New Science Leadership, 5
Situational or Contingency theory, 4
Trait theories, 4
Transformational theory, 5
Lean methodology, 249
Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your
Organization, 249
Leapfrog Group, 243
Learned behavior, 115
Learning organizations theory, 44–45, 176–178
Senge’s ﬁve disciplines of, 177t
Legal system
in America, 58
common law, 59–62
federal legislation, 58, 59b
state legislation, 58–59
Legitimate power, 202
Leininger’s model of transcultural nursing, 320–321,
320f
Lenient ratings, 306t
Leveraging incremental changes, 22t
Lewin’s force ﬁeld analysis, 174
Licensed practical nurse (LPN), role of, 184, 185t
Licensed vocational nurse (LVN), role of, 185t

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 441

Index
Licensure, 70
Line positions, 48
Line-staff conﬂict, 332
Lippitt’s phases of change theory, 174–175
Liquidation, proceeds in, 108
Living wills, 63
Lobbyist, reward power and, 204
Local policy, 217
Logical Observation Identiﬁers Names and Codes (LOINC),
137t, 139t
Logs, 404
LOINC. See Logical Observation Identiﬁers Names and Codes
(LOINC)
Long-term goals, 362
Long-term memory, in information processing model, 154
LPN. See Licensed practical nurse (LPN)
Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital, 107

M
Magnet certiﬁcation program, 253
Magnet facility, 253
Magnet Hospital Program, 21, 234
Magnet hospitals, 34, 52
Magnet Recognition Guidelines, 286
Magnet Recognition Program, 245, 281
Magnet status, 48, 52–53, 53, 377
Maintenance of change, in Lippitt’s phases of change, 175
Malpractice
:Best Practices for Reducing the Risk of Malpractice
Litigation, 62
damages in, 60, 60b
elements of, 60b
as form of negligence, 59–60
Managed care, 52
Managed care plans, common types of, 101
Management. See also Management theory; Nursing
management
according to Fayol, 17
budgets and, 267
communication, 5
concept of, 15–16
of culturally diverse workforce, 323–325
deﬁnition of, 14
equity principle of, 18t
leadership vs., 6–7
of nurses, 23–26
of organizations, 49
principles of, Foyle’s concepts and, 18t
top, nurse intrapreneurs and, 405–406
Management by objectives (MBO), 299, 302–303
Management methods, traditional, 17–19
Management theory
behavioral management movement, 19–20
concepts of management and leadership, 15–23, 16t
evolution of, 14–15
management of nurses, 23–26
Management tools, dashboards as, 276–277
Managerial model, 158, 158t
Managers. See also Nurse managers
bottom line-oriented, 15
care/case, 407–408

441

communication and, 128
“Five Minds of a Manager, The,” 23
marketing, 234
middle, 224
nonverbal behavior of, 119
in organizations, 24
responsibilities of, 14
risk, 258
Managing, in leadership task, 6
Managing People: The Collaborative Mind-Set, 20
Mandatory overtime, 289–290
Market system, 104
Marketing
career development, 402–404
deﬁnition of, 402
evaluation, 235
goals and objectives, 234–235, 235t
for hospitals, 234
intrapreneur or entrepreneur and, 402
plan, 233, 235–236
situational analysis in, 233–234
strategies, 235
Maslow, A. H., 30
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, 30
Massachusetts Nurses Association, 62
Master of Science in Nursing (MSN), 184, 185t
Master’s-prepared nurse program, 417t
Matrix structure, 51
Matthiesen, Valerie J., 420
Mayo, Elton, 19
MBO. See Management by objectives (MBO)
McGregor, Douglas, 20
McGregor’s theory of management. See Management by
objectives (MBO)
Measurable goals, 362
Mechanistic perspective of communication, 114–115
Medicaid program in New York state, 105b
Medical care, demand of, 104–105
Medical emergency team. See Rapid response team
Medical Illness Severity Grouping System (MedisGroups), 260
Medicare
about, 101–102
Inpatient prospective payment system, 102–103
outpatient PPS, 103
Medication administration, 353
Medication errors and nursing quality, 250–251
Medigap plans, 102
MedisGroups. See Medical Illness Severity Grouping System
(MedisGroups)
Memos, 118, 122
Men leaders, 9
Mental models, in learning organization, 45, 177, 177t
Mentoring. See also Mentor(s)
career development and, 402–404
leaders and, 9, 10
Mentor(s)
attributes of, 376b
Clara-Adams-Ender and, 379
formal and informal relationship, 26
nurses as, 26
selecting, 390
in successful career, 404

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

442

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 442

Index

Messages, written, 118, 122
Middle managers, 224, 225
Midwives, 71
Mind-set, positive, 363
Minnesota Board of Nursing, 72
Mintzberg, Henry, 20
Mission statement, 45–46, 230
personal, 361
Mixed staffing, 287, 288
Modeling, 76
Model(s). See also Models of quality
of cultural competence, 318–320, 319f, 320f
delegation decision, 351, 352f
for improvement, 248
of transcultural nursing, Leininger’s, 320–321, 320f
Models of quality
lean methodology, 249–250
model for improvement, 248
plan, do, study, act (PDSA) cycle, 245–247
quality health outcomes model, 248, 248f
six sigma, 248–249
Modern organizational theory, 42
MORAL model of ethical decision making, 65, 65b
Motivating. See also Motivation
as attribute in leadership, 8
in implementing plan of action, 309
in leadership tasks, 5
Motivation
assessment, in Lippitt’s phases of change, 175
deﬁnition of, 30
extrinsic, 307
generation effects on, 32
importance of understanding, 30
jobs satisfaction, successful organizations, and, 32–33
in neoclassical theory, 43
theories of employee motivation, 30–32
Motivation-Hygiene theory (Herzberg’s theory), 30–31, 34
Multistate licensure privilege, 74
Mutual recognition model, 74

N
NANDA. See North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
(NANDA)
Narrow span of control, 43, 50
National Academy of Sciences, 243
National Certiﬁcation Board for Diabetes Educators, 418t
National Chronic Pain Society Facilitators Training Manual,
364
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN), 73, 74,
74b, 77, 302, 346, 398
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI),
290
National Institute of Nursing Research, 88
National League for Nursing Education, 416
National League for Nursing (NLN), 418t, 419
National Nurse Aide Assessment Program (NNAAP), 348
National Nursing Accrediting Service, 416
National Nursing Informatics Project, 81
National Organization for Public Health Nursing, 419

National Patient Safety, 242
National Quality Forum (NQF), 243–244, 280
National Student Nurses’ Association, 419
NCLEX-RN ﬁrst-time pass rates, 21
NCNE. See New Center for Nursing Entrepreneurship (NCNE)
NCSBN. See National Council of State Boards of Nursing
(NCSBN)
NDNQI. See National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators
(NDNQI)
Need categories, McClelland and, 31
Needs, self-concept and, 360
Negative valence, 31
Negligence, 59–60
Negotiation. See also Competitive negotiation
assessment stage in, 340, 341t
Best Alternative to the Negotiated Agreement (BATNA) use
in, 342t
leaders and skills of, 10
principled, in win-win solutions, 213–214
process of, 339, 342
Negotiation plan development stage, 340–342, 341t, 342
Negotiator, nurse as, 25
Neoclassical theory (humanistic theory), 43
Net Generation, 32
Networking, 390, 402–404
Networks
in political strategies, 211
of structures, 51
New Center for Nursing Entrepreneurship (NCNE), 392
New employees, 310
New Science Leadership, 5
New York, Medicaid program in, 105b
New York State Nurses Association (NYSNA), 207
New York State Practice Act of 1972, 207
NHPPD. See Nursing hours per patient day (NHPPD)
NI. See Nursing informatics (NI)
NIC. See Nursing Interventions Classiﬁcation (NIC)
Niche, in professional practice, 392
Nicoll, Leslie, 408
NIDSEC. See Nursing Information and Data Set Evaluation
Center (NIDSEC)
“Night people,” 365
Nightingale, Florence, 7, 206, 393, 416, 420
NLC. See Nurse licensure compact (NLC)
NLN. See National League for Nursing (NLN)
NMDS. See Nursing Minimum Data Set (NMDS)
NMMDS. See Nursing Management Minimum Data Set
(NMMDS)
NNAAP. See National Nurse Aide Assessment Program
(NNAAP)
NOC. See Nursing Outcome Classiﬁcation (NOC)
Nonjudgmental communication, 195
Nonmaleﬁcence, as ethical principle, 64, 64b
Nonperformers, 196
Nonproductive, deﬁnition of, 268
Nonproductive hours, in budget, 268
Nontraditional models of care delivery, 283
Nonverbal behavior, 115, 122, 194b
Nonverbal communication, 119
Normative-re-educative strategy, 170, 171t

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 443

Index
Norming stage, in group development, 190, 191t
Norms, 367, 367b, 368
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association (NANDA),
136t
Not-for-proﬁt, deﬁnition of, 268
Not-for-proﬁt health organizations, 108–109
Novice stage, in transition to skilled clinician, 370
NPA. See Nurse practice acts (NPAs)
NQF. See National Quality Forum (NQF)
NRC Picker, 251
Nurse aides, 348b
Nurse Competence Scale, 79, 79b
Nurse educators, 298
Nurse entrepreneurs. See also Nurse intrapreneurs
marketing and, 402
options and successes of, 307–408
qualities of, 406–407
roles of, 390, 407
Nurse informaticists
focus of, 133–134
as specialty, 132
Nurse internship program, 371
Nurse intrapreneurs. See also Nurse entrepreneurs
options and successes, 406
qualities of, 405
roles of, 390, 405–406
Nurse job description, 33
Nurse job satisfaction, patient outcomes and, 34
Nurse leaders, 5, 35, 62
Nurse licensure compact (NLC), 73–74, 74b
Nurse managers, 35. See also Managers
client role of, 26t
competencies of, 26t
cultural competence initiatives employment by, 325
diverse team of workers and, 323–324
in evaluator bias, 305
ﬁscal planning and budgeting and, 266, 273
implementation of budget and, 269–270, 273
privacy of clients and, 62
risk managers and, 59
role in budget assessment, 267
role in budgeting, 272
role in performance appraisal, 298, 307
role in planning, 269, 273
roles and competencies of, 26t
supply budget and, 272
working with diverse workforce, 324–325
writing skills for, 118
Nurse-midwives, 71
Nurse practice acts (NPAs), 58–59, 350
Nurse practitioners, 400, 409
Nurse residency program, 371
Nurse/nursing administrators
performance appraisal and, 299
responsibilities of, 298
Nurse/patient index, 285
Nurse/patient ratio, 267
Nurse-patient relationship, 275
Nurses. See also Nursing; Speciﬁc types of
nurses

443

beginning, computer competencies of, 76, 82b
as communicators, 25
community and, 207–208
as decision makers, 24–25
delegating to, 349
as delegators, 25–26
job description of, 33
management of, 23–26
as mentors, 26
as negotiators, 25
positions of, 14
and the public, 44
shortage of, 280
span of control for, 14
as team builders, 23–24
Nurse’s aide (NA), role of, 185t
Nurse-sensitive indicators, 250
Nursing. See also Nurses; Nursing education; Nursing leaders;
Nursing management; Nursing practice; Nursing process;
Nursing regulation
advancing in the profession, 424
building career in, 390–391
competencies, 70, 75–77
conﬂict styles in, 337–338
government and, 208
growth of, 324
in health-care organization, 42
legislative and administrative regulation of, 86
as profession, 416
quality, 250–253
shortage in, nurses careers and, 396–397
workforce shortage, 280
writing and publishing scholarship in, 421–424
Nursing administration, leaders of, 8
Nursing care delivery systems. See Care delivery models
Nursing care models, 283
Nursing diagnosis, 74
Nursing education. See also Education
leaders of, 8
levels of, 185t
overview of, 416–417
programs for, 417t
Nursing Home Compare, 242
Nursing Home Quality Initiative, 82
Nursing Home Reform Act, 348
Nursing hours per patient day (NHPPD), 267, 273, 274
Nursing informatics (NI)
competencies in, 81–82
computer competencies of, 83b
computer hardware, 143–145
evolution and deﬁnition of, 132–133
information system goals for early 21st century, 141–143
knowledge representation, 138–140
nursing practice and, 73
privacy and protection of health-care data, 145–146
role of, 146
standards of practice, 133–138, 134t
terminologies of, 140–142
Nursing Information and Data Set Evaluation Center
(NIDSEC), 141

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

444

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 444

Index

Nursing Interventions Classiﬁcation (NIC), 136t, 286
Nursing leaders, 5
becoming, 10
names and accomplishments of, 7–8
Nursing management
competencies critical to, 80
roles, 14
Nursing Management Minimum Data Set (NMMDS), 136t
Nursing Minimum Data Set (NMDS), 135, 136t, 137
Nursing organizations, leaders of, 8
Nursing Outcome Classiﬁcation (NOC), 136t
Nursing practice. See also Nursing Practice Act
disease control as safety issue in, 88
effective, 323
impact of culture on, 317–318
informatics competencies for four levels, 82
leadership and management in, 7
regulation of, 70, 86
Nursing practice acts
discipline and rehabilitation under, 75
standards of care for advanced nursing practice, 71–74
standards of care for registered nurse, 70, 70b
telenursing effects upon expansion of, 72–73
Nursing process
decision making and, 154
model, 156, 156f, 158t
planning in, 224
vs. nursing informatics standards of practice, 134t
vs. policy-setting process, 216t
Nursing regulation
for advanced practice nurse, 71–72, 71b
of nursing practice, 70
Pew Commission Taskforce on Health Care Workforce
Regulation, 77, 77b
Nursing research
evidence-based practice through, 84–85
in long-term care, 87
in professional performance, 301
Nursing staff
autonomy for, 48
in staffing plan, 286
Nursing students, responsibilities of, 14–15
Nursing terminology, 140–141, 142
Nursing theories, leaders of, 8
Nursing workloads, 290
NYSNA. See New York State Nurses Association (NYSNA)

O
Objectives
marketing, 234–235, 235t
of organizations, 46, 231, 231t
in principled negotiation, 214
in strategic planning process, 231, 231t
Obliging/capitulation, in conﬂict management style, 336
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), 1970, 59b
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 86,
87, 88
pathogens standard, 87–88
Occupational therapist, role of, 186t

OMAHA system, 137t
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 348
On Becoming a Leader (Bennis), 15
On-the-job experiences, leaders and, 10
Operating budget, 271
Operational planning
critical path method, 226–227, 227f
focus of, 225–226
Gantt chart, 226, 226t
in medical-surgical unit, 225t
program evaluation and review technique, 227
Opposition, in political strategies, 211
Optimism, leaders and, 9
Order principle of management, 18t
Orderly, 348b
Organization of people and materials concept, 18t
Organizational communication
communication theories, 114–116
gender and generational differences and, 122–123
importance of, 114, 126–127
organizational structure and, 116–118
technology and electronic communication, 123–126
types of, 118–122
Organizational conﬂict, 332
Organizational goals and objectives, 46, 47b
Organizational information, 122
Organizational policies and procedures, 46–47, 46b
Organizational role of nurse managers, 26t
Organizational strategic planning
assessment step in, 267–269
evaluation in, 270–271
implementation step in, 269–270
planning step in, 269
value and implementation of, 47
Organizational structure
bureaucratic model of, 43
description of, 43
inﬂuence on communication, 116–118
speciﬁc to health care, 51
types of, 49–51
Organizational theory, 42–45
Organization-focused manager, 7
Organizations. See also Organizational strategic planning;
Organizational structure; Professional organizations
characteristics of, 34
chart, 47, 48f
climate of, 53
components and planning, 45
culture of, 53
deﬁnition of, 42, 116
function of, 17
goals of, achieving, 15
growth of, 20
interpersonal and group communication in, 117
organizational theory and, 45
philosophy of, 46
values, 45, 46b
ORYX initiative, 241
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), 1970;
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 445

Index
Outcomes, in strategic planning process, 232, 232t
Outcomes measurement, 259–260
Output devices, 144
Overtime, in scheduling outcomes, 289–290

P
PA. See Physician assistant (PA)
PACU nurses. See Postanesthesia recovery unit (PACU) nurses
Paralanguage, 194
Pareto diagram, 255, 255f
Participative leader, 24
Parties involved, in conﬂict situation, 333
Partners, 6
Partnership Care Delivery Model, 285
Passive resistance, in political tactics, 212
Patient acuity, in staffing plan, 285–286
Patient care, 18, 275
Patient Care Data Set (PCDS), 137t
Patient care delivery models. See Care delivery models
Patient care unit-related principle, 281
Patient outcomes. See also Patients
job satisfaction and, 34
leaders and, 35
Patient Right to Self-Determination Act, 63
Patient Self-Determination Act, 1990, 59b, 64
Patient surveys, as performance appraisal tool, 305
Patient-centered care, 143
Patients
competencies of caring for, 76–77
as drivers of quality, 240–241
satisfaction of, nursing quality and, 251–253
Payers, as drivers of quality, 243
PCDS. See Patient Care Data Set (PCDS)
PDSA cycle. See Plan, do, study, act (PDSA) cycle
Peer evaluation, in self-assessment, 302
Peer reviews, as performance appraisal tool, 299, 303–304
PEPRS, 333
Performance appraisal. See also Performance appraisal tools
baselines for, 300–302
data collection in, 303–305
employee appraisal meeting, 306
employee problem, 311–312
evaluator bias in, 305
follow-up in, 308–310
meeting, 308, 308t
process of, 298–300
role of employee in, 306
role of nurse manager in, 306–307
Performance appraisal tools
anecdotal records, 304, 307
checklists, 304
patient surveys, 305
peer reviews, 303–304
ranking employees, 304
rating scales, 304
sample of, 299f
skill testing, 304–305
Performance planning, 224
Performing stage, in group development, 190–191, 191t
Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS), 137

445

Permanent memory, 144
Perpetual budget, 269
Per-Sé Technologies, 287
Persistence
in career planning and development, 393–394
in political strategies, 210–211
Personal face-to-face communication, 25
Personal hygiene training, for home health aides, 350b, 354
Personal integrity, in leadership, 8
Personal involvement, leaders and, 10
Personal mastery
in learning organization, 176–177, 177t
as process, 45
Personal mission statement, 361
Personal power, 202
Personal qualities, power and, 10
Personal roles of nurse managers, 26t
Personal space, in nonverbal behavior, 194b
Personal survival skills, in leadership, 8
Personal time, 286
Personal values, 360, 361
Person-to-person communication, 118
Persuasion, in Rogers’ diffusion of innovation, 176
PERT. See Program evaluation and review technique (PERT)
PEST factors. See Political, educational, social, and technology
(PEST) factors
Pew Commission Taskforce on Health Care Workforce
Regulation, 77, 77b
Pew Foundation’s competencies, 378, 378b
PHI. See Protected health information (PHI)
Physical therapist, role of, 186t
Physical vitality, as attribute in leadership, 8
Physician, role of, 186t
Physician assistant (PA)
delegation of, 349
role of, 186t
Physiological needs, in Maslow’s hierarchy, 30
Picker Patient Centered Care Dimensions, 251, 251b
Pill pushing, 353
Plagiarism, 421b
Plan, do, study, act (PDSA) cycle, 245–247
Planned change, 168, 170
Plan/planning. See also Operational planning; Strategic
plan/planning
action in job prospecting, 381–383
business, 224
creation of, 379–381
deﬁnition of planning, 224
disaster, 224
in nursing process, 134t
process, 227
project, 224–225
in strategic planning process, 228–236, 228t, 267–269, 273
types of, 224
PNDS. See Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS)
Policy development, 215–217
Policy(ies). See also Public policy
deﬁnition of, 86, 214
health-care, 214–215
malpractice and, 62
organizational, developing, 311b

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

446

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 446

Index

Policy(ies) (Continued)
private, 216
and procedures of organizations, 46–47
sample of philosophy, 46b
system, 214
Policy-setting process, nursing process vs., 216t
Political, educational, social, and technology (PEST) factors,
229–230
Political analysis
components of, 209–210, 209b
systematic analysis framework in, 208–209
Political forces, in shaping nurses’ careers, 396
Political sensitivity, in leadership, 8
Political strategies, 210–212
Political tactics, 211
Politicians, 6
Politics
action spheres of, 206–210
deﬁnition of, 206
Porter-Lawler Model, 32b
Portfolio, in measuring competence, 78–79
Position control, deﬁnition of, 268
Positional (administrative) power, 202
Positions
in negotiation plan development, 340
of nurses, 14
Positive self-affirmation, 362–363
Positive self-talk, 362–363
Positive work environment, 35
Postanesthesia recovery unit (PACU) nurses, 160
Poster presentations, 422–424
Posture, in nonverbal behavior, 194b
Power
abuse of, 205
coercive, 204
of computers, 144–145
in conﬂict situation, 334–335
deﬁnition of, 202, 212
expert, 203
leadership and, 9–10
need for, 204
personal, 202
positional, 202
referent, 204
reward, 203–204
ways to achieve, 204–205
Power bases, analysis of, 210
Power-coercive strategy, 170, 171t
PPS. See Prospective payment system (PPS)
Practice of Management, The (Drucker), 16
Practice to strive
applying for Magnet certiﬁcation program, 253
applying negotiation model, 342
autonomy for nursing staff, 49
best budget practices, 275
Best Practices for Reducing the Risk of Malpractice Litigation,
62
cost reduction and increasing proﬁts, 107
decision-making guidelines, 160
decision to advancing in profession, 424
do’s and don’t’s in delegation, 347

do’s and don’t’s in preparing résumé, 382
effective organizational communication, 127
as efficient team, 193
electronic medical records systems, 143
employing cultural competence initiatives, 325
improving health care with political participation,
210
leaders/managers meeting organizational goals, 24
linking motivation, job satisfaction, and positive organizational outcomes, 35
nurse internship programs, 371
nurse leaders, 5
planning process in organizations, 227
promoting best practice, 89
using evidence-based practice in delivery of care, 169
Practices of leadership, 5–6
Preceptors’ record of competency-based orientation, 78
Pre–decision making, 157
Preferred provider organizations, 101
Presentations
helpful hints for, 423t
scholarship in, 422–424
President Clinton’s Health Security Act, 209
Prevoyance concept, 18t
Price system, 104
Pricing services, 107
Primary health care services, 51
Principled negotiation, in win-win solutions, 213–214
Principles for Nurse Staffing (ANA), 280, 281
Principles of Biomedical Ethics (Beauchamp and Childress),
64
“Prior planning prevents poor performance”, 307
Priorities, in political tactics, 212
Privacy of health-care data, 145–146
Private insurers, 100–104
Private policy, 216
Privately held ﬁrms, 108
Proactive approach of risk managers, 258
Probationary employees, 310
Problem solving
in conﬂict management, 336
decision making and, 161–162
in learning organizations, 178–179
Problems. See also Problem solving
diagnosis in Lippitt’s phases of change, 174–175
identiﬁcation and analysis of, 209, 209b
Procedure, deﬁnition of, 86
Process analysis, 254
Process experts, 255
Process goals, 334
Process measures, in quality, 244
Productive, deﬁnition of, 268
Profession, nursing as, 390
Professional authority, 203
Professional nurse
adjusting to the role of, 368–369
transition from student to, 367–371
Professional organizations
about, 418–419
American Nurses Association, 419
National League for Nursing, 419

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 447

Index
National Student Nurses’ Association, 419
politics and, 207
Sigma Theta Tau (STT), 419–420
Specialty organizations, 420
Professional performance, standards of, 301–302
Professional practice evaluation, in professional performance,
301–302
Professional practice models, 52
Professional socialization, 368
Professionalization, 203, 207
Proﬁcient stage, in transition to skilled clinician, 370
Proﬁts, maximizing, 106–107
Program budget, 271
Program evaluation and review technique (PERT), 227
Program planning, 224
Progressive change objectives selection, in Lippitt’s phases of
change, 175
Project planning, 224–225, 228
Projected patient days, 268
Pros and cons, in decision making, 158–159, 158t
Prospective payment system (PPS)
inpatient, 102–103
inpatient reimbursement, 103t
outpatient, 103
providers in, 102
reimbursement in, 98–99
Protected health information (PHI), 145
Protection of health-care data, 145–146
Protégé, 26
Psychiatrist, role of, 186t
Psychological knowledge, 425
Psychological needs, in Maslow’s hierarchy, 30
Psychological perspective of communication, 115
Psychologist, role of, 186t
Public, nurses and, 44
Public policy
government and, 216–217
leaders of, 8
role of, 419
Publicly held ﬁrms, 108
Purnell’s model for cultural competence, 318, 319f

Q
QIO. See Quality improvement organizations (QIO)
Quality health care, deﬁnition of, 240b
Quality Health Outcomes Model, 246, 248, 248f
Quality improvement organizations (QIO), 242
Quality management, 107
Quality of practice, in professional performance, 301
Quality tools and strategies
chart audits, 254
failure mode and effects analysis, 254–255
ﬂowcharts, 255
histograms, 256
Pareto diagram, 255, 255f
root cause analysis, 255
run charts, 256, 256f, 257f, 261
statistical thinking and control charts, 256–257
Quality(ies). See also Drivers of quality; Quality tools and
strategies

Baldrige National Quality Award, 245b
as deﬁned by Crosby, 246
deﬁnition of terms, 240b
drivers of, 240–250
historical perspectives of, 245–246
of intrapreneurs, 405
of leaders, 8–9
models of, 245–250
of nurse entrepreneurs, 406–407
of nurses and medication error, 250–251
of nurses and patient satisfaction, 251–253
as organizational value, 46b
outcomes measurement, 259–260
requirements of, 260
risk management and, 257–259
trilogy, 246
Quasi-participative model, 21

R
RAM. See Random access memory (RAM)
Random access memory (RAM), 144
Ranking employees, as performance appraisal tool, 304
Rapid response team, 289
Rater errors, 304, 305, 306t
Rater temperament effect, 306t
Rating scales
example of, 299f
as performance appraisal tool, 298–300, 304
Rational minds, 363
Rational-empirical strategy, 170, 171t
Rationing of health care, 109
Readability, deﬁnition of, 421b
Read-only memory (ROM), 144
Realistic goals, 362
Reality shock, 369
Reasoning, 152
Receiver, in effective communication, 193–194
Recognition, leaders and, 9
Recovery phase, in reality shock, 369
Recruitment of foreign nurses, 324
Reengineering, 107
Referent power, 204
Reﬂection, 152
Refreezing phase, change agent and, 174
Regional Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), 397
Registered Nurse Assistant (RNA), 348b
Registered nurse (RN)
certiﬁcation of, 417–418
educational program, 317t
in health-care organization, 42
as knowledge workers, 138
role of, 185t
standards of care for, 70, 70b
Regulated nurse, 283
Regulating nurses
accreditation and, 85–86
evidence-based practice: Standard of Care, 83–85
legislative and administrative regulation, 86–88
nursing competencies, 75–82
Nursing Practice Act, 70–75

447

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

448

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 448

Index

Rehabilitation Nursing, 418t
Reimbursement models, health-care payment systems and,
98–99
Relatedness needs, in ERG theory, 31
Relational goals, 334
Relationship-based nursing model, 283
Relationship building, 10
Relationship conﬂicts, 331
Relationship development stage, in negotiation process, 340,
341t
Relationship goal, 334
Relationship management, emotional intelligence and, 364b
Remuneration principle of management, 18t
Renewing, in leadership tasks, 6
“Rent-a-nurse,” 289
Representing the group, in leadership tasks, 6
Research. See Nursing research
Research-practice gap, 84–85
Resolution, in reality shock, 369
Resource utilization, in professional performance, 301, 302
Resources
allocating, 104
assessment of, 210
regulating, 335–336
Respect management, 5
Responsibility
of delegators, 346
in organizational chart, 47
Responsibility accounting, in ﬁscal planning, 266
Results, achievement of, leaders and, 9
Résumé
action words and phrases for, 382b
do’s and don’t’s in writing, 382
sample, 381b
tips for writing, 380b
writing of, 379–381
Retirement plans, 425–426, 425b
Retrospective vs. concurrent audits, 254b
Revenue, deﬁnition of, 268
Reward power, 203–204
Right direction, 353–354
Right person in delegation
APN delegation, 349–359
delegating to nurses, 349
delegating to UAP, 347–349
physician assisted delegation, 349
student delegation, 350
Rights of delegation. See also Right person in delegation
right circumstances in, 351–353
right direction in, 353–354
right supervision in, 354–355
right task in, 350–351
Risk, 426
Risk adjustment technique, 260
Risk leadership, 5
Risk management, 5, 257–259
Risk priority number, 254
Risk taking, in political strategies, 211
Risk tolerance, 426
RNA. See Registered Nurse Assistant (RNA)
Rogers, Carl, 195

Rogers, Everett, 175
Rogers, Martha, 8
Rogers’ diffusion of innovation, 175–176
Role, deﬁnition of, 367, 367b, 368
Role behaviors, 367, 367b, 368
Role conﬂict, 332
Role model, in leadership, 5
Role modeling, 76
Role theory
deﬁnitions of, 367b
social structure in, 367
symbolic interaction in, 367
ROM. See Read-only memory (ROM)
Root cause analysis, 255, 261
Routine decisions, 157
Rumor in organizations, 121–122
Run charts, 256, 256f, 257f, 261

S
Safety needs, in Maslow’s hierarchy, 30
Safety protocols, establishing, 88
Safety standards regulation, informatics utilized in, 82
Sale, proceeds in, 108
Sample matrix model, 159–160, 160t
Sample mission statement, 46b
Sanctions, 367, 367b, 368
“Sandwich generation”, 408
Scalar chain principle of management, 18t
Scenario-based strategic planning, 228
Scheduling and staffing systems
deﬁnition of scheduling, 286
ﬂexible scheduling, 288
planning schedule, 287
scheduling methodologies, 287
scheduling outcomes, 289–290
self-scheduling, 288
variables of scheduling, 280
work schedules, 287
Scholarship
in nursing, 420–421
in presentations, 422–424
writing and publishing in nursing, 421–422
School nurses, job satisfaction for, 33
Science of nursing practice, leaders of, 8
Scientiﬁc management movement, 17
Scientiﬁc rigor, 259
Scope and Standards for Nurse Administrators, 126
Scope of practice, 346
Scope of Practice for Nursing Informatics, 132
Scoreboards, in strategic planning process, 232–233, 233t
Seacole, Mary, 393
Secondary health-care services, 51–52
Self-assessment, sociocultural, 323b
Self-actualization needs, 30
Self-appraisal, 306–307, 378–379
Self-assessment tools, in measuring competence, 79
Self-awareness
emotional intelligence and, 363, 364b
leaders and, 5
self-concept and, 360

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 449

Index
Self-concept, 360–361
Self-development, leaders and, 5
Self-direction, in leadership, 8
Self-Efficacy theory, 32b
Self-esteem, 5, 30
Self-evaluation, 302
Self-management
about, 360
achieving goals, 362–367
developing personal and prospective goals, 361
importance of, 360
self-concept as ﬁrst step in, 360–361
transitioning from student to professional nurse, 367–371
Self-organization, 22t
Self-reﬂective thinking, 399
Self-reported competency of caring, 76
Self-scheduling, 288
Selye, Hans, 364
Sender, in effective communication, 194
Senge, Peter, 45, 176
Service, as organizational value, 46b
Serving as a symbol, in leadership tasks, 6
Seven hat technique, 162–163
Severity adjustment, 260
“Shadowing,” 10
Shared governance, 52
Shared governance model, 21
Shared vision
in leadership, 5
in learning organization, 177, 177t
Sharing, in conﬂict management style, 336
Sheep followers, 6
Shift bidding, 288
Shock phase, in reality shock, 369
Shortage in nursing, nurses careers and, 396–397
Short-term goals, 362
Short-term memory, in information processing model,
154
Sick leave, 311, 311b
Sigma Theta Tau (STT), 419–420
Sigma Theta Tau International, 26
Situational theory, 4
Situation-level workloads, 290
Six Sigma Model, 248–249
Skill testing, as performance appraisal tool, 305
Skilled clinician, transition from student to, 369–370
Skills. See also Communication skills
avoiding malpractice, 62
developing leadership, 10
of successful leaders, 8
in workplace, 211–212
Sleep deprivation, 364–366, 366b
SMART guidelines, 362
“Smart pumps,” 250
Smoothing, in conﬂict management style, 336
Social awareness, emotional intelligence and, 364b
Social justice, 64, 66b
Social Security Act of 1965, 101, 103, 132
Social worker, role of, 186t
Socialization, 368
Sociocultural self-assessment, 323b

449

Sociopolitical economy forces, in shaping nurses’ careers,
396–397
Solutions
analyzing, 209
win-win, 213–214
SOMED-CT. See Systemic Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical
Terms (SOMED-CT)
Soothing, as behavior pattern, 336
Span of control
broad (wide), 43, 50
in chain of command, 48–49
description of, 43
for nurses, 14
Speaking style, in nonverbal behavior, 194b
Special-cause variation, 257
Specialist nursing competencies, 80–81, 80b
Specialization of labor, 43
Specialty organizations, 420
Specialty practice, competencies in, 77
Speciﬁc goals, 362
Speech language pathologist, role of, 186t
Sphere of concern, 362
Spoken communication, 119
Staff education, 85
Staff members, Mosby’s deﬁnition of, 286
Staff nurses, newly graduated, responsibilities of, 14
Staff positions, 48
Staffing
autonomy for, 48
centralized, 287–288
daily, in scheduling outcome, 289
decentralized, 287, 288
deﬁnition of, 286
managing culturally diverse, 323–325
mixed, 287, 288
overview of, 280–282
plan, 282–286
process, 282–286, 282f, 290
regulation of, 86
requirements, compliance with, 86
Stage sequential models, 216
Stamina, as attribute in leadership, 8
Standard of care
for advanced nursing practice, 71–74
hours in, 267
informatics utilized in, 82
Standard of practice, nursing informatics, 133–135
Standardized procedure, Technical in nature, Routine task,
Unlikely risk, and Predictable results (STRUP), 350–351
Standards, 240b, 253
Standards of Practice for Nursing Informatics, 1995, 132
Stare decisis, 58
STAT nurses, 289
State Children’s Insurance Health Care Program, 87
State policy, 217
State regulators, as drivers of quality, 242
State-mandated competencies, hospitals and, 79–80
Statistical thinking, 254, 256–257
Status, 306t, 367, 367b, 368
Status quo challenges, in leadership, 5
Stents, 103

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

450

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 450

Index

Stereotyping, 316b, 325
Stewardship, 10
Storming stage, in group development, 189–190
Strategic planning process, 228t
assessment of environment in, 228–230, 229t
evaluation in, 232–233, 233t, 270–271
goal setting in, 230–231, 231t
implementation in, 232
mission and vision statement in, 230
objectives in, 231, 231t
outcomes in, 232, 232t
strategies in, 231–232, 231t
Strategic plan/planning
building, 393, 401–402
as management tool, 227–228
Strategic vision/action orientation, in leadership, 8
Strategies
for achieving SMART goals, 362–367
for leading planned change, 170
marketing, 235
to overcome barriers to change, 170, 171–172t, 173
quality, 254–257
in strategic planning process, 231–232, 231t
Stress management, 364–366, 365b
Stressor, 364, 372
Strict ratings, 306t
Structural conﬂicts, 331–332
Structural measures, in quality, 244
STRUP. See Standardized procedure, Technical in nature,
Routine task, Unlikely risk, and Predictable results
(STRUP)
STT. See Sigma Theta Tau (STT)
Student delegation, 350
Students
transition to professional nurse, 367–371
transition to skilled clinician, 369–370
Subordinates, 6
Subordination to corporate good principle of management, 18t
Sunﬂower effect, 306t
Supervision
deﬁnition of, 354
right, 354–355
Supervision Competency, 76
Supply and demand, 104–109
Supply budget, 271–272
Supply curve and equilibrium price, 105–106, 106f
Surreptitious energy drain, 366, 372
“Survival Guide,” for presentations, 422
SWAT. See System-wide action team (SWAT)
SWOT analysis, 393
in decision making, 159, 159t
in environmental assessment, 230, 230t
marketing and, 233–234
Symbolic interactionism, 115
Symbols in communication, 115–116
Systemic Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SOMEDCT), 137t
Systems theory, 43–44
Systems thinking, in learning organizations, 45, 177–178, 177t
System-wide action team (SWAT), 289

T
Tactics in workplace, 211–212
Taft Hartley Act, 1947, 59b
Tall structure, 49–50
Tardiness, 311, 311b
Task competence, as attribute in leadership, 8
Task-oriented work, 17
Tasks
delegated, refusing, 351
in delegation, 346–347
of leadership, 5–6
unﬁnished, 366
Tax subsidies, 108
T-CAB. See Transforming Care at the Bedside (T-CAB)
Team builder, nurse as, 23–24
Team building
in leadership, 8
in learning organization, 177, 177t
in Lippitt’s phases of change, 174
in performance appraisal, 298
in political tactics, 211
Team leaders
effective, 195–196
eight themes of, 197
responsibilities of, 14
skills of, 196
Team leading, 195–197
Team learning, in learning organizations, 45, 177
Team member roles, 186t
Team spirit, 18
Teams. See also Team building; Team leaders
characteristics, group vs., 191t
effective, qualities of, 193
Teamwork, 18
Technical expertise, effective expertise and, 196
Technological forces, nursing careers and, 398–399
Technology, electronic communication and, 123–126
Telenursing, 72–73
Teleology, ethical theory of, 63
Temporary/supplemental staffing, 289
Termination, 311–312
Terminology. See Terms/terminology
Terms/terminology
ANA approved standards, 136–137t
cultural, 316
nursing, 140–141, 142
quality, 240b
used in complexity science, 22t
Tertiary health-care services, 52
Texas Board of Nurse Examiners, 70, 70b, 71
Texas Nurses Association Nurse-Friendly Hospital Criteria
(TNA, 2005), 281
Texas Nursing Practice Act, 72b, 75b
The National Academies, 124
“The Nurses Guide to the Internet,” 408
“The Sunrise Model”, 321
Theories of communication, 114–116
Theory X, 20, 34
Theory Y, 20, 34
Theory Z: Japanese Management Style, 20–21

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 451

Index
Thinking, divergent, 152
Third-party payers, 100–104
Thompson, Richard C., 408
Thought element, in writing, 421b
Through the Patients’ Eyes, 241, 251
Time and motion study concept, 17
Time management, 366, 367b
Time-oriented goals, 362
Timing
assessment of, in political strategies, 211
in decision making, 157
in moving phase, 174
Tone of voice, in nonverbal communication, 119
Tools
quality, 254–257
for severity and risk adjustment, 260
Tort law, 59–60
Touch, in nonverbal communication, 119
Toyota Production System (TPS), 249–250
TPS. See Toyota Production System (TPS)
Tracer method of evaluation, 241
Traditional management methods, 17–19
Traditional nursing care models, 283
Traditional policies and procedures, 8686
Traditional problem-solving process, 157–158, 158t
Training
for home health aides, 348t, 354
personal hygiene, for home health aides, 350b
Trait theories, 4
Transactional leaders, 35
Transcultural nursing, Leininger’s model of, 320–321,
320f
Transculturism, 321
Transfers, 311–312
Transformational leaders/leadership, 5, 10, 24, 35
Transformational theory, 5
Transforming Care at the Bedside (T-CAB), 285
Trust management, 5
Turley, James, 133
Twentieth century
informatics in, 132
management approaches in, 19
Twenty-ﬁrst century
Foyal principles of management, 18
information systems goals for, 141, 143–144
management thought, 21–23
Pew Foundation’s competencies for, 378, 378b
view on management and leadership, 16t
2004 University Health System Consortium Nursing
Work Environment Benchmarking Survey (2005),
281
Two-Factor theory (Herzberg’s theory), 30–31, 34

U
U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 324
UAP. See Unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP)
Uncontrollable expenses, 275
Uncontrollable factors identiﬁcation, in decision making,
157

Understanding of followers’ needs, as attribute in
leadership, 8
Unﬁnished tasks, 366
Unfreezing phase, change agent and, 174
Uninsured consumers, health-care payment systems and,
97–98, 98f
Unintentional torts, 59
Union activity, in health care, 340
Unit staffing plan, 286
Unit-based peer review, 303–304
Unit-based report cards, 250
United States
culture of, 317
ethnic groups in, 317
Unit-related activity, 286
Unity of command, 18t, 48
Unity of direction principle of management, 18t
University HealthSystem Consortium study, 281
University of Michigan School of Nursing, 78
University of New Castle upon Tyne, 81, 85
Unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP), 283, 285
delegating to, 346–349
names for, 348b
Upward communication, 120
Utilitarianism, 63
Utter vs. United Hospital Center, Inc., 59

V
Valence, negative, 31
Value conﬂicts, 331
Values
affirmation, in leadership tasks, 6
assessment of, 210
deﬁnition of, 316b
essential, 66b
as level of culture, 316
organizational, 45, 46b
personal, 360, 361
self-concept and, 360
Variable expenses, 274
Variance analysis, 272–274
Veracity, 65
Verbal communication, 118–119
Vertical communication, 119–120
Vertical conﬂict, 332
Vertical information, 122
Vertical integration, 51
Veterans Health Administration, 250
Vicarious liability, 61
Victim mentality, 362
Videotaping, in assessing competency, 78
Virtue ethics, 64
Visible level of culture, 316
Vision
clear, fostering, 9
shared, in leadership, 5
“Vision oriented” leader, 15
Vision statement, 46, 46b, 230
Visionary image, nursing career and, 399–400

451

26Jones Leadership(F)-Index

452

1/14/07

3:57 PM

Page 452

Index

Visionary transformation, change and, 394–396
VitalSmarts, 330
Vocal, in nonverbal behavior, 194b
Von Bertalanffy, L., 43
Vonfrolio, Laura Gasparis, 408
Vroom, V., 31

W
Wagner Act (National Labor Act of 1935), 59b
Wald, Lillian, 7, 393
Waters, Verle, 8
Watson, Jean, 8
Web logs, 404
Web sites
of certiﬁcation organizations, 418t
for job search, 378b
Weber, Max, 18, 42
Western Management Styles, 20t
Wheeler’s model, 154, 155, 155f
WHO. See World Health Organization (WHO)
Wide (broad) span of control, 43, 50
Willingness to accept responsibility, as attribute in
leadership, 8
Win-win solutions, 213–214
Withdrawing, in conﬂict management style, 336
Women leaders, 9

Work environment
positive, 35
selecting, 376–378
Workable unity achievement, in leadership tasks, 6
Worker needs, in ERG theory, 30
Workforce. See Staffing
Working effectively with others, as attribute in leadership, 8
Workload, assigned, 290
Workplace
skills and tactics in, 211–212
sphere, politics and, 207
World Health Organization (WHO), 397
World Trade Organization’s General Agreement on Trade in
Services (GATS), 397
Writing and publishing scholarship
general writing guidelines, 421–422
writer assistance from experts, 421b
Writing skills for nurse managers, 118
Written messages, 118, 122

Y
“Yes” people followers, 6

Z
Zero-based budget, 273

